d few scenes more sombre than
that which I witnessed on this night in December, 1864.

I found John M. Daniel in his house on Broad Street, as before; perched
still in his high chair of black horse-hair, all alone. His face was
thinner; his cheeks more sallow, and now haggard and sunken; his eyes
sparkling with gloomy fire, as he half reclined beneath the cluster of
globe lamps, depending from the ceiling, and filling the whole
apartment with their brilliant light--one of his weaknesses.

He received me with grim cordiality, offered me a cigar, and
said:--

"I am glad to see you, colonel, and to offer you one of the last of my
stock of Havanas. Wilmington is going soon--then good-bye to blockade
goods."

"You believe Wilmington is going to fall, then?"

"As surely as Savannah."

"Savannah! You think that? We are more hopeful at Petersburg."

"Hopeful or not, colonel, I am certain of what I say. Remember my
prediction when it is fulfilled. The Yankees are a theatrical people.
They take Vicksburg, and win Gettysburg, on their 'great national
anniversary;' and now they are going to present themselves with a
handsome 'Christmas gift'--that is the city of Savannah."

He spoke with evident difficulty, and his laboring voice, like his
haggard cheeks, showed that he had been ill since I last saw him.

"Savannah captured, or surrendered!" I said, with knit brows. "What
will be the result of that?"

"Ruin," was the curt response.

"Not the loss of a mere town?"

"No; the place itself is nothing. For Sherman to take it will not
benefit him much; but it will prove to the country, and the President,
that he is irresistible. Then they will _hack_; and you will see the
beginning of the end."

"That is a gloomy view enough."

"Yes--every thing is gloomy now. The devil of high-headed obstinacy and
incompetence rules affairs. I do not croak in the _Examiner_ newspaper.
But we are going straight to the devil."

As he uttered these words, he placed his hand upon his breast, and
closed his eyes, as though he were going to faint.

"What is the matter?" I exclaimed, rising abruptly, and approaching
him.

"Nothing!" he replied, in a weak voice; "don't disturb yourself about
me. These fits of faintness come on, now and then, in consequence of an
attack of pneumonia which I had lately. Sit down, colonel. You must
really pardon me for saying it, but you make me nervous."

There was nothing in the tone of this singular address to take offence
at,--the voice of the speaker was perfectly courteous,--and I resumed
my seat.

"We were talking about Sherman," he said. "They call him Gog, Magog,
anti-Christ, I know not what, in the clerical circles of this city!"

His lip curled as he spoke.

"One reverend divine publicly declared the other day, that 'God had put
a hook in Sherman's nose, and was leading him to his destruction!' I
don't think it looks much like it!"

The speaker was stopped by a fit of coughing, and when it had subsided,
leaned back, faint and exhausted, in his chair.

"The fact is--Sherman--" he said, with difficulty, "seems to have--the
hook in--_our_ nose!"

There was something grim and lugubrious in the smile which accompanied
the painfully uttered words. A long silence followed them, which was
broken by neither of us. At last I raised my head, and said:--

"I find you less hopeful than last summer. At that time you were in
good spirits, and the tone of the _Examiner_ was buoyant."

"It is hopeful still," he replied, "but by an effort--from a sentiment
of duty. I often write far more cheerfully than I feel, colonel."[1]

[Footnote 1: His words.]

"Your views have changed, I perceive--but you change with the whole
country."

"Yes. A whole century has passed since last August, when you visited me
here. One by one, we have lost all that the country could depend
on--hope goes last. For myself, I began to doubt when Jackson fell at
Chancellorsville, and I have been doubting, more or less, ever since.
He was _a dominant man_, colonel, fit, _if any thing happened_, to rise
to the head of affairs.[1] Oh! for an hour of Jackson! Oh! for a day of
our dead Dundee!"[2]

[Footnote 1: His words.]

[Footnote 2: His words.]

The face of the speaker glowed, and I shall never forget the flash of
his dark eye, as he uttered the words, "if any thing happened." There
was a whole volume of menace to President Davis in those words.

"But this is useless!" he went on; "Jackson is dead, and there is none
to take his place. So, without leaders, with every sort of
incompetence, with obstinacy and stupidity directing the public
councils, and shaping the acts of the administration, we are gliding
straight into the gulf of destruction."

I could make no reply. The words of this singular man and profound
thinker, affected me dolefully.

"Yes, colonel," he went on, "the three or four months which have passed
since your last visit, have cleared away all mists from _my_ eyes at
least, and put an end to all my dreams--among others, to that project
which I spoke of--the purchase and restoration of the family estate of
Stafford. It will never be restored by me. Like Randolph, I am the last
of my line."

And with eyes full of a profound melancholy, the speaker gazed into the
fire.

"I am passing away with the country," he added. "The cause is going to
fail. I give it three months to end in, and have sent for a prominent
senator, who may be able to do something. I intend to say to him, 'The
time has come to make the best terms possible with the enemy,' and I
shall place the columns of the _Examiner_ newspaper at his disposal to
advocate that policy."[1]

[Footnote 1: This, I learned afterward, from the Hon. Mr. -----, was
duly done by Mr. Daniel. But it was too late.]

"Is it possible!" I said. "Frankly, I do not think things are so
desperate."

"You are a soldier, and hopeful, colonel. The smoke blinds you."

"And yet General Lee is said to repudiate negotiations with scorn. He
is said to have lately replied to a gentleman who advised them, 'For
myself, I intend to die sword in hand!'"

"General Lee is a soldier--and you know what the song says: 'A
soldier's business, boys, is to die!'"

I could find no reply to the grim words.

"I tell you the cause is lost, colonel!" with feverish energy, "lost
irremediably, at this moment while we are speaking! It is lost from
causes which are enough to make the devil laugh, but it is lost all the
same! When the day of surrender, and Yankee domination comes--when the
gentlemen of the South are placed under the heel of negroes and
Yankees--I, for one, wish to die. Happy is the man who shall have
gotten into the grave before that day![1] Blessed will be the woman who
has never given suck![2] Yes, the best thing for me is to
die--[3] and I am going to do so. I shall not see that _Dies Irae_! I
shall be in my grave!"

[Footnote 1: His words.]

[Footnote 2: His words.]

[Footnote 3: His words.]

And breathing heavily, the journalist again leaned back in his chair,
as though about to faint.

An hour afterward, I terminated my visit, and went out, oppressed and
gloomy.

This singular man had made a reluctant convert of me to his own dark
views. The cloud which wrapped him, now darkened me--from the black
future I saw the lightnings dart already.

His predictions were destined to have a very remarkable fulfilment.

On the 21st of December, a few days after our interview, Sherman
telegraphed to Lincoln:--

"I beg to present you, as a Christmas gift, the city of Savannah, with
one hundred and fifty guns, and plenty of ammunition, and also about
twenty-five thousand bales of cotton."

In January, Wilmington fell.

Toward the end of the same month, John M. Daniel was a second time
seized with pneumonia, and took to his bed, from which he was never
again to rise. He would see no one but his physician and a few chosen
friends. All other persons were persistently denied admittance to his
chamber. Lingering throughout the remainder of the winter, as spring
approached, life seemed gradually leaving him. Day by day his pulse
grew weaker. You would have said that this man was slowly dying with
the cause for which he had fought; that as the life-blood oozed, drop
by drop, from the bleeding bosom of the Southern Confederacy, the last
pulses of John M. Daniel kept time to the pattering drops.

One morning, at the end of March, his physician came to see him, and
found him lying on the outer edge of his bed. Not wishing to disturb
him, the physician went to the window to mix a stimulant. All at once a
noise attracted his attention, and he turned round. The dying man had,
by a great effort, turned completely over, and lay on his back in the
middle of the bed, with his eyes closed, and his arms folded on his
breast, as though he were praying.

When the physician came to his bedside, he was dead.

It was four days before the fall of Petersburg and Richmond; and he was
buried in Hollywood, just in time to escape the tramp of Federal feet
around his coffin.

His prophecy and wish were thus fulfilled.[1]

[Footnote 1: These details are strictly accurate.]




IV.


GARROTED.


When I left Mr. John M. Daniel it was past ten at night, and designing
to set out early in the morning for Petersburg, I bent my steps toward
home.

The night was not however to pass without adventures of another
character.

I was going along Governor Street, picking my way by the light of the
few gas-lamps set far apart and burning dimly, when all at once I heard
a cry in front, succeeded by the noise of a scuffle, and then by a
heavy fall.

Hastening forward I reached the spot, which was not far from the City
Hall; and a glance told me all.

A wayfarer had been garroted; that is to say, suddenly attacked while
passing along, by one of the night-birds who then infested the streets
after dark; seized from behind; throttled, and thrown violently to the
ground--the object of the assailant being robbery.

When I reached the spot the robber was still struggling with his
victim, who, stretched beneath him on the ground, uttered frightful
cries. One hand of the garroter was on his throat, the other was busily
rifling his pockets.

I came up just in time to prevent a murder, but not to disappoint the
robber. As I appeared he hastily rose, releasing the throat of the
unfortunate citizen. I saw a watch gleam in his hand; he bestowed a
violent kick on his prostrate victim;--then he disappeared running, and
was in an instant lost in the darkness.

I saw that pursuit would be useless; and nobody ever thought, at that
period, of attempting to summon the police. I turned to assist the
victim, who all at once rose from the ground, uttering groans and
cries.

The lamp-light shone upon his face. It was the worthy Mr. Blocque--Mr.
Blocque, emitting howls of anguish! Mr. Blocque, shaking his clenched
hands, and maligning all created things! Mr. Blocque, devoting, with
loud curses and imprecations, the assembled wisdom of the "city
fathers," and the entire police force of the Confederate capital, to
the infernal deities!

"I am robbed--murdered!" screamed the little Jewish-looking personage,
in a shrill falsetto which resembled the shriek of a furious old woman,
"robbed! rifled!--stripped of every thing!--garroted!--my money
taken!--I had ten thousand dollars in gold and greenbacks on my
person!--not a Confederate note in the whole pack--not one! gold and
greenbacks!--two watches!---I am ruined! I will expose the police! I
was going to my house like a quiet citizen! I was harming nobody! and I
am to be set on and robbed of my honest earnings by a highwayman
--choked, strangled, knocked down, my pockets picked, my money taken
--and this in the capital of the Confederacy, under the nose of the
police!"

It was a shrill squeak which I heard--something unutterably ludicrous.
I could scarce forbear laughing, as I looked at the little
blockade-runner, with disordered hair, dirty face, torn clothes, and
bleeding nose, uttering curses, and moaning in agony over the loss of
his "honest earnings!"

I consoled him in the best manner I could, and asked him if he had lost
every thing. That question seemed to arouse him. He felt hastily in his
pockets,--and then at the result my eyes opened wide. Thrusting his
hand into a secret pocket, he drew forth an enormous roll of
greenbacks, and I could see the figures "100" on each of the notes as
he ran over them. That bundle alone must have contained several
thousands of dollars. But the worthy Mr. Blocque did not seem in the
least consoled.

"He got _the other bundle_!" shrieked the victim, still in his wild
falsetto; "it was ten thousand dollars--I had just received it this
evening--I am robbed!--they are going to murder me!--Where is the
police!--murder!"

I laid my hand upon his arm.

"You have lost a very considerable sum," I said, "but--you may lose
more still."

And I pointed to the roll of bank notes in his hand, with a significant
glance. At these words he started.

"You are right, colonel!" he said, hastily; "I may be attacked again! I
may be robbed of all--they may finish me! I will get home as quickly as
I can! Thank you, colonel! you have saved me from robbery and murder!
Come and see me, colonel. Come and dine with me, my dear sir! At five,
precisely!"

And Mr. Blocque commenced running wildly toward a place of safety.

In a moment he had disappeared, and I found myself alone--laughing
heartily.




V.


THE CLOAKED WOMAN.


"Well," I said, as I walked on, "this is a charming adventure and
conveys a tolerably good idea of the city of Richmond, after dark, in
the year 1864. Our friend Blocque is garroted, and robbed of his
'honest earnings,' at one fell swoop by a footpad! The worthy citizen
is waylaid; his pockets rifled; his life desolated. All the proceeds of
a life of virtuous industry have disappeared. Terrible condition of
things!--awful times when a good citizen can not go home to his modest
supper of canvas-backs and champagne, without being robbed by----his
brother robber!"

Indulging in these reflections, not unaccompanied with smiles, I
continued my way, with little fear, myself, of pickpockets or
garroters. Those gentry were intelligent. They were never known to
attack people with gray coats--they knew better! They attacked the
black coats, in the pockets of which they suspected the presence of
greenbacks and valuable papers; never the gray coats, where they would
find only a frayed "leave of absence" for their pains!

I thus banished the whole affair from my mind; but it had aroused and
excited me. I did not feel at all sleepy; and finding, by a glance at
my watch beneath a lamp, that it was only half past ten, I resolved to
go and ask after the health of my friend, Mr. X-----, whose house was
only a square or two off.

This resolution I proceeded at once to carry out. A short walk brought
me to the house, half buried in its shrubbery; but as I approached I
saw a carriage was standing before the house.

Should I make my visit then, or postpone it? Mr. X----- evidently had
company. Or had the carriage brought a visitor to some other member of
the household? Mr. X----- was only a boarder, and I might be mistaken
in supposing that _he_ was engaged at the moment.

As these thoughts passed through my mind, I approached the gate in the
iron railing. The carriage was half hidden by the shadow of the elms,
which grew in a row along the sidewalk. On the box sat a motionless
figure. The vehicle and driver were as still and silent as if carved
out of ebony.

"Decidedly I will discover," I said, and opening the gate I turned into
the winding path through the shrubbery, which led toward the rear of
the house; that is to say, toward the private entrance to the room of
Mr. X-----.

Suddenly, as I passed through the shadowy shrubs, I felt a hand on my
shoulder. I started back, and unconsciously felt for some weapon.

"Don't shoot me, colonel!" said a voice in the darkness, "I am a
friend."

I recognized the voice of Nighthawk.

"Good heavens! my dear Nighthawk," I said, drawing a long breath of
relief, "you are enough to make Alonzo the Brave, himself, tremble? You
turn up everywhere, and especially in the dark! What are you doing
here?"

"I am watching, colonel," said Nighthawk, with benignant sweetness.

"Watching?"

"And waiting."

"Waiting for whom?"

"For a lady with whom you have the honor of being acquainted."

"A lady--?"

"That one you last saw in the lonely house near Monk's Neck. Hush! here
she comes."

His voice had sunk to a whisper, and he drew me into the shrubbery, as
a long bar of light, issuing from the door in the rear of the house,
ran out into the night.

"I am going to follow her," whispered Nighthawk, placing his lips close
to my ear, "she is at her devil's work here in Richmond, as Swartz
was--."

Suddenly he was silent; a light step was heard. A form approached us,
passed by. I could see that it was a woman, wrapped from head to foot
in a gray cloak.

She passed so close to us that the skirt of her cloak nearly brushed
our persons, and disappeared toward the gate. The iron latch was heard
to click, the door of the carriage to open and close, and then the
vehicle began to move.

Nighthawk took two quick steps in the direction of the gate.

"I am going to follow the carriage, colonel," he whispered. "I have
been waiting here to do so. I will tell you more another time. Give my
respects to General Mohun, and tell him I am on his business!"

With which words Nighthawk glided into the darkness--passed through the
gate without sound from the latch--and running noiselessly, disappeared
on the track of the carriage.

I gazed after him for a moment, said to myself, "well this night is to
be full of incident!"--and going straight to the door in the rear of
the house, passed through it, went to the door of Mr. X-----'s room,
and knocked.

"Come in," said the voice of that gentleman; and opening the door I
entered.




VI.


THE HEART OF A STATESMAN.


Mr. X----- was seated in front of an excellent coal fire, in his great
armchair, near a table covered with papers, and between his lips was
the eternal cigar.

At sight of me he rose courteously--for he never omitted any form of
politeness--and cordially shook my hand.

"I am glad to see you, colonel," he said. "Just from the army? Have a
cigar."

And he extended toward me an elegant cigar-case full of Havanas, which
he took from the table. I declined, informing him that I had been
smoking all the evening in the sanctum of the editor of the _Examiner_.

"Ah! you have been to see Daniel," said Mr. X-----. "He is a very
remarkable man. I do not approve of the course of his paper, and he has
attacked me very bitterly on more than one occasion. But I bear no
grudge against him. He is honest in his opinions. I admire the pluck of
the man, and the splendid pith of his writings."

"My views accord with your own," I replied.

"Everybody thinks with us," said Mr. X-----, puffing at his cigar. "It
is only ignoramuses who deny this man's courage and ability. I have
never done injustice to Daniel--and I call that 'liberal' in myself,
colonel! He has flayed me alive on three or four occasions, and it is
not his fault that I am enjoying this excellent Havana."

"I read the attacks," I said.

"Were they not fearful?" said Mr. X-----, smiling tranquilly. "After
reading them, I regarded myself as a moral and political monster!"

I could not forbear from laughing as the portly statesman uttered the
words. He seemed to derive a species of careless enjoyment from the
recollection of his "flayings."

"I expect to talk over these little affairs with Daniel hereafter," he
said. "We shall have a great deal of time on our hands--in Canada."

And Mr. X----- smiled, and went on smoking. It was the second time he
had uttered that phrase--"in Canada."

I laughed now, and said:--

"You continue to regard Toronto, or Montreal, or Quebec, as your future
residence?"

"Yes; I think I prefer Quebec. The view from Cape Diamond is superb;
and there is something English and un-American in the whole place,
which I like. The Plains of Abraham bring back the history of the
past,--which is more agreeable to me at least than the history of the
present."

"You adhere more than ever, I see, to your opinion that we are going to
fail?"

"It is not an opinion, my dear colonel, but a certainty."

My head sank. In the army I had been hopeful. When I came to Richmond,
those high intelligences, John M. Daniel and Mr. X-----, did not even
attempt to conceal their gloomy views.

"I see you think me a croaker," said Mr. X-----, tranquilly smoking,
"and doubtless say to yourself, colonel, that I am injudicious in thus
discouraging a soldier, who is fighting for this cause. A year ago I
would not have spoken to you thus, for a year ago there was still some
hope. Now, to discourage you--if thinking men, fighting for a
principle, like yourself, _could_ be discouraged--would result in no
injury: for the cause is lost. On the contrary, as the friend of that
most excellent gentleman, your father, I regard it as a sort of duty to
speak thus--to say to you 'Don't throw away your life for nothing. Do
your duty, but do no more than your duty, for we are doomed.'"

I could find no reply to these gloomy words.

"The case is past praying for," said Mr. X----- composedly, "the whole
fabric of the Confederacy at this moment is a mere shell. It is going
to crumble in the spring, and another flag will float over the Virginia
capitol yonder--what you soldiers call 'The Gridiron.' The country is
tired. The administration is unpopular, and the departments are
mismanaged. I am candid, you see. The days of the Confederacy are
numbered, and worse than all, nobody knows it. We ought to negotiate
for the best terms, but the man who advises that, will be hissed at and
called a 'coward.' It is an invidious thing to do. It is much grander
to shout 'Death sooner than surrender!' I shouted that lustily as long
as there was any hope--now, I think it my duty as a statesman, and
public functionary, to say, 'There are worse things than death--let us
try and avoid them by making terms.' I say that to you--I do not say so
on the streets--the people would tear me to pieces, and with their
sources of information they would be right in doing so."

"Is it possible that all is lost? That negotiations are our only hope?"

"Yes; and confidentially speaking--this is a State secret, my dear
colonel--these will soon be made."

"Indeed!"

"You think that impossible, but it is the impossible which invariably
takes place in this world. We are going to send commissioners to meet
Mr. Lincoln in Hampton Roads--and it will be useless."

"Why?"

"We are going to demand such terms as he will not agree to. The
commissioners will return. The war will continue to its legitimate
military end, which I fix about the last days of March."

"Good heaven! so soon!"

"Yes."

"In three months?"

Mr. X----- nodded.

"General Lee may lengthen the term a little by his skill and courage,
but it is not in _his_ power, even, to resist beyond the month of
April."

"The army of Northern Virginia, driven by the enemy!"

"Forced to surrender, or annihilated; and in Virginia--it will never
join Johnston. Its numbers are too small to cut a path through the
enemy. Grant will be at the Southside road before the first of April;
Lee will evacuate his lines, which he will be compelled to hold to the
last moment; he will retreat; be intercepted; be hunted down toward
Lynchburg, and either surrender, or be butchered. Cheerful, isn't it?"

"It is frightful!"

"Yes, Lee's men are starving now. The country is tired of the war, and
disgusted with the manner in which we manage things. No recruits are
arriving. The troops are not _deserting_, but they are leaving the army
without permission, to succor their starving families. Lee's last hours
are approaching, and we are playing the comedy here in Richmond with an
immense appearance of reality; dancing, and fiddling, and laughing on
the surface of the volcano. I play my part among the rest. I risk my
head more even, perhaps, than the military leaders. I take a
philosophic view, however, of the present and future. If I am not hung,
I will go to Canada; meanwhile, I smoke my cigar, colonel."

And Mr. X----- lazily threw away his stump, and lit a fresh Havana. It
is impossible to imagine any thing more careless than his attitude.
This man was either very brave or frightfully apathetic.

Five minutes afterward, I knew that any thing but apathy possessed him.
All at once he rose in his chair, and his eyes were fixed upon me with
a glance so piercing and melancholy, that they dwell still in my
memory, and will always dwell there.

"I said we were playing a comedy here in Richmond, colonel," he said,
in tones so deep and solemn that they made me start; "I am playing my
part with the rest; I play it in public, and even in private, as before
you to-night. I sit here, indolently smoking and uttering my jests and
platitudes, and, at the moment that I am speaking, my heart is
breaking! I am a Virginian--I love this soil more than all the rest of
the world--not a foot but is dear and sacred, and a vulgar horde are
about to trample it under foot, and enslave its people. Every pulse of
my being throbs with agony at the thought! I can not sleep. I have lost
all taste for food. One thought alone haunts me--that the land of
Washington, Jefferson, Mason, Henry, and Randolph, is to become the
helpless prey of the scum of Europe and the North! My family has lived
here for more than two hundred years. I have been, and am to-day, proud
beyond words, of my birthright! I am a Virginian! a Virginian of
Virginians! I have for forty years had no thought but the honor of
Virginia. I have fought for her, and her only, in the senate and
cabinet of the old government at Washington. I have dedicated all my
powers to her--shrunk from nothing in my path--given my days and nights
for years, and was willing to pour out my blood for Virginia; and now
she is about to be trampled upon, her great statues hurled down, her
escutcheon blotted, her altars overturned! And I, who have had no
thought but her honor and glory, am to be driven, at the end of a long
career, to a foreign land! I am to crouch yonder in Canada, with my
bursting brow in my two hands--and every newspaper is to tell me 'the
negro and the bayonet rule Virginia!' Can you wonder, then, that I am
gloomy--that despair lies under all this jesting? _You_ are happy. You
go yonder, where a bullet may end you. Would to God that I had entered
the army, old as I am, and that at least I could hope for a death of
honor, in arms for Virginia!"




VII.


SECRET SERVICE.


The statesman leaned back in his great chair, and was silent. At the
same moment a tap was heard at the door; it opened noiselessly, and
Nighthawk glided into the apartment.

Under his cloak I saw the gray uniform of a Confederate soldier; in his
hand he carried a letter.

Nighthawk saluted Mr. X----- and myself with benignant respect. His
quick eye, however, had caught the gloomy and agitated expression of
the statesman's countenance, and he was silent.

"Well," said Mr. X-----, raising his head, with a deep sigh. Then
passing his hand over his face, he seemed to brush away all emotion.
When he again looked up, his face was as calm and unmoved as at the
commencement of our interview.

"You see I begin a new scene in this comedy," he said to me in a low
tone.

And turning to Nighthawk, he said:--

"Well, you followed that agreeable person?"

"Yes, sir," said Nighthawk, with great respect.

"She turned out to be the character you supposed? Speak before Colonel
Surry."

Nighthawk bowed.

"I never had any doubt of her character, sir," he said. "You will
remember that she called on you a week ago, announcing that she was a
spy, who had lately visited the Federal lines and Washington. You
described her to me, and informed me that you had given her another
appointment for to-night; when I assured you that I knew her; she was
an enemy, who had come as a spy upon _us_; and you directed me to be
here to-night, and follow her, after your interview."

"Well," said Mr. X-----, quietly, "you followed her!"

"Yes, sir. On leaving you, after making her pretended report of affairs
in Washington, she got into her carriage, and the driver started
rapidly, going up Capitol and Grace streets. I followed on foot, and
had to run--but I am used to that, sir. The carriage stopped at a house
in the upper part of the city--a Mr. Blocque's; the lady got out,
telling the driver to wait, and went into the house, where she staid
for about half an hour. She then came out--I was in the shadow of a
tree, not ten yards from the spot, and as she got into the carriage, I
could see that she held in her hand a letter. As the driver closed the
door, she said, 'Take me to the flag-of-truce bureau, on Ninth Street,
next door to the war office.' The driver mounted his box, and set
off--and crossing the street, I commenced running to get a-head. In
this I succeeded, and reached the bureau five minutes before the
carriage.

"Well, sir, I hastened up stairs, and went into the bureau, where three
or four clerks were examining the letters left to be sent by the
flag-of-truce boat to-morrow. They were laughing and jesting as they
read aloud the odd letters from the Libby and other prisons--some of
which, I assure you, were very amusing, sir--when the lady's footsteps
were heard upon the stairs, and she came in, smiling.

"I had turned my back, having given some excuse for my presence to one
of the clerks, who is an acquaintance. Thus the lady, who knows me,
could not see my face; but I could, by looking out of the corners of my
eyes, see _her_. She came in, in her rich gray cloak, smiling on the
clerks, and handing an open letter to one of them, said:--"'Will you
oblige me by sending that to my sister in New York, by the
flag-of-truce boat, to-morrow, sir?'

"'If there is nothing contraband in it, madam,' said the clerk.

"'Oh!' she replied, with a laugh, 'it is only on family matters. My
sister is a Southerner, and so am I, sir. You can read the letter; it
is not very dangerous!'

"And she smiled so sweetly that the clerk was almost ashamed to read
the letter. He, however, glanced his eye over it, and evidently found
nothing wrong in it. While he was doing so, the lady walked toward the
mail-bags in which the clerks had been placing such letters as they
found unobjectionable, the others being marked, 'Condemned,' and thrown
into a basket. As she passed near one of the bags, I saw the lady, whom
I was closely watching, flirt her cloak, as though by accident, across
the mouth of one of the mail-bags, and at the same instant her hand
stole down and dropped a letter into the bag. As she did so, the clerk,
who had finished reading _the other letter_, bowed, and said:---

"'There is nothing objectionable in this, madam, and it will be sent,
of course.'

"'I was sure of that, sir,' replied the lady, with a smile. 'I am very
much obliged. Good evening, sir!'

"And she sailed out, all the clerks politely rising as she did so.

"No sooner had the door closed than I darted upon the bag in which I
had seen her drop the letter. The clerks wished to stop me, but I
informed them of what I had seen. If they doubted, they could see for
themselves that the letter, which I had easily found, was not sealed
with the seal of the bureau. They looked at it, and at once
acknowledged their error.

"'Arrest her!' exclaimed one of them, suddenly. The rapid rolling of a
carriage came like an echo to his words.

"'It is useless, gentlemen,' I said. 'I know where to find the lady,
and will look to the whole affair. You know I am in the secret service,
and will be personally responsible for every thing. I will take this
letter to the official who directed me to watch the lady who brought
it.'

"To this, no objection was made, as I am known at the office. I came
away; returned as quickly as possible; and here is the letter, sir."

With which words Nighthawk drew his hand from under his cloak, and
presented the letter to Mr. X-----, who had listened in silence to his
narrative.




VIII.


BY FLAG-OF-TRUCE BOAT.


MR. X----- took the letter, broke the seal, and ran his eye over the
contents.

"Decidedly, that woman is a skilful person," he said; "she fishes in
troubled waters with the coolness of an experienced hand."

And presenting the letter to me, the statesman said:--

"Would you like to see a specimen of the sort of documents which go on
file in the departments, colonel?"

I took the letter, and read the following words:--

"RICHMOND, 18 _Dec'r_, 1864.

"Tell, _you know who_, that I have just seen the honorable
Mr.-----" (here the writer gave the real name and official position of
Mr. X-----), "and have had a long conversation with him. He is fully
convinced that I am a good Confederate, and spoke without reserve of
matters the most private. He is in high spirits, and looks on the rebel
cause as certain to succeed. I never saw one more blinded to the real
state of things. Richmond is full of misery, and the people seem in
despair, but this high official, who represents the whole government,
is evidently certain of Lee's success. I found him in a garrulous mood,
and he did not conceal his views. The government has just received
heavy supplies from the south, by the Danville railroad--others are
coming--the whole country in rear of Sherman is rising--and Lee, he
stated, would soon be re-enforced by between fifty and seventy-five
thousand men. What was more important still, was a dispatch, which he
read me, from England. This startled me. There seems no doubt that
England is about to recognize the Confederacy. When he had finished
reading this dispatch, on the back of which I could see the English
postmark, he said to me--these are his words:--'You see, things were
never brighter; it is only a question of time; and by holding out a
little longer, we shall compel the enemy to retire and give up the
contest. With the re-enforcements coming, Lee will have about one
hundred thousand men. With that force, he will be able to repulse all
General Grant's assaults. Things look dark at this moment, but the
cause was never more hopeful.'

"He seemed insane, but I give you his words. It is certain that these
are the views of the government, and that our authorities are much
mistaken in supposing the Confederacy at its last gasp. It is
impossible that the honorable Mr.----- was attempting to deceive me;
because I carried him a letter from -----" (here the writer gave the
name of a prominent official of the Confederate Government, which I
suppress) "who vouched for me, and declared that I was passionately
Southern in my sympathies.

"I shall see the honorable Mr.----- in a day or two again. In the mean
while, I am staying, _incognita_, at the house of our friend, Mr.
Blocque, who has afforded me every facility in return for the
_safeguard_ I brought him, to protect his property when we occupy
Richmond. The city is in a terrible state. Mr. Blocque has just come
in, and informs me that he has been garroted near the capitol, and
robbed of ten thousand dollars in good money. He is in despair.

"As soon as I have finished some important private business, which
keeps me in the Confederate lines, I shall be with ----- again. Tell
him to be in good spirits. This city has still a great deal of money
hoarded in garrets--and we shall soon be here. Then we can retire on a
competence--and when _Fonthill_ is confiscated, we will purchase it,
and live in affluence.

"LUCRETIA."


I looked at the back of the letter. It was directed to a lady in
Suffolk. From the letter, my glance passed to the face of Mr. X-----.
He was smiling grimly.

"A valuable document," he said, "which madam will doubtless duplicate
before very long, with additional particulars. I make you a present of
it, colonel, as a memorial of the war."

I thanked him, and placed the letter in my pocket. To-day I copy it,
word for word.

Mr. X----- reflected a moment; then he said to Nighthawk:--

"Arrest this woman; I am tired of her. I have no time to waste upon
such persons, however charming."

Nighthawk looked greatly delighted.

"I was going to beg that order of you, sir," he said, "as the 'private
business' alluded to in the letter, concerns a friend of mine,
greatly."

"Ah! well, here is the order."

And taking a pen, Mr. X----- scrawled two lines, which he handed to
Nighthawk. A glow of satisfaction came to that worthy's face, and
taking the paper, he carefully placed it in his pocket.

As he did so, the bell in the capitol square struck midnight, and I
rose to take my departure.

"Come and see me soon again, colonel," said Mr. X-----, going to the
door with me. He had made a sign to Nighthawk, who rose to go out with
me, that he wished him to remain.

"What I have said to you, to-night," continued the statesman, gravely,
"may have been injudicious, colonel. I am not certain of that--but I am
quite sure that to have it repeated at this time would be inconvenient.
Be discreet, therefore, my dear friend--after the war, tell or write
what you fancy; and I should rather have my present views known then,
than not known. They are those neither of a time-server, a faint heart,
or a fool. I stand like the Roman sentinel at the gate of Herculaneum,
awaiting the lava flood that will bury me. I see it coming--I hear the
roar--I know destruction is rushing on me--but I am a sentinel on post;
I stand where I have been posted; it is God and my conscience that have
placed me on duty here. I will stay, whatever comes, until I am
relieved by the same authority which posted me." And with the bow of a
nobleman, the gray-haired statesman bade me farewell.

I returned to my lodgings, buried in thought, pondering deeply on the
strange scenes of this night of December.

On the next morning I set out, and rejoined the army at Petersburg.

I, too, was a sentinel on post, like the statesman. And I determined to
remain on duty to the last.




IX.


TO AND FRO IN THE SPRING OF '65.


The months of January and February, 1865, dragged on, sombre and
dreary.

Two or three expeditions which I made during that woeful period, gave
me a good idea of the condition of the country.

In September, 1864, I had traversed Virginia from Petersburg to
Winchester, and had found the people--especially those of the lower
Shenandoah Valley--still hopeful, brave, resolved to resist to the
death.

In January and February, 1865, my official duties carried me to the
region around Staunton; to the mountains west of Lynchburg; and to the
North Carolina border, south of Petersburg. All had changed. Everywhere
I found the people looking blank, hopeless, and utterly discouraged.
The shadow of the approaching woe seemed to have already fallen upon
them.

The army was as "game" as ever--even Early's little handful, soon to be
struck and dispersed by General Sheridan's ten thousand cavalry.
Everywhere, the soldiers laughed in the face of death. Each seemed to
feel, as did the old statesman with whom I had conversed on that night
at Richmond, that he was a sentinel on post, and must stand there to
the last. The lava might engulf him, but he was "posted," and must
stand until relieved, by his commanding officer or death. It was the
"poor private," in his ragged jacket and old shoes, as well as the
officer in his braided coat, who felt thus. For those private soldiers
of the army of Northern Virginia were gentlemen. _Noblesse oblige_ was
their motto; and they meant to die, musket in hand!

Oh, soldiers of the army, who carried those muskets in a hundred
battles!--who fought with them from Manassas, in 1861, to Appomattox,
in 1865--you are the real heroes of the mighty struggle, and one
comrade salutes you now, as he looked at you with admiration in old
days! What I saw in those journeys was dreary enough; but however black
may be the war-cloud, there is always the gleam of sunlight somewhere!
We laughed now and then, reader, even in the winter of 1864-'5!

I laugh still, as I think of the brave cannoneers of the horse
artillery near Staunton--and of the fearless Breathed, their commander,
jesting and playing with his young bull-dog, whom he had called
"Stuart" for his courage. I hear the good old songs, all about "Ashby,"
and the "Palmetto Tree," and the "Bonnie Blue Flag"--songs sung with
joyous voices in that dreary winter, as in other days, when the star of
hope shone more brightly, and the future was more promising.

At Lynchburg, where I encountered a number of old friends, songs still
sweeter saluted me--from the lips of my dear companions, Major Gray and
Captain Woodie. How we laughed and sang, on that winter night, at
Lynchburg! Do you chant your sweet "Nora McShane" still, Gray? And you,
Woodie, do you sing in your beautiful and touching tenor
to-day,--

  "The heart bowed down by deep despair.
     To weakest hopes will cling?"

Across the years comes once more that magical strain; again I hear your
voice, filled with the very soul of sadness, tell how

  "Memory is the only friend
     That grief can call its own!"

That seemed strangely applicable to the situation at the time. The
memory of our great victories was all that was left to us; and I
thought that it was the spirit of grief itself that was singing. Again
I hear the notes--but "Nora McShane" breaks in--"Nora McShane," the
most exquisite of all Gray's songs. Then he winds up with uproarious
praise of the "Bully Lager Beer!"--and the long hours of night flit
away on the wings of laughter, as birds dart onward, and are buried in
the night.

Are you there still, Gray? Do you sing still, Woodie? Health and
happiness, comrades! All friendly stars smile on you! Across the years
and the long leagues that divide us, I salute you!

Thus, at Staunton and Lynchburg, reader, gay scenes broke the monotony.
In my journey toward North Carolina, I found food also, for laughter.

I had gone to Hicksford, fifty miles south of Petersburg, to inspect
the cavalry; and in riding on, I looked with curiosity on the
desolation which the enemy had wrought along the Weldon railroad, when
they had destroyed it in the month of December. Stations, private
houses, barns, stables, all were black and charred ruins. The railroad
was a spectacle. The enemy had formed line of battle close along the
track; then, at the signal, this line of battle had attacked the road.
The iron rails were torn from the sleepers; the latter were then piled
up and fired; the rails were placed upon the blazing mass, and left
there until they became red-hot in the middle, and both ends bent down
--then they had been seized, broken, twisted; in a wild spirit of sport
the men had borne some of the heated rails to trees near the road;
twisted them three or four times around the trunks; and there, as I
passed, were the unfortunate trees with their iron boa-constrictors
around them--monuments of the playful humor of the blue people, months
before.

Hill and Hampton had attacked and driven them back; from the dead
horses, as elsewhere, rose the black vultures on flapping wings: but it
is no part of my purpose, reader, to weary you with these war-pictures,
or describe disagreeable scenes. It is an odd interview which I had on
my return toward Petersburg that my memory recalls. It has naught to do
with my narrative--but then it will not fill more than a page!

I had encountered two wagons, and, riding, ahead of them, saw a courier
of army head-quarters, whose name was Ashe.

I saluted the smiling youth, in return for his own salute, and said:--

"Where have you been, Ashe?"

"To Sussex, colonel, on a foraging expedition."

"For the general?"

"And some of the staff, colonel."

Ashe smiled; we rode on together.

"How did you come to be a forager, Ashe?" I said.

"Well this was the way of it, colonel," he said. "I belonged to the old
Stonewall brigade, but General Lee detailed me at the start of the war
to shoe the head-quarters horses. It was old General Robert that sent
me with these wagons. I was shoeing the general's gray, and had just
pared the hind-hoof, when he sent for me. A man had started with the
wagons, and had mired in the field right by head-quarters. So old
General Robert says, says he, 'Ashe, you can get them out.' I says,
'General, I think I can, if you'll give me a canteen full of your
French brandy for the boys.' He laughed at that, and I says, 'General,
I have been with you three years, and if in that time you have ever
seen me out of the way, I hope you will tell me so.' 'No, Ashe,' says
he, 'I have not, and you shall have the brandy.' And his black fellow
went into the closet and drew me a canteen full; for you see, colonel,
old General Robert always keeps a demijohn full, and carries it about
in his old black spring wagon, to give to the wounded soldiers--he
don't drink himself. Well, I got the brandy, and set the boys to work,
building a road with pine saplings, and got the wagons out! From that
time to this, I have been going with them, colonel, and sometimes some
very curious things have happened."

I assumed that inquiring expression of countenance dear to
story-tellers. Ashe saw it, and smiled.

"Last fall, colonel," he said, "I was down on the Blackwater, foraging
with my wagons, for old General Robert, when a squadron of Yankees
crossed in the ferryboat, and caught me. I did not try to get off, and
the colonel says, says he, 'Who are _you?_' I told him I was only
foraging with General Lee's head-quarters teams, to get something for
the old general to eat, as nothing could be bought in Petersburg; and,
says I, 'I have long been looking to be captured, and now the time has
come.' As I was talking, I saw an uncle of mine among the Yankees, and
says he, 'Ashe, what are you doing here?' 'The same you are doing
there,' I says; and I asked the colonel just to let me off this time,
and I would try and keep out of their way hereafter. He asked me, Would
I come down there any more? And I told him I didn't know--I would have
to go where I was ordered. 'Well,' says he, 'you can't beg off.' But I
says, 'step here a minute, colonel,' and I took him to the wagon, and
offered him my canteen of brandy. He took three or four good drinks,
and then he says, says he, 'That's all I want! You can go on with your
wagons.' And I tell you I put out quick, colonel, and never looked
behind me till I got back to Petersburg?"[1]

[Footnote 1: In the words of the narrator.]

I have attempted to recall here, reader, the few gleams of sunshine,
the rare moments of laughter, which I enjoyed in those months of the
winter of 1864-'5.

I shrink from dwelling on the events of that dreary epoch. Every day I
lost some friend. One day it was the brave John Pegram, whom I had
known and loved from his childhood; the next day it was some other,
whose disappearance left a gap in my life which nothing thenceforth
could fill.  I pass over all that. Why recall more of the desolate
epoch than is necessary?

For the rest that is only a momentary laugh that I have indulged in.
Events draw near, at the memory of which you sigh--or even groan
perhaps--to-day, when three years have passed.

For this page is written on the morning of April 8, 1868.

This day, three years ago, Lee was staggering on in sight of
Appomattox.




X.


AEGRI SOMNIA.--MARCH, 1865.


These letters and figures arouse terrible memories--do they not,
reader? You shudder as you return in thought to that epoch, provided
always that you then wore the gray, and not the blue. If you wore the
blue, you perhaps laugh.

The South had reached, in this month of March, one of those periods
when the most hopeful can see, through the black darkness, no single
ray of light. Throughout the winter, the government had made unceasing
efforts to bring out the resources of the country--efforts honest and
untiring, if not always judicious--but as the days, and weeks, and
months wore on, it became more and more evident that the hours of the
Confederacy were numbered. The project of employing negro troops, which
Congress long opposed, had been adopted at last, but only in time to be
too late. The peace commissioners had held their interview with
Lincoln, but effected nothing. The enemy continually advanced toward
the achievement of their end. Sherman had safely made his famous "march
to the sea"--Savannah and Charleston had fallen--the western army was
about to unite with the army of Grant at Petersburg. There the great
game went on, but the end was near. Lee had attempted, late in
February, to evacuate his lines, but was overruled. His army was
reduced to about forty thousand, while Grant's numbered about one
hundred and fifty thousand. The Confederate troops were almost naked,
and had scarce food enough to sustain life. They fought still, in the
trenches, along the great line of works, but it was plain, as Lee said,
that the line was stretched so far, that a very little more would snap
it.

That line extended from the Williamsburg road, east of Richmond to Five
Forks, west of Petersburg--a distance of nearly fifty miles. Gradually
Grant had pushed westward, until his grasp was now very nearly upon the
Southside road. Lee had extended his own thin line to still confront
him. The White Oak road, beyond the Rowanty, had been defended by heavy
works. The hill above Burgess's bristled with batteries. The extreme
right of the Confederate line rested in the vicinity of Five Forks.
Beyond that it could not be extended. Already it began to crack. Along
the works stretching from east to west, there was scarce a soldier
every ten yards. Grant was only prevented from bursting through by the
masterly handling of Lee's troops--the rapid concentration of masses at
the points which he threatened. The cavalry was almost paralyzed. The
destruction of the Weldon road southward to Hicksford, in December, had
been a death-blow nearly, to that arm of the service. The Confederate
cavalry had depended upon it, hauling their forage from Stony Creek
Station. Now they had been compelled to go south to Hicksford, the
nearest point, fifty miles from Petersburg. The consequence was that
Lee's right was almost undefended by cavalry. Grant's horsemen could
penetrate, almost unchecked, to the Danville and Southside railroads.
The marvel was, not that this was effected at the end of March, but
that it was not effected a month sooner. But I anticipate.

To glance, for an instant before proceeding, at the condition of the
country. It had reached the last point of depression, and was yielding
to despair. The government was enormously unpopular--mismanagement had
ceased to attract attention. The press roared in vain. The _Enquirer_
menaced the members of Congress from the Gulf States. The _Examiner_
urged that the members of the Virginia Legislature, to be elected in
the spring, should be "clothed with the state sovereignty," to act for
Virginia! Thus the executive and legislative were both attacked. The
people said, "Make General Lee dictator." And General ----- wrote and
printed that, in such an event, he "had the dagger of Brutus" for Lee.
Thus all things were in confusion. The currency was nothing but
paper--it was a melancholy farce to call it money. The Confederate note
was popularly regarded as worth little more than the paper upon which
it was printed. Fathers of families went to market and paid hundreds of
dollars for the few pounds of meat which their households required each
day. Officers were forced to pay one thousand dollars for their boots.
Old saddle-bags were cut up, and the hides of dead horses carried off,
to manufacture into shoes. Uniform coats were no longer procurable--the
government had to supply them gratis, even to field officers. Lee
subsisted, like his soldiers, on a little grease and corn bread.
Officers travelling on duty, carried in their saddle-pockets bits of
bacon and stale bread, for the country could not supply them. In the
homes of the land once overflowing with plenty, it was a question each
day where food could be procured. The government had impressed every
particle, except just sufficient to keep the inmates alive. What the
commissaries had left, the "Yankee cavalry" took. A lady of Goochland
said to a Federal officer, "General, I can understand why you destroy
railroads and bridges, but why do you burn mills, and the houses over
women and children?" The officer bowed, and replied, "Madam, your
soldiers are so brave that we can't beat you; and we are trying to
_starve you_!"

The interior of these homes of the country was a touching spectacle.
The women were making every sacrifice. Delicate hands performed duties
which had always fallen to menials. The servants had gone to the enemy,
and aristocratic young women cooked, washed, swept, and drudged--a
charming spectacle perhaps to the enemy, who hated the "aristocracy,"
but woeful to fathers, and sons, and brothers, when they came home
sick, or wounded. Clothes had long grown shabby, and were turned and
mended. Exquisite beauty was decked in rags. A faded calico was a
treasure. The gray-haired gentleman, who had always worn broadcloth,
was content with patched homespun. It was not of these things that they
were thinking, however. Dress had not made those seigneurs and
dames--nor could the want of it hide their dignity. The father, and
care-worn wife, and daughter, and sister, were thinking of other
things. The only son was fighting beside Lee--dying yonder, in the
trenches. He was only a "poor private," clad in rags and carrying a
musket--but he was the last of a long line, perhaps, of men who had
built up Virginia and the Federal government which he was fighting--he
was "only a private," but his blood was illustrious; more than all, he
was the treasure of the gray-haired father and mother; the head of the
house in the future; if he fell, the house would fall with him--and it
was nearly certain that he would fall!

So they mourned, and looked fearfully to the coming hours, in town and
country. In the old homesteads--poverty and despair. In the
cities--wasting cares and sinking hearts. More than ever before, all
the vile classes of society rioted and held sway. The forestallers and
engrossers drove a busy trade. They seemed to feel that their "time was
short"--that the night was coming, in which not even rascals could
work! Supplies were hoarded, and doled out at famine prices to the
famine-stricken community; not supplies of luxuries, but of the
commonest necessaries of life. The portly extortioner did not invite
custom, either. Once he had bowed and smirked behind his counter when a
purchaser entered. Now, he turned his back coldly, went on reading his
newspaper, scarce replied to the words addressed to him, and threw his
goods on the counter with the air of one reluctantly conferring a
favor. Foreboding had entered even the hearts of the forestaller and
extortioner. They had sold their souls for gain, and that gain was
turning to dross. As at the wave of a magician's wand, their crisp new
"Confederate notes" had become rags. The biter was bit. His gains were
to count for nothing. Extortioner and victim were soon to be stripped
equally naked--the cold blast of ruin was to freeze both alike. Thus,
all things hastened toward the inevitable catastrophe. Brave hearts did
not shrink, but they saw ruin striding on. Every thing crumbled--the
Confederacy was staggering and gasping in the death agony. Day by day
the cause was slowly, but certainly, being lost. Children cried aloud
for bread--women moaned, and knelt, and prayed. Their last hope was
leaving them. Lee's army was starving and dying. Hour by hour, nearer
and nearer came the roar of the gulf of destruction. A sort of stupor
descended. The country--prostrate and writhing--tried to rise, but
could not. The government knew not where to turn, or what course to
pursue. Grant was growing in strength hourly. Lee's little force was
dwindling. Sherman was streaming through South Carolina. Grant was
reaching out toward Five Forks. All-destroying war grinned
hideously--on all sides stared gaunt Famine. The air jarred with the
thunder of cannon. The days and nights blazed, and were full of wild
cries--of shouts, groans, and reverberations. The ground shook--the
grave yawned--the black cloud slowly drew on; that cloud from which the
thunderbolt was about to fall.

How to describe in a volume like this, now near its end, that terrible
state of coma--that approaching cataclysm, in which all things, social,
civil, and military were about to disappear! The whole fabric of
society was going to pieces; every hour flamed with battles; tragic
events jostled each other; blood gushed; a people were wailing; a
victorious enemy were rushing on; the whole continent trembled; Lee was
being swept away, in spite of every effort which he made to steady his
feet--and that torrent was going to engulf a whole nation!

All this I am to describe in the last few pages of this volume! The
task is far beyond my strength. In the future, some writer may
delineate that hideous dream--to do so to-day, in this year 1868, would
tear the stoutest heart.

For myself, I do not attempt it. Were I able to paint the picture,
there would be no space. My memoir is nearly ended. The threads of the
woof are nearly spun out, and the loom is going to stop. Death stands
ready with his shears to cut the ravelled thread, knit up the seam, and
put his red label on the fabric!





XI.


I VISIT GENERAL FITZHUGH LEE.


The end of March, 1865, was approaching when I set out on what was to
prove my last tour of duty amid the pine woods of Dinwiddie.

It was a relief to be back in the army; to see brave faces and smiles
around me, instead of gloomy eyes and careworn cheeks, as in the city.
I passed along the Boydton road almost gayly; crossed the Rowanty at
Burgess's, and went on by General Lee's powerful works covering the
White Oak road, beyond. Soon I was approaching Dinwiddie Court-House,
in the vicinity of which was encamped our small force of starved and
broken-down cavalry.

Hampton had gone to meet Sherman, and the cavalry was commanded now by
General Fitzhugh Lee, who had recovered from his severe wound received
at Winchester. I was greeted by this brave soldier and accomplished
gentleman as warmly as I could have desired--for "General Fitz," as we
always called him at Stuart's head-quarters, was the soul of good humor
and good fellowship. You have seen him, have you not, reader--whether
you wore gray or blue--fighting beside him, or meeting him in battle?
You recall the open and manly features, the frank and soldierly glance
of the eye, the long beard and heavy mustache, almost always curling
with laughter? You remember the mirthful voice, the quick jest, the
tone of badinage--that joyful and brave air which said, "as long as
life lasts there is hope!" You have not forgotten this gay cavalier,
the brother-in-arms of Stuart; this born cavalryman, with his love of
adventure, his rollicking mirth, his familiar greeting of high and low,
his charming abandon and ever-ready laughter. That was the character of
the _individual_--of "Fitz Lee," the good companion. The
commander-in-chief has defined for all, the traits of Major-General
Fitzhugh Lee. It was General R.E. Lee who wrote him in 1863, "Your
admirable conduct, devotion to the cause of your country, and devotion
to duty, fill me with pleasure. I hope you will soon see her efforts
for independence crowned with success, and long live to enjoy the
affection and gratitude of your country."

These few lines were worth fighting hard for--were they not? All things
change; many things fail. Chaos or monarchy may come, but the good
opinion of Lee will survive all!

I talked with General Fitz Lee for an hour nearly, recalling the old
days with Stuart, who had loved and confided in him more than in any
other living man. It was a beautiful friendship, indeed, and each
understood the value of the other as man and soldier. Stuart is dead,
and can not give his testimony; but General Fitz Lee is alive, and can
give his. Here and there a voice still denies Stuart's genius as a
commander. Ask his friend who survives; and if tears do not choke the
voice, you will learn the real rank of Stuart!

But I can not linger on these scenes. The narrative draws on.

I mounted my horse, after shaking hands with General Fitz Lee and his
brave staff, and, for the first time, remembered to ask, "Where was Tom
Herbert?"

At that question, a beaming smile came to every countenance.

"Done for!" said one.

"Captured!" laughed another.

"Demoralized, subjugated, and negotiating with the enemy!" said a
third.

"Well, where is the place of meeting--where are the terms being
arranged?" I said.

"At a place called Disaways, on the lower Rowanty!"

"Good! I know the road there," I said.

And with a laugh, which the general and his gay cavaliers echoed, I
touched my gray with the spur, and set out toward the south.




XII.


BY A FIRE IN THE WOODS.


I pushed on, having resolved, after finishing my duties, to visit
Disaways.

Soon Dinwiddie Court-House came in sight. I entered the small village,
and looked attentively--as I had done on more than one occasion
before--at the locality which General Davenant's narrative had
surrounded with so strange an interest. There was the old tavern, with
its long portico, where Darke had held his orgies, and from which he
had set forth on his errand of robbery and murder. There was the county
jail, in which General Davenant had insisted upon being confined, and
where so many friends had visited him. There was the old court-house,
in which he had been tried for the murder of George Conway; and I
fancied I could distinguish upon one of the shutters, the broken bolt
which Darke had forced, more than ten years before, in order to purloin
the knife with which the crime had been committed.

For some miles, that tragic story absorbed me, banishing all other
reflections. That was surely the strangest of histories!--and the drama
had by no means reached its denouement. Between the first and last acts
"an interval of ten years is supposed to pass." There was the stage
direction! Darke was still alive, active, dangerous, bent on mischief.
He had an able coadjutress in his female ally. That singular woman,
with whom his life was so closely connected, was in prison, it was
true, but the Confederate authorities might release her; she might, at
any moment, recommence her _diablerie_. Had she found that paper--or
had Mohun found it? In any event, she was dangerous--more so, even,
than her male companion--that worthy whom I might meet at every turn in
the road--that prince of surprises and tragic "appearances!"

"Decidedly, these are curiosities, this man and this woman!" I said;
"they are two bottomless pits of daring and depravity. Mohun has
escaped them heretofore, but now, when the enemy seem driving us, and
sweeping every thing before them, will not Darke and madam attain their
vengeance, and come out winners in the struggle?"

With that reflection, I dismissed the subject, and pushed on, over the
narrow and winding roads, to make my inspections.

The day was cold and brilliant; the winds cut the face; and I rode on
steadily, thinking of many things. Then the desire to smoke seized upon
me. General Fitzhugh Lee had given me some excellent cigars, captured
from the enemy, and I looked around to find some house where I could
light my cigar. None appeared; but at two hundred yards from the road,
in a hidden hollow, I thought I perceived the glimmer of a
fire--probably made by some straggler. I rode toward it, descended into
the hollow, approached the fire, beside which crouched a figure,
wrapped in an overcoat. The figure raised its head--and I recognized
Nighthawk.

He rose and smiled benignantly, as he shook hands with me.

"An unexpected meeting, Nighthawk," I said, laughing. "What on earth
makes you come out and camp in the woods?"

"A little fancy, colonel; you know I am eccentric. I like this way of
living, from having scouted so much--but I came here with an object!"

"What?"

"To be private. I thought my fire could not be seen from the road."

"Why should it not be?"

"Well, perhaps I exaggerate danger. But I am on an important scouting
expedition--wanted to reflect, and not be seen--I am going, to-night,
through the lines on a little affair of which you know something."

"Ah, what do you refer to?"

"That paper," said Nighthawk, succinctly. "It is in the hands of
Alibi--there is a Yankee picket at his house--but I am going to see
him, and force him to surrender it."

"Is it possible he has it! Do you know that?"

"Strangely enough, colonel. Do you remember that woman, Amanda?"

"Perfectly. I visited her with Mohun."

"He told me of your visit. Well, you no doubt remember also, colonel,
that he offered her a large sum to discover the paper--that she offered
to try and find it, or give him a clue to its whereabouts--he was to
return in ten days, and hear her report."

"Yes," I said.

"Well, he returned, colonel, but Amanda could tell him nothing--which
you no doubt have heard."

"Yes, from him."

"I have been more successful, at last, in dealing with this strange
woman. I do not know if she is a witch or an epileptic, or what--but
she has convinced me that Alibi has the paper we want."

And Nighthawk proceeded to explain. It was an exceedingly curious
explanation. Amanda had first demanded of him a statement of all the
facts. He had thereupon informed her of the appointment which he had
made with Swartz in Richmond, to meet him three days afterward at the
house of Alibi--of his detention by the pickets, so that he had been
unable to keep the appointment--Alibi's statement when he saw him, that
Swartz had not been to his house--and Swartz's confinement in the
lonely house, ending in his murder by Darke. That was all he knew, he
said--the paper was gone--where was it?

"At Mr. Alibi's," Amanda had replied; "I only asked you this, Mr.
Nighthawk, to satisfy myself that my visions were true. I _saw_ poor
Mr. Swartz go to Mr. Alibi's, and ask for you, on the day you
appointed. When he was told that you had not come, he seemed very
low-spirited, and told Mr. Alibi that he _must_ see you, to give you a
paper. His life was threatened, he said, on account of that paper. An
officer and a lady had discovered that he had that paper--it was as
much as his life was worth to keep it on his person--if Mr. Alibi would
take it, and for old times' sake, put it away until _he_ came back, he
would pay him as much gold as he could hold in both hands. Then he gave
the paper to Mr. Alibi, and went away, telling him to say nothing of
it."

"I then asked her," continued Nighthawk, "where the paper could be
found. She replied that Alibi always carried it on his person. That was
a few days ago. I am going to-night to see him, and recover the paper."

I had listened to this narrative with strange interest. This singular
woman was a curious problem. Were her _visions_ really such as she
described them? Or did she only "put this and that together," as the
phrase is, and by her marvellous acumen, sharpened possibly by disease,
arrive at results which defied the most penetrating glance of the sane?
I knew not--but reflecting often upon this subject since, have finally
come to the latter conclusion, as the more philosophic of the two.
Epilepsy is insanity of mind and body; and one of the most infallible
characteristics of insanity is cunning--which is only another word for
diseased and abnormal activity of brain. Amanda arrived at strange
results, but I think she attained them by disease. Her acumen in this
affair could be thus explained, almost wholly. As to the truth of the
explanation, I felt a singular presentiment that it was correct.

"Well, that is curious enough," I said, "and I wish you success,
Nighthawk. What of our other female friend--the fair lady you arrested
in Richmond?"

"She is safe enough, colonel, and I don't think she will trouble us
soon."

"I am glad of it. I think her the more dangerous of _the two_."

"And I agree with you."

"When did you see Darke, last?"

"I have not met him for three months."

"He can not be dead?"

"He may be wounded."

"And Mohun--is he at his head-quarters?"

Nighthawk smiled.

"He is at Five Forks, to-day, colonel."

"And Willie Davenant?"

"In Richmond, on business at the war department."

"Humph! So I shall see neither--but another time."

And mounting my horse, I added:--

"Good luck, Nighthawk."

"Thank you, colonel--the same to you."

And leaving Nighthawk crouching down beside his fire, I rode on.




XIII.


DRINKING TEA UNDER DIFFICULTIES.


Pushing on, I reached the cavalry and horse artillery, which I was soon
done with--you see I dismiss "official" matters with commendable
rapidity, reader--then I went on across Roney's bridge and along the
"Flat Foot road" toward Disaways.

Following, amid a great wind and falling boughs, this winding road,
stretching onward between its lofty walls of pines--a wild and deserted
track, outside of the pickets, and completely untravelled. I recrossed
Stony Creek, rode on over a bridle-path, and came just at sunset in
sight of the hill upon which Disaways raised its ancient gables, near
the Rowanty.

My horse neighed as he cantered up, and passed under the great oaks. He
seemed to feel that this was something like home to him now, and that
his day's march was over. In fact, all the months of winter I had
regularly stopped at Disaways on my way to the cavalry at Hicksford. My
friends had pathetically remonstrated--"there was not a single picket
on the Rowanty in front of me, there, and I would certainly be captured
some day,"--but I had persisted in stopping there still, on every tour
which I made. How to resist the temptation! Disaways was just thirty
miles from Petersburg. I always reached its vicinity as night fell, on
the dark winter days. I was always cold, hungry, weary, depressed by
the dull gray skies; and I knew what awaited me there--a blazing fire,
a good supper, and Katy's smiles brighter than sunshine! She always ran
to greet me, with both hands extended. Her blue eyes danced with joy,
her rosy cheeks glowed, her lips laughed, and were like carnations, her
golden ringlets fell in a shower over her white and delicate temples,
or were blown back in ripples by the wintry wind.

Could you have resisted that, my dear reader? Would you have shrunk
from Yankee scouting parties? For my part I thought I would risk it. I
might be surprised and captured at any moment--the territory was open
to the enemy--but I would have had a charming evening, would have been
cheered by Katy's sunshine--while I was alive and free, I would have
lived, and in a manner the most delightful!

Hitherto some angel had watched over me, and Disaways had been
unvisited by the enemy's scouting parties, without so much as a vedette
at the Halifax bridge, within half a mile. I had sat by the fire, eaten
countless suppers, laughed and conversed with my good friends, slept
soundly in a _real bed_, and gone on my way in the morning rejoicing.

I had thus always escaped surprise. No enemy ever annoyed me. It was
the old adage, however, of the pitcher that went to the well so
often!--but let me go on with my narrative.

As my horse uttered his shrill neigh now, ringing through the March
evening, the door opened and Katy ran out to greet me. She had never
looked more beautiful, and I recall still, as though I had seen it
yesterday, the charming smile on her red lips. The wind blew back her
ringlets till they resembled golden ripples--the rosy cheeks were
flushed--there madam! (I say this to some one who is leaning over my
shoulder, and laughing) don't begrudge me these smiling memories! Katy
was only my little niece as it were--she is married and far away now.
Nay, Surry ought to love and be grateful to the little lady who took
such good care, in those grim days, of--your husband, madam!

Behind Katy appeared the faces of the excellent family, who cordially
greeted me. Behind all appeared the blushing but dandified Tom Herbert.

"Ah! there is a straggler!" I said. "Why don't you send him back to his
command, ladies? Every man should be at his post in this trying
moment!"

"Oh, bother, my dear Surry! what a tongue you have!" exclaimed Tom.

"I see General Fitz was right, or his staff rather, in what they told
me, Tom."

"What did they tell you, my dear boy?"

"That you were demoralized and captured!"

Sweet smile on the faces of the family at these words!

"That you had acknowledged your weakness, seen that further resistance
was hopeless, and were already negotiating a surrender to the enemy.
Well, Tom, what are the terms? Are they arranged?"

Suddenly I felt my hair pulled by an enemy from behind; and looking
round I saw Miss Katy passing by, with an immense appearance of
innocence. Her face was blushing; her lips emitted a low laugh; and
seeing that no one was looking at her, she raised her finger in silent
menace at me.

This caused a diversion, and Tom was enabled to rally his forces.

"My dear Surry," he said, smiling, with his delightfully foppish air,
"it always charms me to meet you, for you are always sparkling,
brilliant, full of wit; which reminds me of the good old days with
Stuart! You have only one fault, my boy, you think yourself a
philosopher. Don't do that, I beg, Surry!--But what's the news from
Petersburg?"

I acquiesced in the change of topic, and gave Tom the news; but I was
looking at Katy.

More than ever before I admired that little "bird of beauty," flitting
about with charming grace, and an irresistible business air, to get me
my supper, for the rest had just finished. This privilege she always
claimed when I came to Disaways; fighting furiously, if the excellent
lady of the manor attempted to supplant her. Looking at her, as she ran
about now, engaged in her most admirable occupation, I thought her
lovelier than ever before--certainly than when talking in the woods
with Tom! You see she was getting my supper, reader!--and it seemed to
be a labor of love. The little fairy ran on her tiptoes from sideboard
to table; spread a snowy napkin, and placed a gilt china plate upon it;
made tea; covered the table with edibles; and placed beside my plate a
great goblet of yellow cream, of the consistency of syrup. Then she
poured out my tea, set my chair to the table, and came with courtesy
and laughing ceremony, to offer me her arm, and lead me to my seat.

Men are weak, worthy reader, and the most "romantic and poetical" of us
all, have much of the animal in us. That is a mortifying confession. I
was terribly hungry, and at that moment I think my attention was more
closely riveted on the table, than even upon Miss Katy with her roses
and ringlets.

I therefore unbuckled my sabre, placed the little hand on my arm, and
was about to proceed toward the table, when a shot, accompanied by a
shout, was heard from the direction of the Rowanty.

I went and buckled on my sword again. Then seeing Tom rise quickly--to
get his horse ready, he said--I requested him to have my own resaddled,
and returned to the table.

I had just raised the cup of tea to my lips, amid warnings from the
family, to take care or I would be captured, when a cavalryman galloped
up the hill, and stopped in front of the door.

"Look out, the Yankees are coming!" he cried.

I glanced through the window, and recognized a man of Mohun's command,
who also recognized me.

"How near are they?" I said, attempting to swallow the burning tea.

"Not a quarter of a mile off, colonel!"

"That will give me time," I said.

And I applied myself again to the tea, which this time I poured out
into the saucer, in order to cool it.

"Look out, colonel!" cried the man.

"Where are they?"

"At the gate."

I finished the tea, and the goblet of cream just as the man
shouted:--

"Here they are, right on you, colonel!"

And I heard the sound of a galloping horse, accompanied by shots at the
retreating cavalryman.

I went quickly to the window. A column of Federal cavalry was rapidly
ascending the hill. By the last beams of day I recognized Darke at the
head of the column; and by his side rode Mr. Alibi. I thought I could
see that Darke was thin and very pale, but was not certain. The light
was faint, and I had only one glance--discretion suggested a quick
retreat.

I just grazed capture--passing through the door, in rear of the
mansion, at the very moment when a number of the enemy, who had hastily
dismounted, rushed in at the front door.

Tom was mounted, and holding my horse, which the good boy had saddled
with his own hands. I leaped to saddle, and had scarcely done so, when
a pistol bullet whizzed by my head. It had crashed through a pane of
the window from within--and a loud shout followed. We had been
perceived.

Under these circumstances, my dear reader, we always ran in the late
war. Some persons considered it disgraceful to run or dodge, but they
were civilians.

"Don't run until you are obliged to, but then run like the ----!" said
a hard-fighting general.

And one day when a lady was telling General R.E. Lee, how a friend of
hers had dodged once, the general turned to the laughing officer, and
said in his deep voice, "That's right captain, dodge all you can!"

I have often dodged, and more than once have--withdrawn rapidly. On
this occasion, Tom and I thought that retreat was the wisest course. In
a moment we had disappeared in the woods, followed by pistol shots and
some of the enemy.

They did not pursue us far. The Federal cavalry did not like the
Virginia woods.

In ten minutes their shots were no longer heard; their shouts died
away; and returning on our steps, we came once more in sight of
Disaways and reconnoitred.

The enemy were not visible, and riding up, we dismounted and
entered.[1]

[Footnote 1: "I have taken up too much space with this trifle," said
Colonel Surry when I read this, "but that hot tea was a real cup of
tea! I was really burned nearly to death, in attempting to swallow it!
The dialogue with my friend, the cavalryman, was real; and it is just
these trifles which cling to the memory, obscuring the 'greater
events!'"]




XIV.


MR. ALIBI.


The enemy had eaten up my supper! A glance at the table told the whole
tragic history;--but the unnerved family were scarce in a condition to
think of my misfortune.

The enemy had staid for a few moments only, but in that time the family
had gathered important information of their intentions. They were going
to surprise and attack General Fitz Lee that night; and had not so much
as halted, as they passed the house, to gain a by-road beyond. They
were commanded, the men said, by a General Darke, and guided by a man
living near Monk's Neck, whose name was Alibi.

This information of the enemy's design banished all other thoughts from
my mind and Tom's. We ran to our horses--and I think I heard something
like a kiss, in the shadow of the porch, as Tom and Katy parted.

We galloped into the woods, following a course parallel to that taken
by the enemy's cavalry, and keeping as close to it as was safe.

"A sudden parting between yourself and Katy, Tom!" I said, as we
galloped on. "A touching spectacle! When will you be married?"

"In a week or two--to answer seriously, old fellow," responded Tom.

"Is it possible!"

"Even so, my boy."

"Here, at Disaways?"

"No, in Richmond. Katy's family are refugees there, now; and I was
going to escort her to Petersburg to-morrow, but for these rascals--and
I will do it, yet."

"Good! I hope the way will be clear then! Let us go on. There is no
time to lose in order to warn General Fitz!"

We pushed on, following bridle-paths, and making toward Dinwiddie
Court-House. Half an hour thus passed, and we were near the Roney's
Bridge road, when, suddenly, the whole forest on our right blazed with
shots. Loud shouts accompanied the firing. The woods crackled as
horsemen rushed through them. An obstinate fight was going on in the
darkness, between the Federal and Confederate cavalry.

Plainly, the Confederates had not been surprised, and the dash and vim
with which they met the Federal onset, seemed to dishearten their
enemies. For fifteen minutes the combat continued with great fury, amid
the pines; the air was filled with quick spirts of flame, with the
clash of sabres, with loud cheers and cries; then the wave of Federal
horsemen surged back toward the Rowanty; the Confederates pressed them,
with cheer; and the affair terminated in a headlong pursuit.

Tom and myself had gotten into the _melee_ early in the action, and my
feather had been cut out of my hat by a sabre stroke which a big blue
worthy aimed at me. This was my only accident, however. In fifteen
minutes I had the pleasure of seeing our friends run.

I followed with the rest, for about a mile. Then I drew rein, and
turned back--my horse was completely exhausted. I slowly returned
toward Dinwiddie Court-House; hesitated for a moment whether I would
lodge at the tavern; shook my head in a manner not complimentary to the
hostelry; and set out to spend the night at "Five Forks."

I did not know, until some days afterward, that a serious accident had
happened to the worthy Mr. Alibi, guide and friend of General Darke.

He had been struck by a bullet in the fight; had flapped his wings;
cackled; tumbled from his horse; and expired.

Nighthawk's visit thus went for nothing.

Mr. Alibi was dead.




XV.


FROM FIVE FORKS TO PETERSBURG.


I shall not dwell upon the evening and night spent at "Five
Forks"--upon whose threshold I was met and cordially greeted by the
gray-haired Judge Conway.

In the great drawing-room I found the young ladies, who hastened to
procure me supper; and I still remember that waiter of every species of
edibles,--that smiling landscape above which rose the spire-like neck
of a decanter! These incessant "bills of fare" will, I fear, revolt
some readers! But these are my memoirs; and _memoirs_ mean
recollections. I have forgotten a dozen battles, but still remember
that decanter-phenomenon in March, 1865.  I spent the evening in
cordial converse with the excellent Judge Conway and his daughters, and
on the next morning set out on my return to Petersburg. Mohun had not
been visible. At the first sound of the firing, he had mounted his
horse and departed at a gallop.

So much for my visit to Five Forks. I pass thus rapidly over it, with
real regret--lamenting the want of space which compels me to do so.

Do you love the queenly rose, and the modest lily of the valley,
reader? I could have shown you those flowers, in Georgia and Virginia
Conway. They were exquisitely cordial and high-bred--as was their
gray-haired father. They spoke, and moved, and looked, as only the
high-bred can. Pardon that obsolete word, "high-bred," so insulting in
the present epoch! I am only jesting when I seem to intimate that I
considered the stately old judge better than the black servant who
waited upon me at supper!

Of Mohun and Will Davenant, I had said nothing, in conversing with the
smiling young ladies. But I think Miss Georgia, stately and imposing as
she was, looked at me with a peculiar smile, which said, "You are _his_
friend, and cannot be a mere ordinary acquaintance to _me_!"

And here I ought to inform the reader, that since that first visit of
mine to Five Forks, affairs had marched with the young lady and her
friend. Mohun and Miss Georgia were about to be married, and I was to
be the first groomsman. The woman-hating Benedict of the banks of the
Rappahannock had completely succumbed, and the satirical Beatrice had
also lost all her wit. It died away in sighs, and gave place to
reveries--those reveries which come to maidens when they are about to
embark on the untried seas of matrimony.

But I linger at Five Forks when great events are on the march. Bidding
my hospitable host and his charming daughters good morning, I mounted
my horse and set out over the White Oak road toward Petersburg. As I
approached the Rowanty, I saw that the new defenses erected by Lee,
were continuous and powerful. Long tiers of breastworks, and redoubts
crowning every eminence, showed very plainly the great importance which
Lee attached to holding the position.

In fact, this was the key to the Southside road. Here was to take place
the last great struggle.

I rode on, in deep thought, but soon my reverie was banished. Just as I
reached the hill above Burgess's, who should I see coming from the
direction of the Court-House--but Tom Herbert and Katy Dare!

Katy Dare, on a little pony, with a riding skirt reaching nearly to the
ground!--with her trim little figure clearly outlined by the
fabric--with a jaunty little riding hat balanced lightly upon her
ringlets--with her cheeks full of roses, her lips full of smiles, her
eyes dancing like two blue waves, which the wind agitates!

Don't find fault with her, Mrs. Grundy, for having Tom only as an
escort. Those were stern and troubled times; our poor girls were
compelled often to banish ceremony. Katy had only this means to get
back to her family, and went with Tom as with her brother.

She held out both hands to me, her eyes dancing. Three years have
passed since then, but if I were a painter, I could make her portrait,
reproducing every detail! Nothing has escaped my memory; I still hear
her voice; the sun of 1868, not of 1865, seems to shine on the rosy
cheeks framed by masses of golden ringlets!

I would like to record our talk as we rode on toward
Petersburg--describe that ride--a charming episode, flashing like a
gleam of sunlight, amid the dark days, when the black clouds had
covered the whole landscape. In this volume there is so much gloom!
Suffering and death have met us so often! Can you wonder, my dear
reader, that the historian of such an epoch longs to escape, when he
can, from the gloom of the tragedy, and paint those scenes of comedy
which occasionally broke the monotonous drama? To write this book is
not agreeable to me. I wear out a part of my life in composing it. To
sum up, in cold historic generalities that great epoch would be
little--but to enter again into the hot atmosphere; to live once more
that life of the past; to feel the gloom, the suspense, the despair of
1865 again--believe me, that is no trifle! It wears away the nerves,
and tears the heart. The cheek becomes pale as the MS. grows! The
sunshine is yonder, but you do not see it. The past banishes the
present. Across the tranquil landscape of March, 1868, jars the cannon,
and rushes the storm wind of March, 1865!

The cloud was black above, therefore, but Katy Dare made the world
bright with her own sunshine, that day. All the way to Petersburg, she
ran on in the most charming prattle. The winding Boydton road, like the
banks of the lower Rowanty, was made vocal with her songs--the "Bird of
Beauty" and the whole repertoire. Nor was Tom Herbert backward in
encouraging his companion's mirth. Tom was the soul of joy. He sang
"Katy! Katy! don't marry any other!" with an unction which spoke in his
quick color, and "melting glances" as in the tones of his laughing
voice. Riding along the famous highway, upon which only a solitary
cavalryman or a wagon occasionally appeared, the little maiden and her
lover made the pine-woods ring with their songs, their jests, and their
laughter!

It is good to be young and to love. Is there any thing more charming?
For my part I think that the curly head holds the most wisdom! Tell me
which was the happier--the gray-haired general yonder, oppressed by
care, or the laughing youth and maiden? It is true there is something
nobler, however, than youth, and joy, and love. It is to know that you
are doing your duty--to bear up, like Atlas, a whole world upon your
shoulders--to feel that, if you fall, the whole world will shake--and
that history will place your name beside that of Washington!

As the sun began to decline, we rode into Petersburg, and bidding Katy
and Tom adieu, I returned to my Cedars.

I had taken my last ride in the "low grounds" of the county of
Dinwiddie; I was never more to see Disaways, unless something carries
me thither in the future. To those hours spent in the old mansion, and
with my comrades, near it, I look back now with delight. Days and
nights on the Rowanty! how you come back to me in dreams! Happy hours
at Disaways, with the cavalry, with the horse artillery! you live still
in my memory, and you will live there always! Katy Dare runs to greet
me again as in the past--again her blue eyes dance, and the happy winds
are blowing her bright curls into ripples! She smiles upon me still--as
in that "winter of discontent." Her cheerful voice again sounds. Her
small hands are held out to me. All things go--nothing lingers--but
those days on the Rowanty, amid the sunset gilded pines, come back with
all their tints, and are fadeless in my memory.

Going back thus in thought, to that winter of 1864, I recall the
friendly faces of Katy, and all my old comrades--I hear their laughter
again, touch their brave hands once more, and salute them, wishing them
long life and happiness.

"Farewell!" I murmur, "Rowanty, and Sappony, and Disaways! _Bonne
fortune!_ old companions, little maiden, and kind friends all! It has
not been time lost to gather together my recollections--to live again
in the past,--to catch the aroma of those hours when kindness smoothed
the front of war! We no longer wear the gray--my mustache only shows it
_now_! but, thank heaven! many things in memory survive. I think of
these--of the old comrades, the old times. Health and happiness attend
you on your way through life, comrades! May the silver spare the gold
of your clustering ringlets, Katy! Joy and gladness follow your steps!
all friendly stars shine on you! Wherever you are, old friends, may a
kind heaven send you its blessing!"




XVI.


LEE'S LAST GREAT BLOW.


I reached Petersburg on the evening of March 24, 1865.

The ride was a gay comedy--but a tragedy was about to follow it. On the
very next morning, in the gray March dawn, Lee was going to strike his
last great blow at Grant. A column under Gordon, that brave of braves,
was going to be hurled headlong against Hare's Hill, the enemy's
centre, just below Petersburg.

That design was evidently the result of supreme audacity, or of
despair. In either case it indicated the terrible character of the
crisis. There could be no two opinions upon that point. Lee aimed at
nothing less than to cut General Grant's army in two--to root himself
doggedly in the very centre of his enemies, and to force General Grant
to draw back the entire left wing of his army, or run the risk, by
holding his position, to have it destroyed.

Was Lee's motive to open the way for his retreat over the Boydton road
toward Danville? I know not. Military critics say so, and it is certain
that, a month before, he had endeavored to retreat. The government had
checked him, then, but now, that step was plainly the only one left. He
might effect his retreat by forcing Grant to draw in his left wing for
the support of his centre. Lee could then retire from Hare's Hill; make
a rapid march westward; push for North Carolina; and joining his forces
with those of Johnston, continue the war in the Gulf States, falling
back if necessary to Texas.

I have always thought that this was his design, but I was much too
obscure a personage to gain any personal knowledge of his plans. It is
certain that he designed one of two things--either to open the path for
his retreat, or to relieve his right wing toward Five Forks, which was
bending under the immense pressure upon it. Either motive was that of a
good soldier--and what seemed wild audacity was sound common sense.

For the rest, there was little else to do. Some change in the aspect of
things was vitally necessary. Grant had been re-enforced by a large
portion of Sherman's army, and the Federal troops in front of Lee now
numbered about one hundred and fifty thousand. As Lee's force, all
told, on his entire line, was only about forty thousand, the rupture of
the far-stretching defences, at some point, seemed only a question of
time. And scarcely that. Rather, a question of the moment selected by
Grant for his great blow.

At the end of March the hour of decisive struggle was plainly at hand.
The wind had dried the roads; artillery could move; the Federal left
was nearly in sight of the Southside road; one spring, and General
Grant could lay hold on that great war-artery, and then nothing would
be left to Lee but retreat or surrender.

Such was the condition of things at Petersburg, in these last days of
March. Grant was ready with his one hundred and fifty thousand infantry
to strike Lee's forty thousand. Sheridan was ready with his twelve
thousand superbly mounted cavalry, to hurl himself against the two
thousand half-armed horsemen, on starved and broken-down animals, under
command of General Fitz Lee. A child could have told the result. The
idea of resistance, with any hope, in the defences, any longer, was a
chimera. Lee was a great soldier--history contains few greater. The
army of Northern Virginia was brave--the annals of the world show none
braver. But there was one thing which neither great generalship, or
supreme courage could effect. Opposed by one hundred and fifty thousand
well-fed troops, with every munition of war, forty thousand starving
men, defending a line of forty miles, must in the end meet capture or
destruction.

The country did not see it, but General Lee did. The civilians--the
brave ones--had a superstitious confidence in the great commander and
his old army. It had repulsed the enemy so uninterruptedly, that the
unskilled people believed it invincible. Lee had foiled Grant so
regularly that he was looked upon as the very God of Victory. Defeat
could not come to him. Glory would ever follow his steps. On the
banners of the old army of Northern Virginia, led by Lee, the eagles of
victory would still, perch, screaming defiance, and untamed to the end.

While the civilians were saying this, Lee was preparing to retreat.
Nothing blinded that clear vision--the eyes of the great chief pierced
every mist. He saw the blow coming--the shadow of the Grant hammer as
the weapon was lifted, ran before--on the 25th of March Lee's rapier
made it last lunge. But when his adversary recoiled to avoid it, it was
Lee who was going to retreat.

That lunge was sudden and terrible--if it did not accomplish its
object. In the dark March morning, Gordon, "The Bayard of the army,"
advanced with three thousand men across the abatis in front of Hare's
Hill.

What followed was a fierce tragedy, as brief and deadly as the fall of
a thunder-bolt.

Gordon rushed at the head of his column over the space which separated
the lines; stormed the Federal defences at the point of the bayonet;
seized on Fort Steadman, a powerful work, and the batteries surrounding
it, then as the light broadened in the East, he looked back for
re-enforcements. None came--he was holding the centre of Grant's army
with three thousand men. What he had won was by sheer audacity--the
enemy had been surprised, and seemed laboring under a species of
stupor; if not supported, and supported at once, he was gone!

An hour afterward, Gordon was returning, shattered and bleeding at
every pore. The enemy had suddenly come to their senses after the
stunning blow. From the forts and redoubts crowning every surrounding
hill issued the thunder. Cannon glared, shell crashed, musketry rolled
in long fusillade, on three sides of the devoted Confederates. Huddled
in the trenches they were torn to pieces by a tempest of shell and
bullets.

As the light broadened, the hills swarmed with blue masses hastening
toward the scene of the combat, to punish the daring assailants.
Grant's army was closing in around the little band of Gordon. No help
came to them, they were being butchered; to stay longer there was mere
suicide, and the few who could do so, retreated to the Confederate
lines.

They were few indeed. Of the splendid assaulting column, led by Gordon,
more than two thousand were killed or captured. He had split the
stubborn trunk, but it was the trunk which now held the wedge in its
obdurate jaws.

Gordon retreated with his bleeding handful--it was the second or third
time that this king of battle had nearly accomplished impossibilities
by the magic of his genius.

He could do only what was possible. To stay yonder was impossible. And
the scarred veteran of thirty-three years, came back pale and in
despair.

Lee had struck his last great blow, and it had failed.




XVII.


THE WRESTLE FOR THE WHITE OAK ROAD.


It is unsafe to wound the wild-boar, unless the wound be mortal. To
change the figure, Grant had parried the almost mortal thrust of Lee;
and now, with the famous hammer lifted and whirled aloft, aimed the
final and decisive blow at the crest of his great adversary.

On Wednesday, March 29th, the Federal commander commenced the general
movement, which had for its object the destruction of Lee's right wing,
and the occupation of the Southside road.

Before dawn, the masses of blue infantry began to move westward across
the Rowanty, laying down bridges over the watercourses, as the columns
passed on; and on the night of the same day, the corps of Humphreys and
Warren were near Dinwiddie Court-House with their extreme right
guarded, by Sheridan's cavalry.

Such was the work of Wednesday. The great moment had evidently arrived.
Lee penetrated at a single glance the whole design of his adversary;
collected about fifteen thousand men, nearly half his army, and leaving
Longstreet north of the James, and only a skirmish line around
Petersburg, marched westward, beyond the Rowanty, to meet the enemy on
the White Oak road.

On the morning of the 30th, all was ready for General Grant's great
blow. But the elements were hostile to the Federal side. In the night,
a heavy rain had fallen. All day on the 30th, it continued to rain, and
military movements were impossible. The two great opponents looked at
each other,--lines drawn up for the decisive struggle.

On the 31st, Grant was about to open the attack on Lee, when that
commander saved him the trouble. The Virginian seemed resolved to die
in harness, and advancing.

The corps of Humphreys and Warren had advanced from Dinwiddie
Court-House toward the Southside road, and Warren was in sight of the
White Oak road, when, suddenly, Lee hurled a column against him, and
drove him back. The Confederates followed with wild cheers, endeavoring
to turn the enemy's left, and finish them. But the attempt was in vain.
Federal re-enforcements arrived. Lee found his own flank exposed, and
fell back doggedly to the White Oak road again, having given the enemy
a great scare, but effecting nothing.

As he retired, intelligence reached him that Sheridan's cavalry were
advancing upon Five Forks. That position was the key of the whole
surrounding country. If Sheridan seized and occupied this great
_carrefour_, Lee's right was turned.

A column was sent without delay, and reached the spot to find Sheridan
in possession of the place. Short work was made of him. Falling upon
the Federal cavalry, Pickett and Fitzhugh Lee drove them back upon
Dinwiddie--pushed rapidly after them--and, but for the terrible swamp,
into which the late rains had converted the low grounds, would have
followed them to the Court-House, and gotten in rear of the left wing
of the Federal army.

That was the turning point. If Pickett and Fitz Lee had reached
Dinwiddie court-house, and attacked in the enemy's rear, while Lee
assailed them in front, it is difficult to believe that the battle
would not have resulted in a Confederate victory.

Such was the alarm of General Grant at the new aspect of affairs, that
late at night he withdrew Warren, and ordered him to hurry toward
Dinwiddie Court-House, to succor Sheridan in his hour of need. Then if
our flanking column could have pushed on--if Lee had then advanced--but
all this is idle, reader. Providence had decreed otherwise. The
flanking column could not advance--at ten at night it was withdrawn by
Lee--midnight found the two armies resting on their arms, awaiting the
morning of the first of April.




XVIII.


THE BRIDEGROOM.


I have endeavored to present a rapid, but accurate summary of the great
events which took place on the lines around Petersburg, from the
morning of the 29th of March, when General Grant began his general
movement, to the night of the 3lst, when he confronted Lee on the White
Oak road, ready, after a day of incessant combat, which had decided
little, to renew the struggle on the next morning for the possession of
the Southside road.

This summary has been, of necessity, a brief and general one. For this
volume has for its object, rather to narrate the fortunes of a set of
individuals, than to record the history of an epoch, crowded with
tragic scenes. I cannot here paint the great picture. The canvass and
the time are both wanting. The rapid sketch which I have given will
present a sufficient outline. I return, now, to those personages whose
lives I have tried to narrate, and who were destined to reach the
catastrophe in their private annals at the moment when the Confederacy
reached its own.

I shall, therefore, beg the reader to leave the Confederate forces at
bay on the White Oak road--the flanking column under Pickett and
Johnson falling back on Five Forks--and accompany me to the house of
the same name, within a mile of the famous _carrefour_, where, on the
night of the 3lst of March, some singular scenes are to be enacted.

It was the night fixed for Mohun's marriage. I had been requested to
act as his first groomsman; and, chancing to encounter him during the
day, he had informed me that he adhered to his design of being married
in spite of every thing.

When night came at last, on this day of battles, I was wearied out with
the incessant riding on staff duty; but I remembered my promise; again
mounted my horse; and set out for "Five Forks," where, in any event, I
was sure of a warm welcome.

Pushing on over the White Oak road, I turned southward at Five Forks,
and riding on toward Judge Conway's, had just reached the road coming
in from Dinwiddie Court-House, when I heard a cavalier approaching from
that quarter, at a rapid gallop.

He was darting by, toward Five Forks, when by the starlight I
recognized Mohun.

"Halt!" I shouted.

He knew my voice, and drew rein with an exclamation of pleasure.

"Thanks, my dear old friend," he said, grasping my hand. "I knew you
would not fail me."

"Your wedding will take place, Mohun?"

"Yes, battle or no battle."

"You are right. Life is uncertain. You will hear cannon instead of
marriage-bells probably, at your nuptials--but that will be inspiring.
What is the news from the Court-House?"

"Our infantry is falling back."

"The condition of the roads stopped them?"

"Yes, it was impossible to get on; and they have been recalled by order
of General Lee. Listen! There is the column coming--they are falling
back to Five Forks, a mile north of Judge Conway's."

In fact, as we rode on now, I heard the muffled tramp of a column, and
the rattle of artillery chains in the woods.

"The enemy will follow, I suppose?"

"Not before morning, I hope."

I smiled.

"Meanwhile you are making good use of the time to get married. What
will you do with Miss Georgia?"

"You mean Mrs. Mohun, Surry!" he said, smiling.

"Yes."

"Well, she will be sent off--her father will take the whole family to
Petersburg in the morning, to avoid the battle which will probably take
place in this vicinity to-morrow."

"You are right. I predict a thundering fight here, in the morning."

"Which I hope I shall not balk in, my dear Surry," said Mohun, smiling.

"Is there any danger of that?"

"I really don't know. It is not good for a soldier to be too happy. It
makes him shrink from bullets, and raises visions of a young widow, in
mourning, bending over a tomb."

"Pshaw! stop that folly!" I said. "Is it possible that a stout-hearted
cavalier like General Mohun can indulge in such apprehensions--and at a
moment as happy as this?"

I saw him smile sadly, in the dim starlight.  "I am much changed," he
said, gently; "I no longer risk my life recklessly--trying to throw it
away. Once, as you know, Surry, I was a poor outcast, and my conscience
was burdened with a terrible crime. Life was little to me, then, and I
would not have cared if a bullet cut it short. I was reckless,
desperate, and had no hope. Now, I have hope--and a great deal more
than all--I have happiness. My hands are not stained with the blood of
that man and woman--I have the love of a pure girl who is going to give
her life to me--and I have prayed to God for pardon, and been pardoned,
I feel--else that All-merciful Being would not make my poor life bright
again! But let me stop this talk! A strange conversation for a wedding
night! Let me say again, however, my dear Surry, that I have no
enmities now. I no longer hate _that man_, and would not harm _that
woman_ for aught on earth. Let them go--they are indifferent to me. I
appeal to God to witness the purity of my sentiments, and the sincerity
with which I have prayed, 'Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
those who have trespassed against us!'"

I reached out my hand in the darkness, and pressed that of the speaker.

"You are right, Mohun--there is something greater, more noble, than
vengeance--it is forgiveness. More than ever, I can say now of you,
what I said after hearing your history that night."

"What was that, old friend?"

"That you were no longer the bitter misanthrope, hating your species,
and snarling at all things--no longer the gay cavalier rushing to
battle as a pastime--that you were altered, entirely changed,
rather--that your character was elevated and purified--and that now,
you were a patriotic soldier, fit to live or die with Lee!"

"Would that I were!" he murmured, letting his head fall upon his
breast.

"That is much to say of any man; but I will add more. You are worthy of
her--the blossom of Five Forks!"

As I uttered these words, we reached the gate.

A moment afterward we had entered the grounds, tethered our horses, and
were hastening to the house.




XIX.


THE CEREMONY.


On the threshold we were met by Judge Conway, with a bow and a smile.

He pressed our hands cordially, but with a covert sadness, which I
suppose comes to the heart of every father who is about to part with a
beloved daughter--to give up his place as it were to another--and then
we entered the great drawing-room where a gentleman in a white cravat
and black coat awaited us. No other persons were visible.

The great apartment was a charming spectacle, with its brilliant lights
and blazing fire. The frescoed walls danced in light shadows; the long
curtains were drawn down, completely excluding the March air. Coming in
out of the night, this smiling interior was inexpressibly home-like and
delightful.

As we entered, the clerical-looking gentleman rose, modestly, and
smiled.

"The Reverend Mr. Hope," said Judge Conway, presenting him. And Mr.
Hope, with the same gentle smile upon his lips, advanced and shook
hands.

At that name I had seen Mohun suddenly start, and turn pale. Then his
head rose quickly, his pallor disappeared, and he said with entire
calmness:

"Mr. Hope and myself are old acquaintances, I may even say, old
friends."

To these words Mr. Hope made a gentle and smiling reply; and it was
plain that he was very far from connecting the personage before him
with the terrible tragedy which had taken place at Fonthill, in
December, 1856. What was the origin of this ignorance? Had the worthy
man, in his remote parsonage, simply heard of the sudden disappearance
of Mohun, the lady, and _her brother_? Had his solitary life prevented
him from hearing the vague rumors and surmises which must have followed
that event? This was the simplest explanation, and I believe the
correct one. Certain it is that the worthy Mr. Hope received us with
smiling cordiality. Doubtless he recalled the past, but was too kind to
spread a gloom over Mohun's feelings by _alluding to his loss_. In a
few moments we were seated, and Judge Conway explained the presence of
the parson.

The explanation was simple. Mohun, incessantly engaged on duty, had
begged Judge Conway to send a message to the parson of his parish; the
parson was absent, leaving his church temporarily in charge of his
brother-clergyman, Mr. Hope; thus that gentleman by a strange chance,
was about to officiate at Mohun's second marriage, as he had at his
first.

I have explained thus, perhaps tediously, an incident which struck me
at the time as most singular. Are there fatalities in this world? The
presence of the Reverend Mr. Hope on that night at "Five Forks,"
resembled one of those strange coincidences which make us believe in
the doctrine of destiny.

Having exchanged compliments with the clergyman, Mohun and I were shown
to a dressing-room.

No sooner had the door closed, than I said to Mohun:--

"That is strange, is it not?"

"Singular, indeed," he replied, calmly, "but I am not averse to this
worthy man's presence, Surry. I have no concealments. I have related my
whole life to Judge Conway and Georgia. They both know the
circumstances which lead to the conviction that _that woman_ was
already married, when she married _me_--that the proof of her marriage
with Darke exists. Judge Conway is a lawyer, and knows that, in legal
phraseology, the array of circumstances 'excludes every other
hypothesis;' thus it is not as an adventurer that my father's son
enters this house: all is known, and I do not shrink from the eye of
this good man, who is about to officiate at my marriage."

"Does he know all?"

"I think not. I had half resolved to tell him. But there is no time
now. Let us get ready; the hour is near."

And Mohun looked at his watch.

"Nine o'clock," he said. "The ceremony takes place at ten."

And he rapidly made his toilet. The light fell on a superb-looking
cavalier. He was clad in full dress uniform, with the braid and stars
of a brigadier-general. The erect figure was clearly defined by the
coat, buttoned from chin to waist. Above, rose the proudly-poised head,
with the lofty brow, the brilliant black eyes, the dark imperial and
mustache, beneath which you saw the firm lips.

We descended to the drawing-room, where Judge Conway and Mr. Hope
awaited us.

Fifteen minutes afterward light steps were heard upon the great
staircase; the old statesman opened the door, and Miss Georgia Conway
entered the apartment, leaning upon the arm of her father.

She was clad in simple white muslin, with a string of pearls in her
dark hair; and I have never seen a more exquisite beauty. Her cheeks
glowed with fresh roses; a charming smile just parted her lips; and her
dark eyes, grand and calm, shone out from the snow-white forehead, from
which her black hair was carried back in midnight ripples, ending in
profuse curls. It was truly a _grande dame_ whom I gazed at on this
night, and, with eyes riveted upon the lovely face, I very nearly lost
sight of Miss Virginia, who followed her sister.

I hastened to offer my arm to the modest little flower, and followed
Judge Conway, who approached the parson, standing, prayer-book in hand,
in the middle of the apartment.

In another instant Mohun was standing beside Miss Georgia, and the
ceremony began.

It was not destined to proceed far.

The clergyman had nearly finished the exhortation with which the "form
for the solemnization of matrimony," commences.

All at I once I was certain that I heard steps on the portico, and in
the hall of the mansion.

The rest seemed not to hear them, however, and Mr. Hope continued the
ceremony.

"Into this holy estate," he went on, "these two persons present come
now to be joined. If any man can show just cause why they may not
lawfully be joined together, let him now speak, or else hereafter
forever hold his peace."

As he uttered the words the door was suddenly burst open, and Darke
entered the apartment with _the gray woman_.

In the midst of the stupor of astonishment, she advanced straight
toward Georgia Conway, twined her arm in that of the young lady, and
said quietly:--

"How do you do, cousin? I am Lucretia Conway. Your father is my uncle.
I have come to show just cause why you cannot marry General Mohun--my
husband!"




XX.


WHAT OCCURRED AT "FIVE FORKS," ON THE NIGHT OF MARCH 31, 1865.


Mohun turned like a tiger, and was evidently about to throw himself
upon Darke. I grasped his arm and restrained him.

"Listen!" I said.

The house was surrounded by trampling hoofs, and clattering sabres.

Darke had not drawn his pistol, and now glanced at me. His face was
thin and pale--he was scarce the shadow of himself--but his eyes
"burned" with a strange fire under his bushy brows.

"You are right, Colonel Surry!" he said, in his deep voice, to me,
"restrain your friend. Let no one stir, or they are dead. The house is
surrounded by a squadron of my cavalry. You are a mile from all succor.
You can make no resistance. I am master of this house. But I design to
injure no one. Sit down, madam," he added, to his companion, "I wish to
speak first."

The sentences followed each other rapidly. The speaker's accent was
cold, and had something metallic in it. The capture of the party before
him seemed to be no part of his design.

All at once the voice of the strange woman was heard in the silence.
She quietly released the arm of Georgia Conway, who had drawn back with
an expression of supreme disdain; and calmly seating herself in a
chair, gracefully cut some particles of dust from her gray riding habit
with a small whip which she carried.

"Yes, let us converse," she said, with her eyes riveted upon Georgia
Conway, "nothing can be more pleasant than these sweet family
reunions!"

Judge Conway glanced at the speaker with eyes full of sudden rage.

"Who are you, madam," he exclaimed, "who makes this impudent claim of
belonging to my family?"

"I have already told you," was the satirical reply of the woman.

"And you, sir!" exclaimed the old judge, suddenly turning and
confronting Darke, "perhaps you, too, are a member of the Conway
family?"

"Not exactly," was the cold reply.

"Your name, sir!"

"Mortimer Davenant."

Judge Conway gazed at the speaker with stupor.

"You that person?--you the son of General Arthur Davenant?"

"Yes, I am the son of General Arthur Davenant of the Confederate States
army--General Davenant, whom you hate and despise as a felon and
murderer--and I have come here to-night to relieve him of that
imputation; to tell you that it was I and not he, who murdered your
brother!

"A moment, if you please, sir," continued the speaker, in the same low,
cold tone, "do not interrupt me, I beg. I have little time, and intend
to be brief. You believe that your brother, George Conway, was put to
death by General Davenant. Here is the fact of the matter: I saw him at
Dinwiddie Court-House; knew he had a large sum of money on his person;
followed him, attacked him, murdered him--and with General Davenant's
pen-knife, which I had accidentally come into possession of. Then I
stole the knife from the court-house, to prevent his conviction;--wrote
and sent to him on the day of his trial a full confession of the
murder, signed with my name--and that confession he would not use; he
would not inculpate his son; for ten years he has chosen rather to
labor under the imputation of murder, than blacken the name of a
castaway son, whose character was wretched already, and whom he
believed dead.

"That is what I came here, to-night, to say to you, sir. I am a
wretch--I know that--it is a dishonor to touch my hand, stained with
every vice, and much crime. But I am not entirely lost, though I
told--my father--so, when I met him, not long since. Even a dog will
not turn and bite the hand that has been kind to him. I was a gentleman
once, and am a vulgar fellow now--but there is something worse than
crime, in my estimation; it is cowardice and ingratitude. You shall not
continue to despise my father; he is innocent of that murder. You have
no right to continue your opposition to my brother's marriage with your
daughter, for he is not the son of the murderer of your brother. _I_
count for nothing in this. I am not my father's son, or my brother's
brother. I am an outcast--a lost man--dead, as far as they are
concerned. It was to tell you this that I have come here to-night--and
for that only."

"And--this woman?" said Judge Conway, pale, and glaring at the speaker.

"Let her speak for herself," said Darke, coldly.

"I will do so, with pleasure," said the woman, coolly, but with an
intensely satirical smile. That smile chilled me--it was worse than any
excess of rage. The glance she threw upon Georgia Conway was one of
such profound, if covert, hatred, that it drove my hand to my hilt as
though to grasp some weapon.

"I will be brief," continued the woman, rising slowly, and looking at
Georgia Conway, with that dagger-like smile. "General Darke-Davenant
has related a pleasing little history. I will relate another, and
address myself more particularly to Judge Conway--my dear uncle. He
does not, or will not, recognize me; and I suppose I may have changed.
But that is not important. I am none the less Lucretia Conway. You do
not remember that young lady, perhaps, sir; your proud Conway blood has
banished from your memory the very fact of her former existence. And
yet she existed--she exists still--she is speaking to you--unbosoming
herself in the midst of her dear family! But to tell my little
story--it will not take many minutes. I was born here, you remember,
uncle, and grew up what is called headstrong. At sixteen, I fell in
love with a young Adonis with a mustache; and, as you and the rest
opposed my marriage, obdurately refusing your consent, I yielded to the
eloquence of Mr. Adonis, and eloped with him, going to the North. Here
we had a quarrel. I grew angry, and slapped Adonis; and he took his
revenge by departing without leaving me a wedding-ring to recall his
dear image. Then I met that gentleman--General Darke-Mortimer-Davenant!
We took a fancy to each other; we became friends; and soon afterward
travelled to the South, stopping in Dinwiddie. Here I made the
acquaintance of General Mohun--there he stands; he fell desperately in
love with me--married me--Parson Hope will tell you that--and then
attempted to murder me, without rhyme or reason. Luckily, I made my
escape from the monster! rejoined my friend, General Darke-Davenant;
the war came on; I came back here; have been lately arrested, but
escaped by bribing the rebel jailers; only, however, to find that my
naughty husband is going to marry my cousin Georgia! Can you wonder,
then, that I have exerted myself to be present at the interesting
ceremony? That I have yielded to my fond affection, and come to say to
my dear Georgia, 'Don't marry my husband, cousin!' And yet you frown at
me--you evidently hate me--you think I am _lying_--that I was married
before, perhaps. Well, if that be the case, where is the proof of that
marriage?" "Here it is!" said a voice, which made the woman turn
suddenly.

And opening the heavy window-curtains, which had, up to this moment,
concealed him, Nighthawk advanced into the apartment, holding in his
hand a paper.

A wild rage filled the eyes of the woman, but now so smiling. Her hand
darted to her bosom, and I saw the gleam of a poniard.

"This paper," said Nighthawk, coolly, "was found on the dead body of a
man named Alibi, who had stolen it. See, Judge Conway; it is in regular
form. 'At Utica, New York, Mortimer Davenant to Lucretia Conway.'
Attested by seal and signature. There can be no doubt of its
genuineness."

Suddenly a hoarse exclamation was heard, and a poniard gleamed in the
hand of the woman.

With a single bound, she reached Georgia Conway, and struck at her
heart. The corsage of the young lady, however, turned the poniard, and
at the same instant a thundering volley of musketry resounded without.

Furious cries were then heard; the wild trampling of horses; and a loud
voice ordering:--

"Put them to the bayonet!"

Darke drew his sword, and reached the side of the woman at a bound.
Throwing his arms around her, he raised her, and rushed, with his
burden, through the hall, toward the lawn, where a fierce combat was in
progress.

Suddenly the woman uttered a wild cry, and relaxed her grasp upon his
neck. A bullet had buried itself in her bosom.

Darke's hoarse and menacing voice echoed the cry; but he did not
release the body; with superhuman strength he raised it aloft, and
bounded down the steps.

As he reached the bottom, a man rushed upon him, and drove his bayonet
through his breast. It was withdrawn, streaming with blood.

"Put all to the bayonet!" shouted the voice of General Davenant, as he
charged with his young son, Charles, beside him.

At that voice Darke stretched out both hands, and dropping his sword,
uttered a cry, which attracted the general's attention.

For an instant they stood facing each other--unutterable horror in the
eyes of General Davenant.

"I am--done for," exclaimed Darke, a bloody foam rushing to his lips,
"but--I have told him--that _I_ was the murderer--that _you_ were
innocent. Give me your hand, father!"

General Davenant leaped to the ground, and with a piteous groan
received the dying man in his arms.

"I am a wretch--I know that--but I was a Davenant once"--came in low
murmurs. "Tell Will, he can marry now, for I will be dead--kiss me
once, Charley!"

The weeping boy threw himself upon his knees, and pressed his lips to
those of his brother.

As he did so, the wounded man fell back in his father's arms, and
expired.




XXI.


FIVE FORKS.


On the day after these events, Lee's extreme right at Five Forks, was
furiously attacked, and in spite of heroic resistance, the little force
under Pickett and Fitzhugh Lee was completely routed and dispersed.

Do you regard that term "heroic," as merely rhetorical, reader?

Hear a Northern writer, a wearer of blue, but too honest not to give
brave men their due:--

"Having gained the White Oak road, Warren changed front again to the
right, and advanced westward, so continually to take in flank and rear
whatever hostile force still continued to hold the right of the
Confederate line. This had originally been about three miles in extent,
but above two-thirds of it were now carried. Yet, vital in all its
parts, what of the two divisions remained, still continued the combat
with unyielding mettle. Parrying the thrusts of the cavalry from the
front, this poor scratch of a force threw back its left in a new and
short crochet, so as to meet the advance of Warren, who continued to
press in at right angles to the White Oak road. When the infantry,
greatly elated with their success, but somewhat disorganized by
marching and fighting so long in the woods, arrived before this new
line, they halted and opened an untimely fusillade, though there had
been orders not to halt. The officers, indeed, urged their men forward,
but they continued to fire without advancing. Seeing this hesitation,
Warren dashed forward, calling to those near him to follow. Inspired by
his example, the color-bearers and officers all along the front, sprang
out, and without more firing, the men charged at the _pas de course_,
capturing all that remained of the enemy. The history of the war
presents no equally splendid illustration of personal magnetism.... A
charge of the cavalry completed the rout, and the remnants of the
divisions of Pickett and Johnson fled westward from Five Forks, pursued
for many miles, and until long after dark, by the mounted divisions of
Merritt and McKenzie."

That is picturesque, is it not? It is amusing, too--though so tragic.

You can see that "poor scratch of a force" fighting to the death, can
you not? You can see the poor little handful attacked by Sheridan's
crack cavalry corps in front, and then suddenly by Warren's superb
infantry corps in both their flank and rear. You can see them, game to
the last, throwing back their left in the crochet to meet Warren; see
that good soldier cheering on his men "greatly elated," but "somewhat
disorganized," too--so much so that they suddenly halt, and require the
"personal magnetism" of the general to inspire them, and bring them up
to the work. Then the little scratch gives way--they are a handful, and
two corps are pressing them. They have "continued the combat with
unyielding mettle," as long as they could--now they are driven; and on
rushes the thundering cavaliers to destroy them! Sound the bugles! Out
with sabres! charge! ride over them! "Hurra!" So'the little scratch
disappears.

General Warren, who won that fight, was a brave man, and did not boast
of it. Tell me, general--you are honest--is any laurel in your hardwon
wreath, labelled "Five Forks?" It would be insulting that other laurel
labelled "Gettysburg," where you saved Meade!

In that bitter and desperate fight, Corse's infantry brigade and Lee's
cavalry won a renown which can never be taken from them. The infantry
remained unbroken to the last moment; and a charge of Lee's cavalry
upon Sheridan's drove them back, well nigh routed.

But nothing could avail against such numbers. The Confederate infantry,
cavalry, and artillery at last gave way. Overwhelmed by the great
force, they were shattered and driven. Night descended upon a
battlefield covered with heaps of dead and wounded, the blue mingled
with the gray.

Among those wounded, mortally to all appearances, was Willie Davenant.
He had fought with the courage of the bull-dog which lay _perdu_ under
the shy bearing of the boy. All the army had come to recognize it, by
this time; and such was the high estimate which General R.E. Lee placed
upon him, that it is said he was about to be offered the command of a
brigade of infantry. Before this promotion reached him, however, the
great crash came; and the brave youth was to fall upon the field of
Five Forks, where he fought his guns obstinately to the very last.

It was just at nightfall that he fell, with a bullet through his
breast.

The enemy were pressing on hotly, and there was no time to bring off
the wounded officer. It seemed useless, too. He lay at full length, in
a pool of blood, and was breathing heavily. To attempt to move him,
even if it were possible, threatened him with instant death.

A touching incident followed. The enemy carried Five Forks as night
descended. They had advanced so early, that Judge Conway and his
daughters had had no time to leave their home. Compelled to remain
thus, they did not forget their duty to the brave defenders of the
Confederacy, and when the firing ceased, the old statesman and his
daughters went to succor the wounded.

Among the first bodies which they saw was that of Will Davenant. One
gleam of the lantern carried by the Federal surgeon told all; and
Virginia Conway with a low moan knelt down and raised the head of the
wounded boy, placing it upon her bosom.

As she did so, he sighed faintly, and opening his eyes, looked up into
her face. The blood rushed to his cheeks; he attempted to stretch out
his arms; then falling back upon her bosom the young officer fainted.

A cry from the girl attracted the attention of the Federal surgeon who
was attending to the wounded Federalists. He was a kind-hearted man,
and came to the spot whence he had heard the cry.

"He is dying!" moaned the poor girl, with bloodless cheeks. "Can you do
nothing for him? Oh, save him, sir!--only save him!--have pity upon
me!"

She could say no more.

The surgeon bent over and examined the wound. When he had done so, he
shook his head.

"His wound is mortal, I am afraid," he said, "but I will do all I can
for him."

And with a rapid hand he stanched the blood, and bandaged the wound.

The boy had not stirred. He remained still, with his head leaning upon
the girl's breast.

"Can he live?" she murmured, in a tone almost inaudible.

"If he is not moved, he may possibly live; but if he is moved his death
is certain. The least change in the position of his body, for some
hours from this time, will be fatal."

"Then he shall not have to change his position!" exclaimed the girl.

And, with the pale face still lying upon her bosom, she remained
immovable.

Throughout all the long night she did not move or disturb the youth. He
had fallen into a deep sleep, and his head still lay upon her bosom.

Who can tell what thoughts came to that brave child as she thus watched
over his sleep? The long hours on the lonely battle-field, full of the
dead and dying, slowly dragged on. The great dipper wheeled in circle;
the moon rose; the dawn came; still the girl, with the groans of the
dying around her, held the wounded boy in her arms.[1]

[Footnote 1: Fact.]

Is there a painter in Virginia who desires a great subject? There it
is; and it is historical.

When the sun rose, Willie Davenant opened his eyes, and gazed up into
her face. Their glances met; their blushing cheeks were near each
other; the presence of her, whom he loved so much, seemed to have
brought back life to the shattered frame.

An hour afterward he was moved to "Five Forks," where he was tenderly
cared for. The old statesman had forgotten his life-long prejudice, and
was the first to do all in his power to save the boy.

A month afterward he was convalescent. A week more and he was well. In
the summer of 1865 he was married to Virginia Conway.

As for Mohun, his marriage ceremony, so singularly interrupted, had
been resumed and completed an hour after the death of the unfortunate
Darke and his companion.




XXII.


"THE LINE HAS BEEN STRETCHED UNTIL IT HAS BROKEN, COLONEL.".


At nightfall, on the first of April, the immense struggle had really
ended.

Lee's whole right was swept away; he was hemmed in, in Petersburg; what
remained for General Grant was only to give the _coup de grace_ to the
great adversary, who still confronted him, torn and shattered, but with
a will and courage wholly unbroken.

It is not an exaggeration, reader. Judge for yourself. I am to show you
Lee as I saw him in this moment of terrible trial: still undaunted,
raising his head proudly amid the crash of all around him; great in the
hour of victory; in the hour of ruin, sublime.

Grant attacked again at dawn, on the morning of the second of April. It
was Sunday, but no peaceful church-bells disturbed the spring air. The
roar of cannon was heard, instead, hoarse and menacing, in the very
suburbs of the devoted city.

There was no hope now--all was ended--but the Confederate arms were to
snatch a last, and supreme laurel, which time can not wither. Attacked
in Fort Gregg, by General Gibbon, Harris's Mississippi brigade, of two
hundred and fifty men, made one of those struggles which throw their
splendor along the paths of history.

"This handful of skilled marksmen," says a Northern writer, "conducted
the defence with such intrepidity, that Gibbon's forces, surging
repeatedly against it, were each time thrown back."

That is the generous but cold statement of an opponent; but it is
sufficient. It was not until seven o'clock that Gibbon stormed the
fort. Thirty men only out of the two hundred and fifty were left, but
they were still fighting.

In the attack the Federal loss was "about five hundred men," says the
writer above quoted.

So fell Lee's last stronghold on this vital part of his lines. Another
misfortune soon followed. The gallant A.P. Hill, riding ahead of his
men, was fired on and killed, by a small detachment of the enemy whom
he had halted and ordered to surrender.

He fell from his horse, and was borne back, already dying. That night,
amid the thunder of the exploding magazines, the commander, first, of
the "light division," and then of a great corps--the hero of Cold
Harbor, Sharpsburg, and a hundred other battles--was buried in the city
cemetery, just in time to avoid seeing the flag he had fought under,
lowered.

Peace to the ashes of that brave! Old Virginia had no son more
faithful!

Fort Gregg was the last obstacle. At ten o'clock that had fallen, heavy
masses of the enemy were pushing forward. Their bristling battalions,
and long lines of artillery had advanced nearly to General Lee's
head-quarters, a mile west of Petersburg.

As the great blue wave surged forward, General Lee, in full-dress
uniform, and wearing his gold-hilted sword, looked at them through his
field glasses from the lawn, in front of his head-quarters, on foot,
and surrounded by his staff. I have never seen him more composed.
Chancing to address him, he saluted me with the calmest and most
scrupulous courtesy; and his voice was as measured and unmoved as
though he were attending a parade. Do you laugh at us, friends of the
North, for our devotion to Lee? You should have seen him that day, when
ruin stared him in the face; you would have known then, the texture of
that stout Virginia heart.

The enemy's column literally rushed on. Our artillery, on a hill near
by, had opened a rapid fire on the head of the column; the enemy's
object was to gain shelter under a crest, in their front.

They soon gained it; formed line of battle, and charged the guns.

Then all was over. The bullets rained, in a hurtling tempest on the
cannoneer; the blue line came on with loud shouts; and the pieces were
brought off at a gallop, followed by a hailstorm of musket-balls.

Suddenly the Federal artillery opened from a hill behind their line.
General Lee had mounted his iron-gray, and was slowly retiring toward
Petersburg, surrounded by his officers. His appearance was superb at
this moment--and I still see the erect form of the proud old cavalier;
his hand curbing his restive horse; his head turned over his shoulder;
his face calm, collected, and full of that courage which nothing could
break.

All at once a shell screamed from the Federal battery, and bursting
close to the general, tore up the ground in a dozen places. The horse
of an officer at his side was mortally wounded by a fragment, and fell
beneath his rider other animals darted onward, with hanging bridle-reins,
cut by the shell--but I was looking at General Lee, feeling certain that
he must have been wounded.

He had escaped, however. Not a muscle of his calm face had moved. Only,
as he turned his face over his shoulder in the direction of the
battery, I could see a sudden color rush to his cheeks, and his eye
flashed.

"I should now like to go into a charge!" he said to Stuart, once, after
a disaster. And I thought I read the same thought in his face at this
moment.

But it was impossible. He had no troops. The entire line on the right
of Petersburg had been broken to pieces, and General Lee retired slowly
to his inner works, near the city where a little skirmish line, full of
fight yet, and shaking their fists at the huge enemy approaching,
received him with cheers and cries which made the pulse throb.

There was no _hack_ in that remnant--pardon the word, reader; it
expresses the idea.

"Let 'em come on! We'll give 'em ----!" shouted the ragged handful. I
dare not change that rough sentence. It belongs to history. And it was
glorious, if rude. In front of that squad was a whole army-corps. The
corps was advancing, supported by a tremendous artillery fire, to crush
them--and the tatterdemalions defied and laughed at them.

This all took place before noon. Longstreet had come in from the north
of the James with his skeleton regiments; and these opposed a bold
front to the enemy on the right, while Gordon commanding the left,
below the city, was thundering. A cordon hemmed in the little army now,
in the suburbs of Petersburg. The right, on the Boydton road, was
carried away; and the left beyond James River. One hope alone
remained--to hold Petersburg until night, and then retreat.

I will not describe that day. This volume approaches its end; and it is
fortunate. To describe at length those last days would be a terrible
task to the writer.

Lee telegraphed to the President that he was going to retreat that
night; and at the moment when the officers of the government hastily
left Richmond by the Danville railroad, the army at Petersburg began to
retire.

Did you witness what I describe, reader? What a spectacle!--the army of
Northern Virginia, or what was left of it, rather, stealing away amid
darkness. I sat my horse on the Hickory road, north of the Appomattox,
near the city, and looked at the ragged column, which defiled by from
the bridge over the river. In the starlight I could see their faces.
There was not a particle of depression in them. You would have said,
indeed, that they rejoiced at being out of the trenches--to be once
more on the march, with Lee, riding his old iron-gray, in front of his
old soldiers--with the battle-flags of a hundred battles still floating
defiantly.

General Lee stood at the forks of the road, directing his column. He
had said little during the day, and said little now, but his voice was
as calm and measured, his eye as serene as before.

"This is a bad business, colonel!"[1] I had heard him say, at the
moment when the shell burst near him in the morning.

[Footnote 1: His words.]

I heard but one other allusion which he made to the situation.

"Well, colonel," he said to an officer, in his deep and sonorous voice,
"it has happened as I told them it would, at Richmond. The line has
been stretched until it has broken."[1]

[Footnote 1: His words.]

So, over the Hickory road, leading up the northern bank of the
Appomattox, in the direction of Lynchburg--amid the explosion of
magazines, surging upward like volcanoes, the old army of Northern
Virginia, reduced to fifteen thousand men, went forth, still defiant,
into the night.




XXIII.


WHAT I SAW FROM THE GRAVE OF STUART.


Three hours afterward I was in Richmond.

Sent with a message for General Ewell, I had taken the last train which
left for the capital, and reached the city toward midnight.

The first person whom I saw was Tom Herbert, who ran to meet me. His
face was pale, but his resolute smile still lit up the brave face.

"Come and wait on me, my dear old friend," he said; "I am to be married
to-night!"

And in a few words he informed me that Katy had consented to have the
ceremony performed before Tom followed General Lee southward.

Half an hour afterward I witnessed a singular spectacle: that of a
wedding, past midnight, in the midst of hurry, confusion, uproar,
universal despair--the scene, a city about to fall into the hands of
the enemy--from which the government and all its defenders had fled.[1]

[Footnote 1: Real.]

Katy acted her part bravely. The rosy cheeks were unblanched still--the
sweet smile was as endearing. When I took an old friend's privilege to
kiss the smiling lips, there was no tremor in them, and her blue eyes
were as brave as ever.

So Tom and Katy were married--and I bestowed upon them my paternal
blessing! It was a singular incident--was it not, reader? But war is
full of such.

I did not see Tom again until I met him on the retreat. And Katy--I
have never seen her sweet face since--but heaven bless her!

An hour afterward I had delivered my message to General Ewell, who was
already moving out with his small force to join Lee. They defiled
across the bridges, and disappeared. For myself, tired out, I wrapped
my cape around me, and stretching myself upon a sofa, at the house of a
friend, snatched a little rest.

I was aroused toward daybreak by a tremendous explosion, and going to
the window, saw that the city was in flames. The explosion had been
caused, doubtless, by blowing up the magazines, or the rams in James
River. The warehouses and bridges had been fired in anticipation of the
approach of the enemy.

It behooved me to depart now, unless I wished to be captured. I had
taken the precaution to provide myself with a horse from one of the
government stables; the animal stood ready saddled behind the house; I
bade my alarmed friends farewell, and mounting, rode through the
streets of the devoted city toward the Capitol, amid bursting shell
from the arsenal, exploding magazines, and roaring flames.

I can not describe the scenes which followed. They were terrible and
would present a fit subject for the brush of Rembrandt. Fancy crowds of
desperate characters breaking into the shops and magazines of
stores--negroes, outcasts, malefactors, swarming in the streets, and
shouting amid the carnival. The state prison had disgorged its
convicts--the slums and subterranean recesses of the city its birds of
the night--and now, felons and malefactors, robbers, cut-purses and
murderers held their riotous and drunken carnival in the streets,
flowing with whiskey. Over all surged the flames, roaring, crackling,
tumultuous--the black clouds of smoke drifting far away, under the blue
skies of spring.

Then from the Capitol hill, where I had taken my stand, I saw by the
early light, a spectacle even more terrible--that of the enemy entering
the city. They came on from Charles City in a long blue column
resembling a serpent. Infantry and troopers, artillery and
stragglers--all rushed toward the doomed city where they were met by a
huge crowd of dirty and jabbering negroes and outcasts.

Suddenly a shout near at hand, thundered up to the hill. In front of
the Exchange a column of negro cavalry, with drawn sabres rushed on. As
they came, they yelled and jabbered--that was the darkest spectacle of
all.

I remained looking at the frightful pageant with rage in my heart,
until the advance force of the enemy had reached the railing of the
Capitol. Then I turned my horse, and, pursued by carbine shots, rode
out of the western gate, up Grace Street.

Fifty paces from St. Paul's I saw Colonel Desperade pass
along--smiling, serene, in black coat, snow-white shirt, tall black
hat, and with two ladies leaning upon his arms.

"Ah! gallant to the last, I see!" I growled to him as I rode by. "'None
but the brave desert the fair!'"

The colonel smiled, but made no reply.

A hundred yards farther I met little Mr. Blocque joyously approaching.

In his hand he carried his safeguard, brought him by the gray woman.
At his breast fluttered a miniature United States flag. The little
gentleman was radiant, and exclaimed as he saw me:--

"What! my dear colonel! you are going to leave us? Come and dine with
me--at five o'clock, precisely!"

My reply was not polite. I drew my pistol--at which movement Mr.
Blocque disappeared, running, at the corner of St. Paul's.

On his heels followed a portly and despairing gentleman--Mr. Croaker.

"Save my warehouse! it is on fire! I shall be a beggar!" yelled Mr.
Croaker.

I laughed aloud as the wretched creature rushed by, puffing and
panting. Ten minutes afterward I was out of the city.

My last view of Richmond was from Hollywood Hill, near the grave of
Stuart. The spectacle before me was at once terrible and splendid. The
city was wrapped in a sea of flame. A vast black cloud swept away to
the far horizon. A menacing roar came up from beneath those flames
surging around the white Capitol;--the enemy's guns, troopers,
musketeers and the rabble, were rushing with shouts, yells, and curses
into the devoted city, which had at last fallen a prey to the Federal
arms.

A last pang was to tear my heart. The sight before me was not enough, I
had turned my horse to ride westward, throwing a parting glance upon
the city, when suddenly the Virginia flag descended from the summit of
the Capitol and the United States flag was run up.

I turned and shook my clenched hand at it.

"That is not my flag, and shall never be!" I exclaimed, aloud.

And taking off my hat as I passed the grave of Stuart, I rode on,
thinking of the past and the present.




XXIV.


THE RETREAT.


Crossing James River, above the city, I pushed after the army, which I
rejoined on the evening of the 4th, as it was crossing the Appomattox
opposite Amelia Court-House.

It reached that village on Wednesday April 5th, and you could see at a
glance that its spirit was unbroken. As to General Lee, his resolution
up to that time had astonished all who saw him. Never had he seemed in
more buoyant spirits.

"I have got my army safe out of its breastworks," he said, "and in
order to follow me, my enemy must abandon his lines, and can derive no
further benefit from his railroads, or James River."[1]

[Footnote 1: His words.]

It was only the faint-hearts who lost hope. Lee was not of those.
Mounted upon his old iron-gray--at the head of his old army, if his
little handful of about fifteen thousand men could be called such--Lee
was still the great cavalier. The enemy had not yet checkmated him: his
heart of hope was untouched. He would cut his way through, and the red
flag should again float on victorious fields!

The army responded to the feeling of its chief. The confidence of the
men in Lee was as great as on his days of victory. You would have said
that the events of the last few days were, in the estimation of the
troops, only momentary reverses. The veterans of Hill and Longstreet
advanced steadily, tramping firm, shoulder to shoulder, with glittering
gun barrels, and faces as resolute and hopeful as at Manassas and
Chancellorsville.

"Those men are not whipped," said a keen observer to me, as he looked
at the closed-up column moving. And he was right. The morale of this
remnant of the great army of Northern Virginia was untouched. Those who
saw them then will testify to the truth of my statement.

At Amelia Court-House a terrible blow, however, awaited them. General
Lee had ordered rations to be sent thither from North Carolina. They
had been sent, but the trains had gone on and disgorged them in
Richmond. When Lee arrived with his starved army, already staggering
and faint, not a pound of bread or meat was found; there was nothing.

Those who saw General Lee at this moment, will remember his expression.
For the first time the shadow of despair passed over that brave
forehead. Some one had, indeed, struck a death-blow at him. His army
was without food. All his plans were reversed. He had intended to
reprovision his force at Amelia, and then push straight on. His plan, I
think I can state, was to attack the detached forces of Grant in his
front; cut his way through there; cross the Nottoway and other streams
by means of pontoons, which had been provided; and, forming a junction
with General Johnston, crush Sherman or retreat into the Gulf States.
All this was, however, reversed by one wretched, microscopic incident.
The great machine was to be arrested by an atom in its path. The
rations were not found at Amelia Court-House; the army must have food,
or die; half the force was dispersed in foraging parties throughout the
surrounding country, and the delay gave Grant time to mass heavily in
Lee's front, at Burksville.

Then all was decided. Lee had not doubted his ability to crush a corps,
or even more, before the main force of the enemy came up. He saw as
clearly now, that there was no hope of his cutting his way through
Grant's army. It was there in his front--the failure of rations had
caused all. With what must have been a terrible weight upon his heart,
Lee directed his march toward Lynchburg, determined to fight to the
end; and, as he had said during the winter, "die sword in hand."

Then commenced the woeful tragedy. What words can paint that retreat?
There is only one other that equals it--Napoleon's retreat from Moscow.
The army staggered on, fighting, and starving, and dying. Stalwart men
fell by the roadside, or dropped their muskets as they tottered on. The
wagons were drawn by skeleton mules, without food like the soldiers. If
an ear of corn was found, the men seized and munched it fiercely, like
animals. Covered with mud, blackened with powder, with gaunt frames,
and glaring eyes, the old guard of the army of Northern Virginia still
stood to their colors--fighting at every step, despairing, but not
shrinking; and obeying the orders of Lee to the last.

You would not doubt that confidence in, and love for, their commander,
reader, if you had witnessed the scene which I did, near Highbridge.
The enemy had suddenly assailed Ewell and Custis Lee, and broken them
to pieces. The blue horsemen and infantry pressing fiercely on all
sides, and hunting their opponents to the death, seemed, at this
moment, to have delivered a blow from which the Confederates could not
rise. The attack had fallen like a thunderbolt. Ewell, Anderson, and
Custis Lee were swept away by mere weight of numbers; the whole army
seemed threatened with instant destruction.

Lee suddenly appeared, however, and the scene which followed was
indescribable. He had rushed a brigade across, riding in front on his
iron-gray; and at that instant he resembled some nobleman of the old
age on the track of the wild-boar. With head erect, face unmoved, eyes
clear and penetrating, he had reached the scene of danger; and as the
disordered remnants of Ewell's force crowded the hill, hot and panting,
they had suddenly seen, rising between them and the enemy, a wall of
bayonets, flanked by cannon.

A great painter should have been present then. Night had fallen, and
the horizon was lit up by the glare of burning wagons. Every instant
rose, sudden and menacing, the enemy's signal rockets. On the summit of
the hill, where the infantry waited, Lee rode among the disordered men
of Ewell, and his presence raised a storm.

"It's General Lee!"

"Uncle Robert!"

"Where's the man who won't follow old Uncle Robert!"

Such were the shouts, cries, and fierce exclamations. The haggard faces
flushed; the gaunt hands were clenched. On all sides explosions of rage
and defiance were heard. The men called on the gray old cavalier,
sitting his horse as calm as a statue, to take command of them, and
lead them against the enemy.

No attack was made on them. An hour afterward the army moved again--the
rear covered by General Fitzhugh Lee with his cavalry, which, at every
step, met the blue huntsmen pressing on to hunt down their prey.

Such were some of the scenes of the retreat, up to the 7th. Who has the
heart to narrate what followed in the next two days? A great army dying
slowly--starving, fighting, falling--is a frightful spectacle. I think
the memory of it must affect even the enemies who witnessed it.

It is only a small portion of the tragic picture that the present
writer has the heart to paint.




XXV.


HUNTED DOWN.


On the morning of the 7th of April, and throughout the 8th, the horrors
of the retreat culminated.

The army was fighting at every step. Hope had deserted them, but they
were still fighting.

On every side pressed the enemy like bands of wolves hunting down the
wounded steed.

Gordon and Longstreet, commanding the two skeleton corps of infantry,
and Fitzhugh Lee the two or three thousand cavalry remaining, met the
incessant attacks, with a nerve which had in it something of the
heroic.

Fitz Lee had commanded the rear guard on the whole retreat. All along
the route he had confronted the columns of Sheridan, and checked them
with heavy loss.

At Paynesville he had driven Sheridan back, killing, wounding, and
capturing two hundred of his men. At Highbridge he captured seven
hundred and eighty more, killing many, among the rest the Federal
General Read. On the morning of the 7th, beyond the river, he drove
back a large column, capturing General Irwin Gregg.

That was a brave resistance made by the old army of Northern Virginia,
reader, as it was slowly advancing into the gulf of perdition.

Beyond Farmville there was no longer any hope. All was plainly over. I
shrink from the picture, but here is that of one of my friends. "It
became necessary to burn hundreds of wagons. At intervals the enemy's
cavalry dashed in and struck the interminable train, here or there,
capturing and burning dozens on dozens of wagons. Hundreds of men
dropped from exhaustion, and thousands let fall their muskets from
inability to carry them any farther. The scenes were of a nature which
can be apprehended in its vivid reality only by men who are thoroughly
familiar with the harrowing details of war. Behind, and on either
flank, a ubiquitous and increasingly adventurous enemy; every mud-hole
and every rise in the road choked with blazing wagons; the air filled
with the deafening reports of ammunition exploding, and shell bursting
when touched by the flames; dense columns of smoke ascending to heaven
from the burning and exploding vehicles; exhausted men, worn-out mules
and horses, lying down side by side; gaunt famine glaring hopelessly
from sunken lack-lustre eyes; dead mules, dead horses, dead men,
everywhere; death many times welcomed as God's blessing in
disguise--who can wonder if many hearts tried in the fiery furnace of
four unparalleled years, and never hitherto found wanting, should have
quailed in presence of starvation, fatigue, sleeplessness, misery,
un-intermitted for five or six days, and culminating in
hopelessness?"[1]

[Footnote 1: The Hon. Charles Francis Lawley, in the London _Times_.]

They did not "quail," they fell. It was not fear that made them drop
the musket, their only hope of safety; it was weakness. It was an army
of phantoms that staggered on toward Lynchburg--and what had made them
phantoms was hunger.

Let others describe those last two days in full. For myself I can not.
To sum up all in one sentence. The Army of Northern Virginia, which had
for four years snatched victory upon some of the bloodiest
battle-fields of history, fought, reeled, fired its last rounds, and
fell dead from starvation, defying fiercely with its last breath,
gurgling through blood in its throat, the enemy who was hunting it down
to its death.

Call it what you will, reader--there was something in those men that
made them fight to the last.




XXVI.


THE LAST COUNCIL OF WAR OF THE ARMY OF NORTHERN VIRGINIA.


On the night of the 8th of April, within a few miles of Appomattox
Court-House, took place the last council of war of the army of Northern
Virginia.

It was in the open air, beside a camp-fire, near which were spread
General Lee's blankets; for throughout the retreat he had used no tent,
sleeping, shelterless like his men, by the bivouac fire.

To this last council of war, none but the corps commanders were
invited. Thus the only persons present were Gordon and Longstreet,
commanding the skeleton corps of infantry, and Fitzhugh Lee, the
cavalry of the army.

Gordon was stretched near Fitzhugh Lee, upon the blankets of the
commander-in-chief; Gordon, with his clear complexion, his penetrating
eyes, his firm lip, his dark hair, and uniform coat buttoned to his
chin--the man to fight and die rather than surrender. Near him lay Fitz
Lee, the ardent and laughing cavalier, with the flowing beard, the
sparkling eyes, the top-boots, and cavalry sabre--the man to stand by
Gordon. On a log, a few feet distant, sat the burly Longstreet, smoking
with perfect nonchalance--his heavily bearded face exhibiting no
emotion whatever. Erect, within a few paces of these three men, stood
General Lee--grave, commanding, unmoved; the fire-light revealing every
outline of his vigorous person, clad in its plain gray uniform, the
gray beard and mustache, the serene eyes, and that stately poise of the
head upon the shoulders, which seemed to mark this human being for
command.

All these persons were composed. Their faces were haggard from want of
rest, but there was nothing in their expressions indicating anxiety,
though some gloom.

"It was a picture for an artist," said that one of them who described
the scene to me afterward. The ruddy light brought out every detail of
these martial figures. By that fire on the roadside had assembled for
the last time General Robert E. Lee and his corps commanders.

The council was brief.

General Lee succinctly laid before his listeners the whole situation.

His army was on a strip of land between the James River and the enemy.
He could not cross the river--if he could not break through the enemy
in his front the army was lost. General Grant had understood his
situation, and a correspondence had taken place. He would read General
Grant's notes and copies of his own replies.

By the light of the fire, General Lee then proceeded to read the papers
alluded too.

Grant had opened the correspondence. "The result of the last week must
convince General Lee," he wrote, "of the hopelessness of further
resistance on the part of the army of Northern Virginia." He therefore
"asked the surrender" of that army to prevent bloodshed.

Lee had written in reply, requesting Grant to state the terms.

Grant had stated them on this 8th of April, and Lee had replied at once
that he "did not intend to propose the surrender of the army of
Northern Virginia, but to ask the terms of General Grant's proposition.
To be frank," he had added, "I do not think the emergency has arisen to
call for the surrender." But he would meet General Grant on the next
morning to discuss the whole affair.

There the correspondence had terminated. What was the opinion of his
corps commanders?

Their replies were brief and informal. The scene was august but simple.
What was determined upon was this---

That the army should continue its march on the next day toward
Lynchburg, breaking through Sheridan's cavalry which was known to be in
front; but in case the Federal infantry, a very different thing from
the cavalry, was found to be "up," then Gordon, who was to lead the
advance, should inform the commander-in-chief of that fact, when a flag
of truce would be sent to General Grant acceding to the terms of
capitulation proposed in his last note to General Lee.

Fitzhugh Lee only stipulated that if he saw that the Federal infantry
in his front, rendered surrender inevitable, he should be allowed to go
off with his cavalry to save the horses of his men.

This was agreed to, and it will be seen that Fitz Lee availed himself
of the conmmander-in-chief's permission.

So ended that last council of war, by the camp fire.

With grave salutes and a cordial pressure of the brave hands, the
famous soldiers took leave of Lee.

As they disappeared he drew his blanket around him and fell asleep by
the blazing fire.

It was the night of April 8th, 1865--three years, day for day, from the
moment when these lines are written.




XXVII.


THE NIGHT BEFORE THE SURRENDER.


Throughout that strange night of the eighth of April, 1865, I was in
the saddle, carrying orders.

Those who saw it will remember how singularly brilliant it was. The
moon and stars shone. The light clouds sweeping across the sky scarcely
obscured the mournful radiance. All was still. The two armies--one
surrounded and at bay, the other ready to finish the work before
it--rested silently on their arms, waiting for that day which would
bring the thunder.

Every arrangement had been made by Lee to break through the force in
his front, and gain Lynchburg, from which he could retreat to the
southwest.

The column of infantry to open the way was about one thousand six
hundred men, under Gordon. The cavalry, numbering two or three
thousand, was commanded by Fitzhugh Lee. The artillery, consisting of
three or four battalions, was placed under that brave spirit, Colonel
Thomas H. Carter.

For the tough work, Lee had selected three braves.

I saw them all that night, and read in their eyes the fire of an
unalterable resolution.

You know those men, reader. If _you_ do not, history knows them. It was
their immense good fortune to bear the red cross banner in the last
charge on the enemy, and with their handful of followers to drive the
Federal forces back nearly a mile, half an hour before Lee's surrender.

I had just left General Fitzhugh Lee, near Appomattox Court-House, and
was riding through the pines, when a sonorous voice halted me.

"Who goes there?" said the voice.

"Surry, Mordaunt!"

For I had recognized the voice of the general of cavalry. We have seen
little of him, reader, in this rapid narrative; but in all the long
hard battles from the Rapidan to this night, I had everywhere found
myself thrown in collision with the great soldier--that tried and
trusty friend of my heart. The army had saluted him on a hundred
fields. His name had become the synonym of unfaltering courage. He was
here, on the verge of surrender now, looking as calm and resolute as on
his days of victory.

"Well, old friend," said Mordaunt, grasping my hand and then leaning
upon my shoulder; "as the scriptures say, what of the night?"

"Bad, Mordaunt."

"I understand. You think the enemy's infantry is up."

"Yes."

"Then we'll have hard work; but we are used to that, Surry."

"The work is nothing. It is death only. But something worse than death
is coming Mordaunt."

"What?"

"Surrender."

Mordaunt shook his head.

"I am not going to surrender," he said. "I have sworn to one I love
more than my life--you know whom I mean, Surry--that I would come back,
or die, sword in hand; and I will keep my oath."

The proud face glowed. In the serene but fiery eyes I could read the
expression of an unchangeable resolution.

"Another friend of ours has sworn that too," he said.

"Who?"

"Mohun."

"And just married! His poor, young wife, like yours, is far from him."

"You are mistaken; she is near him. She went ahead of the army, and is
now at the village here."

"Is it possible? And where is Mohun?"

"He is holding the advance skirmish line, on the right of Gordon. Look!
Do you see that fire, yonder, glimmering through the woods? I left him
there half an hour since."

"I will go and see him. Do nothing rash, to-morrow, Mordaunt. Remember
that poor Old Virginia, if no one else, needs you yet!"

"Be tranquil, Surry," he replied, with a cool smile. "Farewell; we
shall meet at Philippi!"

And we parted with a pressure of the hand.

I rode toward the fire. Stretched on his cape, beside it, I saw the
figure of Mohun. He was reading in a small volume, and did not raise
his head until I was within three paces of him.

"What are you reading, Mohun?"

He rose and grasped my hand.

"The only book for a soldier," he said, with his frank glance and brave
smile--"the book of books, my dear Surry--that which tells us to do our
duty, and trust to Providence."

I glanced at the volume, and recognized it. I had seen it in the hands
of Georgia Conway, at Five Forks. On the fly leaf, which was open, her
name was written.

"That is _her_ Bible," I said, "and doubtless you have just parted with
her."

"Yes, I see you know that she is here, not far from me."

"Mordaunt told me. It must be a great delight to you, Mohun."

He smiled, and sighed.

"Yes," he replied, "but a sort of sorrow, too."

"Why a sorrow?"

Mohun was silent. Then he said:---

"I think I shall fall to-morrow."

"Absurd!" I said, trying to laugh, "Why should you fancy such a thing?"

"I am not going to surrender, Surry. I swore to Chambliss, my old
comrade, that I would never surrender, and he swore that to me. He was
killed in Charles City--he kept his word; I will not break mine,
friend."

My head sank. I had taken my seat on Mohun's cape, and gazed in silence
at the fire.

"That is a terrible resolution, Mohun," I said at length.

"Yes," he replied, with entire calmness, "especially in me. It is hard
to die, even when we are old and sorrowful--when life is a burden. Men
cling to this miserable existence even when old age and grief have
taken away, one by one, all the pleasures of life. Think, then, what it
must be to die in the flush of youth, and health, and happiness! I am
young, strong, happy beyond words. The person I love best in all the
world, has just given me her hand. I have before me a long life of joy,
if I only live! But I have sworn that oath, Surry! Chambliss kept his;
shall I break mine? Let us not talk further of this, friend."

And Mohun changed the conversation, refusing to listen to my
remonstrances.

Half an hour afterward I left him, with a strange sinking of the heart.

Taking my way back to the Court-House, I passed through the little
village, rode on for a mile, and then, overwhelmed by fatigue, lay down
by a camp fire in the woods, and fell asleep.

I was waked by a single gun, sending its dull roar through the gray
dawn.

Rising, I buttoned my cape around me, mounted my horse, and rode toward
the front.

As I ascended the hill, upon which stands Appomattox Court-House, a
crimson blush suddenly spread itself over the fields and woods.

I looked over my shoulder. In the east, on the summit of the forest,
the newly risen sun was poised, like a great shield bathed in blood.

Such was the spectacle which ushered in the ninth of April, 1865, at
Appomattox Court-House.




XXVIII.


THE LAST CHARGE OF THE OLD GUARD.


I rode on rapidly to the front.

It was the morning of the ninth of April, 1865. Since that time three
years, day for day, nearly hour for hour have passed; for these lines
are written on the morning of the ninth of April, 1868.

Gordon had formed his line of battle across the road just beyond the
court-house--and supported by Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry, and Carter's
artillery on his right, was advancing with measured steps to break
through the enemy.

It was a spectacle to make the pulse throb. The little handful was
going to death unmoved. The red light of morning darted from the
burnished gun-barrels of the infantry, the sabres of the cavalry, and
the grim cannon following, in sombre lightnings.

Gordon, the "Bayard of the army," was riding in front of his line. The
hour and the men had both come. Steadily the old guard of the army of
Northern Virginia advanced to its last field of battle.

[Illustration: THE LAST CHARGE]

Suddenly, in front of them, the woods swarmed with the enemy's
infantry, cavalry, and artillery. The great multitude had evidently
employed the hours of night well. Grant's entire army seemed to have
massed itself in Gordon's front.

But the force was not the question. Gordon's one thousand six hundred
men were in motion. And when Gordon moved forward he always fought, if
he found an enemy.

In five minutes the opponents had closed in, in stubborn fight, and the
woods roared with musketry, cannon, and carbines.

Then a resounding cheer rose. The enemy had recoiled before Gordon, and
he pressed forward, sweeping every thing in his path for nearly a mile
beyond the court-house.

On his right Fitzhugh Lee's horsemen thundered forward on the retiring
enemy; and Carter's guns advanced at a gallop, taking positions--Starke
to the left and Poague to the right of the road--from which they opened
a rapid fire upon the Federal line of battle.

I had accompanied the advance and looked on with positive wonder. A
miracle seemed about to be enacted before my very eyes. Gordon's poor
little skirmish-line of less than two thousand men, with the half-
equipped horsemen of Fitzhugh Lee, on their broken-down animals, seemed
about to drive back the whole Federal army, and cut their way through
in safety.

Alas! the hope was vain. In front of the handful were eighty thousand
men! It was not Sheridan's cavalry only--that would have speedily been
disposed of. During the night, General Grant's best infantry had
pressed forward, and arrived in time to place itself across Lee's path.
What Gordon and Fitzhugh Lee encountered was the Federal army.

Right and left, as in front, were seen dense blue columns of infantry,
heavy masses of cavalry, crowding batteries, from which issued at every
instant that quick glare which precedes the shell.

From this multitude a great shout arose; and was taken up by the
Federal troops for miles. From the extreme rear, where Longstreet stood
stubbornly confronting the pursuers, as from the front, where Gordon
was trying to break through the immense obstacles in his path, came
that thunder of cheers, indicating clearly that the enemy at last felt
that their prey was in their clutch.

The recoil was brief. The great Federal wave which had rolled backward
before Gordon, now rolled forward to engulf him. The moment seemed to
have come for the old guard of the army of Northern Virginia to crown
its victories with a glorious death.

The Federal line rushed on. From end to end of the great field, broken
by woods, the blue infantry delivered their fire, as they advanced with
wild cheers upon the line of Gordon and Lee.

The guns of Carter thundered in vain. Never were cannon fought more
superbly; the enemy were now nearly at the muzzle of the pieces.

Gordon was everywhere encouraging his men, and attempting to hold them
steady. With flaming eyes, his drawn sword waving amid the smoke, his
strident voice rising above the din of battle, Gordon was superb.

But all was of no avail. The Federal line came on like a wave of steel
and fire. A long deafening crash, mingled with the thunder of cannon,
stunned the ear; above the combatants rose a huge smoke-cloud, from
which issued cheers and groans.

Suddenly an officer of General Lee's staff passed by like lightning;
was lost in the smoke; then I saw him speaking to Gordon. At the few
words uttered by the officer, the latter turned pale.

A moment afterward a white flag fluttered--the order to surrender had
come.

What I felt at that instant I can not describe. Something seemed to
choke me. I groaned aloud, and turned toward the cavalry.

At fifty paces from me I saw Mordaunt, surrounded by his officers and
men.

His swarthy face glowed--his eyes blazed. Near him, General Fitzhugh
Lee--with Tom Herbert, and some other members of his staff--was sitting
his horse, pale and silent.

"What will you do, general?" said Mordaunt, saluting with drawn sabre.

Fitzhugh Lee uttered a groan.

"I don't wish to be included in the surrender," he said. "Come, let's
go. General Lee no longer requires my poor services!"[1]

[Footnote 1: His words.]

Mordaunt saluted again, as General Lee and his staff officers turned
away.

"We'll go out sword in hand!" Mordaunt said. "Let who will, follow me!"

A wild cheer greeted the words. The men formed column and charged.

As they moved, a second cheer was heard at fifty paces from us. I
turned my head, and saw Mohun, in front of about fifty cavalrymen,
among whom I recognized Nighthawk.

In an instant I was at Mohun's side.

"You are going to charge!" I said.

"And die, Surry! A gentleman gives his word but once!"

And, following Mordaunt with long leaps, Mohun and his horsemen burst
upon the enemy.

Then was presented a spectacle which made the two armies hold their
breath.

The column of cavalry under Mordaunt and Mohun, had struck the Federal
line of battle.

For an instant, you could see little, hear little, in the smoke and
uproar. A furious volley unhorsed at least half of the charging column,
and the rest were seen striking with their sabres at the blue infantry,
who stabbed with their bayonets at the rearing horses.

Then a thundering shout rose. The smoke was swept away by the wind, and
made all clear.

Mordaunt had cut his way through, and was seen to disappear with a
dozen followers.

Mohun, shot through the breast, and streaming with blood, had fallen
from the saddle, his foot had caught in the stirrup, and he was dragged
by his frightened animal toward the Confederate lines.

The horse came on at a headlong gallop, but suddenly a cavalier came up
with him, seized the bridle, and threw him violently on his haunches.

The new-comer was Nighthawk.

Leaping to the ground, he seized the body of Mohun in his arms,
extricated his foot from the stirrup, and remounted his own horse, with
the form of his master still clasped to his breast.

Then, plunging the spurs into his animal, he turned to fly. But his
last hour had come.

A bullet, fired at fifty paces, penetrated his back, and the blood
spouted. He fell from the flying animal to the earth, but his arms
still clasped the body of Mohun, whose head lay upon his breast.

A loud cheer rose, and the blue line rushed straight upon him.
Nighthawk's head rose, and he gazed at them with flashing eyes--then he
looked at Mohun and groaned.

Summoning his last remains of strength, he drew from his breast a
pencil and a piece of paper, wrote some words upon the paper, and
affixed it to Mohun's breast.

This seemed to exhaust him. He had scarcely finished, when his head
sank, his shoulders drooped, and falling forward on the breast of
Mohun, he expired.

An hour afterward, all was still. On the summit of the Court-House hill
a blue column was stationary, waving a large white flag.

General Lee had surrendered.




XXIX.


THE SURRENDER.


Lee had surrendered the army of Northern Virginia.

Ask old soldiers of that army to describe their feelings at the
announcement, reader. They will tell you that they can not; and I will
not attempt to record my own.

It was, truly, the bitterness of death that we tasted at ten o'clock on
the morning of that ninth of April, 1865, at Appomattox Court-House.
Gray-haired soldiers cried like children. It was hard to say whether
they would have preferred, at that moment, to return to their families
or to throw themselves upon the bayonets of the enemy, and die.

In that hour of their agony they were not insulted, however. The
deportment of the enemy was chivalric and courteous. No bands played;
no cheers were heard; and General Grant was the first to salute
profoundly his gray-haired adversary, who came, with a single officer,
to arrange, in a house near the field, the terms of surrender.

They are known. On the tenth they were carried out.

The men stacked the old muskets, which they had carried in a hundred
fights, surrendered the bullet-torn colors, which had waved over
victorious fields, and silently returned, like mourners, to their
desolate homes.

Two days after the surrender, Mohun was still alive.

Three months afterward, the welcome intelligence reached me that he was
rapidly recovering.

He had made a narrow escape. Ten minutes after the death of the
faithful Nighthawk, the Federal line had swept over him; and such was
the agony of his wound, that he exclaimed to one of the
enemy:--

"Take your pistol, and shoot me!"

The man cocked his weapon, and aimed at his heart. Then he turned the
muzzle aside, and uncocking the pistol, replaced it in its holster.

"No," he said, "Johnny Reb, you might get well!"

[Footnote: These details are all real.]

And glancing at the paper on Mohun's breast, he passed on,
muttering--

"It's a general!"

The paper saved Mohun's life. An acquaintance in the Federal army saw
it, and speedily had him cared for. An hour afterward his friends were
informed of his whereabouts. I hastened to the house to which he had
been borne. Bending over him, the beautiful Georgia was sobbing
hopelessly, and dropping tears upon the paper, which contained the
words--

_"This is the body of General Mohun, C.S.A."_

The army had surrendered; the flag was lowered: with a singular feeling
of bewilderment, and a "lost" feeling that is indescribable, I set out,
followed by my servant, for Eagle's Nest.

I was the possessor of a paper, which I still keep as a strange
memorial.

"The bearer," ran this paper, "a paroled prisoner of the army of
Northern Virginia, has permission to go to his home, and there remain
undisturbed--with two horses!"

At the top of this document, was, "Appomattox Court-House, Va., April,
10, 1865." On the left-hand side was, "Paroled Prisoner's Pass."

So, with his pass, the paroled prisoner passed slowly across Virginia
to his home.

Oh! that Virginia of 1865--that desolate, dreary land! Oh! those poor,
sad soldiers returning to their homes! Everywhere burned houses,
unfenced fields, ruined homesteads! On all sides, the desolation of the
torch and the sword! The "poor paroled prisoners," going home wearily
in that dark April, felt a pang which only a very bitter foe will laugh
at.

But all was not taken. Honor was left us--and the angels of home! As
the sorrowful survivors of the great army came back, as they reached
their old homes, dragging their weary feet after them, or urging on
their jaded horses, suddenly the sunshine burst forth for them, and lit
up their rags with a sort of glory. The wife, the mother, and the
little child rushed to them. Hearts beat fast, as the gray uniforms
were clasped in a long embrace. Those angels of home loved the poor
prisoners better in their dark days than in their bright. The fond eyes
melted to tears, the white arms held them close; and the old soldiers,
who had only laughed at the roar of the enemy's guns, dropped tears on
the faces of their wives and little children!




EPILOGUE.


In the autumn of last year, 1867, I set out on horseback from "Eagle's
Nest," and following the route west by Fredericksburg, Chancellorsville,
Germanna Ford, Culpeper, and Orleans, reached "The Oaks" in Fauquier.

I needed the sunshine and bright faces of the old homestead, after that
journey; for at every step had sprung up some gloomy or exciting
recollection.

It was a veritable journey through the world of memory.

Fredericksburg! Chancellorsville! the Wilderness! the plains of
Culpeper!--as I rode on amid these historic scenes, a thousand memories
came to knock at the door of my heart. Some were gay, if many were
sorrowful--laughter mingled with the sighs. But to return to the past
is nearly always sad. As I rode through the waste land now, it was with
drooping head. All the old days came back again, the cannon sent their
long dull thunder through the forests; again the gray and blue lines
closed in, and hurled together; again Jackson in his old dingy coat,
Stuart with his floating plume, Pelham, Farley, all whom I had known,
loved, and still mourned, rose before me--a line of august phantoms
fading away into the night of the past.

Once more I looked upon Pelham, holding in his arms the bleeding form
of Jean--passing "Camp-no-camp," only a desolate and dreary field now,
all the laughing faces and brave forms of Stuart and his men
returned--in the Wilderness I saw Jackson fight and fall; saw him borne
through the moonlight; heard his sighs and his last greeting with
Stuart. A step farther, I passed the lonely old house in the
Wilderness, and all the strange and sombre scenes there surged up from
the shadows of the past. Mordaunt, Achmed, Fenwick, Violet
Grafton!--all reappeared, playing over again their fierce tragedy; and
to this was added the fiercer drama of May, 1864, when General Grant
invented the "Unseen Death."

Thus the journey which I made through the bare and deserted fields, or
the mournful thickets, was not gay; and these were only a part of the
panorama which passed before me. Looking toward the south, I saw as
clearly with the eyes of the memory, the banks of the Po, the swamps of
the Chickahominy, the trenches at Petersburg, the woods of Dinwiddie,
Five Forks, Highbridge--Appomattox Court-House! Nearer was Yellow
Tavern, where Stuart had fallen. Not a foot of this soil of Old
Virginia but seemed to have been the scene of some fierce battle, some
sombre tragedy!

"Well, well," I sighed, as I rode on toward the Oaks, "all that is
buried in the past, and it is useless to think of it. I am only a poor
paroled prisoner, wearing arms no more--let me forget the red cross
flag which used to float so proudly here, and bow my head to the will
of the Supreme Ruler of all worlds."

So I went on, and in due time reached the Oaks, in Fauquier.

You recall the good old homestead, do you not, my dear reader? I should
be sorry to have you forget the spot where I have been so happy. It was
to this honest old mansion that I was conducted in April, 1861, when
struck from my horse by a falling limb in the storm-lashed wood, I saw
come to my succor the dearest person in the world. She awaited me
now--having a month before left Eagle's Nest, to pay a visit to her
family--and again, as in the spring of '63, she came to meet me as I
ascended the hill--only we met now as bridegroom and bride!

This May of my life had brought back the sunshine, even after that
black day of 1865. Two white arms had met the poor paroled prisoner, on
his return to Eagle's Nest--a pair of violet eyes had filled with happy
tears--and the red lips, smiling with exquisite emotion, murmured "All
is well, since you have come back to me!"

It was this beautiful head which the sunshine of that autumn of 1867
revealed to me, on the lawn of the good old chateau of the mountains!
And behind, came all my good friends of the Oaks--the kind lady of the
manor, the old colonel, and Charley and Annie, who were there too! With
his long gray hair, and eyes that still flashed, Colonel Beverly came
to meet me--brave and smiling in 1867 as he had been in 1861. Then,
with Annie's arm around me--that little sister had grown
astonishingly!--I went in and was at home.

At home! You must be a soldier to know what that simple word means,
reader! You must sleep under a tree, carry your effects behind your
saddle, lie down in bivouac in strange countries, and feel the longing
of the heart for the dear faces, the old scenes.

"Tell my mother that I die in a foreign land!" murmured my poor dear
Tazewell Patton, at Gettysburg. I have often thought of those words;
and they express much I think. Oh! for home! for a glimpse, if no more,
of the fond faces, as life goes! You may be the bravest of the brave,
as my dear Tazewell was; but 'tis home where the heart is, and you sigh
for the dear old land!

The Oaks was like home to me, for the somebody with violet eyes, and
chestnut hair, was here to greet me.

The sun is setting, and we wander in the fields touched by the dreamy
autumn.

"Look," says the somebody who holds my hand, and smiles, "there is the
rock where we stopped in the autumn of 1862, and where you behaved with
so little propriety, you remember, sir!"

"I remember the rock but not the absence of propriety. What were a
man's arms made for but to clasp the woman he loves!"

"Stop, sir! People would think we were two foolish young lovers."

"Young lovers are not foolish, madam. They are extremely intelligent."

Madam laughs.

"Yonder is the primrose from which I plucked the bud," she says.

"That sent me through Stuart's head-quarters in April, 1863?" I say.

"Yes; you have not forgotten it I hope."

"Almost; Stay! I think it meant 'Come,'--did it not?--And you sent it
to me!"

Madam pouts beautifully.

"You have 'almost forgotten' it! Have you, indeed, sir?"

"These trifles will escape us."

May loses all her smiles, and her head sinks.

I begin to laugh, taking an old porte-monnaie from my pocket. There is
very little money in it, but a number of worn papers, my parole and
others. I take one and open it. It contains a faded primrose.

"Look!" I say, with a smile, "it said 'Come,' once, and it brings me
back again to the dearest girl in the world!"

A tear falls from the violet eyes upon the faded flower, but through
the tears burst a smile!

They are curious, these earthly angels--are they not, my dear reader?
They are romantic and sentimental to the last, and this old soldier
admires them!

So, conversing of a thousand things, we return to the Oaks wandering
like boy and girl through the "happy autumn fields." May Surry flits
through the old doorway and disappears.

As she goes the sun sinks behind the forest. But it will rise, as she
will, to-morrow!

The smiling Colonel Beverly meets me on the threshold, with a note in
his hand.

"A servant has just brought this," he says, "it is from your friend,
Mordaunt."

I opened the note and read the following words:--

"_My dear Surry_:--

"I send this note to await your appearance at the Oaks. Come and see
me. Some old friends will give you a cordial greeting, in addition to

"Your comrade,

"Mordaunt."

I had intended visiting Mordaunt in a day or two after my arrival. On
the very next morning I mounted my horse, and set out for the house in
the mountain, anxious to ascertain who the "old friends" were, to whom
he alluded.

In an hour I had come within sight of Mordaunt's mansion. Passing
through the great gate, I rode on between the two rows of magnificent
trees; approached the low mansion with its extensive wings,
overshadowed by the huge black oaks; dismounted; raised the heavy
bronze knocker, carved like the frowning mask of the old tragedians;
and letting it fall sent a peal of low thunder through the mansion.

Mordaunt appeared in a few moments; and behind him came dear Violet
Grafton, as I will still call her, smiling. Mordaunt's face glowed with
pleasure, and the grasp of his strong hand was like a vice. He was
unchanged, except that he wore a suit of plain gray cloth. His
statuesque head, with the long black beard and mustache, the sparkling
eyes, and cheeks tanned by exposure to the sun and wind, rose as
proudly as on that morning in 1865, when he had charged and cut through
the enemy at Appomattox.

Violet was Violet still! The beautiful tranquil face still smiled with
its calm sweetness; the lips had still that expression of infantile
innocence. The blue eyes still looked forth from the shower of golden
ringlets which had struck me when I first met her in the lonely house
in the Wilderness, in the gay month of April, 1861.

I had shaken hands with Mordaunt, but I advanced and "saluted" madam,
and the cheek was suddenly filled with exquisite roses.

"For old times' sake, madam!"

"Which are the best of all possible times, Surry!" said Mordaunt,
laughing.

And he led the way into the great apartment, hung round with portraits,
where we had supped on the night of Pelham's hard fight at Barbee's,
after Sharpsburg.

"You remember this room, do you not, my dear Surry?" said Mordaunt. "It
escaped during the war; though you see that my poor little grandmother,
the child of sixteen there, with the curls and laces, received a sabre
thrust in the neck. But you are looking round for the friends I
promised. They were here a moment since, and only retired to give you a
surprise.

"See! here they are!"

The door opened, and I saw enter--Mohun and Landon!

In an instant I had grasped the hands of these dear friends; and they
had explained their presence. Mohun had come to make a visit to
Mordaunt, and had prolonged his stay in order to meet me. Then Mordaunt
had written to Landon, at "Bizarre," just over the mountain, to come
and complete the party--he had promptly arrived--and I found myself in
presence of three old comrades, any one of whom it would have been a
rare pleasure to have met.

Mohun and Landon were as unchanged as Mordaunt. I saw the same proud
and loyal faces, listened to the same frank brave voices, touched the
same firm hands. They no longer wore uniforms--that was the whole
difference. Under the black coats beat the same hearts which had
throbbed beneath the gray.

I spent the whole day with Mordaunt, After dinner he led the way into
the room on the right of the entrance--that singular apartment into
which I had been shown by accident on my first visit to him, and where
afterward I witnessed the test of poor Achmed's love. The apartment was
unchanged. The floor was still covered with the rich furs of lions,
tigers, and leopards--the agate eyes still glared at me, and the
grinning teeth seemed to utter growls or snarls. On the walls I saw
still the large collection of books in every language--the hunting and
battle pictures which I had before so greatly admired--the strange
array of outlandish arms--and over the mantel-piece still hung the
portrait of Violet Grafton.

Seated in front of a cheerful blaze, we smoked and talked--Mordaunt,
Mohun, Landon, and myself--until the shades of evening drew on.

Landon told me of his life at "Bizarre," near the little village of
Millwood, through which we had marched that night to bury his dead at
the old chapel, and where he had surrendered in April, 1865. Arden and
Annie lived near him, and were happy: and if I would come to "Bizarre,"
he would show me the young lady whom I had carried off, that night,
from the chapel graveyard, on the croup of my saddle!

Landon laughed. His face was charming; it was easy to see that he was
happy. To understand how that expression contrasted with his former
appearance, the worthy reader must peruse my episodical memoir, _Hilt
to Hilt_.

Mohun's face was no less smiling. He had lost every trace of gloom.

He gave me intelligence of all my old friends. General Davenant and
Judge Conway had become close friends again. Will and Virginia were
married. Charley was cultivating a mustache and speculating upon a new
revolution. Tom Herbert and Katy were on a visit to "Disaways."

"Poor Nighthawk is the only one whom I miss, my dear Surry," said
Mohun. "He died trying to save me, and I have had his body taken to
Fonthill, where it is buried in the family graveyard."

"He was a faithful friend; and to be killed on that very last morning
was hard. But many were. _You_ had a narrow escape, Mohun."

"Yes, and was only preserved by a Bible."

"A Bible?"

"Do you remember that I was reading by the camp fire, when you came to
visit me on the night preceding the surrender?"

"Yes--in your wife's Bible."

"Well, my dear Surry, when I had finished reading, I placed the volume
in my breast, as usual. When I was shot, on the next morning, the
bullet struck the book and glanced. Had the Bible not been there, that
bullet would have pierced my heart. As it was, it only wounded me in
the breast. Here is my old Bible--I carry it about me still."

As he spoke, Mohun drew from his breast the small leather-bound volume,
in the cover of which was visible a deep gash.

He looked at it with a smile, and said:---

"This book has been the salvation of my body and soul, Surry. I was
haughty and a man-hater once--now I try to be humble. I had no hope
once, now I am happy. I have one other souvenir of that memorable day
at Appomattox--this scrap of paper between the leaves of my old Bible."

He drew out the scrap, which was dirty and discolored with blood.

Upon it was written in pencil, the words:--

"This is the body of General Mohun, C.S.A."

As Mohun pointed to it, a ray of sunset shot athwart the forest, and
fell on his serene features, lighting them up with a sort of glory. The
clear eyes gave back the ray, and there was something exquisitely soft
in them. Mordaunt and Landon too, were bathed in that crimson light of
evening, disappearing beyond the shaggy crest of the Blue Ridge--and I
thought I saw on their proud faces the same expression.

"These three men are happy," I thought. "Their lot has been strange;
they have been nearly lost; but heaven has sent to each an angel, to
bring back hope to them. Ellen Adair, Georgia Conway, Violet
Grafton--these fond hearts have changed your lives, Landon, Mohun, and
Mordaunt!"

In an hour I was at the "Oaks."

A month afterward, I had returned to "Eagle's Nest."

And in this April, 1868, when the flowers are blooming, and the sun is
shining--when a pair of violet eyes make the sunshine still brighter--I
end the last volume of my memoirs.


THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mohun, or, The Last Days of Lee
by John Esten Cooke





Produced by Distributed Proofreaders




[Illustration: The Delft Gate at Rotterdam.]



Dutch Life in Town and Country

By

P. M. Hough, B.A.

With Thirty-Two Illustrations




Contents



    I. National Characteristics
   II. Court and Society
  III. The Professional Classes
   IV. The Position of Women
    V. The Workman of the Towns
   VI. The Canals and Their Population
  VII. A Dutch Village
 VIII. The Peasant at Home
   IX. Rural Customs
    X. Kermis and St. Nicholas
   XI. National Amusements
  XII. Music and the Theatre
 XIII. Schools and School Life
  XIV. The Universities
   XV. Art and Letters
  XVI. The Dutch as Readers
 XVII. Political Life and Thought
XVIII. The Administration of Justice
  XIX. Religious Life and Thought
   XX. The Army and Navy
  XXI. Holland Over Sea

Index




List of Illustrations



The Delft Gate at Rotterdam
Types of Zeeland Women
Zeeland Peasant--The Dark Type
A Zeeland Woman--The Dark Type
Dutch Fisher Girls
A Bridal Pair Driving Home
A Dutch Street Scene
A Sea-Going Canal
A Village in Dyke-Land
A Canal in Dordrecht
An Overyssel Farmhouse
An Overyssel Farmhouse
Approach to an Overyssel Farm
Zeeland Costume
Zeeland Costumes
An Itinerant Linen-Weaver
Farmhouse Interior, Showing the Linen-Press
Type of an Overyssel Farmhouse
A Farmhouse Interior, Showing the Door into the Stable
Farmhouse Interior, the Open Fire on the Floor
Palm Paschen--Begging for Eggs
Rommel Pot
A Hindeloopen Lady in National Costume
Rural Costume--Cap with Ruche of Fur
An Overyssel Peasant Woman
Zeeland Children in State
Kermis 'Hossen-Hossen--Hi-Ha!'
St. Nicholas Going His Rounds on December 5th
Skating to Church
Parliament House at the Hague--View From the Great Lake
Interior of Delftshaven Church (Where the Pilgrim Fathers Worshipped
    Before Leaving for New England)
Utrect Cathedral





Dutch Life in Town and Country




Chapter I

National Characteristics



There is in human affairs a reason for everything we see, although not
always reason in everything. It is the part of the historian to seek in
the archives of a nation the reasons for the facts of common experience
and observation, it is the part of the philosopher to moralize upon
antecedent causes and present results. Neither of these positions is taken
up by the author of this little book. He merely, as a rule, gives the
picture of Dutch life now to be seen in the Netherlands, and in all things
tries to be scrupulously fair to a people renowned for their kindness and
courtesy to the stranger in their midst.

And this strikes one first about Holland--that everything, except the old
Parish Churches, the Town Halls, the dykes and the trees, is in
miniature. The cities are not populous, the houses are not large, the
canals are not wide, and one can go from the most northern point in the
country to the most southern, or from the extreme east to the extreme
west, in a single day, and, if it be a summer's day, in _day-light_,
while from the top of the tower of the Cathedral at Utrecht one can look
over a large part of the land.

[Illustration: Types of Zeeland Women.]

As it is with the natural so it is with the political horizon. This latter
embraces for the average Dutchman the people of a country whose interests
seem to him bound up for the most part in the twelve thousand square miles
of lowland pressed into a corner of Europe; for, extensive as the Dutch
colonies are, they are not 'taken in' by the average Dutchman as are the
colonies of some other nations. There are one or two towns, such as The
Hague and Arnhem, where an Indo-Dutch Society may be found, consisting of
retired colonial civil servants, who very often have married Indian women,
and have either returned home to live on well-earned pensions or who
prefer to spend the money gained in India in the country which gave them
birth. But Holland has not yet begun to develop as far as she might the
great resources of Netherlands India, and therefore no very great amount
of interest is taken in the colonial possessions outside merely home,
official, or Indo Dutch society.

[Illustration: Zeeland Peasant--The Dark Type.]

With regard to the affairs of his country generally, the state of mind of
the average Dutchman has been well described as that of a man well on in
years, who has amassed a fair fortune, and now takes things easily, and
loves to talk over the somewhat wild doings of his youth. Nothing is more
common than to hear the remarks from both old and young, 'We _have_ been
great,' 'We have _had_ our time,' 'Every nation reaches a climax;' and
certainly Holland has been very great in statesmen, patriots, theologians,
artists, explorers, colonizers, soldiers, sailors, and martyrs. The names
of William the Silent, Barneveldt, Arminius, Rembrandt, Rubens, Hobbema,
Grotius, De Ruyter, Erasmus, Ruysdael, Daendels, Van Speijk, Tromp afford
proof of the pertinacity, courage, and devotion of Netherland's sons in
the great movements which have sprung from her soil.

To have successfully resisted the might of a Philip of Spain and the
strategy and cruelties of an Alva is alone a title-deed to imperishable
fame and honour. Dutch men and women fought and died at the dykes, and
suffered awful agonies on the rack and at the stake. 'They sang songs of
triumph,' so the record runs, 'while the grave diggers were shovelling
earth over their living faces.' It is not, therefore, to be wondered at
that a legacy of true and deep feeling has been bequeathed to their
descendants, and the very suspicion of injustice or infringement of what
they consider liberty sets the Dutchman's heart aflame with patriotic
devotion or private resentment. Phlegmatic, even comal, and most difficult
to move in most things, yet any 'interference' wakes up the dormant spirit
which that Prince of Orange so forcibly expressed when he said, in
response to a prudent soldier's ear of consequences if resistance were
persisted in, 'We can at least die in the last ditch.'

Until one understands this tenacity in the Dutch character one cannot
reconcile the old world methods seen all over the country with the
advanced ideas expressed in conversation, books, and newspapers. The
Dutchman hates to be interfered with, and resents the advice of candid
friends, and cannot stand any 'chaff.' He has his kind of humour, which is
slow in expression and material in conception, but he does not understand
'banter.' He is liberal in theories, but intensely conservative in
practice. He will _agree_ with a new theory, but often _do_ as his
grandfather did, and so in Holland there may be seen very primitive
methods side by side with _fin de siecle_ thought. In a _salon_ in any
principal town there will be thought the most advanced, and manner of life
the most luxurious; but a stone's-throw off, in a cottage or in a
farmhouse just outside the town, may be witnessed the life of the
seventeenth century. Some of the reasons for this may be gathered from the
following pages as they describe the social life and usages of the people.

In the seven provinces which comprise the Netherlands there are
considerable differences in scenery, race, dialect, pronunciation, and
religion, and therefore in the features and character of the people.
United provinces in the course of time effect a certain homogeneity of
purpose and interest, yet there are certain fundamental differences in
character. The Frisian differs from the Zeelander: one is fair and the
other dark, and both differ from the Hollander. And not only do the
provincials differ in character, dialect, and pronunciation from one
another, but also the inhabitants of some cities differ in these respects
from those of other cities. An educated Dutchman can tell at once if a man
comes from Amsterdam, Rotterdam, or The Hague. The 'cockney' of these
places differs, and of such pronunciations 'Hague Dutch' is considered the
worst, although--true to the analogy of London--the best Dutch is heard in
The Hague. This difference in 'civic' pronunciation is certainly very
remarkable when one remembers that The Hague and Rotterdam are only
sixteen miles apart, and The Hague and Amsterdam only forty miles. Arnhem
and The Hague are the two most cosmopolitan cities in the kingdom, and one
meets in their streets all sorts and conditions of the Netherlander.

[Illustration: A Zeeland Woman--The Dark Type.]

All other towns are provincial in character and akin to the county-town
type. Even Amsterdam, the capital of the country, is only a commercial
capital. The Court is only there for a few days in each year; Parliament
does not meet there; the public offices are not situated there; and
diplomatic representatives are not accredited to the Court at Amsterdam
but to the Court at The Hague; and so Amsterdam is 'the city,' and no more
and no less. This Venice of the North looks coldly on the pleasure seeking
and loving Hague, and jealously on the thriving and rapidly increasing
port of Rotterdam, and its merchant princes build their villas in the
neighbouring and pleasant woods of Bussum and Hilversum, and near the
brilliantly-coloured bulb-gardens of Haarlem, living in these suburban
places during the summer months, while in winter they return to the fine
old houses in the Heerengracht and the many other 'grachten' through which
the waters of the canals move slowly to the river. But to The Hague the
city magnates seldom come, and the young men consider their contemporaries
of the Court capital wanting in energy and initiative, and very proud, and
so there is little communication between the two towns--between the City
and Belgravia. One knows, as one walks in the streets of Amsterdam, The
Hague, Rotterdam, or Utrecht, that each place is a microcosm devoted to
its own particular and narrow interests, and in these respects they are
survivals of the Italian cities of the Middle Ages. There is, indeed,
great similarity in the style of buildings, and, with the exception of
Maestricht, in the south of the country, which is mediaeval and Flemish,
one always feels that one is in Holland. The neatness of the houses, the
straight trees fringing the roads, the canals and their smell, the
steam-trams, the sound of the conductor's horn and the bells of the
horse-trams, the type of policeman, and above and beyond all the universal
cigar--all these things are of a pattern, and that pattern is seen
everywhere, and it is not until one has lived in the country for some time
that one recognizes that there are differences in the mode of life in the
larger towns which are more real than apparent, and that this practical
isolation is not realized by the stranger.

The country life of the peasant, however, is much more uniform in
character, in spite of the many differences in costume and in dialect. The
methods of agriculture are all equally old-fashioned, and the peasants
equally behind the times in thought. Their thrifty habits and devotion to
the soil of their country ensure them a living which is thrown away by the
country folk of other lands, who at the first opportunity flock into the
towns. But the Dutch peasant _is_ a peasant, and does not mix, or want to
mix, with the townsman except in the way of business. He brings his garden
and farm produce for sale, and as soon as that is effected--generally very
much to his own advantage, for he is wonderfully 'slim'--he rattles back,
drawn by his dogs or little pony, to the farmhouse, and relates how he has
come safely back, his stock of produce diminished, but his stock of
inventions and subtleties improved and increased by contact with
housewives and shopkeepers, who do their best to drive a hard bargain. In
dealing with the 'boer' the townspeople's ingenuity is taxed to the utmost
in endeavouring to get the better of one whose nature is heavy but
cunning, and families who have dealt with the same 'boer' vendor for years
have to be as careful as if they were transacting business with an entire
stranger. The 'boer's' argument is simplicity itself: 'They try to get the
better of me, and I try to get the better of them'--and he _does_ it!

If, however, there are these differences between city and city and class
and class, there is one common characteristic of the Dutchman which, like
the mist which envelops meadow and street alike in Holland after a warm
day, pertains to the whole race, viz. his deliberation, that slowness of
thought, speech, and action which has given rise to such proverbs as 'You
will see such and such a thing done "in a Dutch month."' The Netherlander
is most difficult to move, but once roused he is far more difficult to
pacify. Many reasons are given for this 'phlegm,' and most people
attribute it to the climate, which is very much abused, especially by
Dutch people themselves, because of its sunlessness during the winter
months; though as a matter of fact the climate is not so very different
from that in the greater part of England. The temperature on an average is
a little higher in summer and a little lower in winter than in the eastern
part of England; but certainly there is in the southern part of the
country a softness in the air which is enervating, and in such places as
Flushing snow is seldom seen, and does not lie long. But the same thing is
seen in Cornwall. Hence this climatic influence is not a sufficient reason
in itself to account for the undeniable and general 'slowness' of the
Dutchman. It is to be found rather in the history of the country, which
has taught the Netherlander to attempt to prove by other people's
experience the value of new ideas, and only when he has done so will he
adopt them. This saps all initiative.

There is a great lack of faith in everything, in secular as well as
religious matters, the Dutchman will risk nothing, for four cents' outlay
he must be quite certain of six cents in return. As long as he is in this
mood the country will 'mark time,' but not advance much. The Dutchman
believes so thoroughly in being comfortable, and, given a modest income
which he has inherited or gained, he will not only not go a penny beyond
it in his expenditure, but often he will live very much below it. He would
never think of 'living up to' his income; his idea is to leave his
children something very tangible in the shape of guldens. A small income
and little or no work is a far more agreeable prospect than a really busy
life allied to a large income. All the cautiousness of the Scotchman the
Dutchman has, but not the enterprise and industry. With his
cosmopolitanism, which he has gained by having to learn and converse in so
many languages, in order to transact the large transfer business of such a
country as the Netherlands, he has acquired all the various views of life
which cosmopolitanism opens to a man's mind. The Dutchman can talk upon
politics extremely well, but his interest is largely academic and not
personal; he is as a man who looks on and loves _desipere in loco_.

The Dutchman is therefore a philosopher and a delightful _raconteur_, but
at present he is not doing any very great things in the international
battle of life, though when great necessity arises there is no man who can
do more or do better.




Chapter II

Court and Society



Society life in Holland is, as everywhere else, the gentle art of escaping
self-confession of boredom. But society in Holland is far different from
society abroad, because The Hague, the official residence of Queen
Wilhelmina, is not only not the capital of her kingdom, but is only the
third town of the country so far as importance and population go. The
Hague is the royal residence and the seat of the Netherlands Government;
but although, as a rule, Cabinet Ministers live there, most of the members
of the First Chamber of the States-General live elsewhere, and a great
many of their colleagues of the Second Chamber follow their example,
preferring a couple of hours' railway travelling per day or per week
during the time the States sit, to a permanent stay. Hence, so far as
political importance goes, society has to do without it to a great extent.
Nor is The Hague a centre of science. The universities of Leyden, Utrecht,
and Amsterdam are very near, but, as the Dutch proverb judiciously says,
'Nearly is not half;' there is a vast difference between having the rose
and the thing next to it. In consequence the leading scientific men of the
Netherlands do not, as a rule, add the charm of their conversation to
social intercourse at The Hague.

High life there is represented by members of the nobility and by such
high officials in the army, navy, and civil service as mix with that
nobility. Of course there are sets just as there are everywhere else, sets
as delightful to those who are in them as they are distasteful to
outsiders; but talent and money frequently succeed in making serious
inroads upon the preserves of noble birth. This is, however, unavoidable,
for the Netherlands were a republic for two centuries, and the scions of
the ancient houses are not over-numerous. They fought well in the wars of
their country against Spain, France, and Great Britain, but fighting well
in many cases meant extermination.

On the other hand, two centuries of republican rule are apt to turn any
republicans into patricians, particularly so if they are prosperous,
self-confident, and well aware of their importance. And a patrician
republic necessarily turns into an oligarchy. The prince-merchants of
Holland were Holland's statesmen, Holland's absolute rulers; two centuries
of heroic struggles, intrepid energy, crowned with success on all sides,
may even account for their belief that they were entrusted by the Almighty
with a special mission to bring liberty, equal rights, and prosperity to
other nations.

When, after Napoleon's downfall, the Netherlands constituted themselves a
kingdom, the depleted ranks of the aristocracy were soon amply filled from
these old patrician families. Clause 65 of the Netherlands constitution
says, 'The Queen grants nobility. No Dutchman may accept foreign
nobility.' This is the only occasion upon which the word nobility appears
in any code. No Act defines the status, privileges, or rights of this
nobility, because there are none. There is, however, a 'Hooge Raad van
Adel,' consisting of a permanent chairman, a permanent secretary, and
four members, whose functions it is to report on matters of nobility,
especially heraldic and genealogic, and on applications from Town Councils
which wish to use some crest or other. This 'High Council of Nobility'
acts under the supervision of the Minister of Justice, and its powers are
regulated by royal decrees, or writs in council. The titles used are
'Jonkheer' (Baronet) and 'Jonkvrouw,' Baron and Baroness, 'Graaf' (Earl)
and 'Gravin.' Marquess and Duke are not used as titles by Dutch noblemen.
If any man is ennobled, ail his children, sons as well as daughters, share
the privilege, so there is no 'courtesy title;' officially they are
indicated by the father's rank from the moment of their birth, but as long
as they are young it is the custom to address the boys as 'Jonker,' the
girls as 'Freule.'

For the rest, life at The Hague is very much like life everywhere else. In
summer there is a general exodus to foreign countries; in winter, dinners,
bazaars, balls, theatre, opera, a few officiai Court functions, which may
become more numerous in the near future if the young Queen and Prince
Henry are so disposed, are the order of the day. For the present, 'Het
Loo,' that glorious country-seat in the centre of picturesque, hilly,
wooded Gelderland, continues to be the favourite residence of the Court,
and only during the colder season is the palace in the 'Noordeinde,' at
The Hague, inhabited by the Queen.

Her Majesty, apparently full of youthful mirth and energy, enjoys her life
in a wholesome and genuine manner. State business is, of course, dutifully
transacted; but as the entire constitutional responsibility rests with the
Cabinet Ministers and the High Councils of State, she has no need to feel
undue anxiety about her decisions. She is well educated, a strong patriot,
and has on the whole a serions turn of mind, which came out in pathetic
beauty as she took the oath in the 'Nieuwe Kerk' of Amsterdam at her
coronation. How far she and her husband will influence and lead Society
life in Holland remains to be seen. Both are young, and their union is
younger still. During the late King's life and Queen Emma's subsequent
widowhood, society was for scores of years left to itself, and of course
it has settled down into certain grooves. But, on the other hand, the
tastes and inclinations of well-bred, well to do people, with an
inexhaustible amount of spare time on their hands, and an unlimited
appetite for amusement in their minds, are everywhere the same. Of course,
Ministerial receptions, political dinners, and the intercourse of
Ambassadors and foreign Ministers at The Hague form a special feature of
social life there, but here, again, The Hague is just like European
capitals generally.

Once every year the Dutch Court and the Dutch capital proper meet.
Legally, by the way, it is inaccurate to indicate even Amsterdam as the
capital of Holland; no statute mentions a capital of the kingdom, but by
common consent Amsterdam, being the largest and most important town, is
always accorded that title, so highly valued by its inhabitants. The Royal
Palace in Amsterdam is royal enough, and it is also sufficiently palatial,
but it is no Royal Palace in the strict sense of the word. It was built
(1649-1655), and for centuries was used, as a Town Hall. As such it is a
masterpiece, and one's imagination can easily go back to the times when
the powerful and masterful Burgomasters and Sheriffs met in the almost
oppressing splendour of its vast hall. It is an ideal meeting-place for
stern merchants, enterprising shipowners, and energetic traders. Every
hall, every room, every ornament speaks of trade, trade, and trade again.
And there lies some grim irony in the fact that these merchants, whose
meeting-place is surmounted by the proud symbol of Atlas carrying the
globe, offered that mansion as a residence to their kings, when Holland
and Amsterdam could no longer boast of supporting the world by their
wealth and their energy.

Here they meet once a year--the stern, ancient city, represented by its
sturdy citizens, its fair women, its proud inhabitants, and Holland's
youthful Queen, blossoming forth as a symbol of new, fresh life, fresh
hope and promise. Here they meet, the sons and daughters of the men and
women who never gave way, who saw their immense riches accrue, as their
liberties grew, by sheer force of will, by inflexible determination, by
dauntless power of purpose; here they meet, the last descendant of the
famous House of Orange-Nassau, the queenly bride, whose forefathers were
well entitled to let their proud war-cry resound on the battlefields of
Europe: 'A moi, genereux sang de Nassau!'

When the Queen is in Amsterdam the citizens go out to the 'Dam,' the
Square where the palace stands, offering their homage by cheers and
waving of hats, and by singing the war-psalm of the old warriors of
William the Silent, 'Wilhelmus van Nassouwe.' Then the leaders of
Amsterdam, its merchants, scientists, and artists, leave their beautiful
homes on Heeren-and Keizers-gracht, with their wives and daughters
wrapped in costly garments, glittering in profusion of diamonds and
rubies and pearls, and drive to the huge palace to offer homage to their
Queen, just as proud as she, just as patriotic as she, just as faithful
and loyal as she.

Three hundred years have done their incessant work in welding the House of
Orange and Amsterdam together; ruptures and quarrels have occurred; yet,
after every struggle, both found out that they could not well do without
each other; and now when the Queen and the city meet, mutual respect,
mutual confidence, and reciprocal affection attest the firm bond which
unites them.

To the Amsterdam patriciate the yearly visit of the Queen is a social
function full of interest. To the Queen it is more than that; she visits
not only the patricians, she also visits the people, the poor and the
toilers. Of course Amsterdam has its Socialists, and a good many of them,
too, and Socialists are not only fiery but also vociferous republicans as
a rule, who believe that royalty and a queen are a blot upon modern
civilization. But their sentiments, however well uttered, are not popular.
For when 'Our Child,' as the Queen is still frequently called, drives
through the workmen's quarter of Amsterdam, the 'Jordaan' (a corruption of
the French _jardin_), the bunting is plentiful, the cheering and singing
are more so, and the general enthusiasm surpasses both. The 'man in the
street,' that remarkable political genius of the present age, has scarcely
ever wavered in his simple affection for his Prince and Princess of
Orange; and though this affection is personal, not political--for nothing
is political to 'the man in the street'--there it is none the less, and it
does not give way to either reasoning or prejudice.

Such is the external side of Court life. Internally it strikes one as
simple and unaffected. Queen Emma was a lady possessing high
qualifications as a mother and as a ruler. She grasped with undeniable
shrewdness the popular taste and fancy, she had no difficulty in realizing
that her rather easy-going, sometimes blustering, Consort could have
retained a great deal more of his popularity by very simple means, if he
had cared to do so. She did care, so she allowed her little girl to be a
little girl, and she let the people notice it. She went about with her,
all through the country, and the people beheld not two proud princesses,
strutting about in high and mighty manner, but a gracions, kind lady and
an unaffected child. This child showed a genuine interest in sport in
Friesland, in excavations in Maastricht, in ships and quays and docks in
Rotterdam and Amsterdam, and in hospitals and orphanages everywhere.
Anecdotes came into existence--the little Queen had been seen at
'hop-scotch,' had refused to go to bed early, had annoyed her governess,
had been skating, had been snow balling her royal mother, etc. And later,
when she was driving or riding, when she attended State functions or paid
official visits, there was always a simplicity in her turn out, a quiet
dignity in her demeanour, which proved that she felt no particular desire
to advertise herself as one of the wealthiest sovereigns of the world by
the mere splendour of her surroundings.

This supreme tact of Queen Emma resulted in her daughter being educated
as a queen, as the Dutch like their sovereigns. Court life in The Hague
or at the Loo certainly lacks neither dignity nor brilliancy, but it
lacks showiness, and many an English nobleman lives in a grander style
than Holland's Queen. Now, education may bend, but it does not alter a
charactcr, and whatever qualifies may have adorned or otherwise
influenced the late King, he was no more a stickler for etiquette or a
lover of display than Queen Emma has proved to be. So there is a
probability that their daughter will also be satisfied with very limited
show, and if Prince Henry be wise, he will not interfere with the Queen's
inclinations. He is said to be 'horsy,' but the same may be said of her,
though as yet her 'horsiness' has not become an absorbing passion, nor
is it likely to be.

It is said also that she abhors music; but as long as she, as Queen, does
not transfer her abhorrence from the art to the artists, no harm will be
done. The facts are that, simple as her tastes are, she does not impose
her simplicity upon others. When she presides at State dinners or at Court
dinners, she is entirely the _grande dame_, but when she is allowed to be
wholly herself, in a small, quiet circle, she is praised by every one, low
or high, who has been favoured with an invitation to the royal table, for
her natural and unaffected manners, her urbanity, and her gentle courtesy.




Chapter III

The Professional Classes



The professional classes of Holland show their characteristics best in the
social circle in which they move and find their most congenial
companionships. Imagine, then, that we are the guests of the charming wife
of a successful counsel ('advocaat en procureur')--Mr. Walraven, let us
call him--settled in a large and prosperous provincial town. She is a
typical Dutch lady, with bright complexion, kind, clear blue eyes, rather
dark eyebrows, which give a piquant air to the white and pink of the face,
and a mass of fair golden hair, simply but tastefully arranged, leaving
the ears free, and adorning but not hiding the comely shape of the head.
She wears a dark-brown silk dress, covered with fine Brussels lace around
the neck, at the wrists, along the bodice, and here and there on the
skirt. A few rings glitter on her fingers, and her hands are constantly
busy with a piece of point lace embroidery; for many Dutch ladies cannot
stand an evening without the companionship of a 'handwerkje,' as
fancy-needlework is called. It does not in the least interfere with their
conversational duties. She is rather tall. Dutch men and women seem to
have all sizes equally distributed amongst them; it cannot be said that
they are a short people, like the French and the Belgians, nor can the
indication of middle size be so rightly applied to them as to their
German neighbours, whereas the taller Anglo-Saxons can frequently find
their match in the Netherlands.

The room in which we are seated is furnished in so-called 'old Dutch
style.' My friend and his wife have collected fine old wainscots,
sideboards and cupboards of richly carved oak in Friesland and in the
Flemish parts of Belgium. Their tables and chairs are all of the same
material and artistically cut. A very dark, greenish-grey paper covers the
walls; the curtains, the carpet, and the doors are in the same slightly
sombre shades. Venetian mirrors, Delft, Chinese and Rouen china plates,
arranged along the walls, over the carved oak bench, and on the
over-mantel, make delightful patches of bright colour in the room, and the
easy-chairs are as stylish as they are comfortable.

Our visit has fallen in the late autumn, and the gas burns bnghtly in the
bronze chandelier, while the fire in the old-fashioned circulating stove,
a rare specimen of ancient Flemish design, makes the room look cosy and
hospitable. For the moment our friend the lawyer is absent. He has been
called away to his study, for a client has come to see him on urgent
business, and we are left in the gracious society of his wife in the
comfortable sitting-room. On the table the Japan tray, with its silver
teapot, sugar-basin, milk-jug and spoon-box of mother-of-pearl and
crystal, and its dark-blue real China cups and saucers, enjoys the company
of two silver boxes, on silver trays, full of all sorts of 'koekjes'
(sweet biscuits). Many Dutch families like to take a 'koekje' with their
tea, tea-time falling in Holland between 7 and 8 o'clock, half-way between
dinner at 5 or 6 p.m. and supper at 10 or 11 p.m. A cigar-stand is not
wanting, nor yet dainty ash-trays; while by the side of our hostess is an
old-fashioned brass 'komfoor,' or chafer,[Footnote: _Komfoor_ (or
_kaffoor_) and _chafer_ are etymologically the same word, derived from the
Latin _califacere_. The French member of the family is _chauffoir_.] on a
high foot, so that within easy reach of the lady's hand is the handle of
the brass kettle, in which the 'theewater' is boiling.

Conversation turns from politics and literature to the ball to which my
hostess, her husband, and we as their guests have been invited at a
friend's house. She intends to go earlier; he and we are to follow later
in the evening, for that evening his 'Krans' is to meet at his house, and
it will keep us till eleven o'clock. A 'Krans' is simply a small company
of very good friends who meet, as a rule, once a month, at the house of
one of them, and at such meetings converse about things in general. The
English word for 'Krans' is 'wreath,' and the name indicates the intimate
and thoroughly friendly relations existing between the composing members.
They are twisted and twined together not merely by affectionate feeling,
but also by equality of social position, education, and intelligence.

Our friend's little circle numbers seven, and as every one of them happens
to be the leading man in his profession in that town, and in consequence
wields a powerful influence, their 'Krans' is generally nicknamed the
'Heptarchy.' Our friend the lawyer is not only a popular legal adviser,
but as 'Wethouder' (alderman) for finance and public works he is the
much-admired originator of the rejuvenated town. The place had been
fortified in former days, but after the home defence of Holland was
re-organized and a System of defence on a coherent and logically
conceived basis accepted, all fortified towns disappeared and became open
cities, of which this was one. The public-spirited lawyer grasped the
situation at once, and, spurred by his influence and enthusiasm, the Town
Council adopted a large scheme of streets, roads, parks, and squares, so
that when all was completed the inhabitants of the old city scarcely knew
where they were. Besides this, he is legal adviser of the local branch of
the Netherlands Bank, a director on the boards of various limited
companies, and the president-director of a prosperous Savings Bank.
Nevertheless, he finds time in his crowded life to read a great deal, to
see his friends occasionally, and to keep up an incessant courtship of his
handsome wife, who in return asseverates that he is the most sociable
husband in the world.

After Walraven has returned to the tea table, his admiring consort leaves
us, and shortly afterwards his best friend, within and without the
'Krans,' Dr. Klaassen, appears on the scene. He and Dr. Klaassen were
students at the same University, and nothing is better fitted to form
lifelong friendship than the freedom of Holland's University life and
University education. Dr. Klaassen is one of the most attractive types of
the Dutch medical man. His University examinations did not tie him too
tightly to his special science. Like ail Dutch students, he mixed freely
with future lawyers, clergymen, philosophers, and philologists, and it is
often said that while the University teaches young men chiefly sound
methods of work, students in Holland acquire quite as much instruction
from each other as from their professors. Doctor Klaassen left the
University as fresh as when he entered it, and ready to take a
healthvariousest in all departments of human affairs. He is a man to whom
the Homeric phrase might well be applied--'A physician is a man knowing
more than many others.'

His non-professional work takes him to the boards and comrmttees of
societies promoting charity, ethics, religion, literature, and the fine
arts. The local branch of the famous 'Maatschappy tot Nut van 't Algemeen'
(the 'Society for promoting the Common-weal') and its various
institutions, schools, libraries, etc., find in him one of their most
energetic and faithful directors; a local hospital admitting people of all
religions denominations has grown up by his untiring energy; and he
prepared the basis upon which younger men afterwards built what is now a
model institution in Holland; nor does he forget the poor and the orphans,
to whom he gives quite half his time, though how much of his money he
gives them nobody knows, least of all he himself.

The Reverend Mr. Barendsen, the third arrival, is a very different person.
His sermons are eloquent; he is a fluent speaker--too fluent, some say,
for words and phrases come so easily to him that the lack of thought is
not always felt by this preacher, although noticed by his flock. Now, a
sermon for Dutch Protestants is a difficult thing; it has to be long
enough to fill nearly a whole service of about two hours; and it is
listened to by educated and uneducated people, who all expect to be
edified. Dominee Barendsen, like so many of his colleagues, tries to meet
this difficulty by giving light nourishment in an attractive form. But if
his sermons do not succeed as well as his kind intentions deserve, his
influence is firmly established by his sympathetic personality. He may be
much more superficial than his two friends; he may be less dogged, less
tenacious than they; yet his fertile brain, his quick intelligence, and
his serious character have won for him a unique position, and his public
influence is very great. Both doctor and parson meet and mix in the best
society of the town, but the slums of the poor are also equally well known
to them; neither is a member of the Town Council, but the same
institutions have their common support. Livings in Holland are not
over-luxurious; and the consequence is that many 'Dominees' go out
lecturing, or make an additional income by translating or writing books.
Some of Holland's best and most successful authors and poets are, or were,
clergymen, such as Allard Pierson, P. A. de Genestet, Nicolaas Beets
(Hildebrand), Coenraad Busken Huet, J. J. L. ten Kate, Dr. Jan ten Brink,
Bernard ter Haar, etc. Dominee Barendsen is likewise well known in Dutch
literary circles.

General Hendriks is the next to be announced. Dutch officers do not like
to go about in their uniform, but the gallant general is also expected at
the ball, and so he has donned his military garments. He is a 'Genist,' a
Royal Engineer, and had his education at the Royal Military Academy at
Breda. This means that he is no swashbuckler, but a genial, well-mannered,
open-minded and well-read gentleman, with a somewhat scientific turn of
mind and a rare freedom from military prejudice. Hollanders are not a
military people in the German sense, and fire-eaters and military fanatics
are rare, but they are rarest amongst the officers of the General Staff,
the Royal Engineers, and the Artillery.

General Hendriks married a lady of title with a large fortune, so his
position is a very pleasant one. His friendship for the other
'Heptarchists' is necessarily of recent date, for he has been abroad a
great deal, and was five years in the Dutch East Indies fighting in the
endless war against Atchin. His stay there has widened his views still
more, and when he tells of his experiences he is at once interesting and
attractive, for he is well-informed and a charming _raconteur_. His rank
causes Society to impose on him duties which he is inclined to consider as
annoying, but he fulfils them graciously enough. He is a popular
president-director of the "Groote Societeit" (the Great Club), and of
Caecilia, the most prominent society for vocal and instrumental music; and
whenever races, competitions, exhibitions, bazaars, and similar social
functions, to which the Dutch are greatly addicted, take place, General
Hendriks is sure to be one of the honorary presidents, or at least a
member of the working board, and his urbanity and affability are certain
to ensure success. He has been a member of the States-General, and is said
to be a probable future Minister of War. But the weak spot in his heart is
for poetry and for literature generally; the number of poems he knows by
heart is marvellous, and at the meetings of the Heptarchy he freely
indulges his love of quotations, a pleasure he strictly denies himself in
other surroundings, for fear of boring people. But everybody has a dim
presumption that the general knows a good deal more than most people are
aware of, and this dim presumption is strengthened by the very firm
conviction that he is an exceedingly genial man and a 'jolly good fellow.'

Mr. Ariens, Lit.D., 'Rector of the Gymnasium (equivalent to Head-master of
a Grammar School), is the most remarkable type even in this very
remarkable set of men. He is highly unconventional, and his boys adore
him, while his old boys admire him, and the parents are his perennial
debtors in gratitude. He is unconventional in everything, in his dress, in
his way of living, in his opinions and judgments, but he parades none of
these, reducing them to neither a whim nor a hobby. He passed some years
in the Dutch Indies, travelled all over Europe, knows more of Greek,
Latin, and antiquities than anybody else, and is as thoroughly scientific
as any University professer. But the Government will never give him a
vacant chair, for his pedagogical powers surpass even his scientific
abilities, and they cannot spare such men in such places. To some
aristocratic people his noble simple-mindedness is downright appalling;
but when he goes about in dull, cold, wintry weather and visits the poor
wretches in the slums, where nature and natural emotions and forms of
speech are quite unconventional, he is duly appreciated. For he is not
only a splendid 'gymnasii rector,' he is also a very charitable man,
though he likes only one form of charity, that by which the rich man first
educates himself into being the poor man's friend, and then only offers
his sympathy and help, the charity which the one can give and the other
take without either of them feeling degraded by the act. He is not a
public-body man, our 'Rector,' but his friends appreciate his keen, just
judgment. They may disagree with him on some points, but a discussion with
him is always interesting on account of his original, fresh method of
thought, and instructive by reason of his very superior and universal
knowledge.

His best friend is Mr. Jacobs, a civil engineer. Dutch civil engineers are
educated at Delft, at the Polytechnic School, after having passed their
final examination at a 'Higher Burgher School.' Boys of sixteen or
seventeen are not fit to digest sciences by the dozen, and, however
pleasant and convenient it may be to become a walking cyclopedia, a
cyclopedia is not a living book, but a dead accumulation of dead
knowledge, which may inform though it does not educate. Happily, the
majority of Dutch engineers are saved by the Polytechnic School, where
they have about the same liberty as undergraduates at the Universities to
go their own way. Educationally they are not so well equipped, attention
only being paid to mental instruction, for the Director of a 'Higher
Burgher School' is a different man from the Rector of a Gymnasium, while
the System over which he presides is more or less incoherent so far as
educational considerations go.

But if a civil engineer is a success he is generally a big one. So is Mr.
Jacobs. He is thoroughly well read, though his reading may be somewhat
desultory. His splendid memory, assisted by a remarkably quick wit, allows
him to feel interested in nearly everything--sociology, literature, art,
music, theatre, sport, charity, municipal enterprise. If he is
superficial, nobody notices it, for he is much too smart to show it. His
general level-headedness makes him an inexhaustible source of admiration
to Dr. Ariens, whose peer he is in kindness of heart. His manner is
irreproachable; he never loses his temper in discussion, and treats his
opponents in such a quiet, courteous way that they are obviously sorry to
disagree with him. His business capacities are of the first rank; he makes
as much money as he likes, and however crowded his life may be, he always
finds time for more work. He is a member of the Town Council and a staunch
supporter of Walraven's progressive plans. Walraven has certain misgivings
about Jacobs' thoroughness, but he fully realizes his friend's quick grasp
of things. He may build bridges, irrigate whole districts, and drain
marshes in Holland, open up mines in Spain, build docks in America, or
hunt for petroleum in Russia; he is always sure to succeed, and a fair
profit for himself, at any rate, is the invariable result of his
exertions. He travels a great deal, knows everybody everywhere, and always
turns up again in the old haunts, bristling with interesting information,
visibly enjoying his busy, full life, and not without a certain vanity,
arising from the feeling that his fellow-citizens are rather proud of him.

The last to come is Mr. Smits, President of the Court of Justice, a man of
philosophical turn of mind, an ardent student of social problems, a fine
lawyer, a first-rate speaker, a shrewd judge of men, and a tolerant and
mild critic of their weaknesses. He also is a member of the Town Council,
and, like Jacobs, a member of a municipal committee of which Walraven is
the chairman. Their duties are the supervision and general management of
the communal trade and industry, such as tramways, gas-works,
water-supply, slaughter-houses, electrical supply, corn exchange, public
parks and public gardens, hothouses and plantations, etc. Smits is also
the chairman of two debating societies, one for workmen and the other for
the better educated classes; but social problems are the chief topics
discussed at both. These societies, he says, keep him well in touch with
the general drift of the popular mind; as a fact, by his encouraging ways,
he draws from the people what is in their thoughts and hearts, and very
often succeeds in correcting wrong impressions and conceptions. He is also
the Worshipful Master of the local Masonic lodge, 'The Three Rings,' so
called after the famous parable of religions tolerance in Lessing's noble
drama, _Nathan der Weise_. Dutch Freemasonry is not churchy as in England;
it is charitable, teaches ethics as distinct from, but not opposed to,
religion, admits men of all creeds and of no creed whatever, and preaches
tolerance all round; but it fights indifferentism, apathy, or carelessness
on all matters affecting the material, intellectual, and psychical
well-being of mankind.

Smits feels very strongly on all these matters, and his enthusiasm is of
a staying kind; but the ancient device 'Suaviter in modo' has quite as
much charm for him as its counterpart, 'Fortiter in re.' The consequence
is that superficial people take him for a Socialist because he neither
prosecutes nor persecutes Socialists for the opinions they hold. Himself
an agnostic, and lacking religions sentiment, he realises so well the
supreme influence of religion on numberless people and the comfort they
derive from it, that many consider him not nearly firm enough in his
intercourse with Roman Catholics or 'orthodox' Protestants, with whom, in
fact, he frequently arranges political 'deals.' For Smits is, if not the
chairman, the most influential and active member of the Liberal caucus;
and, being in favour of proportional representation, he insists that the
other political parties shall have their fair number of Town Councillors.

Such are the men who come together in this elegant and yet homely
sitting-room; each of them a leader in his profession, each of them coming
in daily and close contact with all sorts and conditions of men and women
in the town, and enabled by their wide and unbiassed views of humanity and
human affairaffairsntrol them and to divert the common energies in wise
paths. The 'Heptarchy' has, of course, no legal standing as such, but from
their conversations one understands the influence which its members wield
by their intellectual and moral superiority. They conspire in no way to
attain certain ends, but discuss things as intimately as only brothers or
man and wife can discuss them, in the genial intimacy of their unselfish
friendship. They generally agree on the lines to be taken in certain
matters, but even if they fail to agree, this does not prevent them from
acting according to their own rights, still respecting each other's
convictions and preferences. And not only local topics are discussed in
the meetings of the 'Heptarchy,' for politics, art, trade, and science,
foreign and Dutch, come within their scope; for their intellectual
outlook, like their sympathies, is universal.

Towards eleven o'clock we take leave of each other. Walraven, Hendriks,
and ourselves go to the ball at the house of the 'Commissaris der
Koningin' (Queen's Commissioner), the Lord-Lieutenant of the county, Baron
Alma van Strae. Baron and Baroness Alma live in a palatial mansion, and we
find the huge reception and drawing rooms full of a gay crowd of young
folk. The rooms are beautifully decorated, there is a profusion of flowers
and palms in the halls and on the stairs; and a host of footmen in
bright-buttoned, buff-coloured livery coats, short trousers, and white
stockings, move quietly about, betraying the well-trained instincts of
hereditary lackeydom. There are county councillors, judges, officers of
army and navy, bankers, merchants, manufacturers, town councillors, the
mayor and town clerk, the president and some members of the Chamber of
Commerce, and committee-men of orphanages and homes for old people. All
have brought their wives, daughters, and sons to do the dancing, for
though they occasionally join themselves, they prefer to indulge in a
quiet game of whist or to settle down in Baron Alma's smoking and billiard
room for a cigar.

These social fonctions, however, are much the same in Holland as in other
countries. Etiquette may differ in small details, but on the whole the
world of society lives the same life, cultivates the same interests, and
amuses or bores itself in much the same fashion. It is _tout comme chez
nous_ in this as in nearly everything else.

On the whole, this elegant crowd shows a somewhat greater amount of
deference towards professionals than towards officials. Doctors, lawyers,
and parsons are clearly highly esteemed; it is the victory of intellect in
a fair field of encounter. In The Hague the officials beat them, but not
so much on account of their office as in consrquence of the fact that so
many are titled persons, highly connected and frequently well off. But
after the great Revolution and the Napoleonic times officialdom lost its
influence and social importance in Holland in consequence of the
demolition of the oligarchic, patrician Republic; and clause five of the
Netherlands constitution, which declares that 'Every Netherlander may be
appointed to every public office,' is a very real and true description of
the actual, visible facts of social life.




Chapter IV

The Position of Women



The Dutch woman, generally speaking, is not the 'new woman' in the sense
of taking any very definite part in the politics of the country. Neither
does she interest herself, or interfere, in ecclesiastical matters.
Dutchmen have not a very high opinion of the mental and administrative
qualities of their womenfolk outside of what is considered their sphere,
but for all that the women of the upper class are certainly more clever
than the men, but as they do not take any practical part in the questions
which are 'burning,' as far as any question does burn in this land of
dampness, their interest is academic rather than real. The wives of the
small shopkeeper, the artisan, and the peasant take much the same place as
women of these classes in other European countries. They are kind mothers,
thrifty housewives, very fond of their 'man,' not averse to the
fascinations of dress, and in their persons and houses extremely trim and
tidy, while the poorest quarters of the large towns are, compared with the
slums of London, Manchester, and Liverpool, pictures of neatness. It is
true that windows are seldom opened, for no Dutch window opens at the top,
and so in passing by an open door in the poor quarters of a town one gets
a whiff of an inside atmosphere which baffles description; but the inside
of the house is 'tidy,' and one can see the gleam of polished things,
telling of repeated rubbings, scrubbings, and scourings. In fact,
cleanliness in Holland has become almost a disease, and scrubbing and
banging go on from morning until night both outside and inside a house.

Probably the abundant supply of water accounts for the universal washing,
for, not content with washing everything inside a house, they wash the
outside too, and even the bark of any trees which happen to lie within the
zone of operations. The plinths and bricks of the houses are scrubbed as
far as the arms can reach or a little hand-squirt can carry water. In
cottages both in town and country there is the same cleanliness, but the
people stop short of washing themselves, and the bath among the poorer
classes is practically unknown. People of this kind may not have had one
for thirty or forty years, and will receive the idea with derision and
look on the practice as a 'fad,' while the case of many animals is
seriously cited as an argument that it is quite unnecessary. A doctor told
me once of a rich old patient of the farming class near Utrecht who, on
being ordered a bath, said, 'Any amount of physic, but a bath--never!' On
the principle that you cannot do everything, personal cleanliness is apt
to go to the wall, and the energies of the Dutchwomen of the lower middle
and the poorer classes are concentrated on washing everything _inanimate,_
even the brick footpath before the houses, which accounts for the clean
appearance of the Dutch streets in town and country. Even a heavy downpour
of rain does not interfere with the housewife's or servant's weekly
practice, and you will see servants holding up umbrellas while they wash
the fronts of the houses. This excessive cleanliness, together with the
other household duties of mother and wife, fills up the ordinary day, and
a newspaper or book is seldom seen in their hands.

Passing on to the middle class, we find the mistress's time largely taken
up with directing the servants and bargaining with the tradesmen, who in
many cases bring their goods round from house to house. The lady of the
house takes care to lock up everything after the supplies for the day have
been given out, and the little basket full of keys which she carries about
with her is a study in itself. Even in the upper class this locking up is
a general practice, for very few people keep a housekeeper. The mistress
also takes care of the 'pot.' This is an ingenious but objectionable
device to make a guest pay for his dinner. On leaving a house after dining
you give one of the servants a florin, and all the money so collected is
put into a box, and at certain times is divided between the servants, so
that a servant on applying for a situation asks what is the value of the
'pot' in the year. There are signs of this practice of feeing servants
after a dinner being done away with, for it spoils the idea of
hospitality, and one's host on bidding you 'Good-bye' resorts to many
little artifices in order not to see that you do fee his servant, added to
which you are very likely to shake hands with him with the florin in your
hand, which you have been furtively trying to transfer to the left hand
from the right, and very often the guest drops the wretched coin in his
efforts to give it unseen. It is to be hoped that the ladies of Holland
will succeed in abolishing a custom which is disagreeable alike to
entertainer and entertained.

The women of the upper middle class are certainly much better educated
than their English sisters. They always can speak another language than
their own, and very often two, French and English now being common, while
a few add German and a little Italian, but most of them read German, if
they do not speak it. French is universal, however, for the French novel
is far more to the taste than the more sober English book. The number and
quality of these French books read by the Dutch young lady are enough to
astonish and probably shock an English girl, who reads often with
difficulty the safe 'Daudet' ('Sapho' excepted), but the young Dutchwoman
knows of no _Index Expurgatorius,_ and reads what she likes. At the same
time the classics of England and Germany are very generally read and
valued, and many a Dutchwoman could pass a better examination on the text
and meaning of Shakespeare than the English-woman, whose knowledge is too
often limited to memories of the Cambridge texts of the great poets used
in schools.

But, well educated as the Dutchwoman undoubtedly is, there is nothing
about her of the 'blue-stocking,' and she does not impress you as being
clever until a long acquaintance has brought out her many-sided knowledge.
The great pity is that her education leads to so little, for there are
very few channels into which a Dutchwoman can direct her knowledge.
Politics turn for the most part on differences in religions questions,
which are abstruse and dry to the feminine mind, and of practical
political life she sees nothing. There is no 'terrace,' no Primrose
League, no canvassing, no political _salon_, no excitement about
elections; and added to these negatives, women get snubbed if they venture
opinions on political matters, and young people generally look upon
politics _et hoc genus omne_ as a bore, and the names of the great
statesmen at the helm of affairs are frequently not even known by the
younger generation. Little interest is also taken in the army and navy,
owing to the fact that there is so little active service in the former and
to the smallness of the latter; and woman does not care much about
orders, regulations, manoeuvres and comparative strengths--she wants
'heroes,' and to know what they have done, and does not consider what the
'services' might, could, or should do. The officers who have served in
India and have seen active service rank high in her estimation, but as
these are few, beyond the affection bestowed upon soldier husband,
brother, or lover, which is chiefly displayed in anxiety lest they should
be sent to do garrison duty in some town where social advantages are small
or _nil_, there is no great interest taken in army affairs by the
Dutchwoman. As to the navy, they philosophically acquiesce in the fact
that as a ship must sail on the water they must patiently bear the
necessary separation from their sailor friends.

When we come to things ecclesiastical there is still less interest taken
in the Church. The Roman Catholic Church is outside the question, for the
position of the laity there has been well described as 'kneeling in front
of the altar, sitting under the pulpit, and putting one's hand in one's
pocket without demur when money is required.' The Protestant laity,
however, do not take any great interest in the National Church, and while
there are deaconesses devoted to nursing and all good works, as there are
_soeurs de charite_ in the Roman communion, yet the rank and file of
Dutchwomen do not trouble about their church beyond attending it
occasionally--one may say, very occasionally. There is but little
brightness in the services of the Reformed Church, no ritual, no scope for
artistic work, no curates, and above and beyond ail, no career in the
Church for the clergy. At the best they may get sent to one of the large
towns, but the life is the same as in the village for the wife of the
'domine,' as the Dutch pastor is called. And if the domines move about in
fear and trembling because of the argus-eyes and often Midas-like ears of
the deacons, their wives must be still more discreet. One 'domine' has
been known to brave public opinion and ride a bicycle, but for a mother in
Israel to do the like would scandalize all good members of the Reformed
Church. The wives of the clergy, however, do good and useful work, and
probably are more real helpmeets to their husbands than women in any other
class of what may be called official life, but they take no sort of lead
in parochial or ecclesiastical matters. They do not direct the feminine
influences which do work in the parish, but rather take their place as one
of them. If, therefore, a woman marries a clergyman, she does so for love
of the man and his work's sake; there cannot be a tinge of ambition as to
the career of her husband, for there are no such things as comfortable
rectories and prospective deaneries or bishoprics, with their consequent
influence and power. Nothing but love of the man brings the 'domine' a
wife, and she knows that there will be inquisitorial eyes and not too kind
speeches about her behaviour from the 'faithful,' while the great people,
to their loss, will ignore her socially in much the same way as Queen
Elizabeth did the wives of the bishops in her day.

Passing to lighter subjects, Dutch girls are now breaking loose from the
stiffness and espionage in which their mothers were brought up, and this
is without doubt in a large measure due to the introduction of sport.
Tennis, hockey, golf, and more especially bicycling have conferred, by
the force of circumstances, a freedom which strength of argument,
entreaty, and tears failed to effect. Mothers and and chaperons do not,
as a rule, bicycle, and play tennis and golf; they cannot always go to
club meetings, even to yawn through the sets, and so the young people
play by themselves, and there are fast growing a lack of restraint and a
healthy freedom of intercourse which are gravely deprecated by
grand-mammas, winked at by mothers, but enjoyed to the full by daughters.
But quidnuncs prophesy, however, that people will not marry as early as
of yore, for young people get to know one another too well by
unrestricted intercourse, and the halo with which each sex surrounds the
other is dispelled. Be this as it may, no Dutch girl wishes to go back to
the old days when she could go nowhere alone.

Yet, however much men like to have women as companions in games, they are
not so willing to allow them much to say in matters which the masculine
mind considers its own province; for the fact is that most Dutchmen
consider women inferiors, and when there is a question of admittance into
literary or artistic circles and clubs, women's work has to be of an
undeniably high order. There are one or two ladies' clubs, but they do not
at present flourish, there being so few public platforms on which women
can meet, and so the 'social grade' determines women's relative position
by women's votes, and there is small chance of crossing the Rubicon then.
There is no doubt, however, that women in Holland are slowly winning their
way to greater independence of life. They are filling posts in public
offices; they are going to the universities; they are studying medicine
and qualifying as doctors; and no doubt they will in time compel men to
acknowledge their claims to live an independent life rather than a
dependent one. Besides, in Holland, as in other countries, the proportion
between the sexes is unequal, and so necessity will force open doors of
usefulness hitherto closed to women.

The Dutchwoman dresses expensively in all the towns, and generally well.
The toilettes are mostly of a German model, which suits the build of the
Dutchwoman better than the fashions of Paris. Rarely, however, do women
dress in that simple style in vogue in English morning dress, and a Dutch
town or seaside resort is filled in the mornings with gay toilettes more
fitted for the Row or the Boulevard. Even when bicycling the majority do
not dress very simply.

[Illustration: Dutch Fisher-Girls.]

[Illustration: A Bridal Pair Driving Home.]

Holland has always been noted for the variety and quaintness of its
provincial and even communal costumes, and these may all still be seen,
though they are dying out slowly. In some, and in fact many cases, a
modern bonnet is worn over a beautiful gold or silver headpiece, fringed
with lace, but ancient and modern do not in such cases harmonize. Of the
distinctly provincial costumes, that of Friesland is generally considered
the prettiest, but as illustrations are given of them all in a later
chapter, it must be left to the reader to decide the point for himself.
The fisherfolk more than any other retain their distinctive dress,
although even among them some of the children are habited according to
modern ideas, and certainly when the women are doomed to wear fourteen or
sixteen skirts, which have the effect of making them liable to pulmonary
complaints, it is surprising that modern fashions are not more generally
adopted. The plea for modernity in respect of Dutch national costumes is
considered rank heresy among artists, but the figures look better in a
picture and at a distance than in everyday life, added to which the custom
of cutting off or hiding the hair, which some of the head-dresses compel,
is not one to be encouraged; and it is a wonder that woman, who knows as a
rule her charms, has for so long consented to be deprived of one of the
chief ones. But in Holland, as in all countries where education is
spreading, cosmopolitanism in dress is increasing, and the picturesque
tends to give place to the convenient and in many cases the healthy.

Marriage with all its preliminaries is woman's triumph, and in Holland she
makes the most of it. The manner of seeking a wife and proposing is no
doubt the same in the Netherlands as in other European countries, with the
exception of France; but once accepted, the happy man must resign himself
to the accustomed routine. First of all he exchanges rings, so that a man
who is engaged or married betrays the fact as well as a woman by a plain
gold ring worn on the third finger. A girl, therefore, has a better chance
against those who were 'deceivers ever' than in a country where no such
outward and visible sign exists. The engagement is announced by cards
being sent out, counter-signed by the parents on both sides, and a day is
fixed for receiving the congratulations. The betrothed are then considered
almost married. Engagements are, of course, frequently broken off, but
such a thing as an action for 'breach of promise' is impossible, and would
be considered most mercenary and mean. As a rule, engagements are not
long, and as soon as the wedding-day is agreed upon, the preceding
fortnight is filled with parties of various kinds, while there is another
great reception just before the wedding day, in which, as before, the
bride and bridegroom have to stand for hours receiving the congratulations
of their friends. Every now and then they will snatch a chance to sit
down, but another arrival brings them again to their feet, weary but
smiling. On the wedding morning the happy couple drive to the Town Hall;
for all marriages must first be celebrated by the civil authorities, and
so they appear before the Burgomaster, who says something appropriate, and
they make their vows and sign the papers, after which, if they desire it,
there is a service at the church which is called a 'Benediction,' at which
they are blessed, and have to listen to a long sermon, at the close of
which a Bible is given them. This sermon is not the least of the trying
experiences, for frequently many of the older members of the party are
reduced to tears by allusions to former members of the two families, and
all sorts of subjects alien to the particular service are introduced. At a
recent wedding known to me, the guests had to listen to a long address in
which the Transvaal War and the Paris Exhibition were commented upon. Not
only so, but no fewer than three collections are taken at the service, so
that people who desire to enter into the holy estate of matrimony must not
lack fortitude when they have made up their minds to it.

But once married, a Dutch home is indeed 'Home, sweet home,' as is the
case more or less in all the northern countries, where the changeful
climate compels people to live a great deal within four walls. Dutch
fathers are kind, and the mothers are indulgent, and among the poorer
classes especially family affection is very great. Most beautiful and
touching instances might be abundantly quoted of family devotion, and a
society like that for the 'prevention of cruelty to children' would find
little to do in Holland.




Chapter V

The Workman of the Towns



The condition of the Dutch urban working classes is by no means an
enviable one. Granting that wages are much higher than half a century ago,
when bread cost fivepence-halfpenny the loaf as against three halfpence
to-day, and when clothes and furniture cost fifty per cent. more than now,
the average working-man cannot be otherwise described than as distinctly
poor when compared with his English colleague. Yet it would be misleading
to judge exclusively by the scale of wages, and against making comparisons
of the kind the reader should at once be warned. The fact is that there
are very wide divergences of condition amongst the working classes of
Holland. A carpenter or a blacksmith earning from L1 to L1 10s. in weekly
wages all the year round will rank, if sober and well-behaved, as a
comparatively well-to-do workman. On the other hand, a bricklayer or a
painter, whose work in winter is very uncertain, and who earns, maybe, a
bare L1 a week during the nine months of the year wherein he can find
work, is a poor workman at the best, and his condition is greatly to be
deplored. More pitiable still, however, is the case of working-class
families in some of the manufacturing towns, where wages are still lower,
and where an even tolerable standard of life cannot be maintained unless
mother and children take their place in the factory side by side with the
head of the household as regular wage-earners.

For, as labour is cheap and families are numerous in Holland, as soon as
the boys and girls have reached the sacramental age of twelve, at which
Dutch law allows them to work twelve hours a day, they leave school, and
enter the factory and workshop.

It is no joke for these children, who have to leave their little beds,
frequently under the tiles, at 5 or 6 a.m., or earlier, summer and winter,
to gulp down some hot coffee, or what is conveniently called so, to
swallow a huge piece of the well-known Dutch 'Roggebrood,' or rye-bread,
and then to hurry, in their wooden shoes, through the quiet streets of the
town to their place of work.

Sometimes they have time to return home at 8 or 8.30 a.m. for a second
hurried 'breakfast,' which as often as not is their first, for many of
them start the day's work on an empty stomach. Those who cannot run home
and back in the half-hour usually allowed for the first 'Schaft,' or
meal-time, take their bread-and-butter with them in a cotton or linen bag,
and their milk-and-water or coffee in a tin, and so shift as well as they
can. Dinner-time, as a rule, finds the whole family united from about
twelve until one o'clock or half-past in the kitchen at home. This kitchen
is, of course, used for cooking, washing, dwelling, and sleeping purposes.
The walls are whitewashed, and the floor consists of flag-stones. Of
luxury there is none, of comfort little. Generally the fare of the day is
potatoes, with some vegetable, carrots, turnips, cabbage, or beans. A
piece of bacon, rarely some beef, is sometimes added; while mutton is
hardly ever eaten in Holland, unless by very poor people. Fish is too
expensive for most of them, except fried kippers or bloaters. If there is
time over, and the house has a little garden attached to it, the children
help by watering the vegetables growing there, should it be summer-time,
or by making themselves generally useful. But at 1 or 1.30 they have to be
back at the workshop, and until 7 p.m. the drudgery goes on again. On
Saturday evening the boy brings his sixpence, or whatever his trifling
wages may be, to his mother. Rent and the club-money for illness and
funeral expenses must be at hand when the collectors call either on Sunday
or Monday morning. As a rule, though the exceptions are numerous enough,
the father also brings his whole pay with him; but drink is the curse--a
decreasing curse, it may be, but still a curse--of many a workman's
family, and in such cases the inroads it makes in the domestic budget are
very serious.

So the boys grow up, in a busy, monotonous life, until they are called
upon to subject themselves to compulsory military service. Before they
become recruits they have usually joined various societies--debating,
theatrical, social, political, or other. Arnold Toynbee has a good many
admirers and followers in Holland, who do yeoman's work after his spirit,
and bring bright, healthy pleasure into the lives of these youthful
toilers. Divines of all denominations, Protestant and Catholic, have also
their 'At homes' and their 'Congregations,' and innocent amusement is not
unseldom mixed with religious teaching at their meetings. In this way,
too, a helpful, restraining influence is exerted upon youth. And gradually
the boy becomes a young man, associating with other young men, and, like
his wealthier neighbours, discussing the world's affairs, dreaming of
drastic reforms, and thinking less and less of the dreary home, where
father and mother, grown old before their time, are little more than the
people with whom he boards, and who take the whole or part of his wages,
allowing him some modest pocket-money for himself.

In the meantime his sisters have been living with some middle-class
family, starting as errand-girls, being afterwards promoted to the
important position of 'kindermeid' or children's maid, though all the time
sleeping out, which means that before and after having toiled a whole day
for strangers, they do part of the housework for their mothers at home.
After some time, however, they find employment as housemaids, or in other
domestic positions. If they have the good fortune to find considerate yet
strict and conscientious mistresses, the best time of their life now
begins; there is no exhaustion from work, yet good food, good lodging, and
kind treatment. Should they care to cultivate the fine art of cooking,
they get instruction in that line, and are in most cases allowed to work
independently, and even, when reliable and trustworthy, to do the buying
of vegetables, etc., by themselves in the market-places, which all Dutch
towns boast of, and in which the produce of the land is offered for sale
in abundance and appetizing freshness. All this tends to teach a
servant-girl how to use alike her eyes, hands, and brain, and to educate
her into a thrifty, industrious, and tidy workman's wife, who will know
how to make both ends meet, however short her resources may be. This is
one of the reasons why so many Dutch workmen's homes, notwithstanding the
low wages, have an appearance of snug prosperity--the women there have
learned how to make a little go a long way.

And how about their future husbands? Have they, too, learned their trade?
Perhaps; if they are particularly strong, shrewd, industrious, and
persevering, though technical education ('ambachtsonderwys') is much a
thing of the future in Holland.

In the general course of life a boy goes to a trade which offers him the
highest wages. If he can begin by earning eightpence a week, he will not
go elsewhere to earn sixpence if the wear and tear of shoes and clothes is
the same in both cases, although the sixpenny occupation may perhaps be
better suited to his tastes, ability, and general aptitude. To his mother
the extra two pence are a consideration; they may cover some weekly
contribution to a necessary fund. Running errands is his first work, until
accidentally some workman or some apprentice leaves the shop, in which
case he is moved up, and a new boy has the errands to do. But now he must
look out for himself; his master is not over-anxious to let him learn all
the ins and outs of the work, for as soon as his competitors hear that he
has a very clever boy in his shop, he is sure to lose that boy, who is
tempted away by the offer of better pay. Nor are the workmen greatly
inclined to impart their little secrets, to explain this thing and that,
and so help the young fellow on. Why should they? Nobody did it for them;
they got their qualifications by their own unaided exertions--let the boy
do the same. Moreover, the 'baas,' or chief, does not like them to 'waste
their time' in that manner, and the 'baas' is the dispenser of their
bread-and-butter; so the boy is, as a rule, regarded merely as a nuisance.

There are workshops, first-class workshops, too, where no apprentices have
been admitted for dozens of years, simply because the employers do not see
their way to make an efficient agreement with the boys or their parents
which would prevent them from letting a competitor enjoy the results of
their technical instruction. One would not be astonished that in these
circumstances all over Holland the want of technical schools is badly
felt, and that agitation for their provision is active. Only some
twenty-four such schools exist at present; the oldest, that at Amsterdam,
dates from 1861, and the youngest, that of Nymegen, was established in
1900. Partly municipal schools, partly schools built by the private effort
of citizens, they all do their work well. It is only during the last few
years that the nation has begun to ask whether technical education ought
not to be taken up by the State. The Dutch like private enterprise in
everything, and are always inclined to prefer it to State or municipal
action; but they have come to recognize that technical schools may be good
schools, and may do good work on behalf of the much-needed improvement of
handicraft, even though not private ventures, and that so far this branch
of national education has not kept up with the times.

The idea which will probably in the end gain the day, is that the
Technical Schools should be managed by the town councils and subsidized by
the State, who in return would receive the right of supervision and
inspection, and of laying down general rules for their curricula. For the
present, however, there is no law settling the question, and the
apprentices are the sufferers by the lack, since the employers shrink from
employing their means, time, and knowledge on behalf of unscrupulous
competitors.

In general the life of an urban working-man is a constant struggle against
poverty and sickness. Children come plentifully, rather too much so for
the unelastic possibilities of their parents' wages. The young wife does
not get stronger by frequent confinements; and the fare is bound to get
less nourishing as the mouths round the domestic board increase--always
simple, it often becomes insufficient. The mother, working hard already,
has to work harder still and to do laundry work at home or go out as a
charwoman, in order to increase the modest income. In industrial centres
women frequently work in the factories as well, though the law does at
least protect them against too long hours and premature work after
confinement.

Thanks to the Dutch thrift, burial funds and sickness funds come promptly
to the rescue when death lays his iron grip on the wasted form of the poor
town-bred babies, when illness saps the man's power to earn his usual
wages, and the family's income is for the time cut off. Of these benefit
funds there are about 450 in Holland, distributed amongst some 150 towns.
Half of them are burial funds, and half mixed burial and sickness funds;
their members number about two millions; yet, although they certainly do
much to prevent extreme poverty, they do it in a manner which in many
cases is little short of a scandal. Their legal status is rather
uncertain, and in consequence many managers do as they like, and make a
good thing for themselves out of their duty to the poor. Too often these
managers are supreme controllers of the funds, and the members have no
influence whatever. In many cases the only official the latter know is the
collector, who calls at their houses for the weekly contributions. This
official frequently resorts to questionable tricks for extorting money
from the poor helpless members, who simply and confidently pay what they
are told to pay--small sums, of course, a few cents or pence, it may be,
but still 'adding up' in the long run--and when sorrow and death enter
their humble dwellings they are easily imposed upon by cool scoundrels,
who trade on their disinclination to quarrel about money when there is a
corpse in the house.

Another danger of the irregular condition of these funds lies in the fact
that outsiders may take out policies on the lives of certain families. A
few years ago the country was shocked by the alarming story of a woman who
had poisoned a series of persons merely to be able to get the funeral
expenses paid to herself, while many a wretched little baby has in this
manner been the horrible investment of heartless neighbours, who, knowing
the poor thing was dying, took out policies for its funeral. For medical
examination is not required for these beautifully managed associations.
Their premiums are, however, so high that this detail does not materially
affect their sound financial position; and this being the case, it cannot
be denied that the absence of such examinations considerably increases
their general utility for the labouring classes.

[Illustration: A Dutch Street Scene.]

The clubs for preventing financial loss by illness do require a medical
examination. They number in Holland nearly 700, distributed in over 300
towns. Some allow a fixed sum of money during illness, others provide
doctor and medicines, others do both. But the same objections and
grievances which workmen entertain against burial funds apply likewise to
these latter clubs. The curious thing is that, instead of grumbling, the
workman does not make up his mind to mend matters by insisting on having a
share in the management of societies and funds to which he has contributed
so large a part of his earnings. As yet, however, the Dutch labouring
classes have not found the man who is able to organize them for this or
other purposes. They have able advocates, eloquent, passionate reformers,
straightforward, honest friends, but the work of these is more destructive
criticism than constructive organization. Where organization exists, it is
political, social, religious, but not industrial--local, but not
universal, and it often has the bitter suggestion of charity. On the other
hand, the poor fellows have so often been imposed upon that they feel very
little confidence in each other and in the wealthier classes who profess
deep interest in their woes and sorrows. There are no very large
industrial centres in Holland; the wages are so low that most workmen are
obliged to find supplementary incomes, either by doing overtime, or by
doing odd jobs after the regular day's work is over. Hence there is not
much time or energy left for the common cause. Some great employers, like
Mr. J.C. van Marken, of Delft, and Messrs. Stork Brothers, of Hengeloo,
have organizations of their own, by which important ameliorations are
obtained; but smaller employers hear the labour leaders constantly
deprecating such efforts and preaching the blessings of Social Democracy
as the true panacea, so they do not see why they should put themselves to
any inconvenience or expense for the sake of earning abuse and
ingratitude.

Moreover, many of these employers adhere to the obsolete maxim of the
Manchester economists, that labour is merely a sort of merchandise, of
which the workman keeps a certain stock-in-trade, and that the
capitalist's simple task, as a man of business, is to buy that labour as
cheaply as possible, and that he has done with the seller as soon as his
stock-in-trade is exhausted. Happily, a good many others understand now
that in the long run this ridiculous theory is quite as bad for the State
as killing was for the fowl which laid the golden eggs.

At all events, the feelings of the workman for his 'patroon,' as the old
name still in use calls the employer, are none of the kindest. Sweating is
a much less common occurrence in Holland than it was some twenty years
ago; but while it would be mere demagogic clap-trap to speak of the
remorseless exhaustion of labour by capital, there is nevertheless room
enough for the cultivation of greater amenity between the two. And so it
will remain for some time to come. Social legislation may do a great deal
in the course of time, but it cannot do everything, and at best it must
follow the awakening of the popular conscience. Hence progress must be
made step by step, for nothing is so menacing to the stability of the
social fabric as sudden changes, and a wise statesman prefers to let every
one of his acts do its own work, and produce its own consequences, before
he risks the next move. The disintegration of social life is much worse
than social misery, for disintegration makes misery universal, and throws
innumerable obstacles in the way towards restoration.

And, however much the Dutch understand the workman's feelings and
position, however much they all long to see the latter improved, they also
have learned enough of social and political history to know that for the
community in general the only wise and safe principle of action is
progress by degrees--evolution, not revolution.




Chapter VI

The Canals and Their Population



When Drusus a few years before the commencement of our era excavated the
Yssel canal, and thus gave a new arm to the Rhine, he began a process of
canalization in the Frisian and Batavian provinces which has been going on
more or less ever since. To the foreigner Holland or the Northern
Netherlands must always appear a land of dykes and canals, the one not
more important for protection than the other as an artery of
communication; spreading commerce and supporting national life. Napoleon,
with _naive_ comprehensiveness, called Holland the alluvion of French
rivers. Dutch patriots declare with legitimate pride, 'God gave us the
sea, but we made the shore,' and no one who has seen the artificial
barrier that guards the mainland from the Hook to the Texel will disparage
their achievement or scoff at their pretensions.

[Illustration: A Sea-Going Canal.]

The sea-dyke saves Holland from the Northern Ocean, sombre and grey in its
most genial mood, menacing and stormy for the long winter of our northern
hemisphere; but it is to the inland dykes that protect the low-lying
polders that Holland owes her prosperity and the sources of wealth which
have made her inhabitants a nation. The original character of the country,
a marshland intersected by the numerous channels of the Rhine and the
Meuse, rendered it imperative that the System of dykes should be
accompanied by a brother system of canals. The over-abundant waters had
not merely to be arrested, they had to be confined and led off into
prepared channels. In this manner also they were made to serve the
purposes of man. High-roads across swamps were either impracticable or too
costly; but canals furnished a sure and convenient means of transport and
communication.

At the same time they did not imperil the security of the country. Roads
on causeways or reared on sunken piles would have opened the door to an
invader, but the canals provided an additional weapon of defence, for the
opening of the dykes sufficed to turn the country again into its primeval
state of marshland. The occasion on which this measure alone saved
Holland during the French invasion of 1670 is a well-known passage in
history, and the hopes of the Dutch in resisting the attack of any
powerful aggressor would centre in the same measure of defence, which is
the submerging of the country, practically speaking, under the waters of
the canals and rivers. There exists a popular belief that there is at
Amsterdam one master key, a turn of which would let loose the waters over
the land, but whether it is well founded or not no one except a very few
officials can say.

Pending any unfortunate necessity for breaking through the dykes and
letting loose the waters, it may be observed in passing that the effectual
maintenance of the dykes is a constant anxiety, and entails strenuous
exertions. They stand in need of repeated repairing, and it is computed
that they are completely reconstructed in the course of every four or five
years. A sum of nearly a million sterling is spent annually on the work.
A large and specially trained staff of engineers are in unceasing harness,
a numerous band of dyke watchers are constantly on the look-out, and when
they raise the shout, 'Come out! come out!' not a man, woman, or child
must hold back from the summons to strengthen the weak points through
which threatens to pass the flood that would overwhelm the land. It is a
constant struggle with nature, in which the victory rests with man. As the
dyke is the bulwark of Dutch prosperity in peace, it might be converted
into the ally of despairing patriotism in war.

There are marked differences among the canals. The two largest and best
known canals, the North Canal and the North Sea Canal, are passages to the
ocean for the largest ships, and specially intended to benefit the trade
of Amsterdam. The North Canal was made in 1819-25, soon after the
restoration of the House of Orange, with an outlet at Helder, near the
mouth of the Texel. It has a breadth of between 40 and 50 yards, a length
of 50 miles, and a depth of 20 feet, which was then thought ample. After
forty years' use this canal was found inadequate from every point of view.
It was accordingly decided to construct a new canal direct from Amsterdam
to Ymuiden across the narrowest strip of Holland. Although the Y was
utilized, the labour on this canal was immense, and occupied a period of
eleven years, being finally thrown open to navigation in 1877. In length
it is under 16 miles, but its average breadth is 100 yards, and the depth
varies from 23 to 27 feet. Consequently the largest ships from America or
the Indies can reach the wharves of Amsterdam as easily as if it were a
port on the sea-coast. Leaving aside the sea-passages that have been
canalized among the islands of Zeeland, the remaining canals are inland
waterways serving as the principal highways of the country, giving one
part of the country access to the other, and especially serving as
approaches or lanes to the great rivers Meuse and Rhine.

[Illustration: A Village in Dyke-Land.]

The interesting canal population of Holland is, of course, to be found on
these canals, which are traversed in unceasing flow from year's end to
year's end by the tjalks, or national barges. On these boats, which more
resemble a lugger than a barge, they navigate not only the canals of their
own country, but the Rhine up to Coblentz, and even above that place. It
has been computed that Germany imports half its food-supply through
Rotterdam, and much of this is borne to its destined markets on tjalks.
The William Canal connects Bois le Duc with Limburg, and saves the great
bend of the Meuse. The Yssel connects with the Drenthe the Orange and the
Reitdiep canals, which convey to the Rhine the produce of remote Groningen
and Friesland. The Rhine represents the destination of the bulk of the
permanent canal population of Holland, whose floating habitations furnish
one of the most interesting sights to be met with on the waters of the
country, but which represent one of the secret phases of the people's
life, into which few tourists or visitors have the opportunity of peering.

The canal population of Holland is fixed on a moderate computation at
50,000 persons. For this number of persons the barge represents the only
fixed home, and the year passes in ceaseless movement across the inland
waters of the country or on the great German river, excepting for the
brief interval when the canals are frozen over in the depth of winter.
Even during these periods of enforced idleness the barge does not the less
continue to be their home, for the simple reason that the canal population
possesses no other. Their whole life for generations, the bringing up and
education of the children, the years of toil from youth to old age, are
passed on these barges, which, varying in size and still more in
condition, are as closely identified with the name of home in their
owners' minds as if they were built of brick and stone on firm land. The
ambition of the youth who tugs at the rope is to possess a tjalk of his
own, and he diligently looks out for the maiden whose dowry will assist
him, with his own savings, to make the purchase. This he may hope to
procure for five or six hundred gulden, if he will be content with one of
limited dimensions, and somewhat marked by time. When a family comes he
will want a larger and more commodious boat, but by that time the profits
which his first tjalk will have earned as a carrier will go far towards
buying a second.

The tjalks are all built in the same form and from a common model. They
carry a mast and sail, although for the greater part of their journeys
they are towed by their owners, or rather by the familles, wife and
children, of the owner. Mynheer, the barge-owner, is usually to be seen
smoking his pipe and taking his ease near the tiller. Formerly it was
otherwise, for the towing was done by dogs, under the personal direction
of, and no doubt with some assistance from, the barge-owner himself, while
his wife and children remained on the poop of the boat. But five and
twenty years ago the authorities of Amsterdam issued a law prohibiting the
employment of dogs in the work of towing, and gradually this law was
generally adopted and enforced throughout the country. When dogs were
emancipated from their servitude on the canal-bank the family had to take
their places, and by degrees the ease-loving head of the family has grown
content to look on and think towing a labour reflecting on his dignity.
There is nothing unusual in the sight of a barge being towed by an old
woman, her daughter or daughter-in-law, and several children. As they
strain at the rope the work seems extremely hard, but the people
themselves appear unconscious of any hardship or inequality in the
distribution of labour.

The barge is in the first place a conveyance. The whole of the front part
of the boat represents the hold in which the cargo is placed. This is
generally represented by cheese or vegetables, timber, peat, and stones,
the last-named being a return-cargo for the repairing of dykes and the
construction of quays. But in the second place it is a house or place of
residence, and the stern of the boat is given up for that purpose. The
living room is the raised deck or poop, on which is not only the tiller,
but the cooking-stove. The sleeping-room forms the one covered-in
apartment. It is easily divisible into two by a temporary or removable
partition, and it always possesses the two little windows, one on each
side of the tiller, which give it so great a resemblance to a doll's
house. This resemblance is certainly heightened by the custom of colouring
the barges, which are always painted a bright colour, red or green being
perhaps the most usual. As ornament there is usually a good deal of
brasswork; the handle of the tiller is generally bordered with the metal,
and the owner seems to take pride in nailing brass along the bulwarks of
his boat where it is not wanted and is even little seen. It has been
suggested that the polishing of these brass plates or bars provides a
pleasant change from the dull routine work of towing. The brightness of
the paint and the brasswork constitutes the pride of the barge-owners, and
supplies a standard of comparison among them.

To increase the homelike aspect of this water residence, birds and plants,
always in more or less quantity and variety, are to be seen either in the
windows or on the deck. The poorest bargee, which generally means the
youngest or the beginner, will have one song-bird in a gilt cage, and as
he accumulates money in his really profitable calling, he will add to his
collection of birds a row of flowers and bulbs in pots. Thus he says, with
a glow of satisfaction, 'I possess an aviary and a garden, like my cousin
Hans on the polders, although my home is on the moving waters.' To
strengthen the illusion what does he do but fix a toy gate on the poop
above his sleeping-cabin, and thus cherishes the belief that he is on his
own domain? In the evening, when the towing is over for the day, the women
bring out their sewing, the children play round the tiller, and the good
man smokes his immense pipe with complete and indolent satisfaction. And
so day passes on to day without a variation, and life runs by without a
ripple or a murmur for the canal population, while the mere landsmen look
on with envy at what seems to them an idyllic existence, and even ladies
of breeding and high station have been known to declare that they would
gladly change places with the mistress of the bargee's quarter-deck. That
was no doubt in the days before women had to take on themselves the brunt
and burden of the towing.

[Illustration: A Canal in Dordrecht.]

But even for the canal population of Holland the halcyon days are past.
The spirit of reform is in the air. It may not be long before the tjalk,
with its doll's house and its residential population, will finally
disappear, and leave the canals of Holland as dull and colourless as the
inland waters of any other country. The reform seems likely to come about
in this way. There are at least 30,000 children resident on the
canal-boats. How are they to be properly educated and brought up as useful
citizens if they are to continue to lead a migratory existence which never
leaves them for a fortnight in a single place? Formerly, nobody cared
whether they were educated or not. They were left undisturbed to live
their lives in their own simple and primitive way. As De Amicis wrote:
'The children are born and grow up on the water; the boat carries all
their small belongings, their domestic affections, their past, their
present, and their future. They labour and save, and after many years they
buy a larger boat, selling the old one to a family poorer than themselves,
or handing it over to the eldest son, who in his turn instals his wife,
taken from another boat, and seen for the first time in a chance meeting
on the canal.' But now the State has begun to interest itself in the
children, and its intervention threatens to put a rude and summary ending
to the system of heredity and exclusion which has kept the canal
population a class apart.

For some time past schools have been in existence, especially devoted to
the education of the barge children, and whenever the barges are moored in
harbour the children are expected to attend them. But these periods of
halting are very brief and uncertain. The stationary barge earns no money,
and it may even be that the parents evade the law as far as possible for
fear of seeing their children acquire a distaste for the life in which
they have been brought up. But the Government, having taken one step in
the matter, cannot afford to go back, and it must also have definite
satisfactory results to show for its legislation. The tentative measure of
temporary schools along the canals has not leavened the illiteracy of the
canal population. It will, therefore, become necessary at no great
interval to devise some fresh and drastic regulations. Compulsory
attendance at school for nine months of the year, which now applies to
children in normal circumstances, may not be the lot of the barge children
for some time, but when it comes, as it inevitably will one day, it will
of necessity mean the break-up of the home life on the canals, for the
children will have to be left behind during the almost unceasing voyages,
and a place of residence will have to be provided on land. Where the
children are the women will soon be, and gradually this place of residence
will become the home, displacing the barge in the associations and
affections of the canal population. Whether these changes will benefit
those most affected by them cannot be guaranteed, but at least they will
put an end to the separate existence of the canal population.

When this result has been compassed by the inexorable progress of
education and knowledge, the gradual disappearance of the canal
population, the class of hereditary bargees as we have known it, and as it
still exists, may be expected to follow at no remote date, for it was
based on the enforcement of the family principle, and on the devotion of a
whole community, from its youngest to its eldest member, to its
maintenance. As it is the tow-barge is something of an anachronism, but
the withdrawal of the youthful recruits, whose up-bringing alone rendered
it possible, will entail its inevitable extinction. The decay and break-up
of the guild of tjalk owners will be hastened by the introduction of steam
and electricity as means of locomotion. The canals will lose the
bright-coloured barges which are to-day their most striking feature, and
the population that has so long floated over their surface. Life will be
duller and more monotonous. The canal population, so long distinct, will
be merged in the rest of the community. The tug will displace the
tow-rope. The pullers will be housed on land, mastering the three R's
instead of learning to strain at the girth.

But there is still a brief period left during which the canal population
may be seen in its original primitive existence, devoted to the barge,
which is the only home known to six or seven thousand families, and
traversing the water roads of their country in unceasing and endless
progression. There is nothing like it in any other country of Europe.
Venice has its water routes, but the gondola is not a domicile. There was
a canal population in England, but, like much else in our modern life, it
has lost whatever picturesqueness it might once have claimed. For a true
canal population, bright and happy, living the same life from father to
son and generation to generation, we must go to Holland. There these
inland navigators ply their vocation with only one ambition, and that to
become the owner of a tjalk, and to rear thereon a family of towers. It is
said that the life is one that requires the consumption of unlimited
quantitics of 'schnapps,' and the humidity of the atmosphere is undoubted.
But even free libations do not diminish the prosperity of the bargees.
They are a thriving race, and it must also be noted to their credit that
they are well behaved, and not given to quarrels. Collisions on the
thickly-covered canals are rare; malicious collisions are unknown. The
barges pass and repass without hindrance, the tow-ropes never get
entangled, there is mutual forbearance, and the skill derived from long
experience in slipping the ropes uncler the barges does the rest. The
conditions under which the canal population exists and thrives are a
survival of an older order of things. When they disappear another of the
few picturesque heritages of mediaeval life will have been removecl from
the hurly-burly and fierce competition of modern existence.




Chapter VII

A Dutch Village



Villages in Holland are towns in miniature, for the simple reason that
when you have a marsh to live in you drain a part of it and build on that
part, and so build in streets, and do not form a village as in England, by
houses dotted here and there round a green or down leafy lanes. The
village green in Holland is the village street or square in front of the
church or 'Raadhuis.' Here the children play, for you cannot play in a
swamp, and that is what polder land is seven months out of the year, and
so we find that a Dutch village in most parts of the country is a town in
miniature.

[Illustration: An Overyssel Farmhouse.]

Thirty years ago the 'Raadhuis' would have been the village inn, barber's
shop, and the principal hotel all rolled into one, and the innkeeper, as a
natural consequence, the wealthiest man in the neighbourhood. The farmers
would have sat at the 'Raad,' i.e. the Village Council, with their caps
over their eyes, long Gouda pipes in their mouths, and a 'Glaasje Klare'
('Schiedam') under their chairs which they would have steadily sipped at
intervals, puffing at their pipes during the whole sitting. Their wooden
shoes ('Klompen'), scrubbed for the occasion to a brilliant white with the
help of a good layer of whitening, might have been seen in a row standing
on the door-mat, for no well-educated farmer would ever have dreamed of
entering a room with shoes on his feet, and he would have taken his
'pruim,' or quid of tobacco, which every farmer chews even when smoking,
out of his mouth and laid it on the window-sill, the usual receptacle for
such things, and there it would lie in its own little circle of brown
fluid, to be replaced either in his own or his neighbour's mouth after the
meeting was over. Nowadays a farmer goes to the 'Raad' dressed in a suit
of black clothes and with his feet encased in leather boots. He never
wears 'Klompen' save when at work in the field or on the farm. He also
talks of his 'Gemeente,' for all Holland is portioned off into
'Gemeenten,' and a village is such in as good a sense as large towns like
The Hague and Amsterdam, and better if anything, for the taxes there are
not so high. Each 'Gemeente' is separately governed by a Burgomaster and
'Leden van den Raad', which is nothing more nor less than a County
Council, presided over by a prominent man nominated by the sovereign, and
not elected by the members, of which some are called 'Wethouders,' and
are, like the other members, elected by the residents of the district.
These Wethouders, with the Burgomaster, form the 'Dagelyksch Bestuur.' All
ordinary matters concerning the 'Gemeente,' such as giving information to
the Minister of War about the men who have signed for the militia, or
about any person living in their 'Gemeenten,' are regulated by the
'Dagelyksch Bestuur,' though matters of import are brought before the
'Raad.' Next in importance to the Burgomaster come the 'Gemeenteontvanger,'
who receives all the taxes, and the 'Notary, who is the busiest man in the
village, although the doctor and clergyman or priest have a large share in
the work of contributing to the welfare of the villagers.

[Illustration: An Overyssel Farmhouse.]

A village clergyman is an important person, for he is held in high honour
by his parishioners, and his larder is always well stocked free of cost.
His income also is relatively larger than that of a town pastor, for
besides his fixed salary he reaps a nice little revenue from the pastures
belonging to the 'Pastorie,' which he lets out to farmers. The
schoolmaster, on the contrary, is treated with but little consideration,
and he often feels decidedly like a fish out of water, for though
belonging by birth to the labouring class, he is too well educated to
associate with his former companions and yet not sufficiently refined to
move in the village 'society,' besides which he would not be able to
return hospitality, as his salary only amounts to from L40 to L60 a year,
and nowhere is the principle of reciprocity more observed than in Dutch
hospitality in certain classes. In very small villages many offices are
combined in one person, and so we find a prominent inhabitant blacksmith,
painter, and carpenter, while the baker's shop is a kind of universal
provider for the villagers' simple wants. The butcher is the only person
who is the man of one occupation, though he, too, goes round to the
neighbouring farms to help in the slaughtering of the cattle, and
sometimes lends a hand in the salting and storing of the meat.

The farmers live just outside the village, and only come there when they
go to the 'Raad' or on Saturday evenings when the week's work is done.
They then visit the barber before meeting at the _cafe_ for their weekly
game of billiards. Every resident of the village also betakes himself to
his 'club' or 'Societeit' on Saturday night, and just as the 'Mindere
man,' i.e. farmers and labourers, have their games and discuss their
farms, their cattle, and the price of hay or corn, so, too, the
'Notabelen' discuss every subject under the sun, not forgetting their dear
neighbours.

On Sunday mornings the whole 'Gemeente' goes to church, from the
Burgomaster to the poorest farm-labourer, and all are dressed in their
best. The men of the village have put aside their working-clothes, and
are attired in blue or black cloth suits with white shirt fronts and
coloured ties. The women have donned black dresses, caps and shawls, and
carry their scent-bottles, peppermints, and 'Gezangboek' (hymn-book) with
large golden clasps. The 'Stovenzetster,' a woman who acts as verger,
shows the good people to their seats and provides the women, if the
weather is cold, with 'warme stoven' (hot stoves), to keep their feet
comfortable. These little 'stoves' contain little three-cornered green or
brown pots ('testen'), in which pieces of glowing peat are put, and
sometimes when the peat is not quite red-hot it smokes terribly, and
gives a most unpleasant odour to the building. The women survive it,
however, by resorting to their _eau de Cologne,_ which they sprinkle upon
their handkerchiefs, and keep passing to their neighbours during the
whole service.

The village schoolmaster has a special office to perform in the Sunday
service. It is he who reads a 'chapter' to them before the entrance of the
clergyman, who only comes when service has begun. Then the sermon, which
is the chief part of the service in Dutch churches, begins. This sermon is
very long, and the congregation sleep through the first part very
peacefully, but the rest is not for long, for when the domine has spoken
for about three-quarters of an hour he calls upon his congregation to sing
a verse of some particular psalm. The schoolmaster starts the singing,
which goes very slowly, each note lasting at least four beats, so that the
tune is completely lost. However, as a rule, every one sings a different
tune, and nobody knows which is the right one. Two collections are taken
during the service, one for the poor and one for the church, the
schoolmaster and the elders ('Ouderlingen') of the church going round with
little bags tied to very long sticks, which they pass ail along a row in
which to receive the 'gifts.' Generally one cent is given by each of the
congregation.

[Illustration: Approach to an Overyssel Farm.]

After church is over the Sunday lunch takes the next place in the day's
routine. The table is always more carefully set out on Sundays than on
other days, and to the usual fare of bread, butter, and cheese are added
smoked beef and cake, while the coffee-pot stands on the 'Komfoortje' (a
square porcelain stand with a little light inside to keep the pot hot),
and the sugar-pot contains white sugar as a Sunday treat, for sugar is
very dear in Holland, and cannot form an article of daily consumption.
Servants always make an agreement about sugar; hence on week-days a supply
of 'brokken' (sweets something like toffee, and costing about a penny for
three English ounces) is kept in the sugar-pot, and when the people drink
coffee they put a 'brok' in their mouths and suck it. Should their cup be
emptied before the 'brok' is finished, they replace it on their saucers
till a second cup is poured out for them, and if they do not take a second
cup, then their 'brok' is put back into the sugar-pot again.

After lunch the men now find their way to the 'Societeit,' or in summer to
the village street, where they walk about in their shirt-sleeves and
smoke. The children go to their Sunday schools, or, if they are Roman
Catholics, to their 'Leering,' which is a Bible-class held for them in
church, and in villages where there is no Sunday school they, too,
leisurely perambulate the village dressed in their best clothes, even if
it is a wet day. The women first clear away the lunch utensils, and then
have a little undisturbed chat with their neighbours on the doorstep, or
go to see their friends in town. At four o'clock the whole family
assembles again in the parlour for their 'Borreltje,' either consisting of
'Boerenjongens' (brandied raisins) or 'Brandewyn met suiker' (brandy with
sugar), which they drink out of their best glasses. There is no church in
the evening, so the villagers retire early to bed, so as to be in good
trim for the week's hard work again.

From this sketch it will be judged that life in a village is very dull.
There is nothing to break the monotony of the days, and one season passes
by in precisely the same way as another. Days and seasons, in fact, make
no difference whatever in the villager's existence. There is no pack of
hounds to fire the sporting instinct; no excitement of elections; no
distraction of any kind. All is quiet, regular, and uneventful, and when
their days are over they sleep with their fathers naturally enough, for
only too often have they been half asleep all their lives.




Chapter VIII

The Peasant at Home



To describe an 'average' Dutch peasant would be to say very little of him.
There is far too much difference in this class of people all over the
Netherlands to allow of any generalization. In Zeeland we meet two
distinct types; one very much akin to the Spanish race, having a
Spaniard's dark hair, dark eyes, and sallow complexion, and often very
good-looking. The other type is entirely different, fair-haired,
light-eyed, and of no particular beauty. In Limburg, the most southern
province of the Netherlands, one finds a mixture of the German, Flemish,
and Dutch types, and the language there is a dialect formed from all those
three tongues, while in the most northern province, Groningen, the people
speak a dialect resembling that spoken in Overyssel and Gelderland, and
the Frisians, their neighbours, would feel themselves quite strangers in
the last named provinces, and would not even be able to make themselves
understood when speaking in their usual language. In the Betuwe the
dialect spoken differs from that in the Veluwe, but no distinct line can
be drawn to determine where one dialect begins and the other ends.

In their mode of dressing, too, there is a great difference between the
people of one province and of another, and in Zeeland every island has
its own special costume. Just as they differ in dress, so they also differ
in appearance and education, wealth, and civilization.

A North Holland farmer is well-to-do and independent. For centuries he has
battled and disputed every inch of his land with the sea, and it has been
pointed out by observant people that the effects of the strife are still
marked in his harsh and rugged features and independent ways. It is well
known that his cattle are the best in all the country, for the pastures,
by reason of the damp polder ground, are very rich, and yield year out
year in an abundant crop of grass and hay, the cows he keeps for milking
purposes giving from 20 to 30 litres, or from 45 to 70 pints, of milk a
day, which is a very high yield.

[Illustration: Zeeland Costume.]

The 'Vrye Fries'--for the Frisian congratulates himself on never having
been conquered, but always having in days of war and tribal feud made his
own terms more or less with an adversary--stands higher in culture and
intellect, and is also more enterprising, than the great majority of the
Dutch peasants. He welcomes many inventions, and is willing to risk
something in trying them, and so one can see many kinds of machinery in
use on the Frisian farms. He also works with the most modern and approved
artificial manures.

[Illustration: Zeeland Costumes.]

The Groningen and Overyssel boer[Footnote: Peasant and farmer as a rule
are convertible terms. A farmer is a peasant, although a peasant is not
always the owner of a farm. In point of education the farmer himself does
not differ from the average labourer on his farm, and both alike are
classed as 'boeren.'] follows his example unless the farms are so small as
to make large machinery impracticable, when he goes along the path marked
out by his great-grandfather, and finds safety, if not novelty, in so
doing. All over the north of Holland the cows are good, and there is milk,
butter, and cheese in abundance at the markets, especially the two
last-named articles, as nearly all the milk is sent to the
'Zuivelfabrieken,' as butter and cheese factories are called.

Travelling from north to south, and so reaching the Wilhelminapolder in
Zeeland, we come across the steam-plough, but that is the only place in
the Netherlands where it is in use. The further south one goes--Zeeland
excepted--the lower becomes the standard of life, and the peasants seem to
care for little else than their fields and cattle, while the people of
Noord Brabant are the poorest and dirtiest of them all. The produce of the
soil varies according to the ground cultivated. In Utrecht and Brabant
many thousand acres are devoted to tobacco, while Overyssel and
Gelderland, as a rule, grow rye, oats, buckwheat, and flax. In Drenthe the
greater part of the province yields peat, and North and South Holland are
famous all over the world for their rich pastures. Cabbages and
cauliflowers are also extensively cultivated for exportation, and in
Friesland they have begun to cultivate them also. From Wateringen to the
Hoek van Holland one sees smiling orchards, while from Leyden to Haarlem
blossom the world-famed bulb fields, too well known to need special
description.

The farm-work is done in the spring and summer. The women invariably help
with the lighter work of weeding in the fields, while in harvest-time
they work as hard as the men, and very picturesque they look in their
broad black hats and white linen skirts. But when the harvest is gathered
in, and the pigs have been converted into hams and sausages, the man's
chief labour is over, although the manuring of the land and the threshing
of the corn have to be attended to. Still, he has his evenings wherein to
sit by the fireside and smoke, presumably gathering energies the while
for the coming spring. A woman's work, however, is never ended, for
while the man smokes she spins the flax grown on her own ground and the
wool from the sheep of the farm. In some parts of Overyssel it is still
the custom for the women to meet together at some neighbouring friend's
house to spin, and during these sociable evenings they partake of the
'spinning-meal,' which consists of currant bread and coffee, and in turn
sing and tell stories.

A weaver always visits every house once a year with his own loom to assist
at these gatherings, and when the linen is woven it is rolled up and tied
with coloured ribbons, decorated with artificial flowers, and kept in the
linen-press--the pride of every Dutch housewife--and when a daughter of
the house marries several rolls of this linen are added to her trousseau.
The wealth of a farm is, in fact, calculated by the number of rolls. These
are handed down for generations, and often contain linen more than a
hundred years old. The wool, when woven, is made up into thick petticoats,
of which every well-dressed peasant woman wears six or seven.

The education of the farmer is not very liberal. A child generally goes to
school until he is twelve years of age, and during that time he has learnt
reading, writing, and arithmetic. As a rule, however, he does not attend
regularly, as his help is so often wanted at home, especially at
harvest-time, and although the new education law--the 'Leerplichtwet' of
July 7th, 1901--has made school attendance compulsory, yet a child is
allowed to remain at home when wanted if he has attended school regularly
during the six previous months. The interest of the parent and the
inclination of the child are thus combined to the retarding of the
intellectual progress of the boer. And yet, although they are so badly
taught, the peasantry have a very good opinion about things in general,
and if you assist them in their work and show them that you can use your
hands as well as they can they have great respect for you, and will listen
to anything you like to tell them about or read to them. The women
especially have very pronounced views of their own, a trait not confined
to Netherland womenfolk. To go about among them is at present the best way
of educating them, and when you have once won their regard they will go
through fire and water for you; but they despise any one who 'does
nothing,' for, like most manual workers, they do not understand that
brain-work is as hard as manual labour.

[Illustration: An Itinerant Linen-Weaver.]

[Illustration: Farmhouse Interior, showing the Linen-Press.]

The farmhouses in most parts of the country are neat and more or less of a
pattern, although they differ in minor details. Outside their appearance
is very quaint and picturesque, and the roofs are either thatched or
tiled. In Groningen they now hardly resemble farms. They are, indeed,
little country seats, and the interior is decidedly modern. Some of the
very poorest-looking houses are to be found in Overyssel and Drenthe.
These are built of clay, and stand halfway in the ground. The roofs are
covered with sods taken from the 'Drentsche Veengronden.' Some of these
'Plaggewoningen,' as they are called, are not more than twelve feet square
and eight feet high. The ceiling of the room inside the dwelling is only
four or five feet high, and above this the stores of hay and corn are
kept. A hole in the roof serves as chimney, and in the floor--which is
nothing but hard clay--a hole is dug to serve as fireplace. On the larger
farms in Overyssel the main building is generally divided into two parts.
The back part is for the cattle, which stand in rows on either side, with
a large open space in the centre, called the 'deel,' where the carts are
kept. A large arched double door leads into it, while the thatched roof
comes down low on either side. Leading from the 'deel,' or stable, into
the living-room is a small door, with a window to enable the inhabitants
to see what is going on among their friends of the fields. Against the
wall which forms the partition between the stable and living-room is the
fireplace. You will sometimes find an open fire on the floor, though in
the more modern houses stoves are used. The chimney-piece is in the shape
of a large overhanging hood with a flounce of light print 'Schoorsteenval'
round it, and a row of plates on a shelf above serves for ornament. The
much-prized linen-press, which has already been mentioned, is usually
placed at right-angles to the outer door, so as to form a kind of passage.

In some farmhouses there is no partition at all between the stable and
living-room, but the cattle are kept at the back, and the people live at
the other end, near the window. This is called a 'loshuis,' or open house,
and very picturesque it is to look at. The smell of the cows is considered
to be extremely healthy, and consumptive patients have been completely
cured (so it is popularly believed) by sleeping in the cowsheds. Besides
being healthy, this primitive system is also cheap, for the cows give out
so much warmth that it is almost unnecessary to have fires except for
cooking purposes. Some of these open houses have no chimneys, the smoke
finding its way out between the tiles of the roof or through the door.
There is a hayloft above the part occupied by the cattle, while over the
heads of the family hams, bacon, and sausages of every description hang
from the rafters. Smoke is very useful in curing these stores, and this
may account for the absence of a chimney.

In Brabant, however, where there are chimneys, the farmer hangs his stores
in them, so that when looking up through the wide opening to the sky
beyond numerous tiers of dangling sausages meet one's admiring gaze. The
living-room is a living-room in every sense of the word, for the family
work, eat, and sleep there. Sometimes a larger farm has a wing attached to
it containing bedrooms, but this is not general, and even so most of the
family sleep in the living-room. The beds are placed round the room. They
are, in fact, cupboards, and by day are fixed in the wall. Green curtains
are hung before the beds, and are always drawn at night, completely
concealing the beds from view. Some have doors like ordinary cupboards,
but this is more general in North Holland. In Hindeloopen (Friesland) one
or two beds in the living-room are kept as 'pronk-bedden' (show beds).
They are decked out with the finest linen the farmers' wives possess, the
sheets gorgeous with long laces, and the pillow-slips beautifully
embroidered. These beds are never slept in, and the curtains are kept open
all day long, so that any one who enters the room can at once admire their
beauty. Some of the more wealthy have a 'best bedroom,' which they keep
carefully locked. They dust it every day, and clean it out once a week,
but never use it. In South Holland it is more customary to have a
'pronk-kamer' ('show-room'), which is not a bedroom, but a kind of
parlour. This room is never entered by the inhabitants of the house except
at a birth or a death, and in the latter case they put the corpse there.
In Hindeloopen the dead are put in the church to await burial, and there
they rest on biers specially made for the occasion. A different bier is
used to represent the trade or profession or sex of the dead person. These
biers are always most elaborately painted (as, indeed, are all things in
Hindeloopen), with scenes out of the life of a doctor, a clergyman, a
tradesman, or a peasant.

[Illustration: Type of an Overyssel Farmhouse.]

The costume worn by the peasantry is always quaint, and this is
especially so in Hindeloopen. The waistband of a peasant woman takes
alone an hour and a half to arrange. It consists of a very long, thin,
black band, which is wound round and round the waist till it forms one
broad sash. The dress itself includes a black skirt and a check bodice, a
white apron, and a dark necktie; from the waistband hangs at the
right-hand side a long silver chain, to which are attached a silver
pincushion, a pair of scissors, and a needle-case; then on the left-hand
side hangs a reticule with silver clasps; and a long mantle, falling
loose from the shoulders to the hem of the skirt, is worn over all
out-of-doors. This latter is of some light-coloured material, with a
pattern of red flowers and green leaves. On the head three caps are worn,
one over the other, and for outdoor wear a large, tall bonnet is donned
by way of completing the costume.

[Illustration: A Farmhouse Interior, Showing the Door into the Stable.]

All the Frisian costumes are beautiful. Many ladies of that province still
wear the national dress, and a very becoming one it is.

In Overyssel the women all over the province dress alike and in the same
way their ancestors did. In the house the dress is an ordinary full
petticoat of some cotton stuff, generally blue, and a tight-fitting and
perfectly plain bodice with short sleeves, a red handkerchief folded
across the chest, and a close-fitting white cap, with a little flounce
round the neck. When they go to market with their milk and eggs they are
very smart.[Footnote: Butter used to be one of the wares they took to
market, but now so many butter-factories have arisen, and also so much is
imported from Australia, that it is hardly worth their while to make it.]

They then wear a fine black merino skirt, made very full, and the
inevitable petticoats, which make the skirt stand out like a crinoline. On
Sundays they wear the same costume as on market-days, and in winter they
are to be seen with large Indian shawls worn in a point down the back in
the old-fashioned way. When they go to communion, as they do four times a
year, the shawls are of black silk with long black fringes. The hair is
completely hidden by a close-fitting black cap, and some women cut off
their hair so as to give the head a perfectly round shape. Over the black
cap is worn a white one of real lace, called a 'knipmuts,' the pattern of
which shows to advantage over the black ground. A deep flounce of gauffred
real lace goes round the neck, while round the face there is a ruche or
frill, also very finely gauffred. A broad white brocaded ribbon is laid
twice round the cap, and fastened under the chin. Long gold earrings are
fastened to the cap on either side of the face, and the ears themselves
are hidden. The style of gauffering is still the same as is seen in the
muslin caps of so many Dutch pictures of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, especially in those of Frans Hals. When in mourning, the women
wear a plain linen cap without any lace, and the men a black bow in their
caps. It is quite a work of art to make up a peasant woman's head-dress,
and several cap-makers are kept busy at it all day long.

The clothes the men wear are not so elaborate. They used to be short
knickerbockers with silver clasps, but these have entirely gone out of
fashion, and they have been replaced by ordinary clothes of cloth or
corduroy. Both sexes wear wooden shoes, which the men often make
themselves. In the far-famed little island of Marken, the men are very
clever at this work, and they carve them beautifully. In some lonely
hamlets the unmarried women wear black caps with a thick ruche of ostrich
feathers or black fur round the face. The jewellery consists of garnet
necklaces closed round the neck and fastened by golden clasps. The garnets
are always very large, and this fashion is general ail over the
Netherlands. In Stompwyk, a little village between The Hague and Leyden, a
peasant family possesses garnets as large as a swallow's egg.

If the dress of the boers is solid, quaint, and national, the daily food
of the class is in keeping with their conservative temper and traditional
gastronomic ability. It is of the plainest character, but often consists
of the strangest mixtures. When a pig is killed, and the different parts
for hams, sides of bacon, etc., have been stored, and the sausages
made--especially after they have boiled the black-puddings, or
'Bloedworst,' which is made of the blood of the pigs--a thick fatty
substance remains in the pot. This they thicken with buckwheat meal till
it forms a porridge, and then they eat it with treacle. The name of this
dish is 'Balkenbry.' A portion of this, together with some of the
'slacht,' i.e. the flesh of the pig, is sent as a present to the
clergyman of the village, and it is to be hoped he enjoys it.

Another favourite dish, especially in Overyssel and Gelderland, is
'Kruidmoes.' This is a mixture of buttermilk boiled with buckwheat meal,
vegetables, celery, and sweet herbs, such as thyme, parsley, and chervil,
and, to crown all, a huge piece of smoked bacon, and it is served steaming
hot. The poor there eat a great deal of rice and flour boiled with
buttermilk, which, besides being very nutritious, is 'matchless for the
complexion,' like many of the advertised soaps. The very poor have what is
called a 'Vetpot.' This they keep in the cellar, and in it they put every
particle of fat that remains over from their meals. Small scraps of bacon
are melted down and added to it, for this fat must last them the whole
winter through as an addition to their potatoes. Indeed, the 'Vetpot'
plays as great a part in a poor man's house as the 'stock-pot' does in an
English kitchen.

[Illustration: Farmhouse Interior, the Open Fire on the Floor.]

The meals are cooked in a large iron pot, which hangs from a hook over the
open hearth. The fuel consists of huge logs of wood and heather sods,
which are also used for covering the roofs of the 'Plaggewoning.' Black or
rye bread takes the place of white, and is generally home-made. In Brabant
the women bake what is called 'Boeren mik.' This is a delicious long brown
loaf, and there are always a few raisins mixed with the dough to keep it
from getting stale. Those who have no ovens of their own put the dough in
a large long baking-tin and send it to the baker. One of the children, on
his way back from school, fetches it and carries it home _under his arm_.
You may often see farmers' children walking about in their wooden shoes
with two or more loaves under their arms. Both wooden shoes and loaves are
used in a dispute between comrades, and the loaf-carrier generally gains
the day. The crusts are very hard and difficult to cut, but, inside, the
bread is soft and palatable.

In Brabant the peasants--small of stature, black-haired, brown-eyed, more
of the Flemish than the Dutch type--are as a rule Roman Catholics, and on
Shrove Tuesday evening 'Vastenavond,' 'Fast evening' (the night before
Lent), they bake and eat 'Worstebrood.' On the outside this bread looks
like an ordinary white loaf, but on cutting it open you find it to contain
a spicy sausage-meat mixture. All the people in this part of the country
observe the Carnival, with its accustomed licence.

Times for farming are bad in the Netherlands as elsewhere. The rents are
high and wages low, and the consequence is that many peasants sell their
farms, which have for a long time been in their families, and rent them
again from the purchasers. The relations between landlord and tenants are
in some respects still feudalistic, and hence very old-fashioned. On some
estates the landlord has still the right of exacting personal service from
his tenants, and can call upon them to come and plough his field with
their horses, or help with the harvesting, for which service they are paid
one 'gulden,' or 1s. 8d. a day, which, of course, is not the full value of
their labour. The tenants likewise ask their landlord's consent to their
marriages, and it is refused if the man or woman is not considered
suitable or respectable.

A farmer who keeps two or three cows pays a rent of L8 a year for his
farm, which only yields enough to keep him and his family, not in a high
standard of living either. The rent is generally calculated at the rate of
three per cent. of the value. He pays his farm-labourers 80 cents, or 1s.
4d., for a day's work. In former days, however, money was never given, and
the wages of a farm-servant then were a suit of clothes, a pair of boots,
and some linen, while the women received an apron, some linen, and a few
petticoats once a year. Now they get in addition to this L12 a year. In
Gramsbergen (Overyssel) a whole family, consisting of a mother, her
daughter, and her two grown-up sons, earned no more than four or five
guilders (8s. or 10s.) between them, but then they lived rent free. It is
not wonderful, therefore, that farm-labourers are scarce, and that many a
young man, unable to earn enough to keep body and soul together decently,
seeks work in the factories here or in Belgium,[Footnote: According to a
recent return, 56,506 Netherlands workmen are employed in Belgium.] while
those who do not wish to give up agricultural pursuits migrate to Germany,
where the demand for 'hands' is greater and the wages consequently higher.
In former days strangers came to this country to earn money. Now the
tables are turned, and the fact that Holland is situated between two
countries whose thriving industries demand a greater number of workers
every year will yet bring serious trouble and loss to Dutch agriculture.
[Footnote: Just now great results are expected from the 'allotment
system,' of which a trial has been made in Friesland on the extensive
possessions of Mr. Jansen, of Amsterdam.]




Chapter IX

Rural Customs



The Hollander is a very conservative individual, and therefore some
curious customs still prevail among the peasant and working classes in the
Netherlands, especially in the Eastern provinces, for there the people are
most primitive, and there it is that we find many queer old rhymes,
apparently without any sense in them, but which must have had their origin
in forgotten national or domestic events. A remnant of an old pagan custom
of welcoming the summer is still to be seen in many country places. On the
Saturday before Whitsunday, very early in the morning, a party of children
may be seen setting out towards the woods to gather green boughs. After
dipping these in water they return home in triumph and place them before
the doors of those who were not 'up with the lark' in such a manner that,
when these long sleepers open them, the wet green boughs will come
tumbling down upon their heads. Very often, too, the children pursue the
late risers, and beat them with the branches, jeering at them the while,
and singing about the laziness of the sluggard. These old songs have
undergone very many variations, and nowadays one cannot say which is the
correct and original form. They have, in fact, been hopelessly mixed up
with other songs, and in no two provinces do we find exactly the same
versions. The 'Luilak feest,'[Footnote: This day is called Luilak
(sluggard) in some parts of the country and the feast is called
Luilakfeest.'] of which I have just spoken, goes by the name of
'Dauwtrappen' ('treading the dew') in some parts of the country, but the
observance of it is the same wherever the custom obtains.

[Illustration: Palm Paschen--Begging for Eggs.]

'Eiertikken' at Easter must also not be overlooked. For a whole week
before Easter the peasant children go round from house to house begging
for eggs, and carrying a wreath of green leaves stuck on a long stick.
This stick and wreath they call their 'Palm Paschen,' which really
means Palm-Sunday, and may have been so called because they make the
wreath on that day.

Down the village streets they go, singing all the while and waving the
wreath above their heads:--

    Palm, Palm Paschen,
    Hei koekerei.
    Weldra is het Paschen
    Dan hebben wy een ei.
    Een ei--twee ei,
    Het derde is het Paschei.

    Palm, Palm Sunday,
    Hei koekerei.
    Soon it will be Easter
    And we shall have an egg.
    One egg--two eggs,
    The third egg is the Easter egg.

They knock at every farmhouse, and are very seldom sent away empty-handed.
When they have collected enough eggs to suit their purpose--generally
three or four apiece--they boil them hard and stain them with two
different colours, either brown with coffee or red with beetroot juice,
and then on Easter Day they all repair to the meadows carrying their eggs
with them, and the 'eiertikken' begins. The children sit down on the
grass, and each child knocks one of his eggs against that of another in
such a way that only one of the shells breaks. The child whose egg does
not break wins, and becomes the possessor of the broken egg.

The strangest of all these begging-customs, however, is the one in vogue
between Christmas and Twelfth Night. Then the children go out in couples,
each boy carrying an earthenware pot, over which a bladder is stretched,
with a piece of stick tied in the middle. When this stick is twirled
about, a not very melodious grumbling sound proceeds from the contrivance,
which is known by the name of 'Rommelpot.' By going about in this manner
the children are able to collect some few pence to buy bread--or gin--for
their fathers. When they stop before any one's house, they drawl out,
'Give me a cent, and I will pass on, for I have no money to buy bread.'
The origin both of the custom and song is shrouded in mystery.[Footnote: A
Society of Research into old folklore and folk-song has recently been
founded by some of the leading Dutch literary authorities, who also
propose to publish a little periodical in which all these customs will be
collected and noted.]

Besides the customs in vogue at such festive seasons as Whitsuntide,
Easter, and Christmas, there are yet others of more everyday occurrence
which are well worth the knowing. In Overyssel, for instance, we find a
very sensible one indeed. It is usual there when a family remove to
another part of the village, or when they settle elsewhere, for the people
living in the neighbourhood to bring them presents to help furnish their
new house. Sometimes these presents include poultry or even a pig, which,
though they do not so much furnish the house as the table, prove
nevertheless very acceptable. As soon as all the moving is over and they
are comfortably installed in their new home, the next thing to do is to
invite all the neighbours to a party.

This is a very important social duty and ought on no account to be
omitted, as it entitles host and hostess to the help of all their guests
in the event of illness or adversity taking place in their family. If,
however, they do not conform to this social obligation, their neighbours
and friends stand aloof, and do not so much as move a finger to help them.
Should one of the family fall ill, the four nearest male neighbours are
called in. These men fetch the doctor, and do all the nursing. They will
even watch by the invalid at night, and so long as the illness lasts they
undertake all the farm-work. Sometimes they will go on working the farm
for years, and when a widow is left with young children in straitened
circumstances, these 'Noodburen' ('neighbours in need') will help her in
all possible ways, and take all the business and worry off her hands.

[Illustration: Rommel Pot.]

In case of a marriage, too, the neighbours do the greater part of the
preparations. They invite the relations and friends to come to the
wedding, and make ready the feast. The invitations are always given by
word of mouth, and two young men[Footnote: In Gelderland we find this same
custom and also in Friesland, but in this last-named province the
invitation is given by two young girls.] nearly related to the bride and
bridegroom are appointed to go round from house to house to bid the people
come. They are dressed for this purpose in their best Sunday clothes, and
wear artificial flowers and six peacock's feathers in their caps. The
invitation is made in poetry, in which the assurance is conveyed that
there will be plenty to eat and plenty of gin and beer to drink, and that
whatever they may have omitted to say will be told by the bride and
bridegroom at the feast. This verse in the native patois is very curious--

    'GOEN DAG!

    'Daor stao'k op minen staf
    En weet niet wat ik zeggen mag,
    Nou hek me weer bedach
    En weet ik wat ik zeggen mag
    Hier sturt ons Gut yan Vente als brugom
    En Mientje Elschot as de brud,
    Ende' noget uwder ut
    Margen vrog on tien ur
    Op en tonne bier tiene twalevenne,
    Op en anker win, vif, zesse
    En en wanne vol rozimen.
    De zult by Venterboer verschinen
    Met de husgezeten
    En nums vergeten,
    Vrog kommen en late bliven
    Anders kun wy t nie 't op krigen
    Lustig ezongen, vrolik esprongen,
    Springen met de beide beene,
    En wat ik nog hebbe vergeten
    Zult ow de Brogom ende Brud verbeten.
    Hej my elk nuw wal verstaan
    Dan laot de fles um de taofel gaon


    'GOOD DAY!

    'I rest here on my stick,
    I don't know what to say,
    Now I have thought of it
    And know what I may say:
    Here sent us Gart van Vente, the bridegroom,
    And Mientje Elschot, the bride,
    To invite you
    To-morrow morning at ten o'clock
    To empty ten or twelve barrels of beer,
    Five or six hogsheads of wine,
    And a basket full of dried grapes.
    You will come to the house of Venterboer
    With all your inmates
    And forget nobody.
    Come early and remain late,
    Else we can't swallow it all down.
    Then sing cheerfully, leap joyfully,
    Leap with both your legs.
    And, what I have yet forgotten,
    Think of the bridegroom and bride.
    If you have understood me well
    Let pass the bottle round the table.'

The day before the wedding is to take place the bridegroom and some of
his friends arrive at the bride's house in a cart, drawn by four horses,
to bring away the bride and her belongings. These latter are a motley
collection, for they consist not only of her clothes, bed and
bed-curtains, but her spinning-wheel, linen-press full of linen, and
also a cow. After everything has been loaded upon the cart, and the
young men have refreshed themselves with 'rystebry' (rice boiled with
sweet milk), they drive away in state, singing as they go. The following
day the bride is married from the house of her parents-in-law, and as it
often happens that the young couple live with the bridegroom's people,
it is only natural that they like to have the house in proper order
before the arrival of the wedding-guests, who begin to appear as soon as
eight o'clock in the morning. When all the invited guests are assembled
and have partaken of hot gin mixed with currants, handed round in
two-handled pewter cups, kept especially for these occasions, the whole
party goes, about eleven o'clock, to the 'Stadhuis,' or Town Hall, where
the couple are married before the Burgomaster, and afterwards to the
church, where the blessing is given upon their union. On returning home
the mid-day meal is ready, and, on this festive occasion, consists of
ham, potatoes, and salt fish, and the clergyman is also honoured with
an invitation to the gathering. The rest of the day is spent in
rejoicings, in which eating and drinking take the chief part. The bride
changes her outer apparel about four times during the day, always in
public, standing before her linen-press. The day is wound up with a
dance, for which the village fiddler provides the music, the bride
opening the ball with one of the young men who invited the guests, and
she then presents him with a fine linen handkerchief as a reward for his
invaluable services on the occasion.

In Friesland a curious old custom still exists, called the 'Joen-piezl,'
which furnishes the clue to an odd incident in Mrs. Schreiner's 'Story of
an African Farm.' When a man and girl are about to be married, they must
first sit up for a whole night in the kitchen with a burning candle on the
table between them. By the time the candle is burnt low in its socket they
must have found out whether they really are fond of each other.

The marriage customs in North and South Holland are very different to the
former. As soon as a couple are 'aangeteekend,' i.e. when the banns are
published for the first time (which does not happen in church, but takes
the form of a notice put up at the Town Hall), and have returned from the
'Stadhuis,' they drive about and take a bag of sweets ('bruidsuikers') to
all their friends. On the wedding-day, after the ceremony is over, the
bride and bridegroom again drive out together in a 'chaise'--a high
carriage on very big wheels, with room for but two persons. The horse's
head, the whip, and the reins are all decorated with flowers and coloured
ribbons. The wedding-guests drive in couples behind the bride and
bridegroom's 'chaise,' and the progress is called 'Speuleryden.' Sometimes
they drive for miles across country, stopping at every _cafe_ to drink
brandy and sugar, and when they pass children on the road these call out
to them, 'Bruid, bruid, strooi je suikers uit' ('Bride, bride, strew your
sugars about.') Handfuls of sweets will thereupon be seen flying through
the air and rolling about the ground, while the children tumble over each
other in their eager haste to collect as many of these sweets as they can.
Sometimes as much as twenty-five pounds of sweets are thus scattered upon
the roadside for the village children. Such a wedding is quite an event in
the lives of these little ones, and they will talk for weeks to come about
the amount of sweets they were able to procure.

[Illustration: A Hindeloopen Lady in National Costume.]

[Illustration: Rural Costume--Cap with Ruche of Fur.]

At Ryswyk, a little village near The Hague, and in most villages in
Westland, South Holland, the bride and bridegroom present to the
Burgomaster and Wethouders, and also to the 'Ambtenaar van den
Burgerlyken Stand' who marries them at the 'Stadhuis,' a bag of these
sweets, while one bearing the inscription, 'Compliments of bride and
bridegroom,' is given to the officiating clergyman immediately after the
ceremony in church. On their way home all along the road they strew
'suikers' out of the carriage windows for the gaping crowds. Some of the
less well-to-do farmers, and those who live near large towns, give their
wedding-parties at a _cafe_ or 'uitspanning.' This word means literally a
place where the horse is taken out of the shafts, but it is also a
restaurant with a garden attached to it, in which there are swings and
seesaws, upon which the guests disport themselves during the afternoon,
while in the evening a large hall in the building is arranged for the
ball, for that is the conclusion of every 'Boeren bruiloft.' Very often
the ball lasts till the cock-crowing, and then, if the 'Bruiloft houers'
are Roman Catholics, it is no uncommon practice first to go to church and
'count their beads' before they disperse on their separate ways to begin
the duties of a new day.

A birth is naturally an occasion that calls for very festive celebration.
When the child is about a week old, its parents send round to all their
friends to come and rejoice with them. The men are invited 'op een lange
pyp en een bitterje,' the women for the afternoon 'op suikerdebol.' At
twelve o'clock the men begin to arrive, and are immediately provided with
a long Gouda pipe, a pouch of tobacco, and a cut glass bottle containing
gin mixed with aromatic bitters. While they smoke, they talk in voices
loud enough to make any one who is not acquainted with a farmer's mode of
speech think that a great deal of quarrelling is going on in the house.
This entertainment lasts till seven o'clock, when all the men leave and
the room is cleared, though not ventilated, and the table is rearranged
for the evening's rejoicings.

Dishes of bread and butter, flat buttered rusks liberally spread with
'muisjes' (sugared aniseed--the literal translation is 'mice'), together
with tarts and sweets of all descriptions, are put out in endless
profusion on all the best china the good wife possesses. For each of the
guests two of these round flat rusks are provided, two being the correct
number to take, for more than two would be considered greedy, and to eat
only one would be sure to offend the hostess. Eating and drinking, for
'Advocatenborrel' (brandy and eggs) is also served, go on for the greater
part of the afternoon. The mid-day meal is altogether dispensed with on
such a day, and, judging by appearances, one cannot say that the guests
look as if they had missed it!

It is quite the national custom to eat rusks with 'muisjes' on on these
occasions, and these little sweets are manufactured of two kinds. The
sugar coating is smooth when the child is a girl, and rough and prickly
like a chestnut burr when the child is a boy; and when one goes to buy
'muisjes' at a confectioner's he is always asked whether boys' or girls'
'muisjes' are required. Hundreds-and-thousands, the well-known decoration
on buns and cakes in an English pastry-cook's shop, bear the closest
resemblance to these Dutch 'muisjes.'

When a little child is born into a family of the better classes, the
servants are treated to biscuits and 'mice' on that day; while in the very
old-fashioned Dutch families there is still another custom, that of
offermg 'Kandeel,' a preparation of eggs and Rhine wine or hock, on the
first day the young mother receives visitors, and it is specially made for
these occasions by the 'Baker' nurse.

Funeral processions are a very mournful sight on all occasions, but a
Dutch funeral depresses one for about a month after. The hearse is all
hung with black draperies, while on the box sits the coachman wearing a
large black hat called 'Huilebalk.' From the rim overlapping the face
hangs a piece of black cord. This he holds in his mouth to prevent the hat
from falling off his head. The hearse itself is generally embellished by
the images of grinning skulls, though the carriages following the hearse
have no distinctive mark. If such a funeral procession happens to come
along the road you yourself are going, you may be sure of enjoying its
company the whole way, for the horses are only allowed to walk, never
trot, and it takes hours to get to the cemetery. In former days the horses
were specially shod for this occasion in such a way that they went lame on
one leg. This end was achieved by driving the nail of the shoe into the
animal's foot, for people thought this added to the doleful aspect of the
_coretge_ as it advanced slowly along the road. Happily this cruelty is
now dispensed with, and indeed is entirely forbidden by the Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animais, but the ugly aspect of the hearses
remains the same.

[Illustration: An Overyssel Peasant Woman.]

At a death, the relatives of the deceased have large cards printed,
announcing the family loss. These cards are taken round to every house in
the neighbourhood by a man specially hired for the purpose. This man,
called an 'Aanspreker,' carries a list of the names and addresses of the
people on whom he has to leave the cards; if the people sending out the
cards have friends in any other street of the town, a card is left at
every house in that street.

[Illustration: Zeeland Children in State.]

If the deceased was an officer, the cards, beside being sent round in
the neighbourhood, are left at every officer's house throughout the
town. To whichever profession the deceased belonged, to the people of
that profession the cards are sent. A Minister of State or any other
person occupying a very high position sends cards to every house in the
town and suburbs.

In a village or country place a funeral is rather a popular event, and
the preparations for it somewhat resemble the preparations for a feast.
This, for instance, is the case in Overyssel. When one of a family dies,
the nearest relatives immediately call in the neighbouring women, and
these take upon themselves all the necessary arrangements. They send
round messages announcing the death and day of interment; they buy
coffee, sugar-candy, and a bottle of gin, wherewith to refresh themselves
while making the shroud and dressing the dead body; and the next morning
they take care that the church bells are duly rung, and, in the
afternoon, when the relations and friends come to offer their
condolences, they serve them, as they sit round the bier, with black
bread and coffee. When the plates and cups are empty the visitors leave
again without having spoken a word.

On the day of the funeral, the guests assemble at two o'clock in the
afternoon. They first sit round the tables and eat and drink in silence,
and when the first batch have satisfied their appetites they move away and
make room for others. After this meal all walk round the coffin, and
repeat, one after another, 'Twas een goed mensch,' ('He or she was a good
man or woman,' as the case may be). Then the lid of the coffin is fastened
down with twelve wooden pegs, which the most honoured guest is allowed to
hammer in, and the coffin is forthwith placed on an ordinary farm-cart.
The nearest relations get in, too, and sit on the coffin, and the other
women on the cart facing the coffin. This custom is adhered to,
notwithstanding the prohibition by law to sit on any conveyance carrying a
coffin. The women are in mourning from tip to toe, and closely enveloped
in black merino shawls, which they wear over their heads. The men follow
on foot, and it is a picturesque though melancholy sight to watch these
funeral processions, always at close of day, solemnly wending their way
along the road, the dark figures of the women silhouetted against a sky
all aglow with those glorious sunsets for which Overyssel is famous.




Chapter X

Kermis and St. Nicholas



Of all the festivals and occasions of popular rejoicing and merriment in
Holland none can compare with the Kermis and the Festival of St. Nicholas,
which are in many ways peculiarly characteristic of Dutch life and Dutch
love for primitive usage. The Kermis is particularly popular, because of
the manifold amusements which are associated with it, and because it
unites all classes of the population in the common pursuit of
unsophisticated pleasure. As its name implies, the Kermis ('Kerk-mis') has
a religious origin, being named after the chief part of the Church
service, the mass. Just as the Feast of St. Baro received the name
'Bamisse,' so that of the consecration of the church was called the
'Church-mass,' or 'Kerk-mis.' In ancient times, if a church was
consecrated on the name-day of a certain saint the church was also
dedicated to that saint. Such a festival was a chief festival, or 'Hoof
feest,' for a church, and it was not only celebrated with great pomp and
solemnity, but amusements of all kinds were added to give the celebration
a more festive character. In large towns there were Kermissen at different
times of the year in different parishes, for each church was dedicated to
a different saint, so that there were as many dedicatory feasts in a town
as there were churches in it.

At a very early period in the nation's history the Church-masses began to
wear a more worldly character, for the merchants made them an occasion for
introducing their wares and trading with the people, just as they did at
the ordinary 'year-markets.' These year-markets always fell on the same
day as the Kermissen, but they had a different origin. They were held by
permission of the Sovereign, and were first instituted to encourage trade;
but gradually the Kermis and the year-market went hand-in-hand, for the
people could no longer imagine a year-market without the Kermis
amusements, or a Kermis without booths and stalls, so if there was not
sufficient room for the latter to be built on the streets or squares, the
priest allowed them to be put up in the churchyard or sometimes even in
the church. Moreover, if it was not possible to have the year-market in
the same week as the Kermis, then the Kermis was put off to suit the
year-market, and these latter were of great aid to the religious
festivals, for they attracted a greater number of people, and as
dispensations were given for attending the masses both the churches and
the markets benefited. The mass lasted eight days, and the year-market as
long as the Church festival. The Church protected the year-markets, and
rang them in. With the first stroke of the Kermis clock the year-market
was opened and the first dance commenced, followed by a grand procession,
in which all the principal people of the town took part, and when the last
stroke died away white crosses were nailed upon all the bridges, and on
the gates of the town. These served both as a passport and also as a token
of the 'markt vrede' (market peace), so that any one seeing the cross knew
that he might enter the town and buy and sell _ad libitum_, also that his
peace and safety were guaranteed, and that any one who disturbed the
'markt vrede' would be banished from the place, and not be allowed to come
back another year. In some places this yearly market was named, after the
crosses, 'Cruyce-markt.'

Very festive is the appearance of a town in the Kermis week. On the
opening day, at twelve o'clock, the bells of the cathedral or chief
church are set ringing, and this is the sign for the booths to be opened
and the 'Kermispret' to begin. Everywhere tempting stores are displayed
to view, and although a scent of oil and burning fat pervades the air,
nobody seems to mind that, for it only increases the delight the Kermis
has in store for them. The stalls are generally set out in two rows. The
most primitive of these is the stall of hard-boiled eggs and pickled
gherkins, whose owner is probably a Jew, and pleasant sounds his hoarse
voice while praising his wares high above all others. If he does prevail
upon you to come and try one of his eggs and gherkins it only adds more
relish to your meal when he tells you of the man who only paid one cent
for a large gherkin which really cost two, and although he already had
put it in his mouth he made him put the other part back. Or when you go
to eat 'poffertjes,' which look so tempting, and with the first bite find
a quid of tobacco in the inoffensive-looking little morsel, do not let
this trifling incident disturb your equanimity, but try another booth. It
is quite worth your while to stand in front of a 'poffertjeskraam' and
see how they are made. The batter is simply buckwheat-meal mixed with
water, and some yeast to make it light. Over a bright fire of logs is
placed a large, square, iron baking-sheet with deep impressions for the
reception of the batter. On one side sits a woman on a high stool, with a
bowl of the mixture by her side and a large wooden ladle in her hand.
This she dips into the batter, bringing it out full, then with a quick
sweep of the arm she empties its contents into the hollows of the
baking-sheet. A man standing by turns them dexterously one by one with a
steel fork, and a moment later he pricks them six at a time on to the
fork; this he docs four times to get a plateful, and then he hands it
over to another man inside the booth, who adds a pat of butter and a
liberal sprinkling of sugar. The 'wafelkramen' are not so largely
patronized, as the price of these delicacies is rather too high for the
slender purses of the average 'Kermis houwer,' but 'oliebollen'--round
ball-shaped cakes swimming in oil--are within the reach of all, as they
cost but a cent apiece. Servants and their lovers, after satisfying their
appetites with these 'oliebollen,' go and have a few turns in the
roundabouts by way of a change, and then hurry to the fish stall, where
they eat a raw salted herring to counteract the effects of the earlier
dissipation. The more respectable servant, however, turns up her nose at
the herrings, and goes in for smoked eel. These fish-stalls are very
quaint in appearance, for they are hung with garlands of dried
'scharretje' (a white, thin, leathery-looking fish), which dangle in
front, and form a most original decoration. In the towns a separate day
and evening are set apart for the servant classes to go to the fair, and
there is also a day for the _elite_.

At the commencement of the reign of King William III. the whole Court,
including the King and Queen, used to meet at The Hague Kermis on the
Lange Voorhout on Thursday afternoons, between two and four o'clock, and
walk up and down between the double row of stalls; and in the evening of
that day they all visited either the most renowned circus of the season or
went to see the 'Kermis stuk,' or special play acted in fan-time.

The servants' evening, as it is held in Rotterdam, is the most
characteristic. It is an evening shunned by the more respectable people,
for the 'Kermisgangers are a very rowdy lot. They amuse themselves chiefly
by running along the streets in long rows, arm-in-arm, singing
'Hossen--hossen-hossen!' They also treat each other to 'Nieuw rood met
suiker'--black currants preserved in gin with sugar--until they are all
quite tipsy, and woe to any quiet pedestrian who has the misfortune to
pass their way, for with loud 'Hi-has' they encircle him and make him
'hos' with them. The evening is commonly called the 'Aalbessen
(black-currant) hos.'

[Illustration: Kermis: 'Hossen-Hossen--Hi-Ha!' _(After the Picture of Van
Geldrop_)]

An equally curious but not so bad a custom is the Groninger 'Koek eten.'
All Groningers are fond of cake, and the 'Groninger kauke' is a widespread
and very tasty production; but for this special purpose is used the
'ellekoek,' a very long thin cake, which, as its name implies, is sold by
the yard. It is very tough, and just thin enough to hold in a large mouth,
and when a man chooses a girl to keep Kermis with him they must first see
whether they will suit one another as 'Vryer and Vryster' by eating
'ellekoek.' This is done in the following manner. They stand opposite one
another, and each begins at an end and eats towards the other. They may
not touch the cake with their hands, but must hold it between their teeth
all the while they are eating, and if they are unable to accomplish this
feat and kiss when they get to the middle it is a sure sign that they are
not suited to one another, and so the partnership is not concluded. In
some parts of Friesland and in Voorburg, one of the many villages near The
Hague, there is another cake custom, the 'Koekslaen,' which is a sort of
cake lottery. The cakes are all put out on large blocks, which are higher
at the sides than in the middle, and, for twopence, any one who likes may
try his luck and see if he can break the cake in two by striking it with a
stout stick provided by the stall-keeper for the purpose. It is necessary
to do this in one blow, for a second try involves the payment of another
fee. He who succeeds carries off the broken cake, and receives a second
one as a prize. Some men are very clever at this, and manage to carry off
a good many prizes.

Just as the Kermis is rung in by the bells, so also it is tolled out
again. This, however, is not an official proceeding, but a custom among
the schoolboys of the Gymnasium and Higher Burgher Schools. At The Hague,
on the last day of the fair, all the 'schooljeugd' assembled in the Lange
Voorhout, dressed in black, just as they would dress for a funeral, while
four of them carried a bier, hung with wreaths and black draperies. On
this bier was supposed to rest all that remained of the Kermis. In front
of the bier walked a boy ringing a large bell, and proclaiming, 'De Kermis
is dood, de Kermis wordt begraven' ('The Kermis is dead, and is going to
be buried'). Behind the bier came all the other boys with the most
mournful expression upon their faces they could muster for the occasion,
and thus they carried the 'dead fair' through the principal streets of the
town, and at last buried it in the 'Scheveningsche Boschjes.' But this
custom is now a thing of the past, for the Kermis at The Hague has been
abolished, even as it has been abolished in most of the other towns
throughout the kingdom, for all authorities were agreed that fair-time
promoted vice and drunkenness, and the old-fashioned Kermis is now only to
be found in Rotterdam, Leyden, Delft, and some of the smaller provincial
towns and villages.

The 6th of December is the day dedicated to St. Nicholas, and its vigil is
one of the most characteristic of Dutch festivals. It is an evening for
family reunions, and is filled with old recollections for the elders and
new delights for the younger people and children. Just as English people
give presents at Christmas time, so do the Dutch at St. Nicholas, only in
a different way, for St. Nicholas presents must be hidden and disguised as
much as possible, and be accompanied by rhymes explaining what the gift is
and for whom St. Nicholas intends it. Sometimes a parcel addressed to one
person will finally turn out to be for quite a different member of the
family than the one who first received it, for the address on each wrapper
in the various stages of unpacking makes it necessary for the parcel to
change hands as many times as there are papers to undo. The tiniest
things are sent in immense packing-cases, and sometimes the gifts are
baked in a loaf of bread or hidden in a turf, and the longer it takes
before the present is found the more successful is the 'surprise.'

The greatest delight to the giver of the parcel is to remain unknown as
long as possible, and even if the present is sent from one member of the
family to another living in the same house the door-bell is always rung by
the servant before she brings the parcel in, to make believe that it has
come from some outsider; and if a parcel has to be taken to a friend's
house it is very often entrusted to a passer-by, with the request to leave
it at the door and ring the bell. In houses where there are many children,
some of the elders dress up as the good Bishop St. Nicholas and his black
servant. The children are always very much impressed by the knowledge St.
Nicholas shows of all their shortcomings, for he usually reminds them of
their little failings, and gives them each an appropriate lecture.
Sometimes he makes them repeat a verse to him or asks them about their
lessons, all of which tends to make the moment of his arrival looked
forward to with much excitement and some trembling, for St. Nicholas
generally announces at what time he is to be expected, so that all may be
in readiness for his reception.

On the eventful evening a large white sheet is laid out upon the floor in
the middle of the room, and round it stand all the children with sparkling
eyes and flushed faces, eagerly scrutinizing the hand of the clock. As
soon as it points to five minutes before the expected time of the Saint's
arrivai they begin to sing songs to welcome him to their midst, and ask
him to give as liberally as was his wont, meanwhile praising his goodness
and greatness in the most eloquent terms. The first intimation the
children get of the Saint's arrival is a shower of sweets bursting in
upon them. Then, amid the general scramble which ensues, St, Nicholas
suddenly makes his appearance in full episcopal vestments, laden with
presents, while in the rear stands his black servant with an open sack in
one hand in which to put all the naughty boys and girls, and a rod in the
other which he shakes vigorously from time to time. When the presents have
all been distributed, and St. Nicholas has made his adieus, promising to
come back the following year, and the children are packed to bed to dream
of all the fun they have had, the older people begin to enjoy themselves.
First they sit round the table which stands in the middle of the room
under the lamp, and partake of tea and 'speculaas,' until their own
'surprises' begin to arrive. At ten O'clock the room is cleared, the
dust-sheet which was laid down for the children's scramble is taken up,
and all the papers and shavings, boxes and baskets that contained presents
are removed from the floor; the table is spread with a white table-cloth;
'letterbanket' with hot punch or milk chocolate is provided for the
guests; and, when all have taken their seats, a dish of boiled chestnuts,
steaming hot, is brought in and eaten with butter and salt.

Cigars, the usual resource of Dutchmen when they do not know what to do
with themselves, do not form a feature of this memorable evening
(memorable for this fact also), not so much out of deference to the ladies
who are in their midst as for the reason that they are too fully occupied
with other and even pleasanter employments.

[Illustration: St. Nicholas Going His Rounds on December 5th.]

The personality of St. Nicholas, as now known by Dutch children, is of
mixed origin, for not merely the Bishop of Lycie, but Woden, the Frisian
god of the elements and of the harvest, figures largely in the legends
attached to his name. Woden possessed a magic robe which enabled him
when arrayed in it to go to any place in the world he wished in the
twinkling of an eye. This same power is attached to the 'Beste tabbaard'
of St. Nicholas, as may be seen from the verse addressed to him:--


    'Sint Niklaas, goed, heilig man
    Trek je beste tabberd an
    Ryd er mee naar Amsterdam
    Van Amsterdam naar Spanje.'

    [St. Nicholas, good, holy man
    Put on your best gown
    Ride with it to Amsterdam,
    From Amsterdam to Spain.]

The horse Sleipnir, on whose back Woden took his autumn ride through the
world, has been converted into the horse of St. Nicholas, on which the
Saint rides about over the roofs of the houses to find out where the good
and where the naughty children live. In pagan days a sheaf of corn was
always left out on the field in harvest time for Woden's horse, and the
children of the present day still carry out the same idea by putting a
wisp of hay in their shoes for the four-footed friend of the good Saint.
The black servant who now always accompanies St. Nicholas is an
importation from America, for the Pilgrim Fathers carried their St.
Nicholas festival with them to the New Country, and some of their
descendants who came to live in Holland brought 'Knecht Ruprecht' with
them, and so added another feature to the St. Nicholas festivity.

What the Dutch originally knew of the life and works of 'Dominus Sanctus
Nicolaus' was told them by the Spaniards at the time of their influence in
Holland, and so it is believed that the Saint was born at Myra, in Lycie,
and lived in the commencement of the fourth century, in the reign of
Constantine the Great. From his earliest youth he showed signs of great
piety and self-denial, refusing, it is said, even when quite a tiny child,
to take food more than once a day on fast days! His whole life was devoted
to doing good, and even after his death he is credited with performing
many miracles. Maidens and children chiefly claim him as their patron
saint, but he also guards sailors, and legend asserts that many a ship on
the point of being wrecked or stranded has been saved by his timely
influence. During his lifetime the circumstance took place for which he
was ever afterwards recognized as the maidens' guardian. A certain man had
lost all his money, and to rid himself from his miserable situation he
determined to sell his three beautiful daughters for a large sum. St.
Nicholas heard of his intention, and went to the man's house in the night,
taking with him some of the money left him by his parents, and dropped it
through a broken window-pane. The following night St. Nicholas again took
a purse of gold to the poor man's house, and managed to drop it through
the chimney, but when he reached the man's door on the third night it was
suddenly opened from the inside, and the poor man rushed out, caught St.
Nicholas by his robe, and, falling down on his knees before him,
exclaimed, 'O Nicholas, servant of the Lord, wherefore dost thou hide thy
good deeds?' and from that time forth every one knew it was St. Nicholas
who brought presents during the night. In pictures one often sees St.
Nicholas represented with the threefold gift in his hand, in the form of
three golden apples, fruits of the tree of life. Another very well known
Dutch picture is St. Nicholas standing by a tub, from which are emerging
three bags. About fifty years ago such a picture was to be seen in
Amsterdam on the corner house between the Dam and the Damrak, with the
inscription, 'Sinterklaes.' The story runs that three boys once lost their
way in a dark wood, and begged a night's lodging with a farmer and his
wife. While the children were asleep the wicked couple murdered them,
hoping to rob them of all they had with them, but they soon discovered
that the lads had no treasure at all, and so, to guard against detection,
they salted the dead bodies, and put them in the tub with the pigs' flesh.
That same afternoon, while the farmer was at the market, St. Nicholas
appeared to him in his episcopal robes, and asked him whether he had any
pork to sell. The man replied in the negative, when St. Nicholas rejoined,
'What of the three young pigs in your tub? 'This so frightened the farmer
that he confessed his wicked deed, and implored forgiveness. St. Nicholas
thereupon accompanied him to his house, and waved his staff over the
meat-tub, and immediately the three boys stepped forth well and hearty,
and thanked St. Nicholas for restoring them to life.

The birch rod, which naughty Dutch children have still to fear, has also a
legendary origin, and is not merely an imaginary addition to the
attributes of the Saint. A certain abbot would not allow the responses of
St. Nicholas to be sung in his church, notwithstanding the repeated
requests of the monks of his order, and he dismissed them at last with the
words, 'I consider this music worldly and profane, and shall never give
permission for it to be used in my church.' These words so enraged St.
Nicholas that he came down from the heavens at night when the abbot was
asleep, and, dragging him out of bed by the hair of his head, beat him
with a birch rod he carried in his hand till he was more dead than alive.
The lesson proved salutary, and from that day forth the responses of St.
Nicholas formed a part of the service.

The St. Nicholas festival has always been kept with the greatest splendour
at Amsterdam. It was there that the festival was first instituted, and the
first church built which was dedicated to his name; for when Gysbrecht
III., Heer van Amstel, had the Amstel dammed, many people came to live
there, and houses arose up on all sides, and naturally, when the want of a
church was felt, and it was built, the good Nicholas was chosen the patron
Saint of the town. On his name-day masses were held in the church, and the
usual Kermis observed, Booths and stalls were set out in two rows all
along the Damrak, where the people of Amsterdam could buy sweets and toys
for their children. Special cakes were baked in the form of a bishop, and
named, after St. Nicholas, 'Klaasjes.' They were looked upon as an
offering dedicated to the Saint according to the old custom of their
forefathers, which can be again traced to the service of Woden.

Not only Amsterdammers, however, but people from all the neighbouring
towns flocked to the St. Nicholas market, and followed the Amsterdammers'
example of filling their children's shoes with cakes and toys, always
telling them the old legend that St. Nicholas himself brought these
presents through the chimney and put them in their shoes. During and after
the Reformation this now popular festival had to bear a great deal of
opposition, for authors and preachers alike agreed that it was a foolish
feast, and led to superstition and idolatry. Hence the decree was issued,
in the year 1622, that no cakes might be baked and no Kermis held, and
even the children were forbidden to put out their shoes as they were
accustomed to do. But for once in a way people were sensible enough to
understand that giving their children a pleasant evening had nothing to do
either with superstition or idolatry, and so the festival lived on with
Protestants as well as Roman Catholics, although one point was gained by
the Reformers, in that St. Nicholas was no longer looked upon as holy and
worshipped, but was only honoured as the patron Saint and guardian of
their children.

The fairs which once belonged to the festival of St. Nicholas are no
longer held in the street, at any rate in the larger towns, but the
exchange of presents is as universal as ever, and the shops look as
festive as shops in England do at Christmas-time. In many other ways,
indeed, St. Nicholas corresponds to Christmas in other countries, and
Protestants and Catholics alike observe it, although there is no religions
significance in the festival. The season, too, has its special cakes and
sweets. There are the flat hard cakes, made in the shapes of birds,
beasts, and fishes--the so-called 'Klaasjes'--for they are no longer baked
only in the form of a bishop, as they used to be. Then there is
'Letterbanket,' made, as the name implies, in the form of letters, so that
any one who likes can order his name in cake, and the 'Marsepein'
(marzipan) is now made in all possible shapes, though formerly only in
heart-shaped sweets, ornamented with little turtle-doves made of pink
sugar, or a flaming heart on a little altar. These sweets, it is said,
were invented by St. Nicholas himself, when he was a bishop, for the
benefit and use of lovers; for St. Nicholas held the office of
'Hylik-maker,' and many a couple were united by him. That is why the
confectioners bake 'Vryers and Vrysters' of cake at St. Nicholas time. If
a young man wanted to find out whether a girl cared for him, he used to
send her a heart of 'Marsepein' and a 'Vryer' of cake. Should she accept
this present he knew he had nothing to fear, but if she declined to accept
it he knew there was no hope for him in that quarter. These large dolls of
cake were usually decorated with strips of gold paper pasted over them,
but this fashion has gone out of use, and has caused the death of another
old custom; for it used to be a great treat for children and young people
to go and help the confectioners (who wrote all their customers an
invitation for that evening) on the 4th of December to prepare their goods
for the 'etalage.' Any cake that broke while in their hands they were
allowed to eat, and no doubt many did break.

It is not likely that this celebration of St. Nicholas will ever be
abolished, and the shopkeepers do their best to perpetuate it by offering
new attractions for the little folk every year. Figures of St. Nicholas,
life-size, are placed before their windows; and some even have a man
dressed like the good Saint, who goes about the streets, mounted on a
white steed, while behind him follows a cart laden with parcels, which
have been ordered and are left in this way at the different houses. Crowds
of children, singing, shouting, and clapping their hands, follow in the
rear, adding to the noise and bustle of the already crowded streets, but
people are too good-natured at St. Nicholas time to expostulate. Smiling
faces, mirth, and jollity abound everywhere, and good feeling unites all
men as brethren on this most popular of all the Dutch festivals.




Chapter XI

National Amusements



Holland, like other countries, is indebted to primitive and classic
times for most of its national amusements and children's games, which
have been handed down from generation to generation. Many of the same
games have been played under many differing Governments and opposing
creeds. Hollander and Spaniard, Protestant and Catholic alike have found
common ground in those games and sports which afford so welcome a break
in daily work.

'Hinkelbaan,' for example, found its way into the Netherlands from far
Phoenicia, whose people invented it. The game of cockal, 'Bikkelen,' still
played by Dutch village children on the blue doorsteps of old-fashioned
houses, together with 'Kaatsen,' was introduced into Holland by Nero
Claudius Druses, and it is stated that he laid out the first 'Kaatsbaan.'
The Frisian peasant is very fond of this game; and also of 'Kolven,' the
older form of golf; and often on a Sunday morning after church he may be
seen dressed in his velvet suit and low-buckled shoes, engaged in these
outdoor sports. About a century ago a game called 'Malien' was universally
played in South Holland and Utrecht. For this it was necessary to have a
large piece of ground, at one end of which poles were erected, joined
together by a porch. The bail was driven by a 'Mahen kolf,' a long stick
with an iron head and a leather grip, and it had to touch both poles and
roll through the porch. The 'Maheveld' at The Hague and the 'Mahebaan' at
Utrecht remind one of the places in which this game was played.

In Friesland the Sunday game for youths is 'Het slingeren met
Dimterkoek'--throwing Deventer cake. Four persons are required to play
this game. The players divide themselves into opposite parties, and play
against each other. First they toss up to see which of the parties and
which of the boys shall begin. He on whom the lot falls is allowed to
give his turn to his opponent, which he often does if, on feeling the
cake, he notices that it is soft and liable to break easily. If, on the
contrary, it is hard, he keeps the first throw for himself. Holding the
cake firmly in his right hand, he takes a little run, bends backward, and
with a sudden swing throws the cake forward (as one throws a stone) so
that it flies away a good distance, breaking off just at the grip. This
piece, called 'hanslik,' or handpiece, he must keep in his hand, for if
he drops it he must let his turn pass by once, and his throw is not
counted. The distance of the throw is now measured and noted down,
whereupon one of the opposing party takes the piece of cake and throws
it, and so it goes on alternately till each has had a turn. The distances
of the throws of every two boys are counted together, and the side which
has the most points wins.

There are also games played only at certain seasons of the year, as the
'Eiergaren' at Easter-time. This was very popular even in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. On Easter Monday all the village people betake
themselves to the principal street of the 'dorp' to watch the
'eiergaarder.' At about two o'clock in the afternoon the innkeeper who
provides the eggs appears upon the scene with a basket containing
twenty-five. These he places on the road at equal distances of twelve feet
from each other. In the middle of the road is then placed a tub of water,
on which floats a very large apple, the largest he has been able to
procure. Two men are chosen from the ranks of the villagers. The one is
led to the tub, his hands are tied behind his back, and he is told to eat
the floating apple; the other has to take the basket in his hand and pick
up while running all the eggs and arrange them in the basket before the
apple is eaten. He who finishes his task first is the winner, and carries
off the basket of eggs as a prize. It provokes great fun to see the man
trying to get hold of the floating-apple, which escapes so easily from the
grasp of his teeth, but some men are wise enough to push the apple against
the side of the tub, and of course as soon as they have taken one bite the
rest is easily eaten. When the game is over, the greater number of the
villagers go and drink to the good health of the winner at the
public-house, and so the innkeeper makes a good thing out of this custom
also, and for a game like this it is certainly wise to refresh one's self
_after_ the event. Skittles and billiards are very popular with the
peasant and working classes on Sunday afternoons, the only free time a
labourer has for recreation. Games of chance, also, in which skill is at a
minimum, are as numerous in Holland as in any other country.

Children's games naturally occupy a large share in young Netherlands life,
especially outdoor romping games. Of indoor games there are very few, a
fact which may, perhaps, be accounted for by the custom of allowing
children to play in the streets. In former days children of all classes
played together in outdoor sports and games, and developed both their
muscles and their republican character. Even Prince Frederik Hendrik (who
was brother to and succeeded Prince Maurits in 1625), when at school at
Leyden, mixed freely with his more humble companions, and was often
mistaken for an ordinary schoolboy, and an old woman once sharply rebuked
him for daring to use her boat-hook to fish his ball out of the water into
which it had fallen. Nor did she notice to whom she was speaking until a
passer-by called her attention to the fact that it was the Prince,
whereupon the poor old soul became so frightened that she durst not
venture out of her house for weeks from imaginary fear of falling into the
clutches of the law, and ending her days in prison.

Games may be divided into two classes, those played with toys and those
for which no toys are needed; but whatever the games may be they all have
their special seasons. Once a man wrote an almanack on children's games,
and noted down ail the different sports and their seasons, but, as the
poet Huggens truly said,

    'De kindren weten tyd van knickeren en kooten,
    En zonder almanack en ist hen nooit ontschoten,'

which, freely translated, means that children know which games are in
season by intuition, and do not need an almanack, so he might have saved
himself the trouble. 'The children know the time to play marbles and
"Kooten," and without an almanack have not forgotten.'

In the eighteenth century driving a hoop was as popular an amusement with
children as it is now, only then it was also a sport, and prizes were
given to the most skilful. In fact, hoop-races were held, and boys and
girls alike joined in them. They had to drive their hoops a certain
distance, and the one who first reached the goal received a silver coin
for a prize. This coin was fastened to the hoop as a trophy, and the more
noise a hoop made while rolling over the streets the greater the honour
for the owner of it, for it showed that a great many prizes had been
gained. In Drenthe the popular game for boys is 'Man ik sta op je
blokhuis,' similar to 'I am the King of the Castle,' but there is also the
'Windspel.' For the latter a piece of wood and a ball are necessary. The
wood is placed upon a pole and the ball laid on one side of it, then with
a stick the child strikes as hard as possible the other side of the piece
of wood, at the same time calling 'W-i-n-d,' and the ball flies up into
the air, and may be almost lost to sight.

'Boer lap den Buis,' an exciting game from a boy's point of view, is a
general favourite in Gelderland and Overyssel. For this the boys build a
sort of castle with large stones, and after tossing up to see who is to be
'Boer,' the boy on whom the lot has fallen stands in the stone fortress,
and the others throw stones at it from a distance, to see whether they can
knock bits off it. As soon as one succeeds in doing so he runs to get back
his stone, at the same time calling out 'Boer, lap den buis,' signifying
that the 'Boer' must mend the castle. If the 'Boer' accomplishes this, and
touches the bag before he has picked up his stone, they change places, and
the game begins anew.

Little girls of the labouring classes have not much time for games of any
sort, for they are generally required at home to act as nursemaids and
help in many other duties of the home life, but sometimes on summer
afternoons they bring out their younger brothers and sisters, their
knitting and a skipping-rope, which they take in turns, and so pass a few
pleasant hours free from their share (not an inconsiderable one) of
household cares, or in the evenings, when the younger members of the
family are in bed, they will be quite happy with a bit of rope and their
skipping songs, of which they seem to know many hundreds, and which might
be sung with equal reason to any other game under the sun for all the
words have to do with skipping.

After a long spell of rain the first fall of snow is hailed with
delight, for it is a sign that frost is not far off. Jack Frost, after
several preliminary appearances in December, usually pays his first long
visit in January (sometimes, however, this is but a flying visit of two
or three days), and, as a rule, a Dutchman may reckon on a good hard
winter. As soon, therefore, as he sees the snow he thinks of the good
old saying--'Sneeuw op slik in drie dagen ys dun of dik' ('Snow on mud
in three days' time, thin or thick'). Ice is to be expected, and he gets
out his skates with all speed. This is one of the few occasions when the
people of the Netherlands are enthusiastic. Certainly skating is _the_
national sport. The ditches are always the first to be tried, as the
water in them is very shallow, and naturally freezes sooner than the
very deep and exposed waters of river and canal, over which the wind,
which is always blowing in Holland, has fair play; but when once these
are frozen, then skating begins in real earnest. The tracks are all
marked out by the Hollandsche Ysvereeniging, a society which was founded
in 1889 in South Holland, and which the other provinces have now joined.
Finger-posts to point the way are put up by this society at all
cross-roads and ditches, with notices to mark the dangerous places,
while the newspapers of the day contain reports as to which roads are
the best to take, and which trips can be planned. For people living in
South Holland the first trip is always to the Vink at Leyden, as it can
be reached by narrow streams and ditches, and it is quite a sight to see
the skaters sitting at little tables with plates of steaming hot soup
before them. The Vink has been famous for its pea soup many years, and
has been known as a restaurant from 1768. When the Galgenwater is frozen
(the mouth of the Rhine which flows into the sea at Kat wyk), then the
Vink has a still gayer appearance, for not only skaters, but pedestrians
from Leyden and the villages round about that town, flock to this _cafe_
to watch the skating and enjoy the amusing scenes which the presence of
the ice affords them. Then the broad expanse of water, which in summer
looks so deserted and gloomy as it flows silently and dreamily towards
the sea, is dotted ail over with tents, flags, 'baanvegers,' and, if the
ice is strong, even sleighs.

Among the peasant classes of South Holland it is the custom, as soon as
the ice will bear, to skate to Gouda, men and women together, there to buy
long Gouda pipes for the men and 'Goudsche sprits' for the women, and then
to skate home with these brittle objects without breaking them. As they
come along side by side, the farmer holding his pipe high above his head
and the woman carefully holding her bag of cakes, every passer-by knocks
against them and tries to upset them, but it seldom happens that they
succeed in doing so, as a farmer stands very firmly on his skates, and, as
a rule, he manages to keep his pipe intact after skating many miles. The
longest trip for the people of South Holland, North Holland, and Utrecht,
is through these three provinces, and the way over the ice-clad country is
quite as picturesque as in summer-time, the little mills, quaint old
drawbridges, and rustic farmhouses losing nothing of their charm in winter
garb. All along the banks of the canals and rivers little tents are put
up to keep out the wind; a roughly fashioned rickety table stands on the
ice under the shelter of the matting, and here are sold all manner of
things for the skaters to refresh themselves with--hot milk boiled with
aniseed and served out of very sticky cups, stale biscuits, and sweet
cake. The tent-holders call out their wares in the most poetical language
they can muster--

    'Leg ereis an! Leg ereis an!
    In het tentje by de man.
    Warme melk en zoete koek
    En een bevrozen vaatedoek.'

    ['Put up, put up
    At the tent with the man;
    Warm milk and sweet cake,
    And a frozen dish-cloth.']

and they tell you plainly that you may expect unwashed cups, for the cloth
wherewith to wipe them is frozen, as well as the water to cleanse them.

Under the bridges the ice is not always safe, and even if it has become
safe the men break it up so that they may earn a few cents by people
passing over their roughly constructed gangways, and so boards are laid
down by the 'baanvegers' for the skaters to pass over without risking
their lives. Besides making these wooden bridges, the 'baanvegers' keep
the tracks clean. Every hundred yards or so one is greeted by the
monotonous cry of 'Denk ereis an de baanveger,' so that on long trips
these sweepers are a great nuisance, for having to get out one's purse and
give them cents greatly impedes progress. The Ice Society has, however,
minimized the annoyance by appointing 'baanvegers' who work for it and
are paid out of the common funds, so that the members of the society who
wear their badge can pass a 'baanveger' with a clear conscience, while as
the result of this combination you can skate over miles of good and
well-swept ice without interference for the modest sum of tenpence, this
being the cost of membership of the society for the whole season.

[Illustration: Skating to Church.]

The Kralinger Plassen and the Maas near Rotterdam are greatly frequented
spots for carnivals on the ice, but the grandest place for skating and ice
sports of all kinds is the Zuyder Zee. In a severe winter this large
expanse of ice connects instead of dividing Friesland with North Holland.
Here we see the little ice-boats flying over the glossy surface as fast as
a bird on the wing, and sleighs drawn by horses with waving plumes, while
thousands of people flock from Amsterdam to the little Isle of Marken, and
the variety of costume and colour swaying to and fro on the fettered
billows of the restless inland sea makes it seem for the moment as though
the Netherlander's dream had come true, and Zuyder Zee had really become
once more dry land. In winter every one, from the smallest to the
greatest, gives himself up to ice-sports, and even the poor are not
forgotten. In some villages races are proclaimed, for which the prizes are
turfs, potatoes, rice, coals, and other things so welcome to the poor in
cold weather. A racer is appolnted for every poor family, and where there
are no sons big enough to join in the races, a young man of the better
classes generally offers his services, and, when successful, hands his
prize over to the family he undertook to help.

Skating is second nature with the Dutch, and as soon as a child can walk
it is put upon skates, even though they may often be much too big for it.
Moreover, when the ice is good, winter-time affords recreation for the
working as well as the leisured classes, for the canals and rivers become
roads, and the hard-worked errand-boys, the butchers' and the bakers' boys
manage to secure many hours of delightful enjoyment as they travel for
orders on skates. The milkman also takes his milk-cart round on a sledge,
and the farmers skate to market, saving both time and money, for then
there is no railway fare to be paid, and a really good skater goes almost
as fast as a train in Holland--especially the Frisian farmers, for
Frisians are renowned for their swift skating, and the most famous racer
of the commencement of the nineteenth century, Kornelis Ynzes Reen, skated
four miles in five minutes.

But although the ice affords, and always has afforded, so much pleasure,
there are periods in history when the frost caused great anxiety to the
people of the Netherlands. The cities Naarden and Dordrecht are easily
reached by water, and when that is frozen it would give any one free
access to the town, and so in time of war frost was a much-dreaded thing.
In the year 1672 this fear was realized, for when the ships of the Geuzen
round about Naarden were stuck fast in the ice, and the Zuyder Zee was
frozen, the enemy, armed with canoes and battle-axes, came over the ice
from the Y and across the Zuyder Zee to Naarden. The best skaters among
the Geuzen immediately volunteered to meet the Spaniards on the ice. They
took only their swords with them, and while the ships' cannon had fair
play from the bulwarks of the vessels over the heads of the Geuzen into
the Spanish ranks, the Geuzen could approach them fearlessly and
unmolested for a hand-to-hand fight. The Spaniards, who, besides being
very heavily armed were very bad skaters, were soon defeated, for they
kept tumbling over each other. The Geuzen pursued them to Amsterdam, and
then returned to their ships, where they were greeted with great
enthusiasm, and, as the thaw set in the next day, they were happily saved
from a renewed attack.




Chapter XII

Music and the Theatre



Singing was one of the principal social pastimes of the Dutch nation
during the eighteenth and far into the nineteenth century, and the North
Hollander was especially fond of vocal music. When young girls went to
spend the evening at the house of a friend they always carried with them
their 'Liederboek '--a volume beautifully bound in tortoise-shell covers
or mounted with gold or silver. The songs contained in these books were a
strange mixture of the gay and grave. Jovial drinking-songs or
'Kermisliedjes' would find a place next to a 'Christian's Meditation on
Death.' It was an _olla podrida_, in which everybody's tastes were
considered. Recitations were also a feature of these little gatherings.

Nowadays these national songs are rarely heard. French, Italian, and
German songs have taken their place, and it is but seldom one hears a real
Dutch song at any social gathering. The 'people,' too, seem to have
forgotten their natural gift of poetry, for the only songs now heard about
the streets are badly translated French or English ditties. If England
brings out a comic song of questionable art, six months later that song
will have made its way to Holland, and will have taken a popular place in
a Dutch street musician's _repertoire;_ it will be whistled in many
different keys by butcher and baker boys, and will be heard issuing
painfully from the wonderful mechanism of the superfluous concertina. For
almost every one in Holland possesses some musical instrument on which he
plays, well or otherwise, when his daily work is over, or on Sunday
evenings at home. And here a notable characteristic of the Dutch higher
classes must be mentioned by way of contrast. Musical though they are,
trained as they generally are both to play and sing well, they yet seldom
exercise their gifts in a friendly, social, after-dinner way in their own
homes. They become, in fact, so critical or so self-conscious that they
prefer to pay to hear music rendered by recognized artists, and so a by no
means inconsiderable element of geniality is lost to the social and
domestic circle.

The decay of folk-song is the more regrettable, since Holland is rich in
old ballads, some of which, handed down just as the people used to sing
them centuries ago, are quaint, _naive,_ and exceedingly pretty. The
melodies have all been put to modern harmonies by able composers, and
published for the use of the public.

    'Het daghet in het oosten,
    Het lichtis overal,'

is a little jewel of poetic feeling, and the melody is very sweet. The
story, like most of the songs of the past troublous centuries, tells of
a battlefield where a young girl goes to seek her lover, but finds him
dead. So, after burying him with her own white hands, with his sword
and his banner by his side, she vows entrance into a convent. The story
is a picture in miniature of the times, and as a piece of literature it
ranks high.

Music of some sort finds a place in the homes of the poorest, and the
concert, theatre, and opera are as much frequented by the humble of the
land as by the wealthy and noble born. The servant class on their 'evening
out' frequently go to the French opera, and there is not a boy on the
street but is able to whistle some tune from the great modern operas, such
as 'Faust,' 'Lohengrin,' and other standard works. And no wonder, for the
choristers in the operas walk behind fruit-carts all day long, and often
call out their wares in the musical tones learnt while following their
more select profession as public singers. Some, of course, cannot read a
note of music, and the melodies they have to sing have to be drummed, or
rather trumpeted, into their ears. To this end they are placed in a row,
and a man with a large trumpet stands before them and plays the tune over
and over again until they know it off. In the summer-time whole parties of
these Jewish youths--for Jewish they chiefly are--go about the woods on
their Sabbath day singing the parts they take in the operas in the winter
season, and crowds of people flock to hear them, for their voices are
really well worth listening to.

Concerts are naturally not so largely patronized by the people as are
operas and theatres. In the larger towns of Holland especially theatricals
take a very prominent place in popular relaxation, and even the smaller
towns and villages, should they lack theatres and be unable to get good
theatrical companies to pay them periodical visits, arrange for dramatic
performances by local talent. The popularity of the opera may be judged
from the fact that at Amsterdam, The Hague, Rotterdam, Groningen, Arnhem
and Utrecht, operas in Dutch and French are regularly given, and
occasionally works in German and even Italian are produced. Money is
scarce in Holland, the people generally have little to spare, so grand
opera-houses, such as are thought necessary in most European cities of any
pretension to culture, are impossible, and the singers can seldom count on
liberal fees. But most of the best works are heard all the same--which,
after all, is the principal thing--and the enjoyment and edification which
result are not less genuine because of the simplicity of the properties
and the humble character of the entire surroundings.

Yet outdoor music possesses a powerful attraction for the Dutch humbler
classes, as for the same classes in most, if not all, countries; and when
in the summer-time there is music in the Wood at The Hague on Sunday
afternoons or Wednesday evenings, the walks round about the 'Tent' are
alive with servants and their lovers, parading decorously arm-in-arm.
Happy fathers, too, with their wives and children in Sunday best,
perambulate the grounds or rest on the seats amongst the trees and listen
to the 'Bosch-muziek.' People of the better class only are members of the
'Witte Societeit,' and sit inside the green paling to listen to the music
and drink something meanwhile. For it is strange but true, that a Dutchman
never seems thoroughly to enjoy himself unless he has liquid of some sort
at hand, and never feels really comfortable without his cigar. Indeed, if
smoking were abolished from places of public amusement, most Dutchmen
would frequent them no more. In winter concerts are given every other
Wednesday at The Hague--and what is true of The Hague applies to Amsterdam
and all other towns of any size in the country--and the Public Hall is
always packed; but besides these 'Diligentia' concerts there are others
given by various Singing Societies, so that there is variety enough to
choose from.

In the summer-time there is another attraction besides the Wood for the
people of The Hague, for the season at Scheveningen opens on the 1st of
June, and there is music at the Kurhaus twice a day--in the afternoon on
the terrace of that building, and in the evening in the great hall inside.
On Friday night is given what is called a 'Symphony Concert.' To this all
the world flocks, for no one who at all respects himself, or esteems the
opinion of society, would venture to miss it. Whether every one
understands or enjoys the high class music given is another question,
which it would be imprudent to press too urgently, but then it belongs to
'education' to go to concerts, and so all enjoy it in their own way. For
the townspeople and the working-classes, who have no free time during the
week, concerts are given at the large Voorhout on the Sunday evenings in
summer, so that on that day even the busiest and poorest may enjoy
recreation of a better kind than the public-house offers them, and this
effort on their behalf is greatly appreciated by the people, who gladly
make use of the opportunities of hearing good and popular music.

The national love of music is assiduously fostered by the Netherlands
Musical Union, whose branches are to be found all over the country. Every
town has musical and singing societies of some kind--private as well as
public--and these make life quite endurable in winter, even in the
smallest places. Nor do these 'Zangvereenigingen' derive their membership
exclusively from the higher classes, for the humbler folk have
organizations of their own. Even the servant girl and the day-labourer
will often be found to belong to singing clubs of some kind. Music is also
taught at most of the public schools, though it was long before the
Government capitulated upon the point, and gave this subject a place side
by side with drawing as part of the normal curriculum of the children of
the people.

Happily for the musical and dramatic tastes of the nation, both the
concert and the theatre are cheap amusements in Holland. As a rule, the
dearest seats cost only from 3s. to 5s., while the cheapest, even in
first-class houses at Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and The Hague, cost as little
as sixpence. The only exceptions are when renowned artists tour the
country, and even then the prices seldom exceed L1 for the best places.
There is one musical event which makes a more serious call upon the purse,
and it is the periodical operatic performance of the Wagner Society in
Amsterdam. As a rule, two representations a year are given, and some of
the best singers of Europe are invited to sing in one or other of Wagner's
operas. The best Dutch orchestra plays, and chosen voices from the
Amsterdam Conservatoire take part in the choruses. The scenery is worthy
of Bayreuth itself, and such expense and care are bestowed upon these
choice performances that, though the house is invariably filled on every
occasion, the fees for admission never pay the costs, so that the musical
enthusiasts of Amsterdam, Haarlem, and The Hague regularly make up the
deficit each year, which sometimes amounts to as much as L1000.

While, however, the Dutch may with truth be classed as a distinctly
musical nation, they would seem to have outlived their fame in the domain
of musical art. For it should not be forgotten that Holland has in this
respect a distinguished history behind it. So long ago as the times of
Pope Adrian I. a Dutch school of music was established under the tuition
of Italian masters, and it compared favourably with the contemporary
schools of other nations. Even in the ninth century Holland produced a
composer famous in the annals of music in the person of the monk Huchbald
of St. Amand, in Flanders. He it was who changed the notation, and
arranged the time by marking the worth of each note, and he is also
remembered for his 'Organum,' the oldest form of music written in
harmonies. It is often lamented that the compositions of to-day lack the
originality which marked the earlier works. The country has none the less
produced some noticeable composers during the past century. Of these J.
Verhuist, W.F.G. Nicolal, Daniel de Lange, Richard Hol, and G. Mann are
best known, though of no modern composer can it be said that he has any
special 'cachet,' for the younger men, fed as they are on the works of
other nations, grow into their style of thinking and writing, and follow
almost slavishly in their footsteps. It is unfortunate that many rising
composers cannot be persuaded to publish their works. The reason is that
the cost of publishing in the Netherlands is almost fabulous, and if they
do publish them at all it is done in Germany. But even then the
circulation is so limited, owing to the smallness of the country, that it
does not repay the cost; and so they prefer to plod on unknown, or to
cultivate celebrity by giving private concerts of their own works.




Chapter XIII

Schools and School Life



If the Dutch peasant is not generally well educated it is not for want of
opportunity, but rather because he has not taken what is offered him. For
many years past a good elementary education has been within the reach of
all. Even the small fees usually asked may be remitted in the case of
those parents who cannot afford to pay anything, without entailing any
civil disability; but attendance at school was only made compulsory by an
Act which passed the Second Chamber in March, 1900, and which, at the time
of writing, has just come into force. It is said that as many as sixty
thousand Dutch children are getting no regular schooling. About one half
of this number live on the canal-boats, and will probably give a good deal
of trouble to those who will administer the new Act; for, as we have
already seen, the families that these boats belong to have no other homes
and are always on the move, so that it must ever be difficult to get hold
of the children, especially as their parents do not see the necessity of
sending them to school. It remains to be seen, therefore, whether any
great improvement will resuit from the new Act, especially as private
tuition may take the place of attendance at a school, and exemption is
granted to those who have no fixed place of abode, and to parents who
object to the tuition given in all the schools within two and a half miles
of their homes. Under these conditions it seems that any one who wishes to
evade the law will have little difficulty in doing so. The canal-boat
people, apparently, are exempt so long as they do not remain for
twenty-eight days consecutively in the same 'gemeente,' or commune.

The education provided by the State is strictly neutral in regard to
religion and politics, but there are many denominational schools all over
the country. Protestants call theirs 'Bible schools,' and Romanists call
theirs 'Catholic schools,' and both these receive subsidies from the State
if they satisfy the inspectors. Private schools also exist, but do not as
a rule receive State aid. They are all, however, under State supervision
and subject to the same conditions as to teachers' qualifications; and a
very good rule is in force, namely, that no one may teach in Holland
without having passed a Government examination.

Instruction in the elementary schools supported by Government is in two
grades, though the dividing line is not always clearly drawn. In
Amsterdam, for example, there are four different grades. In the lower
schools the subjects taught are, besides reading, writing, and
arithmetic, grammar and history, geography, natural history and botany,
drawing, singing and free gymnastics, and the girls also learn
needlework, but a large proportion of the pupils are satisfied with a
more modest course, and know little more than the three R's. The children
attending these schools are between six and twelve years of age, though
in some rural districts few of them are less than eight years old, but
according to the new law they must begin to attend when they are seven
and go on until they are twelve or thirteen according to the standard
attained. In the upper grade schools the same subjects are taught in a
more advanced form, with the addition of universal history, French,
German, and English. These languages, being optional, are taught more or
less after regular school hours.

All the teachers in these schools must hold teachers' or head-teachers'
certificates, to gain which they have to pass an examination in all the
subjects which they are to teach except languages, for each of which a
separate certificate is required. Every commune must have a school, though
hitherto no one has been obliged to attend it, and lately, owing to the
new Education Act, the builders have been busy in many places enlarging
the schools to meet the new requirements. If there are more than forty
children two masters are now necessary, and for more than ninety there
must be at least three. Ten weeks' holidays are allowed in the year, and
these are to be given when the children are most wanted to help at home,
in addition to which leave of absence may be granted in certain cases by
the district inspectors. Holidays, therefore, vary according to the
conditions of a town or village.

All schools are more or less under State control. They are divided into
three classes according to the type of education which they provide. Lower
or elementary education has already been dealt with. Between this and the
higher education of the 'Gymnasia' and Universities comes what is called
'middelbaar onderwijs'--that is, secondary, or rather intermediate,
education. This is represented by technical or industrial schools,
'Burgher night schools,' and 'Higher burgher schools.' The first named
train pupils for various trades and crafts, more especially for those
connected with the principal local industries. The course is three years
or thereabouts, following on that of the elementary schools, and there is
generally an entrance examination, but the conditions vary in different
communes. Sometimes the instruction is free, sometimes fees are charged
amounting to a few shillings a year, the cost being borne by the communes,
and in a few towns there are similar schools for girls who have passed
through the elementary schools. The technical classes for girls cover such
subjects as fancy-work, drawing and painting of a utilitarian character,
and sometimes book keeping and dress-making. Most of them are free, but
for some special subjects a small payment is required. Drawing seems to be
a favourite subject, and in most of these technical schools there are
classes for mechanical drawing as well as for some kind of artistic work
connected with industry. In addition there are numerous art schools, some
of them being devoted to the encouragement of fine art, while in others
the object kept in view is the application of art to industry.

The 'Burgher night schools,' like the technical schools, are supported by
the communes in which they are situated. There are about forty of them in
all, and most of them are very well attended, in some cases the regular
students, who are all working men and women, number several hundreds. The
instruction is similar to that given in the technical schools, that is to
say, it is chiefly practical, and local industries receive special
attention. Formerly there were day schools also for working men, on the
same lines as these, but they were not a success, and the technical
schools have taken their place.

Of a higher class, but still included in the term 'middelbaar onderwijs,'
is the 'modern' education of the 'higher burgher' schools. The majority of
these schools were founded by the communes, the rest by the State, but
internally they are ail alike, and all are inspected by commissioners
appointed by the Government for the purpose. Pupils enter at twelve years
of age, and must pass an entrance examination, which, like nearly every
examination in Holland, is a Government affair. Having passed this, they
attend school for five years, as a rule, but at some of these institutions
the course lasts only three years. In some degree the 'higher burgher'
schools correspond to the modern side of an English school: at least the
subjects are much the same, embracing mathematlcs, natural science, modern
languages and commercial subjects, and no Latin or Greek is taught. The
education is wholly modern and practical, with the object of preparing
pupils for commercial life. There are 'higher burgher' schools for girls
as well as for boys, at which nearly the same education is provided.

A great advantage of these schools is that they are very cheap; at the
most expensive the yearly fees amount to a little more than thirty pounds,
but at the majority they only come to four or five. To teach in such
schools as these one must have a diploma or a University degree. A
separate diploma is necessary for each subject, and the examination is not
easy. Even a foreigner who wishes to teach his own language must pass the
same examination as a Dutchman. No difference is made between the masters
at the boys' schools and the ladies who teach the girls; exactly the same
diplomas are required in both cases.

The 'Gymnasia,' to which allusion has been made, are classical schools,
which prepare boys for the Universities. The age of entry is the same as
at the modern schools, twelve; but the course is longer, as a rule
covering six years instead of five, and at the end of this course comes a
Government examination, the passing of which is a necessary preliminary
to a University degree. The 'Gymnasia' were founded by an Act of
Parliament, but are supported by the communes, which in this case are the
larger towns, but they are assisted, as a rule, by a Government grant. The
fees are very small, only about, L8 a year.

There are a few private and endowed schools, which may send up candidates
for the same examinations as are taken by the pupils of the State schools,
and it is among these that we find the only boarding schools in the
country. Some of these have certain privileges; for instance, the
headmaster may engage assistants who do not hold diplomas, which makes it
easier for him to get native teachers for modern languages; but in the
State schools proper, the selection of undermasters does not rest with the
head, or director, as he is called, at all. Foreign teachers are not very
plentiful, as the diplomas are not easy to get, and a native, who has to
relearn much of his own language from a Dutch point of view, has little or
no advantage over a Dutchman in the examinations.

No sketch of Dutch schools would be complete without some reference to the
way in which modern languages are studied, for this is the most striking
feature in the national education, and is of great importance when we are
considering the national life and character of Holland. Former generations
of Dutchmen won a place among the 'learned nations' by their knowledge of
the classical languages; and their descendants seem to have inherited the
gift of tongues, but make a more practical use of it. French, German,
English, and Dutch, which go by the name of 'de vier Talen,' or 'the four
languages,' have taken the place of Greek and Latin. In the 'Gymnasia'
every pupil learns to speak them as a matter of course, and in the 'higher
burgher' schools the same languages receive special attention, with a view
to commercial correspondence. Even in the upper elementary schools, boys
and girls are taught some or all of them. A boy entering one of the higher
schools at the age of twelve or thirteen generally has some knowledge of,
at least, one foreign language, acquired either at an elementary school,
or at home, and he is never shy of displaying that knowledge. If his
parents are well off, he has probably learned to speak French or English
in the nursery, and it sometimes happens that he even speaks Dutch with a
French or an English accent, having been brought up on the foreign
language and acquired his native longue later. German as a rule is not
begun so soon, the idea being that its resemblance to Dutch makes it
easier, which is no doubt true to a certain extent. The result, however,
is very often that the easiest language of the three is the one least
correctly spoken.

As in all Continental countries, there is nothing in Holland corresponding
to the English public school System. The 'Gymnasia' prepare boys for the
Universities, and the 'higher burgher' schools train them for commercial
life and some professions, somewhat in the same way as English modern
schools, but there the resemblance ends. As a rule, a Dutch boy's school
life is limited to the hours he spends at lessons; the rest of the day
belongs rather to home life. There are a few boarding schools in Holland,
but the life in such schools in the two countries is different in almost
every respect. The size of the schools may have something to do with this,
though by itself it is not enough to account for the difference. A Dutch
head-master once drew my attention to the lack of tradition in his own and
other schools in the country, and expressed a hope that time might work a
change. At present there is little sign of such a change. Tradition has
hardly had time to grow up yet, for few of the existing schools are much
more than twenty years old, and its growth is retarded by the small
numbers, which make any widespread freemasonry among old boys impossible.
But there is another and more serious obstacle. The uniform control which
the Government exercises over ail schools alike, State, endowed, or
private, whatever advantages it may have, certainly hinders the
development of that individuality which makes 'the old school,' to many an
English boy, something more than a place where he had lessons to do and
was prepared for examinations.

A rough sketch of the inside of a Dutch school will doubtless be of
interest. One of the few endowed schools in Holland may be taken as fairly
typical of its class, but not of the State schools, though it competes
with these and combines the classical and modern courses. It lies in the
country, near a small village, and in this respect also differs from the
'Gymnasia' and 'higher burgher' schools, which are ail situated in the
larger towns.

One of the first things which attracts notice is the large number of
masters. It seems at first that there are hardly enough boys to go round.
This is due to the law, which requires that every master must be qualified
to teach his particular subject either by a University degree or by an
equivalent diploma. Few hold more than two diplomas, and consequently much
of the teaching is done by men who visit this and other schools two or
three times a week. In this particular foundation the three resident
masters are foreigners, but such an arrangement is exceptional. Classes
seldom include more than half a dozen boys, and very often pupils are
taken singly, and therefore each boy receives a good deal of individual
attention. Such a school is divided into six forms or classes, but not
for teaching purposes; the day's work is differently arranged for each
boy, and these classes merely record the results of the last examination.
Some of the lessons last for an hour, but the rest are only three quarters
of an hour long; they make up in number, however, what they lack in
length, amounting to about nine and a half hours a day. Owing to the time
being so much broken up, it may be doubted whether the amount of work done
is any greater here than in an average English school where the aggregate
of working hours is considerably less. Amongst our Dutch friends, however,
and there may be others who share their opinion, the general belief is
that English schoolboys learn very little except athletics.

With regard to sports and pastimes, these are the only schools in which
any interest is taken or encouragement given therein. Football is played
here on most half-holidays during the winter, and sometimes on Sunday, and
occasionally its place is taken by hockey. It must be admitted that the
standard of play is not very high in either game, though many of the boys
work hard and, with better opportunities, might develop into high-class
players; but as there are only about thirty boys in the school,
competition for places in the teams is not very keen. Rowing has lately
been introduced, not to the advantage of the football eleven. It may be
remarked, by the way, that only Association football is played in Holland;
the Rugby game is strictly barred by head-masters and parents as too
dangerous. Attempts have been made to introduce cricket, but the game
meets with little encouragement. There is a lawn-tennis court, however,
which is constantly in use during the summer term. Bicycling is very
popular, not only here, but in Holland generally; in fact, most of the
boys seem to prefer this form of exercise to any of the games which have
been mentioned.

Whether at work or play, all the boys are under the constant supervision
of one or other of the resident masters, and the head is not far off. A
few of the seniors are allowed to go outside the grounds when they please,
but the rest may only go out under the charge of a master. In spite of
this apparently strict supervision, however, there is not much real
discipline. Corporal punishment is not allowed; both public opinion and
the law of the land are against it. Other punishments, such as detention
and impositions, are ineffectual, and are generally regarded by the
culprit as unjustly interfering with his liberty. Consequently the masters
have not much hold over the boys, who might, if they chose, perpetrate
endless mischief without fear of painful consequences so long as they did
nothing to warrant expulsion; but the young Hollander does not appear to
have much enterprise in that direction. Perhaps he is sometimes kept out
of mischief by his devotion to the fragrant weed, for he generally learns
to smoke at a tender age, with his parents' consent, and no exception is
taken to his cigar except during lessons; but it is certainly startling to
see the boys smoking while playing their games, as well as on all other
possible occasions.

A large proportion of the boys at the 'Gymnasia,' perhaps the majority of
them, pass on to the Universities, some to qualify for the learned
professions, others because it is the fashion in Holland as in other
countries for young men who have no intention of following any profession
to spend a few years at a University in search of pleasure and experience;
but the experience in this case is peculiar and unique.




Chapter XIV

The Universities



As to the Universities themselves, it is not necessary to consider them
separately, as all four of them, Leyden, Groningen, Utrecht and Amsterdam,
are alike in constitution. They are not residential, there are no
beautiful buildings, there are no rival colleges, no tutors or proctors,
and no 'gate;' nor are they independent corporations like Oxford and
Cambridge and Durham, for, though they retain some outward forms which
recall a former independence, they are now maintained and managed entirely
by the State, which pays the professors and provides the necessary
buildings. The subjects to be taught and the examinations to be held in
the various faculties are laid down by statute. Consequently the
Universities show the same want of individuality as the schools, and, to
an outsider at least, there seems to be nothing of the 'Alma Mater' about
them under the present _regime,_ and no real ground for preferring any one
of them to the others. At the same time, fathers usually send their sons
to the Universities at which they themselves have studied, except when
they and the professors happen to hold very different political opinions,
but such a custom may be due as much to the national love of order and
regularity as to any real attachment to a particular University. As to
the political opinions of professors, their influence on the students
cannot be very great in the majority of cases, being limited to the effect
produced by lectures, for there is no social intercourse between teacher
and taught. The professors, though very learned men, do not enjoy any
great social standing, and the title does not carry with it anything like
the same rank as in some other countries.

The system on which these Universities work may be a sound and logical one
so far as it goes, and more up-to-date than the English residential
system, which its enemies deride as mediaeval and monastic; but it is a
cast iron system, designed with the object of preparing men for
examinations, and one which does nothing to discover promising scholars or
to encourage original work and research among those who have taken their
degrees, or, according to the Dutch phrase, have gained their 'promotion'.
There are no scholarships, nor anything that might serve the same purpose,
though some such institution could hardly find a more favourable soil than
that of Holland. Instruction of a very learned and thorough character is
offered to those who will and can receive it, and that is all. The classes
are open to all who pay the necessary fees, which are trifling, though the
degree of Doctor may only be granted to those who have passed the
'Gymnasium' final or an equivalent examination, and, provided he makes
these payments, a student is free to do as he pleases, so far as his
University is concerned.

Discipline there is none, except in very rare cases, when the law provides
for the expulsion of offenders; only theological candidates are indirectly
restrained from undue levity by having to get a certificate of good
conduct at the end of their course. There is no chapel to keep, for the
student's religion and morals are entirely his own concern; there are no
'collections,' for if a man does not choose to read he injures no one but
himself by his idleness; and there is no Vice-Chancellor's Court, for in
theory students are on the same footing as other people before the law,
though in practice the police seldom interfere with them more than they
can help. It is not surprising that young men not long from school should
sometimes abuse such exceptional freedom, but their ideas of enjoyment are
rather strange in foreign eyes. One of their favourite amusements seems to
be driving about the town and neighbourhood in open carriages. On special
occasions all the members of a club turn out, wearing little round caps of
their club colours, and accompanied as likely as not by a band, and drive
off in a procession to some neighbouring town, where they dine; in the
night or next morning they return, all uproariously drunk, singing and
shouting, waving flags and flinging empty wine-bottles about the road. I
do not wish to imply that all Dutch students behave in this way, but such
exhibitions are unfortunately not uncommon, and show to what lengths
'freedom' is permitted to go.

There is a limit, however, even to the liberty of students, as appears
from the following anecdote. One of these young men gave a wine-party in
his lodgings, and some one proposed, by way of a lark, to wake up a young
woman who lived in the house opposite, and fetch her out of bed, so a
rocket was produced and fired through the open window. The bombardment had
the desired effect, but it also set the house on fire, and the joker's
father was called on to make good the damage. Then the police took the
matter up, and the culprit got several weeks' imprisonment for arson,
after which he returned to the University and resumed his interrupted
studies. There was no question of rustication, as the court simply
inflicted the penalty laid down in the Code, and there was no other
authority that had power to interfere in the matter at all.

As may well be imagined, students are not generally popular with the
townsfolk, who resent the unequal treatment of the two classes, not
because they wish for the same measure of license, but because anything
like rowdiness contrasts strongly with their own habits; and extravagance,
not an uncommon failing among students in Holland or elsewhere, is
absolutely repugnant to the average Dutch citizen. This feeling of
resentment seems to be growing, and has already had some slight effect
upon the civil authorities; if the students find some day that they have
lost their privileged position, they will have only themselves to thank,
and certainly the change will do them no harm.

But though a certain number go to the Universities merely to amuse
themselves or to be in the fashion, most of them work well, even if they
do not attend lectures regularly all through their course. In some
faculties private coaching offers a quicker and easier way to 'promotion'
than the more orthodox one through the class-rooms. No doubt there are
some who are in no hurry to leave the attractions of student life, but not
many cling to them so persistently as a certain Dutch student, to whom a
relative bequeathed a liberal allowance, to be paid him as long as he was
studying for his degree. He became known as 'the eternal student,' to the
great wrath of the heirs who waited for the reversion of his legacy. For
most men the ordinary course is long enough, for it averages perhaps six
or seven years, though there is no fixed time, and candidates may take the
examinations as soon as they please. The nominal course--that is, the time
over which the lectures extend--varies in the different faculties, from
four years in law to seven or eight in medicine, but very few men manage,
or attempt, to take a degree in law in four years. The other faculties are
theology, science, including mathematics, and literature and philosophy.

The degree of Doctor is given in these five faculties, and to obtain it
two examinations must be passed, the candidate's and the doctoral. After
passing the latter a student bears the title _doctorandus_ until he has
written a book or thesis and defended it _viva voce_ before the
examiners. He is then 'promoted' to the degree, a ceremony which
generally entails, indirectly, a certain amount of expense. It appears to
be the correct thing for the newly-made doctor to drive round in state,
adorned with the colours of his club and attended by friends gorgeously
disguised as lacqueys, and leave copies of his book at the houses of the
professors and his club fellows, after which he, of course, celebrates
the occasion in the invariable Dutch fashion, with a dinner. Many
students, however, are not qualified to try for a degree, not having been
through the 'Gymnasia,' and others do not wish to do so. Sometimes the
candidate's examination qualifies one to practise a profession, and is
open to all, in other cases, in the faculty of medicine for example, it
gives no qualification, and is only open to candidates for the degree,
but then there is another, a 'professional' examination, for those who do
not aim at the ornamental title.

The cost of living at the Universities naturally depends very much on the
student's tastes and habits. He pays to the University only 200 florins
(_L16 13s 4d_) a year for four years, after which he may attend lectures
free of charge, so the minimum annual expenditure is small; but it should
be borne in mind that the course is about twice as long as in England. A
good many students live with their families, which is cheaper than living
in lodgings; and as nearly all classes are represented, there is a
considerable difference in their standards of life. Some are certainly
extravagant, as in all Universities, which tends to raise prices, but, on
the other hand, many of them are men whose parents can ill afford the
expense, but are tempted by the value which attaches to a University
career in Holland, and these bring the average down. Between these two
extremes there are plenty who do very well on L150 or so a year, and L200
is probably considered a sufficiently liberal allowance by parents who
could easily afford a larger sum. Even the students' corps need not lead
to any great expense, as it consists of a number of minor clubs, and
nearly every one joins it, so that the pace is not always the same;
students who wish to keep their expenses down naturally join with friends
who are similarly situated, leaving the more extravagant clubs to the
young bloods who have plenty of money to spare.

The corps is the only tie which holds the students together where there
are no colleges, and athletics play but a very small part. Each University
has its corps, to which all the students belong except a few who take no
part in the typical student life, and are known as the 'boeven,' or
'knaves.' A Rector and Senate are elected annually from among the members
of four or five years' standing to manage the affairs of the corps. In
order to become a member, a freshman, or 'green,' as he is called in
Holland, has to go through a rather trying initiation, which lasts for
three or four weeks. Having given in his name to the Senate, he must call
on the members of the corps and ask them to sign their names in a book,
which is inspected by the Senate from time to time, and at each visit he
comes in for a good deal of 'ragging,' for, as he may not go away until
he has obtained his host's signature, he is completely at the mercy of his
tormentors. If he does not obey their orders implicitly and give any
information they may require about his private affairs, he is likely to
have a bad time, but as long as he is duly submissive he is generally let
off with a little harmless fooling. One 'green,' a shy and retiring youth,
who did not at all relish the impertinent inquiries which were made into
his morals and family history, was made to stand at the window and give a
full and particular account of himself to the passers-by, with interesting
details supplied by the company. Sometimes, however, the joking is more
brutal and less amusing. For instance, as a punishment for shirking the
bottle, the victim was compelled to kneel on the floor with a funnel in
his mouth, while his tormentors poured libations down his throat.

When the 'green time' is over the new members of the corps are installed
by the Rector, and drive round the town in procession, finishing up, of
course, with a club dinner. The corps has its head-quarters in the
Students' Club, which corresponds more or less to the 'Union' at an
English University, though differing from the latter in two important
respects: first, there are no debates, and secondly, the members are
exclusively students, for, as I have already noticed, there is no social
intercourse between the professors and their pupils. The reading-rooms at
the club are a favourite lounge of a great many of the students, but it
must be admitted that the literature supplied there is not always of a
very wholesome kind, seeing that it includes 'realism' of the most daring
description, with illustrations to match, and obscene Parisian comic
papers. Every member of the corps also belongs to one of the minor clubs
of which it is made up, and which are apparently nothing more than
messes, very often with only a dozen members, or less.

A few sport clubs exist, also under the control of the corps, but they do
not play a very prominent part, for the taste for athletic exercises is
confined to a small minority. Considering the small number of players, the
proficiency attained in the exotic games of football and hockey is
surprisingly high. The rowing is even better, and attracts a larger
number, being perhaps more suited to the physical characteristics of the
race than those games for which agility is more necessary than weight and
strength. Boat-races are held annually between the several Universities,
in which the form of the crews is generally very good. If I am not
mistaken, some of the Dutch crews that have rowed at Henley represented
University clubs. The typical student, however, though well enough endowed
with bone and muscle, has no ambition whatever to become an athlete, or to
submit to the fatigue and self-denial of training. Probably the way he
lives and his aversion to athletics, more than the length of his course of
study, account for his elderly appearance, for he is not only obviously
older than the average undergraduate, but begins to look positively
middle-aged both in face and figure almost before he has done growing.

Before leaving the subject of the students' corps, mention must be made
of the great carnival which each corps holds every five years to
commemorate the foundation of its University. The 'Lustrum-Maskerade,'
which is the chief item in the week of festivities, is a historical
pageant representing some event in the mediaeval history of Holland. The
chief actors are chosen from among the wealthiest of the students, and
spare no trouble or expense in preparing their get-up, while the minor
parts are allotted to the various clubs within the corps, each club
representing a company of retainers or men-at-arms in the service of one
of the mock princes or knights. For six days the players retain their
gorgeous costumes and act their parts, even when excursions are made in
the neighbourhood in company with the friends and relatives who come to
join in the commemoration, and the mixture of mediaeval and modern
costumes in the streets has a somewhat ludicrous effect. On the first day
the visitors are formally welcomed by the officers of the corps. Former
students of all ages meet their old comrades, and the men of each year,
after dining together, march together to the garden or park where the
reception is held. Anything less like the usual calm and serious
demeanour of these seniors than the way in which they dance and sing
through the town is not to be imagined, for the oldest and most sedate of
them are as wildly and ludicrously enthusiastic as the youngest student;
and their arrival at the reception, with bands of music, skipping about
and roaring student songs like their sons and grandsons, is, to say the
least, comical. But the occasion only comes once in five years, and they
naturally make the most of it.

The next day the Masquerade takes place, beginning with a procession to
the ground, and is repeated two or three times before huge crowds of
spectators, for the townsmen are as excited as the students and the
relatives, at least on the first two days. Great pains are always taken to
ensure historical correctness in every detail, and the leading parts are
often admirably played, and it must be the unromantic dress of the
lookers-on that spoils the effect and makes one think of a circus. If only
the crowd could be brought into harmony with the masqueraders in the
matter of clothes the illusion might be complete; as it is, one can hardly
imagine for a moment that the knights who charge so bravely down the
lists mean to do one another any serious damage. A tournament is very
often the subject of the pageant, or an important part of it, or sometimes
a challenge and single combat are introduced as a sort of _entr'acte_. For
the last four days of the feast there is no fixed order of procedure;
balls, concerts, garden-parties, and so on are arranged as may be most
convenient, while the intervals are spent in visits, dinners, and drives.
Not until the end of the week does any student lay aside his gay costume
and resume the more prosaic garments of his own times. All through the
week the influence of the corps, which is the life of the University from
the student's point of view, is manifest in the collective character of
all the festivities, everything being done either by the corps itself or
under its direction. From a comparison of this celebration with 'Commem'
week we can, perhaps, gather a very fair idea of the typical points of
difference between the students of Holland and our own country.




Chapter XV

Art and Letters



The art of a country is ever in unity with the character of the people. It
reflects their ideas and sentiments; their history is marked in its
progress or decline; and it shows forth the influences that have been at
work in the minds and very life of the nation from which it springs. If
this is true of all countries, it is nowhere so visibly true as in
Holland. There art underwent the most decided changes during the various
periods of war and armed peace through which the little country passed. It
may truly be said that 'the first smile of the young Republic was art, for
it was only after the revolt of the Dutch against the Spanish ... that
painting reached a high grade of perfection.' One is accustomed to take it
for granted too readily that the glory of Dutch art lies in the past; that
the works and fame of a Van Eyck, a Rubens, Rembrandt, Van Dyck, and
Ruysdael sum up Holland's contribution to the art of the world, and that
this chapter of its history, like the chapters which deal with its
maritime supremacy, its industrial greatness, and its struggles for
liberty, is closed for ever. Nothing could be farther from the fact. Dutch
art was never more virile, more original, more self-conscious than to-day,
when it is represented by a band of men whose genius and enthusiasm
recall the great names of the past. Professer Richard Muther has well
said, in his 'History of Modern Painting,' that, 'so far from stagnating,
Dutch art is now as fresh and varied as in the old days of its glory.'

The Dutch painters of the present day include, indeed, quite a multitude
of men of the very first rank, and some of them, like the three brothers
Maris, are unexcelled. Jacob Maris, who died so recently as 1890, was
known for his splendid landscapes, and still more for his town pictures
and beach scenes. Willem Maris has a partiality for meadows in which
cattle are browsing in tranquil content. Thys Maris has a very different
style. He paints grey and misty figures and landscapes all hazy and
scarcely visible. His love of the obscure and the suggestive led to the
common refusal of his portraits by patrons, who complained that they
lacked distinctness. No painter, however, commands such large prices as
he, and from L2000 to L3000 is no rare figure for his canvases.

H. W. Mesdag is Holland's most celebrated sea painter. He pictures the
ever rolling ocean with marvellous power, and carries the song of the
waves and the cry of the wild sea birds into his great paintings, which
speak to one of the life and toil of the fishermen, the never weary
waters, and the ever varying aspects of sea and sky. In this domain he is
unrivalled, and he has certainly done some magnificent work. Mesdag has an
exhibition of his own works every Sunday morning in his studio at The
Hague, and any one who wishes is allowed to visit it, while for the
general public's benefit there is the Mesdag Panorama in the same town.

Mauve, who died in 1887, was best known for his pastoral scenes. His
pictures of sheep on the moors and fens recall pleasant memories of
summer days and sunny hours.

Josef Israels went largely to the life of fishermen for his motives,
though one of his best-known works is that noble one, 'David before Saul.'

Bosboom one naturally associates with church interiors, wonderfully well
done; Blommers, Artz, and Bles likewise paint interiors, the first two
choosing their subjects by preference from the houses of the working
classes, while Bles confines himself to the dwellings of the wealthy.

Bisschop is unquestionably the best of the Dutch portrait-painters, though
his still life is considered even more artistic than his portraits. The
foremost of the lady portrait and figure painters is Therese Schwartze,
who, like Josselin de Jong, often takes Queen Wilhelmina as a grateful
subject for her brush.

The foregoing may be regarded as painters of the old school, though every
one has so much originality as to be virtually the initiator of a distinct
direction. The newer schools are represented by men like J. Toorop,
Voerman, Verster, Camerlingh Onnes, Bauer, and Hoytema.

Toorop is the well-known symbolist. His style is Oriental rather than
Dutch, and his topics for the most part are mystical in character. He is
famous also for his decorative art. This many-sided man is probably the
greatest artist soul in Holland. He is expert in almost every domain of
art. Etching, pastel and water-colour drawing, oil-painting, wood-cutting,
lithography, working in silver, copper, and brass, and modelling in clay,
belong equally to his accomplishments, though as a painter he is, of
course, best known.

Voerman, once known for his minutely painted flowers, is now a pronounced
landscape painter. His cloud studies are marvellous, though perhaps the
landscape colours are somewhat hard and overdone in the effort to produce
the desired effects. He paints, as a rule, the rolling cumulus, and is one
of the first of the younger artists.

Verster is known best for his impressionist way of painting flowers in
colour patches, though he has now taken to the minute and mystical method
of representing them.

Onnes, like Toorop, is a decided mystic, and there is a vein of mysticism
in all his paintings. He is famous for his light effects in glass and
pottery, and has especially a wonderful knack of painting choirs in
churches ail in a dreamy light.

Bauer is better known, perhaps, by his drawings and etchings than by his
paintings. He paints with striking beauty old churches, temples, and
mosques, generally the exteriors, and the effect of his minute work is
wonderful. Bauer is also one of the finest of Dutch decorative artists.

Hoytema is known for his illustrations. Animal life is his _forte_,
especially owls and monkeys.

Among other younger painters who, though not yet of European reputation,
may still be classed with many of the older generation, are Jan Veth and
H. Haverman, both of whom excel in portraits. The lady artists who have
best held their own with the stronger sex include, in addition to those
named, Mme Bilders van Bosse, who paints woods and leafy groves with
striking power; and the late Mme. Vogels-Roozeboom, who found her
inspiration in the flora of Nature. In her day (she died in 1894) she was
the first of floral painters, and whenever she raised her brush the finest
of flowers rose up as at the touch of a magic wand. Second to her, though
not so well known by far, came Mlle W. van der Sande Bakhuizen.

The Dutch are not only a nation of painters, but a nation of
picture-lovers, though in Holland, as in other countries, one not seldom
sees upon walls from which better would be expected tawdry art, about
which all that can be said is that it was bought cheap. The country
possesses a number of good public galleries, and much is done in this way
and by the frequent exhibition of paintings to foster the love of the
artistic. The principal exhibitions are those of the Pulchri Studio and
the Kunst-kring (Art Circle) at The Hague, and the 'Arti et Amicitia' at
Rotterdam. To become a working member of the Pulchri Studio is counted a
great honour, for the artists who are on the committee are very
particular as to whom they admit into their circle, and they ruthlessly
blackball any one who is at all 'amateurish' or who does not come up to
their high standard. For this reason it is that so many of the younger
artists give exhibitions of their own works as the only way of getting
them at all known.

Sculpture is not much practised in Holland. It would seem to be an art
belonging almost entirely to Southern climes, although there was a time
when the Dutch modelled busts and heads from snow. The monument of Piet
Hein was originally made of snow, and so much did it take the fancy of the
people of Delftshaven, the place of his birth, that they had a stone
monument erected for him on the place where the one of snow had stood. It
is only recently, however, that sculpture has been re-introduced into
Holland as a fine art, and those artists who have taken it up need hardly
fear competition with their brethren of other Continental countries, for
their names are already on every tongue. The first amongst those who have
shown real power is Pier Pander, the cripple son of a Frisian mat-plaiter,
who came over from Rome (where he had gone to complete his studies) at
the special invitation of the Queen to model a bust of the Prince Consort,
Duke Hendrik of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. Other notable sculptors are Van
Mattos, Ode, Bart de Hove, and Van Wyck.

There is also another art which is in considerable vogue, and in which
much good work has been done--that of wood-carving. In this the painter
and illustrator Hoytema has shown considerable skill. Needless to say,
Holland is also as famous now as ever for its pottery. Delft ware was ever
the fame of the Dutch nation, though the Rosenbach and Gouda pottery is
now gaining approval. It may be doubted, however, whether the love for the
latter is altogether without affectation. One is inclined to believe that
many of its admirers are enthusiastic to order. They admire because the
leading authorities assure them it is their duty so to do.

The Netherlands, though very limited in area and small in population, can
also boast of having contributed much that is excellent to the literature
of the world, and in its roll of famous literary men are to be found names
which would redeem any country from the charge of intellectual barrenness.
Spinoza, Erasmus, and Hugo de Groot (Grotius), to name no others, form a
trio whose influence upon the thought of the world, and upon the movements
which make for human progress, has been beyond estimation, and which still
belongs to-day to the imperishable inheritance of the race.

As illustrating the world-wide fame of Hugo de Groot it is interesting to
note that on the occasion of the Peace Conference held at The Hague in
1899 the American representatives invited all their fellow-delegates to
Delft, and there, in the church of his burial, papers were read in which
the claim of the great thinker to perpetual honour was brought to the
memories of the assembled spokesmen of the civilized world.

It is with the modern literature and literary movements of Holland,
however, that these pages must concern themselves, and for practical
purposes we may confine ourselves principally to the latter part of the
completed century. For the early part of the nineteenth century was by no
means prolific in literary achievement, and does not boast of many great
names, if one disregards the writers whose lives linked that century with
its predecessor, like Betjen Wolff and Agatha Deken. When, in 1814-15,
Holland again became a separate kingdom, that important event failed to
mark a new era in Dutch literature. Strange to say, though the political
changes of the time powerfully influenced the sister arts of music and
painting, which show strong traces of the transition of that crisis in the
nation's history, upon literature they had no effect whatever. Before 1840
no very brilliant writers came to the front, though the period was not
without notable names, such as Willem Bilderdijk, Hendrik C. Tollens, and
Isaac da Costa, all of whom possessed a considerable vogue. Bilderdijk's
chief claim to fame is the fact that he wrote over 300,000 lines of verse,
and regarded himself as the superior of Shakespeare; Tollens had a name
for rare patriotism, and wrote many fine historical poems and ballads;
while Da Costa, who was a converted Jew, had to the last, in spite of a
considerable popularity as a poet, to contend with the oftentimes fatal
shafts of ridicule.

A new period opened, however, about 1840, in the _Gids_ movement promoted
by E.J. Potgieter and R.C. Bakhuizen van den Brink, who were editors of
the _Gids_ and the severest of literary critics. The _Gids_ was the Dutch
equivalent of the _Edinburgh Review_ under Jeffrey, and its criticisms
were so much dreaded by the nervous Dutch author of the day that the
magazine received the name of 'The Blue Executioner,' blue being the
colour of its cover. If, however, Potgieter and Bakhuizen were unsparing
in the use of the tomahawk, the service which they rendered to Dutch
letters by their drastic treatment of crude and immature work was healthy
and lasting in influence, for it undoubtedly raised the tone and standard
of literary work, both in that day and for a long time to come, and so
helped to establish modern Dutch literature on a firm basis. Perhaps the
foremost figure in the literary revival which followed was Conrad Busken
Huet, unquestionably the greatest Dutch critic of the last century, whose
book 'Literary Criticisms and Fancies,' which contains a discriminating
review of all writers from Bilderdijk forward, is essential to a thorough
study of Dutch literature during the nineteenth century. Huet also
emancipated literature from the orthodoxy in thought which had
characterized the earlier Dutch writers, especially by his novel
'Lidewyde.'

No novelist has more truly reflected the old fashioned ideas and simple
home life of Holland than Nicholas Beets, who still lives and even writes
occasionally, though almost a nonagenarian. His 'Camera Obscura,' which
has been translated into English, entitles Beets to be recognized as the
Dickens of Holland, and his two novels, 'De Familie Stastoc' and 'De
Familie Kegge,' are familiar to every Dutchman. The historical novelists,
Jacob van Lennep and Mrs. Bosboom Toussaint, should not be overlooked.

One of the foremost Dutch poets of the century is Petrus Augustus de
Genestet. Although he is not free from rhetoric, and frequently uses old
and worn-out similes, his general view of things is wider and his feeling
deeper than those of any of his contemporaries in verse. The contrast, for
example, between him and Carel Vosmaer, though they belong to the same
period, is very striking, for while the poetry of Genestet is full of
feeling and ideality, that of Vosmaer is unemotional; and though he
dresses his thoughts in beautiful words, the impression left upon the mind
after reading his poetry is that which might be left after looking at a
gracefully modelled piece of marble--it is fine as art, but cold and dead,
and so awakens no responsive sympathy in the mind of the beholder.

But the greatest of modern Dutch authors, and the one who may be termed
the forerunner of the renaissance of 1880, was E. Douwes Dekker, who died
thirteen years ago. Dekker had an eventful career. He went to the Dutch
Indies at the age of twenty-one, and there spent some seventeen years in
official life, gradually rising to the position of Assistant Resident of
Lebac. While occupying that office his eyes were opened to the defective
System of government existing in the Colonies, and the abuses to which the
natives were subjected. He tried to interest the higher officials on
behalf of the subject races, but as all his endeavours proved unavailing
he became disheartened, and, resigning his post, returned to Holland with
the object of pleading in Government circles at home the cause which he
had taken so deeply to heart. As a deaf ear was still turned to all his
entreaties he decided, as a last resource, to appeal for a hearing at the
bar of public opinion. He entered literature, and wrote the stirring story
'Max Havelaar,' in which he gave voice to the wrongs of the natives and
the callous injustices perpetrated by the Colonial authorities. The book
made a great sensation, and has unquestionably had very beneficial results
in opening the public's eyes to some of the more glaring defects of
Colonial administration.

In 1880 Dutch literature entered upon an entirely new phase. The chief
authors of the movement then begun were Lodewryk van Deyssel, Albert
Verwey, and Willem Kloos, who in the monthly magazine, _De Nieuwe Gids_,
exercised by their trenchant criticisms the same beneficial and
restraining influence upon the literature of the day as Potgieter and
Bakhuizen did forty years before. The columns of the _Nieuwe Gids_ were
only opened to the very best of Dutch authors, and any works not coming up
to the editors' high ideas of literary excellence were unmercifully
'slated' by these competent critics. Independence was the prominent
characteristic of the authors of the period. They shook themselves free
from the old thoughts and similes, and created new paths, in which their
minds found freer expression. The new thoughts demanded new words, hence
came about the practice of word-combination, which was in direct defiance
of the conservative canons of literary style which had hitherto prevailed,
so that nowadays almost every author adds a new vocabulary of his own to
the Dutch language, so enhancing the charm of his own writings and adding
to the literary wealth of the nation in general.

The poetess whom Holland to-day most delights to honour is Helena Lapidoth
Swarth, whose works increase in worth and beauty every year. Her command
of the Dutch language and her power of wresting from it literary resources
which are unattainable by any other writer have made her the admiration of
all critics of penetration. Louis Couperas is also another living poet of
mark, who, however, does not confine himself to formal versification, for
his prose is also poetry. His best works are 'Elme Vere,' the first book
he wrote, and the characters in which are said to have been all taken from
life, and his novels 'Majesty' and 'Universal Peace,' which have gained
for him a European reputation, for they have been translated into most
modern languages.

Women authors who have written works with a special tendency are Cornelie
Huygens, who is known particularly by her novel 'Barthold Maryan;' Mrs.
Goekoop de Jong, who champions the cause of women's rights; and Anna de
Savornin Lohman, who, in a striking book entitled, 'Why question any
longer?' has written very bitterly against the political conditions of the
circle of society in which she moves.

While the authors of the present day are beneficially leavening popular
opinion by inculcating higher and healthier sentiments, there are also
authors in Holland, as elsewhere, who debase good metal, and write from a
purely material standpoint. To this class of authors belong Marcellus
Emants and Frans Netcher.

Of Dutch dramatic writers, Herman Heyermans is one of the most noteworthy,
and some of his plays have been translated into French, and produced in
Paris theatres.

It is a great drawback to literary effort in Holland that the _honoraria_
paid to authors are so low that most writers who happen not to be
pecuniarily independent--and they are the majority--are unable to make a
tolerable subsistence at home by the pen alone, and are obliged to
contribute to foreign publications, and some even resort to teaching. Many
Dutch authors of high rank write anonymously in English, French, and
German magazines, and probably earn far more in that way than by their
contributions to Dutch ephemeral literature, for the ordinary fee for a
sheet of three thousand words--which is the average length of a printed
sheet in a Dutch magazine--is only forty francs.

The pity is that Dutch literature itself is not known as well as it
deserves to be, for any one who takes the trouble to master the Dutch
language will find himself well repaid by the treasures of thought which
are contained in the modern authors of Holland.




Chapter XVI

The Dutch as Readers



Although printing was not invented in Holland, the nation would not have
been unworthy of that honour, for there is a widespread culture of the
book among all classes of the population, and the newspaper and periodical
press makes further a very large contribution to its intellectual food.
Nearly two thousand booksellers and publishers are engaged in the task of
bringing within easy reach of their customers everything they wish to
read. It is no unusual thing to find a decently equipped retail bookshop
in quite unimportant townlets, and even in villages. By an admirable
arrangement every publisher sends parcels of books for the various
retailers all over the country to one central house in Amsterdam--'het
Bestelhuis voor den Boekhandel' (the Booksellers' Collecting and
Distributing Office). In this establishment the publishers' parcels are
opened, and all books sent by the various publishers for one retailer are
packed together and forwarded to him, by rail, steamer, or other cheap
mode of conveyance. In consequence, any doctor, clergyman, or schoolmaster
can receive a penny or twopenny pamphlet in his out-of-the-way home, as
well as any book or periodical from London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, etc.,
within a remarkably short time, without trouble, and without extra
expense in postage, by simply applying to the local bookseller.

The Dutch are very cosmopolitan in their reading. Many children of the
superior working classes learn French at the primary schools; most
children of the middle class pick up English and German as well at the
secondary schools, and a large proportion of them are able to talk in
these three foreign languages; and as opportunities for intercourse are
not over-abundant in the smaller towns, they keep up their knowledge of
these languages by reading. Indeed, the five millions of Dutchmen are,
relatively, the largest buyers of foreign literature in Europe. The
translator, however, comes to the rescue of those who succeed in
forgetting so much of their foreign languages that they find reading them
a very mitigated enjoyment. This question of translation is rather a sore
point in the relations between Dutch and foreign authors and publishers.
The pecuniary injury done to foreign authors, however, is very slight,
while in reputation they have benefited; for if Dutch private libraries
are not without their Shakespeare, Motley, Macaulay, Dickens, Thackeray,
Kingsley, Browning, not to mention French and German classics, this is
mainly due to the fact that the parents of the present generation had the
opportunity of buying Dutch translations, and explained to their children
the value and the beauty of these works.

Moreover, most authors and publishers in foreign countries, using
languages with world-wide circulation, are apt to miscalculate the profits
made by Dutch publishers, with their very limited market and limited sale.
A royalty of L5 for the right of translating some novel would be regarded
as a contemptibly small sum in the English book world, but L5 in Dutch
currency presses heavily on the budget of a Dutch translation, of which
only some hundred or so copies can be sold at a retail price of not quite
five shillings, and is an almost prohibitive price to pay for the
copyright of a novel which is only used as the _feuilleton_ of a local
paper with an edition of under a thousand copies a week. As a fact, many
Dutch publishers pay royalties to their foreign colleagues as soon as the
publication is important enough to bear the expense; but the majority
clearly will only give up their ancient 'right' of free translation, and
agree to join the Berne Convention, if a practicable way can be found out
of the financial difficulty. For the present, then, the Dutch are
cosmopolitan readers, direct or indirect. In the average bookseller's shop
one finds, of course, a majority of novels--novels of all sorts and
conditions--supplemented by literary essays and poems. In a number of
cases the bookseller is not merely a shopkeeper who deals in printed
matter, and supplies just what his customers ask for, but a man of
education and judgment, who is well able to give his opinion on books and
authors. Often he has read them, though oftener, of course, he is guided
by the leading monthly and weekly magazines and reviews, and by the
publishers' columns of the leading daily newspapers. The bookseller is
thus in many cases the trusted manager and guiding spirit of one or more
'Leesgezelschappen,' or 'Reading Societies.' These societies have a
history. At the end of the eighteenth century they were often political
and even revolutionary bodies. The members or subscribers met to discuss
books, pamphlets, and periodicals, but frequently they discussed by
preference the passages in the books bearing upon political conditions,
and argued improvements which they considered desirable or necessary. As
time passed by, and free institutions became the possession of the Dutch,
the political mission of the Reading Society became exhausted, but the
institution itself survived, and continues to the present day.

The 'Leesgezelschap' owes its special form to another peculiarity of the
Dutch--their intensely domesticated, home-loving character. Family life,
with its fine and delicate intimacies between husband and wife, between
parent and children, is the most attractive feature of national existence
in the Netherlands. Family life is, indeed, the centre from which the
national virtues emanate, because there the individual members educate
each other in the practice of personal virtues. The Dutchman is not
constitutionally reserved and shy; he knows how to live a full, strong,
public life; he never shrinks from civic duties and social intercourse;
but his love of home life takes the first place after his passion for
liberty and independence. Club life in Holland is insignificant, and few
clubs even attempt to create a substitute for home life; they are merely
used for friendly intercourse for an hour or so every day, and as
better-class restaurants. A Dutchman prefers to do his reading at home, in
the domestic circle, with the members of his family, or in his study if he
follows some scientific occupation, and his 'Leesgezelschap' affords him
the opportunity of doing this. There are military, theological,
educational, philological, and all sorts of scientific reading societies,
besides those for general literature. They work on the co-operative
System. The manager is in many cases a local bookseller, buying Dutch and
foreign books, magazines, reviews, illustrated weeklies and pamphlets in
one or more copies, according to the number, the tastes, and the wants of
the members. Most societies take in books and periodicals in four
languages--Dutch, French, German, English--and so their members keep
themselves well acquainted with the world's opinion. And all this, be it
added, costs the subscriber vastly less than the fees of English
circulating libraries, with their restricted advantages and heavy expenses
of delivery.

Between the book and the newspaper lies a form of literature which is
specifically Dutch--the 'Vlugschrift,' _brochure_, or pamphlet. The
_brochure_ is an old historical institution. In the eighteenth century it
was very popular as a vehicle for the zeal of fiery reformers who thus
vented their opinions on burning political questions of the day. There is
no necessity nowadays for these small booklets, so easily hidden from
suspicions eyes, though the _brochure_ is still used whenever, in stirring
speech or impassioned sermon, Holland's leading men address themselves to
the emotions of the hour. These _brochures_, as a rule, cost no more than
sixpence, yet, none the less, the thrifty Dutch have 'Leesgezelschappen'
which buy and circulate them among their subscribers; they take everything
from everybody, never caring whose opinions they read upon the various
subjects of current interest, a trait which evidences a very praiseworthy
lack of bias.

This lack of bias is not so obvions so far as newspaper reading is
concerned. Like other people, the Dutch take such newspapers as defend or
represent their own political opinions, and often affect towards journals
on the other side a contemptuous indifference which is only half real.

Political parties in Holland differ slightly from those of Great Britain,
except that in the former country politics and religion go together. Thus
in Holland a Liberal who at the same time is not advanced in religious
thought hardly exists, and would scarcely be trusted. In consequence the
Liberals were not defeated at the last general elections because they were
Liberals, but because their opponents (the Anti-Revolutionists and Roman
Catholics) denounced them as irreligious and atheistical. In political
strife the religious controversy takes the form of an argument for and
against the influence of religious dogma upon politics and education.

Now, as far as journalism goes, the Liberal and Radical newspapers
unquestionably take the lead. The Roman Catholics are like the
Anti-Revolutionists, very anxious to provide their readers with wholesome
news, but this anxiety is not successfully backed up by care that this
wholesome news shall be early as well; hence their journalism is somewhat
behind the times. Of most of the progressive newspapers it may be said
that the whole of the contents are interesting; as to the rest, they are
only interesting because of the leading articles, which are sometimes
written by eminent men.

As far as circulation goes, _Het Nieuws van den Dag_ can boast to be the
leading journal, its edition running to nearly 40,000 copies a day. Up to
the present its editors have been advanced, or 'Modern,' Protestant
clergymen, in the persons of Simon Gorter, H. de Veer, and P.H. Ritter.
Although not taking a strong line in politics, its inclinations are
decidedly towards moderate Liberalism, and, thanks to its cheap
price--14s. 6d. per annum--its extensive, prudently and carefully selected
and worded supply of news, and its sagacious management, it became the
family paper of the Dutch, excellently suiting the quiet taste of the
middle class of the nation. It is found everywhere save in those few
places where the Roman Catholic Church has sufficient influence to get it
boycotted. The _Nieuws_, as it is generally called, gives from
twenty-four to thirty-two, and even more, pages of closely printed matter,
of which the advertisements occupy rather over than under half. One does
not see it read in public more than any other Dutch paper, and two reasons
account for this. One is the fact that, as has been said, a Dutchman
prefers to do his reading at home--'met een boekje, in een hoekje' ('with
my book in a quiet corner') is the Dutchman's ideal of cosy literary
enjoyment. Then, too, Dutch newspaper publishers prefer a system of safe
quarterly subscriptions to the chance of selling one day a few thousand
copies less than the other, since even the largest circulation in Holland
is too limited for risky commercial vicissitudes. Hence they make the
price for single numbers so high that only the prospect of long hours in a
railway-carriage frightens a Dutchman into buying one or more newspapers.

The _Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant_ is another typical Dutch newspaper, but
appealing to quite other instincts than the _Nieuws._ In their quiet way
the Dutch are rather proud of their _Nieuwe Kotterdammer_, which inspires
something like awe for its undeniable, but slightly ponderous, virtues.
The _Nieuwe Rotterdammer_ is absolutely Liberal, and stands no Radical or
Social Democratic nonsense; its leading articles are lucid, cool, logical,
and to the point; it has correspondents everywhere, at home and abroad;
and all staunch Liberals of a clear-cut, even dogmatic type, who love Free
Trade and look upon municipal and State intervention as pernicious, swear
by it. The present chief editor is Dr. Zaayer, formerly a Liberal member
of the Second Chamber of the States-General, a shrewd, well-read Dutchman,
with a splendid University education; and the manager, J.C. Nijgh, is as
clever a man of business as Rotterdam can produce. As far as it is
possible to lead Dutchmen by printed matter, the _Nieuwe Rotterdammer_
does it. Its supply of news is so fresh and so reliable that everybody
reads it, even the Roman Catholics in North Brabant and Limburg, Holland's
two Catholic counties.

The next important newspaper is _Het Algemeen Handelsblad_ of Amsterdam,
which is peculiarly the journal of the Amsterdam merchants, shipowners,
and traders. The _Handelsblad_ is not so exclusively Liberal as its
competitor in Rotterdam, for its inclinations are of a more advanced turn,
and it is always ready to admit rather Radical articles on social matters
if written by serious men. Its chief editor is Dr. A. Polak, of whom it is
said that what he does not know about the working and meaning of the Dutch
constitution and the Dutch law is hardly worth knowing. His articles
display a calm, sound, scientific brain and an honest, straightforward
mind. Its managing editor is Charles Boissevain, whose contributions to
the paper, entitled 'Van Dag tot Dag' ('From Day to Day'), are equally
admirable for brilliancy of style, broadness of spirit, and the manly
outspokenness of their contents. This journal has likewise an extensive
staff and a huge army of correspondents at home and abroad.

A third Liberal journal of growing influence is the Radical _Vaderland_,
of which the late Minister of the Interior, Mr. H. Goeman Borgesius, now a
member of the Second Chamber, was chief editor during many years, though
there no longer exists any personal connexion between the two, and the
_Vaderland_ is, if anything, more advanced in politics than its former
editor. Its chief influence is at The Hague, formerly a stronghold of
Conservatism, until the Conservative party disappeared entirely.

Other Liberal, Radical, and Social Democratic newspapers are published
all over the country, the most important and influential being the
Liberal-democratic _Arnhemsche Courant._

Mr. Troelstra, one of the Socialist leaders, edits a daily, _Het Volk_
('The People'), a well-written party newspaper, whose influence, however,
does not extend beyond its party.

Professor Abraham Kuyper, leader of the Anti-Revolutionist or Calvinist
party, the largest but one in the country, was editor of the _Standaard_
until he became President Minister of the Netherlands. In opposition to
the Liberal principle, as formulated by the Italian reformer Cavour, 'A
Free Church in a Free State,' he maintains that the Bible, being God's
Word, is the only possible basis for any State, and holds that the King
and the Government derive their power and authority not from the people,
but from God. His _Standaard_ is another proof that whatever this
universal genius does bears the unmistakable stamp of his power and
personality. One may be thoroughly opposed to his principles, but nobody
can help admiring the sterling merit of his leading articles. If Kuyper
writes or speaks upon any subject under the sun, you will be sure to find
him thoroughly acquainted with it; but then his turn of mind is so
original and his style is so brilliant, that he discloses points of view
which give it fresh interest to those who most cordially disagree with
him. The brilliancy of his journalistic powers is not confined, however,
to his leaders. The _Standaard_ has another and more purely polemical
feature, its 'Driestars'--short paragraphs, separated in the column by
three asterisks, whence their name. These 'Driestars' are the pride and
the wonder of the Dutch Press, on account of their trenchant, clever,
courageous wording, a wording which is sure to incite the opponent to
bitter defence or fiery attack, and to provide the adherent with an
argument so finely sharpened and polished that he delights in the
possession of so excellent a weapon.

Dr. Kuyper's political opponent in the Calvinist party is Mr. A. F. de
Savornin Lohman, the leader of the aristocrats, whereas Kuyper is the head
of the 'kleine luyden'--the humble toilers of the fields and towns. Mr.
Lohman was a member of the first Calvino-Catholic Cabinet, and is still a
great power in his party; in consequence his _Nederlander_ exerts some
influence, though not nearly so much as the _Standaard_.

The two most prominent Roman Catholic newspapers are the Conservative
_Tyd_ ('Time') and the somewhat democratic _Centrum_. Both are party
papers pure and simple, and are excellently edited, so far as party
politics are concerned, by clever, well educated, well read men. The
_Centrum_ frequently enjoys the co-operation of Dr. Herman Schaepman, the
priest-poet, whose somewhat ponderous eloquence is agreeably relieved by a
glowing enthusiasm and a refreshing force of conviction.

Kuyper, Boissevain and Schaepman are, indeed, three journalists of whom
any country might be proud. Their style, their individuality, and their
mental power are equally remarkable, and though living and working in
different grooves of life, using different modes of thought, and
cherishing different ideals, they powerfully impress and influence their
readers by the purity of their aims, the honesty of their convictions, and
the chivalry of their controversial methods. But of the three Boissevain
is the only one who is a journalist for the sake of journalism. Yet
neither Calvinist nor Catholic journal tries to compete with the _Nieuwe
Rotterdammer_ or the _Handelsblad_ in the publication of original and
high-class information. They aim rather at providing their readers with
the necessary party arguments, and the news is a matter of secondary
importance.

As to the provinces in general, of the 1300 towns and villages of Holland,
nearly 300 are the happy possessors of a local newspaper of some
description, and altogether 1700 daily and weekly journals, devoted
variously to the representation of political, clerical, mercantile,
scientific, and other interests, are published in the whole country.

The Dutch like to see more than one newspaper, but the majority of people
cannot afford to be dual subscribers, and a great many cannot even afford
to buy a single news-sheet regularly. Hence agencies exist for circulating
the papers from one reader to another. Those who receive them straight
from the publisher pay most, and those who are contented to enjoy their
news when one, two, or three days old pay but a small fee. The newspaper
circulating agency is very general in Holland, and in centres of
restricted domestic resources it plays a very useful place in social and
political life.




Chapter XVII

Political Life and Thought



Holland is a democratic kingdom. Democracy was born there in the sixteenth
century, and is still unquestionably thriving. But democracy was born in
peculiar circumstances; it was reared by men whose ideas of democracy
differed, for, while the leaders of the nation consistently worked for
popular government, they did not all or always mean exactly the same thing
by the word 'people,' and hence did not aim at exactly the same goal. The
French Revolution of the eighteenth century upset the outward form of the
Dutch Commonwealth; it did away with ancient and more or less obsolete
fetters, which proved no longer strong enough to support the growth of
political life, though still sufficiently strong to hinder it. It could do
nothing for, and add nothing to, the profound love of liberty and the
passion for independence which are dearer to every Dutchman than life
itself, but it could and did extend the blessing of political and
religious freedom to a greater number of people. Love of liberty brought
about the disestablishment of the Church, and love of toleration made
Holland follow this measure in the fifties by the emancipation of the
Roman Catholics.

Every one who is acquainted with Dutch history understands that these two
things have as much meaning for Dutch political as for Dutch religious
life. But side by side with religious and political freedom came also
economic freedom. The guilds were abolished, and so the bonds by which the
handicrafts had been prevented from moving with the movements of the
times, and thus of living a healthy life, were swept away. The social
revolution acted like the doctor who enters a close and stuffy sick-room
and throws open the windows and door, so that the invalid may get the very
first necessity of life--fresh air. So it was with a sigh of relief that
the Dutch--and not they alone--said, 'No State interference in matters of
trade and industry, let us keep open the windows and doors!'

No doctor, however, will compel his patient to live in a constant draught,
winter and summer, since upon one occasion a liberal admission of fresh
air was necessary to save that patient's life. There can be no doubt that
during the nineteenth century the doors and windows were kept open rather
too long. The great employers of labour were strong enough to stand the
draught, for centuries of prosperity had made them a powerful class; but
their men had no such advantages, and they were worse off when steam power
brought about another revolution by creating the so-called system of
'capitalistic production' and the growth of the large industries. Hence it
comes about that Holland, like all civilized countries, is now trying to
find out how far the windows and the doors must be closed, so as to allow
the men to live as well as the masters. This, in few words, characterizes
Dutch party politics from the social and economic side.

Political parties in the Netherlands obviously differ not only in their
views upon political, religious, and economic issues, but also as to the
degree of precedence to be allowed to each of these three departments of
national life and thought. The Liberals say, "Politics first; if these are
sound and religion and commerce are free, everything will be right." The
Social Democrats reply, "Politics only concern us as a means of obtaining
real and substantial economic liberty and material equality; religion does
not affect us at all, and certainly does not help to solve the practical
problems of human life." Differing from both, the Anti-Revolutionists
assert, "Whosoever leaves the firm ground of God's Word, the Holy
Scriptures, as the only true basis for public and private action, can have
neither sound politics nor sound economics." The Roman Catholics also put
religion on the first plane, but they are in the most difficult position
of all. They are a minority, even a decreasing minority, and know
perfectly well that they will never be a majority; so they recognize that
in the first place they must try to be good Dutchmen, faithful, loyal
citizens of the State, while in the second place they must not give up one
single ideal of their Church. Their faith in the eternal existence of
their ecclesiastic system enables them on the one hand to be patient and
to wait, just as on the other hand it teaches them not to sit still, but
to act, to work, either by themselves or conjointly with any party that
may assist them to realize, or even to get nearer to, any of their
religious ideals.

When the Liberals, in the middle of the nineteenth century, did an act of
great toleration by emancipating the Roman Catholic Church, the
Protestants threw over the Liberal Cabinet, and the Liberal leader,
Thorbecke, was returned to Parliament by the most Catholic town of
Holland, Maestricht, in Limburg. But afterwards the Anti-Revolutionists
raised the cry for denominational education, and the Dutch Liberals were
rather sore to find their former friends join their antagonists. The
soreness was in consequence of a miscalculation; the Liberals had
forgotten that in becoming emancipated the Roman Catholics did not become
Liberals, but remained Roman Catholics as before, faithful to their creed,
and to their ideals, even at the cost of political friendship.

The common ground upon which Anti-Revolutionists and Roman Catholics meet
is the conviction that religion must in everything be the starting-point.
The Anti-Revolutionists take the Scriptures as such; the Roman Catholics
accept the Pope's decisions, given _ex cathedra_, as inspired by the Holy
Spirit and transmitted to him by Conclaves and Councils. For the rest,
Rome's creed is sheer idolatry to the Anti-Revolutionist Protestants,
whereas Rome looks upon ail Protestants as lost heretics. But both, again,
consider such Protestants--the so-called 'Moderns'--who reject the
Trinity, the miracles, the Divine origin of the Bible, and certain other
dogmas, as simple atheists, and as most 'Moderns' are Liberals, and
_vice-versa_, they proclaim the Liberal State to be an atheistic State.

Strictly speaking, there is really no Conservative party in Holland, for
it ceased to exist in the beginning of the seventies. After Thorbecke gave
Holland the Liberal constitution of 1848, the Conservatives tried for a
time to obstruct the country's political development, but ultimately they
gave up the attempt, and their best and ablest men, Mr. J. Heemsherk Azn
and Earl C. Th. van Lynden van Sandenburg, headed Liberal Cabinets as men
professing very moderately progressive views, yet openly opposed to the
restoration of the somewhat autocratic and aristocratic conditions which
prevailed before 1848 in consequence of the reaction against the chaotic
era of the French Revolution and Napoleon Bonaparte. Yet though there is
no Conservative party in Holland, there are, none the less, Conservatives
in every party.

The Liberal party counts three sections, the Old Liberals, the
Radico-Liberals, and the Liberal Democrats. The Old Liberals adhere to
Thorbecke's principles, and maintain that it is the primary business of a
Liberal State to promote individuality and to create on this basis the
general conditions by which social development can be achieved. According
to them the State has no right to interfere in everything, to cure
everything, to provide everything, as the collectivist would like; on the
contrary, its first duty is abstinence--simply to preserve a fair field
and to show no favour. These Old Liberals, in fact, regard the State as a
legal corporation which exists merely to administer justice and to guard
the constitutional rights of its citizens.

Their political friends and next-of-kin are the Radico-Liberals of the
'Liberal Union,' who form, for the present, the bulk of the party. They
admit the value of individual energy and enterprise, and hold that
unlimited scope must be allowed to these; they even contend that, on the
whole, the system of unfettered individualism proved to be more in the
workman's favour than the opposite; but they also admit that this
condition is not such as it might and ought to be, and in consequence they
do not object to social legislation wherever individual efforts fail.

The advanced Liberal Democrats ('de Vryzinnige Democraten') differ
fundamentally from both the foregoing parties. They give prominence to
political rights and franchises, and hence fall foul of a leading clause
(clause 80) of the constitution, which confers electoral powers upon only
such adult male inhabitants as 'possess characteristics of capability and
prosperity.' The members of the 'Liberal Union' admit that the requirement
of a certain measure of prosperity withholds from numbers of citizens the
right to influence their country's affairs by their votes. They admit also
that the constitution ought to be altered on this point, but they doubt
whether it is sound practical politics to put this item in the foreground.
They say, in effect, 'We can quite well provide the country with adequate
social legislation either with or without the help of the disfranchised
section of the population, for if we propose measures dealing with social
problems, even the more Conservative amongst us will not object, and those
measures will come on the statute book. But there is not the slightest
chance that we shall ever get the Old Liberals to give the franchise to
poor and destitute people, who have no financial stake whatever in the
country. So by insisting upon adult suffrage you merely postpone social
legislation indefinitely. Moreover, the object of our social legislation
can only be to make the poorer class more capable and more prosperous, and
as soon as that end is gained they get the franchise automatically,
without any change of the constitution.' To this the Liberal Democrats
reply: 'Social legislation must not be regarded as a grudgingly admitted
necessity, it is the paramount duty of the State, and as social
legislation principally affects those who are now disfranchised, it is
only just to begin by affording them the opportunity of expressing their
opinions upon the subject, and hence to alter the constitution so as to
give them votes, for they know best what they want.'

The Liberal Democrats deny, in fact, that the State can make any laws that
do not affect the social life as well as the legal position of its
citizens, and contend that those who hold that natural laws rule the
social relations of man with man, and that on this ground the State ought
to refrain from interference, merely allow the State to protect the
stronger against the weaker classes, whereas its duty is the contrary.
Positive interference in social matters is, according to them, the State's
duty, and it may only refrain when the free operation of social forces
creates no conditions or relationships which offend modern ideas of
justice and equity.

The Democrats have, unquestionably, by their secession, greatly crippled
the strength of the Liberal party, and it will be long before the younger
generation of Liberals can take the places thus vacated and a rejuvenated
and unanimous party can issue from the present dissensions.

The only other political party in Holland who do not accept religion as
the one safe starting-point for politics are the Social Democrats. When
the German Socialists of the school of Marx discovered how the sudden
development of steam and machinery was followed by a vast amount of
distress amongst the labouring classes, affecting also such of the lower
middle class as principally traded with workpeople, they at once jumped
at the conclusion that the same thing was bound to go on for ever.
Perhaps it was with a feeling of despair, therefore, that the father of
Dutch Social Democracy, F. Domela Nieuwenhuys, gradually drifted into
anarchism, or, as he prefers to call it, Free Socialism, and finally
abandoned all political action. The younger generation, led by F. van der
Goes, H. van Kol, and, last but not least, P. J. Troelstra, still
vigorously carry on the fray, however, and a very considerable number of
Dutch workmen follow them. Their ambition is to conquer political power
in Holland, and as soon as they have it to revolutionize, not the
country, but the statute-book, in such a manner that they may acquire the
economic power as well. Of course, they wish to abolish individual
property in all the means of production, and to make the State the owner
of all these; and it is their hope that a general love for the
commonwealth, and zeal for the general welfare of all, may take the place
of the present egotism and sordid pursuit of wealth.

[Illustration: Parliament House at the Hague. View from the Great Lake.]

The Anti-Revolutionists also have their Conservatives and Progressives.
Dr. Kuyper always speaks of a 'Left' and a 'Right' wing of his party, and
as the Conservative 'Right' is largely composed of the members of the
Dutch nobility, he once sneeringly called this fraction 'the men with the
double names.' Their proper title is 'Free Anti-Revolutionists,' and their
leader, Jhr. A.F. de Savornin Lohman, who in 1888, with Baron Ae. Mackay
(Lord Reay's cousin), led the first Anti-Revolutionist-Catholic majority
in the Second Chamber of the States-General.

The third faction is headed by Dr. Bronsveld, and is called the
'Christian Historicals,' who differ on one great principle from the two
others, inasmuch as they seek the re-establishment of the Netherlands
Hervormde Kerk as State Church.

But, however much they differ in practical measures, their common ground
is the recognition of the Holy Scriptures as the only right basis for
statesmanship, and their conviction that the present modern State is
merely a passing, non-Dutch consequence of the French Revolution and its
disastrous teachings. They all agree that the Netherlands should be
governed according to the principles that made Holland great and powerful
ever since the Reformation of the sixteenth century. Dr. Kuyper is fully
convinced that the French Revolution thrust Holland off its historical
line of development, and he wants to return, as near as possible, to the
point reached before that event, or, at any rate, to lead the State
forward in the old direction.

All Anti-Revolutionists hold that their first civic duty is obedience to
God;--if conscience requires resistance to the authorities, resist them,
whatever you may suffer. At the same time they eschew clericalism and
object to every form of State Church. Hence one of their chief antipathies
is clause 171 of the constitution, which continues in the same way as
before the disestablishment of the Church the payments by the Exchequer to
various clergymen of all denominations. In opposition to this they demand
entire and absolute liberty and equality for all churches and confessions,
and, theoretically, admit that one can be a member of their party without
being of their creed. With regard to education, they do not desire to
substitute denominational State schools for the present neutral ones, but
they object that at present the State compels parents, who desire
religious schools for their children, not only to find all necessary
money for these 'free schools,' but to contribute in addition to the
school taxes, to the advantage of such parents as hold that secular and
religious education are better disconnected, since religious education
must needs be dogmatical and sectarian, and that the churches and not the
State should look to this, whereas school education can quite well be
given without reference to religion at all.

The Anti-Revolutionist position, on the other hand, is that it is not the
State's duty to provide school or any other education, all education being
a matter of private concern for the individual family, and not a public
business at all; though they allow that where parents are unable to
maintain them schools may be erected by the taxpayers' money. They also
deprecate legislation against intemperance, immorality, and prostitution,
because they think such laws do not remove the evils themselves, but
merely attack their visible signs, and relieve moral trespassers of part
of their responsibility by protecting them against certain consequences of
their acts. They are opposed to the legal and compulsory observance of the
Sabbath, holding this to be an affair of the churches and of individuals;
but they support laws to compel employers to allow their men a sufficient
weekly rest on Sundays. They admit a limited State interference in social
matters, but contend that it must not discourage individual effort, or
create a host of officials, inspectors, and controllers. The franchise
must, according to them, never enable one section of the nation to
supersede the other by sheer force of numbers; they do not admit that the
majority System is the ultimate and only criterion of legality and
justice; moreover, the family being the unit from which the commonwealth
has grown into existence, they contend that heads of families are the
natural electors. Where the Old Liberals say that the financial test is
the right one for voters, the Anti-Revolutionists hold that no one has a
real stake in the country who has not a family and knows nothing of the
responsibilities involved thereby. Dr. Kuyper is the democratic leader of
what he calls, in classical but antiquated Dutch, the 'Kleine luyden' (the
'Little people') amongst the Anti-Revolutionists. He knows that the
'double-named' Free Anti-Revolutionists have little sympathy with his
social programme, but this does not matter, since they are perfectly well
aware of the fact that they owe everything, as far as political power
goes, to the 'Little people.'

Finally, there is the Left Wing of the Roman Catholic party, who derive
their social convictions from Pope Leo's Encyclica 'Rerum Novarum,' which
affords a great many points upon which joint action is possible, for Leo
XIII. is often called in Holland 'the Workmen's Pope.' Both
Anti-Revolutionists and Roman Catholics entertain entirely different
political ideals, but they agree upon this, that the modern Liberal State
is not really neutral in religions matters, but is 'Modern Protestant,'
and 'Modern' Protestantism spells atheism in their eyes; and both regard a
weak and fragile Christian as a better citizen than the best atheist or
agnostic. For this reason they are combined in hostility to the existing
System of elementary education, which they suspect of an atheistic
tendency. These two questions, religion and the schools, virtually exhaust
the vital points of agreement between the Anti-Revolutionists and the
Roman Catholics, though in an emergency they might possibly unite on
social legislation or some mild form of Protection. The latter would,
however, have to be very mild indeed, for Dr. Kuyper is a Free Trader, and
the 'Little people' like cheap bread just as well as other folk. For
Holland it might be a matter of great importance if progressive social
legislation became Kuyper's chief work.

There is no doubt a great drawback in this mixing up by ail parties of
politics and religion. Kuyper, the Calvinist; Schaepman, the Catholic;
Drucker, Treub, and Molengraaf, the Liberal Democrats; Goeman Borgesius,
the man of the 'Liberal Union;' and Troelstra, the Socialist, all have
many common ideas on social questions, although they may differ in
principles and seek different aims. Each of them, however, has
Conservative opponents in his own party, and there is just a possibility
that the next few years may bring about not only a healthy measure of
social development, but also a much-desired readjustment of parties, on
non-theological, undogmatical lines.




Chapter XVIII

The Administration of Justice



There are two very marked differences between the administration of
justice in Holland and in England. The first is that what are called
'petty offences' are not tried and disposed of summarily in the former
country. There the offender in such cases is subjected to a process known
as 'verbalization'--that is, his name, address, age, and all particulars
of the offence are noted by the police; and he is thereupon informed that
he will be called upon to give an account of himself later. A week or two
may pass before the offender receives verbal or printed notice requiring
his presence before the Court of the Cantonal Judge, which answers
somewhat to the English Police Court. This delay in the administration of
justice is regarded as a great defect even in Holland, and one which is
more and more being recognized. The establishment of the Police Court as
known and conducted in England is felt, therefore, to be a great
_desideratum_, and it is by no means unlikely that it may be introduced
before long, since the Dutch have always shown themselves ready to adopt
any modification of their own institutions which the experience of other
countries may prove to be clearly desirable.

The second difference is that trial by jury as Englishmen understand it
does not exist in the Netherlands. But here the Dutch are not likely to
abandon their own tradition. The jury in Holland is composed of
experienced and qualified judges, who are not apt to modify their opinions
as to the guilt or innocence of accused persons owing to the tears of the
latter or the passionate appeals of their advocates. Rightly or wrongly,
the most eminent lawyers in Holland ascribe the often-recurring cases of
miscarriage of justice in some countries which have adopted the jury
system to this system itself, and it is very improbable, therefore, that
in this respect the Dutch will copy any of their neighbours.

The organization of justice in Holland originated in the Code Napoleon,
which was introduced shortly after the country's annexation to the French
Empire. In the judicial system in vogue to-day, which is the result of
modifications introduced at various times during last century, and
particularly by a law of the year 1895, the administration of justice is
vested in the High Court (_Hooge Raad_), the Provincial Courts of Justice
(_Gerechtskoven_), the Arrondissements (_Rechtbanken_), and the Cantonal
Courts (_Kantongerechten_).

The High Court consists of a President, a Vice-President, from twelve to
fourteen Councillors, a Procurator-General, three Advocates-General (who
form, with the Procurator-General, the 'Public Ministry' or Office of
Public Prosecution), also a Greffier, or Clerk of Court, and two deputy
Greffiers. Most of the appointments are made by the Sovereign, and are
for life. The High Court is situated at The Hague, and its principal duty
is to control the administration of justice by the lower Courts, a
process known as 'cassation.' If, for example, one of the lower Courts
has pronounced a sentence from which there is no appeal in that Court,
and one of the contending parties is of opinion that the sentence is
excessive, that party may require the High Court to cancel or annul
(_casseer_) the verdict. When an appeal for cassation or annulment is
thus made, the High Court has not to go into the question of the guilt or
innocence of the contending parties, but merely into the question whether
the lower Court has judged rightly or whether it was competent to judge
the case at all. Such 'cassations' occur almost daily, not because the
High Court has a reputation for reversing the verdicts given below, but
because the process offers at least a good chance of getting a sentence
reduced. The Public Prosecution, however, has power to set in motion the
process of cassation without being called upon so to do if the interests
of justice should in its opinion require it. To the jurisdiction of the
High Court belong also piracy cases, the apportionment of prizes made in
war, and the determination of accusations against State officials of
abuse of power.

Of Provincial Courts there are five, each composed of officials similar in
name, though not in rank, to those of the High Court, and they, too, are
for the most part appointed by the Crown, though not all for life. These
Provincial Courts pronounce judgment in the second instance--that is, when
the decision of a lower Court has been appealed against. This is, in fact,
their principal function, though they also pronounce judgment in the first
instance in cases of difference between the Cantonal Courts or
Arrondissement Courts. The latter are so named from the divisions into
which the country was split up for administrative purposes during the
Napoleonic _regime_, for the existing arrondissement boundaries are
virtually the same as those of ninety years ago.

There are twenty-three Arrondissement Courts, thirteen of the first-class
and ten of the second class. Their principal business is to pronounce
judgment in the first instance, even in criminal cases, but they also
decide in the final instance in cases of dispute between the Cantonal
Courts, which are under their jurisdiction. They likewise adjudicate upon
claims for compensation up to a certain amount, upon disputes regarding
the boundaries of land and property, and upon complaints relating to
water-supply, drainage, and the like, while cases of mendicancy, vagrancy,
and evasion of taxes are decided by these Courts summarily.

The Cantonal Courts are, as already st