splaced in the west end of the
nave, and serving as an organ-loft, in the church of St. Gery at
Cambrai--another curious link between French and Belgian Flanders.
Dixmude (in Flemish Diksmuide), nine and a half miles south from
Nieuport, is an altogether bigger and more important place, with a
larger and more important church, of St. Nicholas, to match. My
recollection of this last, on a Saturday afternoon of heavy
showers towards the close of March, is one of a vast interior
thronged with men and women in the usual dismal, black Flemish
cloaks, kneeling in confession, or waiting patiently for their
turn to confess, in preparation for the Easter Mass. Here the best
feature, till lately, was the glorious Flamboyant rood-screen,
recalling those at Albi and the church of Brou, in France; and
remarkable in Belgium as one of the very few examples of its sort
(there is, or was, another in St. Pierre, at Louvain) of so early
a period, in a land where rood-screens, as a body, are generally
much later in date.

It is difficult, in dealing with Flanders, to avoid a certain
amount of architectural description, for architecture, after all,
is the chief attraction of the country, save perhaps in Ghent and
Bruges, where we have also noble pictures. Even those who do not
care to study this architecture in detail will be gratified to
stroll at leisure through the dim vastness of the great Flemish
churches, where the eye is satisfied everywhere with the wealth of
brass and iron work, and where the Belgian passion for wood-
carving displays itself in lavish prodigality. Such wealth,
indeed, of ecclesiastical furniture you will hardly find elsewhere
in Western Europe--font covers of hammered brass, like those at
Hal and Tirlemont; stalls and confessionals and pulpits, new and
old, that are mere masses of sculptured wood-work; tall
tabernacles for the reception of the Sacred Host, like those at
Louvain and Leau, that tower towards the roof by the side of the
High Altars. Most of this work, no doubt, is post-Gothic, except
the splendid stalls and canopies (I wonder, do they still survive)
at the church of St. Gertrude at Louvain; for Belgium presents few
examples of mediaeval wood-work like the gorgeous stalls at
Amiens, or like those in half a hundred churches in our own land.
Much, in fact, of these splendid fittings is more or less
contemporary with the noble masterpieces of Rubens and Vandyck,
and belongs to the same great wave of artistic enthusiasm that
swept over the Netherlands in the seventeenth century. Belgian
pulpits, in particular, are probably unique, and certainly, to my
knowledge, without parallel in Italy, England, or France.
Sometimes they are merely adorned, like the confessionals at St.
Charles, at Antwerp, and at Tirlemont, with isolated figures; but
often these are grouped into some vivid dramatic scene, such as
the Miraculous Draught of Fishes, at St. Andrew's, at Antwerp, or
the Conversion of St. Norbert, in the cathedral at Malines.
Certainly the fallen horseman in the latter, if not a little
ludicrous, is a trifle out of place.

From Furnes to Ypres it is a pleasant journey across country by
one of those strange steam-trams along the road, so common in
Belgium and Holland, and not unknown in France, that wind at
frequent intervals through village streets so narrow, that you
have only to put out your hand in passing to touch the walls of
houses. This is a very leisurely mode of travelling, and the halts
are quite interminable in their frequency and length; but the
passenger is allowed to stand on the open platform at the end of
the carriage--though sometimes nearly smothered with thick, black
smoke--and certainly no better method exists of exploring the
short stretches of open country that lie between town and town.
Belgian towns, remember, lie mostly thick on the ground--you are
hardly out of Brussels before you come to Malines, and hardly out
of Malines ere you sight the spire of Antwerp. In no part of
Europe, perhaps, save in parts of Lancashire and Yorkshire, do you
find so many big towns in so limited a space; yet the strips of
country that lie between, though often intolerably dull, are
(unlike the strips in Yorkshire) intensely rural in character.
Belgian towns do not sprawl in endless, untidy suburbs, as
Sheffield sprawls out towards Rotherham, and Bradford towards
Leeds. Belgian towns, moreover--again unlike our own big cities in
England--are mostly extremely handsome, and generally contrive,
however big, to retain, at any rate in their heart, as at Antwerp,
or in the Grande Place at Brussels, a striking air of antiquity;
whilst some fairly big towns, such as Malines and Bruges, are
mediaeval from end to end. This, of course, is not true of Belgian
Luxembourg and the region of the Ardennes, where the population is
much more sparse; where we do not stumble, about every fifteen
miles or so, on some big town of historic name; and where the
endless chessboard of little fields that lies, for example,
between Ghent and Oudenarde, or between Malines and Louvain, is
replaced by long contours of sweeping limestone wold, often
covered with rolling wood.

Ypres is distinguished above all cities in Belgium by the huge
size and stately magnificence of its lordly Cloth Hall, or Halles
des Drapiers. So vast, indeed, is this huge building, and so flat
the surrounding plain, that it is said that it is possible from
the strangely isolated hill of Cassel, which lies about eighteen
miles away to the west, just over the border, in France, on a
really clear day--I have only climbed it myself, unluckily, in a
fog of winter mist--to distinguish in a single view, by merely
turning the head, the clustering spires of Laon, the white chalk
cliffs of Kent, and this vast pile of building, like a ship at
sea, that seems to lie at anchor in the heart of the "sounding
plain." Nothing, perhaps, in Europe is so strangely significant of
vanished greatness--not even Rome, with its shattered Forum, or
Venice, with a hundred marble palaces--as this huge fourteenth-
century building, with a facade that is four hundred and thirty-
six feet long, and with its lofty central tower, that was built
for the pride and need of Ypres, and as a market for the barter of
its priceless linens, at a time when Ypres numbered a population
of two hundred thousand souls (almost as big as Leicester at the
present day), and was noisy with four thousand busy looms; whereas
now it has but a beggarly total of less than seventeen thousand
souls (about as big as Guildford), and is only a degree less
sleepy than Malines or Bruges-la-Morte. Ypres, again, like Arras,
has lent its name to commerce, if diaper be really rightly derived
from the expression "linen of Ypres." The Cloth Hall fronts on to
the Grande Place, and, indeed, forms virtually one side of it; and
behind, in the Petite Place, is the former cathedral of St.
Martin. This is another fine building, though utterly eclipsed by
its huge secular rival, that was commenced in the thirteenth
century, and is typically Belgian, as opposed to French, in the
character of its architecture, and not least in its possession of
a single great west tower. This last feature is characteristic of
every big church in Belgium--one can add them up by the dozen:
Bruges, Ghent, Louvain (though ruined, or never completed),
Oudenarde, Malines, Mons--save Brussels, where the church of Ste.
Gudule, called persistently, but wrongly, the cathedral, has the
full complement of two, and Antwerp, where two were intended,
though only one has been actually raised. This tower at Ypres,
however, fails to illustrate--perhaps because it is earlier, and
therefore in better taste--that astounding disproportion in height
that is so frequently exhibited by Belgian towers, as at Malines,
or in the case of the famous belfry in the market-place at Bruges,
when considered with reference to the church, or town hall, below.
In front of the High Altar, in the pavement, is an inconspicuous
square of white stone, which marks the burial-place of Cornelius
Jansen, who died of the plague, as Bishop of Ypres, in 1638. The
monument, if you can call it monument, is scarcely less
insignificant than the simple block, in the cemetery of
Plainpalais at Geneva, that is traditionally said to mark the
resting-place of Calvin. Yet Jansen, in his way, proved almost a
second Calvin in his death, and menaced the Church from his grave
with a second Reformation. He left behind in manuscript a book
called "Augustinus," the predestinarian tenor of which was
condemned finally, though nearly a century later, by Pope Clement
XI., in 1713, in the Bull called Unigenitus. Jansenism, however,
had struck deep its roots in France, and still survives in Holland
at the present day, at Utrecht, as a sect that is small, indeed,
but not altogether obscure. Jansen himself, it may be noted, was a
Hollander by birth, having been born in 1585 at Akkoi in that
kingdom.

If Ypres is to be praised appropriately as a still delightful old
city that has managed to retain to a quite singular degree the
outward aspect and charm of the Middle Ages, one feels that one
has left one's self without any proper stock of epithets with
which to appraise at its proper value the charm and romance of
Bruges. Of late years, it is true, this world-famed capital of
West Flanders has lost something of its old somnolence and peace.
Malines, in certain quarters, is now much more dead-alive, and
Wordsworth, who seems to have visualized Bruges in his mind as a
network of deserted streets, "whence busy life hath fled," might
perhaps be tempted now to apply to it the same prophetic outlook
that he imagined for Pendragon Castle:

    "Viewing
    As in a dream her own renewing."

One hopes, indeed, that the renewing of Bruges will not proceed
too zealously, even if Bruges come safely through its present hour
of crisis. Perhaps there is no big city in the world--and Bruges,
though it has shrunk pitiably, like Ypres, from its former great
estate in the Middle Ages, has still more than forty thousand
souls--that remains from end to end, in every alley, and square,
and street, so wholly unspoilt and untouched by what is bad in the
modern spirit, or that presents so little unloveliness and squalor
in its more out-of-the-way corners as Bruges. Bruges, of course,
like Venice, and half a dozen towns in Holland, is a strangely
amphibious city that is intersected in every direction, though
certainly less persistently than Venice, by a network of stagnant
canals. On the other hand, if it never rises to the splendour of
the better parts of Venice--the Piazza and the Grand Canal--and
lacks absolutely that charm of infinitely varied, if somewhat
faded or even shabby, colour that characterizes the "Queen of the
Adriatic," there is yet certainly nothing monotonous in her
monotone of mellow red-brick; and certainly nothing so
dilapidated, and tattered, and altogether poverty-stricken as one
stumbles against in Venice in penetrating every narrow lane, and
in sailing up almost every canal. Of Venice we may perhaps say,
what Byron said of Greece, that

    "Hers is the loveliness in death
    That parts not quite with parting breath";

whilst in Bruges we recognize gladly, not death or decay at all,
but the serene and gracious comeliness of a dignified and vital
old age.

We cannot, of course, attempt, in a mere superficial sketch like
this, even to summarize briefly the wealth of objects of interest
in Bruges, or to guide the visitor in detail through its maze of
winding streets. Two great churches, no doubt, will be visited by
everyone--the cathedral of St. Sauveur and the church of Notre
Dame--both of which, in the usual delightful Belgian fashion, are
also crowded picture-galleries of the works of great Flemish
masters. The See of Bruges, however, dates only from 1559; and
even after that date the Bishop had his stool in the church of St.
Donatian, till this was destroyed by the foolish Revolutionaries
in 1799. In a side-chapel of Notre Dame, and carefully boarded up
for no reason in the world save to extort a verger's fee for their
exhibition, are the splendid black marble monuments, with
recumbent figures in copper gilt, of Charles the Bold, who fell at
Nancy in 1477 (but lives for ever, with Louis XI. of France, in
the pages of "Quentin Durward"), and of his daughter, Mary, the
wife of the Emperor Maximilian, of Austria, who was killed by
being thrown from her horse whilst hunting in 1482. These two
tombs are of capital interest to those who are students of Belgian
history, for Charles the Bold was the last male of the House of
Burgundy, and it was by the marriage of his daughter that the
Netherlands passed to the House of Hapsburg, and thus ultimately
fell under the flail of religious persecution during the rule of
her grandson, Spanish Philip. Close to Notre Dame, in the Rue St.
Catherine, is the famous old Hospital of St. Jean, the red-brick
walls of which rise sleepily from the dull waters of the canal,
just as Queens' College, or St. John's, at Cambridge, rise from
the sluggish Cam. Here is preserved the rich shrine, or chasse,
"resembling a large Noah's ark," of St. Ursula, the sides of which
are painted with scenes from the virgin's life by Hans Memling,
who, though born in the neighbourhood of Mayence, and thus really
by birth a German, lived for nearly a quarter of a century or more
of his life in Bruges, and is emphatically connected, like his
master Roger van der Weyden and the brothers Van Eyck, with the
charming early Flemish school. There is a story that he was
wounded under Charles le Temeraire on the stricken field of Nancy,
and painted these gemlike pictures in return for the care and
nursing that he received in the Hospital of St. Jean, but "this
story," says Professor Anton Springer, "may be placed in the same
category as those of Durer's malevolent spouse, and of the
licentiousness of the later Dutch painters." These scenes from the
life of St. Ursula are hardly less delightfully quaint than the
somewhat similar series that was painted by Carpaccio for the
scuola of the Saint at Venice, and that are now preserved in the
Accademia. Early Flemish painting, in fact, in addition to its own
peculiar charm of microscopic delicacy of finish, is hardly
inferior, in contrast with the later strong realism and occasional
coarseness of Rubens or Rembrandt, to the tender poetic dreaminess
of the primitive Italians. Certainly these pictures, though
finished to the minutest and most delicate detail, are lacking in
realism actually to a degree that borders on a delicious
absurdity. St. Ursula and her maidens--whether really eleven
thousand or eleven--in the final scene of martyrdom await the
stroke of death with the stoical placidity of a regiment of dolls.
"All the faces are essentially Flemish, and some of the virgins
display to great advantage the pretty national feature of the
slight curl in one or in both lips." A little farther along the
same street is the city Picture Gallery, with a small but
admirable collection, one of the gems of which is a splendid St.
Christopher, with kneeling donors, with their patron saints on
either side, that was also painted by Memling in 1484, and ranks
as one of his best efforts. Notice also the portrait of the Canon
Van de Paelen, painted by Jan van Eyck in 1436, and representing
an old churchman with a typically heavy Flemish face; and the
rather unpleasant picture by Gerard David of the unjust judge
Sisamnes being flayed alive by order of King Cambyses. By a
turning to the right out of the Rue St. Catherine, you come to the
placid Minne Water, or Lac d'Amour, not far from the shores of
which is one of those curious beguinages that are characteristic
of Flanders, and consist of a number of separate little houses,
grouped in community, each of which is inhabited by a beguine, or
less strict kind of nun. In the house of the Lady Superior is
preserved the small, but very splendid, memorial brass of a former
inmate, who died at about the middle of the fifteenth century.

Wander where you will in the ancient streets of Bruges, and you
will not fail to discover everywhere some delightful relic of
antiquity, or to stumble at every street corner on some new and
charming combination of old houses, with their characteristic
crow-stepped, or corbie, gables. New houses, I suppose, there must
really be by scores; but these, being built with inherent good
taste (whether unconscious or conscious I do not know) in the
traditional style of local building, and with brick that from the
first is mellow in tint and harmonizes with its setting,
assimilate at once with their neighbours to right and left, and
fail to offend the eye by any patchy appearance or crudeness.
Hardly a single street in Bruges is thus without old-world charm;
but the architectural heart of the city must be sought in its two
market-places, called respectively the Grande Place and the Place
du Bourg. In the former are the brick Halles, with their famous
belfry towering above the structure below it, with true Belgian
disregard for proportion in height. It looks, indeed, like tower
piled on tower, till one is almost afraid lest the final octagon
should be going to topple over! In the Place du Bourg is a less
aspiring group, consisting of the Hotel de Ville, the Chapelle du
Saint Sang, the Maison de l'Ancien Greffe, and the Palais de
Justice--all very Flemish in character, and all, in combination,
elaborately picturesque. In the Chapel of the Holy Blood is
preserved the crystal cylinder that is said to enshrine certain
drops of the blood of Our Saviour that were brought from the Holy
Land in 1149 by Theodoric, Count of Flanders, and installed in the
Romanesque chapel that he built for their reception, and the crypt
of which remains, though the upper chapel has long since been
rebuilt, in the fifteenth century. At certain stated times the
relic is exhibited to a crowd of devotees, who file slowly past to
kiss it. Some congealed blood of Our Lord is also said to be
preserved, after remarkable vicissitudes of loss and recovery, in
the Norman Abbey of Fecamp; and mediaeval Gloucestershire once
boasted as big a treasure, which brought great concourse and
popularity to the Cistercian house of Hayles. Pass beneath the
archway of the Maison de l'Ancien Greffe, cross the sluggish
canal, and turn sharply to the left, and follow, first the cobbled
Quai des Marbriers, and afterwards its continuation, the Quai
Vert. Pacing these silent promenades, which are bordered by humble
cottages, you have opposite, across the water, as also from the
adjacent Quai du Rosaire, grand groupings of pinnacle, tower, and
gable, more delightful even, in perfection of combination and in
mellow charm of colour, than those "domes and towers" of Oxford
whose presence Wordsworth confessed, in a very indifferent sonnet,
to overpower his "soberness of reason." "In Brussels," he says
elsewhere in his journal, "the modern taste in costume,
architecture, etc., has got the mastery; in Ghent there is a
struggle; but in Bruges old images are still paramount, and an air
of monastic life among the quiet goings-on of a thinly-peopled
city is inexpressibly soothing. A pensive grace seems to be cast
over all, even the very children." This estimate, after the lapse
of considerably more than half a century, still, on the whole,
stands good.

"In Ghent there is a struggle." Approaching Ghent, indeed, by
railway from Bruges, and with our heads full of old-world romance
of Philip van Artevelte, and of continually insurgent burghers
(for whom Ghent was rather famous), and of how Roland, "my horse
without peer," "brought good news from Ghent," one is rather
shocked at first, as we circle round the suburbs, at the rows of
aggressive new houses, and rather tempted to conclude that the
struggle has now ended, and that modernity, as at Brussels, has
won the day at Ghent. Luckily the doubt is dissipated as we quit
the splendid Sud station--and Belgium, one may add in parenthesis,
has some of the most palatial railway-stations in the world--and
find ourselves once again enmeshed in a network of ancient
thoroughfares, which, if they lack wholly the absolute quiet, and
in part the architectural charm, of Bruges, yet confront us at
every corner with abundance of old-world charm. I suppose the six
great things to be seen in Ghent are the cathedral of St. Bavon
(and in the cathedral the great picture of the "Adoration of the
Lamb," by Hubert and Jan van Eyck); the churches of St. Michel,
with a "Crucifixion" by Van Dyck, and St. Nicholas; the wonderful
old houses on the Quai des Herbes; the splendidly soaring Belfry;
and possibly the Grande Beguinage, on the outskirts of the town.
The cathedral has the usual solitary west tower, as at Ely, that
we have now come to associate--at Ypres and Bruges--with typical
Belgian churches. The great Van Eyck is hung in a chapel on the
south of the choir, and the services of the verger must be sought
for its exhibition. The paintings on the shutters are merely
copies by Coxie, six of the originals being in the Picture Gallery
in Berlin. Their restoration to Ghent, one hopes, will form a
fractional discharge of the swiftly accumulating debt that Germany
owes to Belgium. The four main panels, however, are genuine work
of the early fifteenth century, the reredos as a whole having been
begun by Hubert, and finished by Jan van Eyck in 1432. The centre-
piece is in illustration of the text in the Apocalypse (v. 12):
"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches,
and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing."
One may question, indeed, if figurative language of the kind in
question can ever be successfully transferred to canvas; whether
this literal lamb, on its red-damasked table, in the midst of
these carefully marshalled squadrons of Apostles, Popes, and
Princes, can ever quite escape a hint of something ludicrous. One
may question all this, yet still admire to the full both the
spirit of devotion that inspired this marvellous picture and its
miracle of minute and jewel-like execution. There are scores of
other good pictures in Ghent, including (not even to go outside
St. Bavon's) the "Christ among the Doctors" by Francis Pourbus,
into which portraits of Philip II. of Spain, the Emperor Charles
V., and the infamous Duke of Alva--names of terrible import in
the sixteenth-century history of the Netherlands--are introduced
among the bystanders; whilst to the left of Philip is Pourbus
himself, "with a greyish cap on which is inscribed Franciscus
Pourbus, 1567." But it is always to the "Adoration of the Mystic
Lamb" that our steps are first directed, and to which they always
return.

It is hard, indeed, that necessities of space should
compel us to pass so lightly over other towns in Flanders--over
Courtrai, with its noble example of a fortified bridge, and with
its great picture, by Van Dyck, of the "Raising of the Cross" that
was stolen mysteriously a few years ago from the church of Notre
Dame, but has since, like the Joconde at the Louvre, been
recovered and replaced; over Oudenarde, with its two fine
churches, and its small town hall that is famous for its splendour
even in a country the Hotels de Ville of which are easily the most
elaborate (if not always the most chaste or really beautiful) in
Europe; and over certain very minor places, such as Damme, to the
north-east of Bruges, whose silent, sunny streets, and half-
deserted churches, seem to breathe the very spirit of Flemish
mediaevalism. Of the short strip of Flemish coast, from near
Knocke, past the fashionable modern bathing-places of Heyst,
Blankenberghe, and Ostende, to a point beyond La Panne--from
border to border it measures roughly only some forty miles, and is
almost absolutely straight--I willingly say little, for it seems
to me but a little thing when compared with this glorious inland
wealth of architecture and painting. Recently it has developed in
every direction, and is now almost continuously a thin,
brilliantly scarlet line of small bungalows, villas, and lodging-
houses, linked up along the front by esplanades and casinos, where
only a few years ago the fenland met the sea in a chain of rolling
sand-dunes that were peopled only by rabbits, and carpeted only
with rushes and coarse grass. About tastes there is no disputing;
and there are people, no doubt, who, for some odd reason, find
this kind of aggressive modernity in some way more attractive in
Belgium than in Kent. For myself, I confess, it hardly seems worth
while to incur the penalty of sea-sickness merely to play golf on
the ruined shore of Flanders.





III.


Of Brussels I do not propose to say very much, because Brussels,
although the brightest and gayest town in Belgium, and although
retaining in its Grande Place, and in the buildings that
immediately surround this last, as well as in its great church of
St. Gudule (which, in spite of popular usage, is not, and never
was, in the proper sense a cathedral), relics of antiquity of the
very highest value and interest, yet Brussels, as a whole, is so
distinctively a modern, and even cosmopolitan city, and has so
much general resemblance to Paris (though its site is far more
picturesque, and though the place, to my mind at least, just
because it is smaller and more easily comprehensible, is a much
more agreeable spot to stay in), that it seems better in a sketch
that is principally devoted to what is old and nationally
characteristic in Belgium to give what limited space one has to a
consideration rather of towns like Louvain or Malines, in which
the special Belgian flavour is not wholly overwhelmed by false and
extraneous influences. St. Gudule, of course, should certainly be
visited, not only for the sake of the general fabric, which,
notwithstanding its possession of TWO west towers, is typically
Belgian in its general character, but also for the sake of its
magnificent sixteenth and seventeenth century glass, and
especially for the sake of the five great windows in the Chapelle
du Saint Sacrement, which illustrate in a blaze of gorgeous colour
the story of how Jonathan the Jew bribed Jeanne de Louvain to
steal the three Consecrated Wafers, from which oozed, when
sacrilegiously stabbed by the sceptical Jew, the Sacred Blood of a
world's redemption. This story is told again--or rather, perhaps,
a similar story--in the splendid painted glass from the church of
St. Eloi that is now preserved at Rouen in the Archaeological
Museum. As for the Grande Place, or original market-place of the
city, which is bounded on one side by the magnificent Hotel de
Ville, on the opposite side by the rather heavy, rebuilt Maison du
Roi, and on the remaining two sides chiefly by the splendid old
seventeenth-century Corporation Houses of the various ancient city
guilds--Le Renard, the house of the silk-mercers and haberdashers;
Maison Cornet, the house of the boatmen, or "batelliers"; La
Louvre, the house of the archers; La Brouette, the house of the
carpenters; Le Sac, the house of the printers and booksellers; the
Cygne, the house of the butchers; and other houses that need not
be specified at any greater length, of the tailors, painters, and
brewers--this is probably the completest and most splendid example
of an ancient city market-square that now remains in Europe, and
absolutely without rival even in Belgium itself, though similar
old guild-houses, in the same delightful Flemish fashion, may
still be found (though in this case with admixture of many modern
buildings) in the Grande Place at Antwerp. It was in this splendid
square at Brussels that the unhappy Counts of Egmont and Horn were
brutally done to death, to glut the sinister tyranny of Spanish
Philip, on June 5, 1568.

Also, in addition to these two superlative antiquities, two modern
buildings in Brussels, though for widely different reasons, can
hardly be passed over under plea of lack of space. Crowning the
highest point of the city, and towering itself towards heaven in a
stupendous pile of masonry, is the enormous new Palais de Justice,
probably the most imposing law courts in the world. English Law
undoubtedly is housed with much greater modesty, though not
without due magnificence, in the altogether humbler levels of the
Strand. Also in the High Town--which is the modern quarter of
Brussels, in contrast with the mediaeval Low Town, which lies in
the flat below--is the Royal Museum of Ancient Paintings, which
probably divides honours with the Picture Gallery at Antwerp as
the finest and most representative collection of pictures of the
Netherlandish school in the world. Here you may revel by the hour
in a candlelight effect by Gerard Dow; in the poultry of Melchior
d'Hondecoeter; in a pigsty of Paul Potter's; in landscapes by
Meindert Hobbema; in a moonlight landscape of Van der Neer's; in a
village scene by Jan Steen; in the gallant world of Teniers; and
in the weird imaginings of Pieter Brueghel the younger. The
greatest pictures in the whole collection, I suppose, are those by
Rubens, though he has nothing here that is comparable for a moment
with those in the Picture Gallery and Cathedral at Antwerp. Very
magnificent, however, is the "Woman taken in Adultery," the
"Adoration of the Magi," the "Interceder Interceded" (the Virgin,
at the prayer of St. Francis d'Assisi, restrains the angry Saviour
from destroying a wicked world), and the "Martyrdom of St.
Livinius." This last, however--like the "Crucifixion" in the
Antwerp Gallery; like Van Dyck's picture in this collection of the
drunken Silenus supported by a fawn; and like Rubens' own
disgusting Silenus in our National Gallery at home--illustrates
unpleasantly the painful Flemish facility to condescend to
details, or even whole conceptions, the realism of which is
unnecessarily deliberate and coarse. Here, in this death of St.
Livinius, the executioner is shown in the act of presenting to a
dog with pincers the bleeding tongue that he has just cut out of
the mouth of the dying priest.

Brussels itself, as already intimated, is an exceedingly pleasant
city for a more or less prolonged stay; and, owing at once to the
admirable system of "Rundreise" tickets that are issued by the
State railways at an uncommonly low price, to the rather dubious
quality of the hotels in some of the smaller towns, and to the
cardinal fact that Brussels is a centre from which most of the
other great cities of Belgium--Malines, Ghent, Antwerp, and Liege,
not to mention smaller towns of absorbing interest, such as Mons,
Namur, Hal, Tirlemont, Leau, and Soignies--may be easily visited,
more or less completely, in the course of a single day--owing to
all these facts many people will be glad to make this pleasant
city their centre, or headquarters, for the leisurely exploration
of most of Belgium, with the exception of the more distant and
out-of-the-way districts of West Flanders and the Ardennes. All
the places enumerated are thoroughly worth visiting, but obviously
only the more important can be dealt with more than just casually
here. Mons, on a hill overlooking the great coalfield of the
Borinage, with its strange pyramidal spoil-heaps, is itself
curiously free from the dirt and squalor of an English colliery
town; and equally worth visiting for the sake of its splendid
cathedral of St. Wandru, the richly polychromatic effect of whose
interior, due to the conjunction of deep red-brick vaulting with
the dark blue of its limestone capitals and piers, illustrates
another pleasant phase of Belgian ecclesiastical architecture, as
well as for the sake of a contest, almost of yesterday, that has
added new and immortal laurels to the genius of British battle.
Tournai, on the upper Scheldt, or Escaut, is remarkable for the
heavy Romanesque nave of its cathedral, which is built of the
famous local black marble, as well as for its remarkable central
cluster of five great towers. Soignies (in Flemish Zirick),
roughly half-way between Mons and Brussels, and probably little
visited, has a sombre old abbey church, of St. Vincent Maldegaire,
that was built in the twelfth century, and that is enriched inside
with such a collection of splendidly carved classical woodwork--
stalls, misericordes, and pulpit--as you will scarcely find
elsewhere even in Belgium. The pulpit in particular is wonderful,
with its life-sized girl supporters, with their graceful and
lightly poised figures, and pure and lovely faces. Namur,
strangely enough, has really nothing of antiquity outside the
doors of its Archaeological Museum, but is worth a visit if only
for the pleasure of promenading streets which, if almost wholly
modern, are unusually clean and bright. Tirlemont, again, has two
old churches that will not delay you long, though Notre Dame de
Lac has remarkably fine confessionals of the dawn of the
seventeenth century, and though the splendid brass-work of the
font and baptistery lectern at St. Germains would alone be worth a
visit; but Leau, for which Tirlemont is the junction, is so quaint
and curious a little town, and comes so much in the guise of a
pleasant discovery--since Baedeker barely mentions it--that, even
apart from its perfect wealth of wood and brass work in the fine
thirteenth-century church of St. Leonhard, it might anyhow be
thought to justify a visit to this little visited corner of South
Brabant. I do not know that the brass-work could be easily matched
elsewhere: the huge standard candelabrum to the north of the
altar, with its crowning Crucifixion; the lectern, with its
triumphant eagle and prostrate dragon; the font, with its cover,
and the holy-water stoup almost as big as a small font (in
Brittany I have seen them as big as a bath); and the beautiful
brass railings that surround the splendid Tabernacle that was
executed in 1552 by Cornelius de Vriendt, the brother of the
painter Frans Floris, and that towers high into the vaulting to a
height of fifty-two feet. One realizes more completely in a quiet
village church like this the breadth and intensity of the wave of
artistic impulse that swept through the Lowlands in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries than is possible in half a dozen hurried
visits to a picture gallery at Antwerp or Brussels. Finally Hal,
to conclude our list of minor places, has a grand fourteenth-
century church, with a miracle-working Virgin, and a little red-
brick town hall of characteristically picturesque aspect.

The railway journey from Brussels to Antwerp traverses a typical
bit of Belgian landscape that is as flat as a pancake; and the
monotony is only relieved, first by the little town of Vilvoorde,
where William Tyndale was burnt at the stake on October 6, 1536,
though not alive, having first been mercifully strangled, and
afterwards by the single, huge, square tower of Malines (or
Mechlin) Cathedral, which dominates the plain from enormous
distances, like the towers of Ely or Lincoln, though not, like
these last, by virtue of position on a hill, but solely by its own
vast height and overwhelming massiveness. Malines, though
certainly containing fewer objects of particular interest than
Bruges, and though certainly on the whole a less beautiful city,
strikes one as hardly less dead-and-alive, and altogether may
fairly claim second place among the larger Belgian cities (it
houses more than fifty thousand souls) in point of mediaeval
character. The great thirteenth and fourteenth century cathedral
of St. Rombaut has been the seat of an archbishopric since the
sixteenth century, and is still the metropolitan church of
Belgium. Externally the body, like the market-hall at Bruges, is
almost entirely crushed into insignificance by the utterly
disproportionate height and bulk of the huge west tower, the top
of which, even in its present unfinished state (one almost hopes
that it may never be finished), is actually three hundred and
twenty-four feet high. Boston "Stump" is only two hundred and
eighty feet to the top of the weather vane, but infinitely slimmer
in proportion; whilst even Salisbury spire is only about four
hundred odd feet. Immediately below the parapet is the enormous
skeleton clock-face, the proportions of which are reproduced on
the pavement of the market-place below. The carillons in this
tower are an extravagant example of the Belgian passion for
chiming bells. Once safely inside the church, and the monster
tower forgotten, and we are able to admire its delicate internal
proportions, and the remarkable ornament of the spandrels in the
great main arcades of the choir. Unfortunately, much of this
interior, like that of St. Pierre at Louvain, is smothered under
half an inch of plaster; but where this has been removed in
tentative patches, revealing the dark blue "drums" of the single,
circular columns of the arcades, the general effect is immensely
improved. One would also like to send to the scrap-heap the
enormous seventeenth-century figures of the Apostles on their
consoles on the piers, which form so bad a disfigurement in the
nave. The treasure of the church is the great "Crucifixion" by Van
Dyck, which is hung in the south transept, but generally kept
covered. To see other stately pictures you must go to the church
of St. Jean, where is a splendid altar triptych by Rubens, the
centre panel of which is the "Adoration of the Magi"; or to the
fifteenth-century structure of Notre Dame au dela de la Dyle (the
clumsy title is used, I suppose, for the sake of distinction from
the classical Notre Dame d'Hanswyck), where Rubens' "Miraculous
Draught of Fishes" is sometimes considered the painter's
masterpiece. It is not yet clear whether this noble picture has
been destroyed in the recent bombardment. Even to those who care
little for art, a stroll to these two old churches through the
sleepy back-streets of Malines, with their white and sunny houses,
can hardly fail to gratify.

If Malines is a backwater of the Middle Time, as somnolent or as
dull (so some, I suppose, would call it) as the strange dead towns
of the Zuyder Zee, or as Coggeshall or Thaxted in our own green
Essex, Antwerp, at any rate, which lies only some fifteen miles or
so to the north of it, is very much awake, and of aspect mostly
modern, though not without some very curious and charming relics
of antiquity embedded in the heart of much recent stone and
mortar. Perhaps it will be well to visit one of these at once,
taking the tram direct from the magnificent Gare de l'Est (no
lesser epithet is just) to the Place Verte, which may be
considered the real centre of the city; and making our way thence
by a network of quieter back-streets to the Musee Plantin-
Moretus, which is the goal of our immediate ambition. I bring you
here at once, not merely because the place itself is quite unique
and of quite exceptional interest, but because it strikes
precisely that note of real antiquity that underlies the modern
din and bustle of Antwerp, though apt to be obscured unless we
listen needfully. Happy, indeed, was the inspiration that moved
the city to buy this house from its last private possessor, Edward
Moretus, in 1876. To step across this threshold is to step
directly into the merchant atmosphere of the sixteenth century.
The once great printing house of Plantin-Moretus was founded by
the Frenchman, Christopher Plantin, who was born at St. Aventin,
near Tours, in 1514, and began his business life as a book-binder
at Rouen. In 1549 he removed to Antwerp, and was there innocently
involved one night in a riot in the streets, which resulted in an
injury that incapacitated him for his former trade, and
necessitated his turning to some new employment. He now set up as
printer, with remarkable success, and was a sufficiently important
citizen at the date of his death, in 1589, to be buried in his own
vault under a chapel in the Cathedral. The business passed, on his
decease, to his son-in-law, Jean Moertorf, who had married his
daughter, Martine, in 1570, and had Latinized his surname to
Moretus in accordance with the curious custom that prevailed among
scholars of the sixteenth century. Thus Servetus was really Miguel
Servete, and Thomas Erastus was Thomas Lieber. The foundation of
the fortunes of the house was undoubtedly its monopoly--analogous
to that enjoyed by the English house of Spottiswoode, and by the
two elder Universities--of printing the liturgical works--Missals,
Antiphons, Psalters, Breviaries, etc.--that were used throughout
the Spanish dominions. No attempt, however, seems to have been
made in the later stages of the history of the house to adopt
improved machinery, or to reconstruct the original, antiquated
buildings. The establishment, accordingly, when it was taken over
by the city in 1876, retained virtually the same aspect as it had
worn in the seventeenth century, and remains to the present day
perhaps the best example in the world of an old-fashioned city
business house of the honest time when merchant-princes were
content to live above their office, instead of seeking solace in
smug suburban villas. The place has been preserved exactly as it
stood, and even the present attendants are correctly clad in the
sober brown garb of the servants of three hundred years since. It
is interesting, not only in itself, but as an excellent example of
how business and high culture were successfully combined under the
happier economic conditions of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. The Plantin-Moretus family held a high position in the
civic life of Antwerp, and mixed in the intellectual and artistic
society for which Antwerp was famed in the seventeenth century--
the Antwerp of Rubens (though not a native) and Van Dyck, of
Jordaens, of the two Teniers, of Grayer, Zegers, and Snyders.
Printing, indeed, in those days was itself a fine art, and the
glories of the house of Plantin-Moretus rivalled those of the
later Chiswick Press, and of the goodly Chaucers edited in our own
time by Professor Skeat, and printed by William Morris. Proof-
reading was then an erudite profession, and Francois Ravelingen,
who entered Plantin's office as proof-reader in 1564, and assisted
Arias Montanus in revising the sheets of the Polyglot Bible, is
said to have been a great Greek and Oriental scholar, and crowned
a career of honourable toil, like Hogarth's Industrious
Apprentice, by marrying his master's eldest daughter, Marguerite,
in 1565. The room in which these scholars worked remains much in
its old condition, with the table at which they sat, and some of
their portraits on the wall. Everything here, in short, is
interesting: the press-room, which was used almost continuously
and practically without change--two of the antiquated presses of
Plantin's own time remain--for nearly three centuries; the Great
and Little Libraries, with their splendid collection of books; the
archive room, with its long series of business accounts and
ledgers; the private livingrooms of the Moretus family; and last,
but not least, the modest little shop, where books still repose
upon the shelves, which looks as though the salesman might return
at any moment to his place behind the counter. England has
certainly nothing like it, though London had till recently in
Crosby Hall a great merchant's house of the fifteenth century,
though stripped of all internal fittings and propriety. Luckily
this last has been re-erected at Chelsea, though robbed by the
change of site of half its authenticity and value.

I have chosen to dwell on this strange museum at length that seems
disproportionate, not merely because of its unique character, but
because it seems to me full of lessons and reproach for an age
that has subordinated honest workmanship to cheap and shoddy
productiveness, and has sacrificed the workman to machinery.
Certainly no one who visits Antwerp can afford to overlook it; but
probably most people will first bend their steps towards the more
popular shrine of the great cathedral. Here I confess myself utter
heretic: to call this church, as I have seen it called, "one of
the grandest in Europe," seems to me pure Philistinism--the cult
of the merely big and obvious, to the disregard of delicacy and
beauty. Big it is assuredly, and superficially astonishing; but
anything more barn-like architecturally, or spiritually
unexalting, I can hardly call to memory. Outside it lacks entirely
all shadow of homogeneity; the absence of a central tower, felt
perhaps even in the great cathedrals of Picardy and the Ile de
France, just as it is felt in Westminster and in Beverley Minster,
is here actually accentuated by the hideous little cupola--I
hardly know how properly to call it--that squats, as though in
derision, above the crossing; whilst even the natural meeting and
intersection at this point of high roofs, which in itself would
rise to dignity, is wantonly neglected to make way for this
monstrosity. The church, in fact, looks, when viewed externally,
more like four separate churches than one; and when we step
inside, with all the best will in the world to make the best of
it, it is hard to find, much to admire, and anything at all to
love, in these acres of dismally whitewashed walls, and long,
feeble lines of arcades without capitals. The inherent vice of
Belgian architecture--its lack of really beautiful detail, and
its fussy superfluity of pinnacle and panelling--seems to me here
to culminate. Belgium has really beautiful churches--not merely of
the thirteenth century, when building was lovely everywhere, but
later buildings, like Mons, and St. Pierre at Louvain; but Antwerp
is not of this category. Architecturally, perhaps, the best
feature of the whole church is the lofty spire (over four hundred
feet), which curiously resembles in general outline that of the
Hotel de Ville at Brussels (three hundred and seventy feet), and
dates from about the same period (roughly the middle of the
fifteenth century). As usual in Belgium, it is quite out of scale;
it is lucky, indeed, that the corresponding south-west tower has
never been completed, for the combination of the two would be
almost overwhelming. It is curious and interesting as an example
of a tower tapering upwards to a point in a succession of
diminishing stages, in contrast with tower and spire. France has
something like it, though far more beautiful, in the thirteenth-
century tower at Senlis; but England affords no parallel. I am not
sure who invented the quite happy phrase, "Confectioner's Gothic,"
but this tower at Antwerp is not badly described by it. It is
altogether too elaborate and florid, like the sugar pinnacle of a
wedding-cake.

This cathedral of Antwerp, however, though at the time that it was
built a mere collegiate church of secular canons, and only first
exalted to cathedral rank in 1559, is one of the largest churches
in superficial area in the world, a result largely due to its
possession, uniquely, of not less than six aisles, giving it a
total breadth of one hundred and seventy feet. Hung in the two
transepts respectively are the two great pictures by Rubens--the
"Elevation of the Cross" and the "Descent from the Cross"--that
are described at such length, and with so much critical
enthusiasm, by Sir Joshua Reynolds in his "Journey to Flanders and
Holland." The "Descent from the Cross," painted by Rubens in 1612,
when he was only thirty-five years old, is perhaps the more
splendid, and is specially remarkable for the daring with which
the artist has successfully ventured (what "none but great
colourists can venture") "to paint pure white linen near flesh."
His Christ, continues Sir Joshua, "I consider as one of the finest
figures that ever was invented: it is most correctly drawn, and I
apprehend in an attitude of the utmost difficulty to execute. The
hanging of the head on His shoulder, and the falling of the body
on one side, gives such an appearance of the heaviness of death,
that nothing can exceed it." Antwerp, of course, is full of
magnificent paintings by Rubens, though unfortunately the house in
which he lived in the Place de Meir (which is traversed by the
tram on its way from the Est Station to the Place Verte), which
was built by him in 1611, and in which he died in 1640, was almost
entirely rebuilt in 1703. There is another great Crucifixion by
the master in the Picture Gallery, or Palais des Beaux Arts, which
illustrates his exceptional power as well as his occasional
brutality." The centurion, with his hands on the nape of his
horse's neck, is gazing with horror at the writhings of the
impenitent thief, whose legs are being broken with an iron bar,
which has so tortured the unhappy man that in his agony he has
torn his left foot from the nail." It is questionable whether any
splendour of success can ever justify a man in thus condescending
to draw inspiration from the torture-room or shambles.

One would gladly spend more time in this Antwerp gallery, which
exceeds, I think, in general magnificence the collections at
Brussels and Amsterdam; and gladly would one visit the great
fifteenth and sixteenth century churches of St. Jacques, St.
Andre, and St. Paul, which not merely form together
architecturally an important group of a strongly localized
character, but are also, like the cathedral, veritable museums or
picture galleries. It is necessary, however, to conclude this
section, to say a few words about Louvain, which, lying as it does
on the main route from Brussels to Liege, may naturally be
considered on our way to the northern Ardennes.

Louvain, on the whole, has been much more modernized than other
Belgian cities of corresponding bulk, such as Bruges or Malines.
The road from the railway-station to the centre of the town is
commonplace indeed in its lack of picturesque Flemish house-fronts
or stepped, "corbie," Flemish gables. Louvain, in fact, unlike the
two "dead" cities of West Flanders and Brabant, wears a briskly
business-like aspect, and pulses with modern life. I suppose that
I ought properly to have written all this in the past tense, for
Louvain is now a heap of smoking cinders. The famous Town Hall
has, indeed, so far been spared by ruffians who would better have
spared the magnificent Cloth Hall at Ypres; between these two
great buildings, the products respectively of the Belgian genius
of the fifteenth and thirteenth centuries, "culture" could hardly
hesitate. The Hotel-de-Ville at Louvain is, indeed, an astonishing
structure, just as the cathedral at Antwerp is astonishing; but
one has to be very indulgent, or very forgetful of better models,
not to deprecate this absolutely wanton riot of overladened
panelling and bulging, top-heavy pinnacles. The expiring throes of
Belgian Gothic were a thousand degrees less chaste than the
classicism of the early Renaissance: few, perhaps, will prefer the
lacelike over-richness of this midfifteenth century town hall at
Louvain to the restraint of the charming sixteenth-century facade
of the Hotel de Ville at Leiden. Opposite the town hall is the
huge fifteenth-century church of St. Pierre, the interior of
which, still smothered in whitewash in 1910, was remarkable for
its florid Gothic rood-screen and soaring Tabernacle, or Ciborium.
The stumpy fragment of tower at the west end is said once to have
been five hundred and thirty feet high! It is not surprising to
read that this last, and crowning, manifestation of a familiar
Belgian weakness was largely wrecked by a hurricane in 1604.





IV.


One has left oneself all too little space to say what ought to be
said of the Belgian Ardennes. Personally I find them a trifle
disappointing; they come, no doubt, as a welcome relief after the
rest of Belgian landscape, which I have heard described, not
altogether unjustly, as the ugliest in the world; but the true
glory and value of Belgium will always be discovered in its
marvellously picturesque old towns, and in its unrivalled wealth
of painting, brass-work, and wood-carving. Compared with these
last splendours the low, wooded wolds of the Ardennes, with their
narrow limestone valleys, seem a little thing indeed. Dinant, no
doubt, and Rochefort would be pleasant places enough if one were
not always harking back in memory to Malines and Ypres, or longing
to be once more in Ghent or Bruges.

The traveller by railway between Brussels and Liege passes, soon
after leaving the station of Ans, a point of great significance in
the study of Belgian landscape. Hitherto from Brussels, or for
that matter from Bruges and Ostend, the country, though studded at
frequent intervals with cities and big towns, has been curiously
and intensely rural in the tracts that lie between; but now, as we
descend the steep incline into the valley of the Meuse, we enter
on a scene of industrial activity which, if never quite as bad as
our own Black Country at home, is sufficiently spoilt and
irritating to all who love rustic grace. The redeeming point, as
always, is that infinitely superior good taste which presents us,
in the midst of coal-mines and desolation, not with our own
unspeakably squalid Sheffields or Rotherhams, but with a queenly
city, with broad and handsome streets, with a wealth of public
gardens, and with many stately remnants of the Renaissance and
Middle Time. It is possible in Liege to forget--or rather
impossible to recall--the soiled and grimy country that stretches
from its gates in the direction of Seraing. Even under the sway of
the Spanish tyranny this was an independent state under the rule
of a Bishop Prince, who was also an Elector of the Holy Roman
Empire. Its original cathedral, indeed, has vanished, like those
at Cambrai and Bruges, in the insensate throes of the French
Revolution; and the existing church of St. Paul, though dating in
part from the thirteenth century, and a fine enough building in
its way, is hardly the kind of structure that one would wish to
associate with the seat of a bishopric that is still so historic,
and was formerly so important and even quasi-regal. Here, however,
you should notice, just as in the great neighbour church of St.
Jacques, the remarkable arabesque-pattern painting of the
severies of the vault, and the splendour of the sixteenth-century
glass. St. Jacques, I think, on the whole is the finer church of
the two, and remarkable for the florid ornament of its spandrels,
and for the elaborate, pendent cusping of the soffits of its
arches--features that lend it an almost barbaric magnificence that
reminds one of Rosslyn Chapel. Liege, built as it is exactly on
the edge of the Ardennes, is far the most finely situated of any
great city in Belgium. To appreciate this properly you should not
fail to climb the long flight of steps--in effect they seem
interminable, but they are really about six hundred--that mounts
endlessly from near the Cellular Prison to a point by the side of
the Citadelle Pierreuse. Looking down hence on the city,
especially under certain atmospheric conditions--I am thinking of
a showery day at Easter--one is reminded of the lines by poor John
Davidson:

    "The adventurous sun took Heaven by storm;
    Clouds scattered largesses of rain;
    The sounding cities, rich and warm,
    Smouldered and glittered in the plain."

It is not often that one is privileged to look down so directly,
and from so commanding a natural height, on to so vast and busy a
city--those who like this kind of comparison have styled it the
Belgian Birmingham--lying unrolled so immediately, like a map,
beneath our feet.

From Liege, if you like, you may penetrate the Ardennes--I do not
know whether Shakespeare was thinking in "As You Like It" of this
woodland or of his own Warwickshire forest of Arden; perhaps he
thought of both--immediately by way of Spa and the valley of the
Vesdre, or by the valleys of the Ourthe and of its tributary the
Ambleve; or you may still cling for a little while to the fringe
of the Ardennes, which is also the fringe of the industrial
country, and explore the valley of the Meuse westward, past Huy
and Namur, to Dinant. Huy has a noble collegiate church of Notre
Dame, the chancel towers of which (found again as far away as
Como) are suggestive of Rhenish influence, but strikes one as
rather dusty and untidy in itself. Namur, on the contrary, we have
already noted with praise, though it has nothing of real
antiquity. The valley of the Meuse is graced everywhere at
intervals with fantastic piles of limestone cliff, and certainly,
in a proper light, is pretty; but there is far too much quarrying
and industrialism between Liege and Namur, and far too many
residential villas along the banks between Namur and Dinant,
altogether to satisfy those who have high ideals of scenery.
Wordsworth, in a prefatory note to a sonnet that was written in
1820, and at a date when these signs of industrialism were
doubtless less obtrusive, says: "The scenery on the Meuse pleases
one more, upon the whole, than that of the Rhine, though the river
itself is much inferior in grandeur"; but even he complains that
the scenery is "in several places disfigured by quarries, whence
stones were taken for the new fortifications." Dinant, in
particular, has an exceptionally grand cliff; but the summit is
crowned (or was) by an ugly citadel, and the base is thickly
clustered round with houses (not all, by any means, mediaeval and
beautiful) in a way that calls to mind the High Tor at Matlock
Bath. Dinant, in short, is a kind of Belgian Matlock, and appeals
as little as Matlock to the "careful student" of Nature. If at
Dinant, however, you desert the broad valley of the Meuse for the
narrow and secluded limestone glen of the Lesse, with its clear
and sparkling stream, you will sample at once a kind of scenery
that reminds you of what is best in Derbyshire, and is also best
and most characteristic in the Belgian Ardennes. The walk up the
stream from Dinant to Houyet, where the valley of the Lesse
becomes more open and less striking, is mostly made by footpath;
and the pellucid river is crossed, and recrossed, and crossed
again, by a constant succession of ferries. Sometimes the white
cliff rises directly from the water, sheer and majestic, like that
which is crowned by the romantic Chateau Walzin; sometimes it is
more broken, and rises amidst trees from a broad plinth of emerald
meadow that is interposed between its base and the windings of the
river. Sometimes we thread the exact margin of the stream, or
traverse in the open a scrap of level pasture; sometimes we
clamber steeply by a stony path along the sides of an abrupt and
densely wooded hillside, where the thicket is yellow in spring
with Anemone Ranunculoides, or starred with green Herb Paris. This
is the kind of glen scenery that is found along the courses of the
Semois, Lesse, and Ourthe, recalling, with obvious differences,
that of Monsal Dale or Dovedale, but always, perhaps, without that
subtle note of wildness that robes even the mild splendours of
Derbyshire with a suggestion of mountain dignity. The Ardennes, in
short--and this is their scenic weakness--never attain to the
proper mountain spirit. There is a further point, however, in
which they also recall Derbyshire, but in which they are far
preeminent. This is the vast agglomeration of caves and vertical
potholes--like those in Craven, but here called etonnoirs--that
riddle the rolling wolds in all directions. Chief among these is
the mammoth cave of Han, the mere perambulation of which is said
to occupy more than two hours. I have never penetrated myself into
its sombre and dank recesses, but something may be realized of its
character and scale merely by visiting its gaping mouth at Eprave.
This is the exit of the Lesse, which, higher up the vale, at the
curious Perte de Lesse, swerves suddenly from its obvious course,
down the bright and cheerful valley, to plunge noisily through a
narrow slit in the rock--

    "Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
    Through caverns measureless to man
    Down to a sunless sea."

Rochefort, which itself has a considerable cave, is a pleasant
centre for the exploration of these subterranean marvels.
Altogether this limestone region of the Ardennes, though certainly
not remarkable for mountain or forest splendour, comes as a
somewhat welcome relief after the interminable levels and
chessboard fields of East and West Flanders, or of the provinces
of Limburgh and Antwerp.








Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Brazilian Sketches

By Rev. T. B. Ray, D.D.

Educational Secretary of the Foreign Mission Board of the Southern
Baptist Convention. TO MY WIFE WHO SHARED THE JOURNEY WITH ME





CONTENTS

    I. THE COUNTRY
   II. THE CAPITAL, RIO DE JANEIRO
  III. A VISIT TO A COUNTRY CHURCH
   IV. TWO PRESIDENTS
    V. THE GOSPEL WITHHELD
   VI. SAINT WORSHIP
  VII. PENANCE AND PRIEST
 VIII. THE GOSPEL TRIUMPHANT
   IX. JOSE BARRETTO
    X. CAPTAIN EGYDIO
   XI. FELICIDADE (Felicity)
  XII. PERSECUTION
 XIII. THE BIBLE AS A MISSIONARY FACTOR
  XIV. THE METTLE OF THE NATIVE CHRISTIAN
   XV. THE TESTING OF THE MISSIONARY
  XVI. THE URGENT CALL
 XVII. THE LAST STAND OF THE LATIN RACE
APPENDIX





FOREWORD.


I was dining one day with a very successful business man who,
although his business had extensive relations in many lands, was
meagerly informed about the work of missions. I thought I might
interest him by telling him something of the effects of missions
upon commerce. So I told him about how the civilizing presence of
missionary effort creates new demands which in turn increases
trade. He listened comprehendingly for a while and then remarked:
"What you say is interesting, but what I wish to know is not
whether missions increase business--we have business enough and
have methods of increasing the volume--What I want to know is
whether the missionary is making good and whether Christianity is
making good in meeting the spiritual needs of the heathen. If ever
I should become greatly interested in missions it would be because
I should feel that Christianity could solve the spiritual problem
for the heathen better than anything else. What are the facts
about that phase of missions?"

These words made a profound impression on me, and since then I
have spent little time in setting forth the by-products of
missions, tremendously important and interesting though they are.
I place the main emphasis on how gloriously Christianity, through
the efforts of the missionary, meets the aching spiritual hunger
of the heathen heart and transforms his life into spiritual
efficiency.

Since this is my conception of what the burden of the message
concerning missions should be, it should not surprise anyone to
find the following pages filled with concrete statements of actual
gospel triumphs. I have endeavored to draw a picture of the
religious situation in Brazil by reciting facts. I have described
some of the work of others done in former years and I have
recorded some wonderful manifestations of the triumphant power of
the gospel which I was privileged to see with my own eyes. These
pages record testimony which thing, I take it, most people desire
concerning the missionary enterprise. More arguments might have
been stated and more conclusions might have been expressed, but I
have left the reader to make his own deductions from the facts I
have tried faithfully to record.

No attempt has been made to follow in detail the itinerary taken
by my wife and myself which carried us into Brazil, Argentina and
Chili in South America, and Portugal and Spain in Europe. It is
sufficient to know that we reached the places mentioned and can
vouch for the truth of the facts stated.

I have confined myself to sketches about Brazil because I did not
desire to write a book of travel, but to show how the gospel
succeeds in a Catholic field as being an example of the manner in
which it is succeeding in other similar lands where it is being
preached vigorously.

I wish to say also that I have drawn the materials from the
experiences of my own denomination more largely because I know it
better and therefore could bear more reliable testimony. It should
be borne in mind that the successes of this one denomination are
typical of the work of several other Protestant bodies now
laboring in Brazil.

The missionaries and other friends made it possible wherever we
went to observe conditions at close range and under favorable
auspices. To these dear friends who received us so cordially and
labored so untiringly for our comfort and to make our visit most
helpful we would express here our heartfelt gratitude. We record
their experiences and ours in the hope that the knowledge of them
may bring to the reader a better appreciation of the missionary
and the great cause for which the missionary labors so self-
sacrificingly.

Richmond, Va.





CHAPTER I.

THE COUNTRY.


We had sailed in a southeasternly direction from New York twelve
days when we rounded Cape St. Roque, the easternmost point of
South America. A line drawn due north from this point would pass
through the Atlantic midway between Europe and America. If we had
sailed directly south we should have touched the western instead
of the eastern coast, for the reason that practically the entire
continent of South America lies east of the parallel of longitude
which passes through New York.

After sighting land we sailed along the coast three days before we
cast anchor at Bahia, our first landing place. Two days more were
required to reach Rio de Janeiro. When we afterwards sailed from
Rio to Buenos Aires, Argentina, we spent three and one-half days
skirting along the shore of Brazil. For eight and one-half days we
sailed in sight of Brazilian territory, and had we been close
enough to shore north of Cape St. Roque, we should have added
three days more to our survey of these far-stretching shores.
Brazil lies broadside to the Atlantic Ocean with a coast line
almost as long as the Pacific and Atlantic seaboards of the United
States combined. Its ocean frontage is about 4,000 miles in
length.

This coast line, however, is not all the water front of Brazil.
She boasts of the Amazon, the mightiest river in the world. This
stream is navigable by ships of large draught for 2,700 miles from
its mouth. It has eight tributaries from 700 to 1,200 miles and
four from 1,500 to 2,000 miles in length. One of these, the
Madeira, empties as much water into the larger stream as does the
Mississippi into the Gulf. No other river system drains vaster or
richer territory. It drains one million square miles more than
does the Mississippi, and in all it has 27,000 miles of navigable
waters.

The land connections of Brazil are also extensive. All the other
countries on the continent, save Chili and Ecuador, border on
Brazil. The Guianas and Venezuela, on the north; Colombia and Peru
on the west; Bolivia, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay on the
south--eight countries in all.

It is indeed a vast territory. The United States could be placed
within its borders and still there would be left enough Brazilian
territory to make a State as large as Texas.

Almost from the time we sighted land until we rounded the cape
near Montevideo, we could see the mountains along the shore. The
mountains extend far interior and up and down the length of the
country. The climate of the tropical Amazon Valley is, of course,
very hot, but as soon as the mountains are reached on the way
south the climate even in the tropical section is modified. The
section south of Rio, on account of the mountains and other forces
of nature, has a temperate climate, delightful for the habitation
of man. Each of these great zones, the tropical, the subtropical
and the temperate, is marked more by its distinctive leading
products than by climate. Each of these sections yields a product
in which Brazil leads the world. The largest and most
inexhaustible rubber supply in the world is found in the Amazon
Valley region. The central section raises so much cocoa that it
gives Brazil first rank in the production of this commodity. The
great temperate region produces three-fourths of all the coffee
used in the world. Of course, there is much overlapping in the
distribution of these products. Other products, such as cotton,
farinha, beans, peas, tobacco, sugar, bananas, are raised in large
quantities and could be far more extensively produced if the
people would utilize the best methods and implements of modern
agriculture. The mountains are full of ores and the forests of the
finest timber, and the great interior has riches unknown to man.
It has the most extensive unexplored region on earth. What the
future holds for this marvelously endowed country, when her
resources are revealed and brought to market, no one would dare
predict. Few countries in the world would venture a claim to such
immense riches.





CHAPTER II.

THE CAPITAL, RIO DE JANEIRO.


The city of Rio is the center of life in Brazil. We entered the
Bay of Rio after nightfall on the sixth of June. The miles and
miles of lights in the city of Rio on the one side, and of
Nietheroy on the other, gave us the impression that we were in
some gigantic fair grounds. Missionaries Entzminger, Shepard,
Maddox and Mrs. Entzminger came aboard to welcome us and bring us
ashore. We were taken to the Rio Baptist College and Seminary,
where we were entertained in good old Tennessee style by the
Shepards. This school building was built in 1849 by Dom Pedro II.
for a school which was known as the "Boarding School of Dom Pedro
II." It accommodated two hundred students. The Emperor supported
the school. In 1887 the school was moved to larger quarters. Dr.
Shepard is renting the property for our college, but our school
like Dom Pedro's has outgrown these quarters and we are compelled
to rent additional buildings some distance away to accommodate the
increasing number of students. There are about three hundred
students in all departments.

As we studied the situation at close range, we had it driven in
upon us that one of the greatest needs in Brazil is the one Dr.
Shepard and his co-laborers are trying to meet in this school.
Three-fourths of the population of Brazil cannot read. We need,
above all things now, educated leaders. What a call is there for
trained native pastors and evangelists! Some of the Seminary
students have been preaching as many as twenty-one times a month
in addition to carrying their studies in the school. Dr. Shepard
has been forced to stop them from some of this preaching because
it was preventing successful work in the class room. The need is
so great that it is very difficult to keep the students from such
work.

I must not go too far afield from the subject of this chapter, but
I must take the time to say that nothing breaks down prejudice
against the gospel more effectively than do the schools conducted
by the various mission boards. One day a Methodist colporter
entered a town in the interior of the State of Minas Geraes and
began to preach and offer his Bibles for sale in the public
square. Soon a fanatical mob was howling around him and his life
was in imminent peril. Just as the excitement was at the highest
two young men belonging to one of the best families in the place
pressed through the crowd and, ascertaining that the man was a
minister of the gospel, took charge of him and drove off the mob.
They led the colporter to their home, which was the best in the
town, and showed him generous hospitality. They invited the people
in to hear him preach, and thus through their kindness the man and
his message received a favorable hearing. It should be remembered,
too, that these young men belonged to a very devout Roman Catholic
family.

What was the secret of their actions? They had rescued,
entertained and enabled to preach a man who was endeavoring to
propagate a faith that was very much opposed to their own. The
explanation is that they had attended Granberry College, that
great Methodist school at Juiz de Fora. They had not accepted
Protestant Christianity, but the school had given them such a
vision and appreciation of the gospel that they could never again
be the intolerant bigots their fellow townsmen were. The college
had made them friends and that was a tremendous service. First we
must have friends, then followers. Nothing more surely and more
extensively makes friends for our cause than the schools, and it
must be said also that they are wonderfully effective in the work
of direct evangelization.

The First Baptist Church commissioned Deacon Theodore Teixeira and
Dr. Shepard to pilot us over the city. The church provided us with
an automobile and our splendid guides magnified their office. It
is a MAGNIFICENT city, indeed. The strip of land between the
mountains and the seashore is not wide. In some places, in fact,
the mountains come quite down to the water. The city, in the most
beautiful and picturesque way, avails itself of all possible
space, even in many places climbing high on the mountain sides and
pressing itself deep into the coves. Perhaps no city in the world
has a more picturesque combination of mountain and water with
which to make a beautiful location. It has about a million
inhabitants, and being the federal capital, is the greatest and
most influential city in Brazil.

Most of its streets are narrow and tortuous and until recently
were considered unhealthy. A few years ago the magnificent Avenida
Central was cut through the heart of the city and one of the most
beautiful avenues in the world was built. Twelve million dollars'
worth of property was condemned to make way for this splendid
street. It cuts across a peninsula through the heart of the city
from shore to shore, and is magnificent, indeed, with its
sidewalks wrought in beautiful geometrical designs, with its
ornate street lamps, with its generous width appearing broader by
contrast with other narrow streets, with its modern buildings.

There is another street, however, which is dearer to the Brazilian
than the Avenida. He takes great pride in the Avenida, but he has
peculiar affection for the Rua d'Ouvidor. Down the Ouvidor flows a
human tide such as is found nowhere else in Brazil. No one
attempts to keep on the pavement. The street is given over
entirely to pedestrians. No vehicle ever passes down it until
after midnight. In this narrow street, with its attractive shops
filled with the highest-priced goods in the world, you can soon
find anyone you wish to meet, because before long everyone who can
reach it will pass through. In this street the happy, jesting,
jostling crowd is in one continuous "festa".

In passing through the city one is greatly impressed by the number
of parks and beautiful public squares, and in particular with the
wonderful Beiramar, which is a combination of promenades,
driveways and park effects that stretches for miles along the
shore of the bay. What a thing of beauty this last-named park is!
There is nothing comparable to it anywhere. When Rio wishes to go
on a grand "passeio" (promenade) nothing but the grand Beiramar
will suffice.

One cannot help being impressed also by the prevalence of coffee-
drinking stands and stores--especially if he meets many friends.
These friends will insist upon taking him into a coffee stand and
engaging him in conversation while they sip coffee. On many
corners are little round or octagonal pagoda-like structures in
which coffee and cakes are sold. The coffee-drinking places are
everywhere and most of them are usually filled. The practice of
taking coffee with one's friends must lessen materially the amount
of strong drink consumed by the Brazilian. Nevertheless, that
amount of strong drink is, alas, altogether too great.

The greatest nuisance on the streets of Rio, or any other city of
Brazil, is the lottery ticket seller. These venders are more
numerous and more insistent than are the newsboys in the United
States. There are all sorts of superstitions about lotteries.
Certain images in one's dreams at night are said to correspond to
certain lucky numbers. Dogs, cats, horses, cows and many other
animals have certain numbers corresponding to them. For instance,
if one should dream tonight about a dog, he would try tomorrow to
find a lottery ticket to correspond in number with a dog. Say the
dog number was thirty-seven. This man would try to find a ticket
whose number ends in thirty-seven. Such a ticket would be
considered lucky. The ticket sellers often call out as they pass
along the street the last two numbers on the tickets they have to
sell, and if a man hears the number called which corresponds to
the animal he dreamed about last night, he will consider it lucky
and buy. There are also many shops where only lottery tickets are
sold. No evil has more tenaciously and universally fastened upon
the people than has the evil of gambling in lotteries. There are
310 Federal lotteries, besides many others run by the various
States. These 310 lotteries receive in premiums the enormous sum
of $19,399,200 every month--about one dollar for every individual
in Brazil. A portion of the profits amassed by the lottery
companies is devoted to charity, a portion to Roman Catholic
churches and a portion goes to the government. Even after these
amounts are taken out, there is ample left for the enrichment of
the companies' coffers to the impoverishment of many very needy
working people.

It is difficult to write temperately of Rio de Janeiro. There is
such a rare combination here of the primitive and the progressive,
of the oriental and occidental, that one is inclined to go off
into exclamation points. On the Avenida Central one sees numbers
of street venders carrying all kinds of wares on their heads and
pulling all sorts of carts, making their way in and out among the
automobiles, and handsome victorias PULLED BY MULES. We note also
all types of people. The Latin features predominate, but the negro
is in evidence, the Indian features are often recognized, and
mingled with these are seen faces representing all nations. One is
impressed with the dress of the people. Who is that handsomely-
groomed, gentleman passing? From his fine clothes you think he
must be a man of wealth and influence. Who is he? He is a barber.
That one over there is a clerk. But why these fine clothes? Ah!
thereby hangs the tale. Appearance is worshiped. Parade runs
through everything, even in the prevailing religion, which, alas,
is little more than form--parade. Don't get the idea that
everybody is finely dressed and that every handsomely-dressed man
is a barber. Many are able to afford such clothes and are cultured
gentlemen. One notices most the dress of the lower classes, the
most striking article of which is the wooden-bottom sandals into
which they thrust their toes and go flapping along in imminent
peril of losing the slippers every moment. The remainder of the
clothing worn by these beslippered people consists often of only
two thin garments. Certainly this is a place of great contrasts.
But somehow these contrasts do not impress one as being
incongruous. They are in perfect keeping with their surroundings.
Rio is really a cosmopolitan city and is a pleasant blending of
the old and the new.

There are several places from which splendid views of the city can
be had, but none of them is comparable to the panorama which
stretches out before one when he stands on the top of Mt.
Corcovado. The scene which greets one from this mountain is
indescribable. The Bay of Rio de Janeiro, with its eighty islands,
Sugar Loaf Mountain, a bare rock standing at the entrance, the
city winding its tortuous way in and out between the mountains and
spreading itself over many hills, the open sea in the distance and
the wild mountain scenery to the back of us, constitute a panorama
surpassingly beautiful.

Nictheroy lies just across the bay. We went over there one night
and spoke in the rented hall where our church worships, and spent
the night in the delightful home of the Entzmingers. The next
morning, before breakfast, Dr. Entzminger showed me over the city.
Nictheroy has forty thousand inhabitants and is the capital of the
State of Rio de Janeiro. It is a beautiful city and offers a wide
field for missionary work. Its importance is apparent.

We have a church in the populous suburb of Engenho de Dentro. We
were present there at a great celebration when the church cleared
off the remainder of its debt and burned the notes. The building
was crowded to its utmost capacity. The people stood in the aisles
from the rear to the pulpit. They filled the little rooms behind
the pulpit and occupied space about the windows. There are about
seventy members of the church. A far greater progress should be
made now that the debt as well as other encumbrances have been
removed.

There are in Rio the First, Engenho de Dentro, Governors Island
and Santa Cruz churches, and twelve preaching places, four of
which are in rented halls. Missionary Maddox utilizes many members
of the churches in providing preaching at these missions. There
are only a very few paid evangelists in this mission, but a great
many church members are glad to go to these stations and tell the
gospel story.

Besides our Baptist work, the Southern Methodists are conducting a
very prosperous mission. They have several churches and a station
for settlement work. The Presbyterians and the Congregationalists
have some excellent churches and the YMCA is one of the most
flourishing in South America.





CHAPTER III.

A VISIT TO A COUNTRY CHURCH.


That I may give you a glimpse of the country life in Brazil, and
also some impression of country mission work, I invite you to take
a trip with Missionary Maddox and myself to the little hamlet of
Parahyba do Sul, in the interior of the State of Rio.

On Monday, June 13th, we boarded a six AM train for Parahyba do
Sul, which we reached about ten o'clock. It is a charming town
situated on the river by the same name. This river reminds one of
the French Broad, though the mountains are not so high and
precipitous as the North Carolina mountains. The mountains, too,
in this section are not covered with trees, but with a tall grass,
which, being in bloom, gave a beautiful purple color to the
landscape. The railroad climbs up the mountain sides from Rio in a
very picturesque manner.

The Parahyba do Sul Church is three miles over the mountains from
the station, in the house of Mrs. Manoela Rosa Rodrigues. The
house is constructed with mud walls and a thatched roof. The
floors are the bare ground, which is packed hard and smooth. There
are two rooms, with a narrow hall between them and a sort of "lean
to" kitchen. The largest room, which is about fifteen feet square,
is devoted to the church. The most prominent piece of furniture in
the house is the pulpit, which stands in this room. This pulpit is
large out of all proportion to everything else about the place. It
was covered over with a beautifully embroidered altar piece. The
two chairs placed for Brother Maddox and myself were also entirely
covered with crocheted Brazilian lace. I hesitated to occupy such
a daintily decorated seat.

This church of forty-six members maintains three Sunday schools in
the adjoining country and six preaching stations, members of the
church doing the preaching. Every member gives to the college in
Rio 200 reis (six cents) a month, and to missions, etc., 300 reis
(nine cents) per month. This is munificent liberality when we take
into consideration their exhausting poverty.

Our coming was a great event with them. We were met at the station
by a member of the church, who mounted us on a gray pony apiece
and soon had us on our way. He walked, and with his pacing sort of
stride he easily kept up with us. His feet were innocent of shoes.
He says he does not like shoes because they interfere with his
walking. Underneath that dilapidated hat and those somewhat seedy
clothes we found a warm-hearted Christian, who serves the Lord
with passionate devotion. He often preaches, though he has very
little learning. He is mighty in the Scriptures, having committed
to memory large sections of them, and has a genuine experience of
grace to which he bears testimony with great power.

We arrived at the church about eleven o'clock. We were received
with expressions of great joy. Mrs. Manoela was so happy over our
coming that she embraced us in true Brazilian style. We were shown
into our room, where we refreshed ourselves by brushing off the
dust and bathing. How spick and span clean was everything in that
room, even to the dirt floor!

Before we had completed our ablutions, the good woman of the house
called Maddox out and asked what she could cook for me. She
thought I could not eat Brazilian dishes. He told her, to her
great relief, that I could eat anything he could. Quite right he
was, too, for we had been traveling all the morning on the
sustenance furnished by a cup of coffee which we had taken at the
Rio station a little before six o'clock. We were in possession of
an appetite by this time that would have raised very few questions
about any article of food.

Soon we were seated at the breakfast table, which was placed in
the church room with benches around it for seats. I was honored by
being placed at one end of the table. What a meal it was! Not only
had Mrs. Manoela taxed her own larder, but the other members, who
by this time had arrived in large numbers, had brought in many
good things. I cannot tell what the dishes were, for the reason
that I do not know. It is sufficient to say that every one was
good--perhaps our appetite helped out our appreciation of some of
them. There were as many as eight dishes the like of which I had
never tasted before. How do you suppose I managed it when they
served some delicious cane molasses, and, instead of bread to go
with it, they served cream cheese? I asked Maddox how I should
work this combination. He replied by cutting up his cheese into
his plate of molasses and eating the mixture. I did the same
thing, and I bear testimony that it was fine. By the time the
breakfast was concluded, I had scored a point with our good
friends, for they thought that a stranger who could render such a
good account of himself at a Brazilian breakfast must be very much
like themselves. (Let us explain about Brazilian meals: They take
coffee in the early morning. Bread and butter is served with the
coffee. Breakfast, which is a very substantial meal, is served
about eleven o'clock. Dinner, which is the chief meal of the day,
is served about five o'clock in the afternoon. At bedtime light
refreshments are served, which are often substantial enough to
make another meal).

After breakfast was over, and it was some time before it was over,
for the crowd had to be fed, we assembled for worship. The
congregation was too large for the little room, so the men built a
beautiful arbor out of bamboo cane. When Maddox told me we were to
hold services under an arbor I was dissappointed, for somehow
there had come over me a great desire to speak from that large
pulpit in the little room. My dissappointment was short-lived,
however, for when we reached the arbor there were the pulpit and
the lace-covered chairs! It was a gracious service. The Spirit of
the Lord was upon us. The sermon lost none of its effect from the
fact that it had to be interpreted, because Maddox interpreted it
with sympathy and power.

After preaching, four were received for baptism. They were not
converted at this service, but had been expecting to come for some
time. Maddox baptized them in the spring branch, which had been
deepened by a temporary dam being thrown across it. One of those
baptized was a woman ninety years of age.

Our time was growing short now. Maddox changed his clothes in a
hurry. We had to catch the four o'clock train. We did stop long
enough to drink a cup of Brazilian coffee. Such coffee! I will not
attempt to describe it, because our friends in the States can not
understand. There is nothing like it in this country. We took
time, too, to say good-bye. The whole crowd lined up and we went
the length of the line, bidding everyone a hearty godspeed. The
Brazilian not only shakes hands with you, but he embraces you
heartily. Yes, some of the good matrons embraced us. It was a
novel experience for me, but a mere custom with them, and the act
was performed with such modest restraint that any possible
objectionable features were eliminated. Having said good-bye to
them all we mounted our gray ponies, and, led by our barefooted
friend, rode away with thanks-giving in our hearts for the good
fellowship with the saints of Parahyba do Sul.

The tie of love for a common Lord had bound our affections to
them. Their simple-hearted sincerity and devotion had helped us.
Their zeal had contributed to our faith. One incident touched me
especially. Just before breakfast a little girl about four years
of age, led by her mother, brought to us a package containing some
Brazilian cakes. When we opened the package there lay on top a
piece of folded paper on Which was written: "How beautiful upon
the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that
publisheth peace, that bringeth good tidings of good, that
publisheth salvation, that saith unto Zion, thy God reigneth'
'(Isa. 52:7). Presented to our brother pastors, Maddox and Ray by
Archimina Nunes." Instantly there arose in my heart the prayer
that God would speed the day when his swift-footed messengers
shall publish the good tidings of peace to all this vast and needy
land.





CHAPTER IV.

TWO PRESIDENTS.


It was our good fortune while in Rio to be received by the
President of the Republic, Dr. Nilo Pecanha. Missionaries Shepard,
Langston and Ginsburg and Dr. Nogueira Paranagua escorted me. When
we started I suggested that we take a street car. Not so those
Brazilians! We must go in an automobile. We were very careful to
wear our Prince Albert coats, too; for, above all things, the
Brazilian is a master in punctilious ceremonies. We were ushered
into the waiting room by a doorkeeper, a finely-liveried mulatto
with a large chain around his shoulders to indicate his authority.
The waiting room was full of people, but we were not kept waiting
long. We sent in our cards and soon we heard our names announced
and we were led into the presence of the private secretary. After
a few words of explanation by Dr. Paranagua, the secretary retired
to ask the President if he would see us. He returned presently and
showed us into the audience chamber, which was a large and
tastefully decorated room. Around the walls were several groups of
chairs, placed in true Brazilian style somewhat as follows: A
cane-bottomed divan was set with its back to the wall, then
several cane-bottomed chairs were placed at right angles to it in
two rows facing each other, usually four in a row. The President
guided me between these chairs and took a seat on the divan and
motioned me to a seat by his side. He is a man of slight build,
with a mild expression which wins confidence. He was most informal
in his speech and spoke in a candid and unreserved manner which
quickly put us at ease.

I told him, through an interpreter, that we had come from a visit
to the Minister of the Interior, with whom we had been in
conference about the status of Brazilian schools. The President
expressed his great pleasure over our coming to see him and said
that he had personal knowledge of what our denomination is doing
and of some of the workers. He was satisfied that our object was
altruistic and for the good of the country and people; that so far
as depended upon him, he was ready to give us the full benefit of
his official position. As proof of his wish to see absolute
religious freedom, he cited an instance of how he had protected
some monks in the Amazon Valley recently. These men were in
straits and he had sent soldiers to liberate them, and then
turning with a smile to Ginsburg, he said that he also never
abandoned his friend Solomon when he was attacked. He refreshed
our minds upon the fact that lately, when certain priests in the
city of Rio had attempted to resist the government over a disputed
piece of property which had been granted them under the old
regime, he gave them to understand that if they did not behave
themselves, the door was open and they could leave the country.
They soon came to terms. As to his successor, the President said
that the incoming President was of the same party and would carry
out the same policies, ideas and ideals. These policies meant
absolute liberty of thought, conscience and speech, which is
guaranteed by the constitution. Before the interview closed, he
again expressed his pleasure at receiving a representative of an
American institution, convinced as he was that the propaganda of
our schools, morals and ideals would draw the two nations closer
together, and that he was ready to encourage us to that end. "We
are following the ideals of the United States", he said, "which we
recognize as our elder sister." He expressed peculiar pleasure
over the prospect of our establishing a college and he assured us
that the Brazilian government would put no obstacle in the way of
our purpose, but that it would do all in its power, on the other
hand, to encourage us.

While we are meeting Presidents, I would like to introduce you to
another one upon whom the salvation of Brazil depends more largely
than it does upon any occupant of the chair of chief magistrate.
It is possible for the man who has been elevated by the ballots of
his people to serve in a large way the moral good of his people
and we thank God for all rulers who rule with justice and
liberality in the interest of liberty and the common good. But far
greater and far more serviceable than these are those choice
spirits who, by embracing the gospel of Christ, give themselves
devoutly to bringing in His reign in the hearts of men. Such
spirits, by the sheer force of their characters, wield a far more
abiding influence for the help of their fellows. The man I wish to
introduce is Dr. Nogueira Paranagua, the President of the
Brazilian Baptist Convention.

He belongs to one of the oldest and most aristocratic families of
the State of Piauhy. He was Governor of his state at the time of
the institution of the Republic. After the establishment of the
Republic, he was elected to the National Congress for a term of
four years. Then he was elected to the Senate and served nine
years. He is a skilled physician and is married to a Swiss lady of
fine family. His family connections occupy one quarter of the
State of Piauhy. He is, at the present time, Treasurer of the
National Printing Concern, which does not occupy all of his time.
The remainder of his time he devotes to the practice of his
profession and to the preaching of the gospel. He is a deacon in
the First church in Rio. He is not an ordained minister--he is
simply an humble man of God. He is an ardent patriot who believes
that the salvation of Brazil can be realized only through the
gospel of Christ, to which he gives his life and all.

Now I, for one, believe that the theory of Dr. Nogueira is the one
that will finally lead Brazil into the fullness of life and power
it is capable of attaining. It is well to have written in the
constitution the guarantee of religious and political liberty. It
is well to have Presidents who courageously carry into effect the
provisions of this constitution, but the highest good is not
attained until behind all documentary guarantees is a personal
righteousness in the people. Dr. Nogueira's insistent advocacy of
Christ for Brazil is the one thing that gives assurance of a
genuine righteousness that will exalt the nation.

He is the President of a remarkable body. It was our privilege to
attend the Brazilian Baptist Convention which met in Sao Paulo,
June, 1910. It was composed of sixty delegates, about one third of
whom were missionaries. The remainder were natives. They came from
all parts of Brazil. One man from the Madeira Valley traveled
three weeks on his journey to Sao Paulo. They represented 109
churches, which had a total membership of 7,000. These churches
increased by baptism twenty-five per cent, last year. They
maintain a boys' school and a theological school at Pernambuco, a
school for boys and girls at Bahia, a boys' school at Nova
Friburgo, a girls' school at Sao Paulo and the crown of the school
system, the Rio Baptist College and Seminary in the capital. They
have a Publication Board to produce Sunday School and other
literature, a Home Mission Board to develop the missionary work in
the bounds of Brazil, and a Foreign Mission Board, which conducts
foreign mission operations in Chill and Portugal. While their
country is so needy, they believe in the principle of foreign
missions so thoroughly that they gave last year for foreign
missions as much per capita as did the churches in the bounds of
the Southern Baptist Convention. One night during the Convention,
I addressed them upon the subject of foreign missions, and after I
had finished speaking one of the missionaries came forward and
said he had thought that in as much as he had given his life to
foreign mission work, he was not under any special obligation to
contribute money to this cause, but now he saw his error and
proposed to give as a means of grace and in order to discharge his
duty to the larger cause.

What a privilege it was to attend this Convention! All of us took
our meals at the Girls' College and by this arrangement we had a
most delightful time socially. It is a fine body full of good
cheer, hope, faith, courage, consecration. To come to know them--
missionaries and native Christians alike--is to enter into
fellowship with some of the choicest and most indomitable spirits
that have ever adorned the Kingdom of our Lord.





CHAPTER V.

THE GOSPEL WITHHELD.


When I went to South America I decided that I would spend little
time upon the material aspects of the trip, but would, on the
other hand, attempt to arrive at an understanding of the religious
conditions and needs of the people. I consider that the religious
needs are the abiding and vital interests of any people.

I knew also that Brazil is counted as being a Roman Catholic
country and the consideration at once arose in connection with
this fact as to whether this religion affected the life and
thought of the people sufficiently to satisfy their religious
needs. If it does, then let us be honest enough to recognize it,
and if it does not, let us be courageous enough to assume our
responsibility towards it for we must hold that the great
justification for missionary effort is the evangelical and not the
polemical one. If there is no greater reason for our entering a
country than for the purpose of fighting the Catholics, then I,
for one, am frank to say that I do not think we ought to spend our
energies in any such field. The question for us to settle is
whether there is a real call for the preaching of the gospel in a
given country. That question can be answered only by a candid
consideration of the facts in the case and not by the bigoted
notion that all who do not agree with us are to be driven from the
face of the earth.

What is the religious status of Brazil? Is there any call for
Protestant effort? I answer after giving serious study to this
question, and after personal observation of the effects of the
religious practices upon the people, that there is the same
imperative call for missionary effort in Brazil that comes from
China or any other heathen country, viz., the gospel is not
preached to the people.

The priests hold services, to be sure, in the churches, but there
are many churches in Brazil in which there has been no pretense of
preaching a sermon within five years. The priests do not preach.
They say mass, read prayers and sing songs in Latin, a language
which is not understood by the people. Occasionally, a Catholic
fraternity will invite a special orator to preach a sermon upon
some great feast day. This visiting brother does not preach. His
theme upon such an occasion would either be a discussion of the
special saint whose day is being celebrated, or he would speak
upon some civic question which had more or less to do with the
moral or political life of the people. In the interior these
special occasions occur only once every two to five years, so that
even this semblance of a sermon comes rarely. In the cities these
special addresses are made on one saint's day each year or on some
special anniversary, or when some dignitary is making a visit.
Usually this dignitary will say a mass and not preach. When one of
these special days occurs the preaching is not heard very
extensively for the reason that the noise and commotion about the
stalls for gambling, drinking and other attractions is sufficient
to drown the voice of the speaker. These side-show attractions
fill all available space about the building, giving it the
appearance of a circus more than anything else. They are run by
individuals who pay a tax to the church for the privilege. The
preaching is not the feature of the day, the chief object seeming
to be to furnish amusement for the people and money for the
church. It cannot be said that on such days the gospel can
possibly be preached successfully.

Occasionally there is held in the church what is called a special
mission. This is conducted by visiting monks. We would expect that
on such occasions the gospel would be preached, but such is not
the case. They hear confessions in the morning. A special premium
is placed upon the celebration of marriages during the mission,
because these visiting monks will make a cheaper rate than the
resident priests. For this reason the majority of the priests do
not like to have these monks come in for special missions, and
would not conduct them but for the fact that the bishop compels
them to do so. The addresses delivered by the monks in these
special missions are not sermons. They either upbraid the
Protestants, speak against civil marriage (the only legal marriage
in Brazil is that performed by a civil officer), inveigh against
the Republic, discourse upon the lives of the saints, assail
Luther and other reformers, or urge confession, penance and
submission to the Pope.

Furthermore, the Bible is withheld from the people. The
circulation of no book is so bitterly opposed as that of the
Bible. It is true that the Franciscan monks are trying to
introduce an edition of the New Testament which contains special
comments attacking Protestants. These special editions are very
expensive and difficult to secure. The person who wishes to buy
one of these Bibles must get permission from the vicar of his
parish, and if the would-be purchaser is inclined towards
Protestantism, the vicar will refuse to grant permission. The
priests are not very much in sympathy with the idea of circulating
even this annotated edition of the New Testament.

In Armagoza, near Bahia, the Franciscan monks held, three or four
years ago, a mission and sold about 1,000 of these Catholic
Scriptures. It seems that the Protestants had also been
circulating a Testament which had the same general appearance as
that sold by the Franciscan monks. When the monks had sold out
their supplies, they heard of what the Protestants had done and
inasmuch as the people could not distinguish between the true book
and the false, they ordered the people to bring back all of the
books to the monks, under the promise that they would examine
them, eliminate the Protestant book and return to the owners the
authorized Bible. The people brought back their books in good
faith. The monks took them, but never returned them. Neither did
they return the money.

On the 22nd of February, 1903, there occurred a public burning of
Bibles in Pernambuco. This was done in defiance of the Protestant
work with the evident purpose of intimidating the Protestant
workers and arousing a public sentiment against them.

But having failed in this, their first effort, they decided to try
another even more ostentatious.

Although it is illegal to burn any religious document publicly,
yet the first burning passed unnoticed by the officials of the
law. But not so the second.

Having incurred the censure and ill-will of many of the most
thoughtful and liberal-minded, even of the Catholics themselves,
by the disgrace of February 22nd, the directors of the Anti-
Protestant League decided to make a grand rally on the occasion of
the league's first anniversary, September 27th. And to realize
this, they published about two weeks beforehand a very extensive
program. The program said that "there will be burned 26 Bibles, 42
Testaments, 45 copies of the Gospel of Matthew, Luke 9, John 12,
Mark 4 and Acts 9", besides a great many other useful books. In
the list also there were some three hundred copies of different
religious Protestant papers.

According to the program the bishop was to preside. The public
burning, however, was not performed. Such pressure was brought to
bear upon the officials that they interfered. It was even
discussed in the National House of Congress. But in spite of all
opposition, not to be completely defeated, they burned the Bibles
in the back yard of the church.

These examples are sufficient to demonstrate the attitude of the
priests towards the Scriptures, and we must concede that any
church or set of men who by such methods withhold from the people
the Word of God cannot be said to preach the gospel. He is an
enemy of the gospel who puts any restraint upon the circulation of
the Scriptures. It is wise indeed for the sake of their cause that
these opponents of Protestantism should oppose the circulation of
the Scriptures, for we shall cite numerous instances of how the
Bible unaided has broken down Romish superstition and turned men
from dark error into the light of the glorious gospel of Jesus.





CHAPTER VI.

SAINT WORSHIP.


What is the real religion of the Brazilians? It is more a saint
worship than anything else. Saint worship is at its core. Mary is
the chief saint. All prayers are made to her. She is the
intercessor. The Litany is all addressed to Mary. It runs, "Oh
Mary, hear us, etc." She is worshiped under different aspects--
Mary of the Sailors, Mary of the Conception, Mary of the Candles,
Mary of the Rosary, ad infinitum. Even Christ is worshiped as a
saint. The patron saint of Campos, for instance, is called Sao
Salvador (St. Savior). The city of Bahia is called Sao Salvador.
Its patron saint is Jesus.

A saint is an intercessor between man and God. Because of his
holiness, he has favor with God, and therefore the people pray to
him. Very few consider the saint lower than God. They offer
sacrifices, make prayers and burn candles to the saint.

St. Anthony of Padua is a very hard-worked saint. He has placed
upon him the double duty of furnishing suitors for all the young
women and of leading the armies of the Republic to victory. No
wonder this overworked saint gets into trouble. Young women place
him in their rooms, burn candles and offer prayers before him. He
is dressed up in the finest toggery and is given great honor. If,
however, after awhile he does not bring along the suitor, he is
given a sound beating, or he may be hung head downwards in a well
or stood on his head under a table. These indignities are heaped
upon him in order to force him to produce the suitor which the
young lady very much desires. He is also the military saint. In
the time of the Empire, he was carried at the head of the army and
had the rank of a colonel. Even after the Empire was abolished, he
retained his rank for many years and received from the government
the salary of a colonel. Such an idol was in Bahia and his salary
was discontinued only five years ago. The money went, of course,
to the priest in the church where the image was kept.

Every town, village and country seat has its protecting saint. In
time of drouth they in many places carry the saint through the
streets in procession. He is taken from his place in the church to
some hut, maybe, where he is placed beneath the altar. This is
done in order to cause him to bring rain. After the rain comes he
is taken out and with great distinction is replaced in his
original niche. They do this sometimes in the case of a scourge of
insects or disease.

Late one evening, after Missionary Ginsburg and I had returned
from a trip into the interior of the State of Bahia, we arrived in
the city of Nazareth. It is a town of about 10,000 inhabitants. We
were to wait here until the following morning for the boat which
was to take us to Bahia.

As we went down the street we saw a great throng of people surging
about an image which was being carried upon the shoulders of some
men. Two priests walked in front to direct the movements of the
procession. More than half of the people in the city must have
been in the procession. They paraded far out into the country,
crossed to the opposite side of the river, wound themselves back
and forth through the narrow streets until a late hour at night.
At eleven o'clock just before we retired, we stood for some time
watching the procession pass the hotel where we were stopping. It
was a miserably ugly little image, gaudily decorated. It was being
paraded through the streets for the purpose of staying the plague
of smallpox, which at that time was scourging the town. When we
saw the procession last it had been augmented by such numbers that
it appeared as if the entire city was following this image. They
seemed to believe that it could really charm away the smallpox.

This is not an isolated case. It is typical. Every patron saint
has laid upon him at times the responsibility of breaking a drouth
or the effects of a dreadful scourge which may be afflicting the
people. It is the veriest sort of idolatry.

One of the most pitiful exhibitions of superstition to be found in
Brazil is that in connection with the many shrines to which
pilgrimages are made by thousands of people and at which places
great miracles are supposed to be performed. In Bahia there is a
famous shrine called Bom Fim (Good End). It is located on a hill
in the suburbs of the city. Years ago tradition has it, the image
of San Salvador was found on the summit of this hill. A priest
took charge of the image and removed it to a church. On the
following morning the image was missing, and upon going to the
spot where he first found it, he discovered the image. Again he
took it to the church, and again on the following day, he found
the image at the original place. The tradition was, therefore,
started that the image had fallen from Heaven to the top of the
hill, and every time it was removed from this spot it, of itself,
returned. So it was taken for granted that the image desired its
shrine built on this spot. At first there was a little shrine
constructed, and afterward was built the magnificent edifice which
now shelters the image.

To this place the thousands go annually upon pilgrimages. One of
the most gruesome spectacles to be found anywhere is in a side
room near the altar. From the ceiling are suspended wax and
plaster of paris reproductions called ex-votos of literally every
portion of the body--feet, hands, limbs, heads, all portions--the
ceiling space is completely covered with these uncanny figures.
The wall is hung with pictures, which portray all sorts of scenes,
such as a man in shipwreck, a carpenter falling down a ladder, a
child falling out of a second-story window, death chambers of
various people, etc. These figures and pictures are intended to
represent miracles. When these people were in their afflictions
they prayed to the image of the Good End and made a promise that
if they should recover they would bring one of these votive
offerings of the part affected, whether of man or beast, to the
shrine. Some of them came before the cure was effected, and with a
prayer, left the image behind and the cures of their disease or
afflictions were attributed to the image of Bom Fim. It is said
that when this church is given its annual cleaning, just before
the celebration of the saint's day, thousands of people congregate
here, roll in the waters which are used to wash out the building,
and drink the filthy stuff, deeming it to be holy. There is hardly
a more revolting scene to be found anywhere, and all in the name
of religion. Until recently, when the police put an end to it, a
most disgusting species of holy dance was observed on this annual
day in which the most sensual practices were indulged.

Perhaps the most famous shrine in all Brazil is in the far
interior of the State of Bahia on the San Francisco River. It is
the famous Lapa. The image has its shrine in a cave in a very
remarkable geological formation. One hundred thousand people make
pilgrimages to this shrine every year from all of the States in
Brazil. The last Emperor himself made a visit to this shrine. From
June to August of last year $20,000 was collected from the
pilgrims. Our missionary, Jackson, met a man who had been on the
way six months. It required him a year to make this trip. The same
missionary saw a family from the State of Alagoas which had been
on the journey six weeks. Dr. Z. C. Taylor says he passed through
sections that had been almost depopulated because the men had sold
out their homes, horses and cattle in order to seek a miracle in
their favor at this same shrine. Fire destroyed the image in 1902.
Protestants were accused of setting fire to it because a
missionary was near at the time. (He was forty miles away.) In the
controversy that arose the missionary noted that, inasmuch as the
new image was sent by freight and not by ticket, it must be an
idol and not a saint. Suffice it to say, that a new image was
placed and the people are worshiping it with the same zeal with
which they worshiped the old, even though the new one came by
freight and the old one was supposed to have fallen from Heaven.
It is believed to have miracle working power and to give great
merit to one who makes the pilgrimage to it.

In the daily paper called the "Provinca," published in Pernambuco,
there was printed on August 23, 1910, the following telegram from
the city of Rio, the capital of the Republic.

"The Seculo (Century) of today announces that on St. Leopold
street in Andarahy (a suburb of Rio) there was discovered a
fountain of water in a hollow rock, in which a plebian found an
image of a saint.

"This image," adds the Seculo, "although in water, did not present
the least vestige of humidity. The news of this curious discovery
was immediately circulated, and there was a great pilgrimage,
including a reporter of the Seculo, to this miraculous fountain in
Andarahy."

It is very probable that this telegram heralds the advent of a new
shrine, because it is in this fashion that these so-called
miracle-working shrines are brought into existence.

Not all of these shrines are canonized, but nevertheless they have
power over the people. As we were making a trip into the interior
of the State of Pernambuco we passed a station called Severino.
Near the station we could see a splendid church building which had
been constructed in honor of St. Severino. This saint is not in
the calendar, not recognized by the church nor the bishop, yet it
is popular all over Brazil. Many people are named after him, and
to this shrine are brought many of the same sort of things as were
described in connection with the shrine of the Good End. This idol
is stuffed with sugar-cane pith. The head of it was found in the
woods some time ago. A tradition was started that an image had
fallen from Heaven. The superstitious people believed the report
and soon a shrine was in full operation, which today, even though
it be not canonized, is exerting a far-reaching influence. The
owner of the shrine gave up his farming and lives handsomely on
the offerings the deluded bring to his private shrine.

In one of the most magnificent churches in Bahia is an image of a
negro saint. This holy being won his canonization as a reward for
stealing money from his master to contribute to the church. That
is it: Do anything you please, provided you share the spoils with
the church.

Across the breast of the Virgin's image in the church of Our Lady
of Penha in Pernambuco, before which church the Bibles were burned
in 1903, are written the following words: "One hundred days'
indulgence to the person who will kiss the holy foot of the Holy
Virgin." This pitifully expresses, perhaps, the thought behind
saint worship. It is the hope that the aching of the sinful heart
may find some assuagement through the worship of these gilded,
gaudy images. It is claimed by the priests and some of the more
intelligent that the image worshiped is only a concrete
representation of the saint, and it contains symbolically the
spirit of the saint. To be sure! This is exactly the reason the
more intelligent fetish worshiper in Africa assigns for worshiping
his hand-made god. The etone or piece of wood is a representative
of God and to a degree contains His spirit. Such worship is
condemned as being idolatry in the African. The thing which is
idolatry in the African must be idolatry in the Catholic. Even the
Catholics will condemn the idol worship of the heathen, and yet
this same Catholic church has in scores of places in South America
and in other heathen lands, taken the identical images worshiped
by the heathen and converted them into Catholic saints.

In the city of Braga, in Portugal, is a temple which centuries ago
was devoted to Jupiter. It was afterward converted into a Catholic
church and dedicated to St. Peter. The idol Jupiter, with two keys
in his hand, was consecrated into St. Peter. In another part of
the same city is a temple devoted to Janus in Roman times, which
was turned into a temple dedicated to St. John. The idol which
formerly was worshiped as Janus is being now worshiped as St.
John. In the same temple there is an image now consecrated as St.
Mark which was formerly the god Mars. The saint worship in Brazil
is just as heathenish. In China Buddhist idols were renamed
Jehosaphat by the Jesuits and worshiped. Their practices in Brazil
are in keeping with their methods in other lands.

What is the difference between a worshiper who thus seeks
indulgence through the worship of an image in Brazil and a like
worshiper with a like soul need bowing before a similar wooden
image in Africa or China?





CHAPTER VII.

PENANCE AND PRIEST.


Confession and penance play a large part in the religious life of
the common people. The priests exercise great ingenuity to
preserve the confessional. The better educated classes have long
ago deserted the confessional, but it still holds sway over the
common people and hangs like a dark shadow over the immoral deeds
of the priests. Along with it flourishes the performance of
penance. These two hand-maidens in wrong-doing often thrive in an
absurd way.

In Penedo, the capital of the State of Alagoas, a new wharf was
being built and the money granted by the Government was not
sufficient to complete the work. The contractors approached the
two monks who were to hold a mission in the city during February,
1904, and offered to pay them $500 if they would instruct the
people to, in penance, carry across the city the stones which had
been brought from the interior. A large quantity of building
material had been brought down by rail and needed to be
transported across to the wharf. The monks agreed, gave
instructions accordingly, and in one week the people carried these
stones across the town to the wharf. The transfer of these stones
would have cost $2,500. At least 10,000 people engaged in this
colossal act of penance. They came from two counties. Thus the
contractors, by a little skillful manipulation, made penance save
them considerable money.

In some of these penances the people wear crowns of thorns on
their heads and cords about their necks and go barefooted through
the streets of the city in their pilgrimages to the church. All,
that through these means they may find some ease for the
conscience which accuses them of evil.

What shall I say of the priests? I believe I will say nothing. I
declined steadily to soil the pages of my note book with the
records of the immoral deeds of these men. I will let speak for me
an educated Brazilian, a teacher in an excellent school in
Pernambuco, who is not a professing Christian, but who, like a
great many of his class, admires Christianity very sincerely. When
Mr. Colton, International Secretary of the Young Men's Christian
Association, passed through Pernambuco in June, 1910, he was given
a banquet by some of the leading men, which event offended so
grievously the Catholic authorities that they published in the
"Religious Tribune," their organ, a bitter diatribe on the Young
Men's Christian Association. The professor, to whom I referred,
who is now one of the leading judges in the state, published the
following answer to this attack. He is in far better position to
speak authoritatively about the Brazilian priests than I am. His
article ran as follows:

"FURY UNBRIDLED."

"The official organ of the diocese of Olinda could not on this
occasion control its great animus. It threw aside its old worn-out
mantle of hypocrisy, it precipitated itself furiously and
insolently against the Y.M.C.A. It not only does not forgive, but
does not fear to excommunicate the local and State authorities who
appeared at the banquet nor the directory of the Portuguese
reading rooms who lent their hall to said Y.M.C.A.

"After affirming that the evangelization of Brazil means its
unchristianizing the clerical organ begins to call the members of
the Association and Protestants in general wolves in sheep's
clothing.

"But we ask, to whom does this epithet apply better? To us who
dress as the generality of men, thus leaving no doubt as to our
sex and freeing our consciences from the ignominious Roman yoke,
direct ourselves by that straight and narrow way which leads to
salvation; or to this black band which secretly and maliciously
makes of a man its prey from the moment in which he sees the light
of day until the moment in which he goes to rest in the bosom of
the earth? To us, Who having no thirst for dominion, seek to
cultivate in man all the noble attributes given by the Creator, to
us who teach clearly and without sophistry and gross superstitions
the plan of salvation as it is found in the word of God; or to
this legion of corrupt and hypocritical parasites, corruptors of
youth, whose character they seek to debase and villify by means of
the confessional?

"The only object of the wolf in dressing himself as a sheep is to
devour the sheep. And these shaven heads know perfectly well why
we cite the chronicles of the convents; they know from personal
knowledge who are responsible for the greater part of the
illegitimate children, and they have no doubt about the permanency
and progress of prostitution.

"But they have effrontery, these priests!

"What has the priesthood done in Brazil in about 400 years? The
answer is found in facts that prove the absence of all initiative
of will, of strength, of energy and of activity. Brazil has only
been a field for torpid exploitation by these gain-hunting
libertines. And what of the attacks against private and public
fortunes?

"Happily, for some years, the public conscience has been awakening
and the people are beginning to know that a priest, even the best
of them, is worthless.

"Freed from an official religion, the Brazilian people have really
made progress in spite of the hopelessness of Romanism that
perverts all things and resorts to ail sorts of schemes to
preserve its former easy position

"We, pirates? Ah! deceivers. Then we, who present ourselves
loyally without subterfuge, proclaiming the divine truths,
speaking logically, without artifices or superstitions, are
pirates? You noble priests are noble specimens of Christian
culture, I must confess! You are such good things that France has
already horsewhipped you out of the country, and Spain, whose
knightly race is regaining the noble attributes obliterated by the
iron yoke of Romanism, is about ready to apply to you the same
punishment.

"There is no doubt that the priest is losing ground every day. All
their manifestations of hate and satanic fury are easily
explained.

"One easily recognizes the true value of the explosion of vicious
egotism found in the official organ of the diocese of Olinda. The
priest this time lost his calmness and let escape certain rude
phrases as if he were yet in the good old times when he could
imprison and burn at his pleasure. Console yourselves, reverend
lord priests, everything comes to an end, and the ancient period
of darkness and obscurity exists no more in Brazil."

What is the net result of such religious life as we have been
portraying? The common and more ignorant people accept without
very much questioning the teachings and practices which we have
explained. The better educated people, especially the men, have
lost confidence in the priesthood. Scarcely an educated man can be
found who believes in the moral uprightness of the priest. The
chief hold the Church has upon the better classes is a social and
not a religious one. Births, marriages, deaths, alike are great
social events, and upon such occasions, because it is custom to
have a priest, the better classes of people even call in the
services of the priests, in whom they have no confidence. The
effect upon the beliefs of these better classes is most
distressing. Spiritism, materialism and atheism are rampant, and
one could well believe that these people set adrift without
spiritual guides are in a worse condition than if they were still
devout believers in the ancient practices of the Roman church.
They are far more difficult to reach because they have imbibed the
philosophies of spiritism, materialism and atheism. An atheist in
South America is just as difficult to approach as he is anywhere.
The devout Catholics are easier to reach with the gospel. The
devout Catholic has at least one element which must always be
reckoned with in dealing helpfully with an immortal soul. He has
reverence, which thing many of those people who have been swung
away from their faith have not. I take no comfort in the fact that
the people in large numbers are deserting the Roman Catholic
church and are being set adrift without any form of religion. One
could wish that they might be held to their old beliefs until we
could reach them with the virile truths of the gospel of Jesus.

We come back to it--the gospel is not preached in Brazil except as
it is preached by the Protestant missionary. The need is just as
great for gospel preaching in this country as it is in China.

One day after I had finished speaking to a congregation in
Castello, back in the interior from Campos, an old English woman
came up to me and expressed her great pleasure over having the
privilege of hearing once more the gospel preached in English. I
had spoken in English, and the missionary had interpreted what I
had to say into Portuguese. She had heard the sermon twice. She
had been in Brazil thirty-odd years. She and her husband had lived
in the far interior. They had recently moved down to Castello that
they might be near the little church where they could have
the opportunity of worshiping God. She told me that back in the
town in which they had lived they had left two sons who were
engaged in business for themselves. These two sons had been born
in Brazil, and yet in all their lives THEY HAD NEVER HEARD A
GOSPEL SERMON. Yes, these people are without the gospel and this
is our justification for carrying to them the message of life. For
them Christ died, and to them, because they have not heard, He has
sent us that we might bring His precious message of eternal
salvation, for "How shall they believe in Him of whom they have
not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher?"





CHAPTER VIII.

THE GOSPEL TRIUMPHANT.


It is often claimed that the progress of the gospel is slower and
more difficult in Catholic countries than in outright heathen
lands. Such statements can be answered only by an appeal to the
facts in the case. What are the facts? The Foreign Mission Board
of the Southern Baptist Convention has been conducting operations
in Brazil for about thirty years. It has been doing work in China
for more than sixty years. During all the time since work--was
opened in Brazil, the Board has had about three times as many
missionaries in China as it had in Brazil, with the result that at
the present time we have 9,939 members of our churches in Brazil,
as against 9,990 members of our churches in China. We have worked
less than half as long in Brazil and with one-third of the
missionary force. Last year with a missionary force one-third as
large in Brazil as it was in China, there were 635 more baptisms
in Brazil than there were in China. There were 1,534 baptisms in
China and 2,169 in Brazil. The same sort of comparison between our
work in Italy and Japan would make the same showing. This is not
to make a prejudicial statement concerning the work in any field.
We make it simply to show that the gospel does succeed remarkably
in the Catholic countries. The fact is, the rate of progress is
far greater in the Catholic country than it is in the heathen
land. The gospel does succeed in Catholic countries. What is said
here of the work of this one Board can he laid just as truly of
the others.

It was our privilege to witness some remarkable demonstrations of
the power of the gospel while we were in Brazil. About 3:30
o'clock one afternoon we arrived in Genipapo in the interior of
the State of Bahia, after having ridden since early morning upon
the railroad train through a mountainous country which, with its
tropical vegetation, held our keenest interest. We were met at the
station by some members of our church, who escorted us to the home
of Polycarpo Nogueira. Mrs Nogueira is a very devout Christian.
Some years ago she learned that her mother had embraced
Christianity. Mrs. Nogueira set out upon a journey of 130 miles on
muleback to her mother's home for the purpose of taking out of her
mother's heart her belief in the gospel. She succeeded in shaking
her mother's faith and also the faith of her brother. She now
determined to prepare herself to combat this Baptist teaching
which was spreading over the country. She marked passages of
Scripture which she proposed to use against the Baptists. But when
she used them she grew ashamed because she became conscious of the
fact that she had misapplied the Word which she then gave deeper
study. The Word of God took hold of her own heart and she in turn
was converted. Her first thought was concerning her mother and
brother 130 miles away. Again she took the long journey on
muleback in order to lead her loved ones to Christ. She was able
to re-establish her mother's faith, but to this day her deep
regret is that her brother does not believe.

We had a great service at the church that night. The crowd was so
large that we held the services out in the open. Seven stood to
confess their surrender to Christ. The good deacon of the church
was so thoroughly in the spirit of the occasion and in such
sympathy with me that he declared he could understand my English.
He really seemed to catch it before the missionary could interpret
it.

On the following day we reached St. Inez, the station at the end
of the railway, and spent the night in a poor excuse of a lodging
house called the Commercial Hotel.

At 7 o'clock on the following morning, which was Sunday, we
started on horseback for Arroz Novo, an excellent country church
fifteen miles away. A young brother named John Laringeiro (John
Orangetree) had brought horses for us. Before his conversion he
was an arch persecutor, and since he has become a Christian he has
been called upon to suffer even more bitter persecution than he
ever inflicted upon others. He is struggling to care for his
mother, and as the pastor of the church at Rio Preto, he is a most
acceptable gospel preacher.

It was a fine ride into the country, over hill and mountain and
deeply-shaded valley. After we had ridden about half the length of
our journey several brethren from Arroz Novo (New Rice) met us to
escort us to the church. A mile or two further we were met by
another company, who swelled the number of our dashing cavalcade
to about twenty-five. It was dashing, too, for they were hard
riders. It was a very joyous and cordial reception committee.
Finally we rode into sight of the church, winch is located on a
high hill commanding a grand panorama of the mountains. As we
approached we saw two long lines of people standing facing each
other in front of the church. The men were on one side and the
women on the other--about 600 of them. As we rode up the
congregation sang a hymn to give us welcome. We dismounted when we
reached the end of the two lines and walked down between them to
the church. Now it is the custom in Brazil upon festal occasions
to strew the meeting place with oleander and cinnamon leaves and
to throw rose petals and confetti upon those they wish to honor.
These good people observed this custom generously that day. A wide
space of the ground in front of the church was strewed with
leaves, and they showered such quantities of rose petals and
confetti upon us that we were beautiful sights by the time we
reached the door.

We entered the very creditable church building into which the
people now poured until every foot of space was occupied. There
was hardly room left for me to make gestures as I spoke. It was
ten o'clock. The people had been present since four engaged in a
prayer meeting. We began the service immediately. The Spirit of
the Lord was upon us to preach the gospel. Afterward we called for
those who wished to make confession of their faith in Christ. We
pushed back the people a little bit in the front and the space
thus made vacant was immediately filled with those who wished to
confess their Lord and Savior. We saw that others wanted to come,
so we asked them to stand where they were. All through the
audience they rose. Then began the examination of these
candidates. Numerous questions were put to them by the missionary
and the pastor of the church. Sometimes as many as twenty-five or
even more questions would be asked an individual so great was the
care exercised in examining those who wished to become members of
the church, and what impressed me most was the fact that after
every question they could think of had been asked, they would ask
if anyone present could endorse him. Whereupon someone, if he
could recommend the candidate would, after a brief speech of
endorsement, make a motion to receive him.

Over to my right rose a young woman who was the most beautiful
woman I saw in Brazil. Her name was Elvira Leal. She had been
favorable to the gospel for some time and had suffered cruel
persecution from her father. The tears streamed down her face as
she spoke, saying, "You know my story and what I have been called
upon to endure for the gospel's sake, but this morning I must
confess the Lord. I cannot resist the Spirit longer." I learned
that her father, in order to force her to give up her faith, had
dragged her across the floor by her hair. He had brandished his
dagger over her heart, threatening to take her life; he had forced
her to break her engagement to be married to the young preacher,
John Larinjeiro, who had brought the horses for us; he had
declared he would kill both of them rather than to allow them to
marry, and at the time we were there she was compelled to live in
the home of a neighbor, so violent had become her father in his
opposition to her adherence to the gospel. That morning, however,
she said though she knew it involved suffering, she would follow
her Savior at whatever cost.

By the time the missionary had finished examining this woman, a
man had crowded near to the front and indicated that he wished to
say something. It was John Larinjeiro's brother. He said that for
two years he had been impressed with the gospel, but because of
the persecution in his own home he had held back. When years ago
his mother had been converted, he went to persuade her to give up
her religion. Persuasion failing, he persecuted her severely. She
finally told him that his efforts were of no avail because she
could not give up her faith in Christ, yet if he would take the
Bible and show her where she was wrong, she would give it up. He
secured a gospel circulated by the priest and also "The Manual of
Instructions for Holding Missions" and both of these confirmted
his mother's faith, and he had no more to say. The Word impressed
itself upon his heart and he became sympathetic to the gospel.
Then trouble arose. His father-in-law, he said, had threatened to
take his wife and children from him and to put him out of his own
home. His wife had persecuted him and declared she would leave him
if he made the confession he desired to make. He said that he did
not know what to do, but had come forward to ask us to pray for
him. Then the congregation fell upon its face, as far as such a
thing was possible, and prayed. I could not understand all they
said in the prayers because they were spoken in Portuguese, but so
mighty was the presence of the Spirit and so irresistible was the
appeal sent up to the throne of Grace that I knew before the
prayers ended what the result would be. As soon as the prayers
were concluded, the man stood up and said, "News travels quickly
in this country. It may be that when I reach home I shall find my
wife and children gone, but whatever may he the cost, I cannot
resist the Spirit today. I must confess my Lord and ask for
membership in the church." Of course, he was received. A letter
received from the missionary some months later informed me that
the father-in-law had carried out his threat and did take away the
wife and children.

Numerous others stood to make confession, and the examination
continued far past one o'clock, 'till twenty-one were received
for baptism. This marvelous outpouring of the Spirit of Christ
enabled us to see with our own eyes the power of the gospel
demonstrated in the saving of souls in Brazil.

After the service we went to breakfast in a house near by. The
crowd, according to custom, came into the dining room, as many of
them as could, to hear the conversation while we sat about the
table. The walls of the building were made of mud, the floor was
the bare ground, in the corner of the room, surrounded by a mud
puddle, stood a water jar, around which the chickens were picking.
I kicked a pig out of my way, accidentally stepped on a dog, but
nothing daunted, fell to with good will and ate, asking no
questions.

After a few hours' ride, upon our return journey in the afternoon,
we reached the town of Olhos d'Agua (Fountains of Water) through
which we had passed upon our outward journey in the early morning.
There is a very good church at this place which has suffered cruel
persecution. Upon the doors of every Protestant house in the town
have been painted black crosses. They were placed there at night
by the Catholics to keep the Devil from coming out. The black
cross of derision has become a mark of honor in that community. We
were greeted by a splendid audience that night and the gospel
again was honored. More than a dozen people accepted Christ and
made confession of Him.

I was greatly interested in Brother Raymundo, who is the leading
member of this church. Formerly he was a great persecutor. He was
an enemy to Antonio Barros, who is now a leading member in the
church at Arroz Novo. Barros was converted at Lage, and when he
met Raymundo he greeted him, at which Raymundo was greatly
surprised. Barros explained his action by saying that he had found
Christ and wanted to live at peace with all men. The fact that his
enemy should embrace him and beg his pardon greatly impressed
Raymundo. Upon the invitation of Barros, Raymundo attended the
meeting that night. He was touched by the gospel and was
converted. He now had to experience the same persecution he had
inflicted upon others. His enemies wrote to the merchants in Bahia
and told them that he was out of his mind. So persistent was their
persecution that he was compelled to give up his business. His
credit was destroyed by these reports. He moved away from Olhos
d'Agua, but when the native pastor left the place recently
Raymundo returned in order to hold the work together. He now makes
his meager living by trading, and through great sacrifice leads
the congregation in a very acceptable service.

We returned to St. Ignez by ten o'clock that night, tired and
happy over what our eyes had seen and our hearts had felt. It had
been a day of triumph for the gospel.

On Monday we started on our journey for Santo Antonio. When we
passed through Genipapo we found Brother Polycarpo Nogueira at the
station. He had come to ask about a passage of Scripture I had
pointed out to him on the night when we stayed in his home We had
urged him to accept the gospel and he hesitated. I quoted to him,
"Everyone, therefore, who shall confess me before men, him will I
confess before my Father in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me
before men, him, will I deny before my Father who is in Heaven."
Mat. 10:32, 33. He told us about a wonderful meeting held in the
church on Sunday, in which one had been converted and many others
were deeply interested. He himself was evidently moved upon by the
Spirit. May the word we gave him lead him to Christ.

Some hours further on we passed through Vargem Grande, where we
have another church. Several people boarded the train to accompany
us to Santo Antonio. One of them was Fausto de Almeida. When the
ex-priest, Ottoni, visited Vargem Guande some years ago to preach
the gospel this man Almeida, with a great crowd of boys equipped
with tin cans, met him at the station. This troupe escorted Ottoni
to the church and stood outside making as much noise as possible.
He offered the ex-priest a loaded cigar, which Ottoni declined
with kindly thanks. The minister's conduct was so gentle and kind
that Fausto, when he bethought himself, went home in a rage,
became intoxicated, and in order to vent his wrath, went out into
his back yard and fired his pistols. A little later one of his
sisters was converted, and by her good testimony not long after
that when she died, he was greatly impressed. Another sister was
converted and gave him a Bible, which he read and in which he
found the message of Christ. He obeyed his Lord, and in spite of
violent opposition on the part of his wife, is today in a faithful
and effective way, building up the church at Vargem, Grande.





CHAPTER IX.

JOSE BARRETTO.


When we reached Santo Antonio de Jesus at two p. m. we found a
throng at the station to meet us. They gave us a royal welcome,
receiving us literally with open arms. After this hearty greeting
we formed a procession and marched two and two through the streets
of the city to the church. They wished us to take the lead in the
procession, but we declined the honor and finally took position
about the middle of the line. They seemed to march through every
street in the city, so eager were they to impress the population
that there was somebody else in the world besides their religious
persecutors. When we arrived at the church they showered us once
more with rose petals and confetti. After prayer we were taken to
the home of Jose Barretto to be entertained.

Now, this same Jose Barretto is a very remarkable character. He
was formerly Superintendent of the Manganese mines near by and
very active in politics. If any questionable work needed to be
done in order to influence an election Jose was called upon to do
it. He is a great, strong fellow, more than six feet in height and
weighs, perhaps, 250 pounds. He was a violent man, fearless and
desperate. I noted many scars on his face which were evidences of
many dangerous encounters. He did not deign to steal the ballots,
but would take possession of the ballot box, extract from it the
proper number of votes, destroy them, seal the box and allow the
count to be made. No one dared withstand him. He was just as
violent in his opposition to the Protestants. He declared that he
would beat any Protestant who should ever come into his house.

Well, one day his own brother-in-law came to see him. This
brother-in-law was blind and also a Christian. After a while Jose
and his wife were commiserating the brother over his blindness
when he said, that though his eyes were clouded, his soul saw the
light of life. His sister said to him, "You must be a Protestant."
He replied, "Yes, thank God, I know Jesus Christ." She was so
frightened that she fainted, because she had visions of her burly
husband pouncing upon her blind brother and beating him to death.
Her husband resuscitated her and soothed her by saying, "I know I
have said all of these things about what I would do to the
Protestants, but I hope I am not mean enough to strike a blind man
and certainly I would not injure your brother." That night the
brother asked them to read the Scriptures. They had no Bible, but
did possess a book of Bible stories, one of which the sister read,
and then the brother asked permission to pray. Jose Barretto had
always been reverential, and so he knelt in prayer. So earnest and
childlike was the praying of the blind brother and so fully did he
express the real heart hunger of the great, strong man that when
the prayer was finished, Jose Barretto said very sincerely,
"Amen." He became deeply interested in the gospel.

When the brother left, the Spirit of God so impressed Jose that he
felt he must look up a New Testament which he had taken from an
employee some time ago. He had looked at this book which he had
taken from the employee's hands, and finding no saints' pictures
in it, concluded that it was that hated Protestant Bible the
priests were trying to keep from being circulated, and had thrown
it into a box in the corner of his office. Now he went to this
box, fished out the New Testament, brushed the dust from its pages
and read from it the word of life. The blind brother, in the
meantime, had gone to Santo Antonio and told what had happened.
The chief of police of the city, who was a Christian and the
President of the Baptist Young People's Union, declared that he
was going out to see Jose. "I have been afraid to go," he said,
"because Jose has been so violently opposed to the gospel."

He went and found the strong man poring over the pages of the book
in his effort to find the way of life. He explained the gospel and
Barretto was soon converted, as was also his sister. His wife held
on to her old faith. She would pray, but would use the Crucifix.
Finally the husband and sister decided they would burn the idol,
which they accordingly did. When the wife saw that no dreadful
calamity befell the house she concluded that the idol was a
powerless thing and gave her heart to Christ.

The life of Jose Barretto since that time has been a burning
light. He has been as zealous in following Christ as he ever was
in following evil, though not so violent. His witness has been
honored amongst his own family and relations especially. They have
been forced to realize that there is something in Christianity
which can produce such a remarkable change in the life of such a
violent man. When we were in his home we learned of a family of
twenty-one, some distance out in the country, who were ready to
make confession of their faith and be baptized. They were anxious
for the missionary to come and baptize them and to organize a
church in one of their homes. These people were the relatives of
Jose Barretto. It is marvelous how the witness of his life is
bearing fruit. He lost his position as Superintendent by his
acceptance of Christ, but is now making a living as a coffee
merchant.

We had a remarkable service at the church that night. A great
throng pressed into the building, and Jose Barretto was the chief
usher. I have never seen a man who could crowd more people into a
building than could he. After the house had been packed there
still remained on the outside a crowd as large as that sandwiched
into the building. I preached the gospel once more, speaking, of
course, in all of these services through an interpreter. When I
called for those who would confess Christ I did not ask them to
come forward because there was no room for them. They stood here
and there over the audience until more than twenty expressed
themselves as having accepted Christ and desiring membership in
the church. When one man stood amongst this number I noticed that
Jose Barretto was very deeply moved. His great frame shook with
emotion. I learned afterwards that the man who stood was a police
sergeant, who in the old days had been Jose's confederate in his
political crookedness. That night this man stood acknowledging his
sins and asking for membership in the church. Jose's faithfulness
had won him. Once more we witnessed a marvelous victory of the
gospel.

On the very day on which we visited Santo Antonio and were
entertained in the home of our good brother Jose Barretto, this
great stalwart fellow who had been such a violent opposer of
Christianity and who had previously lived such a desperate life,
was met on the street by one of his former schoolmates. His
schoolmate chided him for becoming a Christian and insinuated that
Jose's conversion was an act of weakness and also that he would
not hold out very long. He went further to say many severe things
in criticism of the cause of Protestant Christianity. Jose
Barretto replied, "You ought to be ashamed of yourself for finding
fault with the thing which has produced such a change in my life.
You know the kind of character I have been in this community. You
know how violent and sinful I have been and you know at this time
how I am living. A religion which can produce such a change as
this does not deserve ridicule." The man turned and slunk away. In
the meantime, there had gathered around them a number of people,
because they knew how serious a matter it was for anyone to oppose
him, and they expected to see something violent take place that
day. Being emboldened by the mild answer which he gave to his
persecutor, others began to ask questions. Finally one of them
asked him this question: "Suppose someone should strike you in the
face in persecution, what would you do?" And then the great,
strong violent man who had been made meek and humble by his
acceptance of Jesus gave an answer which showed him to be
genuinely converted to the Spirit of Jesus. He said: "I am not
afraid of such a thing as that happening, for the reason that I
propose to live in this community such a life for the help of my
brothers that no one will ever desire to strike me in the face,"
and these others turned shame-stricken away from him. He threw
down before that community the challenge of his life, and that is
the thing that not only in Brazil, but here in our own land, must
finally win for our King the triumph which is His due.





CHAPTER X.

CAPTAIN EGYDIO.


What brought about the readiness of this territory in the interior
of the State of Bahia for the acceptance of the gospel? Perhaps
the brand of burning which did more than any other to shed light
through the entire section over which we passed, was the person of
Captain Egydio Pereira de Almeida. He was one of several brothers
of a good country family which owned large possessions in the
interior 150 miles from the city of Bahia. He was an intense
Catholic, but never a persecutor. At one time he was Captain in
the National Guards. He was political boss of his community and
protector for a small tribe of Indians. He was a hard-working,
law-abiding citizen.

In order to know the story we must go back a little. In 1892
Solomon Ginsburg sold a Bible to Guilhermino de Almeida on the
train when he was going to Armagoza. Ginsburg had only one Bible
left and felt constrained to offer it to the stranger across the
aisle. The man said he had no money and did not care to buy. The
missionary pressed him and finally sold him for fifty cents a
Bible worth four times that amount. That night his fellow
passenger heard the missionary speak in the theater in Armagoza
and seemed to enjoy especially the hymns the preacher sang. The
missionary marked for him the Ten Commandments and other passages
in the Bible.

When the man reached his home at Vargem Grande a few days
afterward he told his brother Marciano de Almeida of his encounter
with the missionary, of how he had bought the Bible which he did
not want and of the Ten Commandments the missionary had marked for
him. He very willingly gave his Bible to his brother. Marciano
read the book and was particularly impressed with the Ten
Commandments.

Now, we must introduce into this narrative another character in
the person of good Brother Madeiros. Some time before this, having
become interested in the gospel, he had gone to Bahia and had been
instructed by Missionary Z. C. Taylor in the truth to such good
purpose that he gave himself to the Lord. His neighbors at
Valenca, his native town, on learning of his having accepted
Christ, drove him out, and he moved to Vargem Grande. But he found
no rest in his new home, for his fellow townsmen so persecuted him
that he was compelled to live in the outskirts of the town. He was
the first believer in Vargem Grande. When Marciano de Almeida
became interested in the Scriptures he went to see Madeiros and
was instructed by him in the gospel. He told the persecuted saint
that he would stand by him from now on, for Marciano had
experienced a marvelous conversion.

On learning that his images were idols, Marciano collected all
immediately and burnt them, greatly to the disgust of his family
and the whole town. He began at once to declare the Word of God,
and though he was as gentle as a lamb, he was also as bold as a
lion in defending the gospel.

When his brother, Captain Egydio de Almeida, who lived sixty miles
away, learned that Marciano had become converted, he made the
journey to take out of his brother's heart the false teaching
which he had imbibed. He pitied his brother, thinking that
Marciano's mind had become unbalanced. When Captain Egydio arrived
at his brother's in Vargem Grande, being a very positive man, he
set about the business of straightening out his brother with
dispatch and determination. He failed in his purpose, and then
called in a priest. When he returned with the priest Marciano
asked the two to be seated. Immediately the priest inquired, "What
is this I am hearing about you, Marciano?" He replied, "Mr.
Priest, I am thirty-five years old and you never gave me the
Bible, God's Holy Law and as God ordered it. I came by it through
the Protestants whom you have always abused. You have taken my
money all these years for mass, saying you would take the souls of
our kin out of a purgatory that does not exist. You taught me to
worship idols which God's Word condemns. You sprinkle my children
for money, marry them for money, and when they die you still
demand money to save their souls from an imaginary purgatory. The
Bible teaches me, on the other hand, that God offers me a free
salvation through Jesus Christ." The priest rose and said good-bye
without offering a word of explanation. Seeing the priest thus
defeated, Captain Egydio turned to old Brother Madeiros, who
happened to be present, and said: "If you continue to put these
false doctrines in my brother's head I will send a couple of
Indians here to take off your head." "Yes," replied Madeiros, "you
may cut off my head, but you cannot cut off my soul from God."
Captain Egydio returned home breathing out plagues upon himself
and his family. He drank heavily at every grog shop on his way and
scattered abroad the news about his family's disgrace. He was a
man of a kind heart, and though he did not embrace the truths of
his brother's religion, he did show his brother great
consideration and, being a political leader for that district,
became his brother's protector.

When his wrath had cooled down somewhat he began to recall many
things Marciano had told him about the Bible, and as he looked
upon his many expensive idols set here and there in niches about
his home, he said to himself: "Well, did Marciano say these images
do nothing. They neither draw water, cut wood nor pick coffee.
They do not teach school, they do not protect our home, for there
is one covered with soot. There is another the rats have gnawed,
and recently another fell and was broken. How powerless they are."
Then he remembered the Bible which a believer had given him years
before. He began to examine it in a closed room. Ag he read he
prayed, "Oh, God, if this religion of Marciano be right, show it
to me."

He seemed to be making good progress. But about this time he
received word that his brother and the missionary R. E Neighbor
were coming to see him. The priest had also heard of the
approaching visit and had sent a letter to Captain Egydio's son
warning him against the coming men, saying that they were
emissaries of the United States and wished to lead the Almeidas
astray. The letter bearer was instructed to deliver the letter to
the son and not let the father know anything about it, but he
said, "I cannot do that because I must be true to my old captain,"
so he gave the letter to Captain Egydio. He wag greatly disturbed
over the warnings the priest had given and tried to induce his
children to give up the reading of the pamphlets and Scriptures he
had given to them, which thing they refused to do.

His brother and the missionary came according to agreement and
Captain Egydio, true to his word, went with them to the town of
Areia to protect them while they were engaged in conducting a
gospel service in the public square. The priest of the town sent
the police to prevent the Protestants from conducting the meeting.
The sergeant, who had been under Captain Egydio when he was
Captain in the National Guards, was one of the detail sent to
suppress the meeting. He declared that he would stand by his old
Captain, for the men knew that under the Constitution the
missionary had a perfect right to hold the meeting. The meeting
was held, but under such unfavorable circumstances that the
Captain stood forth and said: "I have not declared myself a
Protestant, but from this time I shall be a Protestant and propose
to give my life to the spread of this faith."

It happened that one day he was called to visit a boy who had been
shot. As he rode along through the open fields he was burdened
with prayer to God. Suddenly he felt a strange feeling and he
seemed to hear a voice saying, "You are saved." Immediately he
knew that the Lord had visited him with His blessed salvation. He
shouted as he rode along the way, "Glory to God. I am redeemed."
He rode on in this state to the home of the boy. Seeing the boy
could not live, he began to exhort him to look to Christ for
salvation, and just before the boy's spirit passed out from him,
he made confession of his Lord. The Captain returned to his home
overflowing with joy. He galloped his horse up to the door,
shouting, "Glory, hallelujah, I am saved." He embraced his wife
and children and all stood back staring at him. Finally the mother
cried: "Poor man! Children, your father is mad. Get the scissors
and let us cut off his hair; let us rub some liniment on his
head." "All right," he said, "only do not cut it too close," and
he suffered them to rub the liniment also upon his head. Seeing
that there was no change in him, they also administered to him one
of their homely medicines, a small portion of which he was willing
to take to pacify them. Their opinion of his sanity was not
changed.

Not only his family, but his neighbors suspected him. As he
engaged in business--and he was a very busy man--people were
watching him to see if something was not dreadfully wrong. Finally
all realized that a great and beneficent change had taken place.
He never became a preacher, but he did not allow to pass an
opportunity to tell the story of his newly-found Savior. His Bible
was constantly in his hands, and he read the marvelous news to
all. His family soon became interested in the gospel and they,
even to his son-in-law, became as crazy upon the subject as he.
Thirteen of them were baptized at one time.

For activity in evangelization his equal was scarcely ever met. He
kept for distribution boxes of Bibles and tracts. While at
business he witnessed for the gospel. He traveled extensively.
Some of his bosom friends became his worst enemies, but many of
them he led to Christ, or at least to a friendship, for the
gospel. He did not preach, but invited many preachers to come to
his community and was always ready to accompany them whenever they
needed his presence. His life was the greatest sermon he could
preach to the people. They had known him once in the old days when
one of his sons fell sick he promised to carry his weight of
beeswax to the miracle working saint of the Lapa shrine, 100 miles
away on the San Francisco River. The son recovered and the father
kept his word. Now they saw him discard his old superstitions for
the truth in Jesus. The gospel that could produce such a marvelous
change as this had its effect upon his neighbors. He organized a
church upon his own fazenda and it held its meetings in his own
house at Casca.

He became deeply interested in the subject of education. He said
one day to Dr. Z. C. Taylor, our missionary at Bahia: "While I was
a Catholic I had no desire to educate my children, but now I would
give all of this farm to see them educated. Dr. Taylor told him of
some of his own plans concerning a school, and Captain Egydio
contributed the first money for the school, which Dr. Taylor
afterward established, Captain Egydio's gift of a thousand dollars
making it possible for this school to be organized.

Of the trials and persecutions which he endured for the gospel, we
can cite only one or two.

A priest paid two men sixty dollars to go and take the Captain's
life. They appeared one night at his door and asked for
employment. He invited them in, saying he had plenty of work he
could give them to do. The time soon arrived for family prayers
and the men were invited to be present. The Captain afterward told
the family that while he was praying he received a distinct
impression that the men had come to do him bodily injury and that
in the prayer he had committed himself absolutely to the
protection of God. The next day he took the two men out into the
field to show them what to do. In the meantime he had been telling
them of the love of Jesus and how He had come to save to the
uttermost those who would believe on Him. One lingered behind to
shoot, but his hand trembled too much. The other did not have the
courage to do the man of God any injury. That night they said they
would not stay longer. He paid them for the day's work, bade them
godspeed and they departed.

But he did not always escape suffering so easily. One afternoon as
he was passing by the priest's home the priest accosted him and
said: "Captain, why is it you do not stop with me any more? You
used to do so, but of late you have passed me by." He urged the
Captain so strongly that he decided to stay all night. They
offered him wine to drink, which he refused. Then they gave him
coffee. That night he suffered agony and was sick for some time
after reaching home. He was sure he had been poisoned.

He suffered many persecutions from unsympathetic neighbors, not
only from criticism, but sometimes from bodily injuries and from
painful abuse, all of which he bore with an equanimity of spirit
which would do credit to any martyr to the cause of Christ.

Dr. Z. C. Taylor relates a trying experience through which he and
Captain Egydio passed together.

"The Captain and I were together one day returning home from a
preaching tour by a near cut, passing the door of our greatest
persecutor, Captain Bernadino, who on seeing us, seized a stick,
and running to us, beat back our hordes, crying, 'Back, back, you
cannot pass my house.' A plunge of my horse caused my hat to fall
off, which he handed me and continued to force our retreat. We
returned by way of the home of his son-in-law, who was a baptized
believer, and while this brother was piloting us down a hill to
another way home Captain Bernadino, jumping from behind a bush,
caught my horse by the bridle. He had an assassin at his heels,
with axe in hand, asking every minute what he should do. Captain
Bernadino wore out his stick on my horse, planting the last stroke
across my loins; then he struck me about a dozen times in the
breast with his fist. I said to him, 'Captain, why are you beating
me, I believe in God; do not you also?' Stopping and panting he
said, 'Do you believe in God, you rascal?' 'Yes,' I said, 'and
Jesus also who came to save us sinners.' 'Don't let up, don't let
up, hit him, hit him,' cried his wife and children. He pulled the
bridle from my hands, led my horse into a pond close by, and
gathering mud, pelted me from foot to shoulder. Then leaving my
horse, he went after Captain Egydio, who was guarded by another
assassin. On passing his son-in-law, kneeling, he struck him on
the head, saying, 'Get up, you fool!' Leading the Captain's horse
into the water, he covered him with mud from foot to head. Then,
putting our bridles up, he beat our horses and told us to go,
never to be seen in those parts any more. My bridle reins he
crossed, which fact caused me when I passed his wife, who stood
with a long stick upraised, to strike me, to turn my horse upon
her instead of away from her, and the horse came near running over
her. She struck and fell back, the stick falling across my horse's
neck. Such a pandemonium of mad voices, cursing and shouting as we
left I never heard. It took us till night to reach home. The
family took it as an honor, and smiling and laughing, we were
spending the evening merrily, when at nine or ten o'clock a rap at
the door caused us all to suspend our hilarity. It was that son-
in-law of the persecutor, bringing his wife, asking to be
baptized. She had witnessed the persecution her father gave us,
and on her husband's return to the house, she told him the scene
made her think of the Apostles and that now she was determined to
be baptized. At first I thought of bloodshed, for her father had
threatened to kill her, her mother, Captain Egydio and the man who
baptized her. But I had always taught them to obey Christ and
leave results with Him, so we heard her experience and at midnight
I baptized her.

Captain Egydio did not complain of our treatment nor did I ever
mention it to our Consul.

When he gave his heart to Christ he gave his life and all. He
followed where his conscience led. Before his conversion he was a
great smoker. The missionary asked him one day if he smoked for
the glory of God. He took the cigarette from his mouth, threw it
away and never smoked again. This was characteristic of his
determination and his unfaltering devotion to what he esteemed to
be right.

The end came swiftly one night. He had an attack apparently of
indigestion which carried him speedily away. The symptoms seemed
to indicate that he had been poisoned. All that night he spent in
prayer and in singing hymns. He died leaving his benediction upon
his family and upon those Brazilians who would give their hearts
and their services to Jesus Christ.

He was buried upon his own farm. As his family did not erect a
cross over his grave, one of his neighbors who had persecuted
Captain Egydio violently many times thought he would correct him
in his grave, and so he set up a large cross over him. One night
soon after, this cross was cut down. The violent neighbor
instituted a suit for the violation of the law in tearing down a
symbol of the Roman Catholic church. He also came with great pomp,
accompanied by soldiers, and set up another cross. The law suit
finally wore itself out and both parties were glad to drop it,
each party sharing an equal amount of the costs.

The persecution has been so bitter that the church which Captain
Egydio organized in his own house was removed to Pe da Serra,
three miles away, and from there it was driven by persecution to
Rio Preto, where today it flourishes with a membership of about
fifty people and is in a hopeful condition. The widow and her
children have been compelled to move into the city of Bahia. A
recent letter informs me of the conversion of the two youngest
girls.

The witness of Captain Egydio has not been lost. It is marvelous
how much he accomplished in his short career. He was converted
October, 1894, baptized February 4, 1895, and died March 30th,
1898, at fifty years of age. In these few years he sowed the
country down with the gospel truth. We visited Vargem Grande,
Santo Antonio, Areia and Genipapo churches, all of which had grown
very largely out of the influence of this one man, and had we been
permitted to go further, we might have visited several other
churches for whose beginning the life of this valiant servant of
God was in a great measure responsible. "He, being dead, yet
speaketh."





CHAPTER XI.

FELICIDADE.


One of the most fascinating phases of mission study is the tracing
of the lines along which the gospel spreads. This is true because
it brings us into touch with the native Christian who is one of
the greatest agencies for the spread of the gospel. As it was in
the first century, so it is now--"they that were scattered abroad
went everywhere preaching the gospel." The history of those
Apostolic times repeats itself in every mission land. He who
personally observes the work in Brazil or any other mission field
will have a keener appreciation and understanding of the Acts of
the Apostles written by Luke. The native Christians must either
witness for their Lord or else betray Him. There is no middle
ground. A large percentage of the churches in Brazil grew out of
the fact that a believer moved into a community and began to tell
the story of the love of Jesus to his neighbors. He may have
entered this community by choice or may have been driven into it
by persecution. However, that may be, the truth is that many a
poor, despised, often persecuted believer, has started a movement
in a community which gathered to itself a large company of
believers, and formed the nucleus of another one of those most
wonderful institutions in all the world--a church of Jesus Christ.

When I had entered the First Baptist Church in Sao Paulo, Brazil,
and stood for a moment looking about me, I heard someone exclaim,
"Oh, there he is! There he is!" and presently I found myself
locked in the affectionate embrace of an apparently very happy old
woman. She was about seventy years of age. She was the janitress
of the church. She had looked forward to our coming with joyful
pleasure, and gave to us as hearty a welcome as did anyone in
Brazil. Her name was Felicidade, which being translated means
"Felicity."

Several years ago she had come from Pernambuco, in which city and
State she had labored with great success for many years in behalf
of the gospel.

When a girl of ten or twelve years of age she heard her father
talk about a book he had seen in the court-house upon which the
Judge had laid his hand as he administered the oath. She had the
greatest desire to see this book. She was married in her
thirteenth year and her husband died when she was eighteen. After
his death she went from the country to the city of Pernambuco,
where she met some members of the Congregational Church and was
led by them to attend the services. She saw the Bible and heard a
sermon preached from the text, "Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst," and soon afterward she gave obedience to Jesus.

From that time forth her whole conversation was upon the gospel
and upon the subject of bringing other people to Christ. One time
when Mrs. Entzminger was away from the city of Pernambuco she left
her children in charge of Felicidade. While Felicidade was passing
along the street with the children one day she was met by Mrs.
Maria Motta and her daughter, who stopped to admire the beautiful
children. Felicidade told who the children were and urged her new
acquaintances to attend the church services. They accepted her
invitation and soon became interested in the gospel, and before
long were converted to faith in Jesus Christ.

Then their persecution began. They lost all their friends and
endured many other hardships. They came from one of the best
families in the city, and therefore felt the persecution more
bitterly than might have some others. The girl, Augusta, secured
work in the English store. Her mother took in fine ironing, and
thus the two made their support. Afterward Augusta married Augusto
Santiago, who at the present time is the pastor of our thriving
church in the city of Nazareth. She has been to him one of the
greatest blessings in that she has done much to help him in his
effort to prepare himself better for his work. When we visited
Nazareth we were entertained in the delightful home of Augusto
Santiago and found it to be charming in every respect.

When Felicidade lived in Pernambuco it was her custom to sell
fruit for six months to make money enough to live upon for the
remainder of the year. She would then go into the interior with
tracts and Bibles, sell them and in every way try to lead people
to Christ. One year she made it her aim to lead not less than
twelve to her Lord, and she was able to accomplish her purpose.
Her education is limited, but she knows any number of Scripture
verses, which she is able to quote with remarkable aptness.

Upon one of her visits into the interior she was found at Nazareth
by Innocencio Barbosa, a farmer who resided in the district of
Ilheitas. He lived about thirty miles from Nazareth. He took
Felicidade home with him in order that she might teach the gospel
to his family. Meanwhile, his friend, Hermenigildo, who lived in a
distant neighborhood, bought a Bible in Limoeiro and told his
friend Innocencio of what he had done. Innocencio told him of the
presence of Felicidade and suggested that his friend might take
her home with him that she might explain the gospel to his family
also. Felicidade accordingly went into this other home and soon
the entire family, including a son-in-law and some relatives, were
led to Jesus, and a church of about fifty members was organized in
Hermenigildo's house.

Thus the faithful witnessing of this humble, consecrated woman was
so honored of the Holy Spirit that scores were led into the light
of the gospel of Jesus. Out of her efforts grew churches which the
violence of the oppressor could not destroy, because the work she
did became immortal when it passed over into the hands of the Lord
of Hosts, against whose church not even the gates of Hell can
prevail.





CHAPTER XII.

PERSECUTION.


Some of the severest persecutions the saints have ever endured in
Pernambuco broke upon this new congregation in the Ilheitas
district. The houses of the believers were broken into and
everything destroyed, some of the buildings were burned. The
believers asked for police protection, but the police sent to
protect them being under the domination of the priest, who was the
political boss of that district, persecuted the believers even
more than their neighbors had done. They drove the believers
about, beating them with their swords, forcing them to drink
whisky and in many ingenious ways heaped indignities upon them.
After the success of the great persecution in Bom Jardim, of which
we will speak later, the priest organized a large force of men to
destroy everything belonging to the Protestants in the Ilheitas
district and to drive them away. They burned all of the church
furniture, as well as the household furniture belonging to
Hermenigildo, who was forced to flee for his life. They cut the
cord to the hammock in which was lying his young baby. The fall
broke the neck of the child. The mother was driven unclothed
between two lines of soldiers and severely beaten. The other
believers were so harrassed that most of them were compelled to
leave the neighborhood. Hermenigildo stayed away five months, when
a change in police chiefs in Pernambuco made it possible for him
to return. The church was reorganized the following year. A new
building was constructed on Hermenigildo's farm and today, with a
membership of 103, it is in a most prosperous condition.

In the little city of Nazareth the fury of persecution has been
felt. Not a great while after the church had been organized by Dr.
Entzminger the farmers in the community and the priest combined to
drive the Protestants out of town. Dr. Entzminger heard of their
purpose and went up to Nazareth, accompanied by a number of
soldiers whom the Government had put at his disposal. A great
throng was collected at the station to do violence to the
missionary on his arrival, but when they saw the soldiers they
took to their heels, and many came that night to the service to
show that they were not in the mob. A year or two later another
mob broke into the church, poured oil over the furniture and
burned practically everything. The police saved the building. Once
after this, when Missionary Ginsburg was to hold an open-air
meeting in this same town, a soldier was hired to take his life.
The officers of the law left town in order that the deed might be
done without hindrance. The soldier drank whisky in order to brace
himself for the deed, and fortunately imbibed too much and became
so intoxicated that he fell asleep. When he awoke the meeting had
been held and he had missed his chance. These facts were confessed
by the soldier to Dr. Entzminger after the soldier had been
converted a year later.

At the railway station at Nazareth we met Primo da Fonseca, who
had, for the sake of the gospel, lost all in a great persecution
at Bom Jardim, which is not a great distance from Nazareth. He was
a reader of evangelical literature and preached the gospel all
over that country, though he had not been baptized. A native
missionary went into that region, began preaching and soon
afterward gathered a congregation and organized a church in
Fonseca's home. The political boss of the community planned with
the Catholics to take 800 men into Bom Jardim on the night of
April 15th, 1900, for the purpose of killing all the Protestants
who were in prayer at Fonseca's house. The mob divided into two
parties. One party was to approach the house from the front and
the other from the opposite side. A gun was to be fired as a
signal for the attack. The first party approached the house, which
was near the theater. Now in the theater at that time was gathered
a great throng of people. When the news came to them of the
approach of the mob the women thought it was a part of the band of
bandits led by Antonio Silvino, who is perhaps the most famous
outlaw of Brazil. All were greatly frightened. The Mayor went out
to see if he could not do something to persuade the mob to leave
the town. After some parleying they said that inasmuch as the
Mayor asks, we will turn back. Someone at that time fired a shot
and shouted, "Viva Santa Anna" in honor of the patron saint of
that city. This signal brought up the supporting party at once,
who mistook their comrades for the believers and fired into them.
In the melee twenty people were killed and about fifty wounded. All
night they were carrying the dead away to burial in order that
they might cover up the deed as far as possible. The Municipal
Judge made out a case that the Protestants had fired on the
Catholics. He pronounced nineteen as being implicated. Several
escaped, six were finally brought to trial. Dr. Entzminger in
Pernambuco sent lawyers and gave such assistance as he could.
After about two years, Missionary Ginsburg having come also to
help in the meantime, the men on trial were set free. Fonseca lost
all he had in this law suit, he being one of those arrested. He
was in jail four months. He has been deserted by his family. When
the disturbance occurred he was Marshal of his town. Today he
lives in Nazareth, poor, deserted, faithful. But what cares he for
this suffering, poverty and desertion as he contemplates the fact
that he has set a torch of eternal light in his community. The
church which he finally established will bear faithful witness in
spite of hardships long after all persecution has ceased, and he,
himself, has gone home to God.

It was our good fortune to visit the little town of Cabo (which
means Cape), two hours' ride from Pernambuco, where we have a
small church, organized about two years ago. We were entertained
in the home of a mechanic who superintends the bridge construction
along the railroad which passes through the town. He takes his
Bible with him when he goes to work, and wherever he is he
preaches the gospel. He told us of two station agents along the
line who had recently accepted Christ through his personal
efforts.

We had a delightful service that night in the church, a great
throng of people being present, six of whom made public profession
of their faith in Jesus. After we had returned from the church we
sat in the little dining room in the rear part of this man's house
until a late hour. Some of those who had suffered for the cause of
the gospel came in to see us, and as we sat there in the dim light
of the flickering candle, they told us of some of their sufferings
for the gospel's sake. The scene reminded me of what must have
taken place often in many a dark room in the early centuries when
the Christians gathered together for the sake of comforting each
other in their trials.

Amongst those who were present in this little room was brother
Honofre, through whose efforts the church at Cabo had been
founded. Several years ago he began to read a Bible which had been
presented to him by a man who was not interested in it. He became
converted along with his household. There was a Catholic family
living opposite to him which he determined to reach with the
gospel. After awhile this family accepted Christ and the two
families began to hold worship in their homes. Soon they rented a
hall, with the aid of a few others, and sent to Pernambuco for a
missionary to come and organize them into a church. This man has
endured cruel hardships. He had to abandon his business as a
street merchant because the people boycotted him. He rented a
house, built an oven and began to bake bread. Not long after that
he was put out of this house. Again and yet again he had the same
experience until recently he has rented a house from the same man
who provided for our church building. He can now make a living.

The church has had experience similar to that of its founder. It
was put out of three rented buildings at the instance of the
Vicar, who either forced the owners to eject or he, himself,
bought the property. Finally a man who is not a believer, but
whose mother is, bought the present building and sold it to me
church. He is permitting the church to pay for the building in
installments of small sums. At last the church has a place upon
which it can rest the sole of its feet and in two years has grown
from ten to fifty members. On the occasion of our visit six more
made public confession of Christ before a large audience and were
received for baptism.

Out on the cape is a fine lighthouse which we had admired as we
came up the coast on the ship. May it be a symbol of the
lighthouse which this church may become to the storm tossed in
that section of Brazil.

Of course, persecution is a painful thing for those who are called
upon to endure it, but wherever I found those who had passed
through afflictions they counted it all joy to suffer for the
cause of Christ, and whenever I attempted to comfort them because
of their hardships, I came away more comforted than they, for the
reason that their joyous willingness to suffer for His sake
strengthened my own faith and assured me of the ultimate triumph
of the gospel through the labors of such heroic people.
Persecution, while it may temporarily suspend work in a certain
place, always defeats its own purpose, and instead of preventing
the spread of the gospel, is one of the most helpful agencies in
the growth of the truth.

A most encouraging illustration of this fact occurred in
Pernambuco in 1904. There had been a bitter persecution at Cortez,
a village not far from Pernambuco. The chief instigator of the
trouble was the parish priest. The believers were driven out of
the town and their lives threatened. The missionary went and was
also driven out, but returned under the protection of some
soldiers and conducted gospel services through a whole week in
order to give courage to the believers and to demonstrate that the
Protestants could not be driven out. A news account of this
persecution was published in a daily paper in Pernambuco. A boy
cut this article out and gave it to his teacher, a priest in the
Silesian College. The teacher read the article and wrote a letter
to Missionary Cannada and asked him to come to the college at
midnight to explain the gospel. Two letters were passed before the
missionary finally went at midnight to hold a conference. The
priest came out and discussed the gospel with the missionary and
then returned to the college, taking with him a copy of the New
Testament. After a month the missionary went again at midnight to
the college and the priest came away with him once for all. The
priest went to the home of the missionary and for two months
studied the Bible, after which time he was converted. He at once
began to preach the gospel to his friends as he would meet them on
the streets. He also made a public declaration of his conversion
in print. The President of the college from which he had gone
obtained an interview with him and offered him every inducement to
return. His parents disinherited him and many other trials came to
him, but through all, he stood firm. He has just graduated from
the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, taking the Th. D.
degree and has been appointed to teach in the Baptist College and
Theological Seminary in Rio. His name is Piani. About a year after
Piani's conversion he induced another priest to leave the same
college. This man spent a month in the missionary's house studying
the Bible, but was enticed back by the priests and hurried away to
New York in order that he might escape the influence of Piani.
Three months after reaching New York he was converted and joined
the Fifth Avenue Baptist Church and is today a pastor of a Baptist
church in Massachusetts.

In no place where our people have endured persecution, even though
it may have been severe enough to cost the lives of some, has the
work been abandoned, but in every place the weak, struggling
congregation which faced obliteration at the fury of its enemy,
has in the end increased, and today enjoys the blessing of growth
in numbers and in the sympathy of the people. Persecution is a
good agency in the spread of the gospel.





CHAPTER XIII.

THE BIBLE AS A MISSIONARY FACTOR.


The Bible is a mighty factor in the spread of the gospel in
Brazil. In 1889 there came down to Bahia a man named Queiroz from
two hundred and fifty miles in the interior. He came seeking
baptism at the hands of Dr. Z. C. Taylor. It appears that some six
or eight years previous to that time an agent of a Bible society
had entered this man's community, preached the gospel and left
behind him some copies of the Scriptures. One of these Bibles was
found afterwards by Queiroz, who studied it and was impressed with
its truth. He began to bring the message of the Word to the
attention of his large circle of friends and kindred. Having
preached in several places, he was finally asked by the district
judge to come to his house where he was given opportunity to meet
a number of friends. The friends of Queiroz, however, began to ask
him whether it was right for him to be preaching thus before he
had been baptized, whereupon he resolved to go to Bahia to seek
baptism. He made the journey and was baptized. A week after he had
returned he wrote to Dr. Taylor, saying he had preached at Deer
Forks and had baptized eight. During the next two weeks similar
letters were sent, which gave the number he had baptized. The
church at Bahia was apprized of conditions, and it decided to send
Queiroz an invitation to come and receive ordination. He came with
great humility and joy and was ordained, but before the ordination
had taken place he had already baptized fifty-five people. The
church, at Bahia, after the ordination of Queiroz, legalized the
baptisms.

Five years after the baptism of this man Dr. Taylor was finally
able to make the journey to Conquista, where he found the church
well organized, with a house of worship built at its own expense
and with the pastor's home erected near by. The missionary says,
"I now understand why God never permitted me to visit Conquista
during these five years. I believe it was for the purpose of
showing me that the native Christians can and will take care of
themselves and the gospel if we will only confide in them. I
wonder how many churches in the United States have built their own
house and pastorium and sustained themselves from the start? Not a
cent from the Board has been spent on the church and the
evangelization done by Brother Queiroz."

Another example of the power of the Bible in spreading the gospel
is found in the way the gospel came to Guandu, State of Rio, and
the country round about. One night in Campos in 1894, after the
missionary had finished his sermon, a young woman approached him
and said, "My father has been teaching us out of that same book
you used. Would you not like to go out in the country to visit
him?" The missionary replied that he would, and then the girl
explained how the Bible came to this community.

One evening a colporteur approached her father's door and asked
for entertainment, saying he had been refused by several families
along the way. To the host's inquiry as to why he had been refused
entertainment for the night the colporteur said: "They declined
because I am a Protestant." The man replied. "Come in and
welcome." After the dinner Mr. Vidal (for that was the farmer's
name) asked what this Protestantism meant. The colporteur
explained and preached the gospel to the best of his ability.

When the time came to retire the colporteur said, "It is my custom
to read the Scriptures and to pray before I retire. If you have no
objection I would like to do so tonight." Mr. Vidal answered, "I
shall be glad for you to do so." The colporteur read and there in
the dining hall before the curious onlookers knelt and poured out
his heart to his Heavenly Father. He called down the blessing and
the favor of God upon the family. The tears poured down his cheeks
as he lifted his soul in this prayer. After he finished praying
Mr. Vidal said, "I have never heard prayer like that. Teach me how
to do it. I have heard Latin prayers repeated, but they did not
grip me like that." The colporteur replied by explaining that
prayer must be from the heart. He then took out a Bible and said,
"I want to make you a present of this book. You have been kind to
me. Read it, for it has in it the Word of Life." He went away the
following morning. We do not know who he was--only the record on
high will discover his person to us.

The book left behind became a great light for Mr. Vidal. He read
it and was so impressed with its teachings that he taught the Word
to his family and neighbors. His house became a house of prayer
and teaching. When Missionary Ginsburg went out there, preached
the Word and explained about Christ, he asked those who wished to
follow the Lord to stand. Practically the whole company stood.
They had been prepared, by Mr. Vidal The missionary went back a
few times and soon a church of about forty members was organized
and was called the Church of Guandu.

The Word spread up the country first amongst Mr. Vidal's relatives
and friends. At Santa Barbara the station master, Carlos Mendonca,
was converted, who is now pastor of our church at Cantagallo. He
first moved to Rio Bonito and founded a church there, the truth
spread, in other directions also and so the light which the
unknown colporteur left with this farmer has shed its rays of
blessings upon a whole county. Twenty-one years ago, a Bible which
belonged to a Catholic priest, or rather a part of a Catholic
Bible, fell into the hands of the old man, Joaquim Borges. Through
the reading of this Bible, he abandoned idolatry and other
practices of Rome and put his trust solely in the Lord Jesus for
his salvation. For sixteen years he resisted all attempts of
priests and others to turn him back to Rome, always giving a clear
and firm testimony to the truth of the gospel. During all this
time he never met with another believer. Hearing of him, E. A.
Jackson wrote him to meet him in Pilao Arcado. He came 120 miles
and waited twelve days for the arrival of the missionary. As
Jackson had through passage to Santa Rita, he asked the captain to
hold the steamer while he baptized Mr. Borges. Before
administering baptism Jackson preached to the great crowd on the
river bank and on the decks of the steamer. It was a solemn and
beautiful sight to behold this man, seventy-seven years of age,
following his Lord in baptism at his first meeting with a minister
of the gospel and before a multitude which had never witnessed
such a scene. Dripping from the river, Jackson welcomed him into
the ranks of God's children. The missionary embarked on the
steamer and Mr. Borges went back to work among his neighbors. Up
till the present time not even a native minister has visited him,
for the lack of workers and funds to send them. Eye hath not seen,
nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart to conceive the
glorious things God has prepared for the man who will go to work
for Him among the neglected people of the interior of Brazil.

In the State of Sao Paulo is a boy, Ramiro by name, now about
thirteen years of age, the only son of parents who do not know a
letter of the alphabet. Indeed, he is the only one in a large
connection that has been taught to read.

The family lives about twenty miles from their market town, Mogy
das Cruzes, to which they go to sell the meager fruits of their
labors on the little farm. In this town they have some
acquaintances, among whom is a believer whose faith had come
through reading the Bible. This believer one day came into
possession of a Bible which he didn't need, and so he gave it to
Ramiro, who was then about nine or ten years of age and was
beginning to learn to read. The little fellow trudged home, twenty
miles away, carrying his priceless present, and showed it joyously
to his parents. This was the first book that ever entered their
humble home, excepting, of course, Ramiro's little school book.
Curious to know what the book contained, the father put Ramiro to
deciphering some of its pages. Guided, no doubt, by the Holy
Spirit, he fell upon the New Testament and laboriously read on and
on for months and months The neighbors--all ignorant alike--would
come and listen to Ramiro spell out sentence after sentence, he
becoming more expert as the days went by. He would read, they
would listen and discuss, the Holy Spirit, in the meantime, fixing
the sacred truth in their hearts. This persistent reading of the
Word went on for two or three years to a time when the Lord opened
to Dr. J. J. Taylor, of Sao Paulo, a door of opportunity in Mogy
das Cruzes. He found twelve people ready to follow on in the
Lord's ordinance.

Since that time even more abundant fruit has been gathered. Dr.
Taylor at first baptized three of Ramiro's cousins who hail from
the same village twenty miles away and recently he baptized the
uncle, aunt, some more cousins and Ramiro himself. Ramiro taught
the words of many hymns to his family and neighbors. Through him
and his book his aged grandparents, ninety years old and
bedridden, rejoice in the Savior.

How great must be the might of the Word of God which can convert
to salvation strong men through the faltering lips of a child And
yet, after all, is not this the combination which alone is
powerful in spreading the gospel--a simple, child-like heart,
through which the Word may speak forth? "A little child shall lead
them," because it can be artless enough to give simple utterance
to the Word of God. Oh, for more in all lands who will give
unaffected voice to the Word of God! That message has power in it
if it can get sincere expression.

We need to realize more than we do the transcendent importance of
giving wide circulation to the Bible in foreign lands. The
illustrations given here of the wonderful success of the Book
should help us to reach a better appreciation of the value of the
Word of God in mission endeavor. Certainly, there is marvelous
power in it. Its enemies fear its might; therefore, they fight
desperately to prevent the circulation of it. Would that we could
have as keen a realization of the vitality of this Book as do its
enemies. Surely then, we would do far more for the sowing of the
Scriptures beside all waters.





CHAPTER XIV.

THE METTLE OF THE NATIVE CHRISTIAN.


In 1894, Francisco da Silva, soon after his conversion in Bahia,
went to Victoria in the State of Espirito Santo to live. He went
into the interior with some surveyors, and in addition to the work
he was called upon to do, he found time to tell the story of
Jesus. Eight people were converted and he wrote Dr. Z. C. Taylor
to come and baptize them.

Dr. Taylor was not able to go immediately, and one of the men
secured his baptism in a very unique way. He asked Francisco to
baptize him Francisco replied that he could not because he was not
ordained. The man returned home and examined his Bible and came
back a few days later and demanded again that Francisco baptize
him. Francisco replied that in order to baptize, one must be
ordained. "No," said the man, "I have looked in the Bible and I do
not find it necessary for one to be ordained in order to baptize."
So catching hold of Francisco, he pulled him along to a river near
by, Francisco through it all holding back the best he could and
arguing with the man that he could not baptize him. But the man
constrained him and forced him into the river. Francisco seeing
his zeal, performed the ceremony. Some question afterward was
raised about the validity of this baptism, and the man was
baptized regularly by the same Francisco, who had in the meantime
received ordination.

When he had finished with one party of surveyors another wanted to
employ him, and they went to the first party to find out about
him. The men said: "He has fine qualifications for the position,
but there is one objection to him--he is a Protestant." "Ah, said
the second party, "can't we with a little money get that out of
him?" "No," replied the first, "it seems to be grown into him." He
was taken by the second party, the chief of which and all his
family soon became devoted Christians.

The desire to tell the story of Jesus burned in Francisco's heart
so warmly that he gave up his lucrative employment with the
surveying party, bought a mule and other necessities for his
journey and started out to proclaim the unsearchable riches of
Christ to the people of that State. He was remarkably successful
and soon gathered about him a little band of believers, who,
because of their faithfulness to Christ, were called upon to
suffer severe persecution. They were compelled to flee into the
distant mountains where Missionary Jackson afterward found them,
organized them into a church and baptized seventy-five converts.
Later they were able to return to their homes, due to the fact
that a more lenient administration was inaugurated in Victoria.
Very soon afterward our faithful missionary, L. M. Reno, was sent
to this State, and the work from this good beginning has had
remarkable prosperity. The pioneer missionary, da Silva, after
having gained the title of Apostle to the State of Espirito Santo,
was called in 1910 to his reward.

From what we have been saying, you have no doubt made many
inferences about the kind of Christians these Brazilians make. If
you had seen them face to face, you would have been, as I was,
impressed with their appearance. They were the best-looking people
I saw. Their countenances were clearer and there was a hopeful,
resourceful look upon them that was not noticeable upon the non-
believers. Sin and fear always break the spirit of men, and though
there may be a brave look assumed, yet there always hangs a cloud
over the countenance of the sin-stained and fear-driven man, be he
a religionist or atheist. This change in appearance is produced by
a change in their way of living. When they are converted they
cease drinking, gambling, Sabbath-breaking, and often the men give
up smoking and the women cease taking snuff. The fact is they
sometimes are extreme upon this subject. I heard of one church
that made the giving up of tobacco and another the laying aside of
jewelry the test of fellowship. These people coming out from under
the domination of a religion of fear into the light and liberty of
the gospel are changed from glory to glory, having upon them the
light of God's countenance.

They are liberal givers. There is a much larger proportion of
tithers among them than among the Christians in the States. Here,
too, they often go to extremes. More than one church in Brazil
makes tithing obligatory upon its members. Last year the Brazilian
Baptists gave as much per capita for foreign missions as did the
Baptists in our Southern States. They have set their aim this year
higher than the Southern Baptists have. They sustain foreign
mission work in Chili and Portugal. They engage in this foreign
mission endeavor because the leaders think that the foreign
mission principle is vital to the life and development of the
churches. This giving to foreign missions is not to the neglect of
their home enterprises. They have Home and State Mission Boards
which they support liberally. They have am Education Board to
which they gave forty cents per capita last year and all of this
giving out of such grinding poverty!

Here and there are people of larger means who are munificent in
their gifts. It was the generous offer of $5,000 by Captain Egydio
that made possible the founding of the Collegio Americano Egydio,
which school was established by the Taylors in Bahia. He paid $650
the first installment upon the furniture, but his sudden taking
off prevented the college from realizing the whole amount
promised, because the family lost so heavily by persecution after
the father had been taken away. Col Benj. Nogueira Paranagua, a
rich cattleman, built a church, school and library building at
Corrente in the State of Piauhy at his own expense and afterward
paid the salary of a teacher for the school. When the church in
San Fidelis, which was established in the face of trying
persecution, was considering how it could possibly build a meeting
house, a coffee farmer, who was not yet a member, rose and said:
"I am old and useless, but I want to do something for Jesus and
His church. I, therefore, offer to erect the church building and
the church may pay me six per cent. annually until I die, and then
the building will belong to the church as a legacy which I intend
to leave." As the work on the house progressed he signified his
desire to be the first one to be baptized in the baptistry. This
was granted gladly and his thought of charging six per cent on the
building until his death disappeared in the watery grave and he
made the church a present outright of the beautiful chapel. Not
only this chapel has been built by an individual, but others have
been built in the same way. Usually, however, the churches are
built out of the sacrificial offerings of the people. So well has
this church building movement progressed that now about one-third
of the 142 Baptist Churches organized in Brazil worship in their
own buildings, and with a few exceptions, these buildings have
been erected by the gifts of the people and not by the gifts of
the Foreign Mission Board. The Presbyterians show a better
proportion of buildings than this and the Methodists quite as
good.

The subject of self-support is a live one. There has been good
progress made in this matter, but, of course, it will require many
years to teach the churches their full duty in this regard. Many
churches have reached the point where they take care of all local
expenses. Some of the missionaries go so far as to advocate not
organizing any more churches until the congregations can be self-
supporting. The South Brazilian Mission, in its recent meeting,
adopted the rule that no church should be organized hereafter
until it could pay at last 60 per cent of its own expenses--these
expenses to include the care of the house, the salary of the
native pastor, etc.

I have already cited instances of personal work. I wish to say
more particularly that the great success which has attended the
work in Brazil must be in a large measure attributed to the fact
that those who have been led to Christ have been zealous in
witnessing personally to others of the grace which had been
bestowed upon them.

One of the greatest laymen in Brazil is our Brother Thomaz L. da
Costa. He is the Superintendent of a very considerable business
firm in Bahia. He is a deacon in the First Baptist Church, one of
the moving spirits upon the Brazilian Foreign Mission Board and
practically superintends the work of the State Mission Board of
Bahia.

Years ago he was converted in Rio through the agency of his
washerwoman. This faithful woman is a member of the First Baptist
Churoh. She decided she would attempt to lead Thomaz to Christ. So
on Saturday when she would bring his laundry she would invite him
to come to her house on the following day for dinner. I might say
by way of parenthesis, that there is not a steam laundry in
Brazil. All of the laundry work is done by hand. Sometimes there
is quite a considerable firm which employs many laundresses.
Thomaz, after declining the good woman's invitation many times,
finally one day decided he would accpt. it.

On Sunday he appeared at her house for dinner. After the dinner
was over she suggested that they, in company with several of her
children, should take a stroll through some of the parks. They
passed through the great park in the center of the city, and after
a while they found themselves in front of a building in which they
heard singing. The good woman suggested that they go upstairs into
the hall from which proceeded the sounds of the music. They went
in, Thomaz not knowing what sort of place it was. Dr. Bagby, the
first missionary of our board to Brazil, was conducting a service
and soon began a sermon which impressed Thomaz very greatly. The
sermon drew such a picture of his life that he accused the woman
of having told Dr. Bagby about him. She had not done so, she
declared, and this fact impressed Thomaz even more.

Next Saturday, when she brought his laundry, she invited him to
take dinner with her again on Sunday, but he was too shrewd for
her and declined, saying that he understood her purpose. The
message which he had heard in the sermon, however, stayed with
him. On the following Saturday the good woman again invited him to
take dinner with her on Sunday. He declined. When the third
Saturday came, before she had time to extend her usual invitation,
he said: "I am coming to dinner with you tomorrow." He went
according to promise, and after the meal had been finished, they
did not take a round-about course, but went directly to the
church, and there the man listened to the gospel again and gave
himself to Christ. He has not missed a service since unless
providentially hindered. I asked him if he was sorry of the step
he had taken and he replied: "No, indeed. It is as Paul says, 'A
salvation not to be repented of.'"

There can be but one inevitable result to such faithful witnessing
as this. One of the most hopeful signs in connection with the
work in Brazil is the fact that a large percentage of the members
of the churches endeavor to lead others to Christ in a personal
way. A large percentage of them will conduct public services
wherever the opportunity can be found. In the First Baptist Church
in Rio there are more than twenty men who will go out and conduct
public services. They are not skilled preachers. They may have
very limited education, but they can take the Book, read it,
explain its message through the light of their own individual
experiences, and by this means of witnessing to the power of the
saving grace of God in their own lives, they are able to lead many
to Jesus. Is not this after all the kind of preaching our Lord has
sent us into the world to do?

The severest persecution which these Brazilian Christians are
called upon to endure is not that which comes to them when they
are stoned, or when their property may be destroyed or when their
business may be taken away from them through boycotts or when they
may be turned into the streets through the bitter hatred of hard-
hearted priests, but the most trying persecution is that which
comes from the insinuating remark, the sneer of the supercilious
and the doubt of the envious. The taunt of hypocrisy is often
thrown into the teeth of native Christians. Their motives are
frequently impugned. I was profoundly impressed with the answer
they usually give to such persecutions. They reply by saying: "See
how we live. Note the difference between our careers now and our
careers before we became Christians." And this challenge of the
life is the one which will finally answer the ridicule and doubt
of all who assail them.





CHAPTER XV.

THE TESTING OF THE MISSIONARY.


In thinking of the missionary, most of us dwell upon the heroic
self-denial he practices and the bravery with which he faces the
gravest dangers. Certainly, the missionary in Brazil is due a good
share of such appreciation. He has been called upon to endure
shameful indignities, painful personal dangers and the enervating
perils of a hostile climate. Our own missionaries have been
beaten, stoned, thrown into streams, arrested and haled before
courts, shot at and in many instances saved only by the most
signal dispensations of Providence. Dr. Bagby, our first
missionary, in spite of stoning and arrest when he was baptizing
converts in Bahia, kept fearlessly on in his endeavor to lead the
people to Christ. Dr. Z. C. Taylor traveled through the interior
of Bahia State in perils of robbers, in perils of fanatics, in
perils of infuriated priests and in perils of bloodthirsty
persecutors without fear or shrinking. In the spring of 1910
Solomon Ginsburg was set upon by a mob at Itabopoana, which opened
fire with such perilous directness that one bullet flattened upon
the wall a few inches above his head.

This same missionary in 1894 endured bitter persecutions when he
attempted to open the work at San Fidelis in the interior of the
State of Rio de Janeiro. A mob of a thousand people threw stones,
grass, corn and a great miscellany of other objects at him and his
little band of worshipers. The howling of the mob prevented him
from preaching. The best that could be done was to sing songs.
Finally, a stone having struck a girl in the congregation, he
carried her out through the infuriated mob to a drug store across
the street, where she was resuscitated, and he returned to his
service of song.

Next morning he was called to the police headquarters and the
officer forbade him to preach. He asked what the missionary was
doing there, to which he replied, "To preach the gospel." The
missionary was then prohibited from preaching in the province. He
replied that he was sorry he could not obey, for he had superior
orders. He could not accept orders from the police, nor the
Governor, nor even from the President of the Republic. The officer
asked who this superior authority was. The missionary replied it
was God. God had told him to go preach the gospel in all the world
to every creature; some of God's creatures were in San Fidelis and
he was there to preach according to the command of his Lord. The
police officer, after plying him with insulting epithets, kept him
a prisoner of the State as a disturber of the peace. On the
following day he was sent to the State prison at Nictheroy, where
he was confined for ten days. Friends, through the solicitation of
Mrs. Ginsburg, brought pressure to bear upon the Government and
the missionary was released. He was requested then as a personal
favor not to return until after the naval revolt, which was then
in progress, should be suppressed and a degree of quiet could be
restored to the State. Being thus requested, he remained away from
San Fidelis awhile.

When the revolt was suppressed he returned to San Fidelis and
persecution arose again. He appealed to the chief officer of the
State and fifty soldiers were sent to his relief. In choosing
these fifty soldiers the officer asked for believers to volunteer.
Twenty-five responded. He asked then for sympathizers and twenty-
five more volunteered. These were put under the command of the
missionary, who instructed them not to appear armed at the church.
They came unarmed, but when the mob began to thrown stones again
and refused to respect the soldiers, they pounced upon the evil
doers and there was a rough and tumble fight. Several were bruised
considerably and a number of limbs were broken, but after this
conflict the persecution ceased.

We relate these incidents for the purpose of making it clear that
our missionaries have been called upon to suffer greatly for the
cause of Christ. Every missionary who has been in Brazil any
length of time has felt the weight of personal, physical
persecution, and all in the gravest dangers have conducted
themselves as became the heroic character with which they are so
splendidly endowed. And this suffering, we are sorry to say, is
not yet over. For many years to come the desperate and despotic
hand of Rome, which could in the name of religion invent the
horrible inquisition and organize the bloodthirsty order of
Jesuits, has not changed its attitude completely and will resist
desperately to the last the inevitable progress of Protestantism
in Brazil.

Let me hasten, however, to say that it is very easy to get the
wrong impression of what the heroism of the missionary consists.
It is easy for us to think it consists in his willingness to face
personal danger. If such an idea should obtain amongst us
permanently and alas, it has persisted altogether too long; it
will rob the story of missions of its true interest and hazard
appreciation of the enterprise upon the ability of the historian
to find thrilling tales of adventure to gratify the appetite of
the sensation-loving public.

The most trying thing to the missionary is not the imminence of
personal danger, but the ever-present chilling, benumbing
indifference of the people to the gospel. Even though here and
there we find large numbers of people who are ready to accept the
gospel, let us not deceive ourselves into the belief that all
Brazil is eagerly seeking to enter the Kingdom of God. The
Macedonian call to Paul did not come from a whole nation which was
ready to accept his teaching, but from one man in a nation. Most
all Macedonian calls are like that. The few, comparatively
speaking, rise to utter such calls and these few are the keys of
opportunity which may be used to unlock whole Empires. The great
body of the people in Brazil (and this is especially true of the
educated classes) are as indifferent to the gospel as people are
most anywhere else. It is the weight of this stolid indifference
which tries the endurance of the missionary. It fills the very
atmosphere he breathes and hangs a dark cloud over his horizon,
which only his faith in God and the winning of occasional converts
graciously tinge with a silver lining. It is indifference, slowly
yielding indifference that tests the temper of the missionary
character. There are times when a bit of physical persecution would
afford a positive relief to the fatigue of his exacting career.

The days of the pioneer missionary, with their personal dangers,
have in a measure passed. The yeans of the persecutor in the face
of an increasingly more enlightened civilization are numbered. The
probability of personal perils is growing steadily less. The
missionary must now fight for a hearing before a public which is
too often willing to let him alone. In many places it does not
care enough for his message to persecute him for bringing it. It
is ready to patronize him with an assumed air of liberality and
resist the message which burns in his heart and upon his lips.
They are willing for him to speak, but not willing to listen to
what he has to say. He must fight for a hearing with this
patronizing indifference. It is this that tries his spirit. It is
this that bleeds his heart of its strength. It is this that calls
out the heroic in him as never does the dart of the savage, the
weapon of the fanatic or the fury of the mob. To hold on true to
his purpose in the face of such soul-harrowing indifference is the
crowning act of heroism upon the part of our missionaries. No one
of them has ever drawn back and given up his work for fear of
death at the hands of his persecutors, but it must be said for the
sake of the truth that some have succumbed before the rigors of
blasting indifference. The saints at home ought to support
valiantly with their prayers our missionaries who at the front are
engaged in a battle even unto death with indifferent souls
unwilling to accept their message.

There is another count in this subject of indifference to which we
at home should give more prayerful consideration. It is the
failure of the churches at home to send out an adequate number of
missionaries to reinforce the workers at the front and make it
possible for them to take advantage of the opportunities that have
come to them already. What could take the spirit out of a man more
quickly than the feeling that those who had sent him out do not
care enough about him to give him support and reinforcements for
his work? It is a shame upon us that we at home add another burden
to our missionaries by failing to loyally support them. What must
be a man's thoughts after he has toiled and sacrificed on a field
for years and has unceasingly begged for a mere tithe of the
helpers he really needs and which we fail to send?

When that brave garrison of English soldiers were shut up in Lady
Smith, South Africa, during the Boer War their courage to hold out
against overwhelming odds and on insufficient rations through many
weeks was kept up by the assurance that the patriotic English
nation was doing its utmost to send relief, though the relief was
long delayed. If the thought that their home people were not
trying to send succor to them had ever taken possession of their
minds, they would have surrendered forthwith. Their line of
communication was cut, but they knew help was coming, and so they
held out with grim determination until relief came.

How is it with our missionaries in Brazil? Their lines of
communication are intact. They know their people at home are able
to supply them with the help they need and yet the help does not
come. What must be the conclusion forced upon, them and what must
be the effect upon them? Either the churches, though able, will
not give the means to send out missionaries, or the men for
reinforcement will not volunteer. It may be that both causes are
at work. What is the matter when a pulpit committee of a
prominent church can have sixty names suggested to it of men who
might become its pastor, and a good percentage (save the mark) of
these direct applications, when our small missionary force in
Brazil is pleading for only ten men to be sent out to relieve them
in their strain? Whatever explanation we may have to offer for
these things, the fact remains that our indifference to the call
of our men at the front adds an additional weight to their already
too heavy load, and yet, in spite of it all, they are standing
with unflinching heroism at their posts.

Something must be done to relieve this situation. Counting all
denominations, there are in Brazil fewer missionaries today in
proportion to the population than there are either in India or
China. Why this disparity of workers in Brazil? Is it because the
work is not successful there? The facts show that, taking into
consideration the number of workers, it is one of the most
fruitful of all mission fields. Is it because there is less need
of the gospel? I believe I have shown that these people are bereft
of the gospel, and because of their sin and idolatry are as needy
as are to be found anywhere. No, there is no excuse to be offered.
Our workers at the front need help. We are trying their brave
spirits by withholding the relief they have a right to expect, and
yet we repeat they are holding on with a courage that stamps them
as heroes of the finest type. God help us to see our obligation to
send out recruits in sufficiently large numbers to relieve these
brave soldiers and transform them from a besieged garrison into an
aggressive army of conquerors.

Let us bear in mind that what is said about indifference both on
the foreign field and among the churches at home is spoken of the
people in the large. Thank God, the light is breaking in many
places at home and abroad. Many individuals and churches are today
seeing the larger vision and are assuming their larger
responsibility in the support of the foreign mission cause. Many
are saying: "We will faithfully strengthen the hands of our
brothers who toil so courageously at the front." In Brazil (and in
other mission fields, too,) there is in many places a marvelous
breaking away from the old attitude of indifference. The little
handful of missionaries we have on the field are straining every
nerve to meet the opportunities that are pressing upon them. They
are not discouraged. They are as busy as life trying to meet the
increasing demands. They are looking to the future with the
largest hope. They are a band of the most incurable optimists you
ever saw.





CHAPTER XVI.

THE URGENT CALL.


This very breaking away in some places is piling up additional
burdens and the pitifully inadequate force is called upon to meet
demands that twice their number could hardly satisfy. If we had
the same distribution of Baptist ministers in our Southern country
that we have in Brazil there would be only four ministers in
Texas, two in Virginia, three in Georgia and other States in like
proportion. Think of E. A. Nelson, the only representative of our
board in the Amazon region, trying to spread himself over four
States which comprise a territory five times as large as Texas.
Passing down the coast, five days journey, we would find D. L.
Hamilton and H. H. Muirhead, who have faced dangers as fearlessly
as have any brave spirits who have enriched the annals of
missionary history with courageous service. They, along with Miss
Voorheis, are our sole representatives in the State of Pernambuco
and in the adjoining State of Alagoas. C. F. Stapp, Solomon
Ginsburg and E. A. Jackson are attempting to carry forward the
work in the vast States of Piauhy, Goyaz, a part of Minas Geraes,
and Bahia, which last named State has in it one city as large as
New Orleans. E. A. Jackson is located far in the interior of the
State, three weeks' journey from Bahia; all of the energies of
Stapp are consumed in caring for the school; Ginsburg is forced to
give his attention to the nurturing of the thirty-five churches
and of evangelizing as far as his strength will go. In the State
beyond them, going down the coast, stands L. M. Reno, in the State
of Espirito Santo. In the populous State of Rio, in which is
located the capital city with its 1,000,000 inhabitants, we have
Entzminger, Shepard, Langston, Maddox, Cannada, Christie, Taylor
and Crosland. Entzminger, in addition to conducting the publishing
house, must also conduct the mission operations in Nictheroy, a
city of 40,000; Shepard, Taylor and Langston have placed upon
their shoulders the tremendous responsibility of conducting the
college and seminary; Cannada must give his energies to the
Flumenense School for Boys, leaving only Maddox, Christie and
Crosland at liberty to do the wider evangelistic work and care for
the many churches which the success of their labors have thrust
upon them. Crosland has been transferred recently to Bello
Horizonte, in the great State of Minas Geraes. Farther South, in
Sao Paulo, the richest and most progressive State in the country,
are Bagby, Deter and Edwards, Misses Carroll, Thomas and Grove.
Bagby and wife and the young ladies just mentioned devote their
time to the school, leaving only two to man a field which, because
of its splendid railroad facilities, has in it scores of inviting
locations for successful work. In Paranagua in the next State to
the South, have been located recently R. E. Pettigrew and wife.
Far down to the South in Rio Grande do Sul, a State as large as
Tennessee and Kentucky combined, stands a single sentinel in the
person of A. L. Dunstan. What a battle line for twenty men to
maintain! It is more than 4,000 miles in length. If you should
place these men in line across our Southern territory, locating
the first one in Baltimore, you would travel 100 miles before you
reach the second, 100 miles before you reach the third, 100 miles
to the fourth, and in going toward the Southwest, you would reach
the twentieth man in El Paso, Tex. Whereas, if you were to draw up
the Baptist ministers enrolled in the Southern Baptist Convention
territory along the same line and pass down it to make the count,
by the time you had reached El Paso you would have passed 8,000
men, for they would have been placed just one-fourth of a mile
apart.

Why do we need 400 ministers in this country to one in Brazil? Is
it possible that we will grudgingly cling to our 8,000 ministers
and decline to give even eight to reinforce our little handful in
Brazil? Such a division of forces can neither be fair nor
faithful.

In drawing this picture I have practically stated the situation
for the other denominations. The Presbyterians occupy the same
general territory as do the Baptists with an equal number of
missionaries. The Methodists have somewhat more compactly
stationed about the same number of missionaries as each of the
other two, while the Episcopalians, the Congregationalists and the
Evangelical Mission of South America combined add a number about
equal to each of the three larger denominations. A total of less
than 100 ordained missionaries scattered over a territory larger
than the United States of North America, which allows about four
missionaries to each Brazilian State. Add to this number the wives
of the missionaries, the thirty-seven unmarried women and the 125
native workers and the entire missionary body, foreign and native,
barely totals 300. How utterly inadequate is such a force in the
presence of such vast needs! Because this situation has in it a
call so apparent and so inexpressibly urgent it is impossible to
portray it in words.

The ripeness of the State of Piauhy for evangelization will
illustrate the urgency of the opportunity all over Brazil. As far
back as 1893 Dr. Nogueira Paranagua, who was at that time National
Senator from his State, urged Dr. Z. C. Taylor to send a man into
Piauhy and promised to help pay the expenses. Two years later Col.
Benj. Nogueira, the brother of the Senator, gave a similar
invitation, making a promise that he would sustain a missionary.
It was not until 1901 that E. A. Jackson was able to reach Col.
Benjamin's home. He preached the gospel in this good man's house
and also in Corrente, the town near by. Persecution, bitter and
determined, arose. There were three attempts to take Jackson's
life in one day. Once Col. Benjamin stepped in between the
assassin and the missionary and thus saved the missionary's life.
Some months later, upon the return of the missionary, Col.
Benjamin, who had been for so many years a friend to the gospel,
gave himself to it and was baptized. In January, 1904, the new
house of worship at Corrente was dedicated. It was built by Col.
Benjamin at his own expense. He also built a school building and
library, and afterward when the missionary was able to secure a
teacher, this generous man paid all the charges.

When we reached Brazil last summer I received a message from Judge
Julio Nogueira Paranagua, a nephew of Col. Benjamin, who is one of
the Circuit Judges in the State of Piauhy and who after a short
while is to be retired upon his pension, according to the
Brazilian law. As soon as this takes place he expects to give
himself entirely to the work of evangelizing his own people. The
message ran: "The State of Piauhy is open to the gospel. There is
a fight on between the priests and the better classes. The better
educated people, disgusted with Romanism and priesthood, are
drifting into materialism and atheism, but if a competent man
could be situated at Therezina, the capital, the whole State could
easily be won to the gospel."

His uncle, who is President of our Brazilian Convention, as we
have already stated, whose family embraces in its immediate
connection over a thousand people, in a letter written me after I
left Rio, reinforces this appeal. He says:

"I come to call your attention to the State of Piauhy, the field
in Brazil at present which seems to me to be the best prepared for
evangelization. Many things have contributed to bring this about.
The Masons, on the one hand, have done the most they possibly
could against Romanism; on the other hand, the propaganda sincere
and fervent of a small church founded in the southern part of the
State, which happily is receiving the greatest blessing from
Almighty God, is greatly contributing to the reception of the
gospel throughout the State. My brother, Col. Benj. Nogueira, the
founder of that church, has passed away, but he has left sons who
are spiritual and who continue to work. With the work developed
there it will spread beneficently. In the adjoining townships
there exist many believers, and a church will be founded soon in
Paranagua, a town situated on the beautiful lake by the same name.
In the cities of Jerumenha and Floriano there are already small
churches, which united to the others in assiduous labors, will
powerfully contribute to the evangelization of the State, which is
one of the most promising of Northern Brazil. My friend, Senator
Gervazio de Britto Passo, strongly desires that a minister of the
gospel come to the section where he is most influential. This
Senator greatly sympathizes with our cause and is convinced that
his numerous and influential friends as soon as enlightened by a
pastor as to what the religion of the Baptists is, will unite with
them, becoming evangelical. The best moment to move in that State
is the present one, when so many causes concur for our evangelical
development. The population of Piauhy, which is over 500,000, will
increase considerably as well as its economic wealth.

"I hope that you will not leave this field without pastors, where
the gospel is being received as the greatest benefit to which the
people can aspire for their civilization."

It was my good fortune to meet the present Senator from the State
of Piauhy aboard the ship as he went up the coast, and he, while
not a Protestant, urged upon me the importance of our heeding the
call of this Nogueira family and personally assured me that he
would do his utmost to see that such a missionary would have the
widest opportunity to preach the gospel to the people. This must
be a Macedonian call, which we hope to soon be able to heed.





CHAPTER XVII.

THE LAST STAND OP THE LATIN RACE.


There was a time in the life of the Anglo-Saxon race When it
became necessary for at least a portion of it to go out into a new
country in order that it might achieve the larger destiny it was
to fulfill in the world. God was behind that exodus as truly as he
was behind the transplanting of Abraham into a new environment.
Here in our country, unfettered by despotic traditions and
precedents, the Anglo-Saxon achieved religious and political
liberty with a rapidity and thoroughness that could not have been
possible in the old Continent of Europe.

Likewise also did God separate the Latin race from continental
oppression that it might grow a better manhood in the freer
atmosphere of the Western World. It is true that the Latin
movement was not prompted by the same motive that impelled the
Anglo-Saxon. Instead of the love of liberty, he was led out by the
lure of gold. Nevertheless, we must believe the final result will
be the same or else disbelieve in the ultimate triumph of the
guidance of God. We should not despair of the success of this
providential movement.

In South America is to be witnessed the last stand of the Latin
race. There God has given him one last chance to achieve a
religious character which will honor his Lord. It is the duty of
his Northern brother to sympathize with him and to believe in his
ability to build up a character worthy of himself and God. If we
cannot bring ourselves to such a belief it is useless for us to
expect to be helpful, and it is unfaithful in us to expend money
upon a people when we are confident it will be wasted.

We must not forget that these people are the descendants of the
Caesars, of Seneca, Napoleon--the race that ruled the world for
fifteen centuries. They surely have not lost all of their
virility. It must be a case of wasted strength. We believe that
this race has in it the possibility of rejuvenation. Lavaleye, the
great Belgian political economist, very probably spoke the truth
when he said that the Latin race is equal to the Anglo-Saxon, the
only difference being the gospel which the Protestants preach and
live.

We shall be helpful in our effort to give him the proper sympathy
if we remember the handicaps under which he has labored. He was
satisfied with his old fossilized religion, which had taught him
to believe that despotism is a virtue. He did not, therefore, come
to America for liberty. The early settlers were the veriest
adventurers of whom the gold lust made paragons of cruelty and
crime. They brought with them the intriguing priest who would
corrupt the Kingdom of Heaven in order to maintain his power.
There was no intentional break with their old life. The light that
guided them to America was the yellow light of gold and not the
white light of righteousness. The first result was that there
developed in the untrammeled West the most unreasoning despotism,
the most unblushing robbery and the most shamelessly corrupt
priestcraft. So this whole transplanted mass of the worst
intolerance, most insatiable greed and the most corrupt priesthood
that Europe has ever produced, had to be taught from the beginning
on the new soil, the elements of the higher manhood they so
desperately needed. They had learned no first lesson in Europe,
and therefore their first lesson in America was to unlearn the
very things that constituted their central life and thought in
Europe.

What progress has this providential teaching of the Latins in the
New World made? So swiftly did they learn the lessons of liberty
that hardly had the conflict which won complete freedom for the
United States closed before the inevitable struggle for the same
priceless heritage was in full swing in all Latin-America. And be
it said to their everlasting credit that this sacred cause, in
spite of revolutions and reactions, which at times hazarded the
whole scheme, has made steady advance, all critics to the
contrary, nothwithstanding. Political liberty is potentially at
least achieved in South America. It is written in the
Constitutions of the Republics and in the purposes of the people.
While many battles will be fought to establish it in detail, yet
the principle is so well established that it will never be
uprooted, provided we give the moral and educational aid we should
render at this critical hour.

We have come upon a time when we must give to our South American
brothers unstinted support. They have attained political freedom,
but they have not yet gained religious freedom. Nothing can be
more anomolous than a State with political freedom fostering a
State religion that is desperately and unscrupulously intolerant.
No genuine Republic can support a State religion. The two will not
live together. One or the other must go, as the history of France
will abundantly substantiate. One result is inevitable--the people
will eventually repudiate the despotic religion and drift into
atheism and infidelity. Indeed, such a thing is happening in South
America today. The better educated classes are being set
hopelessly adrift religiously and the more ignorant, the common
people, are following idolatry. Neither have the gospel preached
to them. The Bible is withheld. Such a state of affairs is a loud
call to us.

If these people are left without a vital, character building
religion they will, because of their volatile natures, degenerate
into the grossest perversions of morality. In such an event the
Monroe Doctrine itself would become a menace. Unless we give these
people the gospel it will be far better to annul the Monroe
Doctrine and permit the stronger nations of Europe to enter for
the sake of good government and morality. We must either carry to
our Latin brothers the regenerating, uplifting, energizing gospel
of Jesus, or step out of the way and let England and Germany
interpose their strong arms to prevent one of the most colossal
catastrophies of all time in the moral collapse of the 70,000,000
Latin-Americans. Surely, this must be the time when we, if we ever
intend to do so, must reinforce our Latin brothers. They have done
well, they have made progress, but they have gone about as far as
they can in the struggle upon the moral resources at their
command. Their very progress in education and civilization is
widening the breach between them and their former religious
teachers. A new life must come in, even the power of the gospel.
This alone can save Latin-America from inglorious failure.

We should not deceive ourselves into believing this prevailing
religion has lost its power, even though it is losing its
religious hold upon the better classes. It still retains its
social influence over these same educated classes, who despise its
priests. This social power is a bulwark of strength that we shall
experience great difficulty in breaking. Then, too, we may be sure
these Latin lands will have reinforcement from the Spanish
priesthood, which fact assures a most astute clerical leadership.
The Spanish priest is today the most resourceful, alert and
capable priest on the earth. I believe he is to be the last strong
defender of the Roman Catholic organization. It is no accident
that Merry de Val, the Pope's prime minister, is a Spaniard. His
appointment to that office is a just recognition of the most
virile priesthood in the Roman realm. I was profoundly impressed
with the Spanish priest. He looks you in the eye. He is on the
street, "hail fellow well met" with the people. It is evident that
he is conscious of power and possesses the gift of leadership
which he is eager to use. Latin-America will feel the force of his
capable leadership.

The situation in Brazil is complicated furthermore by the turn
affairs have taken in Portugal. There were riots in Rio and public
demonstrations against the local priests and against the exiled
Portuguese priests that would probably enter Brazil after the
establishment of the Portuguese Republic. But it appears that
these Portuguese clerics are to be admitted. This increases the
gravity of the situation. We shall be forced to take account of
these men. They are a part of the religious problem of South
America. Whether we wish to antagonize them or not, we shall be
cognizant of their power. They will not let us alone. They will
not give up South America to Protestantism without a bitter
struggle.

Now I do not say all of these things of the Catholic phase of the
religious problem in Latin-America for the purpose of recommending
that we should gird ourselves for a polemical mission to these
countries. We should look the situation squarely in the face that
we may be able to estimate properly every force with which we
shall have to do. I think that if the sole purpose in conducting
these missions is to fight the Catholics, then we can find work to
engage us more worthily. Let us evermore keep before us the fact
that the Latin races have a real need of the gospel and the gospel
is not being preached to them by the priests. If this is true, our
duty is clear and our call is imperative. We must go and preach a
positive, soul-saving gospel, avoiding conflict as far as possible
and by satisfying the heart-hunger of the people with the Bread of
Life, win them to Christ and a new life in Him.

I want to enter a plea for these, our brothers to the South of us.
God has separated them from their old soul-dwarfing environment in
Europe, and set them in this Western World that they might learn
of Him. Whether they realize it or not, they are making the last
fight for salvation and character their race is ever to engage in.
They have a need of the gospel as distressing as that of the
grossest heathen. Their religion itself is leading them further
and further from their saving Lord. Their teachers, who should
show them the light of life, are a beclouding hindrance. The
little band of missionaries we have sent are hopelessly inadequate
to the task and plead for reinforcements with a pathos that almost
breaks our hearts. Oh, do not some of us, as we have followed the
portrayal of the needs of South America, like Isaiah of old, hear
the Lord saying, "Whom shall I send and who will go for us?" God
grant that some of us may respond as he did, "Lord, here am I.
Send me."

The same deep longing for salvation that is in our hearts is in
the Latin heart. One day in the interior of Brazil I stood with a
missionary speaking with a man who had ridden to the railroad
station to talk with us a few moments while the train was
stopping. As we conversed a boy twelve years of age drew near to
hear us. He was pitifully disfigured with leprosy. So moved was
the missionary by the sight that he turned and said: "Why do you
not go somewhere and be treated." There flashed instantly in the
boy's eye a hope that had long since died, and he quickly
inquired, "Where can I go?" The missionary could not tell him, and
I watched the last ray of hope flicker for a second and then die
out forever! Ever since that day I have been hearing that pathetic
question, "Where can I go?" I seem to hear all Latin-Americans ask
it out of depths of sin. And we know to whom they must go for
healing and salvation. Shall we tell them? "Lord to whom shall we
go--thou hast the words of eternal life." To whom shall Latin-
America go? Only Christ has for them the word of life which
blessed truth they will never know unless we carry it to them.

THE END.





APPENDIX.

SUMMARY OF SOUTHERN BAPTIST WORK IN BRAZIL.

I. MISSIONARIES--
  1. Foreign, 44.
    (1) Men, 21.
    (2) Women, 23.

  2. Native, 117.

II. CHURCH STATISTICS--
  1. Churches, 142.
  2. Membership, 9,939.
  3. Church Buildings, 44.
  4. Outstations, 497.
  5. Sunday Schools, 138.
  6. Sunday School Scholars, 4,438.

III. SCHOOLS--
  1. Primary Schools, 9.
  2. Bagby School for Girls in Sao Paulo.
  3. Fluminense School for Boys in Nova Friburgo.
  4. School for Boys and Girls in Bahia.
  5. School for Boys and Girls in Pernambuco.
  6. Rio Baptist College and Seminary in Rio.
  7. Total number of students, 869.
  8. Theological Departments in connection
with Rio and Penrambuco schools.

IV. GENERAL--
  1. Work begun in 1882.
  2. Publishing House in Rio.








Produced by Charles Aldarondo Aldarondo@yahoo.com
            Don Lainson dlainson@sympatico.ca





THE BRITISH BARBARIANS

A HILL-TOP NOVEL

BY

GRANT ALLEN

1895






INTRODUCTION





Which every reader of this book is requested to read before
beginning the story.


This is a Hill-top Novel.  I dedicate it to all who have heart
enough, brain enough, and soul enough to understand it.

What do I mean by a Hill-top Novel?  Well, of late we have been
flooded with stories of evil tendencies: a Hill-top Novel is one
which raises a protest in favour of purity.

Why have not novelists raised the protest earlier?  For this
reason.  Hitherto, owing to the stern necessity laid upon the
modern seer for earning his bread, and, incidentally, for finding a
publisher to assist him in promulgating his prophetic opinions, it
has seldom happened that writers of exceptional aims have been able
to proclaim to the world at large the things which they conceived
to be best worth their telling it.  Especially has this been the
case in the province of fiction.  Let me explain the situation.
Most novels nowadays have to run as serials through magazines or
newspapers; and the editors of these periodicals are timid to a
degree which outsiders would hardly believe with regard to the
fiction they admit into their pages.  Endless spells surround them.
This story or episode would annoy their Catholic readers; that one
would repel their Wesleyan Methodist subscribers; such an incident
is unfit for the perusal of the young person; such another would
drive away the offended British matron.  I do not myself believe
there is any real ground for this excessive and, to be quite frank,
somewhat ridiculous timidity.  Incredible as it may seem to the
ordinary editor, I am of opinion that it would be possible to tell
the truth, and yet preserve the circulation.  A first-class journal
does not really suffer because two or three formalists or two or
three bigots among its thousands of subscribers give it up for six
weeks in a pet of ill-temper--and then take it on again.  Still,
the effect remains: it is almost impossible to get a novel printed
in an English journal unless it is warranted to contain nothing at
all to which anybody, however narrow, could possibly object, on any
grounds whatever, religious, political, social, moral, or
aesthetic.  The romance that appeals to the average editor must say
or hint at nothing at all that is not universally believed and
received by everybody everywhere in this realm of Britain.  But
literature, as Thomas Hardy says with truth, is mainly the
expression of souls in revolt.  Hence the antagonism between
literature and journalism.

Why, then, publish one's novels serially at all?  Why not appeal at
once to the outside public, which has few such prejudices?  Why not
deliver one's message direct to those who are ready to consider it
or at least to hear it?  Because, unfortunately, the serial rights
of a novel at the present day are three times as valuable, in money
worth, as the final book rights.  A man who elects to publish
direct, instead of running his story through the columns of a
newspaper, is forfeiting, in other words, three-quarters of his
income.  This loss the prophet who cares for his mission could
cheerfully endure, of course, if only the diminished income were
enough for him to live upon.  But in order to write, he must first
eat.  In my own case, for example, up till the time when I
published The Woman who Did, I could never live on the proceeds of
direct publication; nor could I even secure a publisher who would
consent to aid me in introducing to the world what I thought most
important for it.  Having now found such a publisher--having
secured my mountain--I am prepared to go on delivering my message
from its top, as long as the world will consent to hear it.  I will
willingly forgo the serial value of my novels, and forfeit
three-quarters of the amount I might otherwise earn, for the sake
of uttering the truth that is in me, boldly and openly, to a
perverse generation.

For this reason, and in order to mark the distinction between these
books which are really mine--my own in thought, in spirit, in
teaching--and those which I have produced, sorely against my will,
to satisfy editors, I propose in future to add the words, "A Hill-
top Novel," to every one of my stories which I write of my own
accord, simply and solely for the sake of embodying and enforcing
my own opinions.

Not that, as critics have sometimes supposed me to mean, I ever
wrote a line, even in fiction, contrary to my own profound beliefs.
I have never said a thing I did not think: but I have sometimes had
to abstain from saying many things I did think.  When I wished to
purvey strong meat for men, I was condemned to provide milk for
babes.  In the Hill-top Novels, I hope to reverse all that--to say
my say in my own way, representing the world as it appears to me,
not as editors and formalists would like me to represent it.

The Hill-top Novels, however, will not constitute, in the ordinary
sense, a series.  I shall add the name, as a Trade Mark, to any
story, by whomsoever published, which I have written as the
expression of my own individuality.  Nor will they necessarily
appear in the first instance in volume form.  If ever I should be
lucky enough to find an editor sufficiently bold and sufficiently
righteous to venture upon running a Hill-top Novel as a serial
through his columns, I will gladly embrace that mode of
publication.  But while editors remain as pusillanimous and as
careless of moral progress as they are at present, I have little
hope that I shall persuade any one of them to accept a work written
with a single eye to the enlightenment and bettering of humanity.

Whenever, therefore, in future, the words "A Hill-top Novel" appear
upon the title-page of a book by me, the reader who cares for truth
and righteousness may take it for granted that the book represents
my own original thinking, whether good or bad, on some important
point in human society or human evolution.

Not, again, that any one of these novels will deliberately attempt
to PROVE anything.  I have been amused at the allegations brought
by certain critics against The Woman who Did that it "failed to
prove" the practicability of unions such as Herminia's and Alan's.
The famous Scotsman, in the same spirit, objected to Paradise Lost
that it "proved naething": but his criticism has not been generally
endorsed as valid.  To say the truth, it is absurd to suppose a
work of imagination can prove or disprove anything.  The author
holds the strings of all his puppets, and can pull them as he
likes, for good or evil: he can make his experiments turn out well
or ill: he can contrive that his unions should end happily or
miserably: how, then, can his story be said to PROVE anything?  A
novel is not a proposition in Euclid.  I give due notice beforehand
to reviewers in general, that if any principle at all is "proved"
by any of my Hill-top Novels, it will be simply this:  "Act as I
think right, for the highest good of human kind, and you will
infallibly and inevitably come to a bad end for it."

Not to prove anything, but to suggest ideas, to arouse emotions,
is, I take it, the true function of fiction.  One wishes to make
one's readers THINK about problems they have never considered, FEEL
with sentiments they have disliked or hated.  The novelist as
prophet has his duty defined for him in those divine words of
Shelley's:


    "Singing songs unbidden
     Till the world is wrought
     To sympathy with hopes and fears it heeded not."


That, too, is the reason that impels me to embody such views as
these in romantic fiction, not in deliberate treatises.  "Why sow
your ideas broadcast," many honest critics say, "in novels where
mere boys and girls can read them?  Why not formulate them in
serious and argumentative books, where wise men alone will come
across them?"  The answer is, because wise men are wise already: it
is the boys and girls of a community who stand most in need of
suggestion and instruction.  Women, in particular, are the chief
readers of fiction; and it is women whom one mainly desires to
arouse to interest in profound problems by the aid of this vehicle.
Especially should one arouse them to such living interest while
they are still young and plastic, before they have crystallised and
hardened into the conventional marionettes of polite society.  Make
them think while they are young: make them feel while they are
sensitive: it is then alone that they will think and feel, if ever.
I will venture, indeed, to enforce my views on this subject by a
little apologue which I have somewhere read, or heard,--or
invented.

A Revolutionist desired to issue an Election Address to the Working
Men of Bermondsey.  The Rector of the Parish saw it at the
printer's, and came to him, much perturbed.  "Why write it in
English?" he asked.  "It will only inflame the minds of the lower
orders.  Why not allow me to translate it into Ciceronian Latin?
It would then be comprehensible to all University men; your logic
would be duly and deliberately weighed: and the tanners and
tinkers, who are so very impressionable, would not be poisoned by
it."  "My friend," said the Revolutionist, "it is the tanners and
tinkers _I_ want to get at.  My object is, to win this election;
University graduates will not help me to win it."

The business of the preacher is above all things to preach; but in
order to preach, he must first reach his audience.  The audience in
this case consists in large part of women and girls, who are most
simply and easily reached by fiction.  Therefore, fiction is today
the best medium for the preacher of righteousness who addresses
humanity.

Why, once more, this particular name, "A Hill-top Novel"?  For
something like this reason.

I am writing in my study on a heather-clad hill-top.  When I raise
my eye from my sheet of foolscap, it falls upon miles and miles of
broad open moorland.  My window looks out upon unsullied nature.
Everything around is fresh and pure and wholesome.  Through the open
casement, the scent of the pines blows in with the breeze from the
neighbouring firwood.  Keen airs sigh through the pine-needles.
Grasshoppers chirp from deep tangles of bracken.  The song of a
skylark drops from the sky like soft rain in summer; in the
evening, a nightjar croons to us his monotonously passionate love-
wail from his perch on the gnarled boughs of the wind-swept larch
that crowns the upland.  But away below in the valley, as night
draws on, a lurid glare reddens the north-eastern horizon.  It marks
the spot where the great wen of London heaves and festers.  Up here
on the free hills, the sharp air blows in upon us, limpid and clear
from a thousand leagues of open ocean; down there in the crowded
town, it stagnates and ferments, polluted with the diseases and
vices of centuries.

This is an urban age.  The men of the villages, alas, are leaving
behind them the green fields and purple moors of their childhood,
are foolishly crowding into the narrow lanes and purlieus of the
great cities.  Strange decadent sins and morbid pleasures entice
them thither.  But I desire in these books to utter a word once more
in favour of higher and purer ideals of life and art.  Those who
sicken of the foul air and lurid light of towns may still wander
side by side with me on these heathery highlands.  Far, far below,
the theatre and the music-hall spread their garish gas-lamps.  Let
who will heed them.  But here on the open hill-top we know fresher
and more wholesome delights.  Those feverish joys allure us not.
O decadents of the town, we have seen your sham idyls, your tinsel
Arcadias.  We have tired of their stuffy atmosphere, their dazzling
jets, their weary ways, their gaudy dresses; we shun the sunken
cheeks, the lack-lustre eyes, the heart-sick souls of your painted
goddesses.  We love not the fetid air, thick and hot with human
breath, and reeking with tobacco smoke, of your modern Parnassus--
a Parnassus whose crags were reared and shaped by the hands of the
stage-carpenter!  Your studied dalliance with your venal muses is
little to our taste.  Your halls are too stifling with carbonic acid
gas; for us, we breathe oxygen.

And the oxygen of the hill-tops is purer, keener, rarer, more
ethereal.  It is rich in ozone.  Now, ozone stands to common oxygen
itself as the clean-cut metal to the dull and leaden exposed
surface.  Nascent and ever renascent, it has electrical attraction;
it leaps to the embrace of the atom it selects, but only under the
influence of powerful affinities; and what it clasps once, it
clasps for ever.  That is the pure air which we drink in on the
heather-clad heights--not the venomous air of the crowded casino,
nor even the close air of the middle-class parlour.  It thrills and
nerves us.  How we smile, we who live here, when some dweller in the
mists and smoke of the valley confounds our delicate atmosphere,
redolent of honey and echoing the manifold murmur of bees, with
that stifling miasma of the gambling hell and the dancing saloon!
Trust me, dear friend, the moorland air is far other than you
fancy.  You can wander up here along the purple ridges, hand locked
in hand with those you love, without fear of harm to yourself or
your comrade.  No Bloom of Ninon here, but fresh cheeks like the
peach-blossom where the sun has kissed it: no casual fruition of
loveless, joyless harlots, but life-long saturation of your own
heart's desire in your own heart's innocence.  Ozone is better than
all the champagne in the Strand or Piccadilly.  If only you will
believe it, it is purity and life and sympathy and vigour.  Its
perfect freshness and perpetual fount of youth keep your age from
withering.  It crimsons the sunset and lives in the afterglow.  If
these delights thy mind may move, leave, oh, leave the meretricious
town, and come to the airy peaks.  Such joy is ours, unknown to the
squalid village which spreads its swamps where the poet's silver
Thames runs dull and leaden.

Have we never our doubts, though, up here on the hill-tops?  Ay,
marry, have we!  Are we so sure that these gospels we preach with
all our hearts are the true and final ones?  Who shall answer that
question?  For myself, as I lift up my eyes from my paper once more,
my gaze falls first on the golden bracken that waves joyously over
the sandstone ridge without, and then, within, on a little white
shelf where lies the greatest book of our greatest philosopher.  I
open it at random and consult its sortes.  What comfort and counsel
has Herbert Spencer for those who venture to see otherwise than the
mass of their contemporaries?

"Whoever hesitates to utter that which he thinks the highest truth,
lest it should be too much in advance of the time, may reassure
himself by looking at his acts from an impersonal point of view.
Let him duly realise the fact that opinion is the agency through
which character adapts external arrangements to itself--that his
opinion rightly forms part of this agency--is a unit of force,
constituting, with other such units, the general power which works
out social changes; and he will perceive that he may properly give
full utterance to his innermost conviction; leaving it to produce
what effect it may.  It is not for nothing that he has in him these
sympathies with some principles and repugnances to others.  He,
with all his capacities, and aspirations, and beliefs, is not an
accident, but a product of the time.  He must remember that while
he is a descendant of the past, he is a parent of the future; and
that his thoughts are as children born to him, which he may not
carelessly let die.  He, like every other man, may properly consider
himself as one of the myriad agencies through whom works the
Unknown Cause; and when the Unknown Cause produces in him a certain
belief, he is thereby authorised to profess and act out that
belief.  For, to render in their highest sense the words of the
poet--


    'Nature is made better by no mean,
     But nature makes that mean; over that art
     Which you say adds to nature, is an art
     That nature makes.'


"Not as adventitious therefore will the wise man regard the faith
which is in him.  The highest truth he sees he will fearlessly
utter; knowing that, let what may come of it, he is thus playing
his right part in the world--knowing that if he can effect the
change he aims at--well: if not--well also; though not SO well."

That passage comforts me.  These, then, are my ideas.  They may be
right, they may be wrong.  But at least they are the sincere and
personal convictions of an honest man, warranted in him by that
spirit of the age, of which each of us is but an automatic
mouthpiece.

G.  A.






THE BRITISH BARBARIANS

I





The time was Saturday afternoon; the place was Surrey; the person
of the drama was Philip Christy.

He had come down by the early fast train to Brackenhurst.  All the
world knows Brackenhurst, of course, the greenest and leafiest of
our southern suburbs.  It looked even prettier than its wont just
then, that town of villas, in the first fresh tenderness of its wan
spring foliage, the first full flush of lilac, laburnum, horse-
chestnut, and guelder-rose.  The air was heavy with the odour of May
and the hum of bees.  Philip paused a while at the corner, by the
ivied cottage, admiring it silently.  He was glad he lived there--
so very aristocratic!  What joy to glide direct, on the enchanted
carpet of the South-Eastern Railway, from the gloom and din and
bustle of Cannon Street, to the breadth and space and silence and
exclusiveness of that upland village!  For Philip Christy was a
gentlemanly clerk in Her Majesty's Civil Service.

As he stood there admiring it all with roving eyes, he was startled
after a moment by the sudden, and as it seemed to him unannounced
apparition of a man in a well-made grey tweed suit, just a yard or
two in front of him.  He was aware of an intruder.  To be sure, there
was nothing very remarkable at first sight either in the stranger's
dress, appearance, or manner.  All that Philip noticed for himself
in the newcomer's mien for the first few seconds was a certain
distinct air of social superiority, an innate nobility of gait
and bearing.  So much at least he observed at a glance quite
instinctively.  But it was not this quiet and unobtrusive tone,
as of the Best Society, that surprised and astonished him;
Brackenhurst prided itself, indeed, on being a most well-bred and
distinguished neighbourhood; people of note grew as thick there as
heather or whortleberries.  What puzzled him more was the abstruser
question, where on earth the stranger could have come from so
suddenly.  Philip had glanced up the road and down the road just two
minutes before, and was prepared to swear when he withdrew his eyes
not a soul loomed in sight in either direction.  Whence, then, could
the man in the grey suit have emerged?  Had he dropped from the
clouds?  No gate opened into the road on either side for two hundred
yards or more; for Brackenhurst is one of those extremely
respectable villa neighbourhoods where every house--an eligible
family residence--stands in its own grounds of at least six acres.
Now Philip could hardly suspect that so well dressed a man of such
distinguished exterior would be guilty of such a gross breach of
the recognised code of Brackenhurstian manners as was implied in
the act of vaulting over a hedgerow.  So he gazed in blank wonder
at the suddenness of the apparition, more than half inclined to
satisfy his curiosity by inquiring of the stranger how the dickens
he had got there.

A moment's reflection, however, sufficed to save the ingenuous
young man from the pitfall of so serious a social solecism.  It
would be fatal to accost him.  For, mark you, no matter how
gentlemanly and well-tailored a stranger may look, you can never be
sure nowadays (in these topsy-turvy times of subversive radicalism)
whether he is or is not really a gentleman.  That makes
acquaintanceship a dangerous luxury.  If you begin by talking to a
man, be it ever so casually, he may desire to thrust his company
upon you, willy-nilly, in future; and when you have ladies of your
family living in a place, you really CANNOT be too particular what
companions you pick up there, were it even in the most informal and
momentary fashion.  Besides, the fellow might turn out to be one of
your social superiors, and not care to know you; in which case, of
course, you would only be letting yourself in for a needless
snubbing.  In fact, in this modern England of ours, this fatherland
of snobdom, one passes one's life in a see-saw of doubt, between
the Scylla and Charybdis of those two antithetical social dangers.
You are always afraid you may get to know somebody you yourself do
not want to know, or may try to know somebody who does not want to
know you.

Guided by these truly British principles of ancestral wisdom,
Philip Christy would probably never have seen anything more of the
distinguished-looking stranger had it not been for a passing
accident of muscular action, over which his control was distinctly
precarious.  He happened in brushing past to catch the stranger's
eye.  It was a clear blue eye, very deep and truthful.  It somehow
succeeded in riveting for a second Philip's attention.  And it was
plain the stranger was less afraid of speaking than Philip himself
was.  For he advanced with a pleasant smile on his open countenance,
and waved one gloveless hand in a sort of impalpable or half-
checked salute, which impressed his new acquaintance as a vaguely
polite Continental gesture.  This affected Philip favourably: the
newcomer was a somebody then, and knew his place: for just in
proportion as Philip felt afraid to begin conversation himself with
an unplaced stranger, did he respect any other man who felt so
perfectly sure of his own position that he shared no such middle-
class doubts or misgivings.  A duke is never afraid of accosting
anybody.  Philip was strengthened, therefore, in his first idea,
that the man in the grey suit was a person of no small distinction
in society, else surely he would not have come up and spoken with
such engaging frankness and ease of manner.

"I beg your pardon," the stranger said, addressing him in pure and
limpid English, which sounded to Philip like the dialect of the
very best circles, yet with some nameless difference of intonation
or accent which certainly was not foreign, still less provincial,
or Scotch, or Irish; it seemed rather like the very purest well of
English undefiled Philip had ever heard,--only, if anything, a
little more so; "I beg your pardon, but I'm a stranger hereabouts,
and I should be so VERY much obliged if you could kindly direct me
to any good lodgings."

His voice and accent attracted Philip even more now he stood near
at hand than his appearance had done from a little distance.  It was
impossible, indeed, to say definitely in set terms what there was
about the man that made his personality and his words so charming;
but from that very first minute, Philip freely admitted to himself
that the stranger in the grey suit was a perfect gentleman.  Nay, so
much did he feel it in his ingenuous way that he threw off at once
his accustomed cloak of dubious reserve, and, standing still to
think, answered after a short pause, "Well, we've a great many very
nice furnished houses about here to let, but not many lodgings.
Brackenhurst's a cut above lodgings, don't you know; it's a
residential quarter.  But I should think Miss Blake's, at
Heathercliff House, would perhaps be just the sort of thing to
suit you."

"Oh, thank you," the stranger answered, with a deferential
politeness which charmed Philip once more by its graceful
expressiveness.  "And could you kindly direct me to them?  I don't
know my way about at all, you see, as yet, in this country."

"With pleasure," Philip replied, quite delighted at the chance of
solving the mystery of where the stranger had dropped from.  "I'm
going that way myself, and can take you past her door.  It's only a
few steps.  Then you're a stranger in England?"

The newcomer smiled a curious self-restrained smile.  He was both
young and handsome.  "Yes, I'm a stranger in your England," he
answered, gravely, in the tone of one who wishes to avoid an
awkward discussion.  "In fact, an Alien.  I only arrived here this
very morning."

"From the Continent?" Philip inquired, arching his eyebrows
slightly.

The stranger smiled again.  "No, not from the Continent," he
replied, with provoking evasiveness.

"I thought you weren't a foreigner," Philip continued in a blandly
suggestive voice.  "That is to say," he went on, after a second's
pause, during which the stranger volunteered no further statement,
"you speak English like an Englishman."

"Do I?" the stranger answered.  "Well, I'm glad of that.  It'll make
intercourse with your Englishmen so much more easy."

By this time Philip's curiosity was thoroughly whetted.  "But you're
not an Englishman, you say?" he asked, with a little natural
hesitation.

"No, not exactly what you call an Englishman," the stranger
replied, as if he didn't quite care for such clumsy attempts to
examine his antecedents.  "As I tell you, I'm an Alien.  But we
always spoke English at home," he added with an afterthought, as if
ready to vouchsafe all the other information that lay in his power.

"You can't be an American, I'm sure," Philip went on, unabashed,
his eagerness to solve the question at issue, once raised, getting
the better for the moment of both reserve and politeness.

"No, I'm certainly not an American," the stranger answered with a
gentle courtesy in his tone that made Philip feel ashamed of his
rudeness in questioning him.

"Nor a Colonist?" Philip asked once more, unable to take the hint.

"Nor a Colonist either," the Alien replied curtly.  And then he
relapsed into a momentary silence which threw upon Philip the
difficult task of continuing the conversation.

The member of Her Britannic Majesty's Civil Service would have
given anything just that minute to say to him frankly, "Well, if
you're not an Englishman, and you're not an American, and you're
not a Colonist, and you ARE an Alien, and yet you talk English like
a native, and have always talked it, why, what in the name of
goodness do you want us to take you for?"  But he restrained himself
with difficulty.  There was something about the stranger that made
him feel by instinct it would be more a breach of etiquette to
question him closely than to question any one he had ever met with.

They walked on along the road for some minutes together, the
stranger admiring all the way the golden tresses of the laburnum
and the rich perfume of the lilac, and talking much as he went of
the quaintness and prettiness of the suburban houses.  Philip
thought them pretty, too (or rather, important), but failed to see
for his own part where the quaintness came in.  Nay, he took the
imputation as rather a slur on so respectable a neighbourhood: for
to be quaint is to be picturesque, and to be picturesque is to be
old-fashioned.  But the stranger's voice and manner were so
pleasant, almost so ingratiating, that Philip did not care to
differ from him on the abstract question of a qualifying epithet.
After all, there's nothing positively insulting in calling a house
quaint, though Philip would certainly have preferred, himself, to
hear the Eligible Family Residences of that Aristocratic
Neighbourhood described in auctioneering phrase as "imposing,"
"noble," "handsome," or "important-looking."

Just before they reached Miss Blake's door, the Alien paused for a
second.  He took out a loose handful of money, gold and silver
together, from his trouser pocket.  "One more question," he said,
with that pleasant smile on his lips, "if you'll excuse my
ignorance.  Which of these coins is a pound, now, and which is a
sovereign?"

"Why, a pound IS a sovereign, of course," Philip answered briskly,
smiling the genuine British smile of unfeigned astonishment that
anybody should be ignorant of a minor detail in the kind of life he
had always lived among.  To be sure, he would have asked himself
with equal simplicity what was the difference between a twenty-
franc piece, a napoleon, and a louis, or would have debated as to
the precise numerical relation between twenty-five cents and a
quarter of a dollar; but then, those are mere foreign coins, you
see, which no fellow can be expected to understand, unless he
happens to have lived in the country they are used in.  The others
are British and necessary to salvation.  That feeling is instinctive
in the thoroughly provincial English nature.  No Englishman ever
really grasps for himself the simple fact that England is a foreign
country to foreigners; if strangers happen to show themselves
ignorant of any petty matter in English life, he regards their
ignorance as silly and childish, not to be compared for a moment to
his own natural unfamiliarity with the absurd practices of foreign
nations.

The Alien, indeed, seemed to have learned beforehand this curious
peculiarity of the limited English intellect; for he blushed
slightly as he replied, "I know your currency, as a matter of
arithmetic, of course: twelve pence make one shilling; twenty
shillings make one pound--"

"Of course," Philip echoed in a tone of perfect conviction; it
would never have occurred to him to doubt for a moment that
everybody knew intuitively those beggarly elements of the inspired
British monetary system.

"Though they're singularly awkward units of value for any one
accustomed to a decimal coinage: so unreasonable and illogical,"
the stranger continued blandly, turning over the various pieces
with a dubious air of distrust and uncertainty.

"I BEG your pardon," Philip said, drawing himself up very stiff,
and scarcely able to believe his ears (he was an official of Her
Britannic Majesty's Government, and unused to such blasphemy).  "Do
I understand you to say, you consider pounds, shillings, and pence
UNREASONABLE?"

He put an emphasis on the last word that might fairly have struck
terror to the stranger's breast; but somehow it did not.  "Why,
yes," the Alien went on with imperturbable gentleness: "no order or
principle, you know.  No rational connection.  A mere survival from
barbaric use.  A score, and a dozen.  The score is one man, ten
fingers and ten toes; the dozen is one man with shoes on--fingers
and feet together.  Twelve pence make one shilling; twenty shillings
one pound.  How very confusing!  And then, the nomenclature's so
absurdly difficult!  Which of these is half-a-crown, if you please,
and which is a florin? and what are their respective values in
pence and shillings?"

Philip picked out the coins and explained them to him separately.
The Alien meanwhile received the information with evident interest,
as a traveller in that vast tract that is called Abroad might note
the habits and manners of some savage tribe that dwells within its
confines, and solemnly wrapped each coin up in paper, as his
instructor named it for him, writing the designation and value
outside in a peculiarly beautiful and legible hand.  "It's so
puzzling, you see," he said in explanation, as Philip smiled
another superior and condescending British smile at this infantile
proceeding; "the currency itself has no congruity or order: and
then, even these queer unrelated coins haven't for the most part
their values marked in words or figures upon them."

"Everybody knows what they are," Philip answered lightly.  Though
for a moment, taken aback by the novelty of the idea, he almost
admitted in his own mind that to people who had the misfortune to
be born foreigners, there WAS perhaps a slight initial difficulty
in this unlettered system.  But then, you cannot expect England to
be regulated throughout for the benefit of foreigners!  Though, to
be sure, on the one occasion when Philip had visited the Rhine and
Switzerland, he had grumbled most consumedly from Ostend to
Grindelwald, at those very decimal coins which the stranger seemed
to admire so much, and had wondered why the deuce Belgium, Germany,
Holland, and Switzerland could not agree among themselves upon a
uniform coinage; it would be so much more convenient to the British
tourist.  For the British tourist, of course, is NOT a foreigner.

On the door-step of Miss Blake's Furnished Apartments for Families
and Gentlemen, the stranger stopped again.  "One more question," he
interposed in that same suave voice, "if I'm not trespassing too
much on your time and patience.  For what sort of term--by the day,
month, year--does one usually take lodgings?"

"Why, by the week, of course," Philip answered, suppressing a broad
smile of absolute surprise at the man's childish ignorance.

"And how much shall I have to pay?" the Alien went on quietly.
"Have you any fixed rule about it?"

"Of course not," Philip answered, unable any longer to restrain his
amusement (everything in England was "of course" to Philip).  "You
pay according to the sort of accommodation you require, the number
of your rooms, and the nature of the neighbourhood."

"I see," the Alien replied, imperturbably polite, in spite of
Philip's condescending manner.  "And what do I pay per room in this
latitude and longitude?"

For twenty seconds, Philip half suspected his new acquaintance of a
desire to chaff him: but as at the same time the Alien drew from
his pocket a sort of combined compass and chronometer which he
gravely consulted for his geographical bearings, Philip came to the
conclusion he must be either a seafaring man or an escaped lunatic.
So he answered him to the point.  "I should think," he said quietly,
"as Miss Blake's are extremely respectable lodgings, in a first-
rate quarter, and with a splendid view, you'll probably have to pay
somewhere about three guineas."

"Three what?" the stranger interposed, with an inquiring glance at
the little heap of coins he still held before him.

Philip misinterpreted his glance.  "Perhaps that's too much for
you," he suggested, looking severe; for if people cannot afford to
pay for decent rooms, they have no right to invade an aristocratic
suburb, and bespeak the attention of its regular residents.

"Oh, that's not it," the Alien put in, reading his tone aright.
"The money doesn't matter to me.  As long as I can get a tidy room,
with sun and air, I don't mind what I pay.  It's the guinea I can't
quite remember about for the moment.  I looked it up, I know, in a
dictionary at home; but I'm afraid I've forgotten it.  Let me see;
it's twenty-one pounds to the guinea, isn't it?  Then I'm to pay
about sixty-three pounds a week for my lodgings."

This was the right spirit.  He said it so simply, so seriously, so
innocently, that Philip was quite sure he really meant it.  He was
prepared, if necessary, to pay sixty odd pounds a week in rent.
Now, a man like that is the proper kind of man for a respectable
neighbourhood.  He'll keep a good saddle-horse, join the club, and
play billiards freely.  Philip briefly explained to him the nature
of his mistake, pointing out to him that a guinea was an imaginary
coin, unrepresented in metal, but reckoned by prescription at
twenty-one shillings.  The stranger received the slight correction
with such perfect nonchalance, that Philip at once conceived a
high opinion of his wealth and solvency, and therefore of his
respectability and moral character.  It was clear that pounds and
shillings were all one to him.  Philip had been right, no doubt,
in his first diagnosis of his queer acquaintance as a man of
distinction.  For wealth and distinction are practically synonyms
in England for one and the same quality, possession of the
wherewithal.

As they parted, the stranger spoke again, still more at sea.  "And
are there any special ceremonies to be gone through on taking up
lodgings?" he asked quite gravely.  "Any religious rites, I mean to
say?  Any poojah or so forth?  That is," he went on, as Philip's
smile broadened, "is there any taboo to be removed or appeased
before I can take up my residence in the apartments?"

By this time Philip was really convinced he had to do with a
madman--perhaps a dangerous lunatic.  So he answered rather testily,
"No, certainly not; how absurd! you must see that's ridiculous.
You're in a civilised country, not among Australian savages.  All
you'll have to do is to take the rooms and pay for them.  I'm sorry
I can't be of any further use to you, but I'm pressed for time
to-day.  So now, good-morning."

As for the stranger, he turned up the path through the lodging-
house garden with curious misgivings.  His heart failed him.  It was
half-past three by mean solar time for that particular longitude.
Then why had this young man said so briskly, "Good morning," at
3.30 P.M., as if on purpose to deceive him?  Was he laying a trap?
Was this some wile and guile of the English medicine-men?






II





Next day was (not unnaturally) Sunday.  At half-past ten in the
morning, according to his wont, Philip Christy was seated in the
drawing-room at his sister's house, smooth silk hat in gloved hand,
waiting for Frida and her husband, Robert Monteith, to go to church
with him.  As he sat there, twiddling his thumbs, or beating the
devil's tattoo on the red Japanese table, the housemaid entered.
"A gentleman to see you, sir," she said, handing Philip a card.
The young man glanced at it curiously.  A visitor to call at such
an early hour!--and on Sunday morning too!  How extremely odd!
This was really most irregular!

So he looked down at the card with a certain vague sense of
inarticulate disapproval.  But he noticed at the same time it was
finer and clearer and more delicately engraved than any other card
he had ever yet come across.  It bore in simple unobtrusive letters
the unknown name, "Mr. Bertram Ingledew."

Though he had never heard it before, name and engraving both tended
to mollify Philip's nascent dislike.  "Show the gentleman in,
Martha," he said in his most grandiose tone; and the gentleman
entered.

Philip started at sight of him.  It was his friend the Alien.  Philip
was quite surprised to see his madman of last night; and what was
more disconcerting still, in the self-same grey tweed home-spun
suit he had worn last evening.  Now, nothing can be more
gentlemanly, don't you know, than a grey home-spun, IN its proper
place; but its proper place Philip Christy felt was certainly NOT
in a respectable suburb on a Sunday morning.

"I beg your pardon," he said frigidly, rising from his seat with
his sternest official air--the air he was wont to assume in the
anteroom at the office when outsiders called and wished to
interview his chief "on important public business."  "To what may I
owe the honour of this visit?"  For he did not care to be hunted up
in his sister's house at a moment's notice by a most casual
acquaintance, whom he suspected of being an escaped lunatic.

Bertram Ingledew, for his part, however, advanced towards his
companion of last night with the frank smile and easy bearing of a
cultivated gentleman.  He was blissfully unaware of the slight he
was putting upon the respectability of Brackenhurst by appearing on
Sunday in his grey tweed suit; so he only held out his hand as to
an ordinary friend, with the simple words, "You were so extremely
kind to me last night, Mr. Christy, that as I happen to know nobody
here in England, I ventured to come round and ask your advice in
unexpected circumstances that have since arisen."

When Bertram Ingledew looked at him, Philip once more relented.  The
man's eye was so captivating.  To say the truth, there was something
taking about the mysterious stranger--a curious air of unconscious
superiority--so that, the moment he came near, Philip felt himself
fascinated.  He only answered, therefore, in as polite a tone as he
could easily muster, "Why, how did you get to know my name, or to
trace me to my sister's?"

"Oh, Miss Blake told me who you were and where you lived," Bertram
replied most innocently: his tone was pure candour; "and when I
went round to your lodgings just now, they explained that you were
out, but that I should probably find you at Mrs. Monteith's; so of
course I came on here."

Philip denied the applicability of that naive "of course" in his
inmost soul: but it was no use being angry with Mr. Bertram
Ingledew.  So much he saw at once; the man was so simple-minded, so
transparently natural, one could not be angry with him.  One could
only smile at him, a superior cynical London-bred smile, for an
unsophisticated foreigner.  So the Civil Servant asked with a
condescending air, "Well, what's your difficulty?  I'll see if
peradventure I can help you out of it."  For he reflected to himself
in a flash that as Ingledew had apparently a good round sum in gold
and notes in his pocket yesterday, he was not likely to come
borrowing money this morning.

"It's like this, you see," the Alien answered with charming
simplicity, "I haven't got any luggage."

"Not got any luggage!" Philip repeated, awestruck, letting his jaw
fall short, and stroking his clean-shaven chin with one hand.  He
was more doubtful than ever now as to the man's sanity or
respectability.  If he was not a lunatic, then surely he must be
this celebrated Perpignan murderer, whom everybody was talking
about, and whom the French police were just then engaged in hunting
down for extradition.

"No; I brought none with me on purpose," Mr. Ingledew replied, as
innocently as ever.  "I didn't feel quite sure about the ways, or
the customs, or the taboos of England.  So I had just this one suit
of clothes made, after an English pattern of the present fashion,
which I was lucky enough to secure from a collector at home; and I
thought I'd buy everything else I wanted when I got to London.  I
brought nothing at all in the way of luggage with me."

"Not even brush and comb?" Philip interposed, horrified.

"Oh, yes, naturally, just the few things one always takes in a
vade-mecum," Bertram Ingledew answered, with a gracefully
deprecatory wave of the hand, which Philip thought pretty enough,
but extremely foreign.  "Beyond that, nothing.  I felt it would be
best, you see, to set oneself up in things of the country in the
country itself.  One's surer then of getting exactly what's worn in
the society one mixes in."

For the first and only time, as he said those words, the stranger
struck a chord that was familiar to Philip.  "Oh, of course," the
Civil Servant answered, with brisk acquiescence, "if you want to be
really up to date in your dress, you must go to first-rate houses
in London for everything.  Nobody anywhere can cut like a good
London tailor."

Bertram Ingledew bowed his head.  It was the acquiescent bow of the
utter outsider who gives no opinion at all on the subject under
discussion, because he does not possess any.  As he probably came,
in spite of his disclaimer, from America or the colonies, which are
belated places, toiling in vain far in the rear of Bond Street,
Philip thought this an exceedingly proper display of bashfulness,
especially in a man who had only landed in England yesterday.  But
Bertram went on half-musingly.  "And you had told me," he said, "I'm
sure not meaning to mislead me, there were no formalities or taboos
of any kind on entering into lodgings.  However, I found, as soon as
I'd arranged to take the rooms and pay four guineas a week for
them, which was a guinea more than she asked me, Miss Blake would
hardly let me come in at all unless I could at once produce my
luggage."  He looked comically puzzled.  "I thought at first," he
continued, gazing earnestly at Philip, "the good lady was afraid I
wouldn't pay her what I'd agreed, and would go away and leave her
in the lurch without a penny,--which was naturally a very painful
imputation.  But when I offered to let her have three weeks' rent
in advance, I saw that wasn't all: there was a taboo as well; she
couldn't let me in without luggage, she said, because it would
imperil some luck or talisman to which she frequently alluded as
the Respectability of her Lodgings.  This Respectability seems a
very great fetich.  I was obliged at last, in order to ensure a
night's lodging of any sort, to appease it by promising I'd go up
to London by the first train to-day, and fetch down my luggage."

"Then you've things at Charing Cross, in the cloak-room perhaps?"
Philip suggested, somewhat relieved; for he felt sure Bertram
Ingledew must have told Miss Blake it was HE who had recommended
him to Heathercliff House for furnished apartments.

"Oh, dear, no; nothing," Bertram responded cheerfully.  "Not a sack
to my back.  I've only what I stand up in.  And I called this
morning just to ask as I passed if you could kindly direct me to an
emporium in London where I could set myself up in all that's
necessary."

"A WHAT?" Philip interposed, catching quick at the unfamiliar word
with blank English astonishment, and more than ever convinced, in
spite of denial, that the stranger was an American.

"An emporium," Bertram answered, in the most matter-of-fact voice:
"a magazine, don't you know; a place where they supply things in
return for money.  I want to go up to London at once this morning
and buy what I require there."

"Oh, A SHOP, you mean," Philip replied, putting on at once his most
respectable British sabbatarian air.  "I can tell you of the very
best tailor in London, whose cut is perfect; a fine flower of
tailors: but NOT to-day.  You forget you're in England, and this is
Sunday.  On the Continent, it's different: but you'll find no decent
shops here open to-day in town or country."

Bertram Ingledew drew one hand over his high white brow with a
strangely puzzled air.  "No more I will," he said slowly, like one
who by degrees half recalls with an effort some forgotten fact from
dim depths of his memory.  "I ought to have remembered, of course.
Why, I knew that, long ago.  I read it in a book on the habits and
manners of the English people.  But somehow, one never recollects
these taboo days, wherever one may be, till one's pulled up short
by them in the course of one's travels.  Now, what on earth am I to
do?  A box, it seems, is the Open, Sesame of the situation.  Some
mystic value is attached to it as a moral amulet.  I don't believe
that excellent Miss Blake would consent to take me in for a second
night without the guarantee of a portmanteau to respectablise me."

We all have moments of weakness, even the most irreproachable
Philistine among us; and as Bertram said those words in rather a
piteous voice, it occurred to Philip Christy that the loan of a
portmanteau would be a Christian act which might perhaps simplify
matters for the handsome and engaging stranger.  Besides, he was
sure, after all--mystery or no mystery--Bertram Ingledew was
Somebody.  That nameless charm of dignity and distinction impressed
him more and more the longer he talked with the Alien.  "Well, I
think, perhaps, I could help you," he hazarded after a moment, in
a dubious tone; though to be sure, if he lent the portmanteau, it
would be like cementing the friendship for good or for evil; which
Philip, being a prudent young man, felt to be in some ways a trifle
dangerous; for who borrows a portmanteau must needs bring it back
again--which opens the door to endless contingencies.  "I MIGHT be
able--"

At that moment, their colloquy was suddenly interrupted by the
entry of a lady who immediately riveted Bertram Ingledew's
attention.  She was tall and dark, a beautiful woman, of that riper
and truer beauty in face and form that only declares itself as
character develops.  Her features were clear cut, rather delicate
than regular; her eyes were large and lustrous; her lips not too
thin, but rich and tempting; her brow was high, and surmounted by a
luscious wealth of glossy black hair which Bertram never remembered
to have seen equalled before for its silkiness of texture and its
strange blue sheen, like a plate of steel, or the grass of the
prairies.  Gliding grace distinguished her when she walked.  Her
motion was equable.  As once the sons of God saw the daughters of
men that they were fair, and straightway coveted them, even so
Bertram Ingledew looked on Frida Monteith, and saw at the first
glance she was a woman to be desired, a soul high-throned, very
calm and beautiful.

She stood there for a moment and faced him, half in doubt, in her
flowing Oriental or Mauresque robe (for she dressed, as Philip
would have said, "artistically"), waiting to be introduced the
while, and taking good heed, as she waited, of the handsome
stranger.  As for Philip, he hesitated, not quite certain in his own
mind on the point of etiquette--say rather of morals--whether one
ought or ought not to introduce "the ladies of one's family" to a
casual stranger picked up in the street, who confesses he has come
on a visit to England without a letter of introduction or even that
irreducible minimum of respectability--a portmanteau.  Frida,
however, had no such scruples.  She saw the young man was good-
looking and gentlemanly, and she turned to Philip with the hasty
sort of glance that says as plainly as words could say it, "Now,
then! introduce me."

Thus mutely exhorted, though with a visible effort, Philip murmured
half inarticulately, in a stifled undertone, "My sister, Mrs.
Monteith--Mr. Bertram Ingledew," and then trembled inwardly.

It was a surprise to Bertram that the beautiful woman with the
soul in her eyes should turn out to be the sister of the very
commonplace young man with the boiled-fish expression he had met
by the corner; but he disguised his astonishment, and only
interjected, as if it were the most natural remark in the world:
"I'm pleased to meet you.  What a lovely gown! and how admirably it
becomes you!"

Philip opened his eyes aghast.  But Frida glanced down at the dress
with a glance of approbation.  The stranger's frankness, though
quaint, was really refreshing.

"I'm so glad you like it," she said, taking the compliment with
quiet dignity, as simply as it was intended.  "It's all my own
taste; I chose the stuff and designed the make of it.  And I know
who this is, Phil, without your troubling to tell me; it's the
gentleman you met in the street last night, and were talking about
at dinner."

"You're quite right," Philip answered, with a deprecating look (as
who should say, aside, "I really couldn't help it").  "He--he's
rather in a difficulty."  And then he went on to explain in a few
hurried words to Frida, with sundry shrugs and nods of profoundest
import, that the supposed lunatic or murderer or foreigner or fool
had gone to Miss Blake's without luggage of any sort; and that,
"Perhaps"--very dubitatively--"a portmanteau or bag might help him
out of his temporary difficulties."

"Why, of course," Frida cried impulsively, with prompt decision;
"Robert's Gladstone bag and my little brown trunk would be the very
things for him.  I could lend them to him at once, if only we can
get a Sunday cab to take them."

"NOT before service, surely," Philip interposed, scandalised.
"If he were to take them now, you know, he'd meet all the church-
people."

"Is it taboo, then, to face the clergy with a Gladstone bag?"
Bertram asked quite seriously, in that childlike tone of simple
inquiry that Philip had noticed more than once before in him.  "Your
bonzes object to meet a man with luggage?  They think it unlucky?"

Frida and Philip looked at one another with quick glances, and
laughed.

"Well, it's not exactly tabooed," Frida answered gently; "and it's
not so much the rector himself, you know, as the feelings of one's
neighbours.  This is a very respectable neighbourhood--oh, quite
dreadfully respectable--and people in the houses about might make a
talk of it if a cab drove away from the door as they were passing.
I think, Phil, you're right.  He'd better wait till the church-
people are finished."

"Respectability seems to be a very great object of worship in your
village," Bertram suggested in perfect good faith.  "Is it a local
cult, or is it general in England?"

Frida glanced at him, half puzzled.  "Oh, I think it's pretty
general," she answered, with a happy smile.  "But perhaps the
disease is a little more epidemic about here than elsewhere.  It
affects the suburbs: and my brother's got it just as badly as any
one."

"As badly as any one!" Bertram repeated with a puzzled air.  "Then
you don't belong to that creed yourself?  You don't bend the knee to
this embodied abstraction?--it's your brother who worships her, I
suppose, for the family?"

"Yes; he's more of a devotee than I am," Frida went on, quite
frankly, but not a little surprised at so much freedom in a
stranger.  "Though we're all of us tarred with the same brush, no
doubt.  It's a catching complaint, I suppose, respectability."

Bertram gazed at her dubiously.  A complaint, did she say?  Was
she serious or joking?  He hardly understood her.  But further
discussion was cut short for the moment by Frida good-humouredly
running upstairs to see after the Gladstone bag and brown
portmanteau, into which she crammed a few useless books and other
heavy things, to serve as make-weights for Miss Blake's injured
feelings.

"You'd better wait a quarter of an hour after we go to church," she
said, as the servant brought these necessaries into the room where
Bertram and Philip were seated.  "By that time nearly all the
church-people will be safe in their seats; and Phil's conscience
will be satisfied.  You can tell Miss Blake you've brought a little
of your luggage to do for to-day, and the rest will follow from
town to-morrow morning."

"Oh, how very kind you are!" Bertram exclaimed, looking down at her
gratefully.  "I'm sure I don't know what I should ever have done in
this crisis without you."

He said it with a warmth which was certainly unconventional.  Frida
coloured and looked embarrassed.  There was no denying he was
certainly a most strange and untrammelled person.

"And if I might venture on a hint," Philip put in, with a hasty
glance at his companion's extremely unsabbatical costume, "it would
be that you shouldn't try to go out much to-day in that suit you're
wearing; it looks peculiar, don't you know, and might attract
attention."

"Oh, is that a taboo too?" the stranger put in quickly, with an
anxious air.  "Now, that's awfully kind of you.  But it's curious,
as well; for two or three people passed my window last night, all
Englishmen, as I judged, and all with suits almost exactly like
this one--which was copied, as I told you, from an English model."

"Last night; oh, yes," Philip answered.  "Last night was Saturday;
that makes all the difference.  The suit's right enough in its way,
of course,--very neat and gentlemanly; but NOT for Sunday.  You're
expected on Sundays to put on a black coat and waistcoat, you know,
like the ones I'm wearing."

Bertram's countenance fell.  "And if I'm seen in the street like
this," he asked, "will they do anything to me?  Will the guardians
of the peace--the police, I mean--arrest me?"

Frida laughed a bright little laugh of genuine amusement.

"Oh, dear, no," she said merrily; "it isn't an affair of police at
all; not so serious as that: it's only a matter of respectability."

"I see," Bertram answered.  "Respectability's a religious or
popular, not an official or governmental, taboo.  I quite understand
you.  But those are often the most dangerous sort.  Will the people
in the street, who adore Respectability, be likely to attack me or
mob me for disrespect to their fetich?"

"Certainly not," Frida replied, flushing up.  He seemed to be
carrying a joke too far.  "This is a free country.  Everybody wears
and eats and drinks just what he pleases."

"Well, that's all very interesting to me," the Alien went on with a
charming smile, that disarmed her indignation; "for I've come here
on purpose to collect facts and notes about English taboos and
similar observances.  I'm Secretary of a Nomological Society at
home, which is interested in pagodas, topes, and joss-houses; and
I've been travelling in Africa and in the South Sea Islands for a
long time past, working at materials for a History of Taboo, from
its earliest beginnings in the savage stage to its fully developed
European complexity; so of course all you say comes home to me
greatly.  Your taboos, I foresee, will prove a most valuable and
illustrative study."

"I beg your pardon," Philip interposed stiffly, now put upon his
mettle.  "We have NO taboos at all in England.  You're misled, no
doubt, by a mere playful facon de parler, which society indulges
in.  England, you must remember, is a civilised country, and taboos
are institutions that belong to the lowest and most degraded
savages."

But Bertram Ingledew gazed at him in the blankest astonishment.  "No
taboos!" he exclaimed, taken aback.  "Why, I've read of hundreds.
Among nomological students, England has always been regarded with
the greatest interest as the home and centre of the highest and
most evolved taboo development.  And you yourself," he added with a
courteous little bow, "have already supplied me with quite half a
dozen.  But perhaps you call them by some other name among
yourselves; though in origin and essence, of course, they're
precisely the same as the other taboos I've been examining so long
in Asia and Africa.  However, I'm afraid I'm detaining you from the
function of your joss-house.  You wish, no doubt, to make your
genuflexions in the Temple of Respectability."

And he reflected silently on the curious fact that the English give
themselves by law fifty-two weekly holidays a year, and compel
themselves by custom to waste them entirely in ceremonial
observances.






III





On the way to church, the Monteiths sifted out their new
acquaintance.

"Well, what do you make of him, Frida?" Philip asked, leaning back
in his place, with a luxurious air, as soon as the carriage had
turned the corner.  "Lunatic or sharper?"

Frida gave an impatient gesture with her neatly gloved hand.  "For
my part," she answered without a second's hesitation, "I make him
neither: I find him simply charming."

"That's because he praised your dress," Philip replied, looking
wise.  "Did ever you know anything so cool in your life?  Was it
ignorance, now, or insolence?"

"It was perfect simplicity and naturalness," Frida answered with
confidence.  "He looked at the dress, and admired it, and being
transparently naif, he didn't see why he shouldn't say so.  It
wasn't at all rude, I thought--and it gave me pleasure."

"He certainly has in some ways charming manners," Philip went on
more slowly.  "He manages to impress one.  If he's a madman, which
I rather more than half suspect, it's at least a gentlemanly form
of madness."

"His manners are more than merely charming," Frida answered, quite
enthusiastic, for she had taken a great fancy at first sight to the
mysterious stranger.  "They've such absolute freedom.  That's what
strikes me most in them.  They're like the best English aristocratic
manners, without the insolence; or the freest American manners,
without the roughness.  He's extremely distinguished.  And, oh,
isn't he handsome!"

"He IS good-looking," Philip assented grudgingly.  Philip owned a
looking-glass, and was therefore accustomed to a very high
standard of manly beauty.

As for Robert Monteith, he smiled the grim smile of the wholly
unfascinated.  He was a dour business man of Scotch descent, who
had made his money in palm-oil in the City of London; and having
married Frida as a remarkably fine woman, with a splendid figure,
to preside at his table, he had very small sympathy with what he
considered her high-flown fads and nonsensical fancies.  He had seen
but little of the stranger, too, having come in from his weekly
stroll, or tour of inspection, round the garden and stables, just
as they were on the very point of starting for St. Barnabas: and
his opinion of the man was in no way enhanced by Frida's enthusiasm.
"As far as I'm concerned," he said, with his slow Scotch drawl,
inherited from his father (for though London-born and bred, he was
still in all essentials a pure Caledonian)--"As far as I'm
concerned, I haven't the slightest doubt but the man's a swindler.
I wonder at you, Frida, that you should leave him alone in the
house just now, with all that silver.  I stepped round before I
left, and warned Martha privately not to move from the hall till
the fellow was gone, and to call up cook and James if he tried to
get out of the house with any of our property.  But you never
seemed to suspect him.  And to supply him with a bag, too, to
carry it all off in!  Well, women are reckless!  Hullo, there,
policeman;--stop, Price, one moment;--I wish you'd keep an eye on
my house this morning.  There's a man in there I don't half like
the look of.  When he drives away in a cab that my boy's going to
call for him, just see where he stops, and take care he hasn't got
anything my servants don't know about."

In the drawing-room, meanwhile, Bertram Ingledew was reflecting, as
he waited for the church people to clear away, how interesting
these English clothes-taboos and day-taboos promised to prove,
beside some similar customs he had met with or read of in his
investigations elsewhere.  He remembered how on a certain morning of
the year the High Priest of the Zapotecs was obliged to get drunk,
an act which on any other day in the calendar would have been
regarded by all as a terrible sin in him.  He reflected how in
Guinea and Tonquin, at a particular period once a twelvemonth,
nothing is considered wrong, and everything lawful, so that the
worst crimes and misdemeanours go unnoticed and unpunished.  He
smiled to think how some days are tabooed in certain countries, so
that whatever you do on them, were it only a game of tennis, is
accounted wicked; while some days are periods of absolute licence,
so that whatever you do on them, were it murder itself, becomes fit
and holy.  To him and his people at home, of course, it was the
intrinsic character of the act itself that made it right or wrong,
not the particular day or week or month on which one happened to do
it.  What was wicked in June was wicked still in October.  But not
so among the unreasoning devotees of taboo, in Africa or in England.
There, what was right in May became wicked in September, and what
was wrong on Sunday became harmless or even obligatory on Wednesday
or Thursday.  It was all very hard for a rational being to
understand and explain: but he meant to fathom it, all the same, to
the very bottom--to find out why, for example, in Uganda, whoever
appears before the king must appear stark naked, while in England,
whoever appears before the queen must wear a tailor's sword or a
long silk train and a headdress of ostrich-feathers; why, in
Morocco, when you enter a mosque, you must take off your shoes and
catch a violent cold, in order to show your respect for Allah;
while in Europe, on entering a similar religious building, you must
uncover your head, no matter how draughty the place may be, since
the deity who presides there appears to be indifferent to the
danger of consumption or chest-diseases for his worshippers; why
certain clothes or foods are prescribed in London or Paris for
Sundays and Fridays, while certain others, just equally warm or
digestible or the contrary, are perfectly lawful to all the world
alike on Tuesdays and Saturdays.  These were the curious questions
he had come so far to investigate, for which the fakirs and
dervishes of every land gave such fanciful reasons: and he saw he
would have no difficulty in picking up abundant examples of his
subject-matter everywhere in England.  As the metropolis of taboo,
it exhibited the phenomena in their highest evolution.  The only
thing that puzzled him was how Philip Christy, an Englishman born,
and evidently a most devout observer of the manifold taboos and
juggernauts of his country, should actually deny their very
existence.  It was one more proof to him of the extreme caution
necessary in all anthropological investigations before accepting
the evidence even of well-meaning natives on points of religious or
social usage, which they are often quite childishly incapable of
describing in rational terms to outside inquirers.  They take their
own manners and customs for granted, and they cannot see them in
their true relations or compare them with the similar manners and
customs of other nationalities.






IV





Whether Philip Christy liked it or not, the Monteiths and he were
soon fairly committed to a tolerably close acquaintance with Bertram
Ingledew.  For, as chance would have it, on the Monday morning
Bertram went up to town in the very same carriage with Philip and
his brother-in-law, to set himself up in necessaries of life for a
six or eight months' stay in England.  When he returned that night
to Brackenhurst with two large trunks, full of underclothing and so
forth, he had to come round once more to the Monteiths, as Philip
anticipated, to bring back the Gladstone bag and the brown
portmanteau.  He did it with so much graceful and gracious courtesy,
and such manly gratitude for the favour done him, that he left still
more deeply than ever on Frida's mind the impression of a gentleman.
He had found out all the right shops to go to in London, he said;
and he had ordered everything necessary to social salvation at the
very best tailor's, so strictly in accordance with Philip's
instructions that he thought he should now transgress no more the
sumptuary rules in that matter made and established, as long as he
remained in this realm of England.  He had commanded a black cut-away
coat, suitable for Sunday morning; and a curious garment called a
frock-coat, buttoned tight over the chest, to be worn in the
afternoon, especially in London; and a still quainter coat, made of
shiny broadcloth, with strange tails behind, which was considered
"respectable," after seven P.M., for a certain restricted class of
citizens--those who paid a particular impost known as income-tax, as
far as he could gather from what the tailor told him: though the
classes who really did any good in the state, the working men and so
forth, seemed exempted by general consent from wearing it.  Their
dress, indeed, he observed, was, strange to say, the least cared for
and evidently the least costly of anybody's.

He admired the Monteith children so unaffectedly, too, telling them
how pretty and how sweet-mannered they were to their very faces,
that he quite won Frida's heart; though Robert did not like it.
Robert had evidently some deep-seated superstition about the
matter; for he sent Maimie, the eldest girl, out of the room at
once; she was four years old; and he took little Archie, the two-
year-old, on his knee, as if to guard him from some moral or social
contagion.  Then Bertram remembered how he had seen African mothers
beat or pinch their children till they made them cry, to avert the
evil omen, when he praised them to their faces; and he recollected,
too, that most fetichistic races believe in Nemesis--that is to
say, in jealous gods, who, if they see you love a child too much,
or admire it too greatly, will take it from you or do it some
grievous bodily harm, such as blinding it or maiming it, in order
to pay you out for thinking yourself too fortunate.  He did not
doubt, therefore, but that in Scotland, which he knew by report to
be a country exceptionally given over to terrible superstitions,
the people still thought their sanguinary Calvinistic deity,
fashioned by a race of stern John Knoxes in their own image, would
do some harm to an over-praised child, "to wean them from it."  He
was glad to see, however, that Frida at least did not share this
degrading and hateful belief, handed down from the most fiendish of
savage conceptions.  On the contrary, she seemed delighted that
Bertram should pat little Maimie on the head, and praise her sunny
smile and her lovely hair "just like her mother's."

To Philip, this was all a rather serious matter.  He felt he was
responsible for having introduced the mysterious Alien, however
unwillingly, into the bosom of Robert Monteith's family.  Now,
Philip was not rich, and Frida was supposed to have "made a good
match of it"--that is to say, she had married a man a great deal
wealthier than her own upbringing.  So Philip, after his kind,
thought much of the Monteith connection.  He lived in lodgings at
Brackenhurst, at a highly inconvenient distance from town, so as to
be near their house, and catch whatever rays of reflected glory
might fall upon his head like a shadowy halo from their horses and
carriages, their dinners and garden-parties.  He did not like,
therefore, to introduce into his sister's house anybody that Robert
Monteith, that moneyed man of oil, in the West African trade, might
consider an undesirable acquaintance.  But as time wore on, and
Bertram's new clothes came home from the tailor's, it began to
strike the Civil Servant's mind that the mysterious Alien, though
he excited much comment and conjecture in Brackenhurst, was
accepted on the whole by local society as rather an acquisition to
its ranks than otherwise.  He was well off: he was well dressed: he
had no trade or profession: and Brackenhurst, undermanned, hailed
him as a godsend for afternoon teas and informal tennis-parties.
That ineffable air of distinction as of one royal born, which
Philip had noticed at once the first evening they met, seemed to
strike and impress almost everybody who saw him.  People felt he was
mysterious, but at any rate he was Someone.  And then he had been
everywhere--except in Europe; and had seen everything--except their
own society: and he talked agreeably when he was not on taboos: and
in suburban towns, don't you know, an outsider who brings fresh
blood into the field--who has anything to say we do not all know
beforehand--is always welcome!  So Brackenhurst accepted Bertram
Ingledew before long, as an eccentric but interesting and romantic
person.

Not that he stopped much in Brackenhurst itself.  He went up to town
every day almost as regularly as Robert Monteith and Philip
Christy.  He had things he wanted to observe there, he said, for the
work he was engaged upon.  And the work clearly occupied the best
part of his energies.  Every night he came down to Brackenhurst
with his notebook crammed full of modern facts and illustrative
instances.  He worked most of all in the East End, he told Frida
confidentially: there he could see best the remote results of
certain painful English customs and usages he was anxious to study.
Still, he often went west, too; for the West End taboos, though not
in some cases so distressing as the East End ones, were at times
much more curiously illustrative and ridiculous.  He must master all
branches of the subject alike.  He spoke so seriously that after a
time Frida, who was just at first inclined to laugh at his odd way
of putting things, began to take it all in the end quite as
seriously as he did.  He felt more at home with her than with
anybody else at Brackenhurst.  She had sympathetic eyes; and he
lived on sympathy.  He came to her so often for help in his
difficulties that she soon saw he really meant all he said, and was
genuinely puzzled in a very queer way by many varied aspects of
English society.

In time the two grew quite intimate together.  But on one point
Bertram would never give his new friend the slightest information;
and that was the whereabouts of that mysterious "home" he so often
referred to.  Oddly enough, no one ever questioned him closely on
the subject.  A certain singular reserve of his, which alternated
curiously with his perfect frankness, prevented them from
trespassing so far on his individuality.  People felt they must not.
Somehow, when Bertram Ingledew let it once be felt he did not wish
to be questioned on any particular point, even women managed to
restrain their curiosity: and he would have been either a very bold
or a very insensitive man who would have ventured to continue
questioning him any further.  So, though many people hazarded
guesses as to where he had come from, nobody ever asked him the
point-blank question:  Who are you, if you please, and what do you
want here?

The Alien went out a great deal with the Monteiths.  Robert himself
did not like the fellow, he said: one never quite knew what the
deuce he was driving at; but Frida found him always more and more
charming,--so full of information!--while Philip admitted he was
excellent form, and such a capital tennis player!  So whenever
Philip had a day off in the country, they three went out in the
fields together, and Frida at least thoroughly enjoyed and
appreciated the freedom and freshness of the newcomer's
conversation.

On one such day they went out, as it chanced, into the meadows that
stretch up the hill behind Brackenhurst.  Frida remembered it well
afterwards.  It was the day when an annual saturnalia of vulgar vice
usurps and pollutes the open downs at Epsom.  Bertram did not care
to see it, he said--the rabble of a great town turned loose to
desecrate the open face of nature--even regarded as a matter of
popular custom; he had looked on at much the same orgies before in
New Guinea and on the Zambesi, and they only depressed him: so he
stopped at Brackenhurst, and went for a walk instead in the fresh
summer meadows.  Robert Monteith, for his part, had gone to the
Derby--so they call that orgy--and Philip had meant to accompany
him in the dogcart, but remained behind at the last moment to take
care of Frida; for Frida, being a lady at heart, always shrank from
the pollution of vulgar assemblies.  As they walked together across
the lush green fields, thick with campion and yellow-rattle, they
came to a dense copse with a rustic gate, above which a threatening
notice-board frowned them straight in the face, bearing the usual
selfish and anti-social inscription, "Trespassers will be
prosecuted."

"Let's go in here and pick orchids," Bertram suggested, leaning
over the gate.  "Just see how pretty they are!  The scented white
butterfly!  It loves moist bogland.  Now, Mrs. Monteith, wouldn't a
few long sprays of that lovely thing look charming on your dinner-
table?"

"But it's preserved," Philip interposed with an awestruck face.
"You can't go in there: it's Sir Lionel Longden's, and he's awfully
particular."

"Can't go in there?  Oh, nonsense," Bertram answered, with a merry
laugh, vaulting the gate like a practised athlete.  "Mrs. Monteith
can get over easily enough, I'm sure.  She's as light as a fawn.
May I help you over?"  And he held one hand out.

"But it's private," Philip went on, in a somewhat horrified voice;
"and the pheasants are sitting."

"Private?  How can it be?  There's nothing sown here.  It's all wild
wood; we can't do any damage.  If it was growing crops, of course,
one would walk through it not at all, or at least very carefully.
But this is pure woodland.  Are the pheasants tabooed, then? or why
mayn't we go near them?"

"They're not tabooed, but they're preserved," Philip answered
somewhat testily, making a delicate distinction without a
difference, after the fashion dear to the official intellect.
"This land belongs to Sir Lionel Longden, I tell you, and he
chooses to lay it all down in pheasants.  He bought it and paid
for it, so he has a right, I suppose, to do as he likes with it."

"That's the funniest thing of all about these taboos," Bertram
mused, as if half to himself.  "The very people whom they injure and
inconvenience the most, the people whom they hamper and cramp and
debar, don't seem to object to them, but believe in them and are
afraid of them.  In Samoa, I remember, certain fruits and fish and
animals and so forth were tabooed to the chiefs, and nobody else
ever dared to eat them.  They thought it was wrong, and said, if
they did, some nameless evil would at once overtake them.  These
nameless terrors, these bodiless superstitions, are always the
deepest.  People fight hardest to preserve their bogeys.  They fancy
some appalling unknown dissolution would at once result from
reasonable action.  I tried one day to persuade a poor devil of a
fellow in Samoa who'd caught one of these fish, and who was
terribly hungry, that no harm would come to him if he cooked it and
ate it.  But he was too slavishly frightened to follow my advice;
he said it was taboo to the god-descended chiefs: if a mortal man
tasted it, he would die on the spot: so nothing on earth would
induce him to try it.  Though to be sure, even there, nobody ever
went quite so far as to taboo the very soil of earth itself:
everybody might till and hunt where he liked.  It's only in Europe,
where evolution goes furthest, that taboo has reached that last
silly pitch of injustice and absurdity.  Well, we're not afraid of
the fetich, you and I, Mrs. Monteith.  Jump up on the gate; I'll
give you a hand over!"  And he held out one strong arm as he spoke
to aid her.

Frida had no such fanatical respect for the bogey of vested
interests as her superstitious brother, so she mounted the gate
gracefully--she was always graceful.  Bertram took her small hand
and jumped her down on the other side, while Philip, not liking to
show himself less bold than a woman in this matter, climbed over it
after her, though with no small misgivings.  They strolled on into
the wood, picking the pretty white orchids by the way as they went,
for some little distance.  The rich mould underfoot was thick with
sweet woodruff and trailing loosestrife.  Every now and again, as
they stirred the lithe brambles that encroached upon the path, a
pheasant rose from the ground with a loud whir-r-r before them.
Philip felt most uneasy.  "You'll have the keepers after you in a
minute," he said, with a deprecating shrug.  "This is just full
nesting time.  They're down upon anybody who disturbs the
pheasants."

"But the pheasants can't BELONG to any one," Bertram cried, with a
greatly amused face.  "You may taboo the land--I understand that's
done--but surely you can't taboo a wild bird that can fly as it
likes from one piece of ground away into another."

Philip enlightened his ignorance by giving him off-hand a brief and
profoundly servile account of the English game-laws, interspersed
with sundry anecdotes of poachers and poaching.  Bertram listened
with an interested but gravely disapproving face.  "And do you mean
to say," he asked at last "they send men to prison as criminals for
catching or shooting hares and pheasants?"

"Why, certainly," Philip answered.  "It's an offence against the
law, and also a crime against the rights of property."

"Against the law, yes; but how on earth can it be a crime against
the rights of property?  Obviously the pheasant's the property of
the man who happens to shoot it.  How can it belong to him and also
to the fellow who taboos the particular piece of ground it was
snared on?"

"It doesn't belong to the man who shoots it at all," Philip
answered, rather angrily.  "It belongs to the man who owns the land,
of course, and who chooses to preserve it."

"Oh, I see," Bertram replied.  "Then you disregard the rights of
property altogether, and only consider the privileges of taboo.  As
a principle, that's intelligible.  One sees it's consistent.  But
how is it that you all allow these chiefs--landlords, don't you call
them?--to taboo the soil and prevent you all from even walking over
it?  Don't you see that if you chose to combine in a body and insist
upon the recognition of your natural rights,--if you determined to
make the landlords give up their taboo, and cease from injustice,--
they'd have to yield to you, and then you could exercise your
native right of going where you pleased, and cultivate the land in
common for the public benefit, instead of leaving it, as now, to be
cultivated anyhow, or turned into waste for the benefit of the
tabooers?"

"But it would be WRONG to take it from them," Philip cried, growing
fiery red and half losing his temper, for he really believed it.
"It would be sheer confiscation; the land's their own; they either
bought it or inherited it from their fathers.  If you were to begin
taking it away, what guarantee would you have left for any of the
rights of property generally?"

"You didn't recognise the rights of property of the fellow who
killed the pheasant, though," Bertram interposed, laughing, and
imperturbably good-humoured.  "But that's always the way with these
taboos, everywhere.  They subsist just because the vast majority
even of those who are obviously wronged and injured by them really
believe in them.  They think they're guaranteed by some divine
prescription.  The fetich guards them.  In Polynesia, I recollect,
some chiefs could taboo almost anything they liked, even a girl or
a woman, or fruit and fish and animals and houses: and after the
chief had once said, 'It is taboo,' everybody else was afraid to
touch them.  Of course, the fact that a chief or a landowner has
bought and paid for a particular privilege or species of taboo, or
has inherited it from his fathers, doesn't give him any better
moral claim to it.  The question is, 'Is the claim in itself right
and reasonable?'  For a wrong is only all the more a wrong for
having been long and persistently exercised.  The Central Africans
say, 'This is my slave; I bought her and paid for her; I've a
right, if I like, to kill her and eat her.'  The king of Ibo, on the
West Coast, had a hereditary right to offer up as a human sacrifice
the first man he met every time he quitted his palace; and he was
quite surprised audacious freethinkers should call the morality of
his right in question.  If you English were all in a body to see
through this queer land-taboo, now, which drives your poor off the
soil, and prevents you all from even walking at liberty over the
surface of the waste in your own country, you could easily--"

"Oh, Lord, what shall we do!" Philip interposed in a voice of
abject terror.  "If here isn't Sir Lionel!"

And sure enough, right across the narrow path in front of them
stood a short, fat, stumpy, unimpressive little man, with a very
red face, and a Norfolk jacket, boiling over with anger.

"What are you people doing here?" he cried, undeterred by the
presence of a lady, and speaking in the insolent, supercilious
voice of the English landlord in defence of his pheasant preserves.
"This is private property.  You must have seen the notice at the
gate, 'Trespassers will be prosecuted.'"

"Yes, we did see it," Bertram answered, with his unruffled smile;
"and thinking it an uncalled-for piece of aggressive churlishness,
both in form and substance,--why, we took the liberty to disregard
it."

Sir Lionel glared at him.  In that servile neighbourhood, almost
entirely inhabited by the flunkeys of villadom, it was a complete
novelty to him to be thus bearded in his den.  He gasped with anger.
"Do you mean to say," he gurgled out, growing purple to the neck,
"you came in here deliberately to disturb my pheasants, and then
brazen it out to my face like this, sir?  Go back the way you came,
or I'll call my keepers."

"No, I will NOT go back the way I came," Bertram responded
deliberately, with perfect self-control, and with a side-glance at
Frida.  "Every human being has a natural right to walk across this
copse, which is all waste ground, and has no crop sown in it.  The
pheasants can't be yours; they're common property.  Besides, there's
a lady.  We mean to make our way across the copse at our leisure,
picking flowers as we go, and come out into the road on the other
side of the spinney.  It's a universal right of which no country
and no law can possibly deprive us."

Sir Lionel was livid with rage.  Strange as it may appear to any
reasoning mind, the man really believed he had a natural right to
prevent people from crossing that strip of wood where his pheasants
were sitting.  His ancestors had assumed it from time immemorial,
and by dint of never being questioned had come to regard the absurd
usurpation as quite fair and proper.  He placed himself straight
across the narrow path, blocking it up with his short and stumpy
figure.  "Now look here, young man," he said, with all the insolence
of his caste: "if you try to go on, I'll stand here in your way;
and if you dare to touch me, it's a common assault, and, by George,
you'll have to answer at law for the consequences."

Bertram Ingledew for his part was all sweet reasonableness.  He
raised one deprecating hand.  "Now, before we come to open
hostilities," he said in a gentle voice, with that unfailing smile
of his, "let's talk the matter over like rational beings.  Let's try
to be logical.  This copse is considered yours by the actual law of
the country you live in: your tribe permits it to you: you're
allowed to taboo it.  Very well, then; I make all possible
allowances for your strange hallucination.  You've been brought up
to think you had some mystic and intangible claim to this corner of
earth more than other people, your even Christians.  That claim, of
course, you can't logically defend; but failing arguments, you want
to fight for it.  Wouldn't it be more reasonable, now, to show you
had some RIGHT or JUSTICE in the matter?  I'm always reasonable: if
you can convince me of the propriety and equity of your claim, I'll
go back as you wish by the way I entered.  If not--well, there's a
lady here, and I'm bound, as a man, to help her safely over."

Sir Lionel almost choked.  "I see what you are," he gasped out with
difficulty.  "I've heard this sort of rubbish more than once before.
You're one of these damned land-nationalising radicals."

"On the contrary," Bertram answered, urbane as ever, with charming
politeness of tone and manner: "I'm a born conservative.  I'm
tenacious to an almost foolishly sentimental degree of every old
custom or practice or idea; unless, indeed, it's either wicked or
silly--like most of your English ones."

He raised his hat, and made as if he would pass on.  Now, nothing
annoys an angry savage or an uneducated person so much as the
perfect coolness of a civilised and cultivated man when he himself
is boiling with indignation.  He feels its superiority an affront on
his barbarism.  So, with a vulgar oath, Sir Lionel flung himself
point-blank in the way.  "Damn it all, no you won't, sir!" he cried.
"I'll soon put a stop to all that, I can tell you.  You shan't go on
one step without committing an assault upon me."  And he drew
himself up, four-square, as if for battle.

"Oh, just as you like," Bertram answered coolly, never losing his
temper.  "I'm not afraid of taboos: I've seen too many of them."
And he gazed at the fat little angry man with a gentle expression
of mingled contempt and amusement.

For a minute, Frida thought they were really going to fight, and
drew back in horror to await the contest.  But such a warlike notion
never entered the man of peace's head.  He took a step backward for
a second and calmly surveyed his antagonist with a critical
scrutiny.  Sir Lionel was short and stout and puffy; Bertram
Ingledew was tall and strong and well-knit and athletic.  After an
instant's pause, during which the doughty baronet stood doubling
his fat fists and glaring silent wrath at his lither opponent,
Bertram made a sudden dart forward, seized the little stout man
bodily in his stalwart arms, and lifting him like a baby, in spite
of kicks and struggles, carried him a hundred paces to one side of
the path, where he laid him down gingerly without unnecessary
violence on a bed of young bracken.  Then he returned quite calmly,
as if nothing had happened, to Frida's side, with that quiet little
smile on his unruffled countenance.

Frida had not quite approved of all this small episode, for she too
believed in the righteousness of taboo, like most other Englishwomen,
and devoutly accepted the common priestly doctrine, that the earth
is the landlord's and the fulness thereof; but still, being a woman,
and therefore an admirer of physical strength in men, she could not
help applauding to herself the masterly way in which her squire had
carried his antagonist captive.  When he returned, she beamed upon
him with friendly confidence.  But Philip was very much frightened
indeed.

"You'll have to pay for this, you know," he said.  "This is a law-
abiding land.  He'll bring an action against you for assault and
battery; and you'll get three months for it."

"I don't think so," Bertram answered, still placid and unruffled.
"There were three of us who saw him; and it was a very ignominious
position indeed for a person who sets up to be a great chief in the
country.  He won't like the little boys on his own estate to know
the great Sir Lionel was lifted up against his will, carried about
like a baby, and set down in a bracken-bed.  Indeed, I was more than
sorry to have to do such a thing to a man of his years; but you see
he WOULD have it.  It's the only way to deal with these tabooing
chiefs.  You must face them and be done with it.  In the Caroline
Islands, once, I had to do the same thing to a cazique who was
going to cook and eat a very pretty young girl of his own
retainers.  He wouldn't listen to reason; the law was on his side;
so, being happily NOT a law-abiding person myself, I took him up in
my arms, and walked off with him bodily, and was obliged to drop
him down into a very painful bed of stinging plants like nettles,
so as to give myself time to escape with the girl clear out of his
clutches.  I regretted having to do it so roughly, of course; but
there was no other way out of it."

As he spoke, for the first time it really came home to Frida's mind
that Bertram Ingledew, standing there before her, regarded in very
truth the Polynesian chief and Sir Lionel Longden as much about the
same sort of unreasoning people--savages to be argued with and
cajoled if possible; but if not, then to be treated with calm
firmness and force, as an English officer on an exploring expedition
might treat a wrathful Central African kinglet.  And in a dim sort
of way, too, it began to strike her by degrees that the analogy was
a true one, that Bertram Ingledew, among the Englishmen with whom
she was accustomed to mix, was like a civilised being in the midst
of barbarians, who feel and recognise but dimly and half-
unconsciously his innate superiority.

By the time they had reached the gate on the other side of the
hanger, Sir Lionel overtook them, boiling over with indignation.

"Your card, sir," he gasped out inarticulately to the calmly
innocent Alien; "you must answer for all this.  Your card, I say,
instantly!"

Bertram looked at him with a fixed gaze.  Sir Lionel, having had
good proof of his antagonist's strength, kept his distance
cautiously.

"Certainly NOT, my good friend," Bertram replied, in a firm tone.
"Why should _I_, who am the injured and insulted party, assist YOU
in identifying me?  It was you who aggressed upon my free
individuality.  If you want to call in the aid of an unjust law to
back up an unjust and irrational taboo, you must find out for
yourself who I am, and where I come from.  But I wouldn't advise
you to do anything so foolish.  Three of us here saw you in the
ridiculous position into which by your obstinacy you compelled me
to put you; and you wouldn't like to hear us recount it in public,
with picturesque details, to your brother magistrates.  Let me say
one thing more to you," he added, after a pause, in that peculiarly
soft and melodious voice of his.  "Don't you think, on reflection--
even if you're foolish enough and illogical enough really to
believe in the sacredness of the taboo by virtue of which you try
to exclude your fellow-tribesmen from their fair share of enjoyment
of the soil of England--don't you think you might at any rate
exercise your imaginary powers over the land you arrogate to
yourself with a little more gentleness and common politeness?  How
petty and narrow it looks to use even an undoubted right, far more
a tribal taboo, in a tyrannical and needlessly aggressive manner!
How mean and small and low and churlish!  The damage we did your
land, as you call it--if we did any at all--was certainly not a
ha'pennyworth.  Was it consonant with your dignity as a chief in the
tribe to get so hot and angry about so small a value?  How grotesque
to make so much fuss and noise about a matter of a ha'penny!  We,
who were the aggrieved parties, we, whom you attempted to debar by
main force from the common human right to walk freely over earth
wherever there's nothing sown or planted, and who were obliged to
remove you as an obstacle out of our path, at some personal
inconvenience"--(he glanced askance at his clothes, crumpled and
soiled by Sir Lionel's unseemly resistance)--"WE didn't lose our
tempers, or attempt to revile you.  We were cool and collected.  But
a taboo must be on its very last legs when it requires the aid of
terrifying notices at every corner in order to preserve it; and I
think this of yours must be well on the way to abolition.  Still, as
I should like to part friends"--he drew a coin from his pocket, and
held it out between his finger and thumb with a courteous bow
towards Sir Lionel--"I gladly tender you a ha'penny in compensation
for any supposed harm we may possibly have done your imaginary
rights by walking through the wood here."






V





For a day or two after this notable encounter between tabooer and
taboo-breaker, Philip moved about in a most uneasy state of mind.
He lived in constant dread of receiving a summons as a party to an
assault upon a most respectable and respected landed proprietor who
preserved more pheasants and owned more ruinous cottages than
anybody else (except the duke) round about Brackenhurst.  Indeed, so
deeply did he regret his involuntary part in this painful escapade
that he never mentioned a word of it to Robert Monteith; nor did
Frida either.  To say the truth, husband and wife were seldom
confidential one with the other.  But, to Philip's surprise,
Bertram's prediction came true; they never heard another word about
the action for trespass or the threatened prosecution for assault
and battery.  Sir Lionel found out that the person who had committed
the gross and unheard-of outrage of lifting an elderly and
respectable English landowner like a baby in arms on his own estate,
was a lodger at Brackenhurst, variously regarded by those who knew
him best as an escaped lunatic, and as a foreign nobleman in
disguise, fleeing for his life from a charge of complicity in a
Nihilist conspiracy: he wisely came to the conclusion, therefore,
that he would not be the first to divulge the story of his own
ignominious defeat, unless he found that damned radical chap was
going boasting around the countryside how he had balked Sir Lionel.
And as nothing was further than boasting from Bertram Ingledew's
gentle nature, and as Philip and Frida both held their peace for
good reasons of their own, the baronet never attempted in any way to
rake up the story of his grotesque disgrace on what he considered
his own property.  All he did was to double the number of keepers
on the borders of his estate, and to give them strict notice that
whoever could succeed in catching the "damned radical" in flagrante
delicto, as trespasser or poacher, should receive most instant
reward and promotion.

During the next few weeks, accordingly, nothing of importance
happened, from the point of view of the Brackenhurst chronicler;
though Bertram was constantly round at the Monteiths' garden for
afternoon tea or a game of lawn-tennis.  He was an excellent player;
lawn-tennis was most popular "at home," he said, in that same
mysterious and non-committing phrase he so often made use of.  Only,
he found the racquets and balls (very best London make) rather
clumsy and awkward; he wished he had brought his own along with him
when he came here.  Philip noticed his style of service was
particularly good, and even wondered at times he did not try to go
in for the All England Championship.  But Bertram surprised him by
answering, with a quiet smile, that though it was an excellent
amusement, he had too many other things to do with his time to make
a serious pursuit of it.

One day towards the end of June, the strange young man had gone
round to The Grange--that was the name of Frida's house--for his
usual relaxation after a very tiring and distressing day in London,
"on important business."  The business, whatever it was, had
evidently harrowed his feelings not a little, for he was
sensitively organised.  Frida was on the tennis-lawn.  She met him
with much lamentation over the unpleasant fact that she had just
lost a sister-in-law whom she had never cared for.

"Well, but if you never cared for her," Bertram answered, looking
hard into her lustrous eyes, "it doesn't much matter."

"Oh, I shall have to go into mourning all the same," Frida
continued somewhat pettishly, "and waste all my nice new summer
dresses.  It's SUCH a nuisance!"

"Why do it, then?" Bertram suggested, watching her face very
narrowly.

"Well, I suppose because of what you would call a fetich," Frida
answered laughing.  "I know it's ridiculous.  But everybody expects
it, and I'm not strong-minded enough to go against the current of
what everybody expects of me."

"You will be by-and-by," Bertram answered, with confidence.
"They're queer things, these death-taboos.  Sometimes people cover
their heads with filth or ashes; and sometimes they bedizen them
with crape and white streamers.  In some countries, the survivors
are bound to shed so many tears, to measure, in memory of the
departed; and if they can't bring them up naturally in sufficient
quantities, they have to be beaten with rods, or pricked with
thorns, or stung with nettles, till they've filled to the last drop
the regulation bottle.  In Swaziland, too, when the king dies, so
the queen told me, every family of his subjects has to lose one of
its sons or daughters, in order that they may all truly grieve at
the loss of their sovereign.  I think there are more horrible and
cruel devices in the way of death-taboos and death-customs than
anything else I've met in my researches.  Indeed, most of our
nomologists at home believe that all taboos originally arose out of
ancestral ghost-worship, and sprang from the craven fear of dead
kings or dead relatives.  They think fetiches and gods and other
imaginary supernatural beings were all in the last resort developed
out of ghosts, hostile or friendly; and from what I see abroad, I
incline to agree with them.  But this mourning superstition, now--
surely it must do a great deal of harm in poor households in
England.  People who can very ill afford to throw away good dresses
must have to give them up, and get new black ones, and that often
at the very moment when they're just deprived of the aid of their
only support and bread-winner.  I wonder it doesn't occur to them
that this is absolutely wrong, and that they oughtn't to prefer the
meaningless fetich to their clear moral duty."

"They're afraid of what people would say of them," Frida ventured
to interpose.  "You see, we're all so frightened of breaking through
an established custom."

"Yes, I notice that always, wherever I go in England," Bertram
answered.  "There's apparently no clear idea of what's right and
wrong at all, in the ethical sense, as apart from what's usual.  I
was talking to a lady up in London to-day about a certain matter I
may perhaps mention to you by-and-by when occasion serves, and she
said she'd been 'always brought up to think' so-and-so.  It seemed
to me a very queer substitute indeed for thinking."

"I never thought of that," Frida answered slowly.  "I've said the
same thing a hundred times over myself before now; and I see how
irrational it is.  But, there, Mr. Ingledew, that's why I always
like talking with you so much: you make one take such a totally new
view of things."

She looked down and was silent a minute.  Her breast heaved and
fell.  She was a beautiful woman, very tall and queenly.  Bertram
looked at her and paused; then he went on hurriedly, just to break
the awkward silence:  "And this dance at Exeter, then--I suppose you
won't go to it?"

"Oh, I CAN'T, of course," Frida answered quickly.  "And my two other
nieces--Robert's side, you know--who have nothing at all to do with
my brother Tom's wife, out there in India--they'll be SO
disappointed.  I was going to take them down to it.  Nasty thing!
How annoying of her!  She might have chosen some other time to go
and die, I'm sure, than just when she knew I wanted to go to
Exeter!"

"Well, if it would be any convenience to you," Bertram put in with
a serious face, "I'm rather busy on Wednesday; but I could manage
to take up a portmanteau to town with my dress things in the
morning, meet the girls at Paddington, and run down by the evening
express in time to go with them to the hotel you meant to stop at.
They're those two pretty blondes I met here at tea last Sunday,
aren't they?"

Frida looked at him, half-incredulous.  He was very nice, she knew,
and very quaint and fresh and unsophisticated and unconventional;
but could he be really quite so ignorant of the common usages of
civilised society as to suppose it possible he could run down alone
with two young girls to stop by themselves, without even a
chaperon, at an hotel at Exeter?  She gazed at him curiously.
"Oh, Mr. Ingledew," she said, "now you're really TOO ridiculous!"

Bertram coloured up like a boy.  If she had been in any doubt before
as to his sincerity and simplicity, she could be so no longer.  "Oh,
I forgot about the taboo," he said.  "I'm so sorry I hurt you.  I was
only thinking what a pity those two nice girls should be cheated
out of their expected pleasure by a silly question of pretended
mourning, where even you yourself, who have got to wear it, don't
assume that you feel the slightest tinge of sorrow.  I remember now,
of course, what a lady told me in London the other day: your young
girls aren't even allowed to go out travelling alone without their
mother or brothers, in order to taboo them absolutely beforehand
for the possible husband who may some day marry them.  It was a
pitiful tale.  I thought it all most painful and shocking."

"But you don't mean to say," Frida cried, equally shocked and
astonished in her turn, "that you'd let young girls go out alone
anywhere with unmarried men?  Goodness gracious, how dreadful!"

"Why not?" Bertram asked, with transparent simplicity.

"Why, just consider the consequences!" Frida exclaimed, with a
blush, after a moment's hesitation.

"There couldn't be ANY consequences, unless they both liked and
respected one another," Bertram answered in the most matter-of-
course voice in the world; "and if they do that, we think at home
it's nobody's business to interfere in any way with the free
expression of their individuality, in this the most sacred and
personal matter of human intercourse.  It's the one point of private
conduct about which we're all at home most sensitively anxious not
to meddle, to interfere, or even to criticise.  We think such
affairs should be left entirely to the hearts and consciences of
the two persons concerned, who must surely know best how they feel
towards one another.  But I remember having met lots of taboos among
other barbarians, in much the same way, to preserve the mere
material purity of their women--a thing we at home wouldn't dream
of even questioning.  In New Ireland, for instance, I saw poor girls
confined for four or five years in small wickerwork cages, where
they're kept in the dark, and not even allowed to set foot on the
ground on any pretext.  They're shut up in these prisons when
they're about fourteen, and there they're kept, strictly tabooed,
till they're just going to be married.  I went to see them myself;
it was a horrid sight.  The poor creatures were confined in a dark,
close hut, without air or ventilation, in that stifling climate,
which is as unendurable from heat as this one is from cold and damp
and fogginess; and there they sat in cages, coarsely woven from
broad leaves of the pandanus trees, so that no light could enter;
for the people believed that light would kill them.  No man might
see them, because it was close taboo; but at last, with great
difficulty, I persuaded the chief and the old lady who guarded them
to let them come out for a minute to look at me.  A lot of beads and
cloth overcame these people's scruples; and with great reluctance
they opened the cages.  But only the old woman looked; the chief was
afraid, and turned his head the other way, mumbling charms to his
fetich.  Out they stole, one by one, poor souls, ashamed and
frightened, hiding their faces in their hands, thinking I was going
to hurt them or eat them--just as your nieces would do if I
proposed to-day to take them to Exeter--and a dreadful sight they
were, cramped with long sitting in one close position, and their
eyes all blinded by the glare of the sunlight after the long
darkness.  I've seen women shut up in pretty much the same way in
other countries, but I never saw quite so bad a case as this of New
Ireland."

"Well, you can't say we've anything answering to that in England,"
Frida put in, looking across at him with her frank, open
countenance.

"No, not quite like that, in detail, perhaps, but pretty much the
same in general principle," Bertram answered warmly.  "Your girls
here are not cooped up in actual cages, but they're confined in
barrack-schools, as like prisons as possible; and they're repressed
at every turn in every natural instinct of play or society.  They
mustn't go here or they mustn't go there; they mustn't talk to this
one or to that one; they mustn't do this, or that, or the other;
their whole life is bound round, I'm told, by a closely woven web
of restrictions and restraints, which have no other object or end
in view than the interests of a purely hypothetical husband.  The
Chinese cramp their women's feet to make them small and useless:
you cramp your women's brains for the self-same purpose.  Even
light's excluded; for they mustn't read books that would make them
think; they mustn't be allowed to suspect the bare possibility that
the world may be otherwise than as their priests and nurses and
grandmothers tell them, though most even of your own men know it
well to be something quite different.  Why, I met a girl at that
dance I went to in London the other evening, who told me she wasn't
allowed to read a book called Tess of the D'Urbervilles, that I'd
read myself, and that seemed to me one of which every young girl
and married woman in England ought to be given a copy.  It was the
one true book I had seen in your country.  And another girl wasn't
allowed to read another book, which I've since looked at, called
Robert Elsmere,--an ephemeral thing enough in its way, I don't
doubt, but proscribed in her case for no other reason on earth than
because it expressed some mild disbelief as to the exact literary
accuracy of those Lower Syrian pamphlets to which your priests
attach such immense importance."

"Oh, Mr. Ingledew," Frida cried, trembling, yet profoundly
interested; "if you talk like that any more, I shan't be able to
listen to you."

"There it is, you see," Bertram continued, with a little wave of
the hand.  "You've been so blinded and bedimmed by being deprived of
light when a girl, that now, when you see even a very faint ray, it
dazzles you and frightens you.  That mustn't be so--it needn't, I
feel confident.  I shall have to teach you how to bear the light.
Your eyes, I know, are naturally strong; you were an eagle born:
you'd soon get used to it."

Frida lifted them slowly, those beautiful eyes, and met his own
with genuine pleasure.

"Do you think so?" she asked, half whispering.  In some dim,
instinctive way she felt this strange man was a superior being, and
that every small crumb of praise from him was well worth meriting.

"Why, Frida, of course I do," he answered, without the least sense
of impertinence.  "Do you think if I didn't I'd have taken so much
trouble to try and educate you?"  For he had talked to her much in
their walks on the hillside.

Frida did not correct him for his bold application of her Christian
name, though she knew she ought to.  She only looked up at him and
answered gravely--

"I certainly can't let you take my nieces to Exeter."

"I suppose not," he replied, hardly catching at her meaning.  "One
of the girls at that dance the other night told me a great many
queer facts about your taboos on these domestic subjects; so I know
how stringent and how unreasoning they are.  And, indeed, I found
out a little bit for myself; for there was one nice girl there, to
whom I took a very great fancy; and I was just going to kiss her as
I said good-night, when she drew back suddenly, almost as if I'd
struck her, though we'd been talking together quite confidentially
a minute before.  I could see she thought I really meant to insult
her.  Of course, I explained it was only what I'd have done to any
nice girl at home under similar circumstances; but she didn't seem
to believe me.  And the oddest part of it all was, that all the time
we were dancing I had my arm round her waist, as all the other men
had theirs round their partners; and at home we consider it a much
greater proof of confidence and affection to be allowed to place
your arm round a lady's waist than merely to kiss her."

Frida felt the conversation was beginning to travel beyond her
ideas of propriety, so she checked its excursions by answering
gravely:  "Oh, Mr. Ingledew, you don't understand our code of
morals.  But I'm sure you don't find your East End young ladies so
fearfully particular?"

"They certainly haven't quite so many taboos," Bertram answered
quietly.  "But that's always the way in tabooing societies.  These
things are naturally worst among the chiefs and great people.  I
remember when I was stopping among the Ot Danoms of Borneo, the
daughters of chiefs and great sun-descended families were shut up
at eight or ten years old, in a little cell or room, as a religious
duty, and cut off from all intercourse with the outside world for
many years together.  The cell's dimly lit by a single small window,
placed high in the wall, so that the unhappy girl never sees
anybody or anything, but passes her life in almost total darkness.
She mayn't leave the room on any pretext whatever, not even for the
most pressing and necessary purposes.  None of her family may see
her face; but a single slave woman's appointed to accompany her and
wait upon her.  Long want of exercise stunts her bodily growth, and
when at last she becomes a woman, and emerges from her prison, her
complexion has grown wan and pale and waxlike.  They take her out in
solemn guise and show her the sun, the sky, the land, the water,
the trees, the flowers, and tell her all their names, as if to a
newborn creature.  Then a great feast is made, a poor crouching
slave is killed with a blow of the sword, and the girl is solemnly
smeared with his reeking blood, by way of initiation.  But this is
only done, of course, with the daughters of wealthy and powerful
families.  And I find it pretty much the same in England.  In all
these matters, your poorer classes are relatively pure and simple
and natural.  It's your richer and worse and more selfish classes
among whom sex-taboos are strongest and most unnatural."

Frida looked up at him a little pleadingly.

"Do you know, Mr. Ingledew," she said, in a trembling voice, "I'm
sure you don't mean it for intentional rudeness, but it sounds to
us very like it, when you speak of our taboos and compare us openly
to these dreadful savages.  I'm a woman, I know; but--I don't like
to hear you speak so about my England."

The words took Bertram fairly by surprise.  He was wholly
unacquainted with that rank form of provincialism which we know as
patriotism.  He leaned across towards her with a look of deep pain
on his handsome face.

"Oh, Mrs. Monteith," he cried earnestly, "if YOU don't like it,
I'll never again speak of them as taboos in your presence.  I didn't
dream you could object.  It seems so natural to us--well--to
describe like customs by like names in every case.  But if it gives
you pain--why, sooner than do that, I'd never again say a single
word while I live about an English custom!"

His face was very near hers, and he was a son of Adam, like all the
rest of us--not a being of another sphere, as Frida was sometimes
half tempted to consider him.  What might next have happened he
himself hardly knew, for he was an impulsive creature, and Frida's
rich lips were full and crimson, had not Philip's arrival with the
two Miss Hardys to make up a set diverted for the moment the
nascent possibility of a leading incident.






VI





It was a Sunday afternoon in full July, and a small party was seated
under the spreading mulberry tree on the Monteiths' lawn.  General
Claviger was of the number, that well-known constructor of
scientific frontiers in India or Africa; and so was Dean Chalmers,
the popular preacher, who had come down for the day from his London
house to deliver a sermon on behalf of the Society for Superseding
the Existing Superstitions of China and Japan by the Dying Ones of
Europe.  Philip was there, too, enjoying himself thoroughly in the
midst of such good company, and so was Robert Monteith, bleak and
grim as usual, but deeply interested for the moment in dividing
metaphysical and theological cobwebs with his friend the Dean, who
as a brother Scotsman loved a good discussion better almost than
he loved a good discourse.  General Claviger, for his part, was
congenially engaged in describing to Bertram his pet idea for a
campaign against the Madhi and his men, in the interior of the
Soudan.  Bertram rather yawned through that technical talk; he was a
man of peace, and schemes of organised bloodshed interested him no
more than the details of a projected human sacrifice, given by a
Central African chief with native gusto, would interest an average
European gentleman.  At last, however, the General happened to say
casually, "I forget the exact name of the place I mean; I think it's
Malolo; but I have a very good map of all the district at my house
down at Wanborough."

"What!  Wanborough in Northamptonshire?" Bertram exclaimed with
sudden interest.  "Do you really live there?"

"I'm lord of the manor," General Claviger answered, with a little
access of dignity.  "The Clavigers or Clavigeros were a Spanish
family of Andalusian origin, who settled down at Wanborough under
Philip and Mary, and retained the manor, no doubt by conversion to
the Protestant side, after the accession of Elizabeth."

"That's interesting to me," Bertram answered, with his frank and
fearless truthfulness, "because my people came originally from
Wanborough before--well, before they emigrated."  (Philip, listening
askance, pricked up his ears eagerly at the tell-tale phrase; after
all, then, a colonist!)  "But they weren't anybody distinguished--
certainly not lords of the manor," he added hastily as the General
turned a keen eye on him.  "Are there any Ingledews living now in
the Wanborough district?  One likes, as a matter of scientific
heredity, to know all one can about one's ancestors, and one's
county, and one's collateral relatives."

"Well, there ARE some Ingledews just now at Wanborough," the
General answered, with some natural hesitation, surveying the tall,
handsome young man from head to foot, not without a faint touch of
soldierly approbation; "but they can hardly be your relatives,
however remote. . . .  They're people in a most humble sphere of
life.  Unless, indeed--well, we know the vicissitudes of families--
perhaps your ancestors and the Ingledews that I know drifted apart
a long time ago."

"Is he a cobbler?" Bertram inquired, without a trace of mauvaise
honte.

The General nodded.  "Well, yes," he said politely, "that's exactly
what he is; though, as you seemed to be asking about presumed
relations, I didn't like to mention it."

"Oh, then, he's my ancestor," Bertram put in, quite pleased at the
discovery.  "That is to say," he added after a curious pause, "my
ancestor's descendant.  Almost all my people, a little way back, you
see, were shoe-makers or cobblers."

He said it with dignity, exactly as he might have said they were
dukes or lord chancellors; but Philip could not help pitying him,
not so much for being descended from so mean a lot, as for being
fool enough to acknowledge it on a gentleman's lawn at Brackenhurst.
Why, with manners like his, if he had not given himself away, one
might easily have taken him for a descendant of the Plantagenets.

So the General seemed to think too, for he added quickly, "But
you're very like the duke, and the duke's a Bertram.  Is he also a
relative?"

The young man coloured slightly.  "Ye-es," he answered, hesitating;
"but we're not very proud of the Bertram connection.  They never did
much good in the world, the Bertrams.  I bear the name, one may
almost say by accident, because it was handed down to me by my
grandfather Ingledew, who had Bertram blood, but was a vast deal a
better man than any other member of the Bertram family."

"I'll be seeing the duke on Wednesday," the General put in, with
marked politeness, "and I'll ask him, if you like, about your
grandfather's relationship.  Who was he exactly, and what was his
connection with the present man or his predecessor?"

"Oh, don't, please," Bertram put in, half-pleadingly, it is true,
but still with that same ineffable and indefinable air of a great
gentleman that never for a moment deserted him.  "The duke would
never have heard of my ancestors, I'm sure, and I particularly
don't want to be mixed up with the existing Bertrams in any way."

He was happily innocent and ignorant of the natural interpretation
the others would put upon his reticence, after the true English
manner; but still he was vaguely aware, from the silence that
ensued for a moment after he ceased, that he must have broken once
more some important taboo, or offended once more some much-revered
fetich.  To get rid of the awkwardness he turned quietly to Frida.
"What do you say, Mrs. Monteith," he suggested, "to a game of
tennis?"

As bad luck would have it, he had floundered from one taboo
headlong into another.  The Dean looked up, open-mouthed, with a
sharp glance of inquiry.  Did Mrs. Monteith, then, permit such
frivolities on the Sunday?  "You forget what day it is, I think,"
Frida interposed gently, with a look of warning.

Bertram took the hint at once.  "So I did," he answered quickly.
"At home, you see, we let no man judge us of days and of weeks, and
of times and of seasons.  It puzzles us so much.  With us, what's
wrong to-day can never be right and proper to-morrow."

"But surely," the Dean said, bristling up, "some day is set apart
in every civilised land for religious exercises."

"Oh, no," Bertram replied, falling incautiously into the trap.  "We
do right every day of the week alike,--and never do poojah of any
sort at any time."

"Then where do you come from?" the Dean asked severely, pouncing
down upon him like a hawk.  "I've always understood the very lowest
savages have at least some outer form or shadow of religion."

"Yes, perhaps so; but we're not savages, either low or otherwise,"
Bertram answered cautiously, perceiving his error.  "And as to your
other point, for reasons of my own, I prefer for the present not to
say where I come from.  You wouldn't believe me, if I told you--as
you didn't, I saw, about my remote connection with the Duke of East
Anglia's family.  And we're not accustomed, where I live, to be
disbelieved or doubted.  It's perhaps the one thing that really
almost makes us lose our tempers.  So, if you please, I won't go
any further at present into the debatable matter of my place of
origin."

He rose to stroll off into the gardens, having spoken all the time
in that peculiarly grave and dignified tone that seemed natural to
him whenever any one tried to question him closely.  Nobody save a
churchman would have continued the discussion.  But the Dean was a
churchman, and also a Scot, and he returned to the attack,
unabashed and unbaffled.  "But surely, Mr. Ingledew," he said in a
persuasive voice, "your people, whoever they are, must at least
acknowledge a creator of the universe."

Bertram gazed at him fixedly.  His eye was stern.  "My people, sir,"
he said slowly, in very measured words, unaware that one must not
argue with a clergyman, "acknowledge and investigate every reality
they can find in the universe--and admit no phantoms.  They believe
in everything that can be shown or proved to be natural and true;
but in nothing supernatural, that is to say, imaginary or non-
existent.  They accept plain facts: they reject pure phantasies.
How beautiful those lilies are, Mrs. Monteith! such an exquisite
colour!  Shall we go over and look at them?"

"Not just now," Frida answered, relieved at the appearance of
Martha with the tray in the distance.  "Here's tea coming." She was
glad of the diversion, for she liked Bertram immensely, and she
could not help noticing how hopelessly he had been floundering all
that afternoon right into the very midst of what he himself would
have called their taboos and joss-business.

But Bertram was not well out of his troubles yet.  Martha brought
the round tray--Oriental brass, finely chased with flowing Arabic
inscriptions--and laid it down on the dainty little rustic table.
Then she handed about the cups.  Bertram rose to help her.  "Mayn't
I do it for you?" he said, as politely as he would have said it to
a lady in her drawing-room.

"No, thank you, sir," Martha answered, turning red at the offer,
but with the imperturbable solemnity of the well-trained English
servant.  She "knew her place," and resented the intrusion.  But
Bertram had his own notions of politeness, too, which were not to
be lightly set aside for local class distinctions.  He could not
see a pretty girl handing cups to guests without instinctively
rising from his seat to assist her.  So, very much to Martha's
embarrassment, he continued to give his help in passing the cake
and the bread-and-butter.  As soon as she was gone, he turned round
to Philip.  "That's a very pretty girl and a very nice girl," he
said simply.  "I wonder, now, as you haven't a wife, you've never
thought of marrying her."

The remark fell like a thunderbolt on the assembled group.  Even
Frida was shocked.  Your most open-minded woman begins to draw a
line when you touch her class prejudices in the matter of marriage,
especially with reference to her own relations.  "Why, really, Mr.
Ingledew," she said, looking up at him reproachfully, "you can't
mean to say you think my brother could marry the parlour-maid!"

Bertram saw at a glance he had once more unwittingly run his head
against one of the dearest of these strange people's taboos; but he
made no retort openly.  He only reflected in silence to himself how
unnatural and how wrong they would all think it at home that a
young man of Philip's age should remain nominally celibate; how
horrified they would be at the abject misery and degradation such
conduct on the part of half his caste must inevitably imply for
thousands of innocent young girls of lower station, whose lives he
now knew were remorselessly sacrificed in vile dens of tainted
London to the supposed social necessity that young men of a certain
class should marry late in a certain style, and "keep a wife in the
way she's been accustomed to."  He remembered with a checked sigh
how infinitely superior they would all at home have considered that
wholesome, capable, good-looking Martha to an empty-headed and
useless young man like Philip; and he thought to himself how
completely taboo had overlaid in these people's minds every ethical
idea, how wholly it had obscured the prime necessities of healthy,
vigorous, and moral manhood.  He recollected the similar though less
hideous taboos he had met with elsewhere: the castes of India, and
the horrible pollution that would result from disregarding them;
the vile Egyptian rule, by which the divine king, in order to keep
up the so-called purity of his royal and god-descended blood, must
marry his own sister, and so foully pollute with monstrous
abortions the very stock he believed himself to be preserving
intact from common or unclean influences.  His mind ran back to
the strange and complicated forbidden degrees of the Australian
Blackfellows, who are divided into cross-classes, each of which
must necessarily marry into a certain other, and into that other
only, regardless of individual tastes or preferences.  He remembered
the profound belief of all these people that if they were to act in
any other way than the one prescribed, some nameless misfortune or
terrible evil would surely overtake them.  Yet, nowhere, he thought
to himself, had he seen any system which entailed in the end so
much misery on both sexes, though more particularly on the women,
as that system of closely tabooed marriage, founded upon a broad
basis of prostitution and infanticide, which has reached its most
appalling height of development in hypocritical and puritan
England.  The ghastly levity with which all Englishmen treated this
most serious subject, and the fatal readiness with which even Frida
herself seemed to acquiesce in the most inhuman slavery ever
devised for women on the face of this earth, shocked and saddened
Bertram's profoundly moral and sympathetic nature.  He could sit
there no longer to listen to their talk.  He bethought him at once
of the sickening sights he had seen the evening before in a London
music-hall; of the corrupting mass of filth underneath, by which
alone this abomination of iniquity could be kept externally decent,
and this vile system of false celibacy whitened outwardly to the
eye like Oriental sepulchres: and he strolled off by himself into
the shrubbery, very heavy in heart, to hide his real feelings from
the priest and the soldier, whose coarser-grained minds could never
have understood the enthusiasm of humanity which inspired and
informed him.

Frida rose and followed him, moved by some unconscious wave of
instinctive sympathy.  The four children of this world were left
together on the lawn by the rustic table, to exchange views by
themselves on the extraordinary behaviour and novel demeanour of
the mysterious Alien.






VII





As soon as he was gone, a sigh of relief ran half-unawares through
the little square party.  They felt some unearthly presence had been
removed from their midst.  General Claviger turned to Monteith.
"That's a curious sort of chap," he said slowly, in his military
way.  "Who is he, and where does he come from?"

"Ah, where does he come from?--that's just the question," Monteith
answered, lighting a cigar, and puffing away dubiously.  "Nobody
knows.  He's a mystery.  He poses in the role.  You'd better ask
Philip; it was he who brought him here."

"I met him accidentally in the street," Philip answered, with an
apologetic shrug, by no means well pleased at being thus held
responsible for all the stranger's moral and social vagaries.  "It's
the merest chance acquaintance.  I know nothing of his antecedents.
I--er--I lent him a bag, and he's fastened himself upon me ever
since like a leech, and come constantly to my sister's.  But I
haven't the remotest idea who he is or where he hails from.  He
keeps his business wrapped up from all of us in the profoundest
mystery."

"He's a gentleman, anyhow," the General put in with military
decisiveness.  "How manly of him to acknowledge at once about the
cobbler being probably a near relation!  Most men, you know,
Christy, would have tried to hide it; HE didn't for a second.  He
admitted his ancestors had all been cobblers till quite a recent
period."

Philip was astonished at this verdict of the General's, for he
himself, on the contrary, had noted with silent scorn that very
remark as a piece of supreme and hopeless stupidity on Bertram's
part.  No fellow can help having a cobbler for a grandfather, of
course: but he need not be such a fool as to volunteer any mention
of the fact spontaneously.

"Yes, I thought it bold of him," Monteith answered, "almost bolder
than was necessary; for he didn't seem to think we should be at all
surprised at it."

The General mused to himself.  "He's a fine soldierly fellow," he
said, gazing after the tall retreating figure.  "I should like to
make a dragoon of him.  He's the very man for a saddle.  He'd dash
across country in the face of heavy guns any day with the best of
them."

"He rides well," Philip answered, "and has a wonderful seat.  I saw
him on that bay mare of Wilder's in town the other afternoon, and I
must say he rode much more like a gentleman than a cobbler."

"Oh, he's a gentleman," the General repeated, with unshaken
conviction: "a thoroughbred gentleman."  And he scanned Philip up
and down with his keen grey eye as if internally reflecting that
Philip's own right to criticise and classify that particular
species of humanity was a trifle doubtful.  "I should much like to
make a captain of hussars of him.  He'd be splendid as a leader of
irregular horse; the very man for a scrimmage!"  For the General's
one idea when he saw a fine specimen of our common race was the
Zulu's or the Red Indian's--what an admirable person he would be
to employ in killing and maiming his fellow-creatures!

"He'd be better engaged so," the Dean murmured reflectively, "than
in diffusing these horrid revolutionary and atheistical doctrines."
For the Church was as usual in accord with the sword; theoretically
all peace, practically all bloodshed and rapine and aggression: and
anything that was not his own opinion envisaged itself always to
the Dean's crystallised mind as revolutionary and atheistic.

"He's very like the duke, though," General Claviger went on, after
a moment's pause, during which everybody watched Bertram and Frida
disappearing down the walk round a clump of syringas.  "Very like
the duke.  And you saw he admitted some sort of relationship, though
he didn't like to dwell upon it.  You may be sure he's a by-blow of
the family somehow.  One of the Bertrams, perhaps the old duke who
was out in the Crimea, may have formed an attachment for one of
these Ingledew girls--the cobbler's sisters: I dare say they were
no better in their conduct than they ought to be--and this may be
the consequence."

"I'm afraid the old duke was a man of loose life and doubtful
conversation," the Dean put in, with a tone of professional
disapprobation for the inevitable transgressions of the great and
the high-placed.  "He didn't seem to set the example he ought to
have done to his poorer brethren."

"Oh, he was a thorough old rip, the duke, if it comes to that,"
General Claviger responded, twirling his white moustache.  "And so's
the present man--a rip of the first water.  They're a regular bad
lot, the Bertrams, root and stock.  They never set an example of
anything to anybody--bar horse-breeding,--as far as I'm aware; and
even at that their trainers have always fairly cheated 'em."

"The present duke's a most exemplary churchman," the Dean
interposed, with Christian charity for a nobleman of position.
"He gave us a couple of thousand last year for the cathedral
restoration fund."

"And that would account," Philip put in, returning abruptly to the
previous question, which had been exercising him meanwhile, "for
the peculiarly distinguished air of birth and breeding this man has
about him."  For Philip respected a duke from the bottom of his
heart, and cherished the common Britannic delusion that a man who
has been elevated to that highest degree in our barbaric rank-
system must acquire at the same time a nobler type of physique and
countenance, exactly as a Jew changes his Semitic features for the
European shape on conversion and baptism.

"Oh, dear, no," the General answered in his most decided voice.
"The Bertrams were never much to look at in any way: and as for the
old duke, he was as insignificant a little monster of red-haired
ugliness as ever you'd see in a day's march anywhere.  If he hadn't
been a duke, with a rent-roll of forty odd thousand a year, he'd
never have got that beautiful Lady Camilla to consent to marry him.
But, bless you, women 'll do anything for the strawberry leaves.  It
isn't from the Bertrams this man gets his good looks.  It isn't from
the Bertrams.  Old Ingledew's daughters are pretty enough girls.  If
their aunts were like 'em, it's there your young friend got his air
of distinction."

"We never know who's who nowadays," the Dean murmured softly.  Being
himself the son of a small Scotch tradesman, brought up in the Free
Kirk, and elevated into his present exalted position by the early
intervention of a Balliol scholarship and a studentship of Christ
Church, he felt at liberty to moralise in such non-committing terms
on the gradual decay of aristocratic exclusiveness.

"I don't see it much matters what a man's family was," the General
said stoutly, "so long as he's a fine, well-made, soldierly fellow,
like this Ingledew body, capable of fighting for his Queen and
country.  He's an Australian, I suppose.  What tall chaps they do
send home, to be sure!  Those Australians are going to lick us all
round the field presently."

"That's the curious part of it," Philip answered.  "Nobody knows
what he is.  He doesn't even seem to be a British subject.  He calls
himself an Alien.  And he speaks most disrespectfully at times--
well, not exactly perhaps of the Queen in person, but at any rate
of the monarchy."

"Utterly destitute of any feeling of respect for any power of any
sort, human or divine," the Dean remarked, with clerical severity.

"For my part," Monteith interposed, knocking his ash off savagely,
"I think the man's a swindler; and the more I see of him, the less
I like him.  He's never explained to us how he came here at all, or
what the dickens he came for.  He refuses to say where he lives or
what's his nationality.  He poses as a sort of unexplained Caspar
Hauser.  In my opinion, these mystery men are always impostors.  He
had no letters of introduction to anybody at Brackenhurst; and he
thrust himself upon Philip in a most peculiar way; ever since which
he's insisted upon coming to my house almost daily.  I don't like
him myself: it's Mrs. Monteith who insists upon having him here."

"He fascinates me," the General said frankly.  "I don't at all
wonder the women like him.  As long as he was by, though I don't
agree with one word he says, I couldn't help looking at him and
listening to him intently."

"So he does me," Philip answered, since the General gave him the
cue.  "And I notice it's the same with people in the train.  They
always listen to him, though sometimes he preaches the most
extravagant doctrines--oh, much worse than anything he's said here
this afternoon.  He's really quite eccentric."

"What sort of doctrines?" the Dean inquired, with languid zeal.
"Not, I hope, irreligious?"

"Oh, dear, no," Philip answered; "not that so much.  He troubles
himself very little, I think, about religion.  Social doctrines,
don't you know; such very queer views--about women, and so forth."

"Indeed?" the Dean said quickly, drawing himself up very stiff: for
you touch the ark of God for the modern cleric when you touch the
question of the relations of the sexes.  "And what does he say?
It's highly undesirable men should go about the country inciting to
rebellion on such fundamental points of moral order in public
railway carriages."  For it is a peculiarity of minds constituted
like the Dean's (say, ninety-nine per cent. of the population) to
hold that the more important a subject is to our general happiness,
the less ought we all to think about it and discuss it.

"Why, he has very queer ideas," Philip went on, slightly hesitating;
for he shared the common vulgar inability to phrase exposition of a
certain class of subjects in any but the crudest and ugliest
phraseology.  "He seems to think, don't you know, the recognised
forms of vice--well, what all young men do--you know what I
mean--Of course it's not right, but still they do them--"  The
Dean nodded a cautious acquiescence.  "He thinks they're horribly
wrong and distressing; but he makes nothing at all of the virtue of
decent girls and the peace of families."

"If I found a man preaching that sort of doctrine to my wife or my
daughters," Monteith said savagely, "I know what _I_'d do--I'd put
a bullet through him."

"And quite right, too," the General murmured approvingly.

Professional considerations made the Dean refrain from endorsing
this open expression of murderous sentiment in its fullest form; a
clergyman ought always to keep up some decent semblance of respect
for the Gospel and the Ten Commandments--or, at least, the greater
part of them.  So he placed the tips of his fingers and thumbs
together in the usual deliberative clerical way, gazed blankly
through the gap, and answered with mild and perfunctory
disapprobation:  "A bullet would perhaps be an unnecessarily severe
form of punishment to mete out; but I confess I could excuse the
man who was so far carried away by his righteous indignation as to
duck the fellow in the nearest horse-pond."

"Well, I don't know about that," Philip replied, with an outburst
of unwonted courage and originality; for he was beginning to like,
and he had always from the first respected, Bertram.  "There's
something about the man that makes me feel--even when I differ from
him most--that he believes it all, and is thoroughly in earnest.
I dare say I'm wrong, but I always have a notion he's a better man
than me, in spite of all his nonsense,--higher and clearer and
differently constituted,--and that if only I could climb to just
where he has got, perhaps I should see things in the same light
that he does."

It was a wonderful speech for Philip--a speech above himself; but,
all the same, by a fetch of inspiration he actually made it.
Intercourse with Bertram had profoundly impressed his feeble
nature.  But the Dean shook his head.

"A very undesirable young man for you to see too much of, I'm sure,
Mr. Christy," he said, with marked disapprobation.  For, in the
Dean's opinion, it was a most dangerous thing for a man to think,
especially when he's young; thinking is, of course, so likely to
unsettle him!

The General, on the other hand, nodded his stern grey head once or
twice reflectively.

"He's a remarkable young fellow," he said, after a pause; "a most
remarkable young fellow.  As I said before, he somehow fascinates
me.  I'd immensely like to put that young fellow into a smart hussar
uniform, mount him on a good charger of the Punjaub breed, and send
him helter-skelter, pull-devil, pull-baker, among my old friends
the Duranis on the North-West frontier."






VIII





While the men talked thus, Bertram Ingledew's ears ought to have
burned behind the bushes.  But, to say the truth, he cared little
for their conversation; for had he not turned aside down one of the
retired gravel paths in the garden, alone with Frida?

"That's General Claviger of Herat, I suppose," he said in a low
tone, as they retreated out of ear-shot beside the clump of
syringas.  "What a stern old man he is, to be sure, with what a
stern old face!  He looks like a person capable of doing or ordering
all the strange things I've read of him in the papers."

"Oh, yes," Frida answered, misunderstanding for the moment her
companion's meaning.  "He's a very clever man, I believe, and a most
distinguished officer."

Bertram smiled in spite of himself.  "Oh, I didn't mean that," he
cried, with the same odd gleam in his eyes Frida had so often
noticed there.  "I meant, he looked capable of doing or ordering all
the horrible crimes he's credited with in history.  You remember, it
was he who was employed in massacring the poor savage Zulus in
their last stand at bay, and in driving the Afghan women and
children to die of cold and starvation on the mountain-tops after
the taking of Kabul.  A terrible fighter, indeed!  A terrible
history!"

"But I believe he's a very good man in private life," Frida put in
apologetically, feeling compelled to say the best she could for her
husband's guest.  "I don't care for him much myself, to be sure, but
Robert likes him.  And he's awfully nice, every one says, to his
wife and step-children."

"How CAN he be very good," Bertram answered in his gentlest voice,
"if he hires himself out indiscriminately to kill or maim whoever
he's told to, irrespective even of the rights and wrongs of the
private or public quarrel he happens to be employed upon?  It's an
appalling thing to take a fellow-creature's life, even if you're
quite, quite sure it's just and necessary; but fancy contracting to
take anybody's and everybody's life you're told to, without any
chance even of inquiring whether they may not be in the right after
all, and your own particular king or people most unjust and cruel
and blood-stained aggressors?  Why, it's horrible to contemplate.
Do you know, Mrs. Monteith," he went on, with his far-away air,
"it's that that makes society here in England so difficult to me.
It's so hard to mix on equal terms with your paid high priests and
your hired slaughterers, and never display openly the feelings you
entertain towards them.  Fancy if you had to mix so yourself with
the men who flogged women to death in Hungary, or with the
governors and jailors of some Siberian prison!  That's the worst of
travel.  When I was in Central Africa, I sometimes saw a poor black
woman tortured or killed before my very eyes; and if I'd tried to
interfere in her favour, to save or protect her, I'd only have got
killed myself, and probably have made things all the worse in the
end for her.  And yet it's hard indeed to have to look on at, or
listen to, such horrors as these without openly displaying one's
disgust and disapprobation.  Whenever I meet your famous generals,
or your judges and your bishops, I burn to tell them how their acts
affect me; yet I'm obliged to refrain, because I know my words
could do no good and might do harm, for they could only anger them.
My sole hope of doing anything to mitigate the rigour of your cruel
customs is to take as little notice of them as possible in any way
whenever I find myself in unsympathetic society."

"Then you don't think ME unsympathetic?" Frida murmured, with a
glow of pleasure.

"O Frida," the young man cried, bending forward and looking at her,
"you know very well you're the only person here I care for in the
least or have the slightest sympathy with."

Frida was pleased he should say so; he was so nice and gentle: but
she felt constrained none the less to protest, for form's sake at
least, against his calling her once more so familiarly by her
Christian name.  "NOT Frida to you, if you please, Mr. Ingledew,"
she said as stiffly as she could manage.  "You know it isn't right.
Mrs. Monteith, you must call me."  But she wasn't as angry, somehow,
at the liberty he had taken as she would have been in anybody
else's case; he was so very peculiar.

Bertram Ingledew paused and checked himself.

"You think I do it on purpose," he said with an apologetic air; "I
know you do, of course; but I assure you I don't.  It's all pure
forgetfulness.  The fact is, nobody can possibly call to mind all
the intricacies of your English and European customs at once,
unless he's to the manner born, and carefully brought up to them
from his earliest childhood, as all of you yourselves have been.
He may recollect them after an effort when he thinks of them
seriously; but he can't possibly bear them all in mind at once
every hour of the day and night by a pure tour de force of mental
concentration.  You know it's the same with your people in other
barbarous countries.  Your own travellers say it themselves about
the customs of Islam.  They can't learn them and remember them all
at every moment of their lives, as the Mohammedans do; and to make
one slip there is instant death to them."

Frida looked at him earnestly.  "But I hope," she said with an
air of deprecation, pulling a rose to pieces, petal by petal,
nervously, as she spoke, "you don't put us on quite the same level
as Mohammedans.  We're so much more civilised.  So much better in
every way.  Do you know, Mr. Ingledew," and she hesitated for a
minute, "I can't bear to differ from you or blame you in anything,
because you always appear to me so wise and good and kind-hearted
and reasonable; but it often surprises me, and even hurts me, when
you seem to talk of us all as if we were just so many savages.
You're always speaking about taboo, and castes, and poojah, and
fetiches, as if we weren't civilised people at all, but utter
barbarians.  Now, don't you think--don't you admit, yourself, it's
a wee bit unreasonable, or at any rate impolite, of you?"

Bertram drew back with a really pained expression on his handsome
features.  "O Mrs. Monteith!" he cried, "Frida, I'm so sorry if
I've seemed rude to you!  It's all the same thing--pure human
inadvertence; inability to throw myself into so unfamiliar an
attitude.  I forget every minute that YOU do not recognise the
essential identity of your own taboos and poojahs and fetiches with
the similar and often indistinguishable taboos and poojahs and
fetiches of savages generally.  They all come from the same source,
and often retain to the end, as in your temple superstitions and
your marriage superstitions, the original features of their savage
beginnings.  And as to your being comparatively civilised, I grant
you that at once; only it doesn't necessarily make you one bit more
rational--certainly not one bit more humane, or moral, or brotherly
in your actions."

"I don't understand you," Frida cried, astonished.  "But there!  I
often don't understand you; only I know, when you've explained
things, I shall see how right you are."

Bertram smiled a quiet smile.

"You're certainly an apt pupil," he said, with brotherly gentleness,
pulling a flower as he went and slipping it softly into her bosom.
"Why, what I mean's just this.  Civilisation, after all, in the
stage in which you possess it, is only the ability to live together
in great organised communities.  It doesn't necessarily imply any
higher moral status or any greater rationality than those of the
savage.  All it implies is greater cohesion, more unity, higher
division of functions.  But the functions themselves, like those of
your priests and judges and soldiers, may be as barbaric and cruel,
or as irrational and unintelligent, as any that exist among the most
primitive peoples.  Advance in civilisation doesn't necessarily
involve either advance in real knowledge of one's relations to the
universe, or advance in moral goodness and personal culture.  Some
highly civilised nations of historic times have been more cruel and
barbarous than many quite uncultivated ones.  For example, the
Romans, at the height of their civilisation, went mad drunk with
blood at their gladiatorial shows; the Athenians of the age of
Pericles and Socrates offered up human sacrifices at the Thargelia,
like the veriest savages; and the Phoenicians and Carthaginians, the
most civilised commercial people of the world in their time, as the
English are now, gave their own children to be burnt alive as
victims to Baal.  The Mexicans were far more civilised than the
ordinary North American Indians of their own day, and even in some
respects than the Spanish Christians who conquered, converted,
enslaved, and tortured them; but the Mexican religion was full of
such horrors as I could hardly even name to you.  It was based
entirely on cannibalism, as yours is on Mammon.  Human sacrifices
were common--commoner even than in modern England, I fancy.
New-born babies were killed by the priests when the corn was sown;
children when it had sprouted; men when it was full grown; and very
old people when it was fully ripe."

"How horrible!" Frida exclaimed.

"Yes, horrible," Bertram answered; "like your own worst customs.  It
didn't show either gentleness or rationality, you'll admit; but it
showed what's the one thing essential to civilisation--great
coherence, high organisation, much division of function.  Some of
the rites these civilised Mexicans performed would have made the
blood of kindly savages run cold with horror.  They sacrificed a man
at the harvest festival by crushing him like the corn between two
big flat stones.  Sometimes the priests skinned their victim alive,
and wore his raw skin as a mask or covering, and danced hideous
dances, so disguised, in honour of the hateful deities whom their
fancies had created--deities even more hateful and cruel, perhaps,
than the worst of your own Christian Calvinistic fancies.  I can't
see, myself, that civilised people are one whit the better in all
these respects than the uncivilised barbarian.  They pull together
better, that's all; but war, bloodshed, superstition, fetich-
worship, religious rites, castes, class distinctions, sex taboos,
restrictions on freedom of thought, on freedom of action, on
freedom of speech, on freedom of knowledge, are just as common in
their midst as among the utterly uncivilised."

"Then what you yourself aim at," Frida said, looking hard at him,
for he spoke very earnestly--"what you yourself aim at is--?"

Bertram's eyes came back to solid earth with a bound.

"Oh, what we at home aim at," he said, smiling that sweet, soft
smile of his that so captivated Frida, "is not mere civilisation
(though, of course, we value that too, in its meet degree, because
without civilisation and co-operation no great thing is possible),
but rationality and tenderness.  We think reason the first good--to
recognise truly your own place in the universe; to hold your head
up like a man, before the face of high heaven, afraid of no ghosts
or fetiches or phantoms; to understand that wise and right and
unselfish actions are the great requisites in life, not the service
of non-existent and misshapen creatures of the human imagination.
Knowledge of facts, knowledge of nature, knowledge of the true
aspects of the world we live in,--these seem to us of first
importance.  After that, we prize next reasonable and reasoning
goodness; for mere rule-of-thumb goodness, which comes by rote, and
might so easily degenerate into formalism or superstition, has no
honour among us, but rather the contrary.  If any one were to say
with us (after he had passed his first infancy) that he always did
such and such a thing because he had been told it was right by his
parents or teachers--still more because priests or fetich-men had
commanded it--he would be regarded, not as virtuous, but as feeble
or wicked--a sort of moral idiot, unable to distinguish rationally
for himself between good and evil.  That's not the sort of conduct
WE consider right or befitting the dignity of a grown man or woman,
an ethical unit in an enlightened community.  Rather is it their
prime duty to question all things, to accept no rule of conduct or
morals as sure till they have thoroughly tested it."

"Mr. Ingledew," Frida exclaimed, "do you know, when you talk like
that, I always long to ask you where on earth you come from, and
who are these your people you so often speak about.  A blessed
people: I would like to learn about them; and yet I'm afraid to.
You almost seem to me like a being from another planet."

The young man laughed a quiet little laugh of deprecation, and sat
down on the garden bench beside the yellow rose-bush.

"Oh, dear, no, Frida," he said, with that transparent glance of
his.  "Now, don't look so vexed; I shall call you Frida if I choose;
it's your name, and I like you.  Why let this funny taboo of one's
own real name stand in the way of reasonable friendship?  In many
savage countries a woman's never allowed to call her husband by his
name, or even to know it, or, for the matter of that, to see him in
the daylight.  In your England, the arrangement's exactly reversed:
no man's allowed to call a woman by her real name unless she's
tabooed for life to him--what you Europeans call married to him.
But let that pass.  If one went on pulling oneself up short at every
one of your customs, one'd never get any further in any question
one was discussing.  Now, don't be deceived by nonsensical talk
about living beings in other planets.  There are no such creatures.
It's a pure delusion of the ordinary egotistical human pattern.
When people chatter about life in other worlds, they don't mean
life--which, of a sort, there may be there:--they mean human life--
a very different and much less important matter.  Well, how could
there possibly be human beings, or anything like them, in other
stars or planets?  The conditions are too complex, too peculiar, too
exclusively mundane.  We are things of this world, and of this world
only.  Don't let's magnify our importance: we're not the whole
universe.  Our race is essentially a development from a particular
type of monkey-like animal--the Andropithecus of the Upper Uganda
eocene.  This monkey-like animal itself, again, is the product of
special antecedent causes, filling a particular place in a
particular tertiary fauna and flora, and impossible even in the
fauna and flora of our own earth and our own tropics before the
evolution of those succulent fruits and grain-like seeds, for
feeding on which it was specially adapted.  Without edible fruits,
in short, there could be no monkey; and without monkeys there could
be no man."

"But mayn't there be edible fruits in the other planets?" Frida
inquired, half-timidly, more to bring out this novel aspect of
Bertram's knowledge than really to argue with him; for she dearly
loved to hear his views of things, they were so fresh and
unconventional.

"Edible fruits?  Yes, possibly; and animals or something more or
less like animals to feed upon them.  But even if there are such,
which planetoscopists doubt, they must be very different creatures
in form and function from any we know on this one small world of
ours.  For just consider, Frida, what we mean by life.  We mean a set
of simultaneous and consecutive changes going on in a complex mass
of organised carbon compounds.  When most people say 'life,'
however,--especially here with you, where education is undeveloped--
they aren't thinking of life in general at all (which is mainly
vegetable), but only of animal and often indeed of human life.
Well, then, consider, even on this planet itself, how special are
the conditions that make life possible.  There must be water in some
form, for there's no life in the desert.  There must be heat up to
a certain point, and not above or below it, for fire kills, and
there's no life at the poles (as among Alpine glaciers), or what
little there is depends upon the intervention of other life wafted
from elsewhere--from the lands or seas, in fact, where it can
really originate.  In order to have life at all, as WE know it at
least (and I can't say whether anything else could be fairly called
life by any true analogy, until I've seen and examined it), you
must have carbon, and oxygen, and hydrogen, and nitrogen, and many
other things, under certain fixed conditions; you must have liquid
water, not steam or ice: you must have a certain restricted range
of temperature, neither very much higher nor very much lower than
the average of the tropics.  Now, look, even with all these
conditions fulfilled, how diverse is life on this earth itself, the
one place we really know--varying as much as from the oak to the
cuttle-fish, from the palm to the tiger, from man to the fern, the
sea-weed, or the jelly-speck.  Every one of these creatures is a
complex result of very complex conditions, among which you must
never forget to reckon the previous existence and interaction of
all the antecedent ones.  Is it probable, then, even a priori, that
if life or anything like it exists on any other planet, it would
exist in forms at all as near our own as a buttercup is to a human
being, or a sea-anemone is to a cat or a pine-tree?"

"Well, it doesn't look likely, now you come to put it so," Frida
answered thoughtfully: for, though English, she was not wholly
impervious to logic.

"Likely?  Of course not," Bertram went on with conviction.
"Planetoscopists are agreed upon it.  And above all, why should one
suppose the living organisms or their analogues, if any such there
are, in the planets or fixed stars, possess any such purely human
and animal faculties as thought and reason?  That's just like our
common human narrowness.  If we were oaks, I suppose, we would only
interest ourselves in the question whether acorns existed in Mars
and Saturn."  He paused a moment; then he added in an afterthought:
"No, Frida; you may be sure all human beings, you and I alike, and
thousands of others a great deal more different, are essential
products of this one wee planet, and of particular times and
circumstances in its history.  We differ only as birth and
circumstances have made us differ.  There IS a mystery about who I
am, and where I come from; I won't deny it: but it isn't by any
means so strange or so marvellous a mystery as you seem to imagine.
One of your own old sacred books says (as I remember hearing in the
joss-house I attended one day in London), 'God hath made of one
blood all the nations of the earth.'  If for GOD in that passage we
substitute COMMON DESCENT, it's perfectly true.  We are all of one
race; and I confess, when I talk to you, every day I feel our unity
more and more profoundly."  He bent over on the bench and took her
tremulous hand.  "Frida," he said, looking deep into her speaking
dark eyes, "don't you yourself feel it?"

He was so strange, so simple-minded, so different in every way from
all other men, that for a moment Frida almost half-forgot to be
angry with him.  In point of fact, in her heart, she was not angry
at all; she liked to feel the soft pressure of his strong man's
hand on her dainty fingers; she liked to feel the gentle way he was
stroking her smooth arm with that delicate white palm of his.  It
gave her a certain immediate and unthinking pleasure to sit still
by his side and know he was full of her.  Then suddenly, with a
start, she remembered her duty: she was a married woman, and she
OUGHT NOT to do it.  Quickly, with a startled air, she withdrew her
hand.  Bertram gazed down at her for a second, half taken aback by
her hurried withdrawal.

"Then you don't like me!" he cried, in a pained tone; "after all,
you don't like me!"  One moment later, a ray of recognition broke
slowly over his face.  "Oh, I forgot," he said, leaning away.  "I
didn't mean to annoy you.  A year or two ago, of course, I might
have held your hand in mine as long as ever I liked.  You were still
a free being.  But what was right then is wrong now, according to
the kaleidoscopic etiquette of your countrywomen.  I forgot all that
in the heat of the moment.  I recollected only we were two human
beings, of the same race and blood, with hearts that beat and hands
that lay together.  I remember now, you must hide and stifle your
native impulses in future: you're tabooed for life to Robert
Monteith: I must needs respect his seal set upon you!"

And he drew a deep sigh of enforced resignation.

Frida sighed in return.  "These problems are so hard," she said.

Bertram smiled a strange smile.  "There are NO problems," he
answered confidently.  "You make them yourselves.  You surround life
with taboos, and then--you talk despairingly of the problems with
which your own taboos alone have saddled you."






IX





At half-past nine one evening that week, Bertram was seated in his
sitting-room at Miss Blake's lodgings, making entries, as usual,
on the subject of taboo in his big black notebook.  It was a large
bare room, furnished with the customary round rosewood centre
table, and decorated by a pair of green china vases, a set of wax
flowers under a big glass shade, and a picture representing two
mythical beings, with women's faces and birds' wings, hovering over
the figure of a sleeping baby.  Suddenly a hurried knock at the door
attracted his attention.  "Come in," he said softly, in that gentle
and almost deferential voice which he used alike to his equals and
to the lodging-house servant.  The door opened at once, and Frida
entered.

She was pale as a ghost, and she stepped light with a terrified
tread.  Bertram could see at a glance she was profoundly agitated.
For a moment he could hardly imagine the reason why: then he
remembered all at once the strict harem rules by which married
women in England are hemmed in and circumvented.  To visit an
unmarried man alone by night is contrary to tribal usage.  He rose,
and advanced towards his visitor with outstretched arms.  "Why,
Frida," he cried,--"Mrs. Monteith--no, Frida--what's the matter?
What has happened since I left?  You look so pale and startled."

Frida closed the door cautiously, flung herself down into a chair
in a despairing attitude, and buried her face in her hands for some
moments in silence.  "O Mr. Ingledew," she cried at last, looking up
in an agony of shame and doubt:  "Bertram--I KNOW it's wrong; I KNOW
it's wicked; I ought never to have come.  Robert would kill me if he
found out.  But it's my one last chance, and I couldn't BEAR not to
say good-bye to you--just this once--for ever."

Bertram gazed at her in astonishment.  Long and intimately as he had
lived among the various devotees of divine taboos the whole world
over, it was with difficulty still he could recall, each time, each
particular restriction of the various systems.  Then it came home to
him with a rush.  He removed the poor girl's hands gently from her
face, which she had buried once more in them for pure shame, and
held them in his own.  "Dear Frida," he said tenderly, stroking them
as he spoke, "why, what does all this mean?  What's this sudden
thunderbolt?  You've come here to-night without your husband's
leave, and you're afraid he'll discover you?"

Frida spoke under her breath, in a voice half-choked with frequent
sobs.  "Don't talk too loud," she whispered.  "Miss Blake doesn't
know I'm here.  If she did, she'd tell on me.  I slipped in quietly
through the open back door.  But I felt I MUST--I really, really
MUST.  I COULDN'T stop away; I COULDN'T help it."

Bertram gazed at her, distressed.  Her tone was distressing.  Horror
and indignation for a moment overcame him.  She had had to slip in
there like a fugitive or a criminal.  She had had to crawl away by
stealth from that man, her keeper.  She, a grown woman and a moral
agent, with a will of her own and a heart and a conscience, was
held so absolutely in serfdom as a particular man's thrall and
chattel, that she could not even go out to visit a friend without
these degrading subterfuges of creeping in unperceived by a back
entrance, and talking low under her breath, lest a lodging-house
crone should find out what she was doing.  And all the world of
England was so banded in league with the slave-driver against the
soul he enslaved, that if Miss Blake had seen her she could hardly
have come in: while, once in, she must tremble and whisper and
steal about with muffled feet, for fear of discovery in this
innocent adventure.  He held his breath with stifled wrath.  It
was painful and degrading.

But he had no time just then to think much of all this, for there
sat Frida, tremulous and shivering before his very eyes, trying
hard to hide her beautiful white face in her quivering hands, and
murmuring over and over again in a very low voice, like an agonised
creature, "I couldn't BEAR not to be allowed to say good-bye to you
for ever."

Bertram smoothed her cheek gently.  She tried to prevent him, but
he went on in spite of her, with a man's strong persistence.
Notwithstanding his gentleness he was always virile.  "Good-bye!" he
cried.  "Good-bye! why on earth good-bye, Frida?  When I left you
before dinner you never said one word of it to me."

"Oh, no," Frida cried, sobbing.  "It's all Robert, Robert!  As soon
as ever you were gone, he called me into the library--which always
means he's going to talk over some dreadful business with me--and
he said to me, 'Frida, I've just heard from Phil that this man
Ingledew, who's chosen to foist himself upon us, holds opinions and
sentiments which entirely unfit him from being proper company for
any lady.  Now, he's been coming here a great deal too often of
late.  Next time he calls, I wish you to tell Martha you're not at
home to him.'"

Bertram looked across at her with a melting look in his honest blue
eyes.  "And you came round to tell me of it, you dear thing!" he
cried, seizing her hand and grasping it hard.  "O Frida, how kind of
you!"

Frida trembled from head to foot.  The blood throbbed in her pulse.
"Then you're not vexed with me," she sobbed out, all tremulous with
gladness.

"Vexed with you!  O Frida, how could I be vexed?  You poor child!
I'm so pleased, so glad, so grateful!"

Frida let her hand rest unresisting in his.  "But, Bertram," she
murmured,--"I MUST call you Bertram--I couldn't help it, you know.
I like you so much, I couldn't let you go for ever without just
saying good-bye to you."

"You DON'T like me; you LOVE me," Bertram answered with masculine
confidence.  "No, you needn't blush, Frida; you can't deceive
me. . . .  My darling, you love me, and you know I love you.  Why
should we two make any secret about our hearts any longer?" He laid
his hand on her face again, making it tingle with joy.  "Frida," he
said solemnly, "you don't love that man you call your husband. . . .
You haven't loved him for years. . . .  You never really loved him."

There was something about the mere sound of Bertram's calm voice
that made Frida speak the truth more plainly and frankly than she
could ever have spoken it to any ordinary Englishman.  Yet she hung
down her head, even so, and hesitated slightly.  "Just at first,"
she murmured half-inaudibly, "I used to THINK I loved him.  At any
rate, I was pleased and flattered he should marry me."

"Pleased and flattered!" Bertram exclaimed, more to himself than to
her; "great Heavens, how incredible!  Pleased and flattered by that
man!  One can hardly conceive it!  But you've never loved him since,
Frida.  You can't look me in the face and tell me you love him."

"No, not since the first few months," Frida answered, still hanging
her head.  "But, Bertram, he's my husband, and of course I must obey
him."

"You must do nothing of the sort," Bertram cried authoritatively.
"You don't love him at all, and you mustn't pretend to.  It's wrong:
it's wicked.  Sooner or later--"  He checked himself.  "Frida," he
went on, after a moment's pause, "I won't speak to you of what I
was going to say just now.  I'll wait a bit till you're stronger and
better able to understand it.  But there must be no more silly talk
of farewells between us.  I won't allow it.  You're mine now--a
thousand times more truly mine than ever you were Monteith's; and I
can't do without you.  You must go back to your husband for the
present, I suppose,--the circumstances compel it, though I don't
approve of it; but you must see me again . . . and soon . . . and
often, just the same as usual.  I won't go to your house, of course:
the house is Monteith's; and everywhere among civilised and
rational races the sanctity of the home is rightly respected.  But
YOU yourself he has no claim or right to taboo; and if _I_ can help
it, he shan't taboo you.  You may go home now to-night, dear one;
but you must meet me often.  If you can't come round to my rooms--
for fear of Miss Blake's fetich, the respectability of her house--
we must meet elsewhere, till I can make fresh arrangements."

Frida gazed up at him in doubt.  "But will it be RIGHT, Bertram?"
she murmured.

The man looked down into her big eyes in dazed astonishment.  "Why,
Frida," he cried, half-pained at the question, "do you think if it
were WRONG I'd advise you to do it?  I'm here to help you, to guide
you, to lead you on by degrees to higher and truer life.  How can
you imagine I'd ask you to do anything on earth unless I felt
perfectly sure and convinced it was the very most right and proper
conduct?"

His arm stole round her waist and drew her tenderly towards him.
Frida allowed the caress passively.  There was a robust frankness
about his love-making that seemed to rob it of all taint or tinge
of evil.  Then he caught her bodily in his arms like a man who has
never associated the purest and noblest of human passions with any
lower thought, any baser personality.  He had not taken his first
lessons in the art of love from the wearied lips of joyless
courtesans whom his own kind had debased and unsexed and degraded
out of all semblance of womanhood.  He bent over the woman of his
choice and kissed her with chaste warmth.  On the forehead first,
then, after a short interval, twice on the lips.  At each kiss, from
which she somehow did not shrink, as if recognising its purity,
Frida felt a strange thrill course through and through her.  She
quivered from head to foot.  The scales fell from her eyes.  The
taboos of her race grew null and void within her.  She looked up at
him more boldly.  "O Bertram," she whispered, nestling close to his
side, and burying her blushing face in the man's curved bosom, "I
don't know what you've done to me, but I feel quite different--as
if I'd eaten the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil."

"I hope you have," Bertram answered, in a very solemn voice; "for,
Frida, you will need it."  He pressed her close against his breast;
and Frida Monteith, a free woman at last, clung there many minutes
with no vile inherited sense of shame or wrongfulness.  "I can't
bear to go," she cried, still clinging to him and clutching him
tight.  "I'm so happy here, Bertram; oh, so happy, so happy!"

"Then why go away at all?" Bertram asked, quite simply.

Frida drew back in horror.  "Oh, I must," she said, coming to
herself: "I must, of course, because of Robert."

Bertram held her hand, smoothing it all the while with his own, as
he mused and hesitated.  "Well, it's clearly wrong to go back," he
said, after a moment's pause.  "You ought never, of course, to spend
another night with that man you don't love and should never have
lived with.  But I suppose that's only a counsel of perfection: too
hard a saying for you to understand or follow for the present.
You'd better go back, just to-night: and, as time moves on, I can
arrange something else for you.  But when shall I see you again?--
for now you belong to me.  I sealed you with that kiss.  When will
you come and see me?"

"I can't come here, you know," Frida whispered, half-terrified;
"for if I did, Miss Blake would see me."

Bertram smiled a bitter smile to himself.  "So she would," he said,
musing.  "And though she's not the least interested in keeping up
Robert Monteith's proprietary claim on your life and freedom, I'm
beginning to understand now that it would be an offence against
that mysterious and incomprehensible entity they call RESPECTABILITY
if she were to allow me to receive you in her rooms.  It's all very
curious.  But, of course, while I remain, I must be content to
submit to it.  By-and-by, perhaps, Frida, we two may manage to
escape together from this iron generation.  Meanwhile, I shall go up
to London less often for the present, and you can come and meet me,
dear, in the Middle Mill Fields at two o'clock on Monday."

She gazed up at him with perfect trust in those luminous dark eyes
of hers.  "I will, Bertram," she said firmly.  She knew not herself
what his kiss had done for her; but one thing she knew: from the
moment their lips met, she had felt and understood in a flood of
vision that perfect love which casteth out fear, and was no longer
afraid of him.

"That's right, darling," the man answered, stooping down and laying
his cheek against her own once more.  "You are mine, and I am yours.
You are not and never were Robert Monteith's, my Frida.  So now,
good-night, till Monday at two, beside the stile in Middle Mill
Meadows!"

She clung to him for a moment in a passionate embrace.  He let her
stop there, while he smoothed her dark hair with one free hand.
Then suddenly, with a burst, the older feelings of her race
overcame her for a minute; she broke from his grasp and hid her
head, all crimson, in a cushion on the sofa.  One second later,
again, she lifted her face unabashed.  The new impulse stirred her.
"I'm proud I love you, Bertram," she cried, with red lips and
flashing eyes; "and I'm proud you love me!"

With that, she slipped quietly out, and walked, erect and graceful,
no longer ashamed, down the lodging-house passage.






X





When she returned, Robert Monteith sat asleep over his paper in
his easy-chair.  It was his wont at night when he returned from
business.  Frida cast one contemptuous glance as she passed at his
burly, unintelligent form, and went up to her bedroom.

But all that night long she never slept.  Her head was too full of
Bertram Ingledew.

Yet, strange to say, she felt not one qualm of conscience for their
stolen meeting.  No feminine terror, no fluttering fear, disturbed
her equanimity.  It almost seemed to her as if Bertram's kiss had
released her by magic, at once and for ever, from the taboos of her
nation.  She had slipped out from home unperceived, that night, in
fear and trembling, with many sinkings of heart and dire misgivings,
while Robert and Phil were downstairs in the smoking-room; she had
slunk round, crouching low, to Miss Blake's lodgings: and she had
terrified her soul on the way with a good woman's doubts and a good
woman's fears as to the wrongfulness of her attempt to say good-bye
to the friend she might now no longer mix with.  But from the moment
her lips and Bertram's touched, all fear and doubt seemed utterly to
have vanished; she lay there all night in a fierce ecstasy of love,
hugging herself for strange delight, thinking only of Bertram, and
wondering what manner of thing was this promised freedom whereof her
lover had spoken to her so confidently.  She trusted him now; she
knew he would do right, and right alone: whatever he advised, she
would be safe in following.

Next day, Robert went up to town to business as usual.  He was
immersed in palm-oil.  By a quarter to two, Frida found herself in
the fields.  But, early as she went to fulfil her tryst, Bertram was
there before her.  He took her hand in his with a gentle pressure,
and Frida felt a quick thrill she had never before experienced
course suddenly through her.  She looked around to right and left,
to see if they were observed.  Bertram noticed the instinctive
movement.  "My darling," he said in a low voice, "this is
intolerable, unendurable.  It's an insult not to be borne that you
and I can't walk together in the fields of England without being
subjected thus to such a many-headed espionage.  I shall have to
arrange something before long so as to see you at leisure.  I can't
be so bound by all the taboos of your country."

She looked up at him trustfully.  "As you will, Bertram," she
answered, without a moment's hesitation.  "I know I'm yours now.
Let it be what it may, I can do what you tell me."

He looked at her and smiled.  He saw she was pure woman.  He had
met at last with a sister soul.  There was a long, deep silence.

Frida was the first to break it with words.  "Why do you always
call them taboos, Bertram?" she asked at last, sighing.

"Why, Frida, don't you see?" he said, walking on through the deep
grass.  "Because they ARE taboos; that's the only reason.  Why not
give them their true name?  We call them nothing else among my own
people.  All taboos are the same in origin and spirit, whether
savage or civilised, eastern or western.  You must see that now: for
I know you are emancipated.  They begin with belief in some fetich
or bogey or other non-existent supernatural being; and they mostly
go on to regard certain absolutely harmless--nay, sometimes even
praiseworthy or morally obligatory--acts as proscribed by him and
sure to be visited with his condign displeasure.  So South Sea
Islanders think, if they eat some particular luscious fruit tabooed
for the chiefs, they'll be instantly struck dead by the mere power
of the taboo in it; and English people think, if they go out in the
country for a picnic on a tabooed day, or use certain harmless
tabooed names and words, or inquire into the historical validity of
certain incredible ancient documents, accounted sacred, or even
dare to think certain things that no reasonable man can prevent
himself from thinking, they'll be burned for ever in eternal fire
for it.  The common element is the dread of an unreal sanction.  So
in Japan and West Africa the people believe the whole existence of
the world and the universe is bound up with the health of their own
particular king or the safety of their own particular royal family;
and therefore they won't allow their Mikado or their chief to go
outside his palace, lest he should knock his royal foot against a
stone, and so prevent the sun from shining and the rain from
falling.  In other places, it's a tree or a shrub with which the
stability and persistence of the world is bound up; whenever that
tree or shrub begins to droop or wither, the whole population
rushes out in bodily fear and awe, bearing water to pour upon it,
and crying aloud with wild cries as if their lives were in danger.
If any man were to injure the tree, which of course is no more
valuable than any other bush of its sort, they'd tear him to pieces
on the spot, and kill or torture every member of his family.  And so
too, in England, most people believe, without a shadow of reason,
that if men and women were allowed to manage their own personal
relations, free from tribal interference, all life and order would
go to rack and ruin; the world would become one vast, horrible
orgy; and society would dissolve in some incredible fashion.  To
prevent this imaginary and impossible result, they insist upon
regulating one another's lives from outside with the strictest
taboos, like those which hem round the West African kings, and
punish with cruel and relentless heartlessness every man, and still
more every woman, who dares to transgress them."

"I think I see what you mean," Frida answered, blushing.

"And I mean it in the very simplest and most literal sense,"
Bertram went on quite seriously.  "I'd been among you some time
before it began to dawn on me that you English didn't regard your
own taboos as essentially identical with other people's.  To me,
from the very first, they seemed absolutely the same as the similar
taboos of Central Africans and South Sea Islanders.  All of them
spring alike from a common origin, the queer savage belief that
various harmless or actually beneficial things may become at times
in some mysterious way harmful and dangerous.  The essence of them
all lies in the erroneous idea that if certain contingencies occur,
such as breaking an image or deserting a faith, some terrible evil
will follow to one man or to the world, which evil, as a matter of
fact, there's no reason at all to dread in any way.  Sometimes, as
in ancient Rome, Egypt, Central Africa, and England, the whole of
life gets enveloped at last in a perfect mist and labyrinth of
taboos, a cobweb of conventions.  The Flamen Dialis at Rome, you
know, mightn't ride or even touch a horse; he mightn't see an army
under arms; nor wear a ring that wasn't broken; nor have a knot in
any part of his clothing.  He mightn't eat wheaten flour or leavened
bread; he mightn't look at or even mention by name such unlucky
things as a goat, a dog, raw meat, haricot beans, or common ivy.
He mightn't walk under a vine; the feet of his bed had to be daubed
with mud; his hair could only be cut by a free man, and with a
bronze knife; he was encased and surrounded, as it were, by endless
petty restrictions and regulations and taboos--just like those that
now surround so many men, and especially so many young women, here
in England."

"And you think they arise from the same causes?" Frida said, half-
hesitating: for she hardly knew whether it was not wicked to say
so.

"Why, of course they do," Bertram answered confidently.  "That's not
matter of opinion now; it's matter of demonstration.  The worst of
them all in their present complicated state are the ones that
concern marriage and the other hideous sex-taboos.  They seem to
have been among the earliest human abuses; for marriage arises from
the stone-age practice of felling a woman of another tribe with a
blow of one's club, and dragging her off by the hair of her head to
one's own cave as a slave and drudge; and they are still the most
persistent and cruel of any--so much so, that your own people, as
you know, taboo even the fair and free discussion of this the most
important and serious question of life and morals.  They make it, as
we would say at home, a refuge for enforced ignorance.  For it's
well known that early tribes hold the most superstitious ideas
about the relation of men to women, and dread the most ridiculous
and impossible evils resulting from it; and these absurd terrors of
theirs seem to have been handed on intact to civilised races, so
that for fear of I know not what ridiculous bogey of their own
imaginations, or dread of some unnatural restraining deity, men
won't even discuss a matter of so much importance to them all, but,
rather than let the taboo of silence be broken, will allow such
horrible things to take place in their midst as I have seen with my
eyes for these last six or seven weeks in your cities.  O Frida, you
can't imagine what things--for I know they hide them from you:
cruelties of lust and neglect and shame such as you couldn't even
dream of; women dying of foul disease, in want and dirt deliberately
forced upon them by the will of your society; destined beforehand
for death, a hateful lingering death--a death more disgusting than
aught you can conceive--in order that the rest of you may be safely
tabooed, each a maid intact, for the man who weds her.  It's the
hatefullest taboo of all the hateful taboos I've ever seen on my
wanderings, the unworthiest of a pure or moral community."

He shut his eyes as if to forget the horrors of which he spoke.
They were fresh and real to him.  Frida did not like to question him
further.  She knew to what he referred, and in a dim, vague way (for
she was less wise than he, she knew) she thought she could imagine
why he found it all so terrible.

They walked on in silence a while through the deep, lush grass of
the July meadow.  At last Bertram spoke again:  "Frida," he said,
with a trembling quiver, "I didn't sleep last night.  I was thinking
this thing over--this question of our relations."

"Nor did I," Frida answered, thrilling through, responsive.  "I was
thinking the same thing. . . .  And, Bertram, 'twas the happiest
night I ever remember."

Bertram's face flushed rosy red, that native colour of triumphant
love; but he answered nothing.  He only looked at her with a look
more eloquent by far than a thousand speeches.

"Frida," he went on at last, "I've been thinking it all over; and
I feel, if only you can come away with me for just seven days, I
could arrange at the end of that time--to take you home with me."

Frida's face in turn waxed rosy red; but she answered only in a
very low voice:  "Thank you, Bertram."

"Would you go with me?" Bertram cried, his face aglow with
pleasure.  "You know, it's a very, very long way off; and I can't
even tell you where it is or how you get there.  But can you trust
me enough to try?  Are you not afraid to come with me?"

Frida's voice trembled slightly.

"I'm not afraid, if that's all," she answered in a very firm tone.
"I love you, and I trust you, and I could follow you to the world's
end--or, if needful, out of it.  But there's one other question.
Bertram, ought I to?"

She asked it, more to see what answer Bertram would make to her
than from any real doubt; for ever since that kiss last night, she
felt sure in her own mind with a woman's certainty whatever Bertram
told her was the thing she ought to do; but she wanted to know in
what light he regarded it.

Bertram gazed at her hard.

"Why, Frida," he said, "it's right, of course, to go.  The thing
that's WRONG is to stop with that man one minute longer than's
absolutely necessary.  You don't love him--you never loved him; or,
if you ever did, you've long since ceased to do so.  Well, then,
it's a dishonour to yourself to spend one more day with him.  How
can you submit to the hateful endearments of a man you don't love
or care for?  How wrong to yourself, how infinitely more wrong to
your still unborn and unbegotten children!  Would you consent to
become the mother of sons and daughters by a man whose whole
character is utterly repugnant to you?  Nature has given us this
divine instinct of love within, to tell us with what persons we
should spontaneously unite: will you fly in her face and unite with
a man whom you feel and know to be wholly unworthy of you?  With us,
such conduct would be considered disgraceful.  We think every man
and woman should be free to do as they will with their own persons;
for that is the very basis and foundation of personal liberty.  But
if any man or woman were openly to confess they yielded their
persons to another for any other reason than because the strongest
sympathy and love compelled them, we should silently despise them.
If you don't love Monteith, it's your duty to him, and still more
your duty to yourself and your unborn children, at once to leave
him; if you DO love me, it's your duty to me, and still more your
duty to yourself and our unborn children, at once to cleave to me.
Don't let any sophisms of taboo-mongers come in to obscure that
plain natural duty.  Do right first; let all else go.  For one of
yourselves, a poet of your own, has said truly:


'Because right is right, to follow right
Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.'"


Frida looked up at him with admiration in her big black eyes.  She
had found the truth, and the truth had made her free.

"O Bertram," she cried with a tremor, "it's good to be like you.  I
felt from the very first how infinitely you differed from the men
about me.  You seemed so much greater and higher and nobler.  How
grateful I ought to be to Robert Monteith for having spoken to me
yesterday and forbidden me to see you! for if he hadn't, you might
never have kissed me last night, and then I might never have seen
things as I see them at present."

There was another long pause; for the best things we each say to
the other are said in the pauses.  Then Frida relapsed once more
into speech:  "But what about the children?" she asked rather
timidly.

Bertram looked puzzled.  "Why, what about the children?" he repeated
in a curious way.  "What difference on earth could that make to the
children?"

"Can I bring them with me, I mean?" Frida asked, a little tremulous
for the reply.  "I couldn't bear to leave them.  Even for you, dear
Bertram, I could never desert them."

Bertram gazed at her dismayed.  "Leave them!" he cried.  "Why, Frida,
of course you could never leave them.  Do you mean to say anybody
would be so utterly unnatural, even in England, as to separate a
mother from her own children?"

"I don't think Robert would let me keep them," Frida faltered, with
tears in her eyes; "and if he didn't, the law, of course, would
take his side against me."

"Of course!" Bertram answered, with grim sarcasm in his face, "of
course!  I might have guessed it.  If there IS an injustice or a
barbarity possible, I might have been sure the law of England would
make haste to perpetrate it.  But you needn't fear, Frida.  Long
before the law of England could be put in motion, I'll have
completed my arrangements for taking you--and them too--with me.
There are advantages sometimes even in the barbaric delay of what
your lawyers are facetiously pleased to call justice."

"Then I may bring them with me?" Frida cried, flushing red.

Bertram nodded assent.  "Yes," he said, with grave gentleness.  "You
may bring them with you.  And as soon as you like, too.  Remember,
dearest, every night you pass under that creature's roof, you
commit the vilest crime a woman can commit against her own purity."






XI





Never in her life had Frida enjoyed anything so much as those
first four happy days at Heymoor.  She had come away with Bertram
exactly as Bertram himself desired her to do, without one thought
of anything on earth except to fulfil the higher law of her own
nature; and she was happy in her intercourse with the one man who
could understand it, the one man who had waked it to its fullest
pitch, and could make it resound sympathetically to his touch in
every chord and every fibre.  They had chosen a lovely spot on a
heather-clad moorland, where she could stroll alone with Bertram
among the gorse and ling, utterly oblivious of Robert Monteith and
the unnatural world she had left for ever behind her.  Her soul
drank in deep draughts of the knowledge of good and evil from
Bertram's lips; she felt it was indeed a privilege to be with him
and listen to him; she wondered how she could ever have endured
that old bad life with the lower man who was never her equal, now
she had once tasted and known what life can be when two well-
matched souls walk it together, abreast, in holy fellowship.

The children, too, were as happy as the day was long.  The heath was
heaven to them.  They loved Bertram well, and were too young to be
aware of anything unusual in the fact of his accompanying them.  At
the little inn on the hill-top where they stopped to lodge, nobody
asked any compromising questions: and Bertram felt so sure he could
soon complete his arrangements for taking Frida and the children
"home," as he still always phrased it, that Frida had no doubts for
their future happiness.  As for Robert Monteith, that bleak, cold
man, she hardly even remembered him: Bertram's first kiss seemed
almost to have driven the very memory of her husband clean out of
her consciousness.  She only regretted, now she had left him, the
false and mistaken sense of duty which had kept her so long tied to
an inferior soul she could never love, and did wrong to marry.

And all the time, what strange new lessons, what beautiful truths,
she learned from Bertram!  As they strolled together, those sweet
August mornings, hand locked in hand, over the breezy upland, what
new insight he gave her into men and things! what fresh impulse he
supplied to her keen moral nature!  The misery and wrong of the
world she lived in came home to her now in deeper and blacker hues
than ever she had conceived it in: and with that consciousness came
also the burning desire of every wakened soul to right and redress
it.  With Bertram by her side, she felt she could not even harbour
an unholy wish or admit a wrong feeling; that vague sense of his
superiority, as of a higher being, which she had felt from the very
first moment she met him at Brackenhurst, had deepened and grown
more definite now by closer intercourse; and she recognised that
what she had fallen in love with from the earliest beginning was
the beauty of holiness shining clear in his countenance.  She had
chosen at last the better part, and she felt in her soul that, come
what might, it could not be taken away from her.

In this earthly paradise of pure love, undefiled, she spent three
full days and part of another.  On the morning of the fourth, she
sent the country girl they had engaged to take care of the
children, out on the moor with the little ones, while she herself
and Bertram went off alone, past the barrow that overlooks the
Devil's Saucepan, and out on the open ridge that stretches with
dark growth of heath and bracken far away into the misty blue
distance of Hampshire.  Bertram had just been speaking to her, as
they sat on the dry sand, of the buried chieftain whose bones still
lay hid under that grass-grown barrow, and of the slaughtered wives
whose bodies slept beside him, massacred in cold blood to accompany
their dead lord to the world of shadows.  He had been contrasting
these hideous slaveries of taboo-ridden England, past or present,
with the rational freedom of his own dear country, whither he hoped
so soon with good luck to take her, when suddenly Frida raised her
eager eyes from the ground, and saw somebody or something coming
across the moor from eastward in their direction.

All at once, a vague foreboding of evil possessed her.  Hardly quite
knowing why, she felt this approaching object augured no good to
their happiness.  "Look, Bertram," she cried, seizing his arm in her
fright, "there's somebody coming."

Bertram raised his eyes and looked.  Then he shaded them with his
hands.  "How strange!" he said simply, in his candid way: "it looks
for all the world just like the man who was once your husband!"

Frida rose in alarm.  "Oh, what can we do?" she cried, wringing her
hands.  "What ever can we do?  It's he!  It's Robert!"

"Surely he can't have come on purpose!" Bertram exclaimed, taken
aback.  "When he sees us, he'll turn aside.  He must know of all
people on earth he's the one least likely at such a time to be
welcome.  He can't want to disturb the peace of another man's
honeymoon!"

But Frida, better used to the savage ways of the world she had
always lived in, made answer, shrinking and crouching, "He's hunted
us down, and he's come to fight you."

"To fight me!" Bertram exclaimed.  "Oh, surely not that!  I was told
by those who ought best to know, you English had got far beyond the
stage of private war and murderous vendetta."

"For everything else," Frida answered, cowering down in her terror
of her husband's vengeance, not for herself indeed so much as for
Bertram.  "For everything else, we have; but NOT for a woman."

There was no time just then, however, for further explanation of
this strange anomaly.  Monteith had singled them out from a great
distance with his keen, clear sight, inherited from generations of
Highland ancestors, and now strode angrily across the moor, with
great wrathful steps, in his rival's direction.  Frida nestled close
to Bertram, to protect her from the man to whom her country's laws
and the customs of her tribe would have handed her over blindfold.
Bertram soothed her with his hand, and awaited in silence, with
some dim sense of awe, the angry barbarian's arrival.

He came up very quickly, and stood full in front of them, glaring
with fierce eyes at the discovered lovers.  For a minute or two his
rage would not allow him to speak, nor even to act; he could but
stand and scowl from under his brows at Bertram.  But after a long
pause his wrath found words.  "You infernal scoundrel!" he burst
forth, "so at last I've caught you!  How dare you sit there and look
me straight in the face?  You infernal thief, how dare you?  how
dare you?"

Bertram rose and confronted him.  His own face, too, flushed
slightly with righteous indignation; but he answered for all that
in the same calm and measured tones as ever:  "I am NOT a scoundrel,
and I will not submit to be called so even by an angry savage.  I
ask you in return, how dare you follow us?  You must have known your
presence would be very unwelcome.  I should have thought this was
just the one moment in your life and the one place on earth where
even YOU would have seen that to stop away was your imperative
duty.  Mere self-respect would dictate such conduct.  This lady has
given you clear proof indeed that your society and converse are
highly distasteful to her."

Robert Monteith glared across at him with the face of a tiger.  "You
infamous creature," he cried, almost speechless with rage, "do you
dare to defend my wife's adultery?"

Bertram gazed at him with a strange look of mingled horror and
astonishment.  "You poor wretch!" he answered, as calmly as before,
but with evident contempt; "how can you dare, such a thing as you,
to apply these vile words to your moral superiors?  Adultery it was
indeed, and untruth to her own higher and purer nature, for this
lady to spend one night of her life under your roof with you; what
she has taken now in exchange is holy marriage, the only real and
sacred marriage, the marriage of true souls, to which even the
wiser of yourselves, the poets of your nation, would not admit
impediment.  If you dare to apply such base language as this to
my lady's actions, you must answer for it to me, her natural
protector, for I will not permit it."

At the words, quick as lightning, Monteith pulled from his pocket a
loaded revolver and pointed it full at his rival.  With a cry of
terror, Frida flung herself between them, and tried to protect her
lover with the shield of her own body.  But Bertram gently unwound
her arms and held her off from him tenderly.  "No, no, darling," he
said slowly, sitting down with wonderful calm upon a big grey
sarsen-stone that abutted upon the pathway; "I had forgotten again;
I keep always forgetting what kind of savages I have to deal with.
If I chose, I could snatch that murderous weapon from his hand, and
shoot him dead with it in self-defence--for I'm stronger than he
is.  But if I did, what use?  I could never take you home with me.
And after all, what could we either of us do in the end in this
bad, wild world of your fellow-countrymen?  They would take me and
hang me; and all would be up with you.  For your sake, Frida, to
shield you from the effects of their cruel taboos, there's but one
course open: I must submit to this madman.  He may shoot me if he
will. . . .  Stand free, and let him!"

But with a passionate oath, Robert Monteith seized her arm and
flung her madly from him.  She fell, reeling, on one side.  His eyes
were bloodshot with the savage thirst for vengeance.  He raised the
deadly weapon.  Bertram Ingledew, still seated on the big round
boulder, opened his breast in silence to receive the bullet.  There
was a moment's pause.  For that moment, even Monteith himself, in
his maniac mood, felt dimly aware of that mysterious restraining
power all the rest who knew him had so often felt in their dealings
with the Alien.  But it was only for a moment.  His coarser nature
was ill adapted to recognise that ineffable air as of a superior
being that others observed in him.  He pulled the trigger and fired.
Frida gave one loud shriek of despairing horror.  Bertram's body
fell back on the bare heath behind it.






XII





Mad as he was with jealousy, that lowest and most bestial of all
the vile passions man still inherits from the ape and tiger, Robert
Monteith was yet quite sane enough to know in his own soul what
deed he had wrought, and in what light even his country's barbaric
laws would regard his action.  So the moment he had wreaked to the
full his fiery vengeance on the man who had never wronged him, he
bent over the body with strangely eager eyes, expecting to see upon
it some evidence of his guilt, some bloody mark of the hateful
crime his own hand had committed.  At the same instant, Frida,
recovering from his blow that had sent her reeling, rushed
frantically forward, flung herself with wild passion on her lover's
corpse, and covered the warm lips with hot, despairing kisses.

One marvellous fact, however, impressed them both with a vague
sense of the unknown and the mysterious from the very first second.
No spot nor trace of blood marred the body anywhere.  And, even as
they looked, a strange perfume, as of violets or of burning
incense, began by degrees to flood the moor around them.  Then
slowly, while they watched, a faint blue flame seemed to issue from
the wound in Bertram's right side and rise lambent into the air
above the murdered body.  Frida drew back and gazed at it, a weird
thrill of mystery and unconscious hope beguiling for one moment her
profound pang of bereavement.  Monteith, too, stood away a pace or
two, in doubt and surprise, the deep consciousness of some strange
and unearthly power overawing for a while even his vulgar and
commonplace Scotch bourgeois nature.  Gradually, as they gazed,
the pale blue flame, rising higher and higher, gathered force and
volume, and the perfume as of violets became distinct on the air,
like the savour of a purer life than this century wots of.  Bit by
bit, the wan blue light, flickering thicker and thicker, shaped
itself into the form and features of a man, even the outward
semblance of Bertram Ingledew.  Shadowy, but transfigured with an
ineffable glory, it hovered for a minute or two above the spot on
the moor where the corpse had lain; for now they were aware that as
the flame-shape formed, the body that lay dead upon the ground
beneath dissolved by degrees and melted into it.  Not a trace was
left on the heath of Robert Monteith's crime: not a dapple of
blood, not a clot of gore: only a pale blue flame and a persistent
image represented the body that was once Bertram Ingledew's.

Again, even as they looked, a still weirder feeling began to creep
over them.  The figure, growing fainter, seemed to fade away
piecemeal in the remote distance.  But it was not in space that it
faded; it appeared rather to become dim in some vaguer and far more
mysterious fashion, like the memories of childhood or the aching
abysses of astronomical calculation.  As it slowly dissolved, Frida
stretched out her hands to it with a wild cry, like the cry of a
mother for her first-born.  "O Bertram," she moaned, "where are you
going?  Do you mean to leave me?  Won't you save me from this man?
Won't you take me home with you?"

Dim and hollow, as from the womb of time unborn, a calm voice came
back to her across the gulf of ages:  "Your husband willed it,
Frida, and the customs of your nation.  You can come to me, but I
can never return to you.  In three days longer your probation would
have been finished.  But I forgot with what manner of savage I had
still to deal.  And now I must go back once more to the place whence
I came--to THE TWENTY-FIFTH CENTURY."

The voice died away in the dim recesses of the future.  The pale
blue flame flickered forward and vanished.  The shadowy shape melted
through an endless vista of to-morrows.  Only the perfume as of
violets or of a higher life still hung heavy upon the air, and a
patch of daintier purple burned bright on the moor, like a pool of
crimson blood, where the body had fallen.  Only that, and a fierce
ache in Frida's tortured heart; only that, and a halo of invisible
glory round the rich red lips, where his lips had touched them.






XIII





Frida seated herself in her misery on the ice-worn boulder where
three minutes earlier Bertram had been sitting.  Her face was buried
in her bloodless hands.  All the world grew blank to her.

Monteith, for his part, sat down a little way off with folded arms
on another sarsen-stone, fronting her.  The strange and unearthly
scene they had just passed through impressed him profoundly.  For
the first few minutes a great horror held him.  But his dogged
Scottish nature still brooded over his wrongs, in spite of the
terrible sight he had so unexpectedly evoked.  In a way, he felt he
had had his revenge; for had he not drawn upon his man, and fired
at him and killed him?  Still, after the fever and torment of the
last few days, it was a relief to find, after all, he was not, as
this world would judge, a murderer.  Man and crime were alike mere
airy phantoms.  He could go back now to the inn and explain with a
glib tongue how Mr. Ingledew had been hurriedly called away to town
on important business.  There was no corpse on the moor, no blabbing
blood to tell the story of his attempted murder: nobody anywhere,
he felt certain in his own stolid soul, would miss the mysterious
Alien who came to them from beyond the distant abyss of centuries.
With true Scotch caution, indeed, even in the midst of his wrath,
Robert Monteith had never said a word to any one at Brackenhurst of
how his wife had left him.  He was too proud a man, if it came to
that, to acknowledge what seemed to him a personal disgrace, till
circumstances should absolutely force such acknowledgment upon him.
He had glossed it over meanwhile with the servants and neighbours
by saying that Mrs. Monteith had gone away with the children for
their accustomed holiday as always in August.  Frida had actually
chosen the day appointed for their seaside journey as the fittest
moment for her departure with Bertram, so his story was received
without doubt or inquiry.  He had bottled up his wrath in his own
silent soul.  There was still room, therefore, to make all right
again at home in the eyes of the world--if but Frida was willing.
So he sat there long, staring hard at his wife in speechless
debate, and discussing with himself whether or not to make
temporary overtures of peace to her.

In this matter, his pride itself fought hard with his pride.  That
is the wont of savages.  Would it not be better, now Bertram
Ingledew had fairly disappeared for ever from their sphere, to
patch up a hollow truce for a time at least with Frida, and let all
things be to the outer eye exactly as they had always been?  The
bewildering and brain-staggering occurrences of the last half-hour,
indeed, had struck deep and far into his hard Scotch nature.  The
knowledge that the man who had stolen his wife from him (as he
phrased it to himself in his curious belated mediaeval phraseology)
was not a real live man of flesh and blood at all, but an
evanescent phantom of the twenty-fifth century, made him all the
more ready to patch up for the time-being a nominal reconciliation.
His nerves--for even HE had nerves--were still trembling to the
core with the mystic events of that wizard morning; but clearer and
clearer still it dawned upon him each moment that if things were
ever to be set right at all they must be set right then and there,
before he returned to the inn, and before Frida once more went back
to their children.  To be sure, it was Frida's place to ask
forgiveness first, and make the first advances.  But Frida made no
move.  So after sitting there long, salving his masculine vanity
with the flattering thought that after all his rival was no mere
man at all, but a spirit, an avatar, a thing of pure imagination,
he raised his head at last and looked inquiringly towards Frida.

"Well?" he said slowly.

Frida raised her head from her hands and gazed across at him
scornfully.

"I was thinking," Monteith began, feeling his way with caution,
but with a magnanimous air, "that perhaps--after all--for the
children's sake, Frida--"

With a terrible look, his wife rose up and fronted him.  Her face
was red as fire; her heart was burning.  She spoke with fierce
energy.  "Robert Monteith," she said firmly, not even deigning to
treat him as one who had once been her husband, "for the children's
sake, or for my own sake, or for any power on earth, do you think,
poor empty soul, after I've spent three days of my life with HIM,
I'd ever spend three hours again with YOU?  If you do, then this is
all: murderer that you are, you mistake my nature."

And turning on her heel, she moved slowly away towards the far edge
of the moor with a queenly gesture.

Monteith followed her up a step or two.  She turned and waved him
back.  He stood glued to the ground, that weird sense of the
supernatural once more overcoming him.  For some seconds he watched
her without speaking a word.  Then at last he broke out.  "What are
you going to do, Frida?" he asked, almost anxiously.

Frida turned and glanced back at him with scornful eyes.  Her mien
was resolute.  The revolver with which he had shot Bertram Ingledew
lay close by her feet, among the bracken on the heath, where
Monteith had flung it.  She picked it up with one hand, and once
more waved him backward.

"I'm going to follow him," she answered solemnly, in a very cold
voice, "where YOU have sent him.  But alone by myself: not here,
before you."  And she brushed him away, as he tried to seize it,
with regal dignity.

Monteith, abashed, turned back without one word, and made his way
to the inn in the little village.  But Frida walked on by herself,
in the opposite direction, across the open moor and through the
purple heath, towards black despair and the trout-ponds at
Broughton.

THE END















Produced by Col Choat colchoat@yahoo.com.au





By Reef and Palm

by Louis Becke





CONTENTS



INTRODUCTION
CHALLIS THE DOUBTER
"'TIS IN THE BLOOD"
THE REVENGE OF MACY O'SHEA
THE RANGERS OF TIA KAU
PALLOU'S TALOI
A BASKET OF BREAD-FRUIT
ENDERBY'S COURTSHIP
LONG CHARLEY'S GOOD LITTLE WIFE
THE METHODICAL MR BURR OF MAJURU
A TRULY GREAT MAN
THE DOCTOR'S WIFE
THE FATE OF THE ALIDA
THE CHILIAN BLUEJACKET
BRANTLEY OF VAHITAHI





INTRODUCTION



When in October, 1870, I sailed into the harbour of Apia, Samoa, in the
ill-fated ALBATROSS, Mr Louis Becke was gaining his first experiences
of island life as a trader on his own account by running a cutter
between Apia and Savai'i.

It was rather a notable moment in Apia, for two reasons. In the first
place, the German traders were shaking in their shoes for fear of what
the French squadron might do to them, and we were the bearers of the
good news from Tahiti that the chivalrous Admiral Clouet, with a very
proper magnanimity, had decided not to molest them; and, secondly, the
beach was still seething with excitement over the departure on the
previous day of the pirate Pease, carrying with him the yet more
illustrious "Bully" Hayes.

It happened in this wise. A month or two before our arrival, Hayes had
dropped anchor in Apia, and some ugly stories of recent irregularities
in the labour trade had come to the ears of Mr Williams, the English
Consul. Mr Williams, with the assistance of the natives, very cleverly
seized his vessel in the night, and ran her ashore, and detained Mr
Hayes pending the arrival of an English man-of-war to which he could be
given in charge. But in those happy days there were no prisons in
Samoa, so that his confinement was not irksome, and his only hard
labour was picnics, of which he was the life and soul. All went
pleasantly until Mr Pease--a degenerate sort of pirate who made his
living by half bullying, half swindling lonely white men on small
islands out of their coconut oil, and unarmed merchantmen out of their
stores--came to Apia in an armed ship with a Malay crew. From that
moment Hayes' life became less idyllic. Hayes and Pease conceived a
most violent hatred of each other, and poor old Mr Williams was really
worried into an attack of elephantiasis (which answers to the gout in
those latitudes) by his continual efforts to prevent the two
desperadoes from flying at each other's throat. Heartily glad was he
when Pease--who was the sort of man that always observed LES
CONVENANCES when possible, and who fired a salute of twenty-one guns on
the Queen's Birthday--came one afternoon to get his papers "all
regular," and clear for sea. But lo! the next morning, when his vessel
had disappeared, it was found that his enemy Captain Hayes had
disappeared also, and the ladies of Samoa were left disconsolate at the
departure of the most agreeable man they had ever known.

However, all this is another story, as Mr Kipling says, and one which I
hope Mr Becke will tell us more fully some day, for he knew Hayes well,
having acted as supercargo on board his ship, and shared a shipwreck
and other adventures with him.

But even before this date Mr Becke had had as much experience as falls
to most men of adventures in the Pacific Ocean.

Born at Port Macquarrie in Australia, where his father was clerk of
petty sessions, he was seized at the age of fourteen with an intense
longing to go to sea. It is possible that he inherited this passion
through his mother, for her father, Charles Beilby, who was private
secretary to the Duke of Cumberland, invested a legacy that fell to him
in a small vessel, and sailed with his family to the then very new
world of Australia. However this may be, it was impossible to keep
Louis Becke at home; and, as an alternative, a uncle undertook to send
him, and a brother two years older, to a mercantile house in
California. His first voyage was a terrible one. There were no
steamers, of course, in those days, and they sailed for San Francisco
in a wretched old barque. For over a month they were drifting about the
stormy sea between Australia and New Zealand, a partially dismasted and
leaking wreck. The crew mutinied--they had bitter cause to--and only
after calling at Rurutu, in the Tubuai Group, and obtaining fresh food,
did they permit the captain to resume command of the half-sunken old
craft. They were ninety days in reaching Honolulu, and another forty in
making the Californian coast.

The two lads did not find the routine of a merchant's office at all to
their taste; and while the elder obtained employment on a sheep ranche
at San Juan, Louis, still faithful to the sea, got a berth as a clerk
in a steamship company, and traded to the Southern ports. In a year's
time he had money enough to take passage in a schooner bound on a
shark-catching cruise to the equatorial islands of the North Pacific.
The life was a very rough one, and full of incident and
adventure--which I hope he will relate some day. Returning to Honolulu,
he fell in with an old captain who had bought a schooner for a trading
venture amongst the Western Carolines. Becke put in $1000, and sailed
with him as supercargo, he and the skipper being the only white men on
board. He soon discovered that, though a good seaman, the old man knew
nothing of navigation. In a few weeks they were among the Marshall
Islands, and the captain went mad from DELIRIUM TREMENS. Becke and the
three native sailors ran the vessel into a little uninhabited atoll,
and for a week had to keep the captain tied up to prevent his killing
himself. They got him right at last, and stood to the westward. On
their voyage they were witnesses of a tragedy (in this instance
fortunately not complete), on which the pitiless sun of the Pacific has
looked down very often. They fell in with a big Marshall Island sailing
canoe that had been blown out of sight of land, and had drifted six
hundred miles to the westward. Out of her complement of fifty people,
thirty were dead. They gave them provisions and water, and left them to
make Strong's Island (Kusaie), which was in sight. Becke and the chief
swore Marshall Island BRUDERSCHAFT with each other. Years afterwards,
when he came to live in the Marshall Group, the chief proved his
friendship in a signal manner.

The cruise proved a profitable one, and from that time Mr Becke
determined to become a trader, and to learn to know the people of the
north-west Pacific; and returning to California, he made for Samoa, and
from thence to Sydney. But at this time the Palmer River gold rush had
just broken out in North Queensland, and a brother, who was a bank
manager on the celebrated Charters Towers goldfields, invited him to
come up, as every one seemed to be making his fortune. He wandered
between the rushes for two years, not making a fortune, but acquiring
much useful experience, learning, amongst other things, the art of a
blacksmith, and becoming a crack shot with a rifle. Returning to
Sydney, he sailed for the Friendly Islands (Tonga) in company with the
king of Tonga's yacht--the TAUFAAHAU. The Friendly Islanders
disappointed him (at which no one that knows them will wonder), and he
went on to Samoa, and set up as a trader on his own account for the
first time. He and a Manhiki half-caste--the "Allan" who so frequently
figures in his stories--bought a cutter, and went trading throughout
the group. This was the time of Colonel Steinberger's brief tenure of
power. The natives were fighting, and the cutter was seized on two
occasions. When the war was over he made a voyage to the north-west,
and became a great favourite with the natives, as indeed seems to have
been the case in most of the places he went to in Polynesia and
Micronesia. Later on he was sent away from Samoa in charge of a vessel
under sealed orders to the Marshall Islands. These orders were to hand
the vessel over to the notorious Captain "Bully" Hayes. (Some day he
promises that he will give us the details of this very curious
adventure). He found Hayes awaiting him in his famous brig LEONORA in
Milli Lagoon. He handed over his charge and took service with him as
supercargo. After some months' cruising in the Carolines they were
wrecked on Strong's Island (Kusaie). Hayes made himself the ruler of
the island, and Mr Becke and he had a bitter quarrel. The natives
treated the latter with great kindness, and gave him land on the lee
side of the island, where he lived happily enough for five months.
Hayes was captured by an English man-of-war, but escaped and went to
Guam. Mr Becke went back in the cruiser to the Colonies, and then again
sailed for Eastern Polynesia, trading in the Gambiers, Paumotus, and
Easter and Pitcairn Islands. In this part of the ocean he picked up an
abandoned French barque on a reef, floated her, and loaded her with
coconuts, intending to sail her to New Zealand with a native crew, but
they went ashore in a hurricane and lost everything. Meeting with Mr
Tom de Wolf, the managing partner of a Liverpool firm, he took service
with him as a trader in the Ellice and Tokelau Groups, finally settling
down as a residential trader. Then he took passage once more for the
Carolines, and was wrecked on Peru, one of the Gilbert Islands (lately
annexed), losing every dollar that he possessed. He returned to Samoa
and engaged as a "recruiter" in the labour trade. He got badly hurt in
an encounter with some natives, and went to New Zealand to recover.
Then he sailed to New Britain on a trading venture, and fell in with,
and had much to do with, the ill-fated colonising expedition of the
Marquis de Ray in New Ireland. A bad attack of malarial fever, and a
wound in the neck (labour recruiting or even trading among the blacks
of Melanesia seems to have been a much less pleasant business than
residence among the gentle brown folk of the Eastern Pacific) made him
leave and return to the Marshall Islands, where Lailik, the chief whom
he had succoured at sea years before, made him welcome. He left on a
fruitless quest after an imaginary guano island, and from then until
two years ago he has been living on various islands in both the North
and South Pacific, leading what he calls "a wandering and lonely but
not unhappy existence," "Lui," as they call him, being a man both liked
and trusted by the natives from lonely Easter Island to the faraway
Pelews. He is still in the prime of life, and whether he will now remain
within the bounds of civilisation, or whether some day he will return to
his wanderings, as Odysseus is fabled to have done in his old age, I fancy
that he hardly knows himself. But when once the charm of a wild roving
life has got into a man's blood, the trammels of civilisation are irksome
and its atmosphere is hard to breathe. It will be seen from this
all-too-condensed sketch of Mr Becke's career that he knows the Pacific
as few men alive or dead have ever known it. He is one of the rare men
who have led a very wild life, and have the culture and talent
necessary to give some account of it. As a rule, the men who know don't
write, and the men who write don't know.

Every one who has a taste for good stories will feel, I believe, the
force of these. Every one who knows the South Seas, and, I believe,
many who do not, will feel that they have the unmistakable stamp of
truth. And truth to nature is a great merit in a story, not only
because of that thrill of pleasure hard to analyse, but largely made up
of associations, memories, and suggestions that faithfulness of
representation in picture or book gives to the natural man; but because
of the fact that nature is almost infinitely rich, and the unassisted
imagination of man but a poor and sterile thing, tending constantly
towards some ossified convention. "Treasure Island" is a much better
story than "The Wreckers," yet I, for one, shall never cease to regret
that Mr Stevenson did not possess, when he wrote "Treasure Island,"
that knowledge of what men and schooners do in wild seas that was his
when he gave us "The Wreckers." The detail would have been so much
richer and more convincing.

It is open to any one to say that these tales are barbarous, and what
Mrs Meynell, in a very clever and amusing essay, has called
"decivilised." Certainly there is a wide gulf separating life on a
Pacific island from the accumulated culture of centuries of
civilisation in the midst of which such as Mrs Meynell move and have
their being. And if there can be nothing good in literature that does
not spring from that culture, these stories must stand condemned. But
such a view is surely too narrow. Much as I admire that lady's
writings, I never can think of a world from which everything was
eliminated that did not commend itself to the dainty taste of herself
and her friends, without a feeling of impatience and suffocation. It
takes a huge variety of men and things to make a good world. And
ranches and CANONS, veldts and prairies, tropical forests and coral
islands, and all that goes to make up the wild life in the face of
Nature or among primitive races, far and free from the artificial
conditions of an elaborate civilisation, form an element in the world,
the loss of which would be bitterly felt by many a man who has never
set foot outside his native land.

There is a certain monotony, perhaps, about these stories. To some
extent this is inevitable. The interest and passions of South Sea
Island life are neither numerous nor complex, and action is apt to be
rapid and direct. A novelist of that modern school that fills its
volumes, often fascinatingly enough, by refining upon the shadowy
refinements of civilised thought and feeling, would find it hard to ply
his trade in South Sea Island society. His models would always be
cutting short in five minutes the hesitations and subtleties that ought
to have lasted them through a quarter of a life-time. But I think it is
possible that the English reader might gather from this little book an
unduly strong impression of the uniformity of Island life. The loves of
white men and brown women, often cynical and brutal, sometimes
exquisitely tender and pathetic, necessarily fill a large space in any
true picture of the South Sea Islands, and Mr Becke, no doubt of set
artistic purpose, has confined himself in the collection of tales now
offered almost entirely to this facet of the life. I do not question
that he is right in deciding to detract nothing from the striking
effect of these powerful stories, taken as a whole, by interspersing
amongst them others of a different character. But I hope it may be
remembered that the present selection is only an instalment, and that,
if it finds favour with the British public, we may expect from him some
of those tales of adventure, and of purely native life and custom,
which no one could tell so well as he. 

PEMBROKE.





CHALLIS THE DOUBTER



The White Lady And The Brown Woman


Four years had come and gone since the day that Challis, with a dull
and savage misery in his heart, had, cursing the love-madness which
once possessed him, walked out from his house in an Australian city
with an undefined and vague purpose of going "somewhere" to drown his
sense of wrong and erase from his memory the face of the woman who, his
wife of not yet a year, had played with her honour and his. So he
thought, anyhow.


* * * * *


You see, Challis was "a fool"--at least so his pretty, violet-eyed wife
had told him that afternoon with a bitter and contemptuous ring in her
voice when he had brought another man's letter--written to her--and
with impulsive and jealous haste had asked her to explain. He was a
fool, she had said, with an angry gleam in the violet eyes, to think
she could not "take care" of herself. Admit receiving that letter? Of
course! Did he think she could help other men writing silly letters to
her? Did he not think she could keep out of a mess? And she smiled the
self-satisfied smile of a woman conscious of many admirers and of her
own powers of intrigue.

Then Challis, with a big effort, gulping down the rage that stirred
him, made his great mistake. He spoke of his love for her. Fatuity! She
laughed at him, said that as she detested women, his love was too
exacting for her, if it meant that she should never be commonly
friendly with any other man.


* * * * *


Challis looked at her steadily for a few moments, trying to smother the
wild flood of black suspicion aroused in him by the discovery of the
letter, and confirmed by her sneering words, and then said quietly, but
with a dangerous inflection in his voice--

"Remember--you are my wife. If you have no regard for your own
reputation, you shall have some for mine. I don't want to entertain my
friends by thrashing R----, but I'm not such a fool as you think. And
if you go further in this direction you'll find me a bit of a brute."

Again the sneering laugh--"Indeed! Something very tragic will occur, I
suppose?"

"No," said Challis grimly, "something damned prosaic--common enough
among men with pretty wives--I'll clear out."

"I wish you would do that now," said his wife, "I hate you quite
enough."

Of course she didn't quite mean it. She really liked Challis in her own
small-souled way--principally because his money had given her the
social pleasures denied her during her girlhood. With an unmoved face
and without farewell he left her and went to his lawyer's.

A quarter of an hour later he arose to go, and the lawyer asked him
when he intended returning.

"That all depends upon her. If she wants me back again, she can write,
through you, and I'll come--if she has conducted herself with a
reasonable amount of propriety for such a pretty woman."

Then, with an ugly look on his face, Challis went out; next day he
embarked in the LADY ALICIA for a six months' cruise among the islands
of the North-west Pacific.


* * * * *


That was four years ago, and to-day Challis, who stands working at a
little table set in against an open window, hammering out a ring from a
silver coin on a marline-spike and vyce, whistles softly and
contentedly to himself as he raises his head and glances through the
vista of coconuts that surround his dwelling on this lonely and almost
forgotten island.

"The devil!" he thinks to himself, "I must be turning into a native.
Four years! What an ass I was! And I've never written yet--that is,
never sent a letter away. Well, neither has she. Perhaps, after all,
there was little in that affair of R----'s. . . . By God! though, if
there was, I've been very good to them in leaving them a clear field.
Anyhow, she's all right as regards money. I'm glad I've done that. It's
a big prop to a man's conscience to feel he hasn't done anything mean;
and she likes money--most women do. Of course I'll go back--if she
writes. If not--well, then, these sinful islands can claim me for their
own; that is, Nalia can."


* * * * *


A native boy with shaven head, save for a long tuft on the left side,
came down from the village, and, seating himself on the gravelled space
inside the fence, gazed at the white man with full, lustrous eyes.

"Hallo, TAMA!" said Challis, "whither goest now?"

"Pardon, Tialli. I came to look at thee making the ring. Is it of soft
silver--and for Nalia, thy wife?"

"Ay, O shaven-head, it is. Here, take this MASI and go pluck me a young
nut to drink," and Challis threw him a ship-biscuit. Then he went on
tapping the little band of silver. He had already forgotten the violet
eyes, and was thinking with almost childish eagerness of the soft glow
in the black orbs of Nalia when she should see his finished handiwork.

The boy returned with a young coconut, unhusked. "Behold, Tialli. This
nut is a UTO GA'AU (sweet husk). When thou hast drunk the juice give it
me back, that I may chew the husk which is sweet as the sugar-cane of
Samoa," and he squatted down again on the gravel.


* * * * *


Challis drank, then threw him the husk and resumed his work. Presently
the boy, tearing off a strip of the husk with his white teeth, said,
"Tialli, how is it that there be no drinking-nuts in thy house?"

"Because, O turtle-head, my wife is away; and there are no men in the
village to-day; and because the women of this MOTU [Island or country.]
I have no thought that the PAPALAGI [Foreigner] may be parched with
thirst, and so come not near me with a coconut." This latter in jest.

"Nay, Tialli. Not so. True it is that to-day all the men are in the bush
binding FALA leaves around the coconut trees, else do the rats steal up
and eat the buds and clusters of little nuts. And because Nalia, thy
wife, is away at the other White Man's house no woman cometh inside the
door."

Challis laughed. "O evil-minded people of Nukunono! And must I, thy
PAPALAGI, be parched with thirst because of this?"

"FAIAGA OE, Tialli, thou but playest with me. Raise thy hand and call
out 'I thirst!' and every woman in the village will run to thee, each
with a drinking-nut, and those that desire thee, but are afraid, will
give two. But to come inside when Nalia is away would be to put shame
on her."


* * * * *


The white man mused. The boy's solemn chatter entertained him. He knew
well the native customs; but, to torment the boy, he commenced again.

"O foolish custom! See how I trust my wife Nalia. Is she not even now
in the house of another white man?"

"True. But, then, he is old and feeble, and thou young and strong. None
but a fool desires to eat a dried flying-fish when a fresh one may be
had."

"O wise man with the shaven crown," said Challis, with mocking good
nature, "thou art full of wisdom of the ways of women. And if I were
old and withered, would Nalia then be false to me in a house of another
and younger white man?"

"How could she? Would not he, too, have a wife who would watch her? And
if he had not, and were NOFO NOA (single), would he be such a fool to
steal that the like of which he can buy--for there are many girls
without husbands as good to look on as that Nalia of thine. And all
women are alike," and then, hearing a woman's voice calling his name,
he stood up.

"Farewell, O ULU TULA POTO (Wise Baldhead)," said Challis, as the boy,
still chewing his sweet husk, walked back to the native houses clustered
under the grove of PUA trees.


* * * * *


Ere dusk, Nalia came home, a slenderly-built girl with big dreamy eyes,
and a heavy mantle of wavy hair. A white muslin gown, fastened at the
throat with a small silver brooch, was her only garment, save the folds
of the navy-blue-and-white LAVA LAVA round her waist, which the
European-fashioned garment covered.

Challis was lying down when she came in. Two girls who came with her
carried baskets of cooked food, presents from old Jack Kelly, Challis's
fellow-trader. At a sign from Nalia the girls took one of the baskets
of food and went away. Then, taking off her wide-brimmed hat of FALA
leaf, she sat down beside Challis and pinched his cheek.

"O lazy one! To let me walk from the house of Tiaki all alone!"

"Alone! There were two others with thee."

"Tapa Could I talk to THEM! I, a white man's wife, must not be too
familiar with every girl, else they would seek to get presents from me
with sweet words. Besides, could I carry home the fish and cooked fowl
sent thee by old Tiaki? That would be unbecoming to me, even as it
would be if thou climbed a tree for a coconut,"--and the daughter of
the Tropics laughed merrily as she patted Challis on his sunburnt
cheek.

Challis rose, and going to a little table, took from it the ring.

"See, Nalia, I am not lazy as thou sayest. This is thine."

The girl with an eager "AUE!" took the bauble and placed it on her
finger. She made a pretty picture, standing there in the last glow of
the sun as it sank into the ocean, her languorous eyes filled with a
tender light.

Challis, sitting on the end of the table regarding her with half-amused
interest as does a man watching a child with a toy, suddenly flushed
hotly. "By God! I can't be such a fool as to begin to LOVE her in
reality, but yet . . . Come here, Nalia," and he drew her to him, and,
turning her face up so that he might look into her eyes, he asked:

"Nalia, hast thou ever told me any lies?"

The steady depths of those dark eyes looked back into his, and she
answered:

"Nay, I fear thee too much to lie. Thou mightst kill me."

"I do but ask thee some little things. It matters not to me what the
answer is. Yet see that thou keepest nothing hidden from me."

The girl, with parted lips and one hand on his, waited.

"Before thou became my wife, Nalia, hadst thou any lovers?"

"Yes, two--Kapua and Tafu-le-Afi."

"And since?"

"May I choke and perish here before thee if I lie! None."

Challis, still holding her soft brown chin in his hand, asked her one
more question--a question that only one of his temperament would have
dared to ask a girl of the Tokelaus.

"Nalia, dost thou love me?"

"Aye, ALOFA TUMAU (everlasting love). Am I a fool? Are there not Letia,
and Miriami, and Eline, the daughter of old Tiaki, ready to come to
this house if I love any but thee? Therefore my love is like the
suckers of the FA'E (octopus) in its strength. My mother has taught me
much wisdom."

A curious feeling of satisfaction possessed the man, and next day
Letia, the "show" girl of the village, visiting Challis's store to buy
a tin of salmon, saw Nalia, the Lucky One, seated on a mat beneath the
seaward side of the trader's house, surrounded by a billowy pile of
yellow silk, diligently sewing.

"Ho, dear friend of my heart! Is that silken dress for thee? For the
love of God, let me but touch it. Four dollars a fathom it be priced
at. Thy husband is indeed the king of generosity. Art thou to become a
mother?"

"Away, silly fool, and do thy buying and pester me not."


* * * * *


Challis, coming to the corner of the house, leant against a post, and
something white showed in his hand. It was a letter. His letter to the
woman of violet eyes, written a week ago, in the half-formed idea of
sending it some day. He read it through, and then paused and looked at
Nalia. She raised her head and smiled. Slowly, piece by piece, he tore
it into tiny little squares, and, with a dreamy hand-wave, threw them
away. The wind held them in mid-air for a moment, and then carried the
little white flecks to the beach.

"What is it?" said the bubbling voice of Letia, the Disappointed.

"Only a piece of paper that weighed as a piece of iron on my bosom. But
it is gone now."

"Even so," said Letia, smelling the gaudy label on the tin of salmon in
the anticipative ecstasy of a true Polynesian, "PE SE MEA
FA'AGOTOIMOANA (like a thing buried deep in ocean). May God send me a
white man as generous as thee--a whole tin of SAMANI for nothing! Now
do I know that Nalia will bear thee a son."


* * * * *


And that is why Challis the Doubter has never turned up again.





"'TIS IN THE BLOOD"



We were in Manton's Hotel at Levuka-Levuka in her palmy days. There
were Robertson, of the barque ROLUMAH; a fat German planter from the
Yasawa Group; Harry the Canadian, a trader from the Tokelaus, and
myself.

Presently a knock came to the door, and Allan, the boatswain of our
brig, stood hat in hand before us. He was a stalwart half-caste of
Manhiki, and, perhaps, the greatest MANAIA (Lothario) from Ponape to
Fiji.

"Captain say to come aboard, please. He at the Consul's for papers--he
meet you at boat," and Allan left.

"By shingo, dot's a big fellow," said Planter Oppermann.

"Ay," said Robertson, the trading skipper, "and a good man with his
mauleys, too. He's the champion knocker-out in Samoa, and is a match
for any Englishman in Polynesia, let alone foreigners"--with a sour
glance at the German.

"Well, good-bye all," I said. "I'm sorry, Oppermann, I can't stay for
another day for your wedding, but our skipper isn't to be got at
anyhow."

The trading captain and Harry walked with me part of the way, and then
began the usual Fiji GUP.

"Just fancy that fat-headed Dutchman going all the way to Samoa and
picking on a young girl and sending her to the Sisters to get educated
properly! As if any old beach-girl isn't good enough for a blessed
Dutchman. Have you seen her?"

"No," I said; "Oppermann showed me her photo. Pretty girl. Says she's
been three years with the Sisters in Samoa, and has got all the virtues
of her white father, and none of the vices of her Samoan mammy. Told me
he's spent over two thousand dollars on her already."

Robertson smiled grimly. "Ay, I don't doubt it. He's been all round
Levuka cracking her up. I brought her here last week, and the
Dutchman's been in a chronic state of silly ever since. She's an
almighty fine girl. She's staying with the Sisters here till the
marriage. By the Lord, here she is now coming along the street! Bet a
dollar she's been round Vagadace way, where there are some fast Samoan
women living. 'Tis in the blood, I tell you."

The future possessor of the Oppermann body and estate WAS a pretty
girl. Only those who have seen fair young Polynesian
half-castes--before they get married, and grow coarse, and drink beer,
and smoke like a factory chimney--know how pretty.

Our boat was at the wharf, and just as we stood talking Allan sauntered
up and asked me for a dollar to get a bottle of gin. Just then the
German's FIANCEE reached us. Robertson introduced Harry and myself to
her, and then said good-bye. She stood there in the broiling Fijian sun
with a dainty sunshade over her face, looking so lovely and cool in her
spotless muslin dress, and withal so innocent, that I no longer
wondered at the Dutchman's "chronic state of silly."

Allan the Stalwart stood by waiting for his dollar. The girl laughed
joyously when Harry the Canadian said he would be at the wedding and
have a high time, and held out her soft little hand as he bade her
adieu and strolled off for another drink.

The moment Harry had gone Allan was a new man. Pulling off his straw
hat, he saluted her in Samoan, and then opened fire.

"There are many TEINE LALELEI (beautiful girls) in the world, but there
is none so beautiful as thou. Only truth do I speak, for I have been to
all countries of the world. Ask him who is here--our supercargo--if I
lie. O maid with the teeth of pearl and face like FETUAO (the morning
star), my stomach is drying up with the fire of love."

The sunshade came a little lower, and the fingers played nervously with
the ivory handle. I leant against a coconut tree and listened.

"Thy name is Vaega. See that! How do I know? Aha, how do I? Because,
for two years or more, whenever I passed by the stone wall of the
Sisters' dwelling in Matafele, I climbed up and watched thee, O Star of
the Morning, and I heard the other girls call thee Vaega. Oho! and some
night I meant to steal thee away."

(The rascal! He told me two days afterwards that the only time he ever
climbed the Mission wall was to steal mangoes.)

The sunshade was tilted back, and displayed two big, black eyes,
luminous with admiring wonder.

"And so thou hast left Samoa to come here to be devoured by this fat
hog of a Dutchman! Dost thou not know, O foolish, lovely one, that she
who mates with a SIAMANI (German) grows old in quite a little time, and
thy face, which is now smooth and fair, will be coarse as the rind of a
half-ripe bread-fruit, because of the foul food these swine of Germans
eat?"

"Allan," I called, "here's the captain!"

There was a quick clasp of hands as the Stalwart One and the Maid
hurriedly spoke again, this time in a whisper, and then the white
muslin floated away out of sight.

The captain was what he called "no' so dry"--viz. half-seas over, and
very jolly. He told Allan he could have an hour to himself to buy what
he wanted, and then told me that the captain of a steam collier had
promised to give us a tug out at daylight. "I'm right for the
wedding-feast after all," I thought.


* * * * *


But the wedding never came off. That night Oppermann, in a frantic
state, was tearing round Levuka hunting for his love, who had
disappeared. At daylight, as the collier steamed ahead and tautened our
tow-line, we could see the parties of searchers with torches scouring
the beach. Our native sailors said they had heard a scream about ten at
night and seen the sharks splashing, and the white liars of Levuka
shook their heads and looked solemn as they told tales of monster
sharks with eight-foot jaws always cruising close in to the shore at
night.


* * * * *


Three days afterwards Allan came to me with stolid face and asked for a
bottle of wine, as Vaega was very sea-sick. I gave him the wine, and
threatened to tell the captain. He laughed, and said he would fight any
man, captain or no captain, who meddled with him. And, as a matter of
fact, he felt safe--the skipper valued him too much to bully him over
the mere stealing of a woman. So the limp and sea-sick Vaega was
carried up out of the sweating foc'sle and given a cabin berth, and
Allan planked down two twenty-dollar pieces for her passage to the
Union Group. When she got better she sang rowdy songs, and laughed all
day, and made fun of the holy Sisters. And one day Allan beat her with
a deal board because she sat down on a band-box in the trade-room and
ruined a hat belonging to a swell official's wife in Apia. And she
liked him all the better for it.


* * * * *


The fair Vaega was Mrs Allan for just six months, when his erratic
fancy was captivated by the daughter of Mauga, the chief of Tutuila,
and an elopement resulted to the mountains. The subsequent and
inevitable parting made Samoa an undesirable place of residence for
Allan, who shipped as boatsteerer in the NIGER of New Bedford. As for
Vaega, she drifted back to Apia, and there, right under the shadow of
the Mission Church, she flaunted her beauty. The last time I saw her
was in Charley the Russian's saloon, when she showed me a letter. It
was from the bereaved Oppermann, asking her to come back and marry him.

"Are you going?" I said.

"E PULE LE ATUA (if God so wills), but he only sent me twenty dollars,
and that isn't half enough. However, there's an American man-of-war
coming next week, and these other girls will see then. I'll make the
PAPALAGI [foriegn] officers shell out. TO FA, ALII [Good-bye]."




THE REVENGE OF MACY O'SHEA



A Story Of The Marquesas


I.


Tikena the Clubfooted guided me to an open spot in the jungle-growth,
and, sitting down on the butt of a twisted TOA, indicated by a sweep of
his tattooed arm the lower course of what had once been the White Man's
dwelling.

"Like unto himself was this, his house," he said, puffing a dirty clay
pipe, "square-built and strong. And the walls were of great blocks made
of PANISINA--of coral and lime and sand mixed together; and around each
centre-post--posts that to lift one took the strength of fifty men--was
wound two thousand fathoms of thin plaited cinnet, stained red and
black. APA! he was a great man here in these MOTU (islands), although
he fled from prison in your land; and when he stepped on the beach the
marks of the iron bands that had once been round his ankles were yet
red to the sight. There be none such as he in these days. But he is now
in Hell."

This was the long-deferred funeral oration of Macy O'Shea, sometime
member of the chain-gang of Port Arthur, in Van Dieman's Land, and
subsequently runaway convict, beachcomber, cutter-off of whaleships,
and Gentleman of Leisure in Eastern Polynesia. And of his many known
crimes the deed done in this isolated spot was the darkest of all.
Judge of it yourself.


* * * * *


The arrowy shafts of sunrise had scarce pierced the deep gloom of the
silent forest ere the village woke to life. Right beside the
thatch-covered dwelling of Macy O'Shea, now a man of might, there
towers a stately TAMANU tree; and, as the first faint murmur of women's
voices arises from the native huts, there is a responsive twittering
and cooing in the thickly-leaved branches, and further back in the
forest the heavy, booming note of the red-crested pigeon sounds forth
like the beat of a muffled drum.


* * * * *


With slow, languid step, Sera, the wife of Macy O'Shea, comes to the
open door and looks out upon the placid lagoon, now just rippling
beneath the first breath of the trade-wind, and longs for courage to go
out there--there to the point of the reef--and spring over among the
sharks. The girl--she is hardly yet a woman--shudders a moment and
passes her white hand before her eyes, and then, with a sudden gust of
passion, the hand clenches. "I would kill him--kill him, if there was
but a ship here in which I could get away! I would sell myself over and
over again to the worst whaler's crew that ever sailed the Pacific if
it would bring me freedom from this cruel, cold-blooded devil!"


* * * * *


A heavy tread on the matted floor of the inner room and her face pales
to the hue of death. But Macy O'Shea is somewhat shy of his two years'
wife this morning, and she hears the heavy steps recede as he walks
over to his oil-shed. A flock of GOGO cast their shadow over the lagoon
as they fly westward, and the woman's eyes follow them--"Kill him, yes.
I am afraid to die, but not to kill. And I am a stranger here, and if I
ran a knife into his fat throat, these natives would make me work in
the taro-fields, unless one wanted me for himself." Then the heavy step
returns, and she slowly faces round to the blood-shot eyes and
drink-distorted face of the man she hates, and raises one hand to her
lips to hide a blue and swollen bruise.

The man throws his short, square-set figure on a rough native sofa,
and, passing one brawny hand meditatively over his stubbly chin, says,
in a voice like the snarl of a hungry wolf: "Here, I say, Sera, slew
round; I want to talk to you, my beauty."

The pale, set face flushed and paled again. "What is it, Macy O'Shea?"

"Ho, ho, 'Macy O'Shea,' is it? Well, just this. Don't be a fool. I was
a bit put about last night, else I wouldn't have been so quick with my
fist. Cut your lip, I see. Well, you must forget it; any way, it's the
first time I ever touched you. But you ought to know by now that I am
not a man to be trifled with; no man, let alone a woman, is going to
set a course for Macy O'Shea to steer by. And, to come to the point at
once, I want you to understand that Carl Ristow's daughter is coming
here. I want her, and that's all about it."


* * * * *


The woman laughed scornfully. "Yes, I know. That was why"--she pointed
to her lips. "Have you no shame? I know you have no pity. But listen. I
swear to you by the Mother of Christ that I will kill her--kill you, if
you do this."

O'Shea's cruel mouth twitched and his jaws set, then he uttered a
hoarse laugh. "By God! Has it taken you two years to get jealous?"

A deadly hate gleamed in the dark, passionate eyes. "Jealous, Mother of
God! jealous of a drunken, licentious wretch such as you! I hate
you--hate you! If I had courage enough I would poison myself to be free
from you."

O'Shea's eyes emitted a dull sparkle. "I wish you would, damn you! Yet
you are game enough, you say, to kill me--and Malia?"

"Yes. But not for love of you, but because of the white blood in me. I
can't--I won't be degraded by you bringing another woman here."

"'Por Dios,' as your dad used to say before the devil took his soul,
we'll see about that, my beauty. I suppose because your father was a
d----d garlic-eating, ear-ringed Dago, and your mother a
come-by-chance Tahiti half-caste, you think he was as good as me."

"As good as you, O bloody-handed dog of an English convict. He was a
man, and the only wrong he ever did was to let me become wife to a
devil like you."

The cruel eyes were close to hers now, and the rough, brawny hands
gripped her wrists. "You spiteful Portuguese quarter-bred ----! Call me
a convict again, and I'll twist your neck like a fowl's. You she-devil!
I'd have made things easy for you--but I won't now. Do you hear?" and
the grip tightened. "Ristow's girl will be here to-morrow, and if you
don't knuckle down to her it'll be a case of 'Vamos' for you--you can
go and get a husband among the natives," and he flung her aside and
went to the god that ran him closest for his soul, next to women--his
rum-bottle.


* * * * *


O'Shea kept his word, for two days later Malia, the half-caste daughter
of Ristow, the trader at Ahunui, stepped from out her father's
whaleboat in front of O'Shea's house. The transaction was a perfectly
legitimate one, and Malia did not allow any inconvenient feeling of
modesty to interfere with such a lucrative arrangement as this, whereby
her father became possessed of a tun of oil and a bag of Chilian
dollars, and she of much finery. In those days missionaries had not
made much head-way, and gentlemen like Messrs Ristow and O'Shea took
all the wind out of the Gospel drum.

And so Malia, dressed as a native girl, with painted cheeks and bare
bosom, walked demurely up from the boat to the purchaser of her
sixteen-years'-old beauty, who, with arms folded across his broad
chest, stood in the middle of the path that led from the beach to his
door. And within, with set teeth and a knife in the bosom of her blouse
bodice, Sera panted with the lust of Hate and Revenge.


* * * * *


The bulky form of O'Shea darkened the door-way. "Sera," he called in
English, with a mocking, insulting inflection in his voice, "come here
and welcome my new wife!"

Sera came, walking slowly, with a smile on her lips, and, holding out
her left hand to Malia, said in the native language, "Welcome!"

"Why," said O'Shea, with mocking jocularity, "that's a left-handed
welcome, Sera."

"Aye," said the girl with the White Man's blood, "my right hand is for
this"--and the knife sank home into Malia's yellow bosom. "A cold bosom
for you to-night, Macy O'Shea," she laughed, as the value of a tun of
oil and a bag of Chilian dollars gasped out its life upon the matted
floor.



II


The native drum was beating. As the blood-quickening boom reverberated
through the village, the natives came out from their huts and gathered
around the House of the Old Men, where, with bound hands and feet,
Sera, the White Man's wife, sat, with her back to one of the
centre-posts. And opposite her, sitting like a native on a mat of
KAPAU, was the burly figure of O'Shea, with the demon of disappointed
passion eating away his reason, and a mist of blood swimming before his
eyes.

The people all detested her, especially the soft-voiced, slender-framed
women. In that one thing savages resemble Christians--the deadly hatred
with which some women hate those of their sex whom they know to be
better and more pure than themselves. So the matter was decided
quickly. Mesi--so they called O'Shea--should have justice. If he
thought death, let it be death for this woman who had let out the blood
of his new wife. Only one man, Loloku the Boar Hunter, raised his voice
for her, because Sera had cured him of a bad wound when his leg had
been torn open by the tusk of a wild boar. But the dull glare from the
eyes of O'Shea fell on him, and he said no more. Then at a sign from
the old men the people rose from the mats, and two unbound the cords of
AFA from the girl, and led her out into the square, and looked at
O'Shea.

"Take her to the boat," he said.


* * * * *


Ristow's boat had been hauled up, turned over, and covered with the
rough mats called KAPAU to keep off the heat of the sun. With
staggering feet, but undaunted heart, the girl Sera was led down. Only
once she turned her head and looked back. Perhaps Loloku would try
again. Then, as they came to the boat, a young girl, at a sign from
O'Shea, took off the loose blouse, and they placed her, face downwards,
across the bilge of the boat, and two pair of small, eager, brown hands
each seized one of hers and dragged the white, rounded arms well over
the keel of the boat. O'Shea walked round to that side, drawing through
his hands the long, heavy, and serrated tail of the FAI--the gigantic
stinging-ray of Oceana. He would have liked to wield it himself, but
then he would have missed part of his revenge--he could not have seen
her face. So he gave it to a native, and watched, with the smile of a
fiend, the white back turn black and then into bloody red as it was cut
to pieces with the tail of the FAI.


* * * * *


The sight of the inanimate thing that had given no sign of its agony
beyond the shudderings and twitchings of torn and mutilated flesh was,
perhaps, disappointing to the tiger who stood and watched the dark
stream that flowed down on both sides of the boat. Loloku touched his
arm--"Mesi, stay thy hand. She is dead else."

"Ah," said O'Shea, "that would be a pity; for with one hand shall she
live to plant taro."

And, hatchet in hand, he walked in between the two brown women who held
her hands. They moved aside and let go. Then O'Shea swung his arm; the
blade of the hatchet struck into the planking, and the right hand of
Sera fell on the sand.

A man put his arms around her, and lifted her off the boat. He placed
his hand on the blood-stained bosom and looked at Macy O'Shea.

"E MATE! [Dead!]" he said.




THE RANGERS OF THE TIA KAU



Between Nanomea and Nanomaga--two of the Ellice Group--but within a few
miles of the latter, is an extensive submerged shoal, on the charts
called the Grand Cocal Reef, but by the people of the two islands known
as Tia Kau (The Reef). On the shallowest part there are from four to
ten fathoms of water, and here in heavy weather the sea breaks. The
British cruiser BASILISK, about 1870, sought for the reef, but reported
it as non-existent. Yet the Tia Kati is well known to many a Yankee
whaler and trading schooner, and is a favourite fishing-ground of the
people of Nanomaga--when the sharks give them a chance.


* * * * *


One night Atupa, Chief of Nanomaga, caused a huge fire to be lit on the
beach as a signal to the people of Nanomea that a MALAGA, or party of
voyagers, was coming over. Both islands are low--not more than fifteen
feet above sea-level--and are distant from one another about
thirty-eight miles. The following night the reflection of the answering
fire on Nanomea was seen, and Atupa prepared to se