eroration, there would be time for a bathe in Cove
Reservoir. Those of the corps who had been to camp in previous years
felt quite limp with the joy of the thought. Why couldn't he get
through with it, and give a fellow a chance of getting cool again?

The gist of the oration was apparently that the Eckleton cadets were
to consider themselves not only as soldiers--and as such subject to
military discipline, and the rules for the conduct of troops quartered
in the Aldershot district--but also as members of a public school. In
short, that if they misbehaved themselves they would get cells, and a
hundred lines in the same breath, as it were.

The corps knew all this ages ago. The man seemed to think he was
telling them something fresh. They began positively to dislike him
after a while.

He finished at last. Eckleton marched off wearily, but in style, to
its lines.

"Dis-miss!"

They did.

"And about time, too," said Jimmy Silver. "I wish they would tie that
man up, or something. He's one of the worst bores I know. He may be
full of bright conversation in private life, but in public he will
talk about his beastly military regulations. You can't stop him. It's
a perfect mania with him. Now, I believe--that's to say, I have a sort
of dim idea--that there's a place round about here called a canteen. I
seem to remember such a thing vaguely. We might go and look for it."

Kennedy made no objection.

This was his first appearance at camp. Jimmy Silver, on the other
hand, was a veteran. He had been there twice before, and meant to go
again. He had a peculiar and extensive knowledge of the ins and outs
of the place. Kennedy was quite willing to take him as his guide. He
was full of information. Kennedy was surprised to see what a number of
men from the other schools he seemed to know. In the canteen there
were, amongst others, a Carthusian, two Tonbridge men, and a
Haileyburian. They all greeted Silver with the warmth of old friends.

"You get to know a lot of fellows in camp," explained Jimmy, as they
strolled back to the Eckleton lines. "That's the best of the place.
Camp's the best place on earth, if only you have decent weather. See
that chap over there? He came here last year. He'd never been before,
and one of the things he didn't know was that Cove Reservoir's only
about three feet deep round the sides. He took a running dive, and
almost buried himself in the mud. It's about two feet deep. He told me
afterwards he swallowed pounds of it. Rather bad luck. Somebody ought
to have told him. You can't do much diving here."

"Glad you mentioned it," said Kennedy. "I should have dived myself if
you hadn't."

Many other curious and diverting facts did the expert drag from the
bonded warehouse of his knowledge. Nothing changes at camp. Once get
to know the ropes, and you know them for all time.

"The one thing I bar," he said, "is having to get up at half-past
five. And one day in the week, when there's a divisional field-day,
it's half-past four. It's hardly worth while going to sleep at all.
Still, it isn't so bad as it used to be. The first year I came to camp
we used to have to do a three hours' field-day before brekker. We used
to have coffee before it, and nothing else till it was over. By Jove,
you felt you'd had enough of it before you got back. This is Laffan's
Plain. The worst of Laffan's Plain is that you get to know it too
well. You get jolly sick of always starting on field-days from the
same place, and marching across the same bit of ground. Still, I
suppose they can't alter the scenery for our benefit. See that man
there? He won the sabres at Aldershot last year. That chap with him is
in the Clifton footer team."

When a school corps goes to camp, it lives in a number of tents, and,
as a rule, each house collects in a tent of its own. Blackburn's had a
tent, and further down the line Kay's had assembled. The Kay
contingent were under Wayburn, a good sort, as far as he himself was
concerned, but too weak to handle a mob like Kay's. Wayburn was not
coming back after the holidays, a fact which perhaps still further
weakened his hold on the Kayites. They had nothing to fear from him
next term.

Kay's was represented at camp by a dozen or so of its members, of whom
young Billy Silver alone had any pretensions to the esteem of his
fellow man. Kay's was the rowdiest house in the school, and the cream
of its rowdy members had come to camp. There was Walton, for one, a
perfect specimen of the public school man at his worst. There was
Mortimer, another of Kay's gems. Perry, again, and Callingham, and the
rest. A pleasant gang, fit for anything, if it could be done in
safety.

Kennedy observed them, and--the spectacle starting a train of
thought--asked Jimmy Silver, as they went into their tent just before
lights-out, if there was much ragging in camp.

"Not very much," said the expert. "Chaps are generally too done up at
the end of the day to want to do anything except sleep. Still, I've
known cases. You sometimes get one tent mobbing another. They loose
the ropes, you know. Low trick, I think. It isn't often done, and it
gets dropped on like bricks when it's found out. But why? Do you feel
as if you wanted to do it?"

"It only occurred to me that we've got a lively gang from Kay's here.
I was wondering if they'd get any chances of ragging, or if they'd
have to lie low."

"I'd forgotten Kay's for the moment. Now you mention it, they are
rather a crew. But I shouldn't think they'd find it worth while to rot
about here. It isn't as if they were on their native heath. People
have a prejudice against having their tent-ropes loosed, and they'd
get beans if they did anything in that line. I remember once there was
a tent which made itself objectionable, and it got raided in the night
by a sort of vigilance committee from the other schools, and the chaps
in it got the dickens of a time. None of them ever came to camp again.
I hope Kay's'll try and behave decently. It'll be an effort for them;
but I hope they'll make it. It would be an awful nuisance if young
Billy made an ass of himself in any way. He loves making an ass of
himself. It's a sort of hobby of his."

As if to support the statement, a sudden volley of subdued shouts came
from the other end of the Eckleton lines.

"Go it, Wren!"

"Stick to it, Silver!"

"Wren!"

"Silver!"

"S-s-h!"

Silence, followed almost immediately by a gruff voice inquiring with
simple directness what the dickens all this noise was about.

"Hullo!" said Kennedy. "Did you hear that? I wonder what's been up?
Your brother was in it, whatever it was."

"Of course," said Jimmy Silver, "he would be. We can't find out about
it now, though. I'll ask him tomorrow, if I remember. I shan't
remember, of course. Good night."

"Good night."

Half an hour later, Kennedy, who had been ruminating over the incident
in his usual painstaking way, reopened the debate.

"Who's Wren?" he asked.

"Wha'?" murmured Silver, sleepily.

"Who's Wren?" repeated Kennedy.

"I d'know.... Oh.... Li'l' beast.... Kay's.... Red hair.... G'-ni'."

And sleep reigned in Blackburn's tent.




VI

THE RAID ON THE GUARD-TENT


Wren and Billy Silver had fallen out over a question of space. It was
Silver's opinion that Wren's nest ought to have been built a foot or
two further to the left. He stated baldly that he had not room to
breathe, and requested the red-headed one to ease off a point or so in
the direction of his next-door neighbour. Wren had refused, and, after
a few moments' chatty conversation, smote William earnestly in the
wind. Trouble had begun upon the instant. It had ceased almost as
rapidly owing to interruptions from without, but the truce had been
merely temporary. They continued the argument outside the tent at
five-thirty the next morning, after the _reveille_ had sounded,
amidst shouts of approval from various shivering mortals who were
tubbing preparatory to embarking on the labours of the day.

A brisk first round had just come to a conclusion when Walton lounged
out of the tent, yawning.

Walton proceeded to separate the combatants. After which he rebuked
Billy Silver with a swagger-stick. Wren's share in the business he
overlooked. He was by way of being a patron of Wren's, and he disliked
Billy Silver, partly for his own sake and partly because he hated his
brother, with whom he had come into contact once or twice during his
career at Eckleton, always with unsatisfactory results.

So Walton dropped on to Billy Silver, and Wren continued his toilet
rejoicing.

Camp was beginning the strenuous life now. Tent after tent emptied
itself of its occupants, who stretched themselves vigorously, and
proceeded towards the tubbing-ground, where there were tin baths for
those who cared to wait until the same were vacant, and a good, honest
pump for those who did not. Then there was that unpopular job, the
piling of one's bedding outside the tent, and the rolling up of the
tent curtains. But these unpleasant duties came to an end at last, and
signs of breakfast began to appear.

Breakfast gave Kennedy his first insight into life in camp. He
happened to be tent-orderly that day, and it therefore fell to his lot
to join the orderlies from the other tents in their search for the
Eckleton rations. He returned with a cargo of bread (obtained from the
quartermaster), and, later, with a great tin of meat, which the
cook-house had supplied, and felt that this was life. Hitherto
breakfast had been to him a thing of white cloths, tables, and food
that appeared from nowhere. This was the first time he had ever
tracked his food to its source, so to speak, and brought it back with
him. After breakfast, when he was informed that, as tent-orderly for
the day, it was his business to wash up, he began to feel as if he
were on a desert island. He had never quite realised before what
washing-up implied, and he was conscious of a feeling of respect for
the servants at Blackburn's, who did it every day as a matter of
course, without complaint. He had had no idea before this of the
intense stickiness of a jammy plate.

One day at camp is much like another. The schools opened the day with
parade drill at about eight o'clock, and, after an instruction series
of "changing direction half-left in column of double companies", and
other pleasant movements of a similar nature, adjourned for lunch.
Lunch was much like breakfast, except that the supply of jam was cut
off. The people who arrange these things--probably the War Office, or
Mr Brodrick, or someone--have come to the conclusion that two pots of
jam per tent are sufficient for breakfast and lunch. The unwary devour
theirs recklessly at the earlier meal, and have to go jamless until
tea at six o'clock, when another pot is served out.

The afternoon at camp is perfect or otherwise, according to whether
there is a four o'clock field-day or not. If there is, there are more
manoeuvrings until tea-time, and the time is spent profitably, but not
so pleasantly as it might be. If there is no field-day, you can take
your time about your bathe in Cove Reservoir. And a really
satisfactory bathe on a hot day should last at least three hours.
Kennedy and Jimmy Silver strolled off in the direction of the
Reservoir as soon as they felt that they had got over the effects of
the beef, potatoes, and ginger-beer which a generous commissariat had
doled out to them for lunch. It was a glorious day, and bathing was
the only thing to do for the next hour or so. Stump-cricket, that
fascinating sport much indulged in in camp, would not be at its best
until the sun had cooled off a little.

After a pleasant half hour in the mud and water of the Reservoir, they
lay on the bank and watched the rest of the schools take their
afternoon dip. Kennedy had laid in a supply of provisions from the
stall which stood at the camp end of the water. Neither of them felt
inclined to move.

"This _is_ decent," said Kennedy, wriggling into a more
comfortable position in the long grass. "Hullo!"

"What's up?" inquired Jimmy Silver, lazily.

He was almost asleep.

"Look at those idiots. They're certain to get spotted."

Jimmy Silver tilted his hat off his face, and sat up.

"What's the matter? Which idiot?"

Kennedy pointed to a bush on their right. Walton and Perry were seated
beside it. Both were smoking.

"Oh, that's all right," said Silver. "Masters never come to Cove
Reservoir. It's a sort of unwritten law. They're rotters to smoke, all
the same. Certain to get spotted some day.... Not worth it.... Spoils
lungs.... Beastly bad ... training."

He dozed off. The sun was warm, and the grass very soft and
comfortable. Kennedy turned his gaze to the Reservoir again. It was no
business of his what Walton and Perry did.

Walton and Perry were discussing ways and means. The conversation
changed as they saw Kennedy glance at them. They were the sort of
persons who feel a vague sense of injury when anybody looks at them,
perhaps because they feel that those whose attention is attracted to
them must say something to their discredit when they begin to talk
about them.

"There's that beast Kennedy," said Walton. "I can't stick that man.
He's always hanging round the house. What he comes for, I can't make
out."

"Pal of Fenn's," suggested Perry.

"He hangs on to Fenn. I bet Fenn bars him really."

Perry doubted this in his innermost thoughts, but it was not worth
while to say so.

"Those Blackburn chaps," continued Walton, reverting to another
grievance, "will stick on no end of side next term about that cup.
They wouldn't have had a look in if Kay hadn't given Fenn that extra.
Kay ought to be kicked. I'm hanged if I'm going to care what I do next
term. Somebody ought to do something to take it out of Kay for getting
his own house licked like that."

Walton spoke as if the line of conduct he had mapped out for himself
would be a complete reversal of his customary mode of life. As a
matter of fact, he had never been in the habit of caring very much
what he did.

Walton's last remarks brought the conversation back to where it had
been before the mention of Kennedy switched it off on to new lines.
Perry had been complaining that he thought camp a fraud, that it was
all drilling and getting up at unearthly hours. He reminded Walton
that he had only come on the strength of the latter's statement that
it would be a rag. Where did the rag come in? That was what Perry
wanted to know.

"When it's not a ghastly sweat," he concluded, "it's slow. Like it is
now. Can't we do something for a change?"

"As a matter of fact," said Walton, "nearly all the best rags are
played out. A chap at a crammer's told me last holidays that when he
was at camp he and some other fellows loosed the ropes of the
guard-tent. He said it was grand sport."

Perry sat up.

"That's the thing," he said, excitedly. "Let's do that. Why not?"

"It's beastly risky," objected Walton.

"What's that matter? They can't do anything, even if they spot us."

"That's all you know. We should get beans."

"Still, it's worth risking. It would be the biggest rag going. Did the
chap tell you how they did it?"

"Yes," said Walton, becoming animated as he recalled the stirring
tale, "they bagged the sentry. Chucked a cloth or something over his
head, you know. Then they shoved him into the ditch, and one of them
sat on him while the others loosed the ropes. It took the chaps inside
no end of a time getting out."

"That's the thing. We'll do it. We only need one other chap. Leveson
would come if we asked him. Let's get back to the lines. It's almost
tea-time. Tell him after tea."

Leveson proved agreeable. Indeed, he jumped at it. His life, his
attitude suggested, had been a hollow mockery until he heard the plan,
but now he could begin to enjoy himself once more.

The lights-out bugle sounded at ten o'clock; the last post at
ten-thirty. At a quarter to twelve the three adventurers, who had been
keeping themselves awake by the exercise of great pains, satisfied
themselves that the other occupants of the tent were asleep, and stole
out.

It was an excellent night for their purpose. There was no moon, and
the stars were hidden by clouds.

They crept silently towards the guard-tent. A dim figure loomed out of
the blackness. They noted with satisfaction, as it approached, that it
was small. Sentries at the public-school camp vary in physique. They
felt that it was lucky that the task of sentry-go had not fallen that
night to some muscular forward from one of the school fifteens, or
worse still, to a boxing expert who had figured in the Aldershot
competition at Easter. The present sentry would be an easy victim.

They waited for him to arrive.

A moment later Private Jones, of St Asterisk's--for it was he--turning
to resume his beat, found himself tackled from behind. Two moments
later he was reclining in the ditch. He would have challenged his
adversary, but, unfortunately, that individual happened to be seated
on his face.

He struggled, but to no purpose.

He was still struggling when a muffled roar of indignation from the
direction of the guard-tent broke the stillness of the summer night.
The roar swelled into a crescendo. What seemed like echoes came from
other quarters out of the darkness. The camp was waking.

The noise from the guard-tent waxed louder.

The unknown marauder rose from his seat on Private Jones, and
vanished.

Private Jones also rose. He climbed out of the ditch, shook himself,
looked round for his assailant, and, not finding him, hurried to the
guard-tent to see what was happening.




VII

A CLUE


The guard-tent had disappeared.

Private Jones' bewildered eye, rolling in a fine frenzy from heaven to
earth, and from earth to heaven, in search of the missing edifice,
found it at last in a tangled heap upon the ground. It was too dark to
see anything distinctly, but he perceived that the canvas was rising
and falling spasmodically like a stage sea, and for a similar
reason--because there were human beings imprisoned beneath it.

By this time the whole camp was up and doing. Figures in
_deshabille_, dashing the last vestiges of sleep away with their
knuckles, trooped on to the scene in twos and threes, full of inquiry
and trenchant sarcasm.

"What are you men playing at? What's all the row about? Can't you
finish that game of footer some other time, when we aren't trying to
get to sleep? What on earth's up?"

Then the voice of one having authority.

"What's the matter? What are you doing?"

It was perfectly obvious what the guard was doing. It was trying to
get out from underneath the fallen tent. Private Jones explained this
with some warmth.

"Somebody jumped at me and sat on my head in the ditch. I couldn't get
up. And then some blackguard cut the ropes of the guard-tent. I
couldn't see who it was. He cut off directly the tent went down."

Private Jones further expressed a wish that he could find the chap.
When he did, there would, he hinted, be trouble in the old homestead.

The tent was beginning to disgorge its prisoners.

"Guard, turn out!" said a facetious voice from the darkness.

The camp was divided into two schools of thought. Those who were
watching the guard struggle out thought the episode funny. The guard
did not. It was pathetic to hear them on the subject of their
mysterious assailants. Matters quieted down rapidly after the tent had
been set up again. The spectators were driven back to their lines by
their officers. The guard turned in again to try and restore their
shattered nerves with sleep until their time for sentry-go came round.
Private Jones picked up his rifle and resumed his beat. The affair was
at an end as far as that night was concerned.

Next morning, as might be expected, nothing else was talked about.
Conversation at breakfast was confined to the topic. No halfpenny
paper, however many times its circulation might exceed that of any
penny morning paper, ever propounded so fascinating and puzzling a
breakfast-table problem. It was the utter impossibility of detecting
the culprits that appealed to the schools. They had swooped down like
hawks out of the night, and disappeared like eels into mud, leaving no
traces.

Jimmy Silver, of course, had no doubts.

"It was those Kay's men," he said. "What does it matter about
evidence? You've only got to look at 'em. That's all the evidence you
want. The only thing that makes it at all puzzling is that they did
nothing worse. You'd naturally expect them to slay the sentry, at any
rate."

But the rest of the camp, lacking that intimate knowledge of the
Kayite which he possessed, did not turn the eye of suspicion towards
the Eckleton lines. The affair remained a mystery. Kennedy, who never
gave up a problem when everybody else did, continued to revolve the
mystery in his mind.

"I shouldn't wonder," he said to Silver, two days later, "if you were
right."

Silver, who had not made any remark for the last five minutes, with
the exception of abusive comments on the toughness of the meat which
he was trying to carve with a blunt knife for the tent, asked for an
explanation. "I mean about that row the other night."

"What row?"

"That guard-tent business."

"Oh, that! I'd forgotten. Why don't you move with the times? You're
always thinking of something that's been dead and buried for years."

"You remember you said you thought it was those Kay's chaps who did
it. I've been thinking it over, and I believe you're right. You see,
it was probably somebody who'd been to camp before, or he wouldn't
have known that dodge of loosing the ropes."

"I don't see why. Seems to me it's the sort of idea that might have
occurred to anybody. You don't want to study the thing particularly
deeply to know that the best way of making a tent collapse is to loose
the ropes. Of course it was Kay's lot who did it. But I don't see how
you're going to have them simply because one or two of them have been
here before."

"No, I suppose not," said Kennedy.

After tea the other occupants of the tent went out of the lines to
play stump-cricket. Silver was in the middle of a story in one of the
magazines, so did not accompany them. Kennedy cried off on the plea of
slackness.

"I say," he said, when they were alone.

"Hullo," said Silver, finishing his story, and putting down the
magazine. "What do you say to going after those chaps? I thought that
story was going to be a long one that would take half an hour to get
through. But it collapsed. Like that guard-tent."

"About that tent business," said Kennedy. "Of course that was all rot
what I was saying just now. I suddenly remembered that I didn't
particularly want anybody but you to hear what I was going to say, so
I had to invent any rot that I could think of."

"But now," said Jimmy Silver, sinking his voice to a melodramatic
whisper, "the villagers have left us to continue their revels on the
green, our wicked uncle has gone to London, his sinister retainer,
Jasper Murgleshaw, is washing his hands in the scullery sink,
and--_we are alone!_"

"Don't be an ass," pleaded Kennedy.

"Tell me your dreadful tale. Conceal nothing. Spare me not. In fact,
say on."

"I've had a talk with the chap who was sentry that night," began
Kennedy.

"Astounding revelations by our special correspondent," murmured
Silver.

"You might listen."

"I _am_ listening. Why don't you begin? All this hesitation
strikes me as suspicious. Get on with your shady story."

"You remember the sentry was upset--"

"Very upset."

"Somebody collared him from behind, and upset him into the ditch. They
went in together, and the other man sat on his head."

"A touching picture. Proceed, friend."

"They rolled about a bit, and this sentry chap swears he scratched the
man. It was just after that that the man sat on his head. Jones says
he was a big chap, strong and heavy."

"He was in a position to judge, anyhow."

"Of course, he didn't mean to scratch him. He was rather keen on
having that understood. But his fingers came up against the fellow's
cheek as he was falling. So you see we've only got to look for a man
with a scratch on his cheek. It was the right cheek, Jones was almost
certain. I don't see what you're laughing at."

"I wish you wouldn't spring these good things of yours on me
suddenly," gurgled Jimmy Silver, rolling about the wooden floor of the
tent. "You ought to give a chap some warning. Look here," he added,
imperatively, "swear you'll take me with you when you go on your tour
through camp examining everybody's right cheek to see if it's got a
scratch on it."

Kennedy began to feel the glow and pride of the successful
sleuth-hound leaking out of him. This aspect of the case had not
occurred to him. The fact that the sentry had scratched his
assailant's right cheek, added to the other indubitable fact that
Walton, of Kay's, was even now walking abroad with a scratch on his
right cheek, had seemed to him conclusive. He had forgotten that there
might be others. Still, it was worth while just to question him. He
questioned him at Cove Reservoir next day.

"Hullo, Walton," he said, with a friendly carelessness which would not
have deceived a prattling infant, "nasty scratch you've got on your
cheek. How did you get it?"

"Perry did it when we were ragging a few days ago," replied Walton,
eyeing him distrustfully.

"Oh," said Kennedy.

"Silly fool," said Walton.

"Talking about me?" inquired Kennedy politely.

"No," replied Walton, with the suavity of a Chesterfield, "Perry."

They parted, Kennedy with the idea that Walton was his man still more
deeply rooted, Walton with an uncomfortable feeling that Kennedy knew
too much, and that, though he had undoubtedly scored off him for the
moment, a time (as Jimmy Silver was fond of observing with a satanic
laugh) would come, and then--!

He felt that it behoved him to be wary.




VIII

A NIGHT ADVENTURE--THE DETHRONEMENT OF FENN


One of the things which make life on this planet more or less
agreeable is the speed with which alarums, excursions, excitement, and
rows generally, blow over. A nine-days' wonder has to be a big
business to last out its full time nowadays. As a rule the third day
sees the end of it, and the public rushes whooping after some other
hare that has been started for its benefit. The guard-tent row, as far
as the bulk of camp was concerned, lasted exactly two days; at the end
of which period it was generally agreed that all that could be said on
the subject had been said, and that it was now a back number. Nobody,
except possibly the authorities, wanted to find out the authors of the
raid, and even Private Jones had ceased to talk about it--this owing
to the unsympathetic attitude of his tent.

"Jones," the corporal had observed, as the ex-sentry's narrative of
his misfortunes reached a finish for the third time since
_reveille_ that morning, "if you can't manage to switch off that
infernal chestnut of yours, I'll make you wash up all day and sit on
your head all night."

So Jones had withdrawn his yarn from circulation. Kennedy's interest in
detective work waned after his interview with Walton. He was quite sure
that Walton had been one of the band, but it was not his business to
find out; even had he found out, he would have done nothing. It was
more for his own private satisfaction than for the furtherance of
justice that he wished to track the offenders down. But he did not
look on the affair, as Jimmy Silver did, as rather sporting; he had
a tender feeling for the good name of the school, and he felt that
it was not likely to make Eckleton popular with the other schools
that went to camp if they got the reputation of practical jokers.
Practical jokers are seldom popular until they have been dead a
hundred years or so.

As for Walton and his colleagues, to complete the list of those who
were interested in this matter of the midnight raid, they lay
remarkably low after their successful foray. They imagined that
Kennedy was spying on their every movement. In which they were quite
wrong, for Kennedy was doing nothing of the kind. Camp does not allow
a great deal of leisure for the minding of other people's businesses.
But this reflection did not occur to Walton, and he regarded Kennedy,
whenever chance or his duties brought him into the neighbourhood of
that worthy's tent, with a suspicion which increased whenever the
latter looked at him.

On the night before camp broke up, a second incident of a sensational
kind occurred, which, but for the fact that they never heard of it,
would have given the schools a good deal to talk about. It happened
that Kennedy was on sentry-go that night. The manner of sentry-go is
thus. At seven in the evening the guard falls in, and patrols the
fringe of the camp in relays till seven in the morning. A guard
consists of a sergeant, a corporal, and ten men. They are on duty for
two hours at a time, with intervals of four hours between each spell,
in which intervals they sleep the sleep of tired men in the
guard-tent, unless, as happened on the occasion previously described,
some miscreant takes it upon himself to loose the ropes. The ground to
be patrolled by the sentries is divided into three parts, each of
which is entrusted to one man.

Kennedy was one of the ten privates, and his first spell of sentry-go
began at eleven o'clock.

On this night there was no moon. It was as black as pitch. It is
always unpleasant to be on sentry-go on such a night. The mind
wanders, in spite of all effort to check it, through a long series of
all the ghastly stories one has ever read. There is one in particular
of Conan Doyle's about a mummy that came to life and chased people on
lonely roads--but enough! However courageous one may be, it is
difficult not to speculate on the possible horrors which may spring
out on one from the darkness. That feeling that there is somebody--or
something--just behind one can only be experienced in all its force by
a sentry on an inky night at camp. And the thought that, of all the
hundreds there, he and two others are the only ones awake, puts a sort
of finishing touch to the unpleasantness of the situation.

Kennedy was not a particularly imaginative youth, but he looked
forward with no little eagerness to the time when he should be
relieved. It would be a relief in two senses of the word. His beat
included that side of the camp which faces the road to Aldershot.
Between camp and this road is a ditch and a wood. After he had been on
duty for an hour this wood began to suggest a variety of
possibilities, all grim. The ditch, too, was not without associations.
It was into this that Private Jones had been hurled on a certain
memorable occasion. Such a thing was not likely to happen again in the
same week, and, even if it did, Kennedy flattered himself that he
would have more to say in the matter than Private Jones had had; but
nevertheless he kept a careful eye in that direction whenever his beat
took him along the ditch.

It was about half-past twelve, and he had entered upon the last
section of his two hours, when Kennedy distinctly heard footsteps in
the wood. He had heard so many mysterious sounds since his patrol
began at eleven o'clock that at first he was inclined to attribute
this to imagination. But a crackle of dead branches and the sound of
soft breathing convinced him that this was the real thing for once,
and that, as a sentry of the Public Schools' Camp on duty, it behoved
him to challenge the unknown.

He stopped and waited, peering into the darkness in a futile endeavour
to catch a glimpse of his man. But the night was too black for the
keenest eye to penetrate it. A slight thud put him on the right track.
It showed him two things; first, that the unknown had dropped into the
ditch, and, secondly, that he was a camp man returning to his tent
after an illegal prowl about the town at lights-out. Nobody save one
belonging to the camp would have cause to cross the ditch.

Besides, the man walked warily, as one not ignorant of the danger of
sentries. The unknown had crawled out of the ditch now. As luck would
have it he had chosen a spot immediately opposite to where Kennedy
stood. Now that he was nearer Kennedy could see the vague outline of
him.

"Who goes there?" he said.

From an instinctive regard for the other's feelings he did not shout
the question in the regulation manner. He knew how he would feel
himself if he were out of camp at half-past twelve, and the voice of
the sentry were to rip suddenly through the silence _fortissimo_.

As it was, his question was quite loud enough to electrify the person
to whom it was addressed. The unknown started so violently that he
nearly leapt into the air. Kennedy was barely two yards from him when
he spoke.

The next moment this fact was brought home to him in a very practical
manner. The unknown, sighting the sentry, perhaps more clearly against
the dim whiteness of the tents than Kennedy could sight him against
the dark wood, dashed in with a rapidity which showed that he knew
something of the art of boxing. Kennedy dropped his rifle and flung up
his arm. He was altogether too late. A sudden blaze of light, and he
was on the ground, sick and dizzy, a feeling he had often experienced
before in a slighter degree, when sparring in the Eckleton gymnasium
with the boxing instructor.

The immediate effect of a flush hit in the regions about the jaw is to
make the victim lose for the moment all interest in life. Kennedy lay
where he had fallen for nearly half a minute before he fully realised
what it was that had happened to him. When he did realise the
situation, he leapt to his feet, feeling sick and shaky, and staggered
about in all directions in a manner which suggested that he fancied
his assailant would be waiting politely until he had recovered. As was
only natural, that wily person had vanished, and was by this time
doing a quick change into garments of the night. Kennedy had the
satisfaction of knowing--for what it was worth--that his adversary was
in one of those tents, but to place him with any greater accuracy was
impossible.

So he gave up the search, found his rifle, and resumed his patrol. And
at one o'clock his successor relieved him.

On the following day camp broke up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kennedy always enjoyed going home, but, as he travelled back to
Eckleton on the last day of these summer holidays, he could not help
feeling that there was a great deal to be said for term. He felt
particularly cheerful. He had the carriage to himself, and he had also
plenty to read and eat. The train was travelling at forty miles an
hour. And there were all the pleasures of a first night after the
holidays to look forward to, when you dashed from one friend's study
to another's, comparing notes, and explaining--five or six of you at a
time--what a good time you had had in the holidays. This was always a
pleasant ceremony at Blackburn's, where all the prefects were intimate
friends, and all good sorts, without that liberal admixture of weeds,
worms, and outsiders which marred the list of prefects in most of the
other houses. Such as Kay's! Kennedy could not restrain a momentary
gloating as he contrasted the state of affairs in Blackburn's with
what existed at Kay's. Then this feeling was merged in one of pity for
Fenn's hard case. How he must hate the beginning of term, thought
Kennedy.

All the well-known stations were flashing by now. In a few minutes he
would be at the junction, and in another half-hour back at
Blackburn's. He began to collect his baggage from the rack.

Nobody he knew was at the junction. This was the late train that he
had come down by. Most of the school had returned earlier in the
afternoon.

He reached Blackburn's at eight o'clock, and went up to his study to
unpack. This was always his first act on coming back to school. He
liked to start the term with all his books in their shelves, and all
his pictures and photographs in their proper places on the first day.
Some of the studies looked like lumber-rooms till near the end of the
first week.

He had filled the shelves, and was arranging the artistic decorations,
when Jimmy Silver came in. Kennedy had been surprised that he had not
met him downstairs, but the matron had answered his inquiry with the
statement that he was talking to Mr Blackburn in the other part of the
house.

"When did you arrive?" asked Silver, after the conclusion of the first
outbreak of holiday talk.

"I've only just come."

"Seen Blackburn yet?"

"No. I was thinking of going up after I had got this place done
properly."

Jimmy Silver ran his eye over the room.

"I haven't started mine yet," he said. "You're such an energetic man.
Now, are all those books in their proper places?"

"Yes," said Kennedy.

"Sure?"

"Yes."

"How about the pictures? Got them up?"

"All but this lot here. Shan't be a second. There you are. How's that
for effect?"

"Not bad. Got all your photographs in their places?"

"Yes."

"Then," said Jimmy Silver, calmly, "you'd better start now to pack
them all up again. And why, my son? Because you are no longer a
Blackburnite. That's what."

Kennedy stared.

"I've just had the whole yarn from Blackburn," continued Jimmy Silver.
"Our dear old pal, Mr Kay, wanting somebody in his house capable of
keeping order, by way of a change, has gone to the Old Man and
borrowed you. So _you're_ head of Kay's now. There's an honour
for you."




IX

THE SENSATIONS OF AN EXILE


"What" shouted Kennedy.

He sprang to his feet as if he had had an electric shock.

Jimmy Silver, having satisfied his passion for the dramatic by the
abruptness with which he had exploded his mine, now felt himself at
liberty to be sympathetic.

"It's quite true," he said. "And that's just how I felt when Blackburn
told me. Blackburn's as sick as anything. Naturally he doesn't see the
point of handing you over to Kay. But the Old Man insisted, so he
caved in. He wanted to see you as soon as you arrived. You'd better go
now. I'll finish your packing."

This was noble of Jimmy, for of all the duties of life he loathed
packing most.

"Thanks awfully," said Kennedy, "but don't you bother. I'll do it when
I get back. But what's it all about? What made Kay want a man? Why
won't Fenn do? And why me?"

"Well, it's easy to see why they chose you. They reflected that you'd
had the advantage of being in Blackburn's with me, and seeing how a
house really should be run. Kay wants a head for his house. Off he
goes to the Old Man. 'Look here,' he says, 'I want somebody shunted
into my happy home, or it'll bust up. And it's no good trying to put
me off with an inferior article, because I won't have it. It must be
somebody who's been trained from youth up by Silver.' 'Then,' says the
Old Man, reflectively, 'you can't do better than take Kennedy. I
happen to know that Silver has spent years in showing him the straight
and narrow path. You take Kennedy.' 'All right,' says Kay; 'I always
thought Kennedy a bit of an ass myself, but if he's studied under
Silver he ought to know how to manage a house. I'll take him. Advise
our Mr Blackburn to that effect, and ask him to deliver the goods at
his earliest convenience. Adoo, mess-mate, adoo!' And there you
are--that's how it was."

"But what's wrong with Fenn?"

"My dear chap! Remember last term. Didn't Fenn have a regular scrap
with Kay, and get shoved into extra for it? And didn't he wreck the
concert in the most sportsmanlike way with that encore of his? Think
the Old Man is going to take that grinning? Not much! Fenn made a
ripping fifty against Kent in the holidays--I saw him do it--but they
don't count that. It's a wonder they didn't ask him to leave. Of
course, I think it's jolly rough on Fenn, but I don't see that you can
blame them. Not the Old Man, at any rate. He couldn't do anything
else. It's all Kay's fault that all this has happened, of course. I'm
awfully sorry for you having to go into that beastly hole, but from
Kay's point of view it's a jolly sound move. You may reform the
place."

"I doubt it."

"So do I--very much. I didn't say you would--I said you might. I
wonder if Kay means to give you a free hand. It all depends on that."

"Yes. If he's going to interfere with me as he used to with Fenn,
he'll want to bring in another head to improve on me."

"Rather a good idea, that," said Jimmy Silver, laughing, as he always
did when any humorous possibilities suggested themselves to him. "If
he brings in somebody to improve on you, and then somebody else to
improve on him, and then another chap to improve on him, he ought to
have a decent house in half-a-dozen years or so."

"The worst of it is," said Kennedy, "that I've got to go to Kay's as a
sort of rival to Fenn. I shouldn't mind so much if it wasn't for that.
I wonder how he'll take it! Do you think he knows about it yet? He
didn't enjoy being head, but that's no reason why he shouldn't cut up
rough at being shoved back to second prefect. It's a beastly
situation."

"Beastly," agreed Jimmy Silver. "Look here," he added, after a pause,
"there's no reason, you know, why this should make any difference. To
us, I mean. What I mean to say is, I don't see why we shouldn't see
each other just as often, and so on, simply because you are in another
house, and all that sort of thing. You know what I mean."

He spoke shamefacedly, as was his habit whenever he was serious. He
liked Kennedy better than anyone he knew, and hated to show his
feelings. Anything remotely connected with sentiment made him
uncomfortable.

"Of course," said Kennedy, awkwardly.

"You'll want a refuge," said Silver, in his normal manner, "now that
you're going to see wild life in Kay's. Don't forget that I'm always
at home in my study in the afternoons--admission on presentation of a
visiting-card."

"All right," said Kennedy, "I'll remember. I suppose I'd better go and
see Blackburn now."

Mr Blackburn was in his study. He was obviously disgusted and
irritated by what had happened. Loyalty to the headmaster, and an
appreciation of his position as a member of the staff led him to try
and conceal his feelings as much as possible in his interview with
Kennedy, but the latter understood as plainly as if his house-master
had burst into a flow of abuse and complaint. There had always been an
excellent understanding--indeed, a friendship--between Kennedy and Mr
Blackburn, and the master was just as sorry to lose his second prefect
as the latter was to go.

"Well, Kennedy," he said, pleasantly. "I hope you had a good time in
the holidays. I suppose Silver has told you the melancholy news--that
you are to desert us this term? It is a great pity. We shall all be
very sorry to lose you. I don't look forward to seeing you bowl us all
out in the house-matches next summer," he added, with a smile, "though
we shall expect a few full-pitches to leg, for the sake of old times."

He meant well, but the picture he conjured up almost made Kennedy
break down. Nothing up to the present had made him realise the
completeness of his exile so keenly as this remark of Mr Blackburn's
about his bowling against the side for which he had taken so many
wickets in the past. It was a painful thought.

"I am afraid you won't have quite such a pleasant time in Mr Kay's as
you have had here," resumed the house-master. "Of course, I know that,
strictly speaking, I ought not to talk like this about another
master's house; but you can scarcely be unaware of the reasons that
have led to this change. You must know that you are being sent to pull
Mr Kay's house together. This is strictly between ourselves, of
course. I think you have a difficult task before you, but I don't
fancy that you will find it too much for you. And mind you come here
as often as you please. I am sure Silver and the others will be glad
to see you. Goodbye, Kennedy. I think you ought to be getting across
now to Mr Kay's. I told him that you would be there before half-past
nine. Good night."

"Good night, sir," said Kennedy.

He wandered out into the house dining-room. Somehow, though Kay's was
only next door, he could not get rid of the feeling that he was about
to start on a long journey, and would never see his old house again.
And in a sense this was so. He would probably visit Blackburn's
tomorrow afternoon, but it would not be the same. Jimmy Silver would
greet him like a brother, and he would brew in the same study in which
he had always brewed, and sit in the same chair; but it would not be
the same. He would be an outsider, a visitor, a stranger within the
gates, and--worst of all--a Kayite. Nothing could alter that.

The walk of the dining-room were covered with photographs of the house
cricket and football teams for the last fifteen years. Looking at
them, he felt more than ever how entirely his school life had been
bound up in his house. From his first day at Eckleton he had been
taught the simple creed of the Blackburnite, that Eckleton was the
finest school in the three kingdoms, and that Blackburn's was the
finest house in the finest school.

Under the gas-bracket by the door hung the first photograph in which
he appeared, the cricket team of four years ago. He had just got the
last place in front of Challis on the strength of a tremendous catch
for the house second in a scratch game two days before the
house-matches began. It had been a glaring fluke, but it had impressed
Denny, the head of the house, who happened to see it, and had won him
his place.

He walked round the room, looking at each photograph in turn. It
seemed incredible that he had no longer any right to an interest in
the success of Blackburn's. He could have endured leaving all this
when his time at school was up, for that would have been the natural
result of the passing of years. But to be transplanted abruptly and
with a wrench from his native soil was too much. He went upstairs to
pack, suffering from as severe an attack of the blues as any youth of
eighteen had experienced since blues were first invented.

Jimmy Silver hovered round, while he packed, with expressions of
sympathy and bitter remarks concerning Mr Kay and his wicked works,
and, when the operation was concluded, helped Kennedy carry his box
over to his new house with the air of one seeing a friend off to the
parts beyond the equator.

It was ten o'clock by the time the front door of Kay's closed upon its
new head. Kennedy went to the matron's sanctum to be instructed in the
geography of the house. The matron, a severe lady, whose faith in
human nature had been terribly shaken by five years of office in
Kay's, showed him his dormitory and study with a lack of geniality
which added a deeper tinge of azure to Kennedy's blues. "So you've
come to live here, have you?" her manner seemed to say; "well, I pity
you, that's all. A nice time _you're_ going to have."

Kennedy spent the half-hour before going to bed in unpacking his box
for the second time, and arranging his books and photographs in the
study which had been Wayburn's. He had nothing to find fault with in
the study. It was as large as the one he had owned at Blackburn's,
and, like it, looked out over the school grounds.

At half-past ten the gas gave a flicker and went out, turned off at
the main. Kennedy lit a candle and made his way to his dormitory.
There now faced him the more than unpleasant task of introducing
himself to its inmates. He knew from experience the disconcerting way
in which a dormitory greets an intruder. It was difficult to know how
to begin matters. It would take a long time, he thought, to explain
his presence to their satisfaction.

Fortunately, however, the dormitory was not unprepared. Things get
about very quickly in a house. The matron had told the housemaids; the
housemaids had handed it on to their ally, the boot boy; the boot boy
had told Wren, whom he happened to meet in the passage, and Wren had
told everybody else.

There was an uproar going on when Kennedy opened the door, but it died
away as he appeared, and the dormitory gazed at the newcomer in
absolute and embarrassing silence. Kennedy had not felt so conscious
of the public eye being upon him since he had gone out to bat against
the M.C.C., on his first appearance in the ranks of the Eckleton
eleven. He went to his bed and began to undress without a word,
feeling rather than seeing the eyes that were peering at him. When he
had completed the performance of disrobing, he blew out the candle and
got into bed. The silence was broken by numerous coughs, of that
short, suggestive type with which the public schoolboy loves to
embarrass his fellow man. From some unidentified corner of the room
came a subdued giggle. Then a whispered, "Shut _up_, you fool!"
To which a low voice replied, "All _right,_ I'm not doing
anything."

More coughs, and another outbreak of giggling from a fresh quarter.

"Good night," said Kennedy, to the room in general.

There was no reply. The giggler appeared to be rapidly approaching
hysterics.

"Shut up that row," said Kennedy.

The giggling ceased.

The atmosphere was charged with suspicion. Kennedy fell asleep fearing
that he was going to have trouble with his dormitory before many
nights had passed.




X

FURTHER EXPERIENCES OF AN EXILE


Breakfast on the following morning was a repetition of the dormitory
ordeal. Kennedy walked to his place on Mr Kay's right, feeling that
everyone was looking at him, as indeed they were. He understood for
the first time the meaning of the expression, "the cynosure of all
eyes". He was modest by nature, and felt his position a distinct
trial.

He did not quite know what to say or do with regard to his new
house-master at this their first meeting in the latter's territory.
"Come aboard, sir," occurred to him for a moment as a happy phrase,
but he discarded it. To make the situation more awkward, Mr Kay did
not observe him at first, being occupied in assailing a riotous fag at
the other end of the table, that youth having succeeded, by a
dexterous drive in the ribs, in making a friend of his spill half a
cup of coffee. Kennedy did not know whether to sit down without a word
or to remain standing until Mr Kay had time to attend to him. He would
have done better to have sat down; Mr Kay's greeting, when it came,
was not worth waiting for.

"Sit down, Kennedy," he said, irritably--rebuking people on an empty
stomach always ruffled him. "Sit down, sit down."

Kennedy sat down, and began to toy diffidently with a sausage,
remembering, as he did so, certain diatribes of Fenn's against the
food at Kay's. As he became more intimate with the sausage, he
admitted to himself that Fenn had had reason. Mr Kay meanwhile pounded
away in moody silence at a plate of kidneys and bacon. It was one of
the many grievances which gave the Kayite material for conversation
that Mr Kay had not the courage of his opinions in the matter of food.
He insisted that he fed his house luxuriously, but he refused to brave
the mysteries of its bill of fare himself.

Fenn had not come down when Kennedy went in to breakfast. He arrived
some ten minutes later, when Kennedy had vanquished the sausage, and
was keeping body and soul together with bread and marmalade.

"I cannot have this, Fenn," snapped Mr Kay; "you must come down in
time."

Fenn took the rebuke in silence, cast one glance at the sausage which
confronted him, and then pushed it away with such unhesitating
rapidity that Mr Kay glared at him as if about to take up the cudgels
for the rejected viand. Perhaps he remembered that it scarcely
befitted the dignity of a house-master to enter upon a wrangle with a
member of his house on the subject of the merits and demerits of
sausages, for he refrained, and Fenn was allowed to go on with his
meal in peace.

Kennedy's chief anxiety had been with regard to Fenn. True, the latter
could hardly blame him for being made head of Kay's, since he had not
been consulted in the matter, and, if he had been, would have refused
the post with horror; but nevertheless the situation might cause a
coolness between them. And if Fenn, the only person in the house with
whom he was at all intimate, refused to be on friendly terms, his stay
in Kay's would be rendered worse than even he had looked for.

Fenn had not spoken to him at breakfast, but then there was little
table talk at Kay's. Perhaps the quality of the food suggested such
gloomy reflections that nobody liked to put them into words.

After the meal Fenn ran upstairs to his study. Kennedy followed him,
and opened conversation in his direct way with the subject which he
had come to discuss.

"I say," he said, "I hope you aren't sick about this. You know I
didn't want to bag your place as head of the house."

"My dear chap," said Fenn, "don't apologise. You're welcome to it.
Being head of Kay's isn't such a soft job that one is keen on sticking
to it."

"All the same--" began Kennedy.

"I knew Kay would get at me somehow, of course. I've been wondering
how all the holidays. I didn't think of this. Still, I'm jolly glad
it's happened. I now retire into private life, and look on. I've taken
years off my life sweating to make this house decent, and now I'm
going to take a rest and watch you tearing your hair out over the job.
I'm awfully sorry for you. I wish they'd roped in some other victim."

"But you're still a house prefect, I suppose?"

"I believe so, Kay couldn't very well make me a fag again."

"Then you'll help manage things?"

Fenn laughed.

"Will I, by Jove! I'd like to see myself! I don't want to do the heavy
martyr business and that sort of thing, but I'm hanged if I'm going to
take any more trouble over the house. Haven't you any respect for Mr
Kay's feelings? He thinks I can't keep order. Surely you don't want me
to go and shatter his pet beliefs? Anyhow, I'm not going to do it. I'm
going to play 'villagers and retainers' to your 'hero'. If you do
anything wonderful with the house, I shall be standing by ready to
cheer. But you don't catch me shoving myself forward. 'Thank Heaven I
knows me place,' as the butler in the play says."

Kennedy kicked moodily at the leg of the chair which he was holding.
The feeling that his whole world had fallen about his ears was
increasing with every hour he spent in Kay's. Last term he and Fenn
had been as close friends as you could wish to see. If he had asked
Fenn to help him in a tight place then, he knew he could have relied
on him. Now his chief desire seemed to be to score off the human race
in general, his best friend included. It was a depressing beginning.

"Do you know what the sherry said to the man when he was just going to
drink it?" inquired Fenn. "It said, '_Nemo me impune lacessit_'.
That's how I feel. Kay went out of his way to give me a bad time when
I was doing my best to run his house properly, so I don't see that I'm
called upon to go out of my way to work for him."

"It's rather rough on me--" Kennedy began. Then a sudden indignation
rushed through him. Why should he grovel to Fenn? If Fenn chose to
stand out, let him. He was capable of running the house by himself.

"I don't care," he said, savagely. "If you can't see what a cad you're
making of yourself, I'm not going to try to show you. You can do what
you jolly well please. I'm not dependent on you. I'll make this a
decent house off my own bat without your help. If you like looking on,
you'd better look on. I'll give you something to look at soon."

He went out, leaving Fenn with mixed feelings. He would have liked to
have followed him, taken back what he had said, and formed an
offensive alliance against the black sheep of the house--and also,
which was just as important, against the slack sheep, who were good
for nothing, either at work or play. But his bitterness against the
house-master prevented him. He was not going to take his removal from
the leadership of Kay's as if nothing had happened.

Meanwhile, in the dayrooms and studies, the house had been holding
indignation meetings, and at each it had been unanimously resolved
that Kay's had been abominably treated, and that the deposition of
Fenn must not be tolerated. Unfortunately, a house cannot do very much
when it revolts. It can only show its displeasure in little things,
and by an increase of rowdiness. This was the line that Kay's took.
Fenn became a popular hero. Fags, until he kicked them for it, showed
a tendency to cheer him whenever they saw him. Nothing could paint Mr
Kay blacker in the eyes of his house, so that Kennedy came in for all
the odium. The same fags who had cheered Fenn hooted him on one
occasion as he passed the junior dayroom. Kennedy stopped short, went
in, and presented each inmate of the room with six cuts with a
swagger-stick. This summary and Captain Kettle-like move had its
effect. There was no more hooting. The fags bethought themselves of
other ways of showing their disapproval of their new head.

One genius suggested that they might kill two birds with one
stone--snub Kennedy and pay a stately compliment to Fenn by applying
to the latter for leave to go out of bounds instead of to the former.
As the giving of leave "down town" was the prerogative of the head of
the house, and of no other, there was a suggestiveness about this mode
of procedure which appealed to the junior dayroom.

But the star of the junior dayroom was not in the ascendant. Fenn
might have quarrelled with Kennedy, and be extremely indignant at his
removal from the headship of the house, but he was not the man to
forget to play the game. His policy of non-interference did not
include underhand attempts to sap Kennedy's authority. When Gorrick,
of the Lower Fourth, the first of the fags to put the ingenious scheme
into practice, came to him, still smarting from Kennedy's castigation,
Fenn promptly gave him six more cuts, worse than the first, and kicked
him out into the passage. Gorrick naturally did not want to spoil a
good thing by giving Fenn's game away, so he lay low and said nothing,
with the result that Wren and three others met with the same fate,
only more so, because Fenn's wrath increased with each visit.

Kennedy, of course, heard nothing of this, or he might perhaps have
thought better of Fenn. As for the junior dayroom, it was obliged to
work off its emotion by jeering Jimmy Silver from the safety of the
touchline when the head of Blackburn's was refereeing in a match
between the juniors of his house and those of Kay's. Blackburn's
happened to win by four goals and eight tries, a result which the
patriotic Kay fag attributed solely to favouritism on the part of the
referee.

"I like the kids in your house," said Jimmy to Kennedy, after the
match, when telling the latter of the incident; "there's no false idea
of politeness about them. If they don't like your decisions, they say
so in a shrill treble."

"Little beasts," said Kennedy. "I wish I knew who they were. It's
hopeless to try and spot them, of course."




XI

THE SENIOR DAYROOM OPENS FIRE


Curiously enough, it was shortly after this that the junior dayroom
ceased almost entirely to trouble the head of the house. Not that they
turned over new leaves, and modelled their conduct on that of the hero
of the Sunday-school story. They were still disorderly, but in a
lesser degree; and ragging became a matter of private enterprise among
the fags instead of being, as it had threatened to be, an organised
revolt against the new head. When a Kay's fag rioted now, he did so
with the air of one endeavouring to amuse himself, not as if he were
carrying on a holy war against the oppressor.

Kennedy's difficulties were considerably diminished by this change. A
head of a house expects the juniors of his house to rag. It is what
they are put into the world to do, and there is no difficulty in
keeping the thing within decent limits. A revolution is another case
altogether. Kennedy was grateful for the change, for it gave him more
time to keep an eye on the other members of the house, but he had no
idea what had brought it about. As a matter of fact, he had Billy
Silver to thank for it. The chief organiser of the movement against
Kennedy in the junior dayroom had been the red-haired Wren, who
preached war to his fellow fags, partly because he loved to create a
disturbance, and partly because Walton, who hated Kennedy, had told
him to. Between Wren and Billy Silver a feud had existed since their
first meeting. The unsatisfactory conclusion to their encounter in
camp had given another lease of life to the feud, and Billy had come
back to Kay's with the fixed intention of smiting his auburn-haired
foe hip and thigh at the earliest opportunity. Wren's attitude with
respect to Kennedy gave him a decent excuse. He had no particular
regard for Kennedy. The fact that he was a friend of his brother's was
no recommendation. There existed between the two Silvers that feeling
which generally exists between an elder and a much younger brother at
the same school. Each thought the other a bit of an idiot, and though
equal to tolerating him personally, was hanged if he was going to do
the same by his friends. In Billy's circle of acquaintances, Jimmy's
friends were looked upon with cold suspicion as officious meddlers who
would give them lines if they found them out of bounds. The
aristocrats with whom Jimmy foregathered barely recognised the
existence of Billy's companions. Kennedy's claim to Billy's good
offices rested on the fact that they both objected to Wren.

So that, when Wren lifted up his voice in the junior dayroom, and
exhorted the fags to go and make a row in the passage outside
Kennedy's study, and--from a safe distance, and having previously
ensured a means of rapid escape--to fling boots at his door, Billy
damped the popular enthusiasm which had been excited by the proposal
by kicking Wren with some violence, and begging him not to be an ass.
Whereupon they resumed their battle at the point at which it had been
interrupted at camp. And when, some five minutes later, Billy, from
his seat on his adversary's chest, offered to go through the same
performance with anybody else who wished, the junior dayroom came to
the conclusion that his feelings with regard to the new head of the
house, however foolish and unpatriotic, had better be respected. And
the revolution of the fags had fizzled out from that moment.

In the senior dayroom, however, the flag of battle was still unfurled.
It was so obvious that Kennedy had been put into the house as a
reformer, and the seniors of Kay's had such an objection to being
reformed, that trouble was only to be expected. It was the custom in
most houses for the head of the house, by right of that position, to
be also captain of football. The senior dayroom was aggrieved at
Kennedy's taking this post from Fenn. Fenn was in his second year in
the school fifteen, and he was the three-quarter who scored most
frequently for Eckleton, whereas Kennedy, though practically a
certainty for one of the six vacant places in the school scrum, was at
present entitled to wear only a second fifteen cap. The claims of Fenn
to be captain of Kay's football were strong, Kennedy had begged him to
continue in that position more than once. Fenn's persistent refusal
had helped to increase the coolness between them, and it had also made
things more difficult for Kennedy in the house.

It was on the Monday of the third week of term that Kennedy, at Jimmy
Silver's request, arranged a "friendly" between Kay's and Blackburn's.
There could be no doubt as to which was the better team (for
Blackburn's had been runners up for the Cup the season before), but
the better one's opponents the better the practice. Kennedy wrote out
the list and fixed it on the notice board. The match was to be played
on the following afternoon.

A football team must generally be made up of the biggest men at the
captain's disposal, so it happened that Walton, Perry, Callingham, and
the other leaders of dissension in Kay's all figured on the list. The
consequence was that the list came in for a good deal of comment in
the senior dayroom. There were games every Saturday and Wednesday, and
it annoyed Walton and friends that they should have to turn out on an
afternoon that was not a half holiday. It was trouble enough playing
football on the days when it was compulsory. As for patriotism, no
member of the house even pretended to care whether Kay's put a good
team into the field or not. The senior dayroom sat talking over the
matter till lights-out. When Kennedy came down next morning, he found
his list scribbled over with blue pencil, while across it in bold
letters ran the single word,

    ROT.

He went to his study, wrote out a fresh copy, and pinned it up in
place of the old one. He had been early in coming down that morning,
and the majority of the Kayites had not seen the defaced notice. The
match was fixed for half-past four. At four a thin rain was falling.
The weather had been bad for some days, but on this particular
afternoon it readied the limit. In addition to being wet, it was also
cold, and Kennedy, as he walked over to the grounds, felt that he
would be glad when the game was over. He hoped that Blackburn's would
be punctual, and congratulated himself on his foresight in securing Mr
Blackburn as referee. Some of the staff, when they consented to hold
the whistle in a scratch game, invariably kept the teams waiting on
the field for half an hour before turning up. Mr Blackburn, an the
other hand, was always punctual. He came out of his house just as
Kennedy turned in at the school gates.

"Well, Kennedy," he said from the depths of his ulster, the collar of
which he had turned up over his ears with a prudence which Kennedy,
having come out with only a blazer on over his football clothes,
distinctly envied, "I hope your men are not going to be late. I don't
think I ever saw a worse day for football. How long were you thinking
of playing? Two twenty-fives would be enough for a day like this, I
think."

Kennedy consulted with Jimmy Silver, who came up at this moment, and
they agreed without argument that twenty-five minutes each way would
be the very thing.

"Where are your men?" asked Jimmy. "I've got all our chaps out here,
bar Challis, who'll be out in a few minutes. I left him almost
changed."

Challis appeared a little later, and joined the rest of Blackburn's
team, who were putting in the time and trying to keep warm by running
and passing and dropping desultory goals. But, with the exception of
Fenn, who stood brooding by himself in the centre of the field,
wrapped to the eyes in a huge overcoat, and two other house prefects
of Kay's, who strolled up and down looking as if they wished they were
in their studies, there was no sign of the missing team.

"I can't make it out," said Kennedy.

"You're sure you put up the right time?" asked Jimmy Silver.

"Yes, quite."

It certainly could not be said that Kay's had had any room for doubt
as to the time of the match, for it had appeared in large figures on
both notices.

A quarter to five sounded from the college clock.

"We must begin soon," said Mr Blackburn, "or there will not be light
enough even for two twenty-fives."

Kennedy felt wretched. Apart from the fact that he was frozen to an
icicle and drenched by the rain, he felt responsible for his team, and
he could see that Blackburn's men were growing irritated at the delay,
though they did their best to conceal it.

"Can't we lend them some subs?" suggested Challis, hopefully.

"All right--if you can raise eleven subs," said Silver. "They've only
got four men on the field at present."

Challis subsided.

"Look here," said Kennedy, "I'm going back to the house to see what's
up. I'll be back as soon as I can. They must have mistaken the time or
something after all."

He rushed back to the house, and flung open the door of the senior
dayroom. It was empty.

Kennedy had expected to find his missing men huddled in a semicircle
round the fire, waiting for some one to come and tell them that
Blackburn's had taken the field, and that they could come out now
without any fear of having to wait in the rain for the match to begin.
This, he thought, would have been the unselfish policy of Kay's senior
dayroom.

But to find nobody was extraordinary.

The thought occurred to him that the team might be changing in their
dormitories. He ran upstairs. But all the dormitories were locked, as
he might have known they would have been. Coming downstairs again he
met his fag, Spencer.

Spencer replied to his inquiry that he had only just come in. He did
not know where the team had got to. No, he had not seen any of them.

"Oh, yes, though," he added, as an afterthought, "I met Walton just
now. He looked as if he was going down town."

Walton had once licked Spencer, and that vindictive youth thought that
this might be a chance of getting back at him.

"Oh," said Kennedy, quietly, "Walton? Did you? Thanks."

Spencer was disappointed at his lack of excitement. His news did not
seem to interest him.

Kennedy went back to the football field to inform Jimmy Silver of the
result of his investigations.




XII

KENNEDY INTERVIEWS WALTON


"I'm very sorry," he said, when he rejoined the shivering group, "but
I'm afraid we shall have to call this match off. There seems to have
been a mistake. None of my team are anywhere about. I'm awfully sorry,
sir," he added, to Mr Blackburn, "to have given you all this trouble
for nothing."

"Not at all, Kennedy. We must try another day."

Mr Blackburn suspected that something untoward had happened in Kay's
to cause this sudden defection of the first fifteen of the house. He
knew that Kennedy was having a hard time in his new position, and he
did not wish to add to his discomfort by calling for an explanation
before an audience. It could not be pleasant for Kennedy to feel that
his enemies had scored off him. It was best to preserve a discreet
silence with regard to the whole affair, and leave him to settle it
for himself.

Jimmy Silver was more curious. He took Kennedy off to tea in his
study, sat him down in the best chair in front of the fire, and
proceeded to urge him to confess everything.

"Now, then, what's it all about?" he asked, briskly, spearing a muffin
on the fork and beginning to toast.

"It's no good asking me," said Kennedy. "I suppose it's a put-up job
to make me look a fool. I ought to have known something of this kind
would happen when I saw what they did to my first notice."

"What was that?"

Kennedy explained.

"This is getting thrilling," said Jimmy. "Just pass that plate.
Thanks. What are you going to do about it?"

"I don't know. What would you do?"

"My dear chap, I'd first find out who was at the bottom of it--there's
bound to be one man who started the whole thing--and I'd make it my
aim in life to give him the warmest ten minutes he'd ever had."

"That sounds all right. But how would you set about it?"

"Why, touch him up, of course. What else would you do? Before the
whole house, too."

"Supposing he wouldn't be touched up?"

"Wouldn't _be!_ He'd have to."

"You don't know Kay's, Jimmy. You're thinking what you'd do if this
had happened in Blackburn's. The two things aren't the same. Here the
man would probably take it like a lamb. The feeling of the house would
be against him. He'd find nobody to back him up. That's because
Blackburn's is a decent house instead of being a sink like Kay's. If I
tried the touching-up before the whole house game with our chaps, the
man would probably reply by going for me, assisted by the whole
strength of the company."

"Well, dash it all then, all you've got to do is to call a prefects'
meeting, and he'll get ten times worse beans from them than he'd have
got from you. It's simple."

Kennedy stared into the fire pensively.

"I don't know," he said. "I bar that prefects' meeting business. It
always seems rather feeble to me, lugging in a lot of chaps to help
settle some one you can't manage yourself. I want to carry this job
through on my own."

"Then you'd better scrap with the man."

"I think I will."

Silver stared.

"Don't be an ass," he said. "I was only rotting. You
can't go fighting all over the shop as if you were a fag. You'd lose
your prefect's cap if it came out."

"I could wear my topper," said Kennedy, with a grin. "You see," he
added, "I've not much choice. I must do something. If I took no notice
of this business there'd be no holding the house. I should be ragged to
death. It's no good talking about it. Personally, I should prefer
touching the chap up to fighting him, and I shall try it on. But he's
not likely to meet me half-way. And if he doesn't there'll be an
interesting turn-up, and you shall hold the watch. I'll send a kid
round to fetch you when things look like starting. I must go now to
interview my missing men. So long. Mind you slip round directly I send
for you."

"Wait a second. Don't be in such a beastly hurry. Who's the chap
you're going to fight?"

"I don't know yet. Walton, I should think. But I don't know."

"Walton! By Jove, it'll be worth seeing, anyhow, if we _are_ both
sacked for it when the Old Man finds out."

Kennedy returned to his study and changed his football boots for a
pair of gymnasium shoes. For the job he had in hand it was necessary
that he should move quickly, and football boots are a nuisance on a
board floor. When he had changed, he called Spencer.

"Go down to the senior dayroom," he said, "and tell MacPherson I want
to see him."

MacPherson was a long, weak-looking youth. He had been put down to
play for the house that day, and had not appeared.

"MacPherson!" said the fag, in a tone of astonishment, "not Walton?"

He had been looking forward to the meeting between Kennedy and his
ancient foe, and to have a miserable being like MacPherson offered as
a substitute disgusted him.

"If you have no objection," said Kennedy, politely, "I may want you to
fetch Walton later on."

Spencer vanished, hopeful once more.

"Come in, MacPherson," said Kennedy, on the arrival of the long one;
"shut the door."

MacPherson did so, feeling as if he were paying a visit to the
dentist. As long as there had been others with him in this affair he
had looked on it as a splendid idea. But to be singled out like this
was quite a different thing.

"Now," said Kennedy, "Why weren't you on the field this afternoon?"

"I--er--I was kept in."

"How long?"

"Oh--er--till about five."

"What do you call about five?"

"About twenty-five to," he replied, despondently.

"Now look here," said Kennedy, briskly, "I'm just going to explain to
you exactly how I stand in this business, so you'd better attend. I
didn't ask to be made head of this sewage depot. If I could have had
any choice, I wouldn't have touched a Kayite with a barge-pole. But
since I am head, I'm going to be it, and the sooner you and your
senior dayroom crew realise it the better. This sort of thing isn't
going on. I want to know now who it was put up this job. You wouldn't
have the cheek to start a thing like this yourself. Who was it?"

"Well--er--"

"You'd better say, and be quick, too. I can't wait. Whoever it was. I
shan't tell him you told me. And I shan't tell Kay. So now you can go
ahead. Who was it?"

"Well--er--Walton."

"I thought so. Now you can get out. If you see Spencer, send him here."

Spencer, curiously enough, was just outside the door. So close to it,
indeed, that he almost tumbled in when MacPherson opened it.

"Go and fetch Walton," said Kennedy.

Spencer dashed off delightedly, and in a couple of minutes Walton
appeared. He walked in with an air of subdued defiance, and slammed
the door.

"Don't bang the door like that," said Kennedy. "Why didn't you turn
out today?"

"I was kept in."

"Couldn't you get out in time to play?"

"No."

"When did you get out?"

"Six."

"Not before?"

"I said six."

"Then how did you manage to go down town--without leave, by the way,
but that's a detail--at half-past five?"

"All right," said Walton; "better call me a liar."

"Good suggestion," said Kennedy, cheerfully; "I will."

"It's all very well," said Walton. "You know jolly well you can say
anything you like. I can't do anything to you. You'd have me up before
the prefects."

"Not a bit of it. This is a private affair between ourselves. I'm not
going to drag the prefects into it. You seem to want to make this
house worse than it is. I want to make it more or less decent. We
can't both have what we want."

There was a pause.

"When would it be convenient for you to be touched up before the whole
house?" inquired Kennedy, pleasantly.

"What?"

"Well, you see, it seems the only thing. I must take it out of some
one for this house-match business, and you started it. Will tonight
suit you, after supper?"

"You'll get it hot if you try to touch me."

"We'll see."

"You'd funk taking me on in a scrap," said Walton.

"Would I? As a matter of fact, a scrap would suit me just as well.
Better. Are you ready now?"

"Quite, thanks," sneered Walton. "I've knocked you out before, and
I'll do it again."

"Oh, then it was you that night at camp? I thought so. I spotted your
style. Hitting a chap when he wasn't ready, you know, and so on. Now,
if you'll wait a minute, I'll send across to Blackburn's for Silver. I
told him I should probably want him as a time-keeper tonight."

"What do you want with Silver. Why won't Perry do?"

"Thanks, I'm afraid Perry's time-keeping wouldn't be impartial enough.
Silver, I think, if you don't mind."

Spencer was summoned once more, and despatched to Blackburn's. He
returned with Jimmy.

"Come in, Jimmy," said Kennedy. "Run away, Spencer. Walton and I are
just going to settle a point of order which has arisen, Jimmy. Will
you hold the watch? We ought just to have time before tea."

"Where?" asked Silver.

"My dormitory would be the best place. We can move the beds. I'll go
and get the keys."

Kennedy's dormitory was the largest in the house. After the beds had
been moved back, there was a space in the middle of fifteen feet one
way, and twelve the other--not a large ring, but large enough for two
fighters who meant business.

Walton took off his coat, waistcoat, and shirt. Kennedy, who was still
in football clothes, removed his blazer.

"Half a second," said Jimmy Silver--"what length rounds?"

"Two minutes?" said Kennedy to Walton.

"All right," growled Walton.

"Two minutes, then, and half a minute in between."

"Are you both ready?" asked Jimmy, from his seat on the chest of
drawers.

Kennedy and Walton advanced into the middle of the impromptu ring.

There was dead silence for a moment.

"Time!" said Jimmy Silver.




XIII

THE FIGHT IN THE DORMITORY


Stating it broadly, fighters may be said to be divided into two
classes--those who are content to take two blows if they can give
three in return, and those who prefer to receive as little punishment
as possible, even at the expense of scoring fewer points themselves.
Kennedy's position, when Jimmy Silver called time, was peculiar. On
all the other occasions on which he had fought--with the gloves on in
the annual competition, and at the assault-at-arms--he had gone in for
the policy of taking all that the other man liked to give him, and
giving rather more in exchange. Now, however, he was obliged to alter
his whole style. For a variety of reasons it was necessary that he
should come out of this fight with as few marks as possible. To begin
with, he represented, in a sense, the Majesty of the Law. He was
tackling Walton more by way of an object-lesson to the Kayite
mutineers than for his own personal satisfaction. The object-lesson
would lose in impressiveness if he were compelled to go about for a
week or so with a pair of black eyes, or other adornments of a similar
kind. Again--and this was even more important--if he was badly marked
the affair must come to the knowledge of the headmaster. Being a
prefect, and in the sixth form, he came into contact with the Head
every day, and the disclosure of the fact that he had been engaged in
a pitched battle with a member of his house, who was, in addition to
other disadvantages, very low down in the school, would be likely to
lead to unpleasantness. A school prefect of Eckleton was supposed to
be hedged about with so much dignity that he could quell turbulent
inferiors with a glance. The idea of one of the august body lowering
himself to the extent of emphasising his authority with the bare
knuckle would scandalise the powers.

So Kennedy, rising at the call of time from the bed on which he sat,
came up to the scratch warily.

Walton, on the other hand, having everything to gain and nothing to
lose, and happy in the knowledge that no amount of bruises could do
him any harm, except physically, came on with the evident intention of
making a hurricane fight of it. He had very little science as a boxer.
Heavy two-handed slogging was his forte, and, as the majority of his
opponents up to the present had not had sufficient skill to discount
his strength, he had found this a very successful line of action.
Kennedy and he had never had the gloves on together. In the
competition of the previous year both had entered in their respective
classes, Kennedy as a lightweight, Walton in the middles, and both,
after reaching the semi-final, had been defeated by the narrowest of
margins by men who had since left the school. That had been in the
previous Easter term, and, while Walton had remained much the same as
regards weight and strength, Kennedy, owing to a term of hard bowling
and a summer holiday spent in the open, had filled out. They were now
practically on an equality, as far as weight was concerned. As for
condition, that was all in favour of Kennedy. He played football in
his spare time. Walton, on the days when football was not compulsory,
smoked cigarettes.

Neither of the pair showed any desire to open the fight by shaking
hands. This was not a friendly spar. It was business. The first move
was made by Walton, who feinted with his right and dashed in to fight
at close quarters. It was not a convincing feint. At any rate, it did
not deceive Kennedy. He countered with his left, and swung his right
at the body with all the force he could put into the hit. Walton went
back a pace, sparred for a moment, then came in again, hitting
heavily. Kennedy's counter missed its mark this time. He just stopped
a round sweep of Walton's right, ducked to avoid a similar effort of
his left, and they came together in a clinch.

In a properly regulated glove-fight, the referee, on observing the
principals clinch, says, "Break away there, break away," in a sad,
reproachful voice, and the fighters separate without demur, being very
much alive to the fact that, as far as that contest is concerned,
their destinies are in his hands, and that any bad behaviour in the
ring will lose them the victory. But in an impromptu turn-up like this
one, the combatants show a tendency to ignore the rules so carefully
mapped out by the present Marquess of Queensberry's grandfather, and
revert to the conditions of warfare under which Cribb and Spring won
their battles. Kennedy and Walton, having clinched, proceeded to
wrestle up and down the room, while Jimmy Silver looked on from his
eminence in pained surprise at the sight of two men, who knew the
rules of the ring, so far forgetting themselves.

To do Kennedy justice, it was not his fault. He was only acting in
self-defence. Walton had started the hugging. Also, he had got the
under-grip, which, when neither man knows a great deal of the science
of wrestling, generally means victory. Kennedy was quite sure that he
could not throw his antagonist, but he hung on in the knowledge that
the round must be over shortly, when Walton would have to loose him.

"Time," said Jimmy Silver.

Kennedy instantly relaxed his grip, and in that instant Walton swung
him off his feet, and they came down together with a crash that shook
the room. Kennedy was underneath, and, as he fell, his head came into
violent contact with the iron support of a bed.

Jimmy Silver sprang down from his seat.

"What are you playing at, Walton? Didn't you hear me call time? It was
a beastly foul--the worst I ever saw. You ought to be sacked for a
thing like that. Look here, Kennedy, you needn't go on. I disqualify
Walton for fouling."

The usually genial James stammered with righteous indignation.

Kennedy sat down on a bed, dizzily.

"No," he said; "I'm going on."

"But he fouled you."

"I don't care. I'll look after myself. Is it time yet?"

"Ten seconds more, if you really are going on."

He climbed back on to the chest of drawers.

"Time."

Kennedy came up feeling weak and sick. The force with which he had hit
his head on the iron had left him dazed.

Walton rushed in as before. He had no chivalrous desire to spare his
man by way of compensation for fouling him. What monopolised his
attention was the evident fact that Kennedy was in a bad way, and that
a little strenuous infighting might end the affair in the desired
manner.

It was at this point that Kennedy had reason to congratulate himself
on donning gymnasium shoes. They gave him that extra touch of
lightness which enabled him to dodge blows which he was too weak to
parry. Everything was vague and unreal to him. He seemed to be looking
on at a fight between Walton and some stranger.

Then the effect of his fall began to wear off. He could feel himself
growing stronger. Little by little his head cleared, and he began once
more to take a personal interest in the battle. It is astonishing what
a power a boxer, who has learnt the art carefully, has of automatic
fighting. The expert gentleman who fights under the pseudonym of "Kid
M'Coy" once informed the present writer that in one of his fights he
was knocked down by such a severe hit that he remembered nothing
further, and it was only on reading the paper next morning that he
found, to his surprise, that he had fought four more rounds after the
blow, and won the battle handsomely on points. Much the same thing
happened to Kennedy. For the greater part of the second round he
fought without knowing it. When Jimmy Silver called time he was in as
good case as ever, and the only effects of the blow on his head were a
vast lump underneath the hair, and a settled determination to win or
perish. In a few minutes the bell would ring for tea, and all his
efforts would end in nothing. It was no good fighting a draw with
Walton if he meant to impress the house. He knew exactly what Rumour,
assisted by Walton, would make of the affair in that case. "Have you
heard the latest?" A would ask of B. "Why, Kennedy tried to touch
Walton up for not playing footer, and Walton went for him and would
have given him frightful beans, only they had to go down to tea."
There must be none of that sort of thing.

"Time," said Jimmy Silver, breaking in on his meditations.

It was probably the suddenness and unexpectedness of it that took
Walton aback. Up till now his antagonist had been fighting strictly on
the defensive, and was obviously desirous of escaping punishment as
far as might be possible. And then the fall at the end of round one
had shaken him up, so that he could hardly fight at all at their
second meeting. Walton naturally expected that it would be left to him
to do the leading in round three. Instead of this, however, Kennedy
opened the round with such a lightning attack that Walton was all
abroad in a moment. In his most scientific mood he had never had the
remotest notion of how to guard. He was aggressive and nothing else.
Attacked by a quick hitter, he was useless. Three times Kennedy got
through his guard with his left. The third hit staggered him. Before
he could recover, Kennedy had got his right in, and down went Walton
in a heap.

He was up again as soon as he touched the boards, and down again
almost as soon as he was up. Kennedy was always a straight hitter, and
now a combination of good cause and bad temper--for the thought of the
foul in the first round had stirred what was normally a more or less
placid nature into extreme viciousness--lent a vigour to his left arm
to which he had hitherto been a stranger. He did not use his right
again. It was not needed.

Twice more Walton went down. He was still down when Jimmy Silver
called time. When the half-minute interval between the rounds was
over, he stated that he was not going on.

Kennedy looked across at him as he sat on a bed dabbing tenderly at
his face with a handkerchief, and was satisfied with the success of
his object-lesson. From his own face the most observant of headmasters
could have detected no evidence that he had been engaged in a vulgar
fight. Walton, on the other hand, looked as if he had been engaged in
several--all violent. Kennedy went off to his study to change, feeling
that he had advanced a long step on the thorny path that led to the
Perfect House.




XIV

FENN RECEIVES A LETTER


But the step was not such a very long one after all. What it amounted
to was simply this, that open rebellion ceased in Kay's. When Kennedy
put up the list on the notice-board for the third time, which he did
on the morning following his encounter with Walton, and wrote on it
that the match with Blackburn's would take place that afternoon, his
team turned out like lambs, and were duly defeated by thirty-one
points. He had to play a substitute for Walton, who was rather too
battered to be of any real use in the scrum; but, with that exception,
the team that entered the field was the same that should have entered
it the day before.

But his labours in the Augean stables of Kay's were by no means over.
Practically they had only begun. The state of the house now was
exactly what it had been under Fenn. When Kennedy had taken over the
reins, Kay's had become on the instant twice as bad as it had been
before. By his summary treatment of the revolution, he had, so to
speak, wiped off this deficit. What he had to do now was to begin to
improve things. Kay's was now in its normal state--slack, rowdy in an
underhand way, and utterly useless to the school. It was "up to"
Kennedy, as they say in America, to start in and make something
presentable and useful out of these unpromising materials.

What annoyed him more than anything else was the knowledge that if
only Fenn chose to do the square thing and help him in his work, the
combination would be irresistible. It was impossible to make any
leeway to speak of by himself. If Fenn would only forget his
grievances and join forces with him, they could electrify the house.

Fenn, however, showed no inclination to do anything of the kind. He
and Kennedy never spoke to one another now except when it was
absolutely unavoidable, and then they behaved with that painful
politeness in which the public schoolman always wraps himself as in a
garment when dealing with a friend with whom he has quarrelled.

On the Walton episode Fenn had made no comment, though it is probable
that he thought a good deal.

It was while matters were in this strained condition that Fenn
received a letter from his elder brother. This brother had been at
Eckleton in his time--School House--and had left five years before to
go to Cambridge. Cambridge had not taught him a great deal, possibly
because he did not meet the well-meant efforts of his tutor half-way.
The net result of his three years at King's was--_imprimis_, a
cricket blue, including a rather lucky eighty-three at Lord's;
secondly, a very poor degree; thirdly and lastly, a taste for
literature and the drama--he had been a prominent member of the
Footlights Club. When he came down he looked about him for some
occupation which should combine in happy proportions a small amount of
work and a large amount of salary, and, finding none, drifted into
journalism, at which calling he had been doing very fairly ever since.

"Dear Bob," the letter began. Fenn's names were Robert Mowbray, the
second of which he had spent much of his time in concealing. "Just a
line."

The elder Fenn always began his letters with these words, whether they
ran to one sheet or eight. In the present case the screed was not
particularly long.

"Do you remember my reading you a bit of an opera I was writing? Well,
I finished it, and, after going the round of most of the managers, who
chucked it with wonderful unanimity, it found an admirer in Higgs, the
man who took the part of the duke in _The Outsider_. Luckily, he
happened to be thinking of starting on his own in opera instead of
farce, and there's a part in mine which fits him like a glove. So he's
going to bring it out at the Imperial in the spring, and by way of
testing the piece--trying it on the dog, as it were--he means to tour
with it. Now, here's the point of this letter. We start at Eckleton
next Wednesday. We shall only be there one night, for we go on to
Southampton on Thursday. I suppose you couldn't come and see it? I
remember Peter Brown, who got the last place in the team the year I
got my cricket colours, cutting out of his house (Kay's, by the way)
and going down town to see a piece at the theatre. I'm bound to admit
he got sacked for it, but still, it shows that it can be done. All the
same, I shouldn't try it on if I were you. You'll be able to read all
about the 'striking success' and 'unrestrained enthusiasm' in the
_Eckleton Mirror_ on Thursday. Mind you buy a copy."

The rest of the letter was on other subjects. It took Fenn less than a
minute to decide to patronise that opening performance. He was never
in the habit of paying very much attention to risks when he wished to
do anything, and now he felt as if he cared even less than usual what
might be the outcome of the adventure. Since he had ceased to be on
speaking terms with Kennedy, he had found life decidedly dull. Kennedy
had been his only intimate friend. He had plenty of acquaintances, as
a first eleven and first fifteen man usually has, but none of them
were very entertaining. Consequently he welcomed the idea of a break
in the monotony of affairs. The only thing that had broken it up to
the present had been a burglary at the school house. Some enterprising
marauder had broken in a week before and gone off with a few articles
of value from the headmaster's drawing-room. But the members of the
school house had talked about this episode to such an extent that the
rest of the school had dropped off the subject, exhausted, and
declined to discuss it further. And things had become monotonous once
more.

Having decided to go, Fenn began to consider how he should do it. And
here circumstances favoured him. It happened that on the evening on
which his brother's play was to be produced the headmaster was giving
his once-a-term dinner to the house-prefects. This simplified matters
wonderfully. The only time when his absence from the house was at all
likely to be discovered would be at prayers, which took place at
half-past nine. The prefects' dinner solved this difficulty for him.
Kay would not expect him to be at prayers, thinking he was over at the
Head's, while the Head, if he noticed his absence at all, would
imagine that he was staying away from the dinner owing to a headache
or some other malady. It seemed tempting Providence not to take
advantage of such an excellent piece of luck. For the rest, detection
was practically impossible. Kennedy's advent to the house had ousted
Fenn from the dormitory in which he had slept hitherto, and, there
being no bed available in any of the other dormitories, he had been
put into the spare room usually reserved for invalids whose invalidism
was not of a sufficiently infectious kind to demand their removal to
the infirmary. As for getting back into the house, he would leave the
window of his study unfastened. He could easily climb on to the
window-ledge, and so to bed without let or hindrance.

The distance from Kay's to the town was a mile and a half. If he
started at the hour when he should have been starting for the school
house, he would arrive just in time to see the curtain go up.

Having settled these facts definitely in his mind, he got his books
together and went over to school.




XV

DOWN TOWN


Fenn arrived at the theatre a quarter of an hour before the curtain
rose. Going down a gloomy alley of the High Street, he found himself
at the stage door, where he made inquiries of a depressed-looking man
with a bad cold in the head as to the whereabouts of his brother. It
seemed that he was with Mr Higgs. If he would wait, said the
door-keeper, his name should be sent up. Fenn waited, while the
door-keeper made polite conversation by describing his symptoms to him
in a hoarse growl. Presently the minion who had been despatched to the
upper regions with Fenn's message returned. Would he go upstairs,
third door on the left. Fenn followed the instructions, and found
himself in a small room, a third of which was filled by a huge
iron-bound chest, another third by a very stout man and a
dressing-table, while the rest of the space was comparatively empty,
being occupied by a wooden chair with three legs. On this seat his
brother was trying to balance himself, giving what part of his
attention was not required for this feat to listening to some story
the fat man was telling him. Fenn had heard his deep voice booming as
he went up the passage.

His brother did the honours.

"Glad to see you, glad to see you," said Mr Higgs, for the fat man was
none other than that celebrity. "Take a seat."

Fenn sat down on the chest and promptly tore his trousers on a jagged
piece of iron.

"These provincial dressing-rooms!" said Mr Higgs, by way of comment.
"No room! Never any room! No chairs! Nothing!"

He spoke in short, quick sentences, and gasped between each. Fenn said
it really didn't matter--he was quite comfortable.

"Haven't they done anything about it?" asked Fenn's brother, resuming
the conversation which Fenn's entrance had interrupted. "We've been
having a burglary here," he explained. "Somebody got into the theatre
last night through a window. I don't know what they expected to find."

"Why," said Fenn, "we've had a burglar up our way too. Chap broke into
the school house and went through the old man's drawing-room. The
school house men have been talking about nothing else ever since. I
wonder if it's the same crew."

Mr Higgs turned in his chair, and waved a stick of grease paint
impressively to emphasise his point.

"There," he said. "There! What I've been saying all along. No doubt of
it. Organised gang. And what are the police doing? Nothing, sir,
nothing. Making inquiries. Rot! What's the good of inquiries?"

Fenn's brother suggested mildly that inquiries were a good beginning.
You _must_ start somehow. Mr Higgs scouted the idea.

"There ought not to be any doubt, sir. They ought to _know_. To
KNOW," he added, with firmness.

At this point there filtered through the closed doors the strains of
the opening chorus.

"By Jove, it's begun!" said Fenn's brother. "Come on, Bob."

"Where are we going to?" asked Fenn, as he followed. "The wings?"

But it seemed that the rules of Mr Higgs' company prevented any
outsider taking up his position in that desirable quarter. The only
place from which it was possible to watch the performance, except by
going to the front of the house, was the "flies," situated near the
roof of the building.

Fenn found all the pleasures of novelty in watching the players from
this lofty position. Judged by the cold light of reason, it was not
the best place from which to see a play. It was possible to gain only
a very foreshortened view of the actors. But it was a change after
sitting "in front".

The piece was progressing merrily. The gifted author, at first silent
and pale, began now to show signs of gratification. Now and again he
chuckled as some _jeu de mots_ hit the mark and drew a quick gust
of laughter from the unseen audience. Occasionally he would nudge Fenn
to draw his attention to some good bit of dialogue which was
approaching. He was obviously enjoying himself.

The advent of Mr Higgs completed his satisfaction, for the audience
greeted the comedian with roars of applause. As a rule Eckleton took
its drama through the medium of third-rate touring companies, which
came down with plays that had not managed to attract London to any
great extent, and were trying to make up for failures in the
metropolis by long tours in the provinces. It was seldom that an actor
of the Higgs type paid the town a visit, and in a play, too, which had
positively never appeared before on any stage. Eckleton appreciated
the compliment.

"Listen," said Fenn's brother. "Isn't that just the part for him? It's
just like he was in the dressing-room, eh? Short sentences and
everything. The funny part of it is that I didn't know the man when I
wrote the play. It was all luck."

Mr Higgs' performance sealed the success of the piece. The house
laughed at everything he said. He sang a song in his gasping way, and
they laughed still more. Fenn's brother became incoherent with
delight. The verdict of Eckleton was hardly likely to affect London
theatre-goers, but it was very pleasant notwithstanding. Like every
playwright with his first piece, he had been haunted by the idea that
his dialogue "would not act", that, however humorous it might be to a
reader, it would fall flat when spoken. There was no doubt now as to
whether the lines sounded well.

At the beginning of the second act the great Higgs was not on the
stage, Fenn's brother knowing enough of the game not to bring on his
big man too soon. He had not to enter for ten minutes or so. The
author, who had gone down to see him during the interval, stayed in
the dressing-room. Fenn, however, who wanted to see all of the piece
that he could, went up to the "flies" again.

It occurred to him when he got there that he would see more if he took
the seat which his brother had been occupying. It would give him much
the same view of the stage, and a wider view of the audience. He
thought it would be amusing to see how the audience looked from the
"flies".

Mr W. S. Gilbert once wrote a poem about a certain bishop who, while
fond of amusing himself, objected to his clergy doing likewise. And
the consequence was that whenever he did so amuse himself, he was
always haunted by a phantom curate, who joined him in his pleasures,
much to his dismay. On one occasion he stopped to watch a Punch and
Judy show,

    And heard, as Punch was being treated penally,
    That phantom curate laughing all hyaenally.

The disgust and panic of this eminent cleric was as nothing compared
with that of Fenn, when, shifting to his brother's seat, he got the
first clear view he had had of the audience. In a box to the left of
the dress-circle sat, "laughing all hyaenally", the following
distinguished visitors:

    Mr Mulholland of No. 7 College Buildings.
    Mr Raynes of No. 4 ditto,
      and
    Mr Kay.

Fenn drew back like a flash, knocking his chair over as he did so.

"Giddy, sir?" said a stage hand, pleasantly. "Bless you, lots of gents
is like that when they comes up here. Can't stand the 'eight, they
can't. You'll be all right in a jiffy."

"Yes. It--it is rather high, isn't it?" said Fenn. "Awful glare, too."

He picked up his chair and sat down well out of sight of the box. Had
they seen him? he wondered. Then common sense returned to him. They
could not possibly have seen him. Apart from any other reasons, he had
only been in his brother's seat for half-a-dozen seconds. No. He was
all right so far. But he would have to get back to the house, and at
once. With three of the staff, including his own house-master, ranging
the town, things were a trifle too warm for comfort. He wondered it
had not occurred to him that, with a big attraction at the theatre,
some of the staff might feel an inclination to visit it.

He did not stop to say goodbye to his brother. Descending from his
perch, he hurried to the stage door.

"It's in the toobs that I feel it, sir." said the door-keeper, as he
let him out, resuming their conversation as if they had only just
parted. Fenn hurried off without waiting to hear more.

It was drizzling outside, and there was a fog. Not a "London
particular", but quite thick enough to make it difficult to see where
one was going. People and vehicles passed him, vague phantoms in the
darkness. Occasionally the former collided with him. He began to wish
he had not accepted his brother's invitation. The unexpected sight of
the three masters had shaken his nerve. Till then only the romantic,
adventurous side of the expedition had struck him. Now the risks began
to loom larger in his mind. It was all very well, he felt, to think, as
he had done, that he would be expelled if found out, but that all the
same he would risk it. Detection then had seemed a remote contingency.
With three masters in the offing it became at least a possibility. The
melancholy case of Peter Brown seemed to him now to have a more
personal significance for him.

Wrapped in these reflections, he lost his way.

He did not realise this for some time. It was borne in upon him when
the road he was taking suddenly came to an abrupt end in a blank wall.
Instead of being, as he had fancied, in the High Street, he must have
branched off into some miserable blind alley.

More than ever he wished he had not come. Eckleton was not a town that
took up a great deal of room on the map of England, but it made up for
small dimensions by the eccentricity with which it had been laid out.
On a dark and foggy night, to one who knew little of its geography, it
was a perfect maze.

Fenn had wandered some way when the sound of someone whistling a
popular music-hall song came to him through the gloom. He had never
heard anything more agreeable.

"I say," he shouted at a venture, "can you tell me the way to the High
Street?"

The whistler stopped in the middle of a bar, and presently Fenn saw a
figure sidling towards him in what struck him as a particularly
furtive manner.

"Wot's thet, gav'nor?"

"Can you tell me where the High Street is? I've lost my way."

The vague figure came closer.

"'Igh Street? Yus; yer go--"

A hand shot out, Fenn felt a sharp wrench in the region of his
waistcoat, and a moment later the stranger had vanished into the fog
with the prefect's watch and chain.

Fenn forgot his desire to return to the High Street. He forgot
everything except that he wished to catch the fugitive, maltreat him,
and retrieve his property. He tore in the direction whence came the
patter of retreating foot-steps.

There were moments when he thought he had him, when he could hear the
sound of his breathing. But the fog was against him. Just as he was
almost on his man's heels, the fugitive turned sharply into a street
which was moderately well lighted. Fenn turned after him. He had just
time to recognise the street as his goal, the High Street, when
somebody, walking unexpectedly out of the corner house, stood directly
in his path. Fenn could not stop himself. He charged the man squarely,
clutched him to save himself, and they fell in a heap on the pavement.




XVI

WHAT HAPPENED TO FENN


Fenn was up first. Many years' experience of being tackled at full
speed on the football field had taught him how to fall. The stranger,
whose football days, if he had ever had any, were long past, had gone
down with a crash, and remained on the pavement, motionless. Fenn was
conscious of an ignoble impulse to fly without stopping to chat about
the matter. Then he was seized with a gruesome fear that he had
injured the man seriously, which vanished when the stranger sat up.
His first words were hardly of the sort that one would listen to from
choice. His first printable expression, which did not escape him until
he had been speaking some time, was in the nature of an official
bulletin.

"You've broken my neck," said he.

Fenn renewed his apologies and explanations.

"Your watch!" cried the man in a high, cracked voice. "Don't stand
there talking about your watch, but help me up. What do I care about
your watch? Why don't you look where you are going to? Now then, now
then, don't hoist me as if I were a hod of bricks. That's right. Now
help me indoors, and go away."

Fenn supported him while he walked lamely into the house. He was
relieved to find that there was nothing more the matter with him than
a shaking and a few bruises.

"Door on the left," said the injured one.

Fenn led him down the passage and into a small sitting-room. The gas
was lit, and as he turned it up he saw that the stranger was a man
well advanced in years. He had grey hair that was almost white. His
face was not a pleasant one. It was a mass of lines and wrinkles from
which a physiognomist would have deduced uncomplimentary conclusions
as to his character. Fenn had little skill in that way, but he felt
that for some reason he disliked the man, whose eyes, which were small
and extraordinarily bright, gave rather an eerie look to his face.

"Go away, go away," he kept repeating savagely from his post on the
shabby sofa on which Fenn had deposited him.

"But are you all right? Can't I get you something?" asked the
Eckletonian.

"Go away, go away," repeated the man.

Conversation on these lines could never be really attractive. Fenn
turned to go. As he closed the door and began to feel his way along
the dark passage, he heard the key turn in the lock behind him. The
man could not, he felt, have been very badly hurt if he were able to
get across the room so quickly. The thought relieved him somewhat.
Nobody likes to have the maiming even of the most complete stranger on
his mind. The sensation of relief lasted possibly three seconds. Then
it flashed upon him that in the excitement of the late interview he
had forgotten his cap. That damaging piece of evidence lay on the
table in the sitting-room, and between him and it was a locked door.

He groped his way back, and knocked. No sound came from the room.

"I say," he cried, "you might let me have my cap. I left it on the
table."

No reply.

Fenn half thought of making a violent assault on the door. He
refrained on reflecting that it would be useless. If he could break it
open--which, in all probability, he could not--there would be trouble
such as he had never come across in his life. He was not sure it would
not be an offence for which he would be rendered liable to fine or
imprisonment. At any rate, it would mean the certain detection of his
visit to the town. So he gave the thing up, resolving to return on the
morrow and reopen negotiations. For the present, what he had to do was
to get safely back to his house. He had lost his watch, his cap with
his name in it was in the hands of an evil old man who evidently bore
him a grudge, and he had to run the gauntlet of three house-masters
and get to bed _via_ a study-window. Few people, even after the
dullest of plays, have returned from the theatre so disgusted with
everything as did Fenn. Reviewing the situation as he ran with long,
easy strides over the road that led to Kay's, he found it devoid of
any kind of comfort. Unless his mission in quest of the cap should
prove successful, he was in a tight place.

It is just as well that the gift of second sight is accorded to but
few. If Fenn could have known at this point that his adventures were
only beginning, that what had taken place already was but as the
overture to a drama, it is possible that he would have thrown up the
sponge for good and all, entered Kay's by way of the front door--after
knocking up the entire household--and remarked, in answer to his
house-master's excited questions, "Enough! Enough! I am a victim of
Fate, a Toad beneath the Harrow. Sack me tomorrow, if you like, but
for goodness' sake let me get quietly to bed now."

As it was, not being able to "peep with security into futurity," he
imagined that the worst was over.

He began to revise this opinion immediately on turning in at Kay's
gate. He had hardly got half-way down the drive when the front door
opened and two indistinct figures came down the steps. As they did so
his foot slipped off the grass border on which he was running to
deaden the noise of his steps, and grated sharply on the gravel.

"What's that?" said a voice. The speaker was Mr Kay.

"What's what?" replied a second voice which he recognised as Mr
Mulholland's.

"Didn't you hear a noise?"

"'I heard the water lapping on the crag,'" replied Mr Mulholland,
poetically.

"It was over there," persisted Mr Kay. "I am certain I heard
something--positively certain, Mulholland. And after that burglary at
the school house--"

He began to move towards the spot where Fenn lay crouching behind a
bush. Mr Mulholland followed, mildly amused. They were a dozen yards
away when Fenn, debating in his mind whether it would not be
better--as it would certainly be more dignified--for him to rise and
deliver himself up to justice instead of waiting to be discovered
wallowing in the damp grass behind a laurel bush, was aware of
something soft and furry pressing against his knuckles. A soft purring
sound reached his ears.

He knew at once who it was--Thomas Edward, the matron's cat, ever a
staunch friend of his. Many a time had they taken tea together in his
study in happier days. The friendly animal had sought him out in his
hiding-place, and was evidently trying to intimate that the best thing
they could do now would be to make a regular night of it.

Fenn, as I have said, liked and respected Thomas. In ordinary
circumstances he would not have spoken an unfriendly word to him. But
things were desperate now, and needed remedies to match.

Very softly he passed his hand down the delighted animal's back until
he reached his tail. Then, stifling with an effort all the finer
feelings which should have made such an act impossible, he
administered so vigorous a tweak to that appendage that Thomas, with
one frenzied yowl, sprang through the bush past the two masters and
vanished at full speed into the opposite hedge.

"My goodness!" said Mr Kay, starting back.

It was a further shock to Fenn to find how close he was to the laurel.

    "'Goodness me,
      Why, what was that?
    Silent be,
      It was the cat,'"

chanted Mr Mulholland, who was in poetical vein after the theatre.

"It was a cat!" gasped Mr Kay.

"So I am disposed to imagine. What lungs! We shall be having the
R.S.P.C.A. down on us if we aren't careful. They must have heard that
noise at the headquarters of the Society, wherever they are. Well, if
your zeal for big game hunting is satisfied, and you don't propose to
follow the vocalist through that hedge, I think I will be off. Good
night. Good piece, wasn't it?"

"Excellent. Good night, Mulholland."

"By the way, I wonder if the man who wrote it is a relation of our
Fenn. It may be his brother--I believe he writes. You probably remember
him when he was here. He was before my time. Talking of Fenn, how do
you find the new arrangement answer? Is Kennedy an improvement?"

"Kennedy," said Mr Kay, "is a well-meaning boy, I think. Quite
well-meaning. But he lacks ability, in my opinion. I have had to speak
to him on several occasions on account of disturbances amongst the
juniors. Once I found two boys actually fighting in the junior
dayroom. I was very much annoyed about it."

"And where was Kennedy while this was going on? Was he holding the
watch?"

"The watch?" said Mr Kay, in a puzzled tone of voice. "Kennedy was
over at the gymnasium when it occurred."

"Then it was hardly his fault that the fight took place."

"My dear Mulholland, if the head of a house is efficient, fights
should be impossible. Even when he is not present, his influence, his
prestige, so to speak, should be sufficient to restrain the boys under
him."

Mr Mulholland whistled softly.

"So that's your idea of what the head of your house should be like, is
it? Well, I know of one fellow who would have been just your man.
Unfortunately, he is never likely to come to school at Eckleton."

"Indeed?" said Mr Kay, with interest. "Who is that? Where did you meet
him? What school is he at?"

"I never said I had met him. I only go by what I have heard of him.
And as far as I know, he is not at any school. He was a gentleman of
the name of Napoleon Bonaparte. He might just have been equal to the
arduous duties which devolve upon the head of your house. Goodnight."

And Fenn heard his footsteps crunch the gravel as he walked away. A
minute later the front door shut, and there was a rattle. Mr Kay had
put the chain up and retired for the night.

Fenn lay where he was for a short while longer. Then he rose, feeling
very stiff and wet, and crept into one of the summer-houses which
stood in Mr Kay's garden. Here he sat for an hour and a half, at the
end of which time, thinking that Mr Kay must be asleep, he started out
to climb into the house.

His study was on the first floor. A high garden-seat stood directly
beneath the window and acted as a convenient ladder. It was easy to
get from this on to the window-ledge. Once there he could open the
window, and the rest would be plain sailing.

Unhappily, there was one flaw in his scheme. He had conceived that
scheme in the expectation that the window would be as he had left it.

But it was not.

During his absence somebody had shot the bolt. And, try his hardest,
he could not move the sash an inch.




XVII

FENN HUNTS FOR HIMSELF


Nobody knows for certain the feelings of the camel when his proprietor
placed that last straw on his back. The incident happened so long ago.
If it had occurred in modern times, he would probably have contributed
a first-hand report to the _Daily Mail._ But it is very likely
that he felt on that occasion exactly as Fenn felt when, after a night
of unparalleled misadventure, he found that somebody had cut off his
retreat by latching the window. After a gruelling race Fate had just
beaten him on the tape.

There was no doubt about its being latched. The sash had not merely
stuck. He put all he knew into the effort to raise it, but without a
hint of success. After three attempts he climbed down again and,
sitting on the garden-seat, began to review his position.

If one has an active mind and a fair degree of optimism, the effect of
the "staggerers" administered by Fate passes off after a while. Fenn
had both. The consequence was that, after ten minutes of grey despair,
he was relieved by a faint hope that there might be some other way
into the house than through his study. Anyhow, it would be worth while
to investigate.

His study was at the side of the house. At the back were the kitchen,
the scullery, and the dining-room, and above these more studies and a
couple of dormitories. As a last resort he might fling rocks and other
solids at the windows until he woke somebody up. But he did not feel
like trying this plan until every other had failed. He had no desire
to let a garrulous dormitory into the secret of his wanderings. What
he hoped was that he might find one of the lower windows open.

And so he did.

As he turned the corner of the house he saw what he had been looking
for. The very first window was wide open. His spirits shot up, and for
the first time since he had left the theatre he was conscious of
taking a pleasure in his adventurous career. Fate was with him after
all. He could not help smiling as he remembered how he had felt during
that ten minutes on the garden-seat, when the future seemed blank and
devoid of any comfort whatsoever. And all the time he could have got
in without an effort, if he had only thought of walking half a dozen
yards.

Now that the way was open to him, he wasted no time. He climbed
through into the dark room. He was not certain which room it was, in
spite of his lengthy residence at Kay's.

He let himself down softly till his foot touched the floor. After a
moment's pause he moved forward a step. Then another. At the third
step his knee struck the leg of a table. He must be in the
dining-room. If so, he was all right. He could find his way up to his
room with his eyes shut. It was easy to find out for certain. The
walls of the dining-room at Kay's, as in the other houses, were
covered with photographs. He walked gingerly in the direction in which
he imagined the nearest wall to be, reached it, and passed his hand
along it. Yes, there were photographs. Then all he had to do was to
find the table again, make his way along it, and when he got to the
end the door would be a yard or so to his left. The programme seemed
simple and attractive. But it was added to in a manner which he had
not foreseen. Feeling his way back to the table, he upset a chair. If
he had upset a cart-load of coal on to a sheet of tin it could not, so
it seemed to him in the disordered state of his nerves, have made more
noise. It went down with an appalling crash, striking the table on its
way. "This," thought Fenn, savagely, as he waited, listening, "is
where I get collared. What a fool I am to barge about like this."

He felt that the echoes of that crash must have penetrated to every
corner of the house. But no one came. Perhaps, after all, the noise
had not been so great. He proceeded on his journey down the table,
feeling every inch of the way. The place seemed one bristling mass of
chairs. But, by the exercise of consummate caution, he upset no more
and won through at last in safety to the door.

It was at this point that the really lively and exciting part of his
adventure began. Compared with what was to follow, his evening had
been up to the present dull and monotonous.

As he opened the door there was a sudden stir and crash at the other
end of the room. Fenn had upset one chair and the noise had nearly
deafened him. Now chairs seemed to be falling in dozens. Bang! Bang!
Crash!! (two that time). And then somebody shot through the window
like a harlequin and dashed away across the lawn. Fenn could hear his
footsteps thudding on the soft turf. And at the same moment other
footsteps made themselves heard.

Somebody was coming downstairs.

"Who is that? Is anybody there?"

It was Mr Kay's voice, unmistakably nervous. Fenn darted from the door
and across the passage. At the other side was a boot-cupboard. It was
his only refuge in that direction. What he ought to have done was to
leave the dining-room by the opposite door, which led _via_ a
corridor to the junior dayroom. But he lost his head, and instead of
bolting away from the enemy, went towards him.

The stairs down which Mr Kay was approaching were at the end of the
passage. To reach the dining-room one turned to the right. Beyond the
stairs on the left the passage ended in a wall, so that Mr Kay was
bound to take the right direction in the search. Fenn wondered if he
had a pistol. Not that he cared very much. If the house-master was
going to find him, it would be very little extra discomfort to be shot
at. And Mr Kay's talents as a marksman were in all probability limited
to picking off sitting haystacks. The important point was that he had
a candle. A faint yellow glow preceded him down the stairs. Playing
hide-and-seek with him in the dark, Fenn might have slipped past in
safety; but the candle made that impossible.

He found the boot-room door and slipped through just as Mr Kay turned
the corner. With a thrill of pleasure he found that there was a key
inside. He turned it as quietly as he could, but nevertheless it
grated. Having done this, and seeing nothing else that he could do
except await developments, he sat down on the floor among the boots.
It was not a dignified position for a man who had played for his
county while still at school, but just then he would not have
exchanged it for a throne--if the throne had been placed in the
passage or the dining-room.

The only question was--had he been seen or heard? He thought not; but
his heart began to beat furiously as the footsteps stopped outside the
cupboard door and unseen fingers rattled the handle.

Twice Mr Kay tried the handle, but, finding the cupboard locked,
passed on into the dining-room. The light of the candle ceased to
shine under the door, and Fenn was once more in inky darkness.

He listened intently. A minute later he had made his second mistake.
Instead of waiting, as he should have done, until Mr Kay had retired
for good, he unlocked the door directly he had passed, and when a
muffled crash told him that the house-master was in the dining-room
among the chairs, out he came and fled softly upstairs towards his
bedroom. He thought that Mr Kay might possibly take it into his head
to go round the dormitories to make certain that all the members of
his house were in. In which case all would be discovered.

When he reached his room he began to fling off his clothes with
feverish haste. Once in bed all would be well.

He had got out of his boots, his coat, and his waistcoat, and was
beginning to feel that electric sensation of triumph which only conies
to the man who _just_ pulls through, when he heard Mr Kay coming
down the corridor towards his room. The burglar-hunter, returning from
the dining-room in the full belief that the miscreant had escaped
through the open window, had had all his ardour for the chase
redoubled by the sight of the cupboard door, which Fenn in his hurry
had not remembered to close. Mr Kay had made certain by two separate
trials that that door had been locked. And now it was wide open. Ergo,
the apostle of the jemmy and the skeleton key must still be in the
house. Mr Kay, secure in the recollection that burglars never show
fight if they can possibly help it, determined to search the house.

Fenn made up his mind swiftly. There was no time to finish dressing.
Mr Kay, peering round, might note the absence of the rest of his
clothes from their accustomed pegs if he got into bed as he was. There
was only one thing to be done. He threw back the bed-clothes, ruffled
the sheets till the bed looked as if it had been slept in, and opened
the door just as Mr Kay reached the threshold.

"Anything the matter, sir?" asked Fenn, promptly. "I heard a noise
downstairs. Can I help you?"

Mr Kay looked carefully at the ex-head of his house. Fenn was a
finely-developed youth. He stood six feet, and all of him that was not
bone was muscle. A useful colleague to have by one in a hunt for a
possibly ferocious burglar.

So thought Mr Kay.

"So _you_ heard the noise?" he said. "Well, perhaps you had
better come with me. There is no doubt that a burglar has entered the
house tonight, in spite of the fact that I locked all the windows
myself. Your study window was unlocked, Fenn. It was extremely
careless of you to leave it in such a condition, and I hope you will
be more careful in future. Why, somebody might have got in through
it."

Fenn thought it was not at all unlikely.

"Come along, then. I am sure the man is still in the house. He was
hiding in the cupboard by the dining-room. I know it. I am sure he is
still in the house."

But, in spite of the fact that Fenn was equally sure, half an hour's
search failed to discover any lurking evil-doer.

"You had better go to bed, Fenn," said Mr Kay, disgustedly, at the end
of that period. "He must have got back in some extraordinary manner."

"Yes, sir," agreed Fenn.

He himself had certainly got back in a very extraordinary manner.

However, he _had_ got back, which was the main point.




XVIII

A VAIN QUEST


After all he had gone through that night, it disturbed Fenn very
little to find on the following morning that the professional
cracksman had gone off with one of the cups in his study. Certainly,
it was not as bad as it might have been, for he had only abstracted
one out of the half dozen that decorated the room. Fenn was a fine
runner, and had won the "sprint" events at the sports for two years
now.

The news of the burglary at Kay's soon spread about the school. Mr Kay
mentioned it to Mr Mulholland, and Mr Mulholland discussed it at lunch
with the prefects of his house. The juniors of Kay's were among the
last to hear of it, but when they did, they made the most of it, to
the disgust of the School House fags, to whom the episode seemed in
the nature of an infringement of copyright. Several spirited
by-battles took place that day owing to this, and at the lower end of
the table of Kay's dining-room at tea that evening there could be seen
many swollen countenances. All, however, wore pleased smiles. They had
proved to the School House their right to have a burglary of their own
if they liked. It was the first occasion since Kennedy had become head
of the house that Kay's had united in a common and patriotic cause.

Directly afternoon school was over that day, Fenn started for the
town. The only thing that caused him any anxiety now was the fear lest
the cap which he had left in the house in the High Street might rise
up as evidence against him later on. Except for that, he was safe. The
headmaster had evidently not remembered his absence from the festive
board, or he would have spoken to him on the subject before now. If he
could but recover the lost cap, all would be right with the world.
Give him back that cap, and he would turn over a new leaf with a
rapidity and emphasis which would lower the world's record for that
performance. He would be a reformed character. He would even go to the
extent of calling a truce with Mr Kay, climbing down to Kennedy, and
offering him his services in his attempt to lick the house into shape.

As a matter of fact, he had had this idea before. Jimmy Silver, who
was in the position--common at school--of being very friendly with two
people who were not on speaking terms, had been at him on the topic.

"It's rot," James had said, with perfect truth, "to see two chaps like
you making idiots of themselves over a house like Kay's. And it's all
your fault, too," he had added frankly. "You know jolly well you
aren't playing the game. You ought to be backing Kennedy up all the
time. Instead of which, you go about trying to look like a Christian
martyr--"

"I don't," said Fenn, indignantly.

"Well, like a stuffed frog, then--it's all the same to me. It's
perfect rot. If I'm walking with Kennedy, you stalk past as if we'd
both got the plague or something. And if I'm with you, Kennedy
suddenly remembers an appointment, and dashes off at a gallop in the
opposite direction. If I had to award the bronze medal for drivelling
lunacy in this place, you would get it by a narrow margin, and Kennedy
would be _proxime_, and honourably mentioned. Silly idiots!"

"Don't stop, Jimmy. Keep it up," said Fenn, settling himself in his
chair. The dialogue was taking place in Silver's study.

"My dear chap, you didn't think I'd finished, surely! I was only
trying to find some description that would suit you. But it's no good.
I can't. Look here, take my advice--the advice," he added, in the
melodramatic voice he was in the habit of using whenever he wished to
conceal the fact that he was speaking seriously, "of an old man who
wishes ye both well. Go to Kennedy, fling yourself on his chest, and
say, 'We have done those things which we ought not to have done--' No.
As you were! Compn'y, 'shun! Say 'J. Silver says that I am a rotter. I
am a worm. I have made an ass of myself. But I will be good. Shake,
pard!' That's what you've got to do. Come in."

And in had come Kennedy. The attractions of Kay's were small, and he
usually looked in on Jimmy Silver in the afternoons.

"Oh, sorry," he said, as he saw Fenn. "I thought you were alone,
Jimmy."

"I was just going," said Fenn, politely.

"Oh, don't let me disturb you," protested Kennedy, with winning
courtesy.

"Not at all," said Fenn.

"Oh, if you really were--"

"Oh, yes, really."

"Get out, then," growled Jimmy, who had been listening in speechless
disgust to the beautifully polite conversation just recorded. "I'll
forward that bronze medal to you, Fenn."

And as the door closed he had turned to rend Kennedy as he had rent
Fenn; while Fenn walked back to Kay's feeling that there was a good
deal in what Jimmy had said.

So that when he went down town that afternoon in search of his cap, he
pondered as he walked over the advisability of making a fresh start.
It would not be a bad idea. But first he must concentrate his energies
on recovering what he had lost.

He found the house in the High Street without a great deal of
difficulty, for he had marked the spot carefully as far as that had
been possible in the fog.

The door was opened to him, not by the old man with whom he had
exchanged amenities on the previous night, but by a short, thick
fellow, who looked exactly like a picture of a loafer from the pages
of a comic journal. He eyed Fenn with what might have been meant for
an inquiring look. To Fenn it seemed merely menacing.

"Wodyer want?" he asked, abruptly.

Eckleton was not a great distance from London, and, as a consequence,
many of London's choicest blackguards migrated there from time to
time. During the hopping season, and while the local races were on,
one might meet with two Cockney twangs for every country accent.

"I want to see the old gentleman who lives here," said Fenn.

"Wot old gentleman?"

"I'm afraid I don't know his name. Is this a home for old gentlemen?
If you'll bring out all you've got, I'll find my one."

"Wodyer want see the old gentleman for?"

"To ask for my cap. I left it here last night."

"Oh, yer left it 'ere last night! Well, yer cawn't see 'im."

"Not from here, no," agreed Fenn. "Being only eyes, you see," he
quoted happily, "my wision's limited. But if you wouldn't mind moving
out of the way--"

"Yer cawn't see 'im. Blimey, 'ow much more of it, I should like to
know. Gerroutovit, cawn't yer! You and yer caps."

And he added a searching expletive by way of concluding the sentence
fittingly. After which he slipped back and slammed the door, leaving
Fenn waiting outside like the Peri at the gate of Paradise.

His resemblance to the Peri ceased after the first quarter of a
minute. That lady, we read, took her expulsion lying down. Fenn was
more vigorous. He seized the knocker, and banged lustily on the door.
He had given up all hope of getting back the cap. All he wanted was to
get the doorkeeper out into the open again, when he would proceed to
show him, to the best of his ability, what was what. It would not be
the first time he had taken on a gentleman of the same class and a
similar type of conversation.

But the man refused to be drawn. For all the reply Fenn's knocking
produced, the house might have been empty. At last, having tired his
wrist and collected a small crowd of Young Eckleton, who looked as if
they expected him to proceed to further efforts for their amusement,
he gave it up, and retired down the High Street with what dignity he
could command--which, as he was followed for the first fifty yards by
the silent but obviously expectant youths, was not a great deal.

They left him, disappointed, near the Town Hall, and Fenn continued on
his way alone. The window of the grocer's shop, with its tins of
preserved apricots and pots of jam, recalled to his mind what he had
forgotten, that the food at Kay's, though it might be wholesome (which
he doubted), was undeniably plain, and, secondly, that he had run out
of jam. Now that he was here he might as well supply that deficiency.

Now it chanced that Master Wren, of Kay's, was down town--without
leave, as was his habit--on an errand of a very similar nature. Walton
had found that he, like Fenn, lacked those luxuries of life which are
so much more necessary than necessities, and, being unable to go
himself, owing to the unfortunate accident of being kept in by his
form-master, had asked Wren to go for him. Wren's visit to the
grocer's was just ending when Fenn's began.

They met in the doorway.

Wren looked embarrassed, and nearly dropped a pot of honey, which he
secured low down after the manner of a catch in the slips. Fenn, on
the other hand, took no notice of his fellow-Kayite, but walked on
into the shop and began to inspect the tins of biscuits which were
stacked on the floor by the counter.




XIX

THE GUILE OF WREN


Wren did not quite know what to make of this. Why had not Fenn said a
word to him? There were one or two prefects in the school whom he
might have met even at such close quarters and yet have cherished a
hope that they had not seen him. Once he had run right into Drew, of
the School House, and escaped unrecognised. But with Fenn it was
different. Compared to Fenn, lynxes were astigmatic. He must have
spotted him.

There was a vein of philosophy in Wren's composition. He felt that he
might just as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb. In other words,
having been caught down town without leave, he might as well stay
there and enjoy himself a little while longer before going back to be
executed. So he strolled off down the High Street, bought a few things
at a stationer's, and wound up with an excellent tea at the
confectioner's by the post-office.

It was as he was going to this meal that Kennedy caught sight of him.
Kennedy had come down town to visit the local photographer, to whom he
had entrusted a fortnight before the pleasant task of taking his
photograph. As he had heard nothing from him since, he was now coming
to investigate. He entered the High Street as Wren was turning into
the confectioner's, saw him, and made a note of it for future
reference.

When Wren returned to the house just before lock-up, he sought counsel
of Walton.

"I say," he said, as he handed over the honey he had saved so neatly
from destruction, "what would you do? Just as I was coming out of the
shop, I barged into Fenn. He must have twigged me."

"Didn't he say anything?"

"Not a word. I couldn't make it out, because he must have seen me. We
weren't a yard away from one another."

"It's dark in the shop," suggested Walton.

"Not at the door; which is where we met."

Before Walton could find anything to say in reply to this, their
conversation was interrupted by Spencer.

"Kennedy wants you, Wren," said Spencer. "You'd better buck up; he's
in an awful wax."

Next to Walton, the vindictive Spencer objected most to Wren, and he
did not attempt to conceal the pleasure he felt in being the bearer of
this ominous summons.

The group broke up. Wren went disconsolately upstairs to Kennedy's
study; Walton smacked Spencer's head--more as a matter of form than
because he had done anything special to annoy him--and retired to the
senior dayroom; while Spencer, muttering darkly to himself, avoided a
second smack and took cover in the junior room, where he consoled
himself by toasting a piece of india-rubber in the gas till it made
the atmosphere painful to breathe in, and recalling with pleasure the
condition Walton's face had been in for the day or two following his
encounter with Kennedy in the dormitory.

Kennedy was working when Wren knocked at his door.

He had not much time to spare on a bounds-breaking fag; and his manner
was curt.

"I saw you going into Rose's, in the High Street, this afternoon,
Wren," he said, looking up from his Greek prose. "I didn't give you
leave. Come up here after prayers tonight. Shut the door."

Wren went down to consult Walton again. His attitude with regard to a
licking from the head of the house was much like that of the other
fags. Custom had, to a certain extent, inured him to these painful
interviews, but still, if it was possible, he preferred to keep out of
them. Under Fenn's rule he had often found a tolerably thin excuse
serve his need. Fenn had so many other things to do that he was not
unwilling to forego an occasional licking, if the excuse was good
enough. And he never took the trouble to find out whether the
ingenious stories Wren was wont to serve up to him were true or not.
Kennedy, Wren reflected uncomfortably, had given signs that this
easy-going method would not do for him. Still, it might be possible to
hunt up some story that would meet the case. Walton had a gift in that
direction.

"He says I'm to go to his study after prayers," reported Wren. "Can't
you think of any excuse that would do?"

"Can't understand Fenn running you in," said Walton. "I thought he
never spoke to Kennedy."

Wren explained.

"It wasn't Fenn who ran me in. Kennedy was down town, too, and twigged
me going into Rose's. I went there and had tea after I got your things
at the grocer's."

"Oh, he spotted you himself, did he?" said Walton. "And he doesn't
know Fenn saw you?"

"I don't think so."

"Then I've got a ripping idea. When he has you up tonight, swear that
you got leave from Fenn to go down town."

"But he'll ask him."

"The odds are that he won't. He and Fenn had a row at the beginning of
term, and never speak to one another if they can help it. It's ten to
one that he will prefer taking your yarn to going and asking Fenn if
it's true or not. Then he's bound to let you off."

Wren admitted that the scheme was sound.

At the conclusion of prayers, therefore, he went up again to Kennedy's
study, with a more hopeful air than he had worn on his previous visit.

"Come in," said Kennedy, reaching for the swagger-stick which he was
accustomed to use at these ceremonies.

"Please, Kennedy," said Wren, glibly. "I did get leave to go down town
this afternoon."

"What!"

Wren repeated the assertion.

"Who gave you leave?"

"Fenn."

The thing did not seem to be working properly. When he said the word
"Fenn", Wren expected to see Kennedy retire baffled, conscious that
there was nothing more to be said or done. Instead of this, the remark
appeared to infuriate him.

"It's just like your beastly cheek," he said, glaring at the
red-headed delinquent, "to ask Fenn for leave instead of me. You know
perfectly well that only the head of the house can give leave to go
down town. I don't know how often you and the rest of the junior
dayroom have played this game, but it's going to stop now. You'd
better remember another time when you want to go to Rose's that I've
got to be consulted first."

With which he proceeded to ensure to the best of his ability that the
memory of Master Wren should not again prove treacherous in this
respect.

"How did it work?" asked Walton, when Wren returned.

"It didn't," said Wren, briefly.

Walton expressed an opinion that Kennedy was a cad; which, however
sound in itself, did little to improve the condition of Wren.

Having disposed of Wren, Kennedy sat down seriously to consider this
new development of a difficult situation. Hitherto he had imagined
Fenn to be merely a sort of passive resister who confined himself to
the Achilles-in-his-tent business, and was only a nuisance because he
refused to back him up. To find him actually aiding and abetting the
house in its opposition to its head was something of a shock. And yet,
if he had given Wren leave to go down town, he had probably done the
same kind office by others. It irritated Kennedy more than the most
overt act of enmity would have done. It was not good form. It was
hitting below the belt. There was, of course, the chance that Wren's
story had not been true. But he did not build much on that. He did not
yet know his Wren well, and believed that such an audacious lie would
be beyond the daring of a fag. But it would be worth while to make
inquiries. He went down the passage to Fenn's study. Fenn, however,
had gone to bed, so he resolved to approach him on the subject next
day. There was no hurry.

He went to his dormitory, feeling very bitter towards Fenn, and
rehearsing home truths with which to confound him on the morrow.




XX

JIMMY THE PEACEMAKER


In these hustling times it is not always easy to get ten minutes'
conversation with an acquaintance in private. There was drill in the
dinner hour next day for the corps, to which Kennedy had to go
directly after lunch. It did not end till afternoon school began. When
afternoon school was over, he had to turn out and practise scrummaging
with the first fifteen, in view of an important school match which was
coming off on the following Saturday. Kennedy had not yet received his
cap, but he was playing regularly for the first fifteen, and was
generally looked upon as a certainty for one of the last places in the
team. Fenn, being a three-quarter, had not to participate in this
practice. While the forwards were scrummaging on the second fifteen
ground, the outsides ran and passed on the first fifteen ground over
at the other end of the field. Fenn's training for the day finished
earlier than Kennedy's, the captain of the Eckleton fifteen, who led
the scrum, not being satisfied with the way in which the forwards
wheeled. He kept them for a quarter of an hour after the outsides had
done their day's work, and when Kennedy got back to the house and went
to Fenn's study, the latter was not there. He had evidently changed
and gone out again, for his football clothes were lying in a heap in a
corner of the room. Going back to his own study, he met Spencer.

"Have you seen Fenn?" he asked.

"No," said the fag. "He hasn't come in."

"He's come in all right, but he's gone out again. Go and ask Taylor if
he knows where he is."

Taylor was Fenn's fag.

Spencer went to the junior dayroom, and returned with the information
that Taylor did not know.

"Oh, all right, then--it doesn't matter," said Kennedy, and went into
his study to change.

He had completed this operation, and was thinking of putting his
kettle on for tea, when there was a knock at the door.

It was Baker, Jimmy Silver's fag.

"Oh, Kennedy," he said, "Silver says, if you aren't doing anything
special, will you go over to his study to tea?"

"Why, is there anything on?"

It struck him as curious that Jimmy should take the trouble to send
his fag over to Kay's with a formal invitation. As a rule the head of
Blackburn's kept open house. His friends were given to understand that
they could drop in whenever they liked. Kennedy looked in for tea
three times a week on an average.

"I don't think so," said Baker.

"Who else is going to be there?"

Jimmy Silver sometimes took it into his head to entertain weird beings
from other houses whose brothers or cousins he had met in the
holidays. On such occasions he liked to have some trusty friend by him
to help the conversation along. It struck Kennedy that this might be
one of those occasions. If so, he would send back a polite but firm
refusal of the invitation. Last time he had gone to help Jimmy
entertain a guest of this kind, conversation had come to a dead
standstill a quarter of an hour after his arrival, the guest refusing
to do anything except eat prodigiously, and reply "Yes" or "No", as
the question might demand, when spoken to. Also he had declined to
stir from his seat till a quarter to seven. Kennedy was not going to
be let in for another orgy of that nature if he knew it.

"Who's with Silver?" he asked.

"Only Fenn," said Baker.

Kennedy pondered for a moment.

"All right," he said, at last, "tell him I'll be round in a few
minutes."

He sat thinking the thing over after Baker had gone back to
Blackburn's with the message. He saw Silver's game, of course. Jimmy
had made no secret for some time of his disgust at the coolness
between Kennedy and Fenn. Not knowing all the circumstances, he
considered it absolute folly. If only he could get the two together
over a quiet pot of tea, he imagined that it would not be a difficult
task to act effectively as a peacemaker.

Kennedy was sorry for Jimmy. He appreciated his feelings in the
matter. He would not have liked it himself if his two best friends had
been at daggers drawn. Still, he could not bring himself to treat Fenn
as if nothing had happened, simply to oblige Silver. There had been a
time when he might have done it, but now that Fenn had started a
deliberate campaign against him by giving Wren--and probably, thought
Kennedy, half the other fags in the house--leave down town when he
ought to have sent them on to him, things had gone too far. However,
he could do no harm by going over to Jimmy's to tea, even if Fenn was
there. He had not looked to interview Fenn before an audience, but if
that audience consisted only of Jimmy, it would not matter so much.

His advent surprised Fenn. The astute James, fancying that if he
mentioned that he was expecting Kennedy to tea, Fenn would make a bolt
for it, had said nothing about it.

When Kennedy arrived there was one of those awkward pauses which are
so difficult to fill up in a satisfactory manner.

"Now you're up, Fenn," said Jimmy, as the latter rose, evidently with
the intention of leaving the study, "you might as well reach down that
toasting-fork and make some toast."

"I'm afraid I must be off now, Jimmy," said Fenn.

"No you aren't," said Silver. "You bustle about and make yourself
useful, and don't talk rot. You'll find your cup on that shelf over
there, Kennedy. It'll want a wipe round. Better use the table-cloth."

There was silence in the study until tea was ready. Then Jimmy Silver
spoke.

"Long time since we three had tea together," he said, addressing the
remark to the teapot.

"Kennedy's a busy man," said Fenn, suavely. "He's got a house to look
after."

"And I'm going to look after it," said Kennedy, "as you'll find."

Jimmy Silver put in a plaintive protest.

"I wish you two men wouldn't talk shop," he said. "It's bad enough
having Kay's next door to one, without your dragging it into the
conversation. How were the forwards this evening, Kennedy?"

"Not bad," said Kennedy, shortly.

"I wonder if we shall lick Tuppenham on Saturday?"

"I don't know," said Kennedy; and there was silence again.

"Look here, Jimmy," said Kennedy, after a long pause, during which the
head of Blackburn's tried to fill up the blank in the conversation by
toasting a piece of bread in a way which was intended to suggest that
if he were not so busy, the talk would be unchecked and animated,
"it's no good. We must have it out some time, so it may as well be
here as anywhere else. I've been looking for Fenn all day."

"Sorry to give you all that trouble," said Fenn, with a sneer. "Got
something important to say?"

"Yes."

"Go ahead, then."

Jimmy Silver stood between them with the toasting-fork in his hand, as
if he meant to plunge it into the one who first showed symptoms of
flying at the other's throat. He was unhappy. His peace-making
tea-party was not proving a success.

"I wanted to ask you," said Kennedy, quietly, "what you meant by
giving the fags leave down town when you knew that they ought to come
to me?"

The gentle and intelligent reader will remember (though that miserable
worm, the vapid and irreflective reader, will have forgotten) that at
the beginning of the term the fags of Kay's had endeavoured to show
their approval of Fenn and their disapproval of Kennedy by applying to
the former for leave when they wished to go to the town; and that Fenn
had received them in the most ungrateful manner with blows instead of
exeats. Strong in this recollection, he was not disturbed by Kennedy's
question. Indeed, it gave him a comfortable feeling of rectitude.
There is nothing more pleasant than to be accused to your face of
something which you can deny on the spot with an easy conscience. It
is like getting a very loose ball at cricket. Fenn felt almost
friendly towards Kennedy.

"I meant nothing," he replied, "for the simple reason that I didn't do
it."

"I caught Wren down town yesterday, and he said you had given him
leave."

"Then he lied, and I hope you licked him."

"There you are, you see," broke in Jimmy Silver triumphantly, "it's
all a misunderstanding. You two have got no right to be cutting one
another. Why on earth can't you stop all this rot, and behave like
decent members of society again?"

"As a matter of fact," said Fenn, "they did try it on earlier in the
term. I wasted a lot of valuable time pointing out to them with a
swagger-stick--that I was the wrong person to come to. I'm sorry you
should have thought I could play it as low down as that."

Kennedy hesitated. It is not very pleasant to have to climb down after
starting a conversation in a stormy and wrathful vein. But it had to
be done.

"I'm sorry, Fenn," he said; "I was an idiot."

Jimmy Silver cut in again.

"You were," he said, with enthusiasm. "You both were. I used to think
Fenn was a bigger idiot than you, but now I'm inclined to call it a
dead heat. What's the good of going on trying to see which of you can
make the bigger fool of himself? You've both lowered all previous
records."

"I suppose we have," said Fenn. "At least, I have."

"No, I have," said Kennedy.

"You both have," said Jimmy Silver. "Another cup of tea, anybody? Say
when."

Fenn and Kennedy walked back to Kay's together, and tea-d together in
Fenn's study on the following afternoon, to the amazement--and even
scandal--of Master Spencer, who discovered them at it. Spencer liked
excitement; and with the two leaders of the house at logger-heads,
things could never be really dull. If, as appearances seemed to
suggest, they had agreed to settle their differences, life would
become monotonous again--possibly even unpleasant.

This thought flashed through Spencer's brain (as he called it) when he
opened Fenn's door and found him helping Kennedy to tea.

"Oh, the headmaster wants to see you, please, Fenn," said Spencer,
recovering from his amazement, "and told me to give you this."

"This" was a prefect's cap. Fenn recognised it without difficulty. It
was the cap he had left in the sitting-room of the house in the High
Street.




XXI

IN WHICH AN EPISODE IS CLOSED


"Thanks," said Fenn.

He stood twirling the cap round in his hand as Spencer closed the
door. Then he threw it on to the table. He did not feel particularly
disturbed at the thought of the interview that was to come. He had
been expecting the cap to turn up, like the corpse of Eugene Aram's
victim, at some inconvenient moment. It was a pity that it had come
just as things looked as if they might be made more or less tolerable
in Kay's. He had been looking forward with a grim pleasure to the
sensation that would be caused in the house when it became known that
he and Kennedy had formed a combine for its moral and physical
benefit. But that was all over. He would be sacked, beyond a doubt. In
the history of Eckleton, as far as he knew it, there had never been a
case of a fellow breaking out at night and not being expelled when he
was caught. It was one of the cardinal sins in the school code. There
had been the case of Peter Brown, which his brother had mentioned in
his letter. And in his own time he had seen three men vanish from
Eckleton for the same offence. He did not flatter himself that his
record at the school was so good as to make it likely that the
authorities would stretch a point in his favour.

"So long, Kennedy," he said. "You'll be here when I get back, I
suppose?"

"What does he want you for, do you think?" asked Kennedy, stretching
himself, with a yawn. It never struck him that Fenn could be in any
serious trouble. Fenn was a prefect; and when the headmaster sent for
a prefect, it was generally to tell him that he had got a split
infinitive in his English Essay that week.

"Glad I'm not you," he added, as a gust of wind rattled the sash, and
the rain dashed against the pane. "Beastly evening to have to go out."

"It isn't the rain I mind," said Fenn; "it's what's going to happen
when I get indoors again," and refused to explain further. There would
be plenty of time to tell Kennedy the whole story when he returned. It
was better not to keep the headmaster waiting.

The first thing he noticed on reaching the School House was the
strange demeanour of the butler. Whenever Fenn had had occasion to
call on the headmaster hitherto, Watson had admitted him with the air
of a high priest leading a devotee to a shrine of which he was the
sole managing director. This evening he seemed restless, excited.

"Good evening, Mr Fenn," he said. "This way, sir."

Those were his actual words. Fenn had not known for certain until now
that he _could_ talk. On previous occasions their conversations
had been limited to an "Is the headmaster in?" from Fenn, and a
stately inclination of the head from Watson. The man was getting a
positive babbler.

With an eager, springy step, distantly reminiscent of a shopwalker
heading a procession of customers, with a touch of the style of the
winner in a walking-race to Brighton, the once slow-moving butler led
the way to the headmaster's study.

For the first time since he started out, Fenn was conscious of a
tremor. There is something about a closed door, behind which somebody
is waiting to receive one, which appeals to the imagination,
especially if the ensuing meeting is likely to be an unpleasant one.

"Ah, Fenn," said the headmaster. "Come in."

Fenn wondered. It was not in this tone of voice that the Head was wont
to begin a conversation which was going to prove painful.

"You've got your cap, Fenn? I gave it to a small boy in your house to
take to you."

"Yes, sir."

He had given up all hope of understanding the Head's line of action.
Unless he was playing a deep game, and intended to flash out suddenly
with a keen question which it would be impossible to parry, there
seemed nothing to account for the strange absence of anything unusual
in his manner. He referred to the cap as if he had borrowed it from
Fenn, and had returned it by bearer, hoping that its loss had not
inconvenienced him at all.

"I daresay," continued the Head, "that you are wondering how it came
into my possession. You missed it, of course?"

"Very much, sir," said Fenn, with perfect truth.

"It has just been brought to my house, together with a great many
other things, more valuable, perhaps,"--here he smiled a
head-magisterial smile--"by a policeman from Eckleton."

Fenn was still unequal to the intellectual pressure of the
conversation. He could understand, in a vague way, that for some
unexplained reason things were going well for him, but beyond that his
mind was in a whirl.

"You will remember the unfortunate burglary of Mr Kay's house and
mine. Your cap was returned with the rest of the stolen property."

"Just so," thought Fenn. "The rest of the stolen property? Exactly.
_Go_ on. Don't mind me. I shall begin to understand soon, I
suppose."

He condensed these thoughts into the verbal reply, "Yes, sir."

"I sent for you to identify your own property. I see there is a silver
cup belonging to you. Perhaps there are also other articles. Go and
see. You will find them on that table. They are in a hopeless state of
confusion, having been conveyed here in a sack. Fortunately, nothing
is broken."

He was thinking of certain valuables belonging to himself which had
been abstracted from his drawing-room on the occasion of the burglar's
visit to the School House.

Fenn crossed the room, and began to inspect the table indicated. On it
was as mixed a collection of valuable and useless articles as one
could wish to see. He saw his cup at once, and attached himself to it.
But of all the other exhibits in this private collection, he could
recognise nothing else as his property.

"There is nothing of mine here except the cup, sir," he said.

"Ah. Then that is all, I think. You are going back to Mr Kay's. Then
please send Kennedy to me. Good night, Fenn."

"Good night, sir."

Even now Fenn could not understand it. The more he thought it over,
the more his brain reeled. He could grasp the fact that his cap and
his cup were safe again, and that there was evidently going to be no
sacking for the moment. But how it had all happened, and how the
police had got hold of his cap, and why they had returned it with the
loot gathered in by the burglar who had visited Kay's and the School
House, were problems which, he had to confess, were beyond him.

He walked to Kay's through the rain with the cup under his mackintosh,
and freely admitted to himself that there were things in heaven and
earth--and particularly earth--which no fellow could understand.

"I don't know," he said, when Kennedy pressed for an explanation of
the reappearance of the cup. "It's no good asking me. I'm going now to
borrow the matron's smelling-salts: I feel faint. After that I shall
wrap a wet towel round my head, and begin to think it out. Meanwhile,
you're to go over to the Head. He's had enough of me, and he wants to
have a look at you."

"Me?" said Kennedy. "Why?"

"Now, is it any good asking _me?_?" said Fenn. "If you can find
out what it's all about, I'll thank you if you'll come and tell me."

Ten minutes later Kennedy returned. He carried a watch and chain.

"I couldn't think what had happened to my watch," he said. "I missed
it on the day after that burglary here, but I never thought of
thinking it had been collared by a professional. I thought I must have
lost it somewhere."

"Well, have you grasped what's been happening?"

"I've grasped my ticker, which is good enough for me. Half a second.
The old man wants to see the rest of the prefects. He's going to work
through the house in batches, instead of man by man. I'll just go round
the studies and rout them out, and then I'll come back and explain. It's
perfectly simple."

"Glad you think so," said Fenn.

Kennedy went and returned.

"Now," he said, subsiding into a deck-chair, "what is it you don't
understand?"

"I don't understand anything. Begin at the beginning."

"I got the yarn from the butler--what's his name?"

"Those who know him well enough to venture to give him a name--I've
never dared to myself--call him Watson," said Fenn.

"I got the yarn from Watson. He was as excited as anything about it. I
never saw him like that before."

"I noticed something queer about him."

"He's awfully bucked, and is doing the Ancient Mariner business all
over the place. Wants to tell the story to everyone he sees."

"Well, suppose you follow his example. I want to hear about it."

"Well, it seems that the police have been watching a house at the
corner of the High Street for some time--what's up?"

"Nothing. Go on."

"But you said, 'By Jove!'"

"Well, why shouldn't I say 'By Jove'? When you are telling sensational
yarns, it's my duty to say something of the sort. Buck along."

"It's a house not far from the Town Hall, at the corner of Pegwell
Street--you've probably been there scores of times."

"Once or twice, perhaps," said Fenn. "Well?"

"About a month ago two suspicious-looking bounders went to live there.
Watson says their faces were enough to hang them. Anyhow, they must
have been pretty bad, for they made even the Eckleton police, who are
pretty average-sized rotters, suspicious, and they kept an eye on
them. Well, after a bit there began to be a regular epidemic of
burglary round about here. Watson says half the houses round were
broken into. The police thought it was getting a bit too thick, but
they didn't like to raid the house without some jolly good evidence
that these two men were the burglars, so they lay low and waited till
they should give them a decent excuse for jumping on them. They had
had a detective chap down from London, by the way, to see if he
couldn't do something about the burglaries, and he kept his eye on
them, too."

"They had quite a gallery. Didn't they notice any of the eyes?"

"No. Then after a bit one of them nipped off to London with a big bag.
The detective chap was after him like a shot. He followed him from the
station, saw him get into a cab, got into another himself, and stuck
to him hard. The front cab stopped at about a dozen pawnbrokers'
shops. The detective Johnny took the names and addresses, and hung on
to the burglar man all day, and finally saw him return to the station,
where he caught a train back to Eckleton. Directly he had seen him
off, the detective got into a cab, called on the dozen pawnbrokers,
showed his card, with 'Scotland Yard' on it, I suppose, and asked to
see what the other chap had pawned. He identified every single thing
as something that had been collared from one of the houses round
Eckleton way. So he came back here, told the police, and they raided
the house, and there they found stacks of loot of all descriptions."

"Including my cap," said Fenn, thoughtfully. "I see now."

"Rummy the man thinking it worth his while to take an old cap," said
Kennedy.

"Very," said Fenn. "But it's been a rum business all along."




XXII

KAY'S CHANGES ITS NAME


For the remaining weeks of the winter term, things went as smoothly in
Kay's as Kay would let them. That restless gentleman still continued
to burst in on Kennedy from time to time with some sensational story
of how he had found a fag doing what he ought not to have done. But
there was a world of difference between the effect these visits had
now and that which they had had when Kennedy had stood alone in the
house, his hand against all men. Now that he could work off the
effects of such encounters by going straight to Fenn's study and
picking the house-master to pieces, the latter's peculiar methods
ceased to be irritating, and became funny. Mr Kay was always ferreting
out the weirdest misdoings on the part of the members of his house,
and rushing to Kennedy's study to tell him about them at full length,
like a rather indignant dog bringing a rat he has hunted down into a
drawing-room, to display it to the company. On one occasion, when Fenn
and Jimmy Silver were in Kennedy's study, Mr Kay dashed in to complain
bitterly that he had discovered that the junior dayroom kept mice in
their lockers. Apparently this fact seemed to him enough to cause an
epidemic of typhoid fever in the place, and he hauled Kennedy over the
coals, in a speech that lasted five minutes, for not having detected
this plague-spot in the house.

"So that's the celebrity at home, is it?" said Jimmy Silver, when he
had gone. "I now begin to understand more or less why this house wants
a new Head every two terms. Is he often taken like that?"

"He's never anything else," said Kennedy. "Fenn keeps a list of the
things he rags me about, and we have an even shilling on, each week,
that he will beat the record of the previous week. At first I used to
get the shilling if he lowered the record; but after a bit it struck
us that it wasn't fair, so now we take it on alternate weeks. This is
my week, by the way. I think I can trouble you for that bob, Fenn?"

"I wish I could make it more," said Fenn, handing over the shilling.

"What sort of things does he rag you about generally?" inquired
Silver.

Fenn produced a slip of paper.

"Here are a few," he said, "for this month. He came in on the 10th
because he found two kids fighting. Kennedy was down town when it
happened, but that made no difference. Then he caught the senior
dayroom making a row of some sort. He said it was perfectly deafening;
but we couldn't hear it in our studies. I believe he goes round the
house, listening at keyholes. That was on the 16th. On the 22nd he
found a chap in Kennedy's dormitory wandering about the house at one
in the morning. He seemed to think that Kennedy ought to have sat up
all night on the chance of somebody cutting out of the dormitory. At
any rate, he ragged him. I won the weekly shilling on that; and
deserved it, too."

Fenn had to go over to the gymnasium shortly after this. Jimmy Silver
stayed on, talking to Kennedy.

"And bar Kay," said Jimmy, "how do you find the house doing? Any
better?"

"Better! It's getting a sort of model establishment. I believe, if we
keep pegging away at them, we may win some sort of a cup sooner or
later."

"Well, Kay's very nearly won the cricket cup last year. You ought to
get it next season, now that you and Fenn are both in the team."

"Oh, I don't know. It'll be a fluke if we do. Still, we're hoping. It
isn't every house that's got a county man in it. But we're breaking
out in another place. Don't let it get about, for goodness' sake, but
we're going for the sports' cup."

"Hope you'll get it. Blackburn's won't have a chance, anyhow, and I
should like to see somebody get it away from the School House. They've
had it much too long. They're beginning to look on it as their right.
But who are your men?"

"Well, Fenn ought to be a cert for the hundred and the quarter, to
start with."

"But the School House must get the long run, and the mile, and the
half, too, probably."

"Yes. We haven't anyone to beat Milligan, certainly. But there are the
second and third places. Don't forget those. That's where we're going
to have a look in. There's all sorts of unsuspected talent in Kay's.
To look at Peel, for instance, you wouldn't think he could do the
hundred in eleven, would you? Well, he can, only he's been too slack
to go in for the race at the sports, because it meant training. I had
him up here and reasoned with him, and he's promised to do his best.
Eleven is good enough for second place in the hundred, don't you
think? There are lots of others in the house who can do quite decently
on the track, if they try. I've been making strict inquiries. Kay's
are hot stuff, Jimmy. Heap big medicine. That's what they are."

"You're a wonderful man, Kennedy," said Jimmy Silver. And he meant it.
Kennedy's uphill fight at Kay's had appealed to him strongly. He
himself had never known what it meant to have to manage a hostile
house. He had stepped into his predecessor's shoes at Blackburn's much
as the heir to a throne becomes king. Nobody had thought of disputing
his right to the place. He was next man in; so, directly the departure
of the previous head of Blackburn's left a vacancy, he stepped into
it, and the machinery of the house had gone on as smoothly as if there
had been no change at all. But Kennedy had gone in against a slack and
antagonistic house, with weak prefects to help him, and a fussy
house-master; and he had fought them all for a term, and looked like
winning. Jimmy admired his friend with a fervour which nothing on
earth would have tempted him to reveal. Like most people with a sense
of humour, he had a fear of appearing ridiculous, and he hid his real
feelings as completely as he was able.

"How is the footer getting on?" inquired Jimmy, remembering the
difficulties Kennedy had encountered earlier in the term in connection
with his house team.

"It's better," said Kennedy. "Keener, at any rate. We shall do our
best in the house-matches. But we aren't a good team."

"Any more trouble about your being captain instead of Fenn?"

"No. We both sign the lists now. Fenn didn't want to, but I thought it
would be a good idea, so we tried it. It seems to have worked all
right"

"Of course, your getting your first has probably made a difference."

"A bit, perhaps."

"Well, I hope you won't get the footer cup, because I want it for
Blackburn's. Or the cricket cup. I want that, too. But you can have
the sports' cup with my blessing."

"Thanks," said Kennedy. "It's very generous of you."

"Don't mention it," said Jimmy.

From which conversation it will be seen that Kay's was gradually
pulling itself together. It had been asleep for years. It was now
waking up.

When the winter term ended, there were distinct symptoms of an
outbreak of public spirit in the house.

The Easter term opened auspiciously in one way. Neither Walton nor
Perry returned. The former had been snapped up in the middle of the
holidays--to his enormous disgust--by a bank, which wanted his
services so much that it was prepared to pay him 40 pounds a year simply
to enter the addresses of its outgoing letters in a book, and post them
when he had completed this ceremony. After a spell of this he might
hope to be transferred to another sphere of bank life and thought, and
at the end of his first year he might even hope for a rise in his
salary of ten pounds, if his conduct was good, and he had not been
late on more than twenty mornings in the year. I am aware that in a
properly-regulated story of school-life Walton would have gone to the
Eckleton races, returned in a state of speechless intoxication, and
been summarily expelled; but facts are facts, and must not be tampered
with. The ingenious but not industrious Perry had been superannuated.
For three years he had been in the Lower Fourth. Probably the master
of that form went to the Head, and said that his constitution would
not stand another year of him, and that either he or Perry must go. So
Perry had departed. Like a poor play, he had "failed to attract," and
was withdrawn. There was also another departure of an even more
momentous nature.

Mr Kay had left Eckleton.

Kennedy was no longer head of Kay's. He was now head of Dencroft's.

Mr Dencroft was one of the most popular masters in the school. He was
a keen athlete and a tactful master. Fenn and Kennedy knew him well,
through having played at the nets and in scratch games with him. They
both liked him. If Kennedy had had to select a house-master, he would
have chosen Mr Blackburn first. But Mr Dencroft would have been easily
second.

Fenn learned the facts from the matron, and detailed them to Kennedy.

"Kay got the offer of a headmastership at a small school in the north,
and jumped at it. I pity the fellows there. They are going to have a
lively time."

"I'm jolly glad Dencroft has got the house," said Kennedy. "We might
have had some awful rotter put in. Dencroft will help us buck up the
house games."

The new house-master sent for Kennedy on the first evening of term. He
wished to find out how the Head of the house and the ex-Head stood
with regard to one another. He knew the circumstances, and
comprehended vaguely that there had been trouble.

"I hope we shall have a good term," he said.

"I hope so, sir," said Kennedy.

"You--er--you think the house is keener, Kennedy, than when you first
came in?"

"Yes, sir. They are getting quite keen now. We might win the sports."

"I hope we shall. I wish we could win the football cup, too, but I am
afraid Mr Blackburn's are very heavy metal."

"It's hardly likely we shall have very much chance with them; but we
might get into the final!"

"It would be an excellent thing for the house if we could. I hope Fenn
is helping you get the team into shape?" he added.

"Oh, yes, sir," said Kennedy. "We share the captaincy. We both sign
the lists."

"A very good idea," said Mr Dencroft, relieved. "Good night, Kennedy."

"Good night, sir," said Kennedy.




XXIII

THE HOUSE-MATCHES


The chances of Kay's in the inter-house Football Competition were not
thought very much of by their rivals. Of late years each of the other
houses had prayed to draw Kay's for the first round, it being a
certainty that this would mean that they got at least into the second
round, and so a step nearer the cup. Nobody, however weak compared to
Blackburn's, which was at the moment the crack football house, ever
doubted the result of a match with Kay's. It was looked on as a sort
of gentle trial trip.

But the efforts of the two captains during the last weeks of the
winter term had put a different complexion on matters. Football is not
like cricket. It is a game at which anybody of average size and a
certain amount of pluck can make himself at least moderately
proficient. Kennedy, after consultations with Fenn, had picked out
what he considered the best fifteen, and the two set themselves to
knock it into shape. In weight there was not much to grumble at. There
were several heavy men in the scrum. If only these could be brought to
use their weight to the last ounce when shoving, all would be well as
far as the forwards were concerned. The outsides were not so
satisfactory. With the exception, of course, of Fenn, they lacked
speed. They were well-meaning, but they could not run any faster by
virtue of that. Kay's would have to trust to its scrum to pull it
through. Peel, the sprinter whom Kennedy had discovered in his search
for athletes, had to be put in the pack on account of his weight,
which deprived the three-quarter line of what would have been a good
man in that position. It was a drawback, too, that Fenn was accustomed
to play on the wing. To be of real service, a wing three-quarter must
be fed by his centres, and, unfortunately, there was no centre in
Kay's--or Dencroft's, as it should now be called--who was capable of
making openings enough to give Fenn a chance. So he had to play in the
centre, where he did not know the game so well.

Kennedy realised at an early date that the one chance of the house was
to get together before the house-matches and play as a coherent team,
not as a collection of units. Combination will often make up for lack
of speed in a three-quarter line. So twice a week Dencroft's turned
out against scratch teams of varying strength.

It delighted Kennedy to watch their improvement. The first side they
played ran through them to the tune of three goals and four tries to a
try, and it took all the efforts of the Head of the house to keep a
spirit of pessimism from spreading in the ranks. Another frost of this
sort, and the sprouting keenness of the house would be nipped in the
bud. He conducted himself with much tact. Another captain might have
made the fatal error of trying to stir his team up with pungent abuse.
He realised what a mistake this would be. It did not need a great deal
of discouragement to send the house back to its old slack ways.
Another such defeat, following immediately in the footsteps of the
first, and they would begin to ask themselves what was the good of
mortifying the flesh simply to get a licking from a scratch team by
twenty-four points. Kay's, they would feel, always had got beaten, and
they always would, to the end of time. A house that has once got
thoroughly slack does not change its views of life in a moment.

Kennedy acted craftily.

"You played jolly well," he told his despondent team, as they trooped
off the field. "We haven't got together yet, that's all. And it was a
hot side we were playing today. They would have licked Blackburn's."

A good deal more in the same strain gave the house team the
comfortable feeling that they had done uncommonly well to get beaten
by only twenty-four points. Kennedy fostered the delusion, and in the
meantime arranged with Mr Dencroft to collect fifteen innocents and
lead them forth to be slaughtered by the house on the following
Friday. Mr Dencroft entered into the thing with a relish. When he
showed Kennedy the list of his team on the Friday morning, that
diplomatist chuckled. He foresaw a good time in the near future. "You
must play up like the dickens," he told the house during the
dinner-hour. "Dencroft is bringing a hot lot this afternoon. But I
think we shall lick them."

They did. When the whistle blew for No-side, the house had just
finished scoring its fourteenth try. Six goals and eight tries to nil
was the exact total. Dencroft's returned to headquarters, asking
itself in a dazed way if these things could be. They saw that cup on
their mantelpiece already. Keenness redoubled. Football became the
fashion in Dencroft's. The play of the team improved weekly. And its
spirit improved too. The next scratch team they played beat them by a
goal and a try to a goal. Dencroft's was not depressed. It put the
result down to a fluke. Then they beat another side by a try to
nothing; and by that time they had got going as an organised team, and
their heart was in the thing.

They had improved out of all knowledge when the house-matches began.
Blair's was the lucky house that drew against them in the first round.

"Good business," said the men of Blair. "Wonder who we'll play in the
second round."

They left the field marvelling. For some unaccountable reason,
Dencroft's had flatly refused to act in the good old way as a doormat
for their opponents. Instead, they had played with a dash and
knowledge of the game which for the first quarter of an hour quite
unnerved Blair's. In that quarter of an hour they scored three times,
and finished the game with two goals and three tries to their name.

The School looked on it as a huge joke. "Heard the latest?" friends
would say on meeting one another the day after the game. "Kay's--I
mean Dencroft's--have won a match. They simply sat on Blair's. First
time they've ever won a house-match, I should think. Blair's are
awfully sick. We shall have to be looking out."

Whereat the friend would grin broadly. The idea of Dencroft's making a
game of it with his house tickled him.

When Dencroft's took fifteen points off Mulholland's, the joke began
to lose its humour.

"Why, they must be some good," said the public, startled at the
novelty of the idea. "If they win another match, they'll be in the
final!"

Kay's in the final! Cricket? Oh, yes, they had got into the final at
cricket, of course. But that wasn't the house. It was Fenn. Footer was
different. One man couldn't do everything there. The only possible
explanation was that they had improved to an enormous extent.

Then people began to remember that they had played in scratch games
against the house. There seemed to be a tremendous number of fellows
who had done this. At one time or another, it seemed, half the School
had opposed Dencroft's in the ranks of a scratch side. It began to
dawn on Eckleton that in an unostentatious way Dencroft's had been
putting in about seven times as much practice as any other three
houses rolled together. No wonder they combined so well.

When the School House, with three first fifteen men in its team, fell
before them, the reputation of Dencroft's was established. It had
reached the final, and only Blackburn's stood now between it and the
cup.

All this while Blackburn's had been doing what was expected of them by
beating each of their opponents with great ease. There was nothing
sensational about this as there was in the case of Dencroft's. The
latter were, therefore, favourites when the two teams lined up against
one another in the final. The School felt that a house that had had
such a meteoric flight as Dencroft's must--by all that was
dramatic--carry the thing through to its obvious conclusion, and pull
off the final.

But Fenn and Kennedy were not so hopeful. A certain amount of science,
a great deal of keenness, and excellent condition, had carried them
through the other rounds in rare style, but, though they would
probably give a good account of themselves, nobody who considered the
two teams impartially could help seeing that Dencroft's was a weaker
side than Blackburn's. Nothing but great good luck could bring them
out victorious today.

And so it proved. Dencroft's played up for all they were worth from
the kick-off to the final solo on the whistle, but they were
over-matched. Blackburn's scrum was too heavy for them, with its three
first fifteen men and two seconds. Dencroft's pack were shoved off the
ball time after time, and it was only keen tackling that kept the
score down. By half-time Blackburn's were a couple of tries ahead.
Fenn scored soon after the interval with a great run from his own
twenty-five, and for a quarter of an hour it looked as if it might be
anybody's game. Kennedy converted the try, so that Blackburn's only
led by a single point. A fluky kick or a mistake on the part of a
Blackburnite outside might give Dencroft's the cup.

But the Blackburn outsides did not make mistakes. They played a
strong, sure game, and the forwards fed them well. Ten minutes before
No-side, Jimmy Silver ran in, increasing the lead to six points. And
though Dencroft's never went to pieces, and continued to show fight to
the very end, Blackburn's were not to be denied, and Challis scored a
final try in the corner. Blackburn's won the cup by the comfortable,
but not excessive, margin of a goal and three tries to a goal.

Dencroft's had lost the cup; but they had lost it well. Their credit
had increased in spite of the defeat.

"I thought we shouldn't be able to manage Blackburn's," said Kennedy,
"What we must do now is win that sports' cup."




XXIV

THE SPORTS


There were certain houses at Eckleton which had, as it were,
specialised in certain competitions. Thus, Gay's, who never by any
chance survived the first two rounds of the cricket and football
housers, invariably won the shooting shield. All the other houses sent
their brace of men to the range to see what they could do, but every
year it was the same. A pair of weedy obscurities from Gay's would
take the shield by a comfortable margin. In the same way Mulholland's
had only won the cricket cup once since they had become a house, but
they had carried off the swimming cup three years in succession, and
six years in all out of the last eight. The sports had always been
looked on as the perquisite of the School House; and this year, with
Milligan to win the long distances, and Maybury the high jump and the
weight, there did not seem much doubt at their success. These two
alone would pile up fifteen points. Three points were given for a win,
two for second place, and one for third. It was this that encouraged
Kennedy in the hope that Dencroft's might have a chance. Nobody in the
house could beat Milligan or Maybury, but the School House second and
third strings were not so invincible. If Dencroft's, by means of
second and third places in the long races and the other events which
were certainties for their opponents, could hold the School House,
Fenn's sprinting might just give them the cup. In the meantime they
trained hard, but in an unobtrusive fashion which aroused no fear in
School House circles.

The sports were fixed for the last Saturday of term, but not all the
races were run on that day. The half-mile came off on the previous
Thursday, and the long steeplechase on the Monday after.

The School House won the half-mile, as they were expected to do.
Milligan led from the start, increased his lead at the end of the
first lap, doubled it half-way through the second, and finally, with a
dazzling sprint in the last seventy yards, lowered the Eckleton record
by a second and three-fifths, and gave his house three points.
Kennedy, who stuck gamely to his man for half the first lap, was
beaten on the tape by Crake, of Mulholland's. When sports' day came,
therefore, the score was School House three points, Mulholland's two,
Dencroft's one. The success of Mulholland's in the half was to the
advantage of Dencroft's. Mulholland's was not likely to score many
more points, and a place to them meant one or two points less to the
School House.

The sports opened all in favour of Dencroft's, but those who knew drew
no great consolation from this. School sports always begin with the
sprints, and these were Dencroft's certainties. Fenn won the hundred
yards as easily as Milligan had won the half. Peel was second, and a
Beddell's man got third place. So that Dencroft's had now six points
to their rival's three. Ten minutes later they had increased their
lead by winning the first two places at throwing the cricket ball,
Fenn's throw beating Kennedy's by ten yards, and Kennedy's being a few
feet in front of Jimmy Silver's, which, by gaining third place,
represented the only point Blackburn's managed to amass during the
afternoon.

It now began to dawn upon the School House that their supremacy was
seriously threatened. Dencroft's, by its success in the football
competition, had to a great extent lived down the reputation the house
had acquired when it had been Kay's, but even now the notion of its
winning a cup seemed somehow vaguely improper. But the fact had to be
faced that it now led by eleven points to the School House's three.

"It's all right," said the School House, "our spot events haven't come
off yet. Dencroft's can't get much more now."

And, to prove that they were right, the gap between the two scores
began gradually to be filled up. Dencroft's struggled hard, but the
School House total crept up and up. Maybury brought it to six by
winning the high jump. This was only what had been expected of him.
The discomforting part of the business was that the other two places
were filled by Morrell, of Mulholland's, and Smith, of Daly's. And
when, immediately afterwards, Maybury won the weight, with another
School House man second, leaving Dencroft's with third place only,
things began to look black for the latter. They were now only one
point ahead, and there was the mile to come: and Milligan could give
any Dencroftian a hundred yards at that distance.

But to balance the mile there was the quarter, and in the mile Kennedy
contrived to beat Crake by much the same number of feet as Crake had
beaten him by in the half. The scores of the two houses were now
level, and a goodly number of the School House certainties were past.

Dencroft's forged ahead again by virtue of the quarter-mile. Fenn won
it; Peel was second; and a dark horse from Denny's got in third. With
the greater part of the sports over, and a lead of five points to
their name, Dencroft's could feel more comfortable. The hurdle-race
was productive of some discomfort. Fenn should have won it, as being
blessed with twice the pace of any of his opponents. But Maybury, the
jumper, made up for lack of pace by the scientific way in which he
took his hurdles, and won off him by a couple of feet. Smith,
Dencroft's second string, finished third, thus leaving the totals
unaltered by the race.

By this time the public had become alive to the fact that Dencroft's
were making a great fight for the cup. They had noticed that
Dencroft's colours always seemed to be coming in near the head of the
procession, but the School House had made the cup so much their own,
that it took some time for the school to realise that another
house--especially the late Kay's--was running them hard for first
place. Then, just before the hurdle-race, fellows with "correct cards"
hastily totted up the points each house had won up-to-date. To the
general amazement it was found that, while the School House had
fourteen, Dencroft's had reached nineteen, and, barring the long run
to be decided on the Monday, there was nothing now that the School
House must win without dispute.

A house that will persist in winning a cup year after year has to pay
for it when challenged by a rival. Dencroft's instantly became warm
favourites. Whenever Dencroft's brown and gold appeared at the
scratch, the school shouted for it wildly till the event was over. By
the end of the day the totals were more nearly even, but Dencroft's
were still ahead. They had lost on the long jump, but not
unexpectedly. The totals at the finish were, School House
twenty-three, Dencroft's twenty-five. Everything now depended on the
long run.

"We might do it," said Kennedy to Fenn, as they changed. "Milligan's a
cert for three points, of course, but if we can only get two we win
the cup."

"There's one thing about the long run," said Fenn; "you never quite
know what's going to happen. Milligan might break down over one of the
hedges or the brook. There's no telling."

Kennedy felt that such a remote possibility was something of a broken
reed to lean on. He had no expectation of beating the School House
long distance runner, but he hoped for second place; and second place
would mean the cup, for there was nobody to beat either himself or
Crake.

The distance of the long run was as nearly as possible five miles. The
course was across country to the village of Ledby in a sort of
semicircle of three and a half miles, and then back to the school
gates by road. Every Eckletonian who ran at all knew the route by
heart. It was the recognised training run if you wanted to train
particularly hard. If you did not, you took a shorter spin. At the
milestone nearest the school--it was about half a mile from the
gates--a good number of fellows used to wait to see the first of the
runners and pace their men home. But, as a rule, there were few really
hot finishes in the long run. The man who got to Ledby first generally
kept the advantage, and came in a long way ahead of the field.

On this occasion the close fight Kennedy and Crake had had in the mile
and the half, added to the fact that Kennedy had only to get second
place to give Dencroft's the cup, lent a greater interest to the race
than usual. The crowd at the milestone was double the size of the one
in the previous year, when Milligan had won for the first time. And
when, amidst howls of delight from the School House, the same runner
ran past the stone with his long, effortless stride, before any of the
others were in sight, the crowd settled down breathlessly to watch for
the second man.

Then a yell, to which the other had been nothing, burst from the
School House as a white figure turned the corner. It was Crake.
Waddling rather than running, and breathing in gasps; but still Crake.
He toiled past the crowd at the milestone.

"By Jove, he looks bad," said someone.

And, indeed, he looked very bad. But he was ahead of Kennedy. That was
the great thing.

He had passed the stone by thirty yards, when the cheering broke out
again. Kennedy this time, in great straits, but in better shape than
Crake. Dencroft's in a body trotted along at the side of the road,
shouting as they went. Crake, hearing the shouts, looked round, almost
fell, and then pulled himself together and staggered on again. There
were only a hundred yards to go now, and the school gates were in
sight at the end of a long lane of spectators. They looked to Kennedy
like two thick, black hedges. He could not sprint, though a hundred
voices were shouting to him to do so. It was as much as he could do to
keep moving. Only his will enabled him to run now. He meant to get to
the gates, if he had to crawl.

The hundred yards dwindled to fifty, and he had diminished Crake's
lead by a third. Twenty yards from the gates, and he was only
half-a-dozen yards behind.

Crake looked round again, and this time did what he had nearly done
before. His legs gave way; he rolled over; and there he remained, with
the School House watching him in silent dismay, while Kennedy went on
and pitched in a heap on the other side of the gates.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Feeling bad?" said Jimmy Silver, looking in that evening to make
inquiries.

"I'm feeling good," said Kennedy.

"That the cup?" asked Jimmy.

Kennedy took the huge cup from the table.

"That's it. Milligan has just brought it round. Well, they can't say
they haven't had their fair share of it. Look here. School House.
School House. School House. School House. Daly's. School House.
Denny's. School House. School House. _Ad infinitum_."

They regarded the trophy in silence.

"First pot the house has won," said Kennedy at length. "The very
first."

"It won't be the last," returned Jimmy Silver, with decision.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Head of Kay's, by P. G. Wodehouse





Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





THE HEAD OF THE HOUSE OF COOMBE

BY

FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT

NEW YORK






CHAPTER I





The history of the circumstances about to be related began many
years ago--or so it seems in these days. It began, at least, years
before the world being rocked to and fro revealed in the pause
between each of its heavings some startling suggestion of a new
arrangement of its kaleidoscopic particles, and then immediately
a re-arrangement, and another and another until all belief in a
permanency of design seemed lost, and the inhabitants of the earth
waited, helplessly gazing at changing stars and colours in a degree
of mental chaos.

Its opening incidents may be dated from a period when people
still had reason to believe in permanency and had indeed many of
them--sometimes through ingenuousness, sometimes through stupidity
of type--acquired a singular confidence in the importance and
stability of their possessions, desires, ambitions and forms of
conviction.

London at the time, in common with other great capitals, felt
itself rather final though priding itself on being much more fluid
and adaptable than it had been fifty years previously. In speaking
of itself it at least dealt with fixed customs, and conditions
and established facts connected with them--which gave rise to
brilliant--or dull--witticisms.

One of these, heard not infrequently, was to the effect that--in
London--one might live under an umbrella if one lived under it in
the right neighbourhood and on the right side of the street, which
axiom is the reason that a certain child through the first six
years of her life sat on certain days staring out of a window
in a small, dingy room on the top floor of a slice of a house on
a narrow but highly fashionable London street and looked on at
the passing of motors, carriages and people in the dull afternoon
grayness.

The room was exalted above its station by being called The Day
Nursery and another room equally dingy and uninviting was known as
The Night Nursery. The slice of a house was inhabited by the very
pretty Mrs. Gareth-Lawless, its inordinate rent being reluctantly
paid by her--apparently with the assistance of those "ravens" who
are expected to supply the truly deserving. The rent was inordinate
only from the standpoint of one regarding it soberly in connection
with the character of the house itself which was a gaudy little
kennel crowded between two comparatively stately mansions. On one
side lived an inordinately rich South African millionaire, and
on the other an inordinately exalted person of title, which facts
combined to form sufficient grounds for a certain inordinateness
of rent.

Mrs. Gareth-Lawless was also, it may be stated, of the fibre
which must live on the right side of the street or dissolve into
nothingness--since as nearly nothingness as an embodied entity can
achieve had Nature seemingly created her at the outset. So light
and airy was the fair, slim, physical presentation of her being
to the earthly vision, and so almost impalpably diaphanous the
texture and form of mind and character to be observed by human
perception, that among such friends--and enemies--as so slight a
thing could claim she was prettily known as "Feather". Her real
name, "Amabel", was not half as charming and whimsical in its
appropriateness. "Feather" she adored being called and as it was
the fashion among the amazing if amusing circle in which she spent
her life, to call its acquaintances fantastic pet names selected
from among the world of birds, beasts and fishes or inanimate
objects--"Feather" she floated through her curious existence. And
it so happened that she was the mother of the child who so often
stared out of the window of the dingy and comfortless Day Nursery,
too much a child to be more than vaguely conscious in a chaotic way
that a certain feeling which at times raged within her and made her
little body hot and restless was founded on something like actual
hate for a special man who had certainly taken no deliberate steps
to cause her detestation.

       *       *        *       *        *

"Feather" had not been called by that delicious name when she married
Robert Gareth-Lawless who was a beautiful and irresponsibly rather
than deliberately bad young man. She was known as Amabel Darrel
and the loveliest girl in the lovely corner of the island of Jersey
where her father, a country doctor, had begotten a large family of
lovely creatures and brought them up on the appallingly inadequate
proceeds of his totally inadequate practice. Pretty female things
must be disposed of early lest their market value decline. Therefore
a well-born young man even without obvious resources represents a
sail in the offing which is naturally welcomed as possibly belonging
to a bark which may at least bear away a burden which the back
carrying it as part of its pack will willingly shuffle on to other
shoulders. It is all very well for a man with six lovely daughters
to regard them as capital if he has money or position or generous
relations or if he has energy and an ingenious unfatigued mind. But
a man who is tired and neither clever nor important in any degree
and who has reared his brood in one of the Channel Islands with a
faded, silly, unattractive wife as his only aid in any difficulty,
is wise in leaving the whole hopeless situation to chance and luck.
Sometimes luck comes without assistance but--almost invariably--it
does not.

"Feather"--who was then "Amabel"--thought Robert Gareth-Lawless
incredible good luck. He only drifted into her summer by merest
chance because a friend's yacht in which he was wandering about
"came in" for supplies. A girl Ariel in a thin white frock and with
big larkspur blue eyes yearning at you under her flapping hat as
she answers your questions about the best road to somewhere will
not be too difficult about showing the way herself. And there you
are at a first-class beginning.

The night after she met Gareth-Lawless in a lane whose banks were
thick with bluebells, Amabel and her sister Alice huddled close
together in bed and talked almost pantingly in whispers over the
possibilities which might reveal themselves--God willing--through
a further acquaintance with Mr. Gareth-Lawless. They were eager and
breathlessly anxious but they were young--YOUNG in their eagerness
and Amabel was full of delight in his good looks.

"He is SO handsome, Alice," she whispered actually hugging her, not
with affection but exultation. "And he can't be more than twenty-six
or seven. And I'm SURE he liked me. You know that way a man has of
looking at you--one sees it even in a place like this where there
are only curates and things. He has brown eyes--like dark bright
water in pools. Oh, Alice, if he SHOULD!"

Alice was not perhaps as enthusiastic as her sister. Amabel had
seen him first and in the Darrel household there was a sort of
unwritten, not always observed code flimsily founded on "First come
first served." Just at the outset of an acquaintance one might
say "Hands off" as it were. But not for long.

"It doesn't matter how pretty one is they seldom do," Alice
grumbled. "And he mayn't have a farthing."

"Alice," whispered Amabel almost agonizingly, "I wouldn't
CARE a farthing--if only he WOULD! Have I a farthing--have you a
farthing--has anyone who ever comes here a farthing? He lives in
London. He'd take me away. To live even in a back street IN LONDON
would be Heaven! And one MUST--as soon as one possibly can.--One
MUST! And Oh!" with another hug which this time was a shudder,
"think of what Doris Harmer had to do! Think of his thick red old
neck and his horrid fatness! And the way he breathed through his
nose. Doris said that at first it used to make her ill to look at
him."

"She's got over it," whispered Alice. "She's almost as fat as he
is now. And she's loaded with pearls and things."

"I shouldn't have to 'get over' anything," said Amabel, "if this
one WOULD. I could fall in love with him in a minute."

"Did you hear what Father said?" Alice brought out the words
rather slowly and reluctantly. She was not eager on the whole to
yield up a detail which after all added glow to possible prospects
which from her point of view were already irritatingly glowing.
Yet she could not resist the impulse of excitement. "No, you didn't
hear. You were out of the room."

"What about? Something about HIM? I hope it wasn't horrid. How
could it be?"

"He said," Alice drawled with a touch of girlishly spiteful
indifference, "that if he was one of the poor Gareth-Lawlesses he
hadn't much chance of succeeding to the title. His uncle--Lord
Lawdor--is only forty-five and he has four splendid healthy
boys--perfect little giants."

"Oh, I didn't know there was a title. How splendid," exclaimed Amabel
rapturously. Then after a few moments' innocent maiden reflection
she breathed with sweet hopefulness from under the sheet, "Children
so often have scarlet fever or diphtheria, and you know they
say those very strong ones are more likely to die than the other
kind. The Vicar of Sheen lost FOUR all in a week. And the Vicar
died too. The doctor said the diphtheria wouldn't have killed him
if the shock hadn't helped."

Alice--who had a teaspoonful more brain than her sister--burst
into a fit of giggling it was necessary to smother by stuffing
the sheet in her mouth.

"Oh! Amabel!" she gurgled. "You ARE such a donkey! You would have
been silly enough to say that even if people could have heard you.
Suppose HE had!"

"Why should he care," said Amabel simply. "One can't help thinking
things. If it happened he would be the Earl of Lawdor and--"

She fell again into sweet reflection while Alice giggled a little
more. Then she herself stopped and thought also. After all perhaps--!
One had to be practical. The tenor of her thoughts was such that
she did not giggle again when Amabel broke the silence by whispering
with tremulous, soft devoutness.

"Alice--do you think that praying REALLY helps?"

"I've prayed for things but I never got them," answered Alice.
"But you know what the Vicar said on Sunday in sermon about 'Ask
and ye shall receive'."

"Perhaps you haven't prayed in the right spirit," Amabel suggested
with true piety. "Shall we--shall we try? Let us get out of bed
and kneel down."

"Get out of bed and kneel down yourself," was Alice's sympathetic
rejoinder. "You wouldn't take that much trouble for ME."

Amabel sat up on the edge of the bed. In the faint moonlight and
her white night-gown she was almost angelic. She held the end of
the long fair soft plait hanging over her shoulder and her eyes
were full of reproach.

"I think you ought to take SOME interest," she said plaintively.
"You know there would be more chances for you and the others--if
I were not here."

"I'll wait until you are not here," replied the unstirred Alice.

But Amabel felt there was no time for waiting in this particular
case. A yacht which "came in" might so soon "put out". She knelt
down, clasping her slim young hands and bending her forehead upon
them. In effect she implored that Divine Wisdom might guide Mr.
Robert Gareth-Lawless in the much desired path. She also made
divers promises because nothing is so easy as to promise things.
She ended with a gently fervent appeal that--if her prayer
were granted--something "might happen" which would result in her
becoming a Countess of Lawdor. One could not have put the request
with greater tentative delicacy.

She felt quite uplifted and a trifle saintly when she rose from
her knees. Alice had actually fallen asleep already and she sighed
quite tenderly as she slipped into the place beside her. Almost
as her lovely little head touched the pillow her own eyes closed.
Then she was asleep herself--and in the faintly moonlit room with
the long soft plait trailing over her shoulder looked even more
like an angel than before.

Whether or not as a result of this touching appeal to the Throne
of Grace, Robert Gareth-Lawless DID. In three months there was
a wedding at the very ancient village church, and the flowerlike
bridesmaids followed a flower of a bride to the altar and later in
the day to the station from where Mr. and Mrs. Robert Gareth-Lawless
went on their way to London. Perhaps Alice and Olive also knelt by
the side of their white beds the night after the wedding, for on
that propitious day two friends of the bridegroom's--one of them
the owner of the yacht--decided to return again to the place where
there were to be found the most nymphlike of pretty creatures a man
had ever by any chance beheld. Such delicate little fair crowned
heads, such delicious little tip-tilted noses and slim white throats,
such ripples of gay chatter and nonsense! When a man has fortune
enough of his own why not take the prettiest thing he sees? So
Alice and Olive were borne away also and poor Mr. and Mrs. Darrel
breathed sighs of relief and there were not only more chances but
causes for bright hopefulness in the once crowded house which now
had rooms to spare.

A certain inattention on the part of the Deity was no doubt
responsible for the fact that "something" did not "happen" to the
family of Lord Lawdor. On the contrary his four little giants of
sons throve astonishingly and a few months after the Gareth-Lawless
wedding Lady Lawdor--a trifle effusively, as it were--presented her
husband with twin male infants so robust that they were humorously
known for years afterwards as the "Twin Herculeses."

By that time Amabel had become "Feather" and despite Robert's
ingenious and carefully detailed method of living upon nothing
whatever, had many reasons for knowing that "life is a back street
in London" is not a matter of beds of roses. Since the back street
must be the "right street" and its accompaniments must wear an aspect
of at least seeming to belong to the right order of detachment and
fashionable ease, one was always in debt and forced to keep out of
the way of duns, and obliged to pretend things and tell lies with
aptness and outward gaiety. Sometimes one actually was so far driven
to the wall that one could not keep most important engagements and
the invention of plausible excuses demanded absolute genius. The
slice of a house between the two big ones was a rash feature of
the honeymoon but a year of giving smart little dinners in it and
going to smart big dinners from it in a smart if small brougham
ended in a condition somewhat akin to the feat of balancing oneself
on the edge of a sword.

Then Robin was born. She was an intruder and a calamity of course.
Nobody had contemplated her for a moment. Feather cried for a week
when she first announced the probability of her advent. Afterwards
however she managed to forget the approaching annoyance and went
to parties and danced to the last hour continuing to be a great
success because her prettiness was delicious and her diaphanous
mentality was no train upon the minds of her admirers male and
female.

That a Feather should become a parent gave rise to much wit of light
weight when Robin in the form of a bundle of lace was carried down
by her nurse to be exhibited in the gaudy crowded little drawing-room
in the slice of a house in the Mayfair street.

It was the Head of the House of Coombe who asked the first question
about her.

"What will you DO with her?" he inquired detachedly.

The frequently referred to "babe unborn" could not have presented
a gaze of purer innocence than did the lovely Feather. Her eyes of
larkspur blueness were clear of any thought or intention as spring
water is clear at its unclouded best.

Her ripple of a laugh was clear also--enchantingly clear.

"Do!" repeated. "What is it people 'do' with babies? I suppose
the nurse knows. I don't. I wouldn't touch her for the world. She
frightens me."

She floated a trifle nearer and bent to look at her.

"I shall call her Robin," she said. "Her name is really Roberta
as she couldn't be called Robert. People will turn round to look
at a girl when they hear her called Robin. Besides she has eyes
like a robin. I wish she'd open them and let you see."

By chance she did open them at the moment--quite slowly. They were
dark liquid brown and seemed to be all lustrous iris which gazed
unmovingly at the object in of focus. That object was the Head of
the House of Coombe.

"She is staring at me. There is antipathy in her gaze," he said,
and stared back unmovingly also, but with a sort of cold interest.






CHAPTER II





The Head of the House of Coombe was not a title to be found in
Burke or Debrett. It was a fine irony of the Head's own and having
been accepted by his acquaintances was not infrequently used by
them in their light moments in the same spirit. The peerage recorded
him as a Marquis and added several lesser attendant titles.

"When English society was respectable, even to stodginess at times,"
was his point of view, "to be born 'the Head of the House' was a
weighty and awe-inspiring thing. In fearful private denunciatory
interviews with one's parents and governors it was brought up against
one as a final argument against immoral conduct such as debt and
not going to church. As the Head of the House one was called upon
to be an Example. In the country one appeared in one's pew and
announced oneself a 'miserable sinner' in loud tones, one had to
invite the rector to dinner with regularity and 'the ladies' of
one's family gave tea and flannel petticoats and baby clothes to
cottagers. Men and women were known as 'ladies' and 'gentlemen'
in those halcyon days. One Represented things--Parties in
Parliament--Benevolent Societies, and British Hospitality in the
form of astounding long dinners at which one drank healths and
made speeches. In roseate youth one danced the schottische and the
polka and the round waltz which Lord Byron denounced as indecent.
To recall the vigour of his poem gives rise to a smile--when one
chances to sup at a cabaret."

He was considered very amusing when he analyzed his own mental
attitude towards his world in general.

"I was born somewhat too late and somewhat too early," he explained
in his light, rather cold and detached way. "I was born and educated
at the closing of one era and have to adjust myself to living in
another. I was as it were cradled among treasured relics of the
ethics of the Georges and Queen Charlotte, and Queen Victoria in
her bloom. _I_ was in my bloom in the days when 'ladies' were
reproved for wearing dresses cut too low at Drawing Rooms. Such
training gives curious interest to fashions in which bodices are
unconsidered trifles and Greek nymphs who dance with bare feet
and beautiful bare legs may be one's own relations. I trust I do
not seem even in the shadowiest way to comment unfavourably. I
merely look on at the rapidities of change with unalloyed interest.
As the Head of the House of Coombe I am not sure WHAT I am an
Example of--or to. Which is why I at times regard myself in that
capacity with a slightly ribald lightness."

The detachment of his question with regard to the newborn infant
of the airily irresponsible Feather was in entire harmony with his
attitude towards the singular incident of Life as illustrated by
the World, the Flesh and the Devil by none of which he was--as far
as could be observed--either impressed, disturbed or prejudiced.
His own experience had been richly varied and practically unlimited
in its opportunities for pleasure, sinful or unsinful indulgence,
mitigated or unmitigated wickedness, the gathering of strange
knowledge, and the possible ignoring of all dull boundaries. This
being the case a superhuman charity alone could have forborne to
believe that his opportunities had been neglected in the heyday
of his youth. Wealth and lady of limitations in themselves would
have been quite enough to cause the Nonconformist Victorian mind
to regard a young--or middle-aged--male as likely to represent a
fearsome moral example, but these three temptations combined with
good looks and a certain mental brilliance were so inevitably the
concomitants of elegant iniquity that the results might be taken
for granted.

That the various worlds in which he lived in various lands accepted
him joyfully as an interesting and desirable of more or less
abominably sinful personage, the Head of the House of Coombe--even
many years before he became its head--regarded with the detachment
which he had, even much earlier, begun to learn. Why should it be
in the least matter what people thought of one? Why should it in
the least matter what one thought of oneself--and therefore--why
should one think at all? He had begun at the outset a brilliantly
happy young pagan with this simple theory. After the passing of
some years he had not been quite so happy but had remained quite
as pagan and retained the theory which had lost its first fine
careless rapture and gained a secret bitterness. He had not married
and innumerable stories were related to explain the reason why.
They were most of them quite false and none of them quite true.
When he ceased to be a young man his delinquency was much discussed,
more especially when his father died and he took his place as the
head of his family. He was old enough, rich enough, important enough
for marriage to be almost imperative. But he remained unmarried.
In addition he seemed to consider his abstinence entirely an affair
of his own.

"Are you as wicked as people say you are?" a reckless young woman
once asked him. She belonged to the younger set which was that
season trying recklessness, in a tentative way, as a new fashion.

"I really don't know. It is so difficult to decide," he answered.
"I could tell better if I knew exactly what wickedness is. When
I find out I will let you know. So good of you to take an interest."

Thirty years earlier he knew that a young lady who had heard he was
wicked would have perished in flames before immodestly mentioning
the fact to him, but might have delicately attempted to offer "first
aid" to reformation, by approaching with sweetness the subject of
going to church.

The reckless young woman looked at him with an attention which
he was far from being blind enough not to see was increased by his
answer.

"I never know what you mean," she said almost wistfully.

"Neither do I," was his amiable response. "And I am sure it would
not be worth while going into. Really, we neither of us know what
we mean. Perhaps I am as wicked as I know how to be. And I may
have painful limitations--or I may not."

After his father's death he spent rather more time in London and
rather less in wandering over the face of the globe. But by the
time he was forty he knew familiarly far countries and near and
was intimate with most of the peoples thereof. He could have found
his way about blind-folded in the most distinctive parts of most
of the great cities. He had seen and learned many things. The
most absorbing to his mind had been the ambitions and changes of
nations, statesmen, rulers and those they ruled or were ruled by.
Courts and capitals knew him, and his opportunities were such as
gave him all ease as an onlooker. He was outwardly of the type
which does not arouse caution in talkers and he heard much which
was suggestive even to illumination, from those to whom he remained
unsuspected of being a man who remembered things long and was
astute in drawing conclusions. The fact remained however that
he possessed a remarkable memory and one which was not a rag-bag
filled with unassorted and parti-coloured remnants, but a large and
orderly space whose contents were catalogued and filed and well
enclosed from observation. He was also given to the mental argument
which follows a point to its conclusion as a mere habit of mind.
He saw and knew well those who sat and pondered with knit brows and
cautiously hovering hand at the great chess-board which is formed
by the Map of Europe. He found an enormous interest in watching
their play. It was his fortune as a result of his position to know
persons who wore crowns and a natural incident in whose lives it
was to receive the homage expressed by the uncovering of the head
and the bending of the knee. At forty he looked back at the time
when the incongruousness, the abnormality and the unsteadiness of
the foundations on which such personages stood first struck him.
The realization had been in its almost sacrilegious novelty and
daring, a sort of thunderbolt passing through his mind. He had
at the time spoken of it only to one person.

"I have no moral or ethical views to offer," he had said. "I only
SEE. The thing--as it is--will disintegrate. I am so at sea as
to what will take its place that I feel as if the prospect were
rather horrible. One has had the old landmarks and been impressed
by the old pomp and picturesqueness so many centuries, that one
cannot see the earth without them. There have been kings even in
the Cannibal Islands."

As a statesman or a diplomat he would have seen far but he had been
too much occupied with Life as an entertainment, too self-indulgent
for work of any order. He freely admitted to himself that he was
a worthless person but the fact did not disturb him. Having been
born with a certain order of brain it observed and worked in spite
of him, thereby adding flavour and interest to existence. But that
was all.

It cannot be said that as the years passed he quite enjoyed the
fact that he knew he was rarely spoken of to a stranger without
its being mentioned that he was the most perfectly dressed man in
London. He rather detested the idea though he was aware that the
truth was unimpeachable. The perfection of his accompaniments had
arisen in his youth from a secret feeling for fitness and harmony.
Texture and colour gave him almost abnormal pleasure. His expression
of this as a masculine creature had its limits which resulted in
a concentration on perfection. Even at five-and-twenty however he
had never been called a dandy and even at five-and-forty no one
had as yet hinted at Beau Brummel though by that time men as well
as women frequently described to each other the cut and colour
of the garments he wore, and tailors besought him to honour them
with crumbs of his patronage in the ambitious hope that they might
mention him as a client. And the simple fact that he appeared in
a certain colour or cut set it at once on its way to become a
fashion to be seized upon, worn and exaggerated until it was
dropped suddenly by its originator and lost in the oblivion of
cheap imitations and cheap tailor shops. The first exaggeration
of the harmony he had created and the original was seen no more.

Feather herself had a marvellous trick in the collecting of her
garments. It was a trick which at times barely escaped assuming the
proportions of absolute creation. Her passion for self-adornment
expressed itself in ingenious combination and quite startling
uniqueness of line now and then. Her slim fairness and ash-gold
gossamer hair carried airily strange tilts and curves of little
or large hats or daring tints other women could not sustain
but invariably strove to imitate however disastrous the results.
Beneath soft drooping or oddly flopping brims hopelessly unbecoming
to most faces hers looked out quaintly lovely as a pictured child's
wearing its grandmother's bonnet. Everything draped itself about
or clung to her in entrancing folds which however whimsical were
never grotesque.

"Things are always becoming to me," she said quite simply. "But
often I stick a few pins into a dress to tuck it up here and there,
or if I give a hat a poke somewhere to make it crooked, they are
much more becoming. People are always asking me how I do it but
I don't know how. I bought a hat from Cerise last week and I gave
it two little thumps with my fist--one in the crown and one in
the brim and they made it wonderful. The maid of the most grand
kind of person tried to find out from my maid where I bought it.
I wouldn't let her tell of course."

She created fashions and was imitated as was the Head of the House
of Coombe but she was enraptured by the fact and the entire power
of such gray matter as was held by her small brain cells was
concentrated upon her desire to evolve new fantasies and amazements
for her world.

Before he had been married for a year there began to creep into the
mind of Bob Gareth-Lawless a fearsome doubt remotely hinting that
she might end by becoming an awful bore in the course of
time--particularly if she also ended by being less pretty. She
chattered so incessantly about nothing and was such an empty-headed,
extravagant little fool in her insistence on clothes--clothes--clothes--as
if they were the breath of life. After watching her for about two
hours one morning as she sat before her mirror directing her maid
to arrange and re-arrange her hair in different styles--in delicate
puffs and curls and straying rings--soft bands and loops--in braids
and coils--he broke forth into an uneasy short laugh and expressed
himself--though she did not know he was expressing himself and
would not have understood him if she had.

"If you have a soul--and I'm not at all certain you have--" he
said, "it's divided into a dressmaker's and a hairdresser's and
a milliner's shop. It's full of tumbled piles of hats and frocks
and diamond combs. It's an awful mess, Feather."

"I hope it's a shoe shop and a jeweller's as well," she laughed
quite gaily. "And a lace-maker's. I need every one of them."

"It's a rag shop," he said. "It has nothing but CHIFFONS in it."

"If ever I DO think of souls I think of them as silly gauzy things
floating about like little balloons," was her cheerful response.

"That's an idea," he answered with a rather louder laugh. "Yours
might be made of pink and blue gauze spangled with those things
you call paillettes."

The fancy attracted her.

"If I had one like that"--with a pleased creative air, "it would
look rather ducky floating from my shoulder--or even my hat--or my
hair in the evenings, just held by a tiny sparkling chain fastened
with a diamond pin--and with lovely little pink and blue streamers."
With the touch of genius she had at once relegated it to its place
in the scheme of her universe. And Robert laughed even louder than
before.

"You mustn't make me laugh," she said holding up her hand. "I am
having my hair done to match that quakery thin pale mousey dress
with the tiny poke bonnet--and I want to try my face too. I must
look sweet and demure. You mustn't really laugh when you wear a
dress and hat like that. You must only smile."

Some months earlier Bob would have found it difficult to believe
that she said this entirely without any touch of humour but he
realized now that it was so said. He had some sense of humour of
his own and one of his reasons for vaguely feeling that she might
become a bore was that she had none whatever.

It was at the garden party where she wore the thin quakery mousey
dress and tiny poke bonnet that the Head of the House of Coombe
first saw her. It was at the place of a fashionable artist who
lived at Hampstead and had a garden and a few fine old trees. It
had been Feather's special intention to strike this note of delicate
dim colour. Every other woman was blue or pink or yellow or white
or flowered and she in her filmy coolness of unusual hue stood out
exquisitely among them. Other heads wore hats broad or curved or
flopping, hers looked like a little nun's or an imaginary portrait
of a delicious young great-grandmother. She was more arresting
than any other female creature on the emerald sward or under the
spreading trees.

When Coombe's eyes first fell upon her he was talking to a group
of people and he stopped speaking. Someone standing quite near him
said afterwards that he had for a second or so become pale--almost
as if he saw something which frightened him.

"Who is that under the copper beech--being talked to by Harlow?"
he inquired.

Feather was in fact listening with a gentle air and with her eyelids
down drooped to the exact line harmonious with the angelic little
poke bonnet.

"It is Mrs. Robert Gareth-Lawless--'Feather' we call her," he was
answered. "Was there ever anything more artful than that startling
little smoky dress? If it was flame colour one wouldn't see it as
quickly."

"One wouldn't look at it as long," said Coombe. "One is in danger
of staring. And the little hat--or bonnet--which pokes and is
fastened under her pink ear by a satin bow held by a loose pale
bud! Will someone rescue me from staring by leading me to her. It
won't be staring if I am talking to her. Please."

The paleness appeared again as on being led across the grass he
drew nearer to the copper beech. He was still rather pale when
Feather lifted her eyes to him. Her eyes were so shaped by Nature
that they looked like an angel's when they were lifted. There are
eyes of that particular cut. But he had not talked to her fifteen
minutes before he knew that there was no real reason why he should
ever again lose his colour at the sight of her. He had thought at
first there was. With the perception which invariably marked her
sense of fitness of things she had begun in the course of the
fifteen minutes--almost before the colour had quite returned to
his face--the story of her husband's idea of her soul, as a balloon
of pink and blue gauze spangled with paillettes. And of her own
inspiration of wearing it floating from her shoulder or her hair
by the light sparkling chain--and with delicate ribbon streamers.
She was much delighted with his laugh--though she thought it had a
rather cracked, harsh sound. She knew he was an important person
and she always felt she was being a success when people laughed.

"Exquisite!" he said. "I shall never see you in the future without
it. But wouldn't it be necessary to vary the colour at times?"

"Oh! Yes--to match things," seriously. "I couldn't wear a pink and
blue one with this--" glancing over the smoky mousey thing "--or
paillettes."

"Oh, no--not paillettes," he agreed almost with gravity, the harsh
laugh having ended.

"One couldn't imagine the exact colour in a moment. One would have
to think," she reflected. "Perhaps a misty dim bluey thing--like
the edge of a rain-cloud--scarcely a colour at all."

For an instant her eyes were softly shadowed as if looking into
a dream. He watched her fixedly then. A woman who was a sort of
angel might look like that when she was asking herself how much
her pure soul might dare to pray for. Then he laughed again and
Feather laughed also.

Many practical thoughts had already begun to follow each other
hastily through her mind. It would be the best possible thing
for them if he really admired her. Bob was having all sorts of
trouble with people they owed money to. Bills were sent in again
and again and disagreeable letters were written. Her dressmaker
and milliner had given her most rude hints which could indeed
be scarcely considered hints at all. She scarcely dared speak to
their smart young footman who she knew had only taken the place
in the slice of a house because he had been told that it might be
an opening to better things. She did not know the exact summing
up at the agency had been as follows:

"They're a good looking pair and he's Lord Lawdor's nephew.
They're bound to have their fling and smart people will come to
their house because she's so pretty. They'll last two or three
years perhaps and you'll open the door to the kind of people who
remember a well set-up young fellow if he shows he knows his work
above the usual."

The more men of the class of the Head of the House of Coombe who
came in and out of the slice of a house the more likely the owners
of it were to get good invitations and continued credit, Feather
was aware. Besides which, she thought ingenuously, if he was rich
he would no doubt lend Bob money. She had already known that certain
men who liked her had done it. She did not mind it at all. One
was obliged to have money.

This was the beginning of an acquaintance which gave rise to much
argument over tea-cups and at dinner parties and in boudoirs--even
in corners of Feather's own gaudy little drawing-room. The argument
regarded the degree of Coombe's interest in her. There was always
curiosity as to the degree of his interest in any woman--especially
and privately on the part of the woman herself. Casual and shallow
observers said he was quite infatuated if such a thing were possible
to a man of his temperament; the more concentrated of mind said it
was not possible to a man of his temperament and that any attraction
Feather might have for him was of a kind special to himself and
that he alone could explain it--and he would not.

Remained however the fact that he managed to see a great deal of
her. It might be said that he even rather followed her about and
more than one among the specially concentrated of mind had seen him
on occasion stand apart a little and look at her--watch her--with
an expression suggesting equally profound thought and the profound
intention to betray his private meditations in no degree. There
was no shadow of profundity of thought in his treatment of her.
He talked to her as she best liked to be talked to about herself,
her successes and her clothes which were more successful than
anything else. He went to the little but exceedingly lively dinners
the Gareth-Lawlesses gave and though he was understood not to be
fond of dancing now and then danced with her at balls.

Feather was guilelessly doubtless concerning him. She was quite sure
that he was in love with her. Her idea of that universal emotion
was that it was a matter of clothes and propinquity and loveliness
and that if one were at all clever one got things one wanted as a
result of it. Her overwhelming affection for Bob and his for her
had given her life in London and its entertaining accompaniments.
Her frankness in the matter of this desirable capture when she
talked to her husband was at once light and friendly.

"Of course you will be able to get credit at his tailor's as you
know him so well," she said. "When I persuaded him to go with me
to Madame Helene's last week she was quite amiable. He helped me
to choose six dresses and I believe she would have let me choose
six more."

"Does she think he is going to pay for them?" asked Bob.

"It doesn't matter what she thinks"; Feather laughed very prettily.

"Doesn't it?"

"Not a bit. I shall have the dresses. What's the matter, Rob? You
look quite red and cross."

"I've had a headache for three days," he answered, "and I feel
hot and cross. I don't care about a lot of things you say, Feather."

"Don't be silly," she retorted. "I don't care about a lot of things
you say--and do, too, for the matter of that."

Robert Gareth-Lawless who was sitting on a chair in her dressing-room
grunted slightly as he rubbed his red and flushed forehead.

"There's a--sort of limit," he commented. He hesitated a little
before he added sulkily "--to the things one--SAYS."

"That sounds like Alice," was her undisturbed answer. "She used
to squabble at me because I SAID things. But I believe one of
the reasons people like me is because I make them laugh by SAYING
things. Lord Coombe laughs. He is a very good person to know,"
she added practically. "Somehow he COUNTS. Don't you recollect
how before we knew him--when he was abroad so long--people used
to bring him into their talk as if they couldn't help remembering
him and what he was like. I knew quite a lot about him--about
his cleverness and his manners and his way of keeping women off
without being rude--and the things he says about royalties and the
aristocracy going out of fashion. And about his clothes. I adore
his clothes. And I'm convinced he adores mine."

She had in fact at once observed his clothes as he had crossed the
grass to her seat under the copper beech. She had seen that his
fine thinness was inimitably fitted and presented itself to the
eye as that final note of perfect line which ignores any possibility
of comment. He did not wear things--they were expressions of his
mental subtleties. Feather on her part knew that she wore her
clothes--carried them about with her--however beautifully.

"I like him," she went on. "I don't know anything about political
parties and the state of Europe so I don't understand the things
he says which people think are so brilliant, but I like him. He
isn't really as old as I thought he was the first day I saw him.
He had a haggard look about his mouth and eyes then. He looked
as if a spangled pink and blue gauze soul with little floating
streamers was a relief to him."

The child Robin was a year old by that time and staggered about
uncertainly in the dingy little Day Nursery in which she passed her
existence except on such occasions as her nurse--who had promptly
fallen in love with the smart young footman--carried her down to
the kitchen and Servants' Hall in the basement where there was an
earthy smell and an abundance of cockroaches. The Servants' Hall
had been given that name in the catalogue of the fashionable
agents who let the home and it was as cramped and grimy as the
two top-floor nurseries.

The next afternoon Robert Gareth-Lawless staggered into his wife's
drawing-room and dropped on to a sofa staring at her and breathing
hard.

"Feather!" he gasped. "Don't know what's up with me. I believe
I'm--awfully ill! I can't see straight. Can't think."

He fell over sidewise on to the cushions so helplessly that Feather
sprang at him.

"Don't, Rob, don't!" she cried in actual anguish. "Lord Coombe
is taking us to the opera and to supper afterwards. I'm going to
wear--" She stopped speaking to shake him and try to lift his head.
"Oh! do try to sit up," she begged pathetically. "Just try. DON'T
give up till afterwards." But she could neither make him sit up nor
make him hear. He lay back heavily with his mouth open, breathing
stertorously and quite insensible.

It happened that the Head of the House of Coombe was announced
at that very moment even as she stood wringing her hands over the
sofa.

He went to her side and looked at Gareth-Lawless.

"Have you sent for a doctor?" he inquired.

"He's--only just done it!" she exclaimed. "It's more than I can
bear. You said the Prince would be at the supper after the opera
and--"

"Were you thinking of going?" he put it to her quietly.

"I shall have to send for a nurse of course--" she began. He went
so far as to interrupt her.

"You had better not go--if you'll pardon my saying so," he suggested.

"Not go? Not go at all?" she wailed.

"Not go at all," was his answer. And there was such entire lack
of encouragement in it that Feather sat down and burst into sobs.

In few than two weeks Robert was dead and she was left a lovely
penniless widow with a child.






CHAPTER III





Two or three decades earlier the prevailing sentiment would have
been that "poor little Mrs. Gareth-Lawless" and her situation were
pathetic. Her acquaintances would sympathetically have discussed
her helplessness and absolute lack of all resource. So very pretty,
so young, the mother of a dear little girl--left with no income!
How very sad! What COULD she do? The elect would have paid her visits
and sitting in her darkened drawing-room earnestly besought her
to trust to her Maker and suggested "the Scriptures" as suitable
reading. Some of them--rare and strange souls even in their
time--would have known what they meant and meant what they said in
a way they had as yet only the power to express through the medium
of a certain shibboleth, the rest would have used the same forms
merely because shibboleth is easy and always safe and creditable.

But to Feather's immediate circle a multiplicity of engagements,
fevers of eagerness in the attainment of pleasures and ambitions,
anxieties, small and large terrors, and a whirl of days left no time
for the regarding of pathetic aspects. The tiny house up whose
staircase--tucked against a wall--one had seemed to have the effect of
crowding even when one went alone to make a call, suddenly ceased
to represent hilarious little parties which were as entertaining
as they were up to date and noisy. The most daring things London
gossiped about had been said and done and worn there. Novel social
ventures had been tried--dancing and songs which seemed almost
startling at first--but which were gradually being generally adopted.
There had always been a great deal of laughing and talking of
nonsense and the bandying of jokes and catch phrases. And Feather
fluttering about and saying delicious, silly things at which her
hearers shouted with glee. Such a place could not suddenly become
pathetic. It seemed almost indecent for Robert Gareth-Lawless to
have dragged Death nakedly into their midst--to have died in his
bed in one of the little bedrooms, to have been put in his coffin
and carried down the stairs scraping the wall, and sent away in a
hearse. Nobody could bear to think of it.

Feather could bear it less than anybody else. It seemed incredible
that such a trick could have been played her. She shut herself
up in her stuffy little bedroom with its shrimp pink frills and
draperies and cried lamentably. At first she cried as a child might
who was suddenly snatched away in the midst of a party. Then she
began to cry because she was frightened. Numbers of cards "with
sympathy" had been left at the front door during the first week
after the funeral, they had accumulated in a pile on the salver
but very few people had really come to see her and while she knew
they had the excuse of her recent bereavement she felt that it made
the house ghastly. It had never been silent and empty. Things had
always been going on and now there was actually not a sound to be
heard--no one going up and down stairs--Rob's room cleared of all
his belongings and left orderly and empty--the drawing-room like a
gay little tomb without an occupant. How long WOULD it be before
it would be full of people again--how long must she wait before
she could decently invite anyone?--It was really at this point that
fright seized upon her. Her brain was not given to activities of
reasoning and followed no thought far. She had not begun to ask
herself questions as to ways and means. Rob had been winning at
cards and had borrowed some money from a new acquaintance so no
immediate abyss had yawned at her feet. But when the thought of
future festivities rose before her a sudden check made her involuntarily
clutch at her throat. She had no money at all, bills were piled
everywhere, perhaps now Robert was dead none of the shops would
give her credit. She remembered hearing Rob come into the house
swearing only the day before he was taken ill and it had been
because he had met on the door-step a collector of the rent which
was long over-due and must be paid. She had no money to pay it,
none to pay the servants' wages, none to pay the household bills,
none to pay for the monthly hire of the brougham! Would they turn
her into the street--would the servants go away--would she be left
without even a carriage? What could she do about clothes! She
could not wear anything but mourning now and by the time she was
out of mourning her old clothes would have gone out of fashion.
The morning on which this aspect of things occurred to her, she
was so terrified that she began to run up and down the room like a
frightened little cat seeing no escape from the trap it is caught
in.

"It's awful--it's awful--it's awful!" broke out between her sobs.
"What can I do? I can't do anything! There's nothing to do! It's
awful--it's awful--it's awful!" She ended by throwing herself on
the bed crying until she was exhausted. She had no mental resources
which would suggest to her that there was anything but crying to
be done. She had cried very little in her life previously because
even in her days of limitation she had been able to get more or
less what she wanted--though of course it had generally been less.
And crying made one's nose and eyes red. On this occasion she
actually forgot her nose and eyes and cried until she scarcely
knew herself when she got up and looked in the glass.

She rang the bell for her maid and sat down to wait her coming.
Tonson should bring her a cup of beef tea.

"It's time for lunch," she thought. "I'm faint with crying. And
she shall bathe my eyes with rose-water."

It was not Tonson's custom to keep her mistress waiting but today
she was not prompt. Feather rang a second time and an impatient
third and then sat in her chair and waited until she began to feel
as she felt always in these dreadful days the dead silence of the
house. It was the thing which most struck terror to her soul--that
horrid stillness. The servants whose place was in the basement
were too much closed in their gloomy little quarters to have
made themselves heard upstairs even if they had been inclined to.
During the last few weeks feather had even found herself wishing
that they were less well trained and would make a little noise--do
anything to break the silence.

The room she sat in--Rob's awful little room adjoining--which was
awful because of what she had seen for a moment lying stiff and
hard on the bed before she was taken away in hysterics--were dread
enclosures of utter silence. The whole house was dumb--the very
street had no sound in it. She could not endure it. How dare
Tonson? She sprang up and rang the bell again and again until its
sound came back to her pealing through the place.

Then she waited again. It seemed to her that five minutes passed
before she heard the smart young footman mounting the stairs slowly.
She did not wait for his knock upon the door but opened it herself.

"How dare Tonson!" she began. "I have rung four or five times!
How dare she!"

The smart young footman's manner had been formed in a good school.
It was attentive, impersonal.

"I don't know, ma'am," he answered.

"What do you mean? What does SHE mean? Where is she?" Feather felt
almost breathless before his unperturbed good style.

"I don't know, ma'am," he answered as before. Then with the same
unbiassed bearing added, "None of us know. She has gone away."

Feather clutched the door handle because she felt herself swaying.

"Away! Away!" the words were a faint gasp.

"She packed her trunk yesterday and carried it away with her on a
four-wheeler. About an hour ago, ma'am." Feather dropped her hand
from the knob of the door and trailed back to the chair she had
left, sinking into it helplessly.

"Who--who will dress me?" she half wailed.

"I don't know, ma'am," replied the young footman, his excellent
manner presuming no suggestion or opinion whatever. He added
however, "Cook, ma'am, wishes to speak to you."

"Tell her to come to me here," Feather said. "And I--I want a cup
of beef tea."

"Yes, ma'am," with entire respect. And the door closed quietly
behind him.

It was not long before it was opened again. "Cook" had knocked and
Feather had told her to come in. Most cooks are stout, but this
one was not. She was a thin, tall woman with square shoulders and
a square face somewhat reddened by constant proximity to fires.
She had been trained at a cooking school. She carried a pile of
small account books but she brought nothing else.

"I wanted some beef tea, Cook," said Feather protestingly.

"There is no beef tea, ma'am," said Cook. "There is neither beef,
nor stock, nor Liebig in the house."

"Why--why not?" stammered Feather and she stammered because even
her lack of perception saw something in the woman's face which
was new to her. It was a sort of finality.

She held out the pile of small books.

"Here are the books, ma'am," was her explanation. "Perhaps as you
don't like to be troubled with such things, you don't know how
far behind they are. Nothing has been paid for months. It's been
an every-day fight to get the things that was wanted. It's not
an agreeable thing for a cook to have to struggle and plead. I've
had to do it because I had my reputation to think of and I couldn't
send up rubbish when there was company."

Feather felt herself growing pale as she sat and stared at her.
Cook drew near and laid one little book after another on the small
table near her.

"That's the butcher's book," she said. "He's sent nothing in for
three days. We've been living on leavings. He's sent his last,
he says and he means it. This is the baker's. He's not been for
a week. I made up rolls because I had some flour left. It's done
now--and HE'S done. This is groceries and Mercom & Fees wrote
to Mr. Gareth-Lawless when the last month's supply came, that it
would BE the last until payment was made. This is wines--and coal
and wood--and laundry--and milk. And here is wages, ma'am, which
CAN'T go on any longer."

Feather threw up her hands and quite wildly.

"Oh, go away!--go away!" she cried. "If Mr. Lawless were here--"

"He isn't, ma'am," Cook interposed, not fiercely but in a way more
terrifying than any ferocity could have been--a way which pointed
steadily to the end of things. "As long as there's a gentleman
in a house there's generally a sort of a prospect that things MAY
be settled some way. At any rate there's someone to go and speak
your mind to even if you have to give up your place. But when
there's no gentleman and nothing--and nobody--respectable people
with their livings to make have got to protect themselves."

The woman had no intention of being insolent. Her simple statement
that her employer's death had left "Nothing" and "Nobody" was
prompted by no consciously ironic realization of the diaphanousness
of Feather. As for the rest she had been professionally trained
to take care of her interests as well as to cook and the ethics
of the days of her grandmother when there had been servants with
actual affections had not reached her.

"Oh! go away! Go AWA-AY!" Feather almost shrieked.

"I am going, ma'am. So are Edward and Emma and Louisa. It's no
use waiting and giving the month's notice. We shouldn't save the
month's wages and the trades-people wouldn't feed us. We can't stay
here and starve. And it's a time of the year when places has to
be looked for. You can't hold it against us, ma'am. It's better
for you to have us out of the house tonight--which is when our
boxes will be taken away."

Then was Feather seized with a panic. For the first time in her
life she found herself facing mere common facts which rose before
her like a solid wall of stone--not to be leapt, or crept under,
or bored through, or slipped round. She was so overthrown and
bewildered that she could not even think of any clever and rapidly
constructed lie which would help her; indeed she was so aghast
that she did not remember that there were such things as lies.

"Do you mean," she cried out, "that you are all going to LEAVE
the house--that there won't be any servants to wait on me--that
there's nothing to eat or drink--that I shall have to stay here
ALONE--and starve!"

"We should have to starve if we stayed," answered Cook simply. "And
of course there are a few things left in the pantry and closets.
And you might get in a woman by the day. You won't starve, ma'am.
You've got your family in Jersey. We waited because we thought
Mr. and Mrs. Darrel would be sure to come."

"My father is ill. I think he's dying. My mother could not leave
him for a moment. Perhaps he's dead now," Feather wailed.

"You've got your London friends, ma'am--"

Feather literally beat her hands together.

"My friends! Can I go to people's houses and knock at their front
door and tell them I haven't any servants or anything to eat! Can
I do that? Can I?" And she said it as if she were going crazy.

The woman had said what she had come to say as spokeswoman for the
rest. It had not been pleasant but she knew she had been quite
within her rights and dealt with plain facts. But she did not
enjoy the prospect of seeing her little fool of a mistress raving
in hysterics.

"You mustn't let yourself go, ma'am," she said. "You'd better lie
down a bit and try to get quiet." She hesitated a moment looking
at the pretty ruin who had risen from her seat and stood trembling.

"It's not my place of course to--make suggestions," she said quietly.
"But--had you ever thought of sending for Lord Coombe, ma'am?"

Feather actually found the torn film of her mind caught for a
second by something which wore a form of reality. Cook saw that
her tremor appeared to verge on steadying itself.

"Coombe," she faintly breathed as if to herself and not to Cook.

"Coombe."

"His lordship was very friendly with Mr. Lawless and he seemed fond
of--coming to the house," was presented as a sort of added argument.
"If you'll lie down I'll bring you a cup of tea, ma'am--though it
can't be beef."

Feather staggered again to her bed and dropped flat upon it--flat
as a slim little pancake in folds of thin black stuff which hung
and floated.

"I can't bring you cream," said Cook as she went out of the room.
"Louisa has had nothing but condensed milk--since yesterday--to
give Miss Robin."

"Oh-h!" groaned Feather, not in horror of the tea without cream
though that was awful enough in its significance, but because this
was the first time since the falling to pieces of her world that
she had given a thought to the added calamity of Robin.






CHAPTER IV





If one were to devote one's mental energies to speculation as
to what is going on behind the noncommittal fronts of any row of
houses in any great city the imaginative mind might be led far.

Bricks, mortar, windows, doors, steps which lead up to the threshold,
are what are to be seen from the outside. Nothing particular may
be transpiring within the walls, or tragedies, crimes, hideous suffering
may be enclosed. The conclusion is obvious to banality--but as
suggestive as banal--so suggestive in fact that the hyper-sensitive
and too imaginative had better, for their own comfort's sake, leave
the matter alone. In most cases the existing conditions would not be
altered even if one knocked at the door and insisted on entering
with drawn sword in the form of attendant policeman The outside
of the slice of a house in which Feather lived was still rather
fresh from its last decorative touching up. It had been painted
cream colour and had white and windows and green window boxes
with variegated vinca vines trailing from them and pink geraniums,
dark blue lobelia and ferns filling the earth stuffed in by the
florist who provided such adornments. Passers-by frequently
glanced at it and thought it a nice little house whose amusing
diminutiveness was a sort of attraction. It was rather like a new
doll's house.

No one glancing at it in passing at the closing of this particular
day had reason to suspect that any unaccustomed event was taking
place behind the cream-coloured front. The front door "brasses"
had been polished, the window-boxes watered and no cries for aid
issued from the rooms behind them. The house was indeed quiet both
inside and out. Inside it was indeed even quieter than usual. The
servants' preparation for departure had been made gradually and
undisturbedly. There had been exhaustive quiet discussion of the
subject each night for weeks, even before Robert Gareth-Lawless'
illness. The smart young footman Edward who had means of gaining
practical information had constituted himself a sort of private
detective. He had in time learned all that was to be learned.
This, it had made itself clear to him on investigation, was not
one of those cases when to wait for evolutionary family events
might be the part of discretion. There were no prospects ahead--none
at all. Matters would only get worse and the whole thing would end
in everybody not only losing their unpaid back wages but having to
walk out into the street through the door of a disgraced household
whose owners would be turned out into the street also when their
belongings were sold over their heads. Better get out before
everything went to pieces and there were unpleasantnesses. There
would be unpleasantnesses because there was no denying that the
trades-people had been played tricks with. Mrs. Gareth-Lawless
was only one of a lot of pretty daughters whose father was a poor
country doctor in Jersey. He had had "a stroke" himself and his
widow would have nothing to live on when he died. That was what
Mrs. Lawless had to look to. As to Lord Lawdor Edward had learned
from those who DID know that he had never approved of his nephew
and that he'd said he was a fool for marrying and had absolutely
refused to have anything to do with him. He had six boys and
a girl now and big estates weren't what they had been, everyone
knew. There was only one thing left for Cook and Edward and Emma
and Louisa to do and that was to "get out" without any talk or
argument.

"She's not one that won't find someone to look after her," ended
Edward. "Somebody or other will take her up because they'll be sorry
for her. But us lot aren't widows and orphans. No one's going to
be sorry for us or care a hang what we've been let in for. The longer
we stay, the longer we won't be paid." He was not a particularly
depraved or cynical young footman but he laughed a little at the
end of his speech. "There's the Marquis," he added. "He's been
running in and out long enough to make a good bit of talk. Now's
his time to turn up."

After she had taken her cup of tea without cream Feather had fallen
asleep in reaction from her excited agitation. It was in accord
with the inevitable trend of her being that even before her eyes
closed she had ceased to believe that the servants were really
going to leave the house. It seemed too ridiculous a thing to
happen. She was possessed of no logic which could lead her to a
realization of the indubitable fact that there was no reason why
servants who could neither be paid nor provided with food should
remain in a place. The mild stimulation of the tea also gave rise
to the happy thought that she would not give them any references
if they "behaved badly". It did not present itself to her that
references from a house of cards which had ignominiously fallen
to pieces and which henceforth would represent only shady failure,
would be of no use. So she fell asleep.

       *       *        *       *        *

When she awakened the lights were lighted in the streets and one
directly across the way threw its reflection into her bedroom. It
lit up the little table near which she had sat and the first thing
she saw was the pile of small account books. The next was that the
light which revealed them also fell brightly on the glass knob of
the door which led into Robert's room.

She turned her eyes away quickly with a nervous shudder. She had
a horror of the nearness of Rob's room. If there had been another
part of the house in which she could have slept she would have fled
to it as soon as he was taken ill. But the house was too small to
have "parts". The tiny drawing-rooms piled themselves on top of the
dining-room, the "master's bedrooms" on top of the drawing-rooms,
and the nurseries and attics where Robin and the servants slept
one on the other at the top of the house. So she had been obliged
to stay and endure everything. Rob's cramped quarters had always
been full of smart boots and the smell of cigars and men's clothes.
He had moved about a good deal and had whistled and laughed and
sworn and grumbled. They had neither of them had bad tempers
so that they had not quarrelled with each other. They had talked
through the open door when they were dressing and they had invented
clever tricks which helped them to get out of money scrapes and
they had gossiped and made fun of people. And now the door was
locked and the room was a sort of horror. She could never think of
it without seeing the stiff hard figure on the bed, the straight
close line of the mouth and the white hard nose sharpened and
narrowed as Rob's had never been. Somehow she particularly could
not bear the recollection of the sharp unnatural modeling of
the hard, white nose. She could not BEAR it! She found herself
recalling it the moment she saw the light on the door handle and
she got up to move about and try to forget it.

It was then that she went to the window and looked down into the
street, probably attracted by some slight noise though she was not
exactly aware that she had heard anything.

She must have heard something however. Two four-wheeled cabs were
standing at the front door and the cabman assisted by Edward were
putting trunks on top of them. They were servants' trunks and
Cook was already inside the first cab which was filled with paper
parcels and odds and ends. Even as her mistress watched Emma got
in carrying a sedate band-box. She was the house-parlourmaid and
a sedate person. The first cab drove away as soon as its door was
closed and the cabman mounted to his seat. Louisa looking wholly
unprofessional without her nurse's cap and apron and wearing a
tailor-made navy blue costume and a hat with a wing in it, entered
the second cab followed by Edward intensely suggesting private
life and possible connection with a Bank. The second cab followed
the first and Feather having lost her breath looked after them as
they turned the corner of the street.

When they were quite out of sight she turned back into the room.
The colour had left her skin, and her eyes were so wide stretched
and her face so drawn and pinched with abject terror that her
prettiness itself had left her.

"They've gone--all of them!" she gasped. She stopped a moment, her
chest rising and falling. Then she added even more breathlessly,
"There's no one left in the house. It's--empty!"

This was what was going on behind the cream-coloured front, the
white windows and green flower-boxes of the slice of a house as
motors and carriages passed it that evening on their way to dinner
parties and theatres, and later as the policeman walked up and down
slowly upon his beat.

Inside a dim light in the small hall showed a remote corner where
on a peg above a decorative seat hung a man's hat of the highest
gloss and latest form; and on the next peg a smart evening overcoat.
They had belonged to Robert Gareth-Lawless who was dead and needed
such things no more. The same dim light showed the steep narrowness
of the white-railed staircase mounting into gruesome little corners
of shadows, while the miniature drawing-rooms illumined only from
the street seemed to await an explanation of dimness and chairs
unfilled, combined with unnatural silence.

It would have been the silence of the tomb but that it was now and
then broken by something like a half smothered shriek followed by
a sort of moaning which made their way through the ceiling from
the room above.

Feather had at first run up and down the room like a frightened
cat as she had done in the afternoon. Afterwards she had had
something like hysterics, falling face downward upon the carpet
and clutching her hair until it fell down. She was not a person to
be judged--she was one of the unexplained incidents of existence.
The hour has passed when the clearly moral can sum up the
responsibilities of a creature born apparently without brain, or
soul or courage. Those who aspire to such morals as are expressed
by fairness--mere fairness--are much given to hesitation. Courage
had never been demanded of Feather so far. She had none whatever
and now she only felt panic and resentment. She had no time to
be pathetic about Robert, being too much occupied with herself.
Robert was dead--she was alive--here--in an empty house with no
money and no servants. She suddenly and rather awfully realized
that she did not know a single person whom it would not be frantic
to expect anything from.

Nobody had money enough for themselves, however rich they were.
The richer they were the more they needed. It was when this thought
came to her that she clutched her hands in her hair. The pretty
and smart women and agreeable more or less good looking men who
had chattered and laughed and made love in her drawing-rooms were
chattering, laughing and making love in other houses at this very
moment--or they were at the theatre applauding some fashionable
actor-manager. At this very moment--while she lay on the carpet in
the dark and every little room in the house had horror shut inside
its closed doors--particularly Robert's room which was so hideously
close to her own, and where there seemed still to lie moveless
on the bed, the stiff hard figure. It was when she recalled this
that the unnatural silence of the drawing-rooms was intruded upon
by the brief half-stifled hysteric shriek, and the moaning which
made its way through the ceiling. She felt almost as if the door
handle might turn and something stiff and cold try to come in.

So the hours went on behind the cream-coloured outer walls and
the white windows and gay flower-boxes. And the street became more
and more silent--so silent at last that when the policeman walked
past on his beat his heavy regular footfall seemed loud and almost
resounding.

To even vaguely put to herself any question involving would not
have been within the scope of her mentality. Even when she began to
realize that she was beginning to feel faint for want of food she
did not dare to contemplate going downstairs to look for something
to eat. What did she know about downstairs? She had never there
and had paid no attention whatever to Louisa's complaints that the
kitchen and Servants' Hall were small and dark and inconvenient
and that cockroaches ran about. She had cheerfully accepted the
simple philosophy that London servants were used to these things
and if they did their work it did not really matter. But to go
out of one's room in the horrible stillness and creep downstairs,
having to turn up the gas as one went, and to face the basement
steps and cockroaches scuttling away, would be even more impossible
than to starve. She sat upon the floor, her hair tumbling about
her shoulders and her thin black dress crushed.

"I'd give almost ANYTHING for a cup of coffee," she protested
feebly. "And there's no USE in ringing the bell!"

Her mother ought to have come whether her father was ill or not.
He wasn't dead. Robert was dead and her mother ought to have come
so that whatever happened she would not be quite alone and SOMETHING
could be done for her. It was probably this tender thought of
her mother which brought back the recollection of her wedding day
and a certain wedding present she had received. It was a pretty
silver travelling flask and she remembered that it must be in her
dressing-bag now, and there was some cognac left in it. She got up
and went to the place where the bag was kept. Cognac raised your
spirits and made you go to sleep, and if she could sleep until
morning the house would not be so frightening by daylight--and
something might happen. The little flask was almost full. Neither
she nor Robert had cared much about cognac. She poured some into
a glass with water and drank it.

Because she was unaccustomed to stimulant it made her feel quite
warm and in a few minutes she forgot that she had been hungry
and realized that she was not so frightened. It was such a relief
not to be terrified; it was as if a pain had stopped. She actually
picked up one or two of the account books and glanced at the
totals. If you couldn't pay bills you couldn't and nobody was
put in prison for debt in these days. Besides she would not have
been put in prison--Rob would--and Rob was dead. Something would
happen--something.

As she began to arrange her hair for the night she remembered what
Cook had said about Lord Coombe. She has cried until she did not
look as lovely as usual, but after she had bathed her eyes with
cold rose-water they began to seem only shadowy and faintly flushed.
And her fine ash-gold hair was wonderful when it hung over each
shoulder in wide, soft plaits. She might be a school-girl of
fifteen. A delicate lacy night-gown was one of the most becoming
things one wore. It was a pity one couldn't wear them to parties.
There was nothing the least indecent about them. Millicent Hardwicke
had been photographed in one of hers and no one had suspected
what it was. Yes; she would send a little note to Coombe. She
knew Madame Helene had only let her have her beautiful mourning
because--. The things she had created were quite unique--thin,
gauzy, black, floating or clinging. She had been quite happy the
morning she gave Helene her orders. Tomorrow when she had slept
through the night and it was broad daylight again she would be
able to think of things to say in her letter to Lord Coombe. She
would have to be a little careful because he did not like things
to bore him.--Death and widows might--a little--at first. She had
heard him say once that he did not wish to regard himself in the
light of a charitable institution. It wouldn't do to frighten him
away. Perhaps if he continued coming to the house and seemed very
intimate the trades-people might be managed.

She felt much less helpless and when she was ready for bed she
took a little more cognac. The flush had faded from her eye-lids
and bloomed in delicious rose on her cheeks. As she crept between
the cool sheets and nestled down on her pillow she had a delightful
sense of increasing comfort--comfort. What a beautiful thing it
was to go to sleep!

And then she was disturbed-started out of the divine doze stealing
upon her-by a shrill prolonged wailing shriek!

It came from the Night Nursery and at the moment it seemed almost
worse than anything which had occurred all through the day. It
brought everything back so hideously. She had of course forgotten
Robin again-and it was Robin! And Louisa had gone away with
Edward. She had perhaps put the child to sleep discreetly before
she went. And now she had wakened and was screaming. Feather had
heard that she was a child with a temper but by fair means or foul
Louisa had somehow managed to prevent her from being a nuisance.

The shrieks shocked her into sitting upright in bed. Their
shrillness tearing through the utter soundlessness of the empty
house brought back all her terrors and set her heart beating at
a gallop.

"I--I WON'T!" she protested, fairly with chattering teeth. "I won't!
I WON'T!"

She had never done anything for the child since its birth, she did
not know how to do anything, she had not wanted to know. To reach
her now she would be obliged to go out in the dark-the gas-jet
she would have to light was actually close to the outer door of
Robert's bedroom--THE room! If she did not die of panic while she
was trying to light it she would have to make her way almost in
the dark up the steep crooked little staircase which led to the
nurseries. And the awful little creature's screams would be going
on all the time making the blackness and dead silence of the house
below more filled with horror by contrast-more shut off and at the
same time more likely to waken to some horror which was new.

"I-I couldn't-even if I wanted to!" she quaked. "I daren't!
I daren't! I wouldn't do it--for A MILLION POUNDS?" And she flung
herself down again shuddering and burrowing her head under the
coverings and pillows she dragged over her ears to shut out the
sounds.

The screams had taken on a more determined note and a fiercer
shrillness which the still house heard well and made the most of,
but they were so far deadened for Feather that she began beneath
her soft barrier to protest pantingly.

"I shouldn't know what to do if I went. If no one goes near her
she'll cry herself to sleep. It's--it's only temper. Oh-h! what
a horrible wail! It--it sounds like a--a lost soul!"

But she did not stir from the bed. She burrowed deeper under the
bed clothes and held the pillow closer to her ears.

       *       *        *       *        *

It did sound like a lost soul at times. What panic possesses
a baby who cries in the darkness alone no one will ever know and
one may perhaps give thanks to whatever gods there be that the baby
itself does not remember. What awful woe of sudden unprotectedness
when life exists only through protection--what piteous panic in
the midst of black unmercifulness, inarticulate sound howsoever
wildly shrill can neither explain nor express.

Robin knew only Louisa, warmth, food, sleep and waking. Or if she
knew more she was not yet aware that she did. She had reached the
age when she generally slept through the night. She might not have
disturbed her mother until daylight but Louisa had with forethought
given her an infant sleeping potion. It had disagreed with and
awakened her. She was uncomfortable and darkness enveloped her.
A cry or so and Louisa would ordinarily have come to her sleepy,
and rather out of temper, but knowing what to do. In this strange
night the normal cry of warning and demand produced no result.

No one came. The discomfort continued--the blackness remained
black. The cries became shrieks--but nothing followed; the shrieks
developed into prolonged screams. No Louisa, no light, no milk.
The blackness drew in closer and became a thing to be fought
with wild little beating hands. Not a glimmer--not a rustle--not
a sound! Then came the cries of the lost soul--alone--alone--in
a black world of space in which there was not even another lost
soul. And then the panics of which there have been no records
and never will be, because if the panic stricken does not die in
mysterious convulsions he or she grows away from the memory of
a formless past--except that perhaps unexplained nightmares from
which one wakens quaking, with cold sweat, may vaguely repeat the
long hidden thing.

What the child Robin knew in the dark perhaps the silent house
which echoed her might curiously have known. But the shrieks wore
themselves out at last and sobs came--awful little sobs shuddering
through the tiny breast and shaking the baby body. A baby's sobs
are unspeakable things--incredible things. Slower and slower
Robin's came--with small deep gasps and chokings between--and when
an uninfantile druglike sleep came, the bitter, hopeless, beaten
little sobs went on.

But Feather's head was still burrowed under the soft protection
of the pillow.






CHAPTER V





The morning was a brighter one than London usually indulges in
and the sun made its way into Feather's bedroom to the revealing
of its coral pink glow and comfort. She had always liked her bedroom
and had usually wakened in it to the sense of luxuriousness it
is possible a pet cat feels when it wakens to stretch itself on
a cushion with its saucer of cream awaiting it.

But she did not awaken either to a sense of brightness or luxury
this morning. She had slept it was true, but once or twice when
the pillow had slipped aside she had found herself disturbed by
the far-off sound of the wailing of some little animal which had
caused her automatically and really scarcely consciously to replace
the pillow. It had only happened at long intervals because it is
Nature that an exhausted baby falls asleep when it is worn out.
Robin had probably slept almost as much as her mother.

Feather staring at the pinkness around her reached at last, with
the assistance of a certain physical consciousness, a sort of
spiritless intention.

"She's asleep now," she murmured. "I hope she won't waken for a
long time. I feel faint. I shall have to find something to eat--if
it's only biscuits." Then she lay and tried to remember what Cook
had said about her not starving. "She said there were a few things
left in the pantry and closets. Perhaps there's some condensed
milk. How do you mix it up? If she cries I might go and give her
some. It wouldn't be so awful now it's daylight."

She felt shaky when she got out of bed and stood on her feet. She
had not had a maid in her girlhood so she could dress herself,
much as she detested to do it. After she had begun however she
could not help becoming rather interested because the dress she
had worn the day before had become crushed and she put on a fresh
one she had not worn at all. It was thin and soft also, and black
was quite startlingly becoming to her. She would wear this one
when Lord Coombe came, after she wrote to him. It was silly of
her not to have written before though she knew he had left town
after the funeral. Letters would be forwarded.

"It will be quite bright in the dining-room now," she said
to encourage herself. "And Tonson once said that the only places
the sun came into below stairs were the pantry and kitchen and it
only stayed about an hour early in the morning. I must get there
as soon as I can."

When she had so dressed herself that the reflection the mirror
gave back to her was of the nature of a slight physical stimulant
she opened her bedroom door and faced exploration of the deserted
house below with a quaking sense of the proportions of the
inevitable. She got down the narrow stairs casting a frightened
glance at the emptiness of the drawing-rooms which seemed to stare
at her as she passed them. There was sun in the dining-room and
when she opened the sideboard she found some wine in decanters and
some biscuits and even a few nuts and some raisins and oranges.
She put them on the table and sat down and ate some of them and
began to feel a little less shaky.

If she had been allowed time to sit longer and digest and reflect
she might have reached the point of deciding on what she would write
to Lord Coombe. She had not the pen of a ready writer and it must
be thought over. But just when she was beginning to be conscious
of the pleasant warmth of the sun which shone on her shoulders from
the window, she was almost startled our of her chair by hearing
again stealing down the staircase from the upper regions that faint
wail like a little cat's.

"Just the moment--the very MOMENT I begin to feel a little
quieted--and try to think--she begins again!" she cried out. "It's
worse then ANYTHING!"

Large crystal tears ran down her face and upon the polished table.

"I suppose she would starve to death if I didn't give her some
food--and then _I_ should be blamed! People would be horrid about
it. I've got nothing to eat myself."

She must at any rate manage to stop the crying before she could
write to Coombe. She would be obliged to go down into the pantry
and look for some condensed milk. The creature had no teeth but
perhaps she could mumble a biscuit or a few raisins. If she could
be made to swallow a little port wine it might make her sleepy. The
sun was paying its brief morning visit to the kitchen and pantry
when she reached there, but a few cockroaches scuttled away before
her and made her utter a hysterical little scream. But there WAS
some condensed milk and there was a little warm water in a kettle
became the fire was not quite out. She imperfectly mixed a decoction
and filled a bottle which ought not to have been downstairs but
had been brought and left there by Louisa as a result of tender
moments with Edward.

When she put the bottle and some biscuits and scraps of cold ham
on a tray because she could not carry them all in her hands, her
sense of outrage and despair made her almost sob.

"I am just like a servant--carrying trays upstairs," she wept.
"I--I might be Edward--or--or Louisa." And her woe increased when
she added in the dining-room the port wine and nuts and raisins
and macaroons as viands which MIGHT somehow add to infant diet
and induce sleep. She was not sure of course--but she knew they
sucked things and liked sweets.

A baby left unattended to scream itself to sleep and awakening
to scream itself to sleep again, does not present to a resentful
observer the flowerlike bloom and beauty of infancy. When Feather
carried her tray into the Night Nursery and found herself confronting
the disordered crib on which her offspring lay she felt the child
horrible to look at. Its face was disfigured and its eyes almost
closed. She trembled all over as she put the bottle to its mouth
and saw the fiercely hungry clutch of its hands. It was old enough
to clutch, and clutch it did, and suck furiously and starvingly--even
though actually forced to stop once or twice at first to give vent
to a thwarted remnant of a scream.

Feather had only seen it as downy whiteness and perfume in
Louisa's arms or in its carriage. It had been a singularly vivid
and brilliant-eyed baby at whom people looked as they passed.

"Who will give her a bath?" wailed Feather. "Who will change her
clothes? Someone must! Could a woman by the day do it? Cook said
I could get a woman by the day."

And then she remembered that one got servants from agencies. And
where were the agencies? And even a woman "by the day" would demand
wages and food to eat.

And then the front door bell rang.

What could she do--what could she do? Go downstairs and open the
door herself and let everyone know! Let the ringer go on ringing
until he was tired and went away? She was indeed hard driven,
even though the wail had ceased as Robin clutched her bottle to
her breast and fed with frenzy. Let them go away--let them! And
then came the wild thought that it might be Something--the Something
which must happen when things were at their worst! And if it had
come and the house seemed to be empty! She did not walk down the
stairs, she ran. Her heart beat until she reached the door out of
breath and when she opened it stood their panting.

The people who waited upon the steps were strangers. They were
very nice looking and quite young--a man and a woman very perfectly
dressed. The man took a piece of paper out of his pocketbook and
handed it to her with an agreeable apologetic courtesy.

"I hope we have not called early enough to disturb you," he said.
"We waited until eleven but we are obliged to catch a train at
half past. It is an 'order to view' from Carson & Bayle." He added
this because Feather was staring at the paper.

Carson & Bayle were the agents they had rented the house from.
It was Carson & Bayle's collector Robert had met on the threshold
and sworn at two days before he had been taken ill. They were
letting the house over her head and she would be turned out into
the street?

The young man and woman finding themselves gazing at this exquisitely
pretty creature in exquisite mourning, felt themselves appallingly
embarrassed. She was plainly the widow Carson had spoken of. But
why did she open the door herself? And why did she look as if she
did not understand? Indignation against Carson & Bayle began to
stir the young man.

"Beg pardon! So sorry! I am afraid we ought not to have come," he
protested. "Agents ought to know better. They said you were giving
up the house at once and we were afraid someone might take it."

Feather held the "order to view" in her hand and snared at them
quite helplessly.

"There--are no--no servants to show it to you," she said. "If you
could wait--a few days--perhaps--"

She was so lovely and Madame Helene's filmy black creation was in
itself such an appeal, that the amiable young strangers gave up
at once.

"Oh, certainly--certainly! Do excuse us! Carson and Bayle ought
not to have--! We are so sorry. Good morning, GOOD morning," they
gave forth in discomfited sympathy and politeness, and really
quite scurried away.

Having shut the door on their retreat Feather stood shivering.

"I am going to be turned out of the house! I shall have to live
in the street!" she thought. "Where shall I keep my clothes if I
live in the street!"

Even she knew that she was thinking idiotically. Of course if
everything was taken from you and sold, you would have no clothes
at all, and wardrobes and drawers and closets would not matter.
The realization that scarcely anything in the house had been paid
for came home to her with a ghastly shock. She staggered upstairs
to the first drawing-room in which there was a silly pretty little
buhl writing table.

She felt even more senseless when she sank into a chair before
it and drew a sheet of note-paper towards her. Her thoughts would
not connect themselves with each other and she could not imagine
what she ought to say in her letter to Coombe. In fact she seemed
to have no thoughts at all. She could only remember the things
which had happened, and she actually found she could write nothing
else. There seemed nothing else in the world.

"Dear Lord Coombe," trailed tremulously over the page--"The house
is quite empty. The servants have gone away. I have no money. And
there is not any food. And I am going to be turned out into the
street--and the baby is crying because it is hungry."

She stopped there, knowing it was not what she ought to say. And
as she stopped and looked at the words she began herself to wail
somewhat as Robin had wailed in the dark when she would not listen
or go to her. It was like a beggar's letter--a beggar's! Telling
him that she had no money and no food--and would be turned out for
unpaid rent. And that the baby was crying because it was starving!

"It's a beggar's letter--just a beggar's," she cried out aloud
to the empty room. "And it's tru-ue!" Robin's wail itself had not
been more hopeless than hers was as she dropped her head and let
it lie on the buhl table.

She was not however even to be allowed to let it lie there, for
the next instant there fell on her startled ear quite echoing
through the house another ring at the doorbell and two steely raps
on the smart brass knocker. It was merely because she did not know
what else to do, having just lost her wits entirely that she got
up and trailed down the staircase again.

When she opened the door, Lord Coombe--the apotheosis of exquisite
fitness in form and perfect appointment as also of perfect
expression--was standing on the threshold.






CHAPTER VI





If he had meant to speak he changed his mind after his first sight
of her. He merely came in and closed the door behind him. Curious
experiences with which life had provided him had added finish to
an innate aptness of observation, and a fine readiness in action.

If she had been of another type he would have saved both her and
himself a scene and steered ably through the difficulties of the
situation towards a point where they could have met upon a normal
plane. A very pretty woman with whose affairs one has nothing
whatever to do, and whose pretty home has been the perfection of
modern smartness of custom, suddenly opening her front door in
the unexplained absence of a footman and confronting a visitor,
plainly upon the verge of hysteria, suggests the necessity of
promptness.

But Feather gave him not a breath's space. She was in fact not
merely on the verge of her hysteria. She had gone farther. And
here he was. Oh, here he was! She fell down upon her knees and
actually clasped his immaculateness.

"Oh, Lord Coombe! Lord Coombe! Lord Coombe!" She said it three
times because he presented to her but the one idea.

He did not drag himself away from her embrace but he distinctly
removed himself from it.

"You must not fall upon your knees, Mrs. Lawless," he said. "Shall
we go into the drawing-room?"

"I--was writing to you. I am starving--but it seemed too silly when
I wrote it. And it's true!" Her broken words were as senseless in
their sound as she had thought them when she saw them written.

"Will you come up into the drawing-room and tell me exactly what
you mean," he said and he made her release him and stand upon her
feet.

As the years had passed he had detached himself from so many
weaknesses and their sequelae of emotion that he had felt himself
a safely unreachable person. He was not young and he knew enough
of the disagreeableness of consequences to be adroit in keeping out
of the way of apparently harmless things which might be annoying.
Yet as he followed Mrs. Gareth-Lawless and watched her stumbling
up the stairs like a punished child he was aware that he was
abnormally in danger of pitying her as he did not wish to pity
people. The pity was also something apart from the feeling that it
was hideous that a creature so lovely, so shallow and so fragile
should have been caught in the great wheels of Life.

He knew what he had come to talk to her about but he had really no
clear idea of what her circumstances actually were. Most people
had of course guessed that her husband had been living on the
edge of his resources and was accustomed to debt and duns, but a
lovely being greeting you by clasping your knees and talking about
"starving"--in this particular street in Mayfair, led one to ask
oneself what one was walking into. Feather herself had not known,
in fact neither had any other human being known, that there was
a special reason why he had drifted into seeming rather to allow
her about--why he had finally been counted among the frequenters
of the narrow house--and why he had seemed to watch her a good
deal sometimes with an expression of serious interest--sometimes
with an air of irritation, and sometimes with no expression at
all. But there existed this reason and this it was and this alone
which had caused him to appear upon her threshold and it had also
been the power which had prevented his disengaging himself with
more incisive finality when he found himself ridiculously clasped
about the knees as one who played the part of an obdurate parent
in a melodrama.

Once in the familiar surroundings of her drawing-room her ash-gold
blondness and her black gauzy frock heightened all her effects
so extraordinarily that he frankly admitted to himself that she
possessed assets which would have modified most things to most
men.

As for Feather, when she herself beheld him against the background
of the same intimate aspects, the effect of the sound of his voice,
the manner in which he sat down in a chair and a certain remotely
dim hint in the hue of his clothes and an almost concealed note of
some touch of colour which scarcely seemed to belong to anything
worn--were so reminiscent of the days which now seemed past forever
that she began to cry again.

He received this with discreet lack of melodrama of tone.

"You mustn't do that, Mrs. Lawless," he said, "or I shall burst
into tears myself. I am a sensitive creature."

"Oh, DO say 'Feather' instead of Mrs. Lawless," she implored.
"Sometimes you said 'Feather'."

"I will say it now," he answered, "if you will not weep. It is an
adorable name."

"I feel as if I should never hear it again," she shuddered, trying
to dry her eyes. "It is all over!"

"What is all over?"

"This--!" turning a hopeless gaze upon the two tiny rooms crowded
with knick-knacks and nonsense. "The parties and the fun--and
everything in the world! I have only had some biscuits and raisins
to eat today--and the landlord is going to turn me out."

It seemed almost too preposterous to quite credit that she was
uttering naked truth.--And yet--! After a second's gaze at her be
repeated what he had said below stairs.

"Will you tell me exactly what you mean?"

Then he sat still and listened while she poured it all forth. And
as he listened he realized that it was the mere every day fact that
they were sitting in the slice of a house with the cream-coloured
front and the great lady in her mansion on one side and the
millionaire and his splendours on the other, which peculiarly
added to a certain hint of gruesomeness in the situation.

It was not necessary to add colour and desperation to the story.
Any effort Feather had made in that direction would only have
detracted from the nakedness of its stark facts. They were quite
enough in themselves in their normal inevitableness. Feather in
her pale and totally undignified panic presented the whole thing
with clearness which had--without being aided by her--an actual
dramatic value. This in spite of her mental dartings to and from
and dragging in of points and bits of scenes which were not connected
with each other. Only a brain whose processes of inclusion and
exclusion were final and rapid could have followed her. Coombe
watched her closely as she talked. No grief-stricken young widowed
loneliness and heart-break were the background of her anguish. She
was her own background and also her own foreground. The strength
of the fine body laid prone on the bed of the room she held in horror,
the white rigid face whose good looks had changed to something she
could not bear to remember, had no pathos which was not concerned
with the fact that Robert had amazingly and unnaturally failed
her by dying and leaving her nothing but unpaid bills. This truth
indeed made the situation more poignantly and finally squalid,
as she brought forth one detail after another. There were bills
which had been accumulating ever since they began their life in
the narrow house, there had been trades-people who had been juggled
with, promises made and supported by adroit tricks and cleverly
invented misrepresentations and lies which neither of the pair had
felt any compunctions about and had indeed laughed over. Coombe
saw it all though he also saw that Feather did not know all she was
telling him. He could realize the gradually increasing pressure
and anger at tricks which betrayed themselves, and the gathering
determination on the part of the creditors to end the matter in the
only way in which it could be ended. It had come to this before
Robert's illness, and Feather herself had heard of fierce interviews
and had seen threatening letters, but she had not believed they
could mean all they implied. Since things had been allowed to go on
so long she felt that they would surely go on longer in the same
way. There had been some serious threatening about the rent and
the unpaid-for furniture. Robert's supporting idea had been that
he might perhaps "get something out of Lawdor who wouldn't enjoy
being the relation of a fellow who was turned into the street!"

"He ought to have done something," Feather plained. "Robert would
have been Lord Lawdor himself if his uncle had died before he had
all those disgusting children."

She was not aware that Coombe frequently refrained from saying
things to her--but occasionally allowed himself NOT to refrain.
He did not refrain now from making a simple comment.

"But he is extremely robust and he has the children. Six stalwart
boys and a stalwart girl. Family feeling has apparently gone out
of fashion."

As she wandered on with her story he mentally felt himself actually
dragged into the shrimp-pink bedroom and standing an onlooker when
the footman outside the door "did not know" where Tonson had gone.
For a moment he felt conscious of the presence of some scent which
would have been sure to exhale itself from draperies and wardrobe.
He saw Cook put the account books on the small table, he heard her,
he also comprehended her. And Feather at the window breathlessly
watching the two cabs with the servants' trunks on top, and
the servants respectably unprofessional in attire and going away
quietly without an unpractical compunction--he saw these also
and comprehended knowing exactly why compunctions had no part in
latter-day domestic arrangements. Why should they?

When Feather reached the point where it became necessary to refer
to Robin some fortunate memory of Alice's past warnings caused her
to feel--quite suddenly--that certain details might be eliminated.

"She cried a little at first," she said, "but she fell asleep
afterwards. I was glad she did because I was afraid to go to her
in the dark."

"Was she in the dark?"

"I think so. Perhaps Louisa taught her to sleep without a light.
There was none when I took her some condensed milk this morning.
There was only c-con-d-densed milk to give her."

She shed tears and choked as she described her journey into the
lower regions and the cockroaches scuttling away before her into
their hiding-places.

"I MUST have a nurse! I MUST have one!" she almost sniffed. "Someone
must change her clothes and give her a bath!"

"You can't?" Coombe said.

"I!" dropping her handkerchief. "How--how CAN I?"

"I don't know," he answered and picked up the handkerchief with
an aloof grace of manner.

It was really Robin who was for Feather the breaking-point.

He thought she was in danger of flinging herself upon him again.
She caught at his arm and her eyes of larkspur blue were actually
wild.

"Don't you see where I am! How there is nothing and nobody--Don't
you SEE?"

"Yes, I see," he answered. "You are quite right. There is nothing
AND nobody. I have been to Lawdor myself."

"You have been to TALK to him?"

"Yesterday. That was my reason for coming here. He will not see
you or be written to. He says he knows better to begin that sort
of thing. It may be that family feeling has not the vogue it once
had, but you may recall that your husband infuriated him years
ago. Also England is a less certain quantity than it once was--and
the man has a family. He will allow you a hundred a year but there
he draws the line."

"A hundred a year!" Feather breathed. From her delicate shoulders
hung floating scarf-like sleeves of black transparency and she lifted
one of them and held it out like a night moth's wing--"This cost
forty pounds," she said, her voice quite faint and low. "A good
nurse would cost forty! A cook--and a footman and a maid--and a
coachman--and the brougham--I don't know how much they would cost.
Oh-h!"

She drooped forward upon her sofa and laid face downward on a
cushion--slim, exquisite in line, lost in despair.

The effect produced was that she gave herself into his hands. He
felt as well as saw it and considered. She had no suggestion to
offer, no reserve. There she was.

"It is an incredible sort of situation," he said in an even,
low-pitched tone rather as if he were thinking aloud, "but it is
baldly real. It is actually simple. In a street in Mayfair a woman
and child might--" He hesitated a second and a wailed word came
forth from the cushion.

"Starve!"

He moved slightly and continued.

"Since their bills have not been paid the trades-people will not
send in food. Servants will not stay in a house where they are
not fed and receive no wages. No landlord will allow a tenant to
occupy his property unless he pays rent. It may sound inhuman--but
it is only human."

The cushion in which Feather's face was buried retained a faint
scent of Robert's cigar smoke and the fragrance brought back to her
things she had heard him say dispassionately about Lord Coombe as
well as about other men. He had not been a puritanic or condemnatory
person. She seemed to see herself groveling again on the floor
of her bedroom and to feel the darkness and silence through which
she had not dared to go to Robin.

Not another night like that! No! No!

"You must go to Jersey to your mother and father," Coombe said.
"A hundred a year will help you there in your own home."

Then she sat upright and there was something in her lovely little
countenance he had never seen before. It was actually determination.

"I have heard," she said, "of poor girls who were driven--by
starvation to--to go on the streets. I--would go ANYWHERE before
I would go back there."

"Anywhere!" he repeated, his own countenance expressing--or rather
refusing to express something as new as the thing he had seen in
her own.

"Anywhere!" she cried and then she did what he had thought her on
the verge of doing a few minutes earlier--she fell at his feet and
embraced his knees. She clung to him, she sobbed, her pretty hair
loosened itself and fell about her in wild but enchanting disorder.

"Oh, Lord Coombe! Oh, Lord Coombe! Oh, Lord Coombe!" she cried as
she had cried in the hall.

He rose and endeavoured to disengage himself as he had done before.
This time with less success because she would not let him go. He
had the greatest possible objection to scenes.

"Mrs. Lawless--Feather--I beg you will get up," he said.

But she had reached the point of not caring what happened if she
could keep him. He was a gentleman--he had everything in the world.
What did it matter?

"I have no one but you and--and you always seemed to like me, I
would do anything--ANYONE asked me, if they would take care of me.
I have always liked you very much--and I did amuse you--didn't I?
You liked to come here."

There was something poignant about her delicate distraught loveliness
and, in the remoteness of his being, a shuddering knowledge that
it was quite true that she would do anything for any man who would
take care of her, produced an effect on him nothing else would
have produced. Also a fantastic and finely ironic vision of Joseph
and Potiphar's wife rose before him and the vision of himself as
Joseph irked a certain complexness of his mentality. Poignant as
the thing was in its modern way, it was also faintly ridiculous.

Then Robin awakened and shrieked again. The sound which had gained
strength through long sleep and also through added discomfort
quite rang through the house. What that sound added to the moment
he himself would not have been able to explain until long afterwards.
But it singularly and impellingly added.

"Listen!" panted Feather. "She has begun again. And there is no
one to go to her."

"Get up, Mrs. Lawless," he said. "Do I understand that you are
willing that _I_ arrange this for you!"

He helped her to her feet.

"Do you mean--really!" she faltered. "Will you--will you--?"

Her uplifted eyes were like a young angel's brimming with crystal
drops which slipped--as a child's tears slip--down her cheeks.
She clasped her hands in exquisite appeal. He stood for a moment
quite still, his mind fled far away and he forgot where he was.
And because of this the little simpleton's shallow discretion
deserted her.

"If you were a--a marrying man--?" she said foolishly--almost in
a whisper.

He recovered himself.

"I am not," with a finality which cut as cleanly as a surgical
knife.

Something which was not the words was of a succinctness which
filled her with new terror.

"I--I know!" she whimpered, "I only said if you were!"

"If I were--in this instance--it would make no difference." He saw
the kind of slippery silliness he was dealing with and what it
might transform itself into if allowed a loophole. "There must be
no mistakes."

In her fright she saw him for a moment more distinctly than she
had ever seen him before and hideous dread beset her lest she had
blundered fatally.

"There shall be none," she gasped. "I always knew. There shall be
none at all."

"Do you know what you are asking me?" he inquired.

"Yes, yes--I'm not a girl, you know. I've been married. I won't
go home. I can't starve or live in awful lodgings. SOMEBODY must
save me!"

"Do you know what people will say?" his steady voice was slightly
lower.

"It won't be said to me." Rather wildly. "Nobody minds--really."

He ceased altogether to look serious. He smiled with the light
detached air his world was most familiar with.

"No--they don't really," he answered. "I had, however, a slight
preference for knowing whether you would or not. You flatter me
by intimating that you would not."

He knew that if he had held out an arm she would have fallen upon
his breast and wept there, but he was not at the moment in the mood
to hold out an arm. He merely touched hers with a light pressure.

"Let us sit down and talk it over," he suggested.

A hansom drove up to the door and stopped before he had time to
seat himself. Hearing it he went to the window and saw a stout
businesslike looking man get out, accompanied by an attendant.
There followed a loud, authoritative ringing of the bell and an
equally authoritative rap of the knocker. This repeated itself.
Feather, who had run to the window and caught sight of the stout
man, clutched his sleeve.

"It's the agent we took the house from. We always said we were
out. It's either Carson or Bayle. I don't know which."

Coombe walked toward the staircase.

"You can't open the door!" she shrilled.

"He has doubtless come prepared to open it himself." he answered
and proceeded at leisure down the narrow stairway.

The caller had come prepared. By the time Coombe stood in the hall
a latchkey was put in the keyhole and, being turned, the door
opened to let in Carson--or Bayle--who entered with an air of
angered determination, followed by his young man.

The physical presence of the Head of the House of Coombe was always
described as a subtly impressive one. Several centuries of rather
careful breeding had resulted in his seeming to represent things
by silent implication. A man who has never found the necessity of
explaining or excusing himself inevitably presents a front wholly
unsuggestive of uncertainty. The front Coombe presented merely
awaited explanations from others.

Carson--or Bayle--had doubtless contemplated seeing a frightened
servant trying to prepare a stammering obvious lie. He confronted
a tall, thin man about whom--even if his clothes had been totally
different--there could be no mistake. He stood awaiting an apology
so evidently that Carson--or Bayle--began to stammer himself
even before he had time to dismiss from his voice the suggestion
of bluster. It would have irritated Coombe immensely if he had
known that he--and a certain overcoat--had been once pointed out
to the man at Sandown and that--in consequence of the overcoat--he
vaguely recognized him.

"I--I beg pardon," he began.

"Quite so," said Coombe.

"Some tenants came to look at the house this morning. They had an
order to view from us. They were sent away, my lord--and decline
to come back. The rent has not been paid since the first half
year. There is no one now who can even PRETEND it's going to be
paid. Some step had to be taken."

"Quite so," said Coombe. "Suppose you step into the dining-room."

He led the pair into the room and pointed to chairs, but neither
the agent nor his attendant was calm enough to sit down.

Coombe merely stood and explained himself.

"I quite understand," he said. "You are entirely within your
rights. Mrs. Gareth-Lawless is, naturally, not able to attend to
business. For the present--as a friend of her late husband's--I
will arrange matters for her. I am Lord Coombe. She does not wish
to give up the house. Don't send any more possible tenants. Call
at Coombe House in an hour and I will give you a cheque."

There were a few awkward apologetic moments and then the front door
opened and shut, the hansom jingled away and Coombe returned to
the drawing-room. Robin was still shrieking.

"She wants some more condensed milk," he said. "Don't be frightened.
Go and give her some. I know an elderly woman who understands
children. She was a nurse some years ago. I will send her here at
once. Kindly give me the account books. My housekeeper will send
you some servants. The trades-people will come for orders."

Feather was staring at him.

"W-will they?" she stammered. "W-will everything--?"

"Yes--everything," he answered. "Don't be frightened. Go upstairs
and try to stop her. I must go now. I never heard a creature yell
with such fury."

She turned away and went towards the second flight of stairs with
a rather dazed air. She had passed through a rather tremendous crisis
and she WAS dazed. He made her feel so. She had never understood
him for a moment and she did not understand him now--but then she
never did understand people and the whole situation was a new one
to her. If she had not been driven to the wall she would have been
quite as respectable as she knew how to be.

Coombe called a hansom and drove home, thinking of many things
and looking even more than usually detached. He had remarked the
facial expression of the short and stout man as he had got into
his cab and he was turning over mentally his own exact knowledge of
the views the business mind would have held and what the business
countenance would have decently covered if he--Coombe--had explained
in detail that he was so far--in this particular case--an entirely
blameless character.






CHAPTER VII





The slice of a house from that time forward presented the external
aspect to which the inhabitants of the narrow and fashionable
street and those who passed through it had been accustomed. Such
individuals as had anticipated beholding at some early day notices
conspicuously placed announcing "Sale by Auction. Elegant Modern
Furniture" were vaguely puzzled as well as surprised by the fact
that no such notices appeared even inconspicuously. Also there
did not draw up before the door--even as the weeks went on--huge
and heavy removal vans with their resultant litter, their final
note of farewell a "To Let" in the front windows.

On the contrary, the florist came and refilled the window boxes
with an admirable arrangement of fresh flowers; new and even more
correct servants were to be seen ascending and descending the area
step; a young footman quite as smart as the departed Edward opened
the front door and attended Mrs. Gareth-Lawless to her perfect
little brougham. The trades-people appeared promptly every day and
were obsequiously respectful in manner. Evidently the household
had not disintegrated as a result of the death of Mr. Gareth-Lawless.

As it became an established fact that the household had not fallen to
pieces its frequenters gradually returned to it, wearing indeed
the air of people who had never really remained away from it. There
had been natural reasons enough for considerate absence from a
house of bereavement and a desolate widow upon whose grief it would
have been indelicate to intrude. As Feather herself had realized,
the circle of her intimates was not formed of those who could
readily adjust themselves to entirely changed circumstances. If
you dance on a tight rope and the rope is unexpectedly withdrawn,
where are you? You cannot continue dancing until the rope is
restrung.

The rope, however, being apparently made absolutely secure, it
was not long before the dancing began again. Feather's mourning,
wonderfully shading itself from month to month, was the joy of all
beholders. Madame Helene treated her as a star gleaming through
gradually dispersing clouds. Her circle watched her with secretly
humorous interest as each fine veil of dimness was withdrawn.

"The things she wears are priceless," was said amiably in her own
drawing-room. "Where does she get them? Figure to yourself Lawdor
paying the bills."

"She gets them from Helene," said a long thin young man with
a rather good-looking narrow face and dark eyes, peering through
pince nez, "But I couldn't."

In places where entertainment as a means of existence proceed so
to speak, fast and furiously, questions of taste are not dwelt
upon at leisure. You need not hesitate before saying anything you
liked in any one's drawing-room so long as it was amusing enough
to make somebody--if not everybody--laugh. Feather had made people
laugh in the same fashion in the past. The persons she most admired
were always making sly little impudent comments and suggestions,
and the thwarted years on the island of Jersey had, in her case,
resulted in an almost hectic desire to keep pace. Her efforts had
usually been successes because Nature's self had provided her with
the manner of a silly pretty child who did not know how far she
went. Shouts of laughter had often greeted her, and the first time
she had for a moment doubted her prowess was on an occasion when
she had caught a glimpse of Coombe who stared at her with an
expression which she would--just for one second--have felt might
be horror, if she had not been so sure it couldn't be, and must of
course be something else--one of the things nobody ever understood
in him.

By the time the softly swathing veils of vaporous darkness were
withdrawn, and the tight rope assuring everyone of its permanent
security became a trusted support, Feather at her crowded little
parties and at other people's bigger ones did not remain wholly
unaware of the probability that even people who rather liked
her made, among themselves, more or less witty comments upon her
improved fortunes. They were improved greatly. Bills were paid,
trades-people were polite, servants were respectful; she had no
need to invent excuses and lies. She and Robert had always kept out
of the way of stodgy, critical people, so they had been intimate
with none of the punctilious who might have withdrawn themselves
from a condition of things they chose to disapprove: accordingly,
she found no gaps in her circle. Those who had formed the habit of
amusing themselves at her house were as ready as before to amuse
themselves again.

The fact remained, however,--curiously, perhaps, in connection with
the usual slightness of all impressions made on her--that there
was a memory which never wholly left her. Even when she tried to
force it so far into the background of her existence that it might
almost be counted as forgotten, it had a trick of rising before
her. It was the memory of the empty house as its emptiness had
struck to the centre of her being when she had turned from her
bedroom window after watching the servants drive away in their
cabs. It was also the memory of the hours which had followed--the
night in which nobody had been in any of the rooms--no one had gone
up or down the stairs--when all had seemed dark and hollow--except
the Night Nursery where Robin screamed, and her own room where she
herself cowered under the bed clothes and pulled the pillow over
her head. But though the picture would not let itself be blotted
out, its effect was rather to intensify her sense of relief because
she had slipped so safely from under the wheels of destiny.

"Sometimes," she revealed artlessly to Coombe, "while I am driving
in the park on a fine afternoon when every one is out and the
dresses look like the flower beds, I let myself remember it just
to make myself enjoy everything more by contrast."

The elderly woman who had been a nurse in her youth and who had
been sent by Lord Coombe temporarily to replace Louisa had not
remained long in charge of Robin. She was not young and smart
enough for a house on the right side of the right street, and
Feather found a young person who looked exactly as she should when
she pushed the child's carriage before her around the square.

The square--out of which the right street branches--and the "Gardens"
in the middle of the square to which only privileged persons were
admitted by private key, the basement kitchen and Servants' Hall,
and the two top floor nurseries represented the world to the
child Robin for some years. When she was old enough to walk in the
street she was led by the hand over the ground she had travelled
daily in her baby carriage. Her first memory of things was a memory
of standing on the gravel path in the Square Gardens and watching
some sparrows quarrel while Andrews, her nurse, sat on a bench
with another nurse and talked in low tones. They were talking in
a way Robin always connected with servants and which she naturally
accepted as being the method of expression of their species--much
as she accepted the mewing of cats and the barking of dogs. As
she grew older, she reached the stage of knowing that they were
generally saying things they did not wish her to hear.

She liked watching the sparrows in the Gardens because she liked
watching sparrows at all times. They were the only friends she had
ever known, though she was not old enough to call them friends,
or to know what friends meant. Andrews had taught her, by means
of a system of her own, to know better than to cry or to make any
protesting noise when she was left alone in her ugly small nursery.
Andrews' idea of her duties did not involve boring herself to death
by sitting in a room on the top floor when livelier entertainment
awaited her in the basement where the cook was a woman of wide
experience, the housemaid a young person who had lived in gay
country houses, and the footman at once a young man of spirit
and humour. So Robin spent many hours of the day--taking them
altogether--quite by herself. She might have more potently resented
her isolations if she had ever known any other condition than
that of a child in whom no one was in the least interested and
in whom "being good" could only mean being passive under neglect
and calling no one's attention to the fact that she wanted anything
from anybody. As a bird born in captivity lives in its cage and
perhaps believes it to be the world, Robin lived in her nursery
and knew every square inch of it with a deadly if unconscious
sense of distaste and fatigue. She was put to bed and taken up,
she was fed and dressed in it, and once a day--twice perhaps if
Andrews chose--she was taken out of it downstairs and into the
street. That was all. And that was why she liked the sparrows so
much.

And sparrows are worth watching if you live in a nursery where
nothing ever happens and where, when you look out, you are so high
up that it is not easy to see the people in the world below, in
addition to which it seems nearly always raining. Robin used to
watch them hopping about on the slate roofs of the homes on the
other side of the street. They fluttered their wings, they picked
up straws and carried them away. She thought they must have houses
of their own among the chimneys--in places she could not see. She
fancied it would be nice to hop about on the top of a roof oneself
if one were not at all afraid of falling. She liked the chippering
and chirping sounds the birds made became it sounded like talking
and laughing--like the talking and laughing she sometimes wakened
out of her sleep to lie and listen to when the Lady Downstairs had
a party. She often wondered what the people were doing because it
sounded as if they liked doing it very much.

Sometimes when it had rained two or three days she had a feeling
which made her begin to cry to herself--but not aloud. She had
once had a little black and blue mark on her arm for a week where
Andrews had pinched her because she had cried loud enough to be
heard. It had seemed to her that Andrews twisted and pinched the
bit of flesh for five minutes without letting it go and she had
held her large hand over her mouth as she did it.

"Now you keep that in your mind," she had said when she had finished
and Robin had almost choked in her awful little struggle to keep
back all sound.

The one thing Andrews was surest of was that nobody would come
upstairs to the Nursery to inquire the meaning of any cries which
were not unearthly enough to disturb the household. So it was easy
to regulate the existence of her charge in such a manner as best
suited herself.

"Just give her food enough and keep her from making silly noises
when she wants what she doesn't get," said Andrews to her companions
below stairs. "That one in the drawing-room isn't going to interfere
with the Nursery. Not her! I know my business and I know how to
manage her kind. I go to her politely now and then and ask her
permission to buy things from Best's or Liberty's or some other
good place. She always stares a minute when I begin, as if she
scarcely understood what I was talking about and then she says
'Oh, yes, I suppose she must have them.' And I go and get them. I
keep her as well dressed as any child in Mayfair. And she's been
a beauty since she was a year old so she looks first rate when I
wheel her up and down the street, so the people can see she's well
taken care of and not kept hidden away. No one can complain of her
looks and nobody is bothered with her. That's all that's wanted
of ME. I get good wages and I get them regular. I don't turn up
my nose at a place like this, whatever the outside talk is. Who
cares in these days anyway? Fashionable people's broader minded
than they used to be. In Queen Victoria's young days they tell
me servants were no class that didn't live in families where they
kept the commandments."

"Fat lot the commandments give any one trouble in these times,"
said Jennings, the footman, who was a wit. "There's one of 'em I
could mention that's been broken till there's no bits of it left
to keep. If I smashed that plate until it was powder it'd have
to be swept into the dust din. That's what happened to one or two
commandments in particular."

"Well," remarked Mrs. Blayne, the cook, "she don't interfere and
he pays the bills prompt. That'll do ME instead of commandments.
If you'll believe me, my mother told me that in them Queen Victoria
days ladies used to inquire about cold meat and ask what was done
with the dripping. Civilisation's gone beyond that--commandments
or no commandments."

"He's precious particular about bills being paid," volunteered
Jennings, with the air of a man of the world. "I heard him having
a row with her one day about some bills she hadn't paid. She'd
spent the money for some nonsense and he was pretty stiff in that
queer way of his. Quite right he was too. I'd have been the same
myself," pulling up his collar and stretching his neck in a manner
indicating exact knowledge of the natural sentiments of a Marquis
when justly annoyed. "What he intimated was that if them bills
was not paid with the money that was meant to pay them, the
money wouldn't be forthcoming the next time." Jennings was rather
pleased by the word "forthcoming" and therefore he repeated it
with emphasis, "It wouldn't be FORTHCOMING."

"That'd frighten her," was Andrews' succinct observation.

"It did!" said Jennings. "She'd have gone in hysterics if he hadn't
kept her down. He's got a way with him, Coombe has."

Andrews laughed, a brief, dry laugh.

"Do you know what the child calls her?" she said. "She calls her
the Lady Downstairs. She's got a sort of fancy for her and tries
to get peeps at her when we go out. I notice she always cranes
her little neck if we pass a room she might chance to be in. It's
her pretty clothes and her laughing that does it. Children's drawn
by bright colours and noise that sounds merry."

"It's my belief the child doesn't know she IS her mother!" said
Mrs. Blayne as she opened an oven door to look at some rolls.

"It's my belief that if I told her she was she wouldn't know what
the word meant. It was me she got the name from," Andrews still
laughed as she explained. "I used to tell her about the Lady
Downstairs would hear if she made a noise, or I'd say I'd let her
have a peep at the Lady Downstairs if she was very good. I saw
she had a kind of awe of her though she liked her so much, so it
was a good way of managing her. You mayn't believe me but for
a good bit I didn't take in that she didn't know there was such
things as mothers and, when I did take it in, I saw there wasn't
any use in trying to explain. She wouldn't have understood."

"How would you go about to explain a mother, anyway?" suggested
Jennings. "I'd have to say that she was the person that had the
right to slap your head if you didn't do what she told you."

"I'd have to say that she was the woman that could keep you slaving
at kitchen maid's work fifteen hours a day," said Mrs. Blayne;
"My mother was cook in a big house and trained me under her."

"I never had one," said Andrews stiffly. The truth was that she
had taken care of eight infant brothers and sisters, while her
maternal parent slept raucously under the influence of beer when
she was not quarrelling with her offspring.

Jane, the housemaid, had passed a not uncomfortable childhood in
the country and was perhaps of a soft nature.

"I'd say that a mother's the one that you belong to and that's
fond of you, even if she does keep you straight," she put in.

"Her mother isn't fond of her and doesn't keep herself straight,"
said Jennings. "So that wouldn't do."

"And she doesn't slap her head or teach her to do kitchen maid's
work," put in Mrs. Blayne, "so yours is no use, Mr. Jennings, and
neither is mine. Miss Andrews 'll have to cook up an explanation
of her own herself when she finds she has to."

"She can get it out of a Drury Lane melodrama," said Jennings, with
great humour. "You'll have to sit down some night, Miss Andrews,
and say, 'The time has come, me chee-ild, when I must tell you
All'."

In this manner were Mrs. Gareth-Lawless and her maternal affections
discussed below stairs. The interesting fact remained that to Robin
the Lady Downstairs was merely a radiant and beautiful being who
floated through certain rooms laughing or chattering like a bird,
and always wearing pretty clothes, which were different each time
one beheld her. Sometimes one might catch a glimpse of her through
a door, or, if one pressed one's face against the window pane at
the right moment, she might get into her bright little carnage in
the street below and, after Jennings had shut its door, she might
be seen to give a lovely flutter to her clothes as she settled
back against the richly dark blue cushions.

It is a somewhat portentous thing to realize that a newborn
human creature can only know what it is taught. The teaching may
be conscious or unconscious, intelligent or idiotic, exquisite
or brutal. The images presented by those surrounding it, as its
perceptions awaken day by day, are those which record themselves
on its soul, its brain, its physical being which is its sole means
of expressing, during physical life, all it has learned. That
which automatically becomes the Law at the dawning of newborn
consciousness remains, to its understanding, the Law of Being,
the Law of the Universe. To the cautious of responsibility this
at times wears the aspect of an awesome thing, suggesting, however
remotely, that it might seem well, perhaps, to remove the shoes
from one's feet, as it were, and tread with deliberate and delicate
considering of one's steps, as do the reverently courteous even
on the approaching of an unknown altar.

This being acknowledged a scientific, as well as a spiritual truth,
there remains no mystery in the fact that Robin at six years
old--when she watched the sparrows in the Square Gardens--did not
know the name of the feeling which had grown within her as a result
of her pleasure in the chance glimpses of the Lady Downstairs. It
was a feeling which made her eager to see her or anything which
belonged to her; it made her strain her child ears to catch the
sound of her voice; it made her long to hear Andrews or the other
servants speak of her, and yet much too shy to dare to ask any
questions. She had found a place on the staircase leading to the
Nursery, where, by squeezing against the balustrade, she could
sometimes see the Lady pass in and out of her pink bedroom. She
used to sit on a step and peer between the railing with beating
heart. Sometimes, after she had been put to bed for the night and
Andrews was safely entertained downstairs, Robin would be awakened
from her first sleep by sounds in the room below and would creep
out of bed and down to her special step and, crouching in a hectic
joy, would see the Lady come out with sparkling things in her hair
and round her lovely, very bare white neck and arms, all swathed
in tints and draperies which made her seem a vision of colour and
light. She was so radiant a thing that often the child drew in
her breath with a sound like a little sob of ecstasy, and her lip
trembled as if she were going to cry. But she did not know that what
she felt was the yearning of a thing called love--a quite simple
and natural common thing of which she had no reason for having
any personal knowledge. As she was unaware of mothers, so she was
unaware of affection, of which Andrews would have felt it to be
superfluously sentimental to talk to her.

On the very rare occasions when the Lady Downstairs appeared on
the threshold of the Day Nursery, Robin--always having been freshly
dressed in one of her nicest frocks--stood and stared with immense
startled eyes and answered in a whisper the banal little questions
put to her. The Lady appeared at such rare intervals and remained
poised upon the threshold like a tropic plumaged bird for moments
so brief, that there never was time to do more than lose breath and
gaze as at a sudden vision. Why she came--when she did come--Robin
did not understand. She evidently did not belong to the small,
dingy nurseries which grew shabbier every year as they grew steadily
more grimy under the persistent London soot and fogs.

Feather always held up her draperies when she came. She would not
have come at all but for the fact that she had once or twice been
asked if the child was growing pretty, and it would have seemed
absurd to admit that she never saw her at all.

"I think she's rather pretty," she said downstairs. "She's round
and she has a bright colour--almost too bright, and her eyes are
round too. She's either rather stupid or she's shy--and one's as
bad as the other. She's a child that stares."

If, when Andrews had taken her into the Gardens, she had played
with other children, Robin would no doubt have learned something
of the existence and normal attitude of mothers through the
mere accident of childish chatter, but it somehow happened that
she never formed relations with the charges of other nurses. She
took it for granted for some time that this was because Andrews
had laid down some mysterious law. Andrews did not seem to form
acquaintances herself. Sometimes she sat on a bench and talked
a little to another nurse, but she seldom sat twice with the same
person. It was indeed generally her custom to sit alone, crocheting
or sewing, with a rather lofty and exclusive air and to call Robin
back to her side if she saw her slowly edging towards some other
child.

"My rule is to keep myself to myself," she said in the kitchen.
"And to look as if I was the one that would turn up noses, if
noses was to be turned up. There's those that would snatch away
their children if I let Robin begin to make up to them. Some
wouldn't, of course, but I'm not going to run risks. I'm going to
save my own pride."

But one morning when Robin was watching her sparrows, a nurse,
who was an old acquaintance, surprised Andrews by appearing in the
Gardens with two little girls in her charge. They were children
of nine and eleven and quite sufficient for themselves, apart from
the fact that they regarded Robin as a baby and, therefore, took
no notice of her. They began playing with skipping ropes, which
left their nurse free to engage in delighted conversation with
Andrews.

It was conversation so delightful that Robin was forgotten, even
to the extent of being allowed to follow her sparrows round a
clump of shrubbery and, therefore, out of Andrews' sight, though
she was only a few yards away. The sparrows this morning were
quarrelsome and suddenly engaged in a fight, pecking each other
furiously, beating their wings and uttering shrill, protesting
chipperings. Robin did not quite understand what they were doing
and stood watching them with spellbound interest.

It was while she watched them that she heard footsteps on the
gravel walk which stopped near her and made her look up to see who
was at her side. A big boy in Highland kilts and bonnet and sporan
was standing by her, and she found herself staring into a pair of
handsome deep blue eyes, blue like the waters of a hillside tarn.
They were wide, glowing, friendly eyes and none like them had ever
looked into hers before. He seemed to her to be a very big boy
indeed, and in fact, he was unusually tall and broad for his age,
but he was only eight years old and a simple enough child pagan.
Robin's heart began to beat as it did when she watched the Lady
Downstairs, but there was something different in the beating. It
was something which made her red mouth spread and curve itself into
a smile which showed all her small teeth.

So they stood and stared at each other and for some strange, strange
reason--created, perhaps, with the creating of Man and still hidden
among the deep secrets of the Universe--they were drawn to each
other--wanted each other--knew each other. Their advances were, of
course, of the most primitive--as primitive and as much a matter
of instinct as the nosing and sniffing of young animals. He spread
and curved his red mouth and showed the healthy whiteness of his
own handsome teeth as she had shown her smaller ones. Then he began
to run and prance round in a circle, capering like a Shetland pony
to exhibit at once his friendliness and his prowess. He tossed his
curled head and laughed to make her laugh also, and she not only
laughed but clapped her hands. He was more beautiful than anything
she had ever seen before in her life, and he was plainly trying
to please her. No child creature had ever done anything like it
before, because no child creature had ever been allowed by Andrews
to make friends with her. He, on his part, was only doing what
any other little boy animal would have done--expressing his child
masculinity by "showing off" before a little female. But to this
little female it had never happened before.

It was all beautifully elemental. As does not too often happen,
two souls as well as two bodies were drawn towards each other by
the Magnet of Being. When he had exhibited himself for a minute
or two he came back to her, breathing fast and glowing.

"My pony in Scotland does that. His name is Chieftain. He is a
Shetland pony and he is only that high," he measured forty inches
from the ground. "I'm called Donal. What are you called?"

"Robin," she answered, her lips and voice trembling with joy. He
was so beautiful. His hair was bright and curly. His broad forehead
was clear white where he had pushed back his bonnet with the eagle
feather standing upright on it. His strong legs and knees were
white between his tartan kilt and his rolled back stockings. The
clasps which held his feather and the plaid over his shoulder were
set with fine stones in rich silver. She did not know that he was
perfectly equipped as a little Highland chieftain, the head of
his clan, should be.

They began to play together, and the unknown Fates, which do their
work as they choose, so wrought on this occasion as to cause
Andrews' friend to set forth upon a journey through a story so
exciting in its nature that its hearer was held spellbound and
oblivious to her surroundings themselves. Once, it is true, she
rose as in a dream and walked round the group of shrubs, but the
Fates had arranged for that moment also. Robin was alone and was
busily playing with some leaves she had plucked and laid on the
seat of a bench for some mysterious reason. She looked good for
an hour's safe occupation, and Andrews returned to her friend's
detailed and intimate version of a great country house scandal,
of which the papers were full because it had ended in the divorce
court.

Donal had, at that special moment, gone to pick some of the biggest
leaves from the lilac bush of which the Gardens contained numerous
sooty specimens. The leaves Robin was playing with were some he
had plucked first to show her a wonderful thing. If you laid a leaf
flat on the seat of the bench and were fortunate enough to possess
a large pin you could prick beautiful patterns on the leaf's
greenness--dots and circles, and borders and tiny triangles of a
most decorative order. Neither Donal nor Robin had a pin but Donal
had, in his rolled down stocking, a little dirk the point of which
could apparently be used for any interesting purpose. It was really
he who did the decoration, but Robin leaned against the bench and
looked on enthralled. She had never been happy before in the entire
course of her brief existence. She had not known or expected and
conditions other than those she was familiar with--the conditions
of being fed and clothed, kept clean and exercised, but totally
unloved and unentertained. She did not even know that this nearness
to another human creature, the exchange of companionable looks,
which were like flashes of sunlight, the mutual outbreaks of child
laughter and pleasure were happiness. To her, what she felt, the
glow and delight of it, had no name but she wanted it to go on
and on, never to be put an end to by Andrews or anyone else.

The boy Donal was not so unconscious. He had been happy all his
life. What he felt was that he had liked this little girl the
minute he saw her. She was pretty, though he thought her immensely
younger than himself, and, when she had looked up at him with her
round, asking eyes, he had wanted to talk to her and make friends.
He had not played much with boys and he had no haughty objection
to girls who liked him. This one did, he saw at once.

Through what means children so quickly convey to each other--while
seeming scarcely to do more than play--the entire history of their
lives and surroundings, is a sort of occult secret. It is not a
matter of prolonged conversation. Perhaps images created by the
briefest of unadorned statements produce on the unwritten tablets
of the child mind immediate and complete impressions. Safe as
the locked garden was, Andrews cannot have forgotten her charge
for any very great length of time and yet before Donal, hearing
his attendant's voice from her corner, left Robin to join her and
be taken home, the two children knew each other intimately. Robin
knew that Donal's home was in Scotland--where there are hills and
moors with stags on them. He lived there with "Mother" and he had
been brought to London for a visit. The person he called "Mother"
was a woman who took care of him and he spoke of her quite often.
Robin did not think she was like Andrews, though she did not in
the least know why. On his part Donal knew about the nurseries
and the sparrows who hopped about on the slates of the houses
opposite. Robin did not describe the nurseries to him, but Donal
knew that they were ugly and that there were no toys in them and
nothing to do. Also, in some mystic fashion, he realized that
Andrews would not let Robin play with him if she saw them together,
and that, therefore, they must make the most of their time. Full
of their joy in each other, they actually embarked upon an ingenious
infant intrigue, which involved their trying to meet behind the
shrubs if they were brought to the Gardens the next day. Donal was
sure he could come because his nurse always did what he asked of
her. He was so big now that she was not a real nurse, but she had
been his nurse when he was quite little and "Mother" liked her
to travel with them. He had a tutor but he had stayed behind in
Scotland at Braemarnie, which was their house. Donal would come
tomorrow and he would look for Robin and when she saw him she must
get away from Andrews and they would play together again.

"I will bring one of my picture books," he said grandly. "Can you
read at all?"

"No," answered Robin adoring him. "What are picture books?"

"Haven't you any?" he blurted out.

"No," said Robin. She looked at the gravel walk, reflecting a
moment thoughtfully on the Day Nursery and the Night Nursery. Then
she lifted her eyes to the glowing blueness of his and said quite
simply, "I haven't anything."

He suddenly remembered things his Mother had told him about poor
people. Perhaps she was poor. Could she be poor when her frock
and hat and coat were so pretty? It was not polite to ask. But the
thought made him love her more. He felt something warm rush all
over his body. The truth, if he had been old enough to be aware of
it, was that the entire simpleness of her acceptance of things as
they were, and a something which was unconsciousness of any cause
for complaint, moved his child masculinity enormously. His old
nurse's voice came from her corner again.

"I must go to Nanny," he said, feeling somehow as if he had been
running fast. "I'll come tomorrow and bring two picture books."

He was a loving, warm blooded child human thing, and the expression
of affection was, to him, a familiar natural impulse. He put his
strong little eight-year-old arms round her and kissed her full
on her mouth, as he embraced her with all his strength. He kissed
her twice.

It was the first time for Robin. Andrews did not kiss. There was
no one else. It was the first time, and Nature had also made her
a loving, warm blooded, human thing. How beautiful he was--how
big--how strong his arms were--and how soft and warm his mouth
felt. She stood and gazed at him with wide asking eyes and laughed a
little. She had no words because she did not know what had happened.

"Don't you like to be kissed?" said Donal, uncertain because she
looked so startled and had not kissed him back.

"Kissed," she repeated, with a small, caught breath, "ye-es." She
knew now what it was. It was being kissed. She drew nearer at once
and lifted up her face as sweetly and gladly, as a flower lifts
itself to the sun. "Kiss me again," she said quite eagerly. As
ingenuously and heartily as before, he kissed her again and, this
time, she kissed too. When he ran quickly away, she stood looking
after him with smiling, trembling lips, uplifted, joyful--wondering
and amazed.






CHAPTER VIII





When she went back to Andrews she carried the pricked leaves with
her. She could not have left them behind. From what source she
had drawn a characterizing passionate, though silent, strength of
mind and body, it would be difficult to explain. Her mind and her
emotions had been left utterly unfed, but they were not of the inert
order which scarcely needs feeding. Her feeling for the sparrows
had held more than she could have expressed; her secret adoration
of the "Lady Downstairs" was an intense thing. Her immediate
surrender to the desire in the first pair of human eyes--child eyes
though they were--which had ever called to her being for response,
was simple and undiluted rapture. She had passed over her little
soul without a moment's delay and without any knowledge of the
giving. It had flown from her as a bird might fly from darkness
into the sun. Eight-year-old Donal was the sun.

No special tendency to innate duplicity was denoted by the fact
that she had acquired, through her observation of Andrews, Jennings,
Jane and Mrs. Blayne, the knowledge that there were things it was
best not to let other people know. You were careful about them.
From the occult communications between herself and Donal, which
had resulted in their intrigue, there had of course evolved a
realizing sense of the value of discretion. She did not let Andrews
see the decorated leaves, but put them into a small pocket in her
coat. Her Machiavellian intention was to slip them out when she
was taken up to the Nursery. Andrews was always in a hurry to go
downstairs to her lunch and she would be left alone and could find
a place where she could hide them.

Andrews' friend started when Robin drew near to them. The child's
cheeks and lips were the colour of Jacqueminot rose petals. Her
eyes glowed with actual rapture.

"My word! That's a beauty if I ever saw one," said the woman.
"First sight makes you jump. My word!"

Robin, however, did not know what she was talking about and in
fact scarcely heard her. She was thinking of Donal. She thought
of him as she was taken home, and she did not cease thinking of
him during the whole rest of the day and far into the night. When
Andrews left her, she found a place to hide the pricked leaves and
before she put them away she did what Donal had done to her--she
kissed them. She kissed them several times because they were Donal's
leaves and he had made the stars and lines on them. It was almost
like kissing Donal but not quite so beautiful.

After she was put to bed at night and Andrews left her she lay
awake for a long time. She did not want to go to sleep because
everything seemed so warm and wonderful and she could think and
think and think. What she thought about was Donal's face, his
delightful eyes, his white forehead with curly hair pushed back
with his Highland bonnet. His plaid swung about when he ran and
jumped. When he held her tight the buttons of his jacket hurt her
a little because they pressed against her body. What was "Mother"
like? Did he kiss her? What pretty stones there were in his clasps
and buckles! How nice it was to hear him laugh and how fond he
was of laughing. Donal! Donal! Donal! He liked to play with her
though she was a girl and so little. He would play with her tomorrow.
His cheeks were bright pink, his hair was bright, his eyes were
bright. He was all bright. She tried to see into the blueness of
his eyes again as it seemed when they looked at each other close
to. As she began to see the clear colour she fell asleep.

The power which had on the first morning guided Robin to the
seclusion behind the clump of shrubs and had provided Andrews with
an enthralling companion, extended, the next day, an even more
beneficient and complete protection. Andrews was smitten with a
cold so alarming as to confine her to bed. Having no intention of
running any risks, whatsoever, she promptly sent for a younger
sister who, temporarily being "out of place", came into the house
as substitute. She was a pretty young woman who assumed no special
responsibilities and was fond of reading novels.

"She's been trained to be no trouble, Anne. She'll amuse herself
without bothering you as long as you keep her out," Andrews said
of Robin.

Anne took "Lady Audley's Secret" with her to the Gardens and,
having led her charge to a shady and comfortable seat which exactly
suited her, she settled herself for a pleasant morning.

"Now, you can play while I read," she said to Robin.

As they had entered the Gardens they had passed, not far from the
gate, a bench on which sat a highly respectable looking woman who
was hemming a delicate bit of cambric, and evidently in charge of
two picture books which lay on the seat beside her. A fine boy in
Highland kilts was playing a few yards away. Robin felt something
like a warm flood rush over her and her joy was so great and
exquisite that she wondered if Anne felt her hand trembling. Anne
did not because she was looking at a lady getting into a carriage
across the street.

The marvel of that early summer morning in the gardens of a
splendid but dingy London square thing was not a thing for which
human words could find expression. It was not an earthly thing,
or, at least, not a thing belonging to an earth grown old. A child
Adam and Eve might have known something like it in the Garden of
Eden. It was as clear and simple as spring water and as warm as
the sun.

Anne's permission to "play" once given, Robin found her way behind
the group of lilacs and snowballs. Donal would come, not only
because he was so big that Nanny would let him do what he wanted
to do, but because he would do everything and anything in the
world. Donal! Donal! Her heart was a mere baby's heart but it
beat as if she were seventeen--beat with pure rapture. He was all
bright and he would laugh and laugh.

The coming was easy enough for Donal. He had told his mother and
Nanny rejoicingly about the little girl he had made friends with
and who had no picture books. But he did not come straight to
her. He took his picture books under his arm, and showing all his
white teeth in a joyous grin, set out to begin their play properly
with a surprise. He did not let her see him coming but "stalked"
her behind the trees and bushes until he found where she was
waiting, and then thrust his face between the branches of a tall
shrub near her and laughed the outright laugh she loved. And when
she turned she was looking straight into the clear blue she had
tried to see when she fell asleep. "Donal! Donal!" she cried like
a little bird with but one note.

The lilac and the snowball were in blossom and there was a big
hawthorn tree which smelt sweet and sweet. They could not see the
drift of smuts on the blossoms, they only smelled the sweetness
and sat under the hawthorn and sniffed and sniffed. The sun was
deliciously warm and a piano organ was playing beautifully not
far away. They sat close to each other, so close that the picture
book could lie open on both pairs of knees and the warmth of each
young body penetrated the softness of the other. Sometimes Donal
threw an arm around her as she bent over the page. Love and
caresses were not amazements to him; he accepted them as parts of
the normal joy of life. To Robin they were absolute wonder. The
pictures were delight and amazement in one. Donal knew all about
them and told her stories. She felt that such splendour could have
emanated only from him. It could not occur to her that he had not
invented them and made the pictures. He showed her Robinson Crusoe
and Robin Hood. The scent of the hawthorn and lilac intoxicated
them and they laughed tremendously because Robin Hood's name was
like Robin's own and he was a man and she was a girl. They could
scarcely stop laughing and Donal rolled over and over on the grass,
half from unconquerable high spirits and half to make Robin laugh
still more.

He had some beautiful coloured glass marbles in his pocket
and he showed her how to play with them, and gave her two of the
prettiest. He could shoot them over the ground in a way to thrill
the beholder. He could hop on one leg as far as he liked. He could
read out of books.

"Do you like me?" he said once in a pause between displays of his
prowess.

Robin was kneeling upon the grass watching him and she clasped
her little hands as if she were uttering a prayer.

"Oh, yes, yes!" she yearned. "Yes! Yes!"

"I like you," he answered; "I told my mother all about you."

He came to her and knelt by her side.

"Have you a mother?" he asked.

"No," shaking her head.

"Do you live with your aunt?"

"No, I don't live with anybody."

He looked puzzled.

"Isn't there any lady in your house?" he put it to her. She
brightened a little, relieved to think she had something to tell
him.

"There's the Lady Downstairs," she said. "She's so pretty--so
pretty."

"Is she----" he stopped and shook his head. "She couldn't be your
mother," he corrected himself. "You'd know about HER."

"She wears pretty clothes. Sometimes they float about and sparkle
and she wears little crowns on her head--or flowers. She laughs,"
Robin described eagerly. "A great many people come to see her.
They all laugh. Sometimes they sing. I lie in bed and listen."

"Does she ever come upstairs to the Nursery?" inquired Donal with
a somewhat reflective air.

"Yes. She comes and stands near the door and says, 'Is she quite
well, Andrews?' She does not laugh then. She--she LOOKS at me."

She stopped there, feeling suddenly that she wished very much that
she had more to tell. What she was saying was evidently not very
satisfactory. He seemed to expect more--and she had no more to
give. A sense of emptiness crept upon her and for no reason she
understood there was a little click in her throat.

"Does she only stand near the door?" he suggested, as one putting
the situation to a sort of crucial test. "Does she never sit on a
big chair and take you on her knee?"

"No, no," in a dropped voice. "She will not sit down. She says
the chairs are grubby."

"Doesn't she LOVE you at all?" persisted Donal. "Doesn't she KISS
you?"

There was a thing she had known for what seemed to her a long
time--God knows in what mysterious fashion she had learned it,
but learned it well she had. That no human being but herself was
aware of her knowledge was inevitable. To whom could she have
told it? But Donal--Donal wanted to know all about her. The little
click made itself felt in her throat again.

"She--she doesn't LIKE me!" Her dropped voice was the whisper of
one humbled to the dust by confession, "She--doesn't LIKE me!"
And the click became another thing which made her put up her arm
over her eyes--her round, troubled child eyes, which, as she had
looked into Donal's, had widened with sudden, bewildered tears.

Donal flung his arms round her and squeezed his buttons into her
tender chest. He hugged her close; he kissed her; there was a
choking in his throat. He was hot all over.

"She does like you. She must like you. I'll make her!" he cried
passionately. "She's not your mother. If she was, she'd LOVE you!
She'd LOVE you!"

"Do Mothers l-love you?" the small voice asked with a half sob.
"What's--what's LOVE you?" It was not vulgar curiosity. She only
wanted to find out.

He loosed his embrace, sitting back on his heels to stare.

"Don't you KNOW?"

She shook her head with soft meekness.

"N-no," she answered.

Big boys like himself did not usually play with such little
girls. But something had drawn him to her at their first moment
of encounter. She wasn't like any other little girls. He felt it
all the time and that was part of the thing which drew him. He
was not, of course, aware that the male thrill at being regarded
as one who is a god had its power over the emotions. She wasn't
making silly fun and pretending. She really didn't know--because
she was different.

"It's liking very much. It's more," he explained. "My mother loves
ME. I--I LOVE you!" stoutly. "Yes, I LOVE you. That's why I kissed
you when you cried."

She was so uplifted, so overwhelmed with adoring gratitude that as
she knelt on the grass she worshipped him.

"I love YOU," she answered him. "I LOVE you--LOVE you!" And she
looked at him with such actual prayerfulness that he caught at her
and, with manly promptness, kissed her again-this being mere Nature.

Because he was eight years old and she was six her tears flashed
away and they both laughed joyously as they sat down on the grass
again to talk it over.

He told her all the pleasant things he knew about Mothers. The
world was full of them it seemed--full. You belong to them from
the time you were a baby. He had not known many personally because
he had always lived at Braemarnie, which was in the country in
Scotland. There were no houses near his home. You had to drive
miles and miles before you came to a house or a castle. He had not
seen much of other children except a few who lived at the Manse
and belonged to the minister. Children had fathers as well as
mothers. Fathers did not love you or take care of you quite as
much as Mothers--because they were men. But they loved you too.
His own father had died when he was a baby. His mother loved him
as much as he loved her. She was beautiful but--it seemed to reveal
itself--not like the Lady Downstairs. She did not laugh very much,
though she laughed when they played together. He was too big now
to sit on her knee, but squeezed into the big chair beside her when
she read or told him stories. He always did what his mother told
him. She knew everything in the world and so knew what he ought to
do. Even when he was a big man he should do what his mother told
him.

Robin listened to every word with enraptured eyes and bated breath.
This was the story of Love and Life and it was the first time she
had ever heard it. It was as much a revelation as the Kiss. She
had spent her days in the grimy Nursery and her one close intimate
had been a bony woman who had taught her not to cry, employing
the practical method of terrifying her into silence by pinching
her--knowing it was quite safe to do it. It had not been necessary
to do it often. She had seen people on the streets, but she had
only seen them in passing by. She had not watched them as she had
watched the sparrows. When she was taken down for a few minutes
into the basement, she vaguely knew that she was in the way and that
Mrs. Blayne's and Andrews' and Jennings' low voices and occasional
sidelong look meant that they were talking about her and did not
want her to hear.

"I have no mother and no father," she explained quite simply to
Donal. "No one kisses me."

"No one!" Donal said, feeling curious. "Has no one ever kissed you
but me?"

"No," she answered.

Donal laughed--because children always laugh when they do not know
what else to do.

"Was that why you looked as if you were frightened when I said
good-bye to you yesterday?"

"I-I didn't know," said Robin, laughing a little too--but not very
much, "I wasn't frightened. I liked you."

"I'll kiss you as often as you want me to," he volunteered nobly.
"I'm used to it--because of my mother. I'll kiss you again now."
And he did it quite without embarrassment. It was a sort of manly
gratuity.

Once Anne, with her book in her hand, came round the shrubs to
see how her charge was employing herself, and seeing her looking
at pictures with a handsomely dressed companion, she returned to
"Lady Audley's Secret" feeling entirely safe.

The lilac and the hawthorn tree continued to breathe forth warmed
scents of paradise in the sunshine, the piano organ went on playing,
sometimes nearer, sometimes farther away, but evidently finding
the neighbourhood a desirable one. Sometimes the children laughed
at each other, sometimes at pictures Donal showed, or stories he
told, or at his own extreme wit. The boundaries were removed from
Robin's world. She began to understand that there was another
larger one containing wonderful and delightful things she had
known nothing about. Donal was revealing it to her in everything
he said even when he was not aware that he was telling her anything.
When Eve was formed from the rib of Adam the information it was
necessary for him to give her regarding her surroundings must have
filled her with enthralling interest and a reverence which adored.
The planted enclosure which was the central feature of the soot
sprinkled, stately London Square was as the Garden of Eden.

       *       *        *       *        *

The Garden of Eden it remained for two weeks. Andrews' cold was
serious enough to require a doctor and her sister Anne continued
to perform their duties. The weather was exceptionally fine and,
being a vain young woman, she liked to dress Robin in her pretty
clothes and take her out because she was a beauty and attracted
attention to her nurse as well as to herself. Mornings spent
under the trees reading were entirely satisfactory. Each morning
the children played together and each night Robin lay awake and
lived again the delights of the past hours. Each day she learned
more wonders and her young mind and soul were fed. There began to
stir in her brain new thoughts and the beginning of questioning.
Scotland, Braemarnie, Donal's mother, even the Manse and the children
in it, combined to form a world of enchantment. There were hills
with stags living in them, there were moors with purple heather and
yellow brome and gorse; birds built their nests under the bushes
and Donal's pony knew exactly where to step even in the roughest
places. There were two boys and two girls at the Manse and they
had a father and a mother. These things were enough for a new heaven
and a new earth to form themselves around. The centre of the whole
Universe was Donal with his strength and his laugh and his eyes
which were so alive and glowing that she seemed always to see them.
She knew nothing about the thing which was their somehow--not-to-be-denied
allure. They were ASKING eyes--and eyes which gave. The boy was
in truth a splendid creature. His body and beauty were perfect life
and joyous perfect living. His eyes asked other eyes for everything.
"Tell me more," they said. "Tell me more! Like me! Answer me! Let
us give each other everything in the world." He had always been
well, he had always been happy, he had always been praised and
loved. He had known no other things.

During the first week in which the two children played together,
his mother, whose intense desire it was to understand him, observed
in him a certain absorption of mood when he was not talking or
amusing himself actively. He began to fall into a habit of standing
at the windows, often with his chin in his hand, looking out as if
he were so full of thought that he saw nothing. It was not an old
habit, it was a new one.

"What are you thinking about, Donal?" she asked one afternoon.

He seemed to awaken, as it were, when he heard her. He turned
about with his alluring smile.

"I am thinking it is FUNNY," he said. "It is funny that I should
like such a little girl such a lot. She is years and years younger
than I am. But I like her so. It is such fun to tell her things."
He marched over to his mother's writing table and leaned against
it. What his mother saw was that he had an impassioned desire
to talk about this child. She felt it was a desire even a trifle
abnormal in its eagerness.

"She has such a queer house, I think," he explained. "She has a
nurse and such pretty clothes and she is so pretty herself, but
I don't believe she has any toys or books in her nursery."

"Where is her mother?"

"She must be dead. There is no lady in her house but the Lady
Downstairs. She is very pretty and is always laughing. But she is
not her mother because she doesn't like her and she never kisses
her. I think that's the queerest thing of all. No one had EVER
kissed her till I did."

His mother was a woman given to psychological analysis. Her eyes
began to dwell on his face with slightly anxious questioning.

"Did you kiss her?" she inquired.

"Yes. I kissed her when I said good morning the first day. I thought
she didn't like me to do it but she did. It was only because no
one had ever done it before. She likes it very much."

He leaned farther over the writing table and began to pour forth,
his smile growing and his eyes full of pleasure. His mother was
a trifle alarmedly struck by the feeling that he was talking like
a young man in love who cannot keep his tongue still, though in
his case even the youngest manhood was years away, and he made no
effort to conceal his sentiments which a young man would certainly
have striven to do.

"She's got such a pretty little face and such a pretty mouth and
cheeks," he touched a Jacqueminot rose in a vase. "They are the
colour of that. Today a robin came with the sparrows and hopped
about near us. We laughed and laughed because her eyes are like
the robin's, and she is called Robin. I wish you would come into
the Gardens and see her, mother. She likes everything I do."

"I must come, dear," she answered.

"Nanny thinks she is lovely," he announced. "She says I am in love
with her. Am I, mother?"

"You are too young to be in love," she said. "And even when you
are older you must not fall in love with people you know nothing
about."

It was an unconscious bit of Scotch cautiousness which she at once
realized was absurd and quite out of place. But--!

She realized it because he stood up and squared his shoulders in
an odd young-mannish way. He had not flushed even faintly before
and now a touch of colour crept under his fair skin.

"But I DO love her," he said. "I DO. I can't stop." And though he
was quite simple and obviously little boy-like, she actually felt
frightened for a moment.






CHAPTER IX





On the afternoon of the day upon which this occurred, Coombe was
standing in Feather's drawing-room with a cup of tea in his hand
and wearing the look of a man who is given up to reflection.

"I saw Mrs. Muir today for the first time for several years," he
said after a silence. "She is in London with the boy."

"Is she as handsome as ever?"

"Quite. Hers is not the beauty that disappears. It is line and
bearing and a sort of splendid grace and harmony."

"What is the boy like?"

Coombe reflected again before he answered.

"He is--amazing. One so seldom sees anything approaching physical
perfection that it strikes one a sort of blow when one comes upon
it suddenly face to face."

"Is he as beautiful as all that?"

"The Greeks used to make statues of bodies like his. They often
called them gods--but not always. The Creative Intention plainly
was that all human beings should be beautiful and he is the
expression of it."

Feather was pretending to embroider a pink flower on a bit of
gauze and she smiled vaguely.

"I don't know what you mean," she admitted with no abasement of
spirit, "but if ever there was any Intention of that kind it has
not been carried out." Her smile broke into a little laugh as she
stuck her needle into her work. "I'm thinking of Henry," she let
drop in addition.

"So was I, it happened," answered Coombe after a second or so of
pause.

Henry was the next of kin who was--to Coombe's great objection--his
heir presumptive, and was universally admitted to be a repulsive
sort of person both physically and morally. He had brought into
the world a weakly and rickety framework and had from mere boyhood
devoted himself to a life which would have undermined a Hercules.
A relative may so easily present the aspect of an unfortunate incident
over which one has no control. This was the case with Henry. His
character and appearance were such that even his connection with
an important heritage was not enough to induce respectable persons
to accept him in any form. But if Coombe remained without issue
Henry would be the Head of the House.

"How is his cough?" inquired Feather.

"Frightful. He is an emaciated wreck and he has no physical cause
for remaining alive."

Feather made three or four stitches.

"Does Mrs. Muir know?" she said.

"If Mrs. Muir is conscious of his miserable existence, that is
all," he answered. "She is not the woman to inquire. Of course
she cannot help knowing that--when he is done with--her boy takes
his place in the line of succession."

"Oh, yes, she'd know that," put in Feather.

It was Coombe who smiled now--very faintly.

"You have a mistaken view of her," he said.

"You admire her very much," Feather bridled. The figure of this
big Scotch creature with her "line" and her "splendid grace and
harmony" was enough to make one bridle.

"She doesn't admire me," said Coombe. "She is not proud of me as
a connection. She doesn't really want the position for the boy,
in her heart of hearts."

"Doesn't want it!" Feather's exclamation was a little jeer only
because she would not have dared a big one.

"She is Scotch Early Victorian in some things and extremely advanced
in others," he went on. "She has strong ideas of her own as to
how he shall be brought up. She's rather Greek in her feeling for
his being as perfect physically and mentally as she can help him
to be. She believes things. It was she who said what you did not
understand--about the Creative Intention."

"I suppose she is religious," Feather said. "Scotch people often
are but their religion isn't usually like that. Creative Intention's
a new name for God, I suppose. I ought to know all about God. I've
heard enough about Him. My father was not a clergyman but he was
very miserable, and it made him so religious that he was ALMOST
one. We were every one of us christened and catechized and confirmed
and all that. So God's rather an old story."

"Queer how old--from Greenland's icy mountains to India's coral
strand," said Coombe. "It's an ancient search--that for the
Idea--whether it takes form in metal or wood or stone."

"Well," said Feather, holding her bit of gauze away from her
the better to criticize the pink flower. "As ALMOST a clergyman's
daughter I must say that if there is one tiling God didn't do, it
was to fill the world with beautiful people and things as if it
was only to be happy in. It was made to-to try us by suffering
and-that sort of thing. It's a-a-what d'ye call it? Something
beginning with P."

"Probation," suggested Coombe regarding her with an expression of
speculative interest. Her airy bringing forth of her glib time-worn
little scraps of orthodoxy--as one who fished them out of a bag of
long-discarded remnants of rubbish--was so true to type that it
almost fascinated him for a moment.

"Yes. That's it--probation," she answered. "I knew it began with
a P. It means 'thorny paths' and 'seas of blood' and, if you are
religious, you 'tread them with bleeding feet--' or swim them as
the people do in hymns. And you praise and glorify all the time
you're doing it. Of course, I'm not religious myself and I can't
say I think it's pleasant--but I do KNOW! Every body beautiful
and perfect indeed! That's not religion--it's being irreligious.
Good gracious, think of the cripples and lepers and hunchbacks!"

"And the idea is that God made them all--by way of entertaining
himself?" he put it to her quietly.

"Well, who else did?" said Feather cheerfully.

"I don't know," he said. "Certain things I heard Mrs. Muir say
suggested to one that it might be interesting to think it out."

"Did she talk to you about God at afternoon tea?" said Feather.
"It's the kind of thing a religious Scotch woman might do."

"No, she did not talk to me. Perhaps that was her mistake. She
might have reformed me. She never says more to me than civility
demands. And it was not at tea. I accidentally dropped in on the
Bethunes and found an Oriental had been lecturing there. Mrs.
Muir was talking to him and I heard her. The man seemed to be a
scholar and a deep thinker and as they talked a group of us stood
and listened or asked questions."

"How funny!" said Feather.

"It was not funny at all. It was astonishingly calm and serious--and
logical. The logic was the new note. I had never thought of reason
in that connection."

"Reason has nothing to do with it. You must have faith. You
must just believe what you're told not think at all. Thinking is
wickedness--unless you think what you hear preached." Feather was
even a trifle delicately smug as she rattled off her orthodoxy--but
she laughed after she had done with it. "But it MUST have been
funny--a Turk or a Hindoo in a turban and a thing like a tea gown
and Mrs. Muir in her Edinburgh looking clothes talking about God."

"You are quite out of it," Coombe did not smile at all as he
said it. "The Oriental was as physically beautiful as Donal Muir
is. And Mrs. Muir--no other woman in the room compared with her.
Perhaps people who think grow beautiful."

Feather was not often alluring or coquettish in her manner to
Coombe but she tilted her head prettily and looked down at her
flower through lovely lashes.

"_I_ don't think," she said. "And I am not so bad looking."

"No," he answered coldly. "You are not. At times you look like a
young angel."

"If Mrs. Muir is like that," she said after a brief pause, "I
should like to know what she thinks of me?"

"No, you would not--neither should I--if she thinks at all," was
his answer. "But you remember you said you did not mind that sort
of thing."

"I don't. Why should I? It can't harm me." Her hint of a pout
made her mouth entrancing. "But, if she thinks good looks are the
result of religiousness I should like to let her see Robin--and
compare her with her boy. I saw Robin in the park last week and
she's a perfect beauty."

"Last week?" said Coombe.

"She doesn't need anyone but Andrews. I should bore her to death if
I went and sat in the Nursery and stared at her. No one does that
sort of thing in these days. But I should like to see Mrs. Muir to
see the two children together!" "That could not easily be arranged,
I am afraid," he said.

"Why not?"

His answer was politely deliberate.

"She greatly disapproves of me, I have told you. She is not proud
of the relationship."

"She does not like ME you mean?"

"Excuse me. I mean exactly what I said in telling you that she has
her own very strong views of the boy's training and surroundings.
They may be ridiculous but that sort of thing need not trouble
you."

Feather held up her hand and actually laughed.

"If Robin meets him in ten years from now-THAT for her very strong
views of his training and surroundings!"

And she snapped her fingers.

Mrs. Muir's distaste for her son's unavoidable connection the man
he might succeed had a firm foundation. She had been brought up in
a Scottish Manse where her father dominated as an omnipotent and
almost divine authority. As a child of imagination she had not been
happy but she had been obedient. In her girlhood she had varied
from type through her marriage with a young man who was a dreamer,
an advanced thinker, an impassioned Greek scholar and a lover
of beauty. After he had from her terrors of damnation, they had
been profoundly happy. They were young and at ease and they read
and thought together ardently. They explored new creeds and cults
and sometimes found themselves talking nonsense and sometimes
discovering untrodden paths of wisdom. They were youthful enough
to be solemn about things at times, and clever enough to laugh
at their solemnity when they awakened to it. Helen Muir left the
reverent gloom of the life at the Manse far behind despite her
respect for certain meanings they beclouded.

"I live in a new structure," she said to her husband, "but it is
built on a foundation which is like a solid subterranean chamber.
I don't use the subterranean chamber or go into it. I don't want
to. But now and then echoes--almost noises--make themselves heard
in it. Sometimes I find I have listened in spite of myself."

She had always been rather grave about her little son and when
her husband's early death left him and his dignified but not large
estate in her care she realized that there lay in her hands the
power to direct a life as she chose, in as far as was humanly
possible. The pure blood and healthy tendencies of a long and
fine ancestry expressing themselves in the boy's splendid body
and unusual beauty had set the minds of two imaginative people
working from the first. One of Muir's deepest interests was the
study of development of the race. It was he who had planted in
her mind that daringly fearless thought of a human perfection as
to the Intention of the Creative Cause. They used to look at the
child as he lay asleep and note the beauty of him--his hands, his
feet, his torso, the tint and texture and line of him.

"This is what was MEANT--in the plan for every human being--How
could there be scamping and inefficiency in Creation. It is
we ourselves who have scamped and been incomplete in our thought
and life. Here he is. Look at him. But he will only develop as he
is--if living does not warp him." This was what his father said.
His mother was at her gravest as she looked down at the little god
in the crib.

"It's as if some power had thrust a casket of loose jewels into
our hands and said, 'It is for you to see that not one is lost',"
she murmured. Then the looked up and smiled.

"Are we being solemn--over a baby?" she said.

"Perhaps," he was always even readier to smile than she was. "I've
an idea, however, that there's enough to be solemn about--not too
solemn, but just solemn enough. You are a beautiful thing, Fair
Helen! Why shouldn't he be like you? Neither of us will forget
what we have just said."

Through her darkest hours of young bereavement she remembered
the words many times and felt as if they were a sort of light she
might hold in her hand as she trod the paths of the "Afterwards"
which were in the days before her. She lived with Donal at Braemarnie
and lived FOR him without neglecting her duty of being the head
of a household and an estate and also a good and gracious neighbour
to things and people. She kept watch over every jewel in his
casket, great and small. He was so much a part of her religion
that sometimes she realized that the echoes from the subterranean
chamber were perhaps making her a little strict but she tried to
keep guard over herself.

He was handsome and radiant with glowing health and vitality. He
was a friendly, rejoicing creature and as full of the joy of life
as a scampering moor pony. He was clever enough but not too clever
and he was friends with the world. Braemarnie was picturesquely
ancient and beautiful. It would be a home of sufficient ease and
luxury to be a pleasure but no burden. Life in it could be perfect
and also supply freedom. Coombe Court and Coombe Keep were huge
and castellated and demanded great things. Even if the Head of the
House had been a man to like and be proud of--the accession of a
beautiful young Marquis would rouse the hounds of war, so to speak,
and set them racing upon his track. Even the totally unalluring
"Henry" had been beset with temptations from his earliest years.
That he promptly succumbed to the first only brought forth others.
It did not seem fair that a creature so different, a splendid
fearless thing, should be dragged from his hills and moors and
fair heather and made to breathe the foul scent of things, of whose
poison he could know nothing. She was not an ignorant childish
woman. In her fine aloof way she had learned much in her stays in
London with her husband and in their explorings of foreign cities.

This was the reason for her views of her boy's training and
surroundings. She had not asked questions about Coombe himself,
but it had not been necessary. Once or twice she had seen Feather
by chance. In spite of herself she had heard about Henry. Now and
then he was furbished up and appeared briefly at Coombe Court or
at The Keep. It was always briefly because he inevitably began to
verge on misbehaving himself after twenty-four hours had passed.
On his last visit to Coombe House in town, where he had turned
up without invitation, he had become so frightfully drunk that he
had been barely rescued from the trifling faux pas of attempting
to kiss a very young royal princess. There were quite definite
objections to Henry.

Helen Muir was NOT proud of the Coombe relationship and with
unvaried and resourceful good breeding kept herself and her boy from
all chance of being drawn into anything approaching an intimacy.
Donal knew nothing of his prospects. There would be time enough
for that when he was older, but, in the meantime, there should be
no intercourse if it could be avoided.

She had smiled at herself when the "echo" had prompted her to the
hint of a quaint caution in connection with his little boy flame
of delight in the strange child he had made friends with. But it
HAD been a flame and, though she, had smiled, she sat very still
by the window later that night and she had felt a touch of weight
on her heart as she thought it over. There were wonderful years
when one could give one's children all the things they wanted, she
was saying to herself--the desires of their child hearts, the joy
of their child bodies, their little raptures of delight. Those
were divine years. They were so safe then. Donal was living
through those years now. He did not know that any happiness could
be taken from him. He was hers and she was his. It would be horrible
if there were anything one could not let him keep--in this early
unshadowed time!

She was looking out at the Spring night with all its stars lit
and gleaming over the Park which she could see from her window.
Suddenly she left her chair and rang for Nanny.

"Nanny," she said when the old nurse came, "tell me something about
the little girl Donal plays with in the Square gardens."

"She's a bonny thing and finely dressed, ma'am," was the woman's
careful answer, "but I don't make friends with strange nurses and
I don't think much of hers. She's a young dawdler who sits novel
reading and if Master Donal were a young pickpocket with the
measles, the child would be playing with him just the same as far
as I can see. The young woman sits under a tree and reads and the
pretty little thing may do what she likes. I keep my eye on them,
however, and they're in no mischief. Master Donal reads out of
his picture books and shows himself off before her grandly and she
laughs and looks up to him as if he were a king. Every lad child
likes a woman child to look up to him. It's pretty to see the
pair of them. They're daft about each other. Just wee things in
love at first sight."

"Donal has known very few girls. Those plain little things at the
Manse are too dull for him," his mother said slowly.

"This one's not plain and she's not dull," Nanny answered. "My
word! but she's like a bit of witch fire dancing--with her colour
and her big silk curls in a heap. Donal stares at her like a young
man at a beauty. I wish, ma'am, we knew more of her forbears."

"I must see her," Mrs. Muir said. "Tomorrow I'll go with you both
to the Gardens."

Therefore the following day Donal pranced proudly up the path to
his trysting place and with him walked a tall lady at whom people
looked as she passed. She was fair like Donal and had a small head
softly swathed with lovely folds of hair. Also her eyes were very
clear and calm. Donal was plainly proud and happy to be with her
and was indeed prancing though his prance was broken by walking
steps at intervals.

Robin was waiting behind the lilac bushes and her nurse was already
deep in the mystery of Lady Audley.

"There she is!" cried Donal, and he ran to her. "My mother has come
with me. She wants to see you, too," and he pulled her forward by
her hand. "This is Robin, Mother! This is Robin." He panted with
elation and stood holding his prize as if she might get away before
he had displayed her; his eyes lifted to his tall mother's were
those of an exultant owner.

Robin had no desire to run away. To adore anything which belonged
to Donal was only nature. And this tall, fair, wonderful person
was a Mother. No wonder Donal talked of her so much. The child could
only look up at her as Donal did. So they stood hand in hand like
little worshippers before a deity.

Andrews' sister in her pride had attired the small creature like
a flower of Spring. Her exquisiteness and her physical brilliancy
gave Mrs. Muir something not unlike a slight shock. Oh! no wonder--since
she was like that. She stooped and kissed the round cheek delicately.

"Donal wanted me to see his little friend," she said. "I always
want to see his playmates. Shall we walk round the Garden together
and you shall show me where you play and tell me all about it."

She took the small hand and they walked slowly. Robin was at
first too much awed to talk but as Donal was not awed at all and
continued his prancing and the Mother lady said pretty things
about the flowers and the grass and the birds and even about the
pony at Braemarnie, she began now and then to break into a little
hop herself and presently into sudden ripples of laughter like
a bird's brief bubble of song. The tall lady's hand was not like
Andrews, or the hand of Andrews' sister. It did not pull or jerk
and it had a lovely feeling. The sensation she did not know was
happiness again welled up within her. Just one walk round the
Garden and then the tall lady sat down on a seat to watch them play.
It was wonderful. She did not read or work. She sat and watched
them as if she wanted to do that more than anything else. Donal
kept calling out to her and making her smile: he ran backwards
and forwards to her to ask questions and tell her what they were
"making up" to play. When they gathered leaves to prick stars and
circles on, they did them on the seat on which she sat and she
helped them with new designs. Several times, in the midst of
her play, Robin stopped and stood still a moment with a sort of
puzzled expression. It was because she did not feel like Robin.
Two people--a big boy and a lady--letting her play and talk to
them as if they liked her and had time!

The truth was that Mrs. Muir's eyes followed Robin more than they
followed Donal. Their clear deeps yearned over her. Such a glowing
vital little thing! No wonder! No wonder! And as she grew older she
would be more vivid and compelling with every year. And Donal was
of her kind. His strength, his beauty, his fearless happiness-claiming
temperament. How could one--with dignity and delicacy--find out
why she had this obvious air of belonging to nobody? Donal was
an exact little lad. He had had foundation for his curious scraps
of her story. No mother--no playthings or books--no one had ever
kissed her! And she dressed and soignee like this! Who was the
Lady Downstairs?

A victoria was driving past the Gardens. It was going slowly because
the two people in it wished to look at the spring budding out of
hyacinths and tulips. Suddenly one of the pair--a sweetly-hued
figure whose early season attire was hyacinth-like itself--spoke
to the coachman.

"Stop here!" she said. "I want to get out."

As the victoria drew up near a gate she made a light gesture.

"What do you think, Starling," she laughed. "The very woman
we are talking about is sitting in the Gardens there. I know her
perfectly though I only saw her portrait at the Academy years ago.
Yes, there she is. Mrs. Muir, you know." She clapped her hands and
her laugh became a delighted giggle. "And my Robin is playing on
the grass near her--with a boy! What a joke! It must be THE boy!
And I wanted to see the pair together. Coombe said couldn't be
done. And more than anything I want to speak to HER. Let's get
out."

They got out and this was why Helen Muir, turning her eyes a moment
from Robin whose hand she was holding, saw two women coming towards
her with evident intention. At least one of them had evident
intention. She was the one whose light attire produced the effect
of being made of hyacinth petals.

Because Mrs. Muir's glance turned towards her, Robin's turned
also. She started a little and leaned against Mrs. Muir's knee,
her eyes growing very large and round indeed and filling with a
sudden worshipping light.

"It is--" she ecstatically sighed or rather gasped, "the Lady
Downstairs!"

Feather floated near to the seat and paused smiling.

"Where is your nurse, Robin?" she said.

Robin being always dazzled by the sight of her did not of course
shine.

"She is reading under the tree," she answered tremulously.

"She is only a few yards away," said Mrs. Muir. "She knows Robin
is playing with my boy and that I am watching them. Robin is your
little girl?" amiably.

"Yes. So kind of you to let her play with your boy. Don't let her
bore you. I am Mrs. Gareth-Lawless."

There was a little silence--a delicate little silence.

"I recognized you as Mrs. Muir at once," said Feather. unperturbed
and smiling brilliantly, "I saw your portrait at the Grosvenor."

"Yes," said Mrs. Muir gently. She had risen and was beautifully
tall,--"the line" was perfect, and she looked with a gracious calm
into Feather's eyes.

Donal, allured by the hyacinth petal colours, drew near. Robin made
an unconscious little catch at his plaid and whispered something.

"Is this Donal?" Feather said.

"ARE you the Lady Downstairs, please?" Donal put in politely,
because he wanted so to know.

Feather's pretty smile ended in the prettiest of outright laughs.
Her maid had told her Andrews' story of the name.

"Yes, I believe that's what she calls me. It's a nice name for a
mother, isn't it?"

Donal took a quick step forward.

"ARE you her mother?" he asked eagerly.

"Of course I am."

Donal quite flushed with excitement.

"She doesn't KNOW," he said.

He turned on Robin.

"She's your Mother! You thought you hadn't one! She's your Mother!"

"But I am the Lady Downstairs, too." Feather was immensely amused.
She was not subtle enough to know why she felt a perverse kind of
pleasure in seeing the Scotch woman standing so still, and that
it led her into a touch of vulgarity. "I wanted very much to see
your boy," she said.

"Yes," still gently from Mrs. Muir.

"Because of Coombe, you know. We are such old friends. How queer
that the two little things have made friends, too. I didn't know.
I am so glad I caught a glimpse of you and that I had seen the
portrait. GOOD morning. Goodbye, children."

While she strayed airily away they all watched her. She picked up
her friend, the Starling, who, not feeling concerned or needed,
had paused to look at daffodils. The children watched her until
her victoria drove away, the chiffon ruffles of her flowerlike
parasol fluttering in the air.

Mrs. Muir had sat down again and Donal and Robin leaned against
her. They saw she was not laughing any more but they did not know
that her eyes had something like grief in them.

"She's her Mother!" Donal cried. "She's lovely, too. But she's--her
MOTHER!" and his voice and face were equally puzzled.

Robin's little hand delicately touched Mrs. Muir.

"IS--she?" she faltered.

Helen Muir took her in her arms and held her quite close. She
kissed her.

"Yes, she is, my lamb," she said. "She's your mother."

She was clear as to what she must do for Donal's sake. It was the
only safe and sane course. But--at this age--the child WAS a lamb
and she could not help holding her close for a moment. Her little
body was deliciously soft and warm and the big silk curls all in
a heap were a fragrance against her breast.






CHAPTER X





Donal talked a great deal as he pranced home. Feather had excited
as well as allured him. Why hadn't she told Robin she was her
mother? Why did she never show her pictures in the Nursery and
hold her on her knee? She was little enough to be held on knees!
Did some mothers never tell their children and did the children
never find out? This was what he wanted to hear explained. He took
the gloved hand near him and held it close and a trifle authoritatively.

"I am glad I know you are my mother," he said, "I always knew."

He was not sure that the matter was explained very clearly. Not as
clearly as things usually were. But he was not really disturbed.
He had remembered a book he could show Robin tomorrow and he thought
of that. There was also a game in a little box which could be
easily carried under his arm. His mother was "thinking" and he was
used to that. It came on her sometimes and of his own volition he
always, on such occasion, kept as quiet as was humanly possible.

After he was asleep, Helen sent for Nanny.

"You're tired, ma'am," the woman said when she saw her, "I'm afraid
you've a headache."

"I have had a good deal of thinking to do since this afternoon,"
her mistress answered, "You were right about the nurse. The
little girl might have been playing with any boy chance sent in
her way--boys quite unlike Donal."

"Yes, ma'am." And because she loved her and knew her face and
voice Nanny watched her closely.

"You will be as--startled--as I was. By some queer chance the
child's mother was driving by and saw us and came in to speak to
me. Nanny--she is Mrs. Gareth-Lawless."

Nanny did start; she also reddened and spoke sharply.

"And she came in and spoke to you, ma'am!"

"Things have altered and are altering every day," Mrs. Muir said.
"Society is not at all inflexible. She has a smart set of her own--and
she is very pretty and evidently well provided for. Easy-going
people who choose to find explanations suggest that her husband
was a relation of Lord Lawdor's."

"And him a canny Scotchman with a new child a year. Yes, my certie,"
offered Nanny, with an acrid grimness. Mrs. Muir's hands clasped
strongly as they lay on the table before her.

"That doesn't come within my bailiewick," she said in her quiet
voice. "Her life is her own and not mine. Words are the wind that
blows." She stopped just a moment and began again. "We must leave
for Scotland by the earliest train."

"What'll he do?" the words escaped from the woman as if involuntarily.
She even drew a quick breath. "He's a strong feeling bairn--strong!"

"He'll be stronger when he is a young man, Nanny!" desperately.
"That is why I must act now. There is no half way. I don't want
to be hard. Oh, am I hard--am I hard?" she cried out low as if she
were pleading.

"No, ma'am. You are not. He's your own flesh and blood." Nanny had
never before seen her mistress as she saw her in the next curious
almost exaggerated moment.

Her hand flew to her side.

"He's my heart and my soul--" she said, "--he is the very entrails
of me! And it will hurt him so and I cannot explain to him because
he is too young to understand. He is only a little boy who must
go where he is taken. And he cannot help himself. It's--unfair!"

Nanny was prone to become more Scotch as she became moved. But
she still managed to look grim.

"He canna help himsel," she said, "an waur still, YOU canna."

There was a moment of stillness and then she said:

"I must go and pack up." And walked out of the room.

       *       *        *       *        *

Donal always slept like a young roe in the bracken, and in deep
and rapturous ease he slept this night. Another perfectly joyful
day had passed and his Mother had liked Robin and kissed her. All
was well with the world. As long as he had remained awake--and it
had not been long--he had thought of delightful things unfeverishly.
Of Robin, somehow at Braemarnie, growing bigger very quickly--big
enough for all sorts of games--learning to ride Chieftain, even
to gallop. His mother would buy another pony and they could ride
side by side. Robin would laugh and her hair would fly behind her
if they went fast. She would see how fast he could go--she would
see him make Chieftain jump. They would have picnics--catch sight
of deer and fawns delicately lifting their feet as they stepped.
She would always look at him with that nice look in her eyes and
the little smile which came and went in a second. She was quite
different from the minister's little girls at the Manse. He liked
her--he liked her!

       *       *        *       *        *

He was wakened by a light in his room and by the sound of moving
about. He sat up quickly and found his Mother standing by his bed
and Nanny putting things into a travelling bag. He felt as if his
Mother looked taller than she had looked yesterday--and almost
thin--and her face was anxious and--shy.

"We let you sleep as late as we could, Donal," she said. "You must
get up quickly now and have breakfast. Something has happened. We
are obliged to go back to Scotland by very early train. There is
not a minute to waste."

At first he only said:

"Back!"

"Yes, dear. Get up."

"To Braemarnie?"

"Yes, dear laddie!"

He felt himself grow hot and cold.

"Away! Away!" he said again vaguely.

"Yes. Get up, dear."

He was as she had said only a little boy and accustomed to do as
he was told. He was also a fine, sturdy little Scot with a pride
of his own. His breeding had been of the sort which did not include
insubordinate scenes, so he got out of bed and began to dress. But
his mother saw that his hands shook.

"I shall not see Robin," he said in a queer voice. "She won't
find me when she goes behind the lilac bushes. She won't know why
I don't come."

He swallowed very hard and was dead still for a few minutes,
though he did not linger over his dressing. His mother felt that
the whole thing was horrible. He was acting almost like a young
man even now. She did not know how she could bear it. She spoke to
him in a tone which was actually rather humble.

"If we knew where she lived you--you could write a little letter
and tell her about it. But we do not where she lives."

He answered her very low.

"That's it. And she's little--and she won't understand. She's very
little--really." There was a harrowingly protective note in his
voice. "Perhaps--she'll cry."

Helen looking down at him with anguished eyes--he was buttoning his
shoes--made an unearthly effort to find words, but, as she said
them, she knew they were not the right ones.

"She will be disappointed, of course, but she is so little that
she will not feel it as much as if she were bigger. She will get
over it, darling. Very little girls do not remember things long."
Oh, how coarse and crass and stupid it sounded--how course and
crass and stupid to say it to this small defiant scrap of what
seemed the inevitable suffering of the world!

The clear blue of the eyes Robin had dwelt in, lifted itself to
her. There was something almost fierce in it--almost like impotent
hatred of something.

"She won't," he said, and she actually heard him grind his little
teeth after it.

He did not look like Donal when he was dressed and sat at the
breakfast table. He did not eat much of his porridge, but she saw
that he determinedly ate some. She felt several times as if he
actually did not look like anybody she had ever seen. And at the
same time his fair hair, his fair cheeks, and the fair sturdy
knees beneath his swinging kilt made him seem as much a little boy
as she had ever known him. It was his hot blue eyes which were
different.

He obeyed her every wish and followed where she led. When the train
laboured out of the big station he had taken a seat in a corner
and sat with his face turned to the window, so that his back was
towards her. He stared and stared at the passing country and she
could only see part of his cheek and the side of his neck. She
could not help watching them and presently she saw a hot red glow
under the skin as if a flood had risen. It subsided in a few moments,
but presently she saw it rise again. This happened several times
and he was holding his lip with, his teeth. Once she saw his
shoulders more and he coughed obstinately two or three times. She
knew that he would die before he would let himself cry, but she
wished he would descend to it just this once, as the fields and
hedges raced past and he was carried "Away! Away!" It might be
that it was all his manhood she was saving for him.

He really made her heart stand still for a moment just as she was
thinking this and saying it to herself almost fiercely. He suddenly
turned on her; the blue of his eyes was flaming and the tide had
risen again in his cheeks and neck. It was a thing like rage she
saw before her--a child's rage and impotently fierce. He cried out
as if he were ending a sentence he had not finished when he spoke
as he sat on the floor buttoning his shoes.

"She has no one but me to remember!" he said. "No one but me had
ever even kissed her. She didn't know!"

To her amazement he clenched both his savage young fists and shook
them before him.

"It'll kill me!" he raged.

She could not hold herself back. She caught at him with her arms
and meant to drag him to her breast. "No! No! Donal!" she cried.
"Darling! No--No!" But, as suddenly as the queer unchildish thing
had broken out, did he remember himself and boy shame at his
fantastic emotion overtook him. He had never spoken like that to
anyone before! It was almost as bad as bursting out crying! The
red tide ebbed away and he withdrew himself awkwardly from her
embrace. He said not another word and sat down in his corner with
his back turned toward the world.

       *       *        *       *        *

That the Lady Downstairs, who was so fond of laughing and who knew
so many persons who seemed to laugh nearly all the time, might
have been joking about being her mother presented itself to Robin
as a vague solution of the problem. The Lady had laughed when she
said it, as people so often laughed at children. Perhaps she had
only been amusing herself as grown-up persons were apparently
entitled to do. Even Donal had not seemed wholly convinced and
though his mother had said the Lady Downstairs WAS--somehow the
subject had been changed at once. Mrs. Muir had so soon begun to
tell them a story. Robin was not in the least aware that she had
swiftly distracted their attention from a question, any discussion
of which would have involved explanations she could not have
produced. It would have been impossible to make it clear to any
child. She herself was helpless before the situation and therefore
her only refuge was to make the two think of other things. She had
so well done this that Robin had gone home later only remembering
the brightly transitory episode as she recalled others as brief and
bright, when she had stared at a light and lovely figure standing
on the nursery threshold and asking careless questions of Andrews,
without coming in and risking the freshness of her draperies by
contact with London top-floor grubbiness. The child was, in fact,
too full of the reality of her happiness with Donal and Donal's
mother to be more than faintly bewildered by a sort of visionary
conundrum.

Robin, like Donal, slept perfectly through the night. Her sleep
was perhaps made more perfect by fair dreams in which she played
in the Gardens and she and Donal ran to and from the knees of
the Mother lady to ask questions and explain their games. As the
child had often, in the past, looked up at the sky, so she had looked
up into the clear eyes of the Mother lady. There was something in
them which she had never seen before but which she kept wanting to
see again. Then there came a queer bit of a dream about the Lady
Downstairs. She came dancing towards them dressed in hyacinths
and with her arms full of daffodils. She danced before Donal's
Mother--danced and laughed as if she thought they were all funny.
She threw a few daffodils at them and then danced away. The
daffodils lay on the gravel walk and they all looked at them but
no one picked them up. Afterwards--in the dream--Mrs. Muir suddenly
caught her in her arms and kissed her and Robin was glad and felt
warm all over--inside and out.

She wakened smiling at the dingy ceiling of the dingy room. There
was but one tiny shadow in the world, which was the fear that
Andrews would get well too quickly. She was no longer in bed but
was well enough to sit up and sew a little before the tiny fire
in the atom of a servant's room grate. The doctor would not let
her go out yet; therefore, Anne still remained in charge. Founding
one's hope on previous knowledge of Anne's habits, she might be
trusted to sit and read and show no untoward curiosity.

From her bed Robin could see the sky was blue. That meant that
she would be taken out. She lay as quiet as a mouse and thought
of the joy before her, until Anne came to dress her and give her
her breakfast.

"We'll put on your rose-coloured smock this morning," the girl said,
when the dressing began. "I like the hat and socks that match."

Anne was not quite like Andrews who was not talkative. She made
a conversational sort of remark after she had tied the white shoes.

"You've got pretty little aristocratic legs of your own," she said
amiably. "I like my children to have nice legs."

Robin was uplifted in spirit by the commendation, but she hoped
Anne would put on her own things quickly. Sometimes she was rather
a long time. The one course, however, towards which discretion
pointed as entirely safe was the continuance of being as quiet
as a mouse--even quieter, if such thing might be--so that nothing
might interfere with anything any one wanted to do. To interfere
would have been to attract attention and might lead to delay. So
she stood and watched the sparrows inoffensively until Anne called
her.

When she found herself out on the street her step was so light on
the pavement that she was rather like a rose petal blown fluttering
along by soft vagrant puffs of spring air. Under her flopping
hat her eyes and lips and cheeks were so happy that more than one
passer-by turned head over shoulder to look after her.

"Your name ought to be Rose," Anne giggled involuntarily as she
glanced down at her because someone had stared. She had not meant
to speak but the words said themselves.

Because the time was young June even London sky and air were
wonderful. Stray breaths of fragrance came and went. The green of
the trees in the Gardens was light and fresh and in the bedded-out
curves and stars and circles there were more flowers every hour,
so that it seemed as if blooming things with scents grew thick
about one's feet. It was no wonder one felt light and smiled back
at nurses and governesses who looked up. Robin drew eyes became she
was like a summer bloom suddenly appearing in the Spring Garden.

Nanny was not sitting on the bench near the gate and Donal was
not to be seen amusing himself. But he was somewhere just out of
sight, or, if he had chanced to be late, he would come very soon
even if his Mother could not come with him--though Robin could
not believe she would not. To a child thing both happiness and
despair cannot be conceived of except as lasting forever.

Anne sat down and opened her book. She had reached an exciting
part and looked forward to a thoroughly enjoyable morning.

Robin hopped about for a few minutes. Donal had taught her to hop
and she felt it an accomplishment. Entangled in the meshes of the
feathery, golden, if criminal, ringlets of Lady Audley, Anne did
not know when she hopped round the curve of the walk behind the
lilac and snowball bushes.

Once safe in her bit of enchanted land, the child stood still and
looked about her. There was no kilted figure to be seen, but it
would come towards her soon with swinging plaid and eagle's feather
standing up grandly in its Highland bonnet. He would come soon.
Perhaps he would come running--and the Mother lady would walk
behind more slowly and smile. Robin waited and looked--she waited
and looked.

She was used to waiting but she had never watched for anyone
before. There had never been any one or anything to watch for. The
newness of the suspense gave it a sort of deep thrill at first. How
long was "at first"? She did not know. She stood--and stood--and
stood--and looked at every creature who entered the gate. She did
not see any one who looked in the least like Donal or his Mother or
Nanny. There were nurses and governesses and children and a loitering
lady or two. There were never many people in the Gardens--only
those who had keys. She knew nothing about time but at length she
knew that on other mornings they had been playing together before
this.

The small rose-coloured figure stood so still for so long that it
began to look rigid and a nurse sitting at some distance said to
another,

"What is that child waiting for?"

What length of time had passed before she found herself looking
slowly down at her feet because of something. The "something"
which had drawn her eyes downward was that she had stood so long
without moving that her tense feet had begun vaguely to hurt her
and the ache attracted her attention. She changed her position
slightly and turned her eyes upon the gate again. He was coming very
soon. He would be sure to run fast now and he would be laughing.
Donal! Donal! She even laughed a little low, quivering laugh
herself.

"What is that child waiting for? I should really like to know,"
the distant nurse said again curiously.

If she had been eighteen years old she would have said to herself
that she was waiting hours and hours. She would have looked at a
little watch a thousand times; she would have walked up and down
and round and round the garden never losing sight of the gate--or
any other point for that matter--for more than a minute. Each
sound of the church clock striking a few streets away would have
brought her young heart thumping into her throat.

But a child has no watch, no words out of which to build hopes
and fears and reasons, arguments battling against anguish which
grows--palliations, excuses. Robin, could only wait in the midst
of a slow dark, rising tide of something she had no name for. This
slow rising of an engulfing flood she felt when pins and needles
began to take possession of her feet, when her legs ached, and her
eyes felt as if they had grown big and tightly strained. Donal!
Donal! Donal!

Who knows but that some echo of the terror against which she had
fought and screamed on the night when she had lain alone in the dark
in her cradle and Feather had hid her head under the pillow--came
back and closed slowly around and over her, filling her inarticulate
being with panic which at last reached its unbearable height?
She had not really stood waiting the entire morning, but she was
young enough to think that she had and that at any moment Anne
might come and take her away. He had not come running--he had not
come laughing--he had not come with his plaid swinging and his
feather standing high! There came a moment when her strained eyes
no longer seemed to see clearly! Something like a big lump crawled
up into her throat! Something of the same sort happened the day
she had burst into a wail of loneliness and Andrews had pinched
her. Panic seized her; she clutched the breast of her rose-coloured
frock and panic-driven turned and fled into a thick clump of bushes
where there was no path and where even Donal had never pierced.

"That child has run away at last," the distant nurse remarked,
"I'd like to find out what she WAS waiting for."

The shrubs were part of the enclosing planting of the Gardens. The
children who came to play on the grass and paths felt as if they
formed a sort of forest. Because of this, Robin had made her
frantic dash to their shelter. No one would come--no one would
see her--no one would hear her, beneath them it was almost dark.
Bereft, broken and betrayed, a little mad thing, she pushed her
way into their shadow and threw herself face downward, a small,
writhing, rose-coloured heap, upon the damp mould. She could not
have explained what she was doing or why she had given up all,
as if some tidal wave had overwhelmed her. Suddenly she knew that
all her new world had gone--forever and ever. As it had come so
it had gone. As she had not doubted the permanence of its joy,
so she KNEW that the end had come. Only the wisdom of the occult
would dare to suggest that from her child mate, squaring his sturdy
young shoulders against the world as the flying train sped on its
way, some wave of desperate, inchoate thinking rushed backward.
There was nothing more. He would not come back running. He was
GONE!

There was no Andrews to hear. Hidden in the shadow under the shrubs,
the rattle and roar of the street outside the railing drowned her
mad little cries. All she had never done before, she did then. Her
hands beat on the damp mould and tore at it--her small feet beat
it and dug into it. She cried, she sobbed; the big lump in her
throat almost strangled her--she writhed and did not know she was
writhing. Her tears pouring forth wet her hair, her face, her dress.
She did not cry out, "Donal! Donal!" because he was nowhere--nowhere.
If Andrews had seen her she would have said she was "in a tantrum,"
But she was not. The world had been torn away.

A long time afterwards, as it seemed to her, she crawled out from
under the shrubs, carrying her pretty flopping hat in her earth-stained
hand. It was not pretty any more. She had been lying on it and it
was crushed and flat. She crept slowly round the curve to Anne.

Seeing her, Anne sprang to her feet. The rose was a piteous thing
beaten to earth by a storm. The child's face was swollen and stained,
her hair was tangled and damp there were dark marks of mould on
her dress, her hat, her hands, her white cheeks; her white shoes
were earth-stained also, and the feet in the rose-coloured socks
dragged themselves heavily--slowly.

"My gracious!" the young woman almost shrieked. "What's happened!
Where have you been? Did you fall down? Ah, my good gracious! Mercy
me!"

Robin caught her breath but did not say a word.

"You fell down on a flower bed where they'd been watering the
plants!" almost wept Anne. "You must have. There isn't that much
dirt anywhere else in the Gardens."

And when she took her charge home that was the story she told
Andrews. Out of Robin she could get nothing, and it was necessary
to have an explanation.

The truth, of which she knew nothing, was but the story of a child's
awful dismay and a child's woe at one of Life's first betrayals.
It would be left behind by the days which came and went--it would
pass--as all things pass but the everlasting hills--but in this way
it was that it came and wrote itself upon the tablets of a child's
day.






CHAPTER XI





"The child's always been well, ma'am," Andrews was standing, the
image of exact correctness, in her mistress' bedroom, while Feather
lay in bed with her breakfast on a convenient and decorative little
table. "It's been a thing I've prided myself on. But I should say
she isn't well now."

"Well, I suppose it's only natural that she should begin sometime,"
remarked Feather. "They always do, of course. I remember we all had
things when we were children. What does the doctor say? I hope it
isn't the measles, or the beginning of anything worse?"

"No, ma'am, it isn't. It's nothing like a child's disease. I could
have managed that. There's good private nursing homes for them in
these days. Everything taken care of exactly as it should be and no
trouble of disinfecting and isolating for the family. I know what
you'd have wished to have done, ma'am."

"You do know your business, Andrews," was Feather's amiable comment.

"Thank you, ma'am," from Andrews. "Infectious things are easy
managed if they're taken away quick. But the doctor said you must
be spoken to because perhaps a change was needed."

"You could take her to Ramsgate or somewhere bracing." said Feather.
"But what did he SAY?"

"He seemed puzzled, ma'am. That's what struck me. When I told him
about her not eating--and lying awake crying all night--to judge from
her looks in the morning--and getting thin and pale--he examined
her very careful and he looked queer and he said, 'This child hasn't
had a SHOCK of any kind, has she? This looks like what we should
call shock--if she were older'."

Feather laughed.

"How could a baby like that have a shock?"

"That's what I thought myself, ma'am," answered Andrews. "A child
that's had her hours regular and is fed and bathed and sleeps by
the clock, and goes out and plays by herself in the Gardens, well
watched over, hasn't any chance to get shocks. I told him so and
he sat still and watched her quite curious, and then he said very
slow: 'Sometimes little children are a good deal shaken up by a
fall when they are playing. Do you remember any chance fall when
she cried a good deal?'"

"But you didn't, of course," said Feather.

"No, ma'am, I didn't. I keep my eye on her pretty strict and
shouldn't encourage wild running or playing. I don't let her play
with other children. And she's not one of those stumbling, falling
children. I told him the only fall I ever knew of her having was a
bit of a slip on a soft flower bed that had just been watered--to
judge from the state her clothes were in. She had cried because
she's not used to such things, and I think she was frightened. But
there wasn't a scratch or a shadow of a bruise on her. Even that
wouldn't have happened if I'd been with her. It was when I was
ill and my sister Anne took my place. Ann thought at first that
she'd been playing with a little boy she had made friends with--but
she found out that the boy hadn't come that morning--"

"A boy!" Andrews was sharp enough to detect a new and interested
note. "What boy?"

"She wouldn't have played with any other child if I'd been there"
said Andrews, "I was pretty sharp with Anne about it. But she said
he was an aristocratic looking little fellow--"

"Was he in Highland costume?" Feather interrupted.

"Yes, ma'am. Anne excused herself by saying she thought you must
know something about him. She declares she saw you come into the
Gardens and speak to his Mother quite friendly. That was the day
before Robin fell and ruined her rose-coloured smock and things.
But it wasn't through playing boisterous with the boy--because
he didn't come that morning, as I said, and he never has since."

Andrews, on this, found cause for being momentarily puzzled by the
change of expression in her mistress' face. Was it an odd little
gleam of angry spite she saw?

"And never has since, has he?" Mrs. Gareth-Lawless said with a
half laugh.

"Not once, ma'am," answered Andrews. "And Anne thinks it queer
the child never seemed to look for him. As if she'd lost interest.
She just droops and drags about and doesn't try to play at all."

"How much did she play with him?"

"Well, he was such a fine little fellow and had such a respectable,
elderly, Scotch looking woman in charge of him that Anne owned up
that she hadn't thought there was any objections to them playing
together. She says they were as well behaved and quiet as children
could be." Andrews thought proper to further justify herself by
repeating, "She didn't think there could be any objection."

"There couldn't," Mrs. Gareth-Lawless remarked. "I do know the
boy. He is a relation of Lord Coombe's."

"Indeed, ma'am," with colourless civility, "Anne said he was a
big handsome child."

Feather took a small bunch of hothouse grapes from her breakfast
tray and, after picking one off, suddenly began to laugh.

"Good gracious, Andrews!" she said. "He was the 'shock'! How
perfectly ridiculous! Robin had never played with a boy before
and she fell in love with him. The little thing's actually pining
away for him." She dropped the grapes and gave herself up to
delicate mirth. "He was taken away and disappeared. Perhaps she
fainted and fell into the wet flower bed and spoiled her frock,
when she first realized that he wasn't coming."

"It did happen that morning," admitted Andrews, smiling a little
also. "It does seem funny. But children take to each other in a
queer way now and then. I've seen it upset them dreadful when they
were parted."

"You must tell the doctor," laughed Feather. "Then he'll see
there's nothing to be anxious about. She'll get over it in a week."

"It's five weeks since it happened, ma'am," remarked Andrews, with
just a touch of seriousness.

"Five! Why, so it must be! I remember the day I spoke to Mrs.
Muir. If she's that sort of child you had better keep her away from
boys. HOW ridiculous! How Lord Coombe--how people will laugh when
I tell them!"

She had paused a second because--for that second--she was not quite
sure that Coombe WOULD laugh. Frequently she was of the opinion
that he did not laugh at things when he should have done so. But
she had had a brief furious moment when she had realized that the
boy had actually been whisked away. She remembered the clearness of
the fine eyes which had looked directly into hers. The woman had
been deciding then that she would have nothing to do with her--or
even with her child.

But the story of Robin worn by a bereft nursery passion for a little
boy, whose mamma snatched him away as a brand from the burning,
was far too edifying not to be related to those who would find it
delicious.

It was on the occasion, a night or so later, of a gathering at
dinner of exactly the few elect ones, whose power to find it
delicious was the most highly developed, that she related it. It
was a very little dinner--only four people. One was the long thin
young man, with the good looking narrow face and dark eyes peering
through a pince nez--the one who had said that Mrs. Gareth-Lawless
"got her wondrous clothes from Helene" but that he couldn't. His
name was Harrowby. Another was the Starling who was a Miss March
who had, some years earlier, led the van of the girls who prostrated
their relatives by becoming what was then called "emancipated"; the
sign thereof being the demanding of latchkeys and the setting up
of bachelor apartments. The relatives had astonishingly settled
down, with the unmoved passage of time, and more modern emancipation
had so far left latchkeys and bachelor apartments behind it that
they began to seem almost old-fogeyish. Clara March, however,
had progressed with her day. The third diner was an adored young
actor with a low, veiled voice which, combining itself with almond
eyes and a sentimental and emotional curve of cheek and chin, made
the most commonplace "lines" sound yearningly impassioned. He was
not impassioned at all--merely fond of his pleasures and comforts
in a way which would end by his becoming stout. At present his
figure was perfect--exactly the thing for the uniforms of royal
persons of Ruritania and places of that ilk--and the name by which
programmes presented him was Gerald Vesey.

Feather's house pleased him and she herself liked being spoken
to in the veiled voice and gazed at by the almond eyes, as though
insuperable obstacles alone prevented soul-stirring things from
being said. That she knew this was not true did not interfere with
her liking it. Besides he adored and understood her clothes.

Over coffee in the drawing-room, Coombe joined them. He had not
known of the little dinner and arrived just as Feather was on the
point of beginning her story.

"You are just in time," she greeted him, "I was going to tell them
something to make them laugh."

"Will it make me laugh?" he inquired.

"It ought to. Robin is in love. She is five years old and she has
been deserted, and Andrews came to tell me that she can neither
eat nor sleep. The doctor says she has had a shock."

Coombe did not join in the ripple of amused laughter but, as he
took his cup of coffee, he looked interested.

Harrowby was interested too. His dark eyes quite gleamed.

"I suppose she is in bed by now," he said. "If it were not so late,
I should beg you to have her brought down so that we might have a
look at her. I'm by way of taking a psychological interest."

"I'm psychological myself," said the Starling. "But what do you
mean, Feather? Are you in earnest?"

"Andrews is," Feather answered. "She could manage measles but she
could not be responsible for shock. But she didn't find out about
the love affair. I found that out--by mere chance. Do you remember
the day we got out of the victoria and went into the Gardens,
Starling?"

"The time you spoke to Mrs. Muir?"

Coombe turned slightly towards them.

Feather nodded, with a lightly significant air.

"It was her boy," she said, and then she laughed and nodded at
Coombe.

"He was quite as handsome as you said he was. No wonder poor Robin
fell prostrate. He ought to be chained and muzzled by law when he
grows up."

"But so ought Robin," threw in the Starling in her brusque, young
mannish way.

"But Robin's only a girl and she's not a parti," laughed Feather.
Her eyes, lifted to Coombe's, held a sort of childlike malice.
"After his mother knew she was Miss Gareth-Lawless, he was not
allowed to play in the Gardens again. Did she take him back to
Scotland?"

"They went back to Scotland," answered Coombe, "and, of course,
the boy was not left behind."

"Have YOU a child five years old?" asked Vesey in his low voice
of Feather. "You?"

"It seems absurd to ME," said Feather, "I never quite believe in
her."

"I don't," said Vesey. "She's impossible."

"Robin is a stimulating name," put in Harrowby. "IS it too late
to let us see her? If she's such a beauty as Starling hints, she
ought to be looked at."

Feather actually touched the bell by the fireplace. A sudden
caprice moved her. The love story had not gone off quite as well
as she had thought it would. And, after all, the child was pretty
enough to show off. She knew nothing in particular about her
daughter's hours, but, if she was asleep, she could be wakened.

"Tell Andrews," she said to the footman when he appeared, "I wish
Miss Robin to be brought downstairs."

"They usually go to bed at seven, I believe," remarked Coombe,
"but, of course, I am not an authority."

Robin was not asleep though she had long been in bed. Because she
kept her eyes shut Andrews had been deceived into carrying on a
conversation with her sister Anne, who had come to see her. Robin
had been lying listening to it. She had begun to listen because
they had been talking about the day she had spoiled her rose-coloured
smock and they had ended by being very frank about other things.

"As sure as you saw her speak to the boy's mother the day before,
just so sure she whisked him back to Scotland the next morning,"
said Andrews. "She's one of the kind that's particular. Lord
Coombe's the reason. She does not want her boy to see or speak to
him, if it can be helped. She won't have it--and when she found
out--"

"Is Lord Coombe as bad as they say?" put in Anne with bated breath.
"He must be pretty bad if a boy that's eight years old has to be
kept out of sight and sound of him."

So it was Lord Coombe who had somehow done it. He had made Donal's
mother take him away. It was Lord Coombe. Who was Lord Coombe? It
was because he was wicked that Donal's mother would not let him
play with her--because he was wicked. All at once there came to
her a memory of having heard his name before. She had heard it
several times in the basement Servants' Hall and, though she had
not understood what was said about him, she had felt the atmosphere
of cynical disapproval of something. They had said "him" and "her"
as if he somehow belonged to the house. On one occasion he had
been "high" in the manner of some reproof to Jennings, who, being
enraged, freely expressed his opinions of his lordship's character
and general reputation. The impression made on Robin then had been
that he was a person to be condemned severely. That the condemnation
was the mere outcome of the temper of an impudent young footman
had not conveyed itself to her, and it was the impression which
came back to her now with a new significance. He was the cause--not
Donal, not Donal's Mother--but this man who was so bad that servants
were angry because he was somehow connected with the house.

"As to his badness," she heard Andrews answer, "there's some that
can't say enough against him. Badness is smart these days. He's
bad enough for the boy's mother to take him away from. It's what
he is in this house that does it. She won't have her boy playing
with a child like Robin."

Then--even as there flashed upon her bewilderment this strange
revelation of her own unfitness for association with boys whose
mothers took care of them--Jennings, the young footman, came to
the door.

"Is she awake, Miss Andrews?" he said, looking greatly edified by
Andrews' astonished countenance.

"What on earth--?" began Andrews.

"If she is," Jennings winked humorously, "she's to be dressed up
and taken down to the drawing-room to be shown off. I don't know
whether it's Coombe's idea or not. He's there."

Robin's eyes flew wide open. She forgot to keep them shut. She
was to go downstairs! Who wanted her--who?

Andrews had quite gasped.

"Here's a new break out!" she exclaimed. "I never heard such a
thing in my life. She's been in bed over two hours. I'd like to
know--"

She paused here because her glance at the bed met the dark liquidity
of eyes wide open. She got up and walked across the room.

"You are awake!" she said. "You look as if you hadn't been asleep
at all. You're to get up and have your frock put on. The Lady
Downstairs wants you in the drawing-room."

Two months earlier such a piece of information would have awakened
in the child a delirium of delight. But now her vitality was lowered
because her previously unawakened little soul had soared so high
and been so dashed down to cruel earth again. The brilliancy of
the Lady Downstairs had been dimmed as a candle is dimmed by the
light of the sun.

She felt only a vague wonder as she did as Andrews told her--wonder
at the strangeness of getting up to be dressed, as it seemed to
her, in the middle of the night.

"It's just the kind of thing that would happen in a house like
this," grumbled Andrews, as she put on her frock. "Just anything
that comes into their heads they think they've a right to do. I
suppose they have, too. If you're rich and aristocratic enough to
have your own way, why not take it? I would myself."

The big silk curls, all in a heap, fell almost to the child's hips.
The frock Andrews chose for her was a fairy thing.

"She IS a bit thin, to be sure," said the girl Anne. "But it points
her little face and makes her eyes look bigger."

"If her mother's got a Marquis, I wonder what she'll get," said
Andrews. "She's got a lot before her: this one!"

When the child entered the drawing-room, Andrews made her go in
alone, while she held herself, properly, a few paces back like a
lady in waiting. The room was brilliantly lighted and seemed full
of colour and people who were laughing. There were pretty things
crowding each other everywhere, and there were flowers on all sides.
The Lady Downstairs, in a sheathlike sparkling dress, and only
a glittering strap seeming to hold it on over her fair undressed
shoulders, was talking to a tall thin man standing before the
fireplace with a gold cup of coffee in his hand.

As the little thing strayed in, with her rather rigid attendant
behind her, suddenly the laughing ceased and everybody involuntarily
drew a half startled breath--everybody but the tall thin man, who
quietly turned and set his coffee cup down on the mantel piece
behind him.

"Is THIS what you have been keeping up your sleeve!" said Harrowby,
settling his pince nez.

"I told you!" said the Starling.

"You couldn't tell us," Vesey's veiled voice dropped in softly.
"It must be seen to be believed. But still--" aside to Feather,
"I don't believe it."

"Enter, my only child!" said Feather. "Come here, Robin. Come to
your mother."

Now was the time! Robin went to her and took hold of a very small
piece of her sparkling dress.

"ARE you my Mother?" she said. And then everybody burst into a
peal of laughter, Feather with the rest.

"She calls me the Lady Downstairs," she said. "I really believe
she doesn't know. She's rather a stupid little thing."

"Amazing lack of filial affection," said Lord Coombe.

He was not laughing like the rest and he was looking down at Robin.
She thought him ugly and wicked looking. Vesey and Harrowby were
beautiful by contrast. Before she knew who he was, she disliked
him. She looked at him askance under her eyelashes, and he saw her
do it before her mother spoke his name, taking her by the tips of
her fingers and leading her to him.

"Come and let Lord Coombe look at you," she said. So it revealed
itself to her that it was he--this ugly one--who had done it, and
hatred surged up in her soul. It was actually in the eyes she
raised to his face, and Coombe saw it as he had seen the sidelong
glance and he wondered what it meant.

"Shake hands with Lord Coombe," Feather instructed.

"If you can make a curtsey, make one." She turned her head over
her shoulders, "Have you taught her to curtsey, Andrews?"

But Andrews had not and secretly lost temper at finding herself made
to figure as a nurse who had been capable of omission. Outwardly
she preserved rigid calm.

"I'm afraid not, ma'am. I will at once, if you wish it."

Coombe was watching the inner abhorrence in the little face. Robin
had put her hand behind her back--she who had never disobeyed since
she was born! She had crossed a line of development when she had
seen glimpses of the new world through Donal's eyes.

"What are you doing, you silly little thing," Feather reproved
her. "Shake hands with Lord Coombe."

Robin shook her head fiercely.

"No! No! No! No!" she protested.

Feather was disgusted. This was not the kind of child to display.

"Rude little thing! Andrews, come and make her do it--or take her
upstairs," she said.

Coombe took his gold coffee cup from the mantel.

"She regards me with marked antipathy, as she did when she first
saw me," he summed the matter up. "Children and animals don't hate
one without reason. It is some remote iniquity in my character
which the rest of us have not yet detected." To Robin he said,
"I do not want to shake hands with you if you object. I prefer to
drink my coffee out of this beautiful cup."

But Andrews was seething. Having no conscience whatever, she
had instead the pride of a female devil in her perfection in her
professional duties. That the child she was responsible for should
stamp her with ignominious fourth-ratedness by conducting herself
with as small grace as an infant costermonger was more than
her special order of flesh and blood could bear-and yet she must
outwardly control the flesh and blood.

In obedience to her mistress' command, she crossed the room and
bent down and whispered to Robin. She intended that her countenance
should remain non-committal, but, when she lifted her head, she
met Coombe's eyes and realized that perhaps it had not. She added
to her whisper nursery instructions in a voice of sugar.

"Be pretty mannered, Miss Robin, my dear, and shake hands with
his lordship."

Each person in the little drawing-room saw the queer flame in the
child-face--Coombe himself was fantastically struck by the sudden
thought that its expression might have been that of an obstinate
young martyr staring at the stake. Robin shrilled out her words:

"Andrews will pinch me--Andrews will pinch me! But--No!--No!" and
she kept her hand behind her back.

"Oh, Miss Robin, you naughty child!" cried Andrews, with pathos.
"Your poor Andrews that takes such care of you!"

"Horrid little thing!" Feather pettishly exclaimed. "Take her
upstairs, Andrews. She shall not come down again."

Harrowby, settling his pince nez a little excitedly in the spurred
novelty of his interest, murmured,

"If she doesn't want to go, she will begin to shriek. This looks
as if she were a little termagant."

But she did not shriek when Andrews led her towards the door.
The ugly one with the wicked face was the one who had done it. He
filled her with horror. To have touched him would have been like
touching some wild beast of prey. That was all. She went with
Andrews quite quietly.

"Will you shake hands with me?" said the Starling, goodnaturedly,
as she passed, "I hope she won't snub me," she dropped aside to
Harrowby.

Robin put out her hand prettily.

"Shake mine," suggested Harrowby, and she obeyed him.

"And mine?" smiled Vesey, with his best allure. She gave him
her hand, and, as a result of the allure probably, a tiny smile
flickered about the corners of her mouth. He did not look wicked.

"I remain an outcast," remarked Coombe, as the door closed behind
the little figure.

"I detest an ill-mannered child," said Feather. "She ought to be
slapped. We used to be slapped if we were rude."

"She said Andrews would pinch her. Is pinching the customary
discipline?"

"It ought to be. She deserves it." Feather was quite out of temper.
"But Andrews is too good to her. She is a perfect creature and
conducts herself like a clock. There has never been the slightest
trouble in the Nursery. You see how the child looks--though her
face ISN'T quite as round as it was." She laughed disagreeably
and shrugged her white undressed shoulders. "I think it's a little
horrid, myself--a child of that age fretting herself thin about
a boy."






CHAPTER XII





But though she had made no protest on being taken out of the
drawing-room, Robin had known that what Andrews' soft-sounding
whisper had promised would take place when she reached the Nursery.
She was too young to feel more than terror which had no defense
whatever. She had no more defense against Andrews than she had
had against the man who had robbed her of Donal. They were both
big and powerful, and she was nothing. But, out of the wonders
she had begun to know, there had risen in her before almost inert
little being a certain stirring. For a brief period she had learned
happiness and love and woe, and, this evening, inchoate rebellion
against an enemy. Andrews led by the hand up the narrow, top-story
staircase something she had never led before. She was quite unaware
of this and, as she mounted each step, her temper mounted also,
and it was the temper of an incensed personal vanity abnormally
strong in this particular woman. When they were inside the Nursery
and the door was shut, she led Robin to the middle of the small
and gloomy room and released her hand.

"Now, my lady," she said. "I'm going to pay you out for disgracing
me before everybody in the drawing-room." She had taken the child
below stairs for a few minutes before bringing her up for the
night. She had stopped in the kitchen for something she wanted for
herself. She laid her belongings on a chest of drawers and turned
about.

"I'm going to teach you a lesson you won't forget," she said.

What happened next turned the woman quite sick with the shock of
amazement. The child had, in the past, been a soft puppet. She
had been automatic obedience and gentleness. Privately Andrews
had somewhat looked down on her lack of spirit, though it had been
her own best asset. The outbreak downstairs had been an abnormality.

And now she stood before her with hands clenched, her little face
wild with defiant rage.

"I'll scream! I'll scream! I'll SCREAM!" she shrieked. Andrews
actually heard herself gulp; but she sprang up and forward.

"You'll SCREAM!" she could scarcely believe her own feelings--not
to mention the evidence of her ears, "YOU'LL scream!"

The next instant was more astonishing still. Robin threw herself on
her knees and scrambled like a cat. She was under the bed and in
the remotest corner against the wall. She was actually unreachable,
and she lay on her back kicking madly, hammering her heels against
the floor and uttering piercing shrieks. As something had seemed
to let itself go when she writhed under the bushes in the Gardens,
so did something let go now. In her overstrung little mind there
ruled for this moment the feeling that if she was to be pinched,
she would be pinched for a reason.

Andrews knelt by the side of the bed. She had a long, strong,
thin arm and it darted beneath and clutched. But it was not long
enough to attain the corner where the kicking and screaming was
going on. Her temper became fury before her impotence and her
hideous realization of being made ridiculous by this baby of six.
Two floors below the afterglow of the little dinner was going on.
Suppose even far echoes of the screams should be heard and make
her more ridiculous still. She knew how they would laugh and her
mistress would make some silly joke about Robin's being too much
for her. Her fury rose so high that she had barely sense to realize
that she must not let herself go too far when she got hold of the
child. Get hold of her she would and pay her out--My word! She
would pay her out!

"You little devil!" she said between her teeth, "Wait till I get
hold of you." And Robin shrieked and hammered more insanely still.

The bed was rather a low one and it was difficult for any one larger
than a child to find room beneath it. The correct and naturally
rigid Andrews lay flat upon her stomach and wriggled herself partly
under the edge. Just far enough for her long and strong arm, and
equally long and strong clutching fingers to do their work. In her
present state of mind, Andrews would have broken her back rather
than not have reached the creature who so defied her. The strong
fingers clenched a flying petticoat and dragged at it fiercely--the
next moment they clutched a frantic foot, with a power which could
not be broken away from. A jerk and a remorseless dragging over
the carpet and Robin was out of the protecting darkness and in
the gas light again, lying tumbled and in an untidy, torn little
heap on the nursery floor. Andrews was panting, but she did not
loose her hold as she scrambled, without a rag of professional
dignity, to her feet.

"My word!" she breathlessly gave forth. "I've got you now! I've
got you now."

She so looked that to Robin she seemed--like the ugly man
downstairs--a sort of wicked wild beast, whose mere touch would
have been horror even if it did not hurt. And the child knew what
was coming. She felt herself dragged up from the floor and also
dragged between Andrew's knees, which felt bony and hard as iron.
There was no getting away from them. Andrews had seated herself
firmly on a chair.

Holding her between the iron knees, she put her large hand over
her mouth. It was a hand large enough to cover more than her mouth.
Only the panic-stricken eyes seemed to flare wide and lustrous
above it.

"YOU'LL scream!" she said, "YOU'LL hammer on the floor with your
heels! YOU'LL behave like a wildcat--you that's been like a kitten!
You've never done it before and you'll never do it again! If it
takes me three days, I'll make you remember!"

And then her hand dropped--and her jaw dropped, and she sat staring
with a furious, sick, white face at the open door--which she had
shut as she came in. The top floor had always been so safe. The
Nursery had been her own autocratic domain. There had been no
human creature to whom it would have occurred to interfere. That
was it. She had been actually SAFE.

Unheard in the midst of the struggle, the door had been opened
without a knock. There on the threshold, as stiff as a ramrod,
and with his hateful eyes uncovering their gleam, Lord Coombe was
standing--no other than Lord Coombe.

Having a sharp working knowledge of her world, Andrews knew that
it was all up. He had come upstairs deliberately. She knew what
he had come for. He was as clever as he was bad, and he had seen
something when he glanced at her in the drawing-room. Now he had
heard and seen her as she dragged Robin from under the bed. He'd
come up for that--for some queer evil reason of his own. The
promptings of a remote gutter training made her feel a desire to
use language such as she still had wisdom enough to restrain.

"You are a very great fool, young woman," he said. "You have
nothing but your character as a nurse to live on. A scene in a
police court would ruin you. There is a Society which interferes
with nursery torture."

Robin, freed from the iron grasp, had slunk behind a chair. He
was there again.

Andrews' body, automatically responsive to rule and habit, rose from
its seat and stood before this member of a class which required
an upright position. She knew better than to attempt to excuse or
explain. She had heard about the Society and she knew publicity would
spell ruin and starvation. She had got herself into an appalling
mess. Being caught--there you were. But that this evil-reputationed
swell should actually have been awakened by some whim to notice
and follow her up was "past her," as she would have put it.

"You were going to pinch her--by instalments, I suppose," he
said. "You inferred that it might last three days. When she said
you would--in the drawing-room--it occurred to me to look into it.
What are your wages?"

"Thirty pounds a year, my lord."

"Go tomorrow morning to Benby, who engaged you for Mrs. Gareth-Lawless.
He will be at his office by nine and will pay you what is owed to
you--and a month's wages in lieu of notice."

"The mistress--" began Andrews.

"I have spoken to Mrs. Gareth-Lawless." It was a lie, serenely
told. Feather was doing a new skirt dance in the drawing-room.
"She is engaged. Pack your box. Jennings will call a cab."

It was the utter idiotic hopelessness of saying anything to
him which finished her. You might as well talk to a front door or
a street lamp. Any silly thing you might try wouldn't even reach
his ears. He had no ears for you. You didn't matter enough.

"Shall I leave her here--as she is?" she said, denoting Robin.

"Undress her and put her to bed before you pack your box," absolutely
certain, fine cold modulations in the voice, which stood for his
special plane of breeding, had their effect on her grovelling
though raging soul. He was so exactly what he was and what she
was not and could never attain. "I will stay here while you do
it. Then go."

No vocabulary of the Servants' Hall could have encompassed the fine
phrase grand seigneur, but, when Mrs. Blayne and the rest talked
of him in their least resentful and more amiable moods, they
unconsciously made efforts to express the quality in him which
these two words convey. He had ways of his own. Men that paid a
pretty woman's bills and kept her going in luxury, Jennings and
Mrs. Blayne and the others knew something about. They sometimes
began well enough but, as time went on, they forgot themselves
and got into the way of being familiar and showing they realized
that they paid for things and had their rights. Most of them began
to be almost like husbands--speak slighting and sharp and be a bit
stiff about accounts--even before servants. They ran in and out
or--after a while--began to stay away and not show up for weeks.
"He" was different--so different that it was queer. Queer it certainly
was that he really came to the place very seldom. Wherever they
met, it didn't noticeably often happen in the slice of a house.
He came as if he were a visitor. He took no liberties. Everything
was punctiliously referred to Mrs. Gareth-Lawless. Mr. Benby, who
did everything, conducted himself outwardly as if he were a sort
of man of business in Mrs. Gareth-Lawless' employ. It was open to
the lenient to believe that she depended on some mysterious private
income. There were people who preferred to try to believe this,
but there were those who, in some occult way, knew exactly where
her income came from. There were, in fact, hypercritical persons
who did not know or notice her, but she had quite an entertaining,
smart circle which neither suspicions nor beliefs prevented from
placing her in their visiting lists. Coombe DID keep it up in the
most perfect manner, some of them said admiringly among themselves.
He showed extraordinarily perfect taste. Many fashionable open
secrets, accepted by a brilliant world, were not half so fastidiously
managed. Andrews knew he had unswervingly lied when he said he
had "spoken to Mrs. Gareth-Lawless." But he never failed to place
her in the position of authority. That he should have presented
himself on the nursery floor was amazingly abnormal enough to
mean some state of mind unregulated by all natural rules. "Him,"
Andrews thought, "that never steps out of a visitor's place in
the drawing-room turning up on the third floor without a word!"
One thing she knew, and that came first. Behind all the polite show
he was the head of everything. And he was one that you'd better
not give back a sound to if you knew what was good for yourself.
Whatever people said against his character, he was one of the
grand and high ones. A word from him--ever so quiet--and you'd be
done for.

She was shaking with fear inwardly, but she undressed Robin and
put her in bed, laying everything away and making things tidy for
the night.

"This is the Night Nursery, I suppose," Coombe had said when she
began. He put up his glasses and looked the uninviting little room
over. He scrutinized it and she wondered what his opinion of it
might be.

"Yes, my lord. The Day Nursery is through that door." He walked
through the door in question and she could see that he moved slowly
about it, examining the few pieces of furniture curiously, still
with his glass in his eye. She had finished undressing Robin
and had put her in her bed before he came back into the sleeping
apartment. By that time, exhausted by the unknown tempest she had
passed through, the child had dropped asleep in spite of herself.
She was too tired to remember that her enemy was in the next room.

"I have seen the child with you several times when you have not
been aware of it," Coombe said to her before he went downstairs.
"She has evidently been well taken care of as far as her body
is concerned. If you were not venomous--if you had merely struck
her, when you lost your temper, you might have had another trial.
I know nothing about children, but I know something about the
devil, and if ever the devil was in a woman's face and voice the
devil was in yours when you dragged the little creature from under
the bed. If you had dared, you would have killed her. Look after
that temper, young woman. Benby shall keep an eye on you if you
take another place as nurse, and I shall know where you are."

"My lord!" Andrews gasped. "You wouldn't overlook a woman and take
her living from her and send her to starvation!"

"I would take her living from her and send her to starvation
without a shadow of compunction," was the reply made in the fine
gentleman's cultivated voice, "--if she were capable of what you
were capable of tonight. You are, I judge, about forty, and, though
you are lean, you are a powerful woman; the child is, I believe,
barely six." And then, looking down at her through his glass, he
added--to her quite shuddering astonishment--in a tone whose very
softness made it really awful to her, "Damn you! Damn you!"

"I'll--I swear I'll never let myself go again, my lord!" the woman
broke out devoutly.

"I don't think you will. It would cost you too much," he said.

Then he went down the steep, crooked little staircase quite
soundlessly and Andrews, rather white and breathless, went and
packed her trunk. Robin--tired baby as she was--slept warm and
deeply.






CHAPTER XIII





It was no custom of his to outstay other people; in fact, he
usually went away comparatively early. Feather could not imagine
what his reason could be, but she was sure there was a reason.
She was often disturbed by his reasons, and found it difficult to
adjust herself to them. How--even if one had a logically brilliant
mind--could one calculate on a male being, who seemed not exactly
to belong to the race of men.

As a result of the skirt dancing, the furniture of the empty
drawing-room was a little scattered and untidy, but Feather had
found a suitable corner among cushions on a sofa, after everyone
had gone leaving Coombe alone with her. She wished he would sit
down, but he preferred to stand in his still, uncomfortable way.

"I know you are going to tell me something," she broke the silence.

"I am. When I went out of the room, I did not drive round to my
club as I said I found myself obliged to. I went upstairs to the
third floor--to the Nursery."

Feather sat quite upright.

"YOU went up to the Nursery!" If this was the reason for his staying,
what on earth had he come upon in the region of the third floor,
and how ridiculously unlike him to allow himself to interfere.
Could it be Andrews and Jennings? Surely Andrews was too old.--This
passed across her mind in a flash.

"You called Andrews to use her authority with the child when she
would not shake hands with me. The little creature, for some reason
of her own, evidently feels an antipathy to me. That interested
me and I watched her as Andrews whispered in her ear. The woman's
vanity was stung. I realized that she whispered a threat. A hint
of actual ferocity showed in her eyes in spite of herself. Robin
turned pale."

"Andrews was quite right. Children must be punished when they are
rude." Feather felt this at once silly and boring. What did he
know about such matters?

"The child said, 'Andrews will pinch me!' and I caught Andrews' eye
and knew it was true--also that she had done it before. I looked
at the woman's long, thin, strong fingers. They were cruel fingers.
I do not take liberties, as a rule, but I took a liberty. I excused
myself and climbed three flights of stairs."

Never had Feather been so surprised in her life. She looked like
a bewildered child.

"But--what COULD it matter to YOU?" she said in soft amaze.

"I don't know," his answer came after a moment's pause. "I have
caprices of mood. Certain mental images made my temperature rise.
Momentarily it did matter. One is like that at times. Andrews'
feline face and her muscular fingers--and the child's extraordinarily
exquisite flesh--gave me a second's furious shudder."

Feather quite broke in upon him.

"Are you--are you FOND of children?"

"No," he was really abrupt. "I never thought of such a thing in
my life--as being FOND of things."

"That was what--I mean I thought so." Feather faltered, as if in
polite acquiescence with a quite natural fact.

Coombe proceeded:

"As I went up the stairs I heard screams and I thought that
the pinching had begun. I got up quickly and opened the door and
found the woman lying flat on the floor by the bed, dragging out
the child who had hidden under it. The woman's face was devilish,
and so was her voice. I heard her threats. She got on her feet and
dragged the child up and held her between her knees. She clapped
her hand over mouth to stifle her shrieks. There I stopped her.
She had a fright at sight of me which taught her something." He
ended rather slowly. "I took the great liberty of ordering her
to pack her box and leave the house--course," with a slight bow,
"using you as my authority."

"Andrews!" cried Feather, aghast. "Has she--gone?"

"Would you have kept her?" he inquired.

"It's true that--that PINCHING" Feather's voice almost held tears,
"--really HARD pinching is--is not proper. But Andrews has been
invaluable. Everyone says Robin is better dressed and better kept
than other children. And she is never allowed to make the least
noise--"

"One wouldn't if one were pinched by those devilish, sinewy fingers
every time one raised one's voice. Yes. She has gone. I ordered
her to put her charge to bed before she packed. I did not leave
her alone with Robin. In fact, I walked about the two nurseries
and looked them over."

He had walked about the Night Nursery and the Day Nursery! He--the
Head of the House of Coombe, whose finely acrid summing up of
things, they were all secretly afraid of, if the truth were known.
"They" stood for her smart, feverishly pleasure-chasing set. In
their way, they half unconsciously tried to propitiate something
in him, always without producing the least effect. Her mental
vision presented to her his image as he had walked about the horrid
little rooms, his somewhat stiffly held head not much below the
low ceilings. He had taken in shabby carpets, furniture, faded
walls, general dim dinginess.

"It's an unholy den for anything to spend its days in--that third
floor," he made the statement detachedly, in a way. "If she's six,
she has lived six years there--and known nothing else."

"All London top floors are like it," said Feather, "and they are
all nurseries and school rooms--where there are children."

His faintly smiling glance took in her girl-child slimness in its
glittering sheath--the zephyr scarf floating from the snow of her
bared loveliness--her delicate soft chin deliciously lifted as she
looked up at him.

"How would YOU like it?" he asked.

"But I am not a child," in pretty protest. "Children are--are
different!"

"You look like a child," he suddenly said, queerly--as if the
aspect of her caught him for an instant and made him absent-minded.
"Sometimes--a woman does. Not often."

She bloomed into a kind of delighted radiance.

"You don't often pay me compliments," she said. "That is a beautiful
one. Robin--makes it more beautiful."

"It isn't a compliment," he answered, still watching her in the
slightly absent manner. "It is--a tragic truth."

He passed his hand lightly across his eyes as if he swept something
away, and then both looked and spoke exactly as before.

"I have decided to buy the long lease of this house. It is for
sale," he said, casually. "I shall buy it for the child."

"For Robin!" said Feather, helplessly.

"Yes, for Robin."

"It--it would be an income--whatever happened. It is in the very
heart of Mayfair," she said, because, in her astonishment--almost
consternation--she could think of nothing else. He would not buy
it for her. He thought her too silly to trust. But, if it were
Robin's--it would be hers also. A girl couldn't turn her own
mother into the street. Amid the folds of her narrow being hid
just one spark of shrewdness which came to life where she herself
was concerned.

"Two or three rooms--not large ones--can be added at the back,"
he went on. "I glanced out of a window to see if it could be done."

Incomprehensible as he was, one might always be sure of a certain
princeliness in his inexplicable methods. He never was personal
or mean. An addition to the slice of a house! That really WAS
generous! Entrancement filled her.

"That really is kind of you," she murmured, gratefully. "It seems
too much to ask!"

"You did not ask it," was his answer.

"But I shall benefit by it. Nothing COULD BE nicer. These rooms
are so much too small," glancing about her in flushed rapture, "And
my bedroom is dreadful. I'm obliged to use Rob's for a dressing-room."

"The new rooms will be for Robin," he said. An excellent method he
had discovered, of entirely detaching himself from the excitements
and emotions of other persons, removed the usual difficulties
in the way of disappointing--speaking truths to--or embarrassing
people who deserved it. It was this method which had utterly cast
down the defences of Andrews. Feather was so wholly left out of the
situation that she was actually almost saved from its awkwardness.
"When one is six," he explained, "one will soon be seven--nine--twelve.
Then the teens begin to loom up and one cannot be concealed in
cupboards on a top floor. Even before that time a governess is
necessary, and, even from the abyss of my ignorance, I see that no
respectable woman would stand either the Night or the Day Nursery.
Your daughter--"

"Oh, don't call her THAT!" cried Feather. "My daughter! It sounds
as if she were eighteen!" She felt as if she had a sudden hideous
little shock. Six years HAD passed since Bob died! A daughter! A
school girl with long hair and long legs to keep out of the way.
A grown-up girl to drag about with one. Never would she do it!

"Three sixes are eighteen," Coombe continued, "as was impressed
upon one in early years by the multiplication table."

"I never saw you so interested in anything before," Feather faltered.
"Climbing steep, narrow, horrid stairs to her nursery! Dismissing
her nurse!" She paused a second, because a very ugly little idea
had clutched at her. It arose from and was complicated with many
fantastic, half formed, secret resentments of the past. It made
her laugh a shade hysterical.

"Are you going to see that she is properly brought up and educated,
so that if--anyone important falls in love with her she can make
a good match?"

Hers was quite a hideous little mind, he was telling himself--fearful
in its latter day casting aside of all such small matters as taste
and feeling. People stripped the garments from things in these
days. He laughed inwardly at himself and his unwitting "these
days." Senile severity mouthed just such phrases. Were they not
his own days and the outcome of a past which had considered itself
so much more decorous? Had not boldly questionable attitudes been
held in those other days? How long was it since the Prince Regent
himself had flourished? It was only that these days brought it
all close against one's eyes. But this exquisite creature had a
hideous little mind of her own whatsoever her day.

Later, he confessed to himself that he was unprepared to see her
spring to her feet and stand before him absurdly, fantastically
near being impassioned.

"You think I as too silly to SEE anything," she broke forth. "But
I do see--a long way sometimes. I can't bear it but I do--I do!
I shall have a grown-up daughter. She will be the kind of girl
everyone will look at--and someone--important--may want to marry
her. But, Oh!--" He was reminded of the day when she had fallen
at his feet, and clasped his rigid and reluctant knees. This was
something of the same feeble desperation of mood. "Oh, WHY couldn't
someone like that have wanted to marry ME! See!" she was like
a pathetic fairy as she spread her nymphlike arms, "how PRETTY I
am!"

His gaze held her a moment in the singular fashion with which she
had become actually familiar, because--at long intervals--she kept
seeing it again. He quite gently took her fingers and returned
her to her sofa.

"Please sit down again," he requested. "It will be better."

She sat down without another imbecile word to say. As for him, he
changed the subject.

"With your permission, Benby will undertake the business of the
lease and the building," he explained. "The plans will be brought
to you. We will go over them together, if you wish. There will be
decent rooms for Robin and her governess. The two nurseries can be
made fit for human beings to live in and used for other purposes.
The house will be greatly improved."

It was nearly three o'clock when Feather went upstairs to her
dozing maid, because, after he had left her, she sat some time in
the empty, untidy little drawing-room and gazed straight before
her at a painted screen on which shepherdesses and swains were
dancing in a Watteau glade infested by flocks of little Loves.






CHAPTER XIV






When, from Robin's embarrassed young consciousness, there had
welled up the hesitating confession, "She--doesn't like me," she
could not, of course, have found words in which to make the reasons
for her knowledge clear, but they had for herself no obscurity.
The fair being who, at rare intervals, fluttered on the threshold
of her world had a way of looking at her with a shade of aloof
distaste in her always transient gaze.

The unadorned fact was that Feather did NOT like her. She had been
outraged by her advent. A baby was absurdly "out of the picture."
So far as her mind encompassed a future, she saw herself flitting
from flower to flower of "smart" pleasures and successes,
somehow, with more money and more exalted invitations--"something"
vaguely--having happened to the entire Lawdor progeny, and she,
therefore, occupying a position in which it was herself who could
gracefully condescend to others. There was nothing so "stodgy"
as children in the vision. When the worst came to the worst, she
had been consoled by the thought that she had really managed the
whole thing very cleverly. It was easier, of course, to so arrange
such things in modern days and in town. The Day Nursery and the
Night Nursery on the third floor, a smart-looking young woman
who knew her business, who even knew what to buy for a child and
where to buy it, without troubling any one simplified the situation.
Andrews had been quite wonderful. Nobody can bother one about
a healthy, handsome child who is seen meticulously cared for and
beautifully dressed, being pushed or led or carried out in the open
air every day.

But there had arrived the special morning when she had seen a
child who so stood out among a dozen children that she had been
startled when she recognized that it was Robin. Andrews had taken
her charge to Hyde Park that day and Feather was driving through
the Row on her way to a Knightsbridge shop. First her glance had
been caught by the hair hanging to the little hips--extraordinary
hair in which Andrews herself had a pride. Then she had seen the
slender, exquisitely modeled legs, and the dancing sway of the
small body. A wonderfully cut, stitched, and fagotted smock and hat
she had, of course, taken in at a flash. When the child suddenly
turned to look at some little girls in a pony cart, the amazing
damask of her colour, and form and depth of eye had given her another
slight shock. She realized that what she had thrust lightly away
in a corner of her third floor produced an unmistakable effect when
turned out into the light of a gay world. The creature was tall
too--for six years old. Was she really six? It seemed incredible.
Ten more years and she would be sixteen.

Mrs. Heppel-Bevill had a girl of fifteen, who was a perfect
catastrophe. She read things and had begun to talk about her "right
to be a woman." Emily Heppel-Bevill was only thirty-seven--three
years from forty. Feather had reached the stage of softening in
her disdain of the women in their thirties. She had found herself
admitting that--in these days--there were women of forty who had
not wholly passed beyond the pale into that outer darkness where
there was weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth. But there
was no denying that this six year old baby, with the dancing step,
gave one--almost hysterically--"to think." Her imagination could
not--never had and never would she have allowed it to--grasp any
belief that she herself could change. A Feather, No! But a creature
of sixteen, eighteen--with eyes that shape--with lashes an inch
long--with yards of hair--standing by one's side in ten years! It
was ghastly!

Coombe, in his cold perfunctory way, climbing the crooked, narrow
stairs, dismissing Andrews--looking over the rooms--dismissing
them, so to speak, and then remaining after the rest had gone
to reveal to her a new abnormal mood--that, in itself alone, was
actually horrible. It was abnormal and yet he had always been more
or less like that in all things. Despite everything--everything--he
had never been in love with her at all. At first she had believed
he was--then she had tried to make him care for her. He had never
failed her, he had done everything in his grand seigneur fashion.
Nobody dare make gross comment upon her, but, while he saw her
loveliness as only such a man could--she had gradually realized
that she had never had even a chance with him. She could not
even think that if she had not been so silly and frightened that
awful day six years ago, and had not lost her head, he might have
admired her more and more and in the end asked her to marry him.
He had said there must be no mistakes, and she had not been allowed
to fall into making one. The fact that she had not, had, finally,
made her feel the power of a certain fascination in him. She thought
it was a result of his special type of looks, his breeding, the
wonderful clothes he wore--but it was, in truth, his varieties of
inaccessibility.

"A girl might like him," she had said to herself that night--she
sat up late after he left her. "A girl who--who had up-to-date sense
might. Modern people don't grow old as they used to. At fifty-five
he won't be fat, or bald and he won't have lost his teeth. People
have found out they needn't. He will be as thin and straight as
he is today--and nothing can alter his nose. He will be ten years
cleverer than he is now. Buying the house for a child of that
age--building additional rooms for her!"

In the fevered, rapid, deep-dipping whirl of the life which was
the only one she knew, she had often seen rather trying things
happen--almost unnatural changes in situations. People had overcome
the folly of being afraid to alter their minds and their views
about what they had temporarily believed were permanent bonds and
emotions. Bonds had become old fogeyish. Marriages went to pieces,
the parties in love affairs engaged in a sort of "dance down the
middle" and turn other people's partners. The rearrangement of
figures sometimes made for great witticism. Occasionally people
laughed at themselves as at each other. The admirers of engaging
matrons had been known to renew their youth at the coming-out balls
of lovely daughters in their early teens, and to end by assuming
the flowery chains of a new allegiance. Time had, of course,
been when such a volte face would have aroused condemnation and
indignant discussion, but a humorous leniency spent but little
time in selecting terms of severity. Feather had known of several
such contretemps ending in quite brilliant matches. The enchanting
mothers usually consoled themselves with great ease, and, if the
party of each part was occasionally wittily pungent in her comments
on the other, everybody laughed and nobody had time to criticize.
A man who had had much to bestow and who preferred in youth
to bestow it upon himself was not infrequently more in the mood
for the sharing of marriage when years had revealed to him the
distressing fact that he was not, and had never been, the centre of
the universe, which distressing fact is one so unfairly concealed
from youth in bloom.

It was, of course, but as a vaguely outlined vision that these
recognitions floated through what could only be alleged to be
Feather's mind because there was no other name for it. The dark
little staircase, the rejected and despised third floor, and Coombe
detachedly announcing his plans for the house, had set the--so to
speak--rather malarious mist flowing around her. A trying thing
was that it did not really dispel itself altogether, but continued
to hang about the atmosphere surrounding other and more cheerful
things. Almost impalpably it added to the familiar feeling--or lack
of feeling--with regard to Robin. She had not at all hated the
little thing; it had merely been quite true that, in an inactive
way, she had not LIKED her. In the folds of the vague mist quietly
floated the truth that she now liked her less.

Benby came to see and talk to her on the business of the
structural changes to be made. He conducted himself precisely as
though her views on the matter were of value and could not, in
fact, be dispensed with. He brought the architect's plans with him
and explained them with care. They were clever plans which made
the most of a limited area. He did not even faintly smile when
it revealed itself to him, as it unconsciously did, that Mrs.
Gareth-Lawless regarded their adroit arrangement as a singular
misuse of space which could have been much better employed for
necessities of her own. She was much depressed by the ground floor
addition which might have enlarged her dining-room, but which was
made into a sitting-room for Robin and her future governess.

"And that is in ADDITION to her schoolroom which might have been
thrown into the drawing-room--besides the new bedrooms which I
needed so much," she said.

"The new nurse, who is a highly respectable person," explained
Benby, "could not have been secured if she had not known that
improvements were being made. The reconstruction of the third floor
will provide suitable accommodations."

The special forte of Dowson, the new nurse, was a sublimated
respectability far superior to smartness. She had been mystically
produced by Benby and her bonnets and jackets alone would have
revealed her selection from almost occult treasures. She wore
bonnets and "jackets," not hats and coats.

"In the calm days of Her Majesty, nurses dressed as she does. I do
not mean in the riotous later years of her reign--but earlier--when
England dreamed in terms of Crystal Palaces and Great Exhibitions.
She can only be the result of excavation," Coombe said of her.

She was as proud of her respectability as Andrews had been of her
smartness. This had, in fact, proved an almost insuperable obstacle
to her engagement. The slice of a house, with its flocking in and
out of chattering, smart people in marvellous clothes was not the
place for her, nor was Mrs. Gareth-Lawless the mistress of her
dreams. But her husband had met with an accident and must be kept
in a hospital, and an invalid daughter must live by the seaside--and
suddenly, when things were at their worst with her, had come
Benby with a firm determination to secure her with wages such as
no other place would offer. Besides which she had observed as she
had lived.

"Things have changed," she reflected soberly. "You've got to resign
yourself and not be too particular."

She accepted the third floor, as Benby had said, because it was to
be rearranged and the Night and Day Nurseries, being thrown into
one, repainted and papered would make a decent place to live in.
At the beautiful little girl given into her charge she often looked
in a puzzled way, because she knew a good deal about children, and
about this one there was something odd. Her examination of opened
drawers and closets revealed piles of exquisite garments of all
varieties, all perfectly kept. In these dingy holes, which called
themselves nurseries, she found evidence that money had been spent
like water so that the child, when she was seen, might look like
a small princess. But she found no plaything--no dolls or toys,
and only one picture book, and that had "Donal" written on the
fly leaf and evidently belonged to someone else.

What exactly she would have done when she had had time to think
the matter over, she never knew, because, a few days after her
arrival, a tall, thin gentleman, coming up the front steps as she
was going out with Robin, stopped and spoke to her as if he knew
who she was.

"You know the kind of things children like to play with, nurse?"
he said.

She respectfully replied that she had had long experience with
young desires. She did not know as yet who he was, but there was
that about him which made her feel that, while there was no knowing
what height his particular exaltation in the matter of rank might
reach, one would be safe in setting it high.

"Please go to one of the toy shops and choose for the child what
she will like best. Dolls--games--you will know what to select.
Send the bill to me at Coombe House. I am Lord Coombe."

"Thank you, my lord," Dowson answered, with a sketch of a curtsey,
"Miss Robin, you must hold out your little hand and say 'thank
you' to his lordship for being so kind. He's told Dowson to buy
you some beautiful dolls and picture books as a present."

Robin's eyelashes curled against her under brows in her wide, still
glance upward at him. Here was "the one" again! She shut her hand
tightly into a fist behind her back.

Lord Coombe smiled a little--not much.

"She does not like me," he said. "It is not necessary that
she should give me her hand. I prefer that she shouldn't, if she
doesn't want to. Good morning, Dowson."

To the well-regulated mind of Dowson, this seemed treating too
lightly a matter as serious as juvenile incivility. She remonstrated
gravely and at length with Robin.

"Little girls must behave prettily to kind gentlemen who are
friends of their mammas. It is dreadful to be rude and not say
'thank you'," she said.

But as she talked she was vaguely aware that her words passed by
the child's ears as the summer wind passed. Perhaps it was all a
bit of temper and would disappear and leave no trace behind. At
the same time, there WAS something queer about the little thing.
She had a listless way of sitting staring out of the window and
seeming to have no desire to amuse herself. She was too young
to be listless and she did not care for her food. Dowson asked
permission to send for the doctor and, when he came, he ordered
sea air.

"Of course, you can take her away for a few weeks," Mrs. Gareth-Lawless
said. Here she smiled satirically and added, "But I can tell you
what it is all about. The little minx actually fell in love with
a small boy she met in the Square Gardens and, when his mother
took him from London, she began to mope like a tiresome girl in
her teens. It's ridiculous, but is the real trouble."

"Oh!" said Dowson, the low and respectful interjection expressing
a shade of disapproval, "Children do have fancies, ma'am. She'll
get over it if we give her something else to think of."

The good woman went to one of the large toy shops and bought a
beautiful doll, a doll's house, and some picture books. When they
were brought up to the Day Nursery, Robin was asleep after a rather
long walk, which Dowson had decided would be good for her. When
she came later into the room, after the things had been unpacked,
she regarded them with an expression of actual dislike.

"Isn't that a beautiful doll?" said Dowson, good-humouredly. "And
did you ever see such a lovely house? It was kind Lord Coombe who
gave them to you. Just you look at the picture books."

Robin put her hands behind her back and would not touch them. Dowson,
who was a motherly creature with a great deal of commonsense, was
set thinking. She began to make guesses, though she was not yet
sufficiently familiar with the household to guess from any firm
foundation of knowledge of small things.

"Come here, dear," she said, and drew the small thing to her knee.
"Is it because you don't love Lord Coombe?" she asked.

"Yes," she answered.

"But why?" said Dowson. "When he is such a kind gentleman?"

But Robin would not tell her why and never did. She never told
any one, until years had passed, how this had been the beginning
of a hatred. The toys were left behind when she was taken to the
seaside. Dowson tried to persuade her to play with them several
times, but she would not touch them, so they were put away. Feeling
that she was dealing with something unusual, and, being a kindly
person, Dowson bought her some playthings on her own account. They
were simple things, but Robin was ready enough to like them.

"Did YOU give them to me?" she asked.

"Yes, I did, Miss Robin."

The child drew near her after a full minute of hesitation.

"I will KISS you!" she said solemnly, and performed the rite as
whole-souledly as Donal had done.

"Dear little mite!" exclaimed the surprised Dowson. "Dear me!" And
there was actual moisture in her eyes as she squeezed the small
body in her arms.

"She's the strangest mite I ever nursed," was her comment to Mrs.
Blayne below stairs. "It was so sudden, and she did it as if she'd
never done it before. I'd actually been thinking she hadn't any
feeling at all."

"No reason why she should have. She's been taken care of by the
clock and dressed like a puppet, but she's not been treated human!"
broke forth Mrs. Blayne.

Then the whole story was told--the "upstairs" story with much vivid
description, and the mentioning of many names and the dotting of
many "i's". Dowson had heard certain things only through vague
rumour, but now she knew and began to see her way. She had not
heard names before, and the definite inclusion of Lord Coombe's
suggested something to her.

"Do you think the child could be JEALOUS of his lordship?" she
suggested.

"She might if she knew anything about him--but she never saw him
until the night she was taken down into the drawing-room. She's
lived upstairs like a little dog in its kennel."

"Well," Dowson reflected aloud, "it sounds almost silly to talk
of a child's hating any one, but that bit of a thing's eyes had
fair hate in them when she looked up at him where he stood. That
was what puzzled me."






CHAPTER XV





Before Robin had been taken to the seaside to be helped by the
bracing air of the Norfolk coast to recover her lost appetite
and forget her small tragedy, she had observed that unaccustomed
things were taking place in the house. Workmen came in and out
through the mews at the back and brought ladders with them and
tools in queer bags. She heard hammerings which began very early
in the morning and went on all day. As Andrews had trained her not
to ask tiresome questions, she only crept now and then to a back
window and peeped out. But in a few days Dowson took her away.

When she came back to London, she was not taken up the steep dark
stairs to the third floor. Dowson led her into some rooms she had
never seen before. They were light and airy and had pretty walls
and furniture. A sitting-room on the ground floor had even a round
window with plants in it and a canary bird singing in a cage.

"May we stay here?" she asked Dowson in a whisper.

"We are going to live here," was the answer.

And so they did.

At first Feather occasionally took her intimates to see the
additional apartments.

"In perfect splendour is the creature put up, and I with a bedroom
like a coalhole and such drawing-rooms as you see each time you
enter the house!" she broke forth spitefully one day when she
forgot herself.

She said it to the Starling and Harrowby, who had been simply gazing
about them in fevered mystification, because the new development
was a thing which must invoke some more or less interesting
explanation. At her outbreak, all they could do was to gaze at her
with impartial eyes, which suggested question, and Feather shrugged
pettish shoulders.

"You knew _I_ didn't do it. How could I?" she said. "It is a queer
whim of Coombe's. Of course, it is not the least like him. I call
it morbid."

After which people knew about the matter and found it a subject
for edifying and quite stimulating discussion. There was something
fantastic in the situation. Coombe was the last man on earth to
have taken the slightest notice of the child's existence! It was
believed that he had never seen her--except in long clothes--until
she had glared at him and put her hand behind her back the night
she was brought into the drawing-room. She had been adroitly kept
tucked away in an attic somewhere. And now behold an addition of
several wonderful, small rooms built, furnished and decorated for
her alone, where she was to live as in a miniature palace attended
by servitors! Coombe, as a purveyor of nursery appurtenances, was
regarded with humour, the general opinion being that the eruption
of a volcano beneath his feet alone could have awakened his somewhat
chill self-absorption to the recognition of any child's existence.

"To be exact we none of us really know anything in particular about
his mental processes." Harrowby pondered aloud. "He's capable of
any number of things we might not understand, if he condescended
to tell us about them--which he would never attempt. He has a
remote, brilliantly stored, cynical mind. He owns that he is of an
inhuman selfishness. I haven't a suggestion to make, but it sets one
searching through the purlieus of one's mind for an approximately
reasonable explanation."

"Why 'purlieus'?" was the Starling's inquiry. Harrowby shrugged
his shoulders ever so lightly.

"Well, one isn't searching for reasons founded on copy-book axioms,"
he shook his head. "Coombe? No."

There was a silence given to occult thought.

"Feather is really in a rage and is too Feathery to be able to
conceal it," said Starling.

"Feather would be--inevitably," Harrowby lifted his near-sighted
eyes to her curiously. "Can you see Feather in the future--when
Robin is ten years older?"

"I can," the Starling answered.

       *       *        *       *        *

The years which followed were changing years--growing years. Life
and entertainment went on fast and furiously in all parts of London,
and in no part more rapidly than in the slice of a house whose
front always presented an air of having been freshly decorated,
in spite of summer rain and winter soot and fog. The plants in
the window boxes seemed always in bloom, being magically replaced
in the early morning hours when they dared to hint at flagging.
Mrs. Gareth-Lawless, it was said, must be renewed in some such
mysterious morning way, as she merely grew prettier as she neared
thirty and passed it. Women did in these days! Which last phrase
had always been a useful one, probably from the time of the Flood.
Old fogeys, male and female, had used it in the past as a means of
scathingly unfavourable comparison, growing flushed and almost
gobbling like turkey cocks in their indignation. Now, as a phrase, it
was a support and a mollifier. "In these days" one knew better how
to amuse oneself, was more free to snatch at agreeable opportunity,
less in bondage to old fancies which had called themselves beliefs;
everything whirled faster and more lightly--danced, two-stepped,
instead of marching.

Robin vaguely connected certain changes in her existence with the
changes which took place in the fashion of sleeves and skirts
which appeared to produce radical effects in the world she caught
glimpses of. Sometimes sleeves were closely fitted to people's
arms, then puffs sprang from them and grew until they were enormous
and required delicate manipulation when coats were put on; then
their lavishness of material fell from the shoulder to the wrists
and hung there swaying until some sudden development of skirt seemed
to distract their attention from themselves and they shrank into
unimportance and skirts changed instead. Afterwards, sometimes
figures were slim and encased in sheathlike draperies, sometimes
folds rippled about feet, "fullness" crept here or there or
disappeared altogether, trains grew longer or shorter or wider or
narrower, cashmeres, grosgrain silks and heavy satins were suddenly
gone and chiffon wreathed itself about the world and took possession
of it. Bonnets ceased to exist and hats were immense or tiny, tall
or flat, tilted at the back, at the side, at the front, worn over
the face or dashingly rolled back from it; feathers drooped or
stood upright at heights which rose and fell and changed position
with the changing seasons. No garment or individual wore the same
aspect for more than a month's time. It was necessary to change
all things with a rapidity matching the change of moods and fancies
which altered at the rate of the automobiles which dashed here
and there and everywhere, through country roads, through town,
through remote places with an unsparing swiftness which set a new
pace for the world.

"I cannot hark back regretfully to stage coaches," said Lord Coombe.
"Even I was not born early enough for that. But in the days of
my youth and innocence express trains seemed almost supernatural.
One could drive a pair of horses twenty miles to make a country
visit, but one could not drive back the same day. One's circle
had its limitations and degrees of intimacy. Now it is possible
motor fifty miles to lunch and home to dine with guests from the
remotest corners of the earth. Oceans are crossed in six days,
and the eager flit from continent to continent. Engagements can be
made by cable and the truly enterprising can accept an invitation
to dine in America on a fortnight's notice. Telephones communicate
in a few seconds and no one is secure from social intercourse for
fifteen minutes. Acquaintances and correspondence have no limitations
because all the inhabitants of the globe can reach one by motor or
electricity. In moments of fatigue I revert to the days of Queen
Anne with pleasure."

While these changes went on, Robin lived in her own world in her
own quarters at the rear of the slice of a house. During the early
years spent with Dowson, she learned gradually that life was a
better thing than she had known in the dreary gloom of the third
floor Day and Night Nurseries. She was no longer left to spend
hours alone, nor was she taken below stairs to listen blankly to
servants talking to each other of mysterious things with which she
herself and the Lady Downstairs and "him" were somehow connected,
her discovery of this fact being based on the dropping of voices
and sidelong glances at her and sudden warning sounds from Andrews.
She realized that Dowson would never pinch her, and the rooms she
lived in were pretty and bright.

Gradually playthings and picture books appeared in them, which she
gathered Dowson presented her with. She gathered this from Dowson
herself.

She had never played with the doll, and, by chance a day arriving
when Lord Coombe encountered Dowson in the street without her
charge, he stopped her again and spoke as before.

"Is the little girl well and happy, Nurse?" he asked.

"Quite well, my lord, and much happier than she used to be."

"Did she," he hesitated slightly, "like the playthings you bought
her?"

Dowson hesitated more than slightly but, being a sensible woman
and at the same time curious about the matter, she spoke the truth.

"She wouldn't play with them at all, my lord. I couldn't persuade
her to. What her child's fancy was I don't know."

"Neither do I--except that it is founded on a distinct dislike,"
said Coombe. There was a brief pause. "Are you fond of toys
yourself, Dowson?" he inquired coldly.

"I am that--and I know how to choose them, your lordship," replied
Dowson, with a large, shrewd intelligence.

"Then oblige me by throwing away the doll and its accompaniments
and buying some toys for yourself, at my expense. You can present
them to Miss Robin as a personal gift. She will accept them from
you."

He passed on his way and Dowson looked after him interestedly.

"If she was his," she thought, "I shouldn't be puzzled. But she's
not--that I've ever heard of. He's got some fancy of his own the
same as Robin has, though you wouldn't think it to look at him.
I'd like to know what it is."

It was a fancy--an old, old fancy--it harked back nearly thirty
years--to the dark days of youth and passion and unending tragedy
whose anguish, as it then seemed, could never pass--but which,
nevertheless, had faded with the years as they flowed by. And yet
left him as he was and had been. He was not sentimental about it,
he smiled at himself drearily--though never at the memory--when
it rose again and, through its vague power, led him to do strange
things curiously verging on the emotional and eccentric. But even
the child--who quite loathed him for some fantastic infant reason
of her own--even the child had her part in it. His soul oddly
withdrew itself into a far remoteness as he walked away and
Piccadilly became a shadow and a dream.

Dowson went home and began to pack neatly in a box the neglected
doll and the toys which had accompanied her. Robin seeing her
doing it, asked a question.

"Are they going back to the shop?"

"No. Lord Coombe is letting me give them to a little girl who is
very poor and has to lie in bed because her back hurts her. His
lordship is so kind he does not want you to be troubled with them.
He is not angry. He is too good to be angry."

That was not true, thought Robin. He had done THAT THING she
remembered! Goodness could not have done it. Only badness.

When Dowson brought in a new doll and other wonderful things, a
little hand enclosed her wrist quite tightly as she was unpacking
the boxes. It was Robin's and the small creature looked at her
with a questioning, half appealing, half fierce.

"Did he send them, Dowson?"

"They are a present from me," Dowson answered comfortably, and
Robin said again,

"I want to kiss you. I like to kiss you. I do."

To those given to psychical interests and speculations, it might
have suggested itself that, on the night when the creature who had
seemed to Andrews a soft tissued puppet had suddenly burst forth
into defiance and fearless shrillness, some cerebral change had
taken place in her. From that hour her softness had become a thing
of the past. Dowson had not found a baby, but a brooding, little,
passionate being. She was neither insubordinate nor irritable,
but Dowson was conscious of a certain intensity of temperament
in her. She knew that she was always thinking of things of which
she said almost nothing. Only a sensible motherly curiosity, such
as Dowson's could have made discoveries, but a rare question put
by the child at long intervals sometimes threw a faint light.
There were questions chiefly concerning mothers and their habits
and customs. They were such as, in their very unconsciousness,
revealed a strange past history. Lights were most unconsciously
thrown by Mrs. Gareth-Lawless herself. Her quite amiable detachment
from all shadow of responsibility, her brilliantly unending
occupations, her goings in and out, the flocks of light, almost
noisy, intimates who came in and out with her revealed much to a
respectable person who had soberly watched the world.

"The Lady Downstairs is my mother, isn't she?" Robin inquired
gravely once.

"Yes, my dear," was Dowson's answer.

A pause for consideration of the matter and then from Robin:

"All mothers are not alike, Dowson, are they?"

"No, my dear," with wisdom.

Though she was not yet seven, life had so changed for her that it
was a far cry back to the Spring days in the Square Gardens. She
went back, however, back into that remote ecstatic past.

"The Lady Downstairs is not--alike," she said at last, "Donal's
mother loved him. She let him sit in the same chair with her and
read in picture books. She kissed him when he was in bed."

Jennings, the young footman who was a humourist, had, of course,
heard witty references to Robin's love affair while in attendance,
and he had equally, of course, repeated them below stairs. Therefore,

Dowson had heard vague rumours but had tactfully refrained from
mentioning the subject to her charge.

"Who was Donal?" she said now, but quite quietly. Robin did not
know that a confidante would have made her first agony easier to
bear. She was not really being confidential now, but, realizing
Dowson's comfortable kindliness, she knew that it would be safe
to speak to her.

"He was a big boy," she answered keeping her eyes on Dowson's
face. "He laughed and ran and jumped. His eyes--" she stopped
there because she could not explain what she had wanted to say about
these joyous young eyes, which were the first friendly human ones
she had known.

"He lives in Scotland," she began again. "His mother loved him.
He kissed me. He went away. Lord Coombe sent him."

Dawson could not help her start.

"Lord Coombe!" she exclaimed.

Robin came close to her and ground her little fist into her knee,
until its plumpness felt almost bruised.

"He is bad--bad--bad!" and she looked like a little demon.

Being a wise woman, Dowson knew at once that she had come upon a
hidden child volcano, and it would be well to let it seethe into
silence. She was not a clever person, but long experience had
taught her that there were occasions when it was well to leave
a child alone. This one would not answer if she were questioned.
She would only become stubborn and furious, and no child should
be goaded into fury. Dowson had, of course, learned that the boy
was a relative of his lordship's and had a strict Scottish mother
who did not approve of the slice of a house. His lordship might
have been concerned in the matter--or he might not. But at least
Dowson had gained a side light. And how the little thing had cared!
Actually as if she had been a grown girl, Dowson found herself
thinking uneasily.

She was rendered even a trifle more uneasy a few days later
when she came upon Robin sitting in a corner on a footstool with
a picture book on her knee, and she recognized it as the one she
had discovered during her first exploitation of the resources
of the third floor nursery. It was inscribed "Donal" and Robin
was not looking at it alone, but at something she held in her
hand--something folded in a crumpled, untidy bit of paper.

Making a reason for nearing her corner, Dowson saw what the paper
held. The contents looked like the broken fragments of some dried
leaves. The child was gazing at them with a piteous, bewildered
face--so piteous that Dowson was sorry.

"Do you want to keep those?" she asked.

"Yes," with a caught breath. "Yes."

"I will make you a little silk bag to hold them in," Dowson said,
actually feeling rather piteous herself. The poor, little lamb
with her picture book and her bits of broken dry leaves--almost
like senna.

She sat down near her and Robin left her footstool and came to her.
She laid the picture book on her lap and the senna like fragments
of leaves on its open page.

"Donal brought it to show me," she quavered. "He made pretty things
on the leaves--with his dirk." She recalled too much--too much all
at once. Her eyes grew rounder and larger with inescapable woe;
"Donal did! Donal!" And suddenly she hid her face deep in Dowson's
skirts and the tempest broke. She was so small a thing--so
inarticulate--and these were her dead! Dowson could only catch
her in her arms, drag her up on her knee, and rock her to and fro.

"Good Lord! Good Lord!" was her inward ejaculation. "And she not
seven! What'll she do when she's seventeen! She's one of them
there's no help for!"

It was the beginning of an affection. After this, when Dowson tucked
Robin in bed each night, she kissed her. She told her stories and
taught her to sew and to know her letters. Using some discretion
she found certain little playmates for her in the Gardens. But there
were occasions when all did not go well, and some pretty, friendly
child, who had played with Robin for a few days, suddenly seemed
to be kept strictly by her nurse's side. Once, when she was about
ten years old, a newcomer, a dramatic and too richly dressed little
person, after a day of wonderful imaginative playing appeared in the
Gardens the morning following to turn an ostentatious cold shoulder.

"What is the matter?" asked Robin.

"Oh, we can't play with you any more," with quite a flounce
superiority.

"Why not?" said Robin, becoming haughty herself.

"We can't. It's because of Lord Coombe." The little person had
really no definite knowledge of how Lord Coombe was concerned,
but certain servants' whisperings of names and mysterious phrases
had conveyed quite an enjoyable effect of unknown iniquity connected
with his lordship.

Robin said nothing to Dowson, but walked up and down the paths
reflecting and building a slow fire which would continue to burn
in her young heart. She had by then passed the round, soft baby
period and had entered into that phase when bodies and legs grow
long and slender and small faces lose their first curves and begin
to show sharper modeling.

Accepting the situation in its entirety, Dowson had seen that it
was well to first reach Lord Coombe with any need of the child's.
Afterwards, the form of presenting it to Mrs. Gareth-Lawless must
be gone through, but if she were first spoken to any suggestion
might be forgotten or intentionally ignored.

Dowson became clever in her calculations as to when his lordship
might be encountered and where--as if by chance, and therefore,
quite respectfully. Sometimes she remotely wondered if he himself
did not make such encounters easy for her. But his manner never
altered in its somewhat stiff, expressionless chill of indifference.
He never was kindly in his manner to the child if he met her.
Dowson felt him at once casual and "lofty." Robin might have been
a bit of unconsidered rubbish, the sight of which slightly bored
him. Yet the singular fact remained that it was to him one must
carefully appeal.

One afternoon Feather swept him, with one or two others, into the
sitting-room with the round window in which flowers grew. Robin
was sitting at a low table making pothooks with a lead pencil on
a piece of paper Dowson had given her. Dowson had, in fact, set
her at the task, having heard from Jennings that his lordship
and the other afternoon tea drinkers were to be brought into the
"Palace" as Feather ironically chose to call it. Jennings rather
liked Dowson, and often told her little things she wanted to know.
It was because Lord Coombe would probably come in with the rest
that Dowson had set the low, white table in the round windows and
suggested the pothooks.

In course of time there was a fluttering and a chatter in the
corridor. Feather was bringing some new guests, who had not seen
the place before.

"This is where my daughter lives. She is much grander than I am,"
she said.

"Stand up, Miss Robin, and make your curtsey," whispered Dowson.
Robin did as she was told, and Mrs. Gareth-Lawless' pretty brows
ran up.

"Look at her legs," she said. "She's growing like Jack and the
Bean Stalk--though, I suppose, it was only the Bean Stalk that
grew. She'll stick through the top of the house soon. Look at her
legs, I ask you."

She always spoke as if the child were an inanimate object and she
had, by this time and by this means, managed to sweep from Robin's
mind all the old, babyish worship of her loveliness and had planted
in its place another feeling. At this moment the other feeling
surged and burned.

"They are beautiful legs," remarked a laughing young man jocularly,
"but perhaps she does not particularly want us to look at them.
Wait until she begins skirt dancing." And everybody laughed at once
and the child stood rigid--the object of their light ridicule--not
herself knowing that her whole little being was cursing them aloud.

Coombe stepped to the little table and bestowed a casual glance
on the pencil marks.

"What is she doing?" he asked as casually of Dowson.

"She is learning to make pothooks, my lord," Dowson answered.
"She's a child that wants to be learning things. I've taught her
her letters and to spell little words. She's quick--and old enough,
your lordship."

"Learning to read and write!" exclaimed Feather.

"Presumption, I call it. I don't know how to read and write--least
I don't know how to spell. Do you know how to spell, Collie?" to
the young man, whose name was Colin. "Do you, Genevieve? Do you,
Artie?"

"You can't betray me into vulgar boasting," said Collie. "Who does
in these days? Nobody but clerks at Peter Robinson's."

"Lord Coombe does--but that's his tiresome superior way," said
Feather.

"He's nearly forty years older than most of you. That is the
reason," Coombe commented. "Don't deplore your youth and innocence."

They swept through the rooms and examined everything in them.
The truth was that the--by this time well known--fact that the
unexplainable Coombe had built them made them a curiosity, and
a sort of secret source of jokes. The party even mounted to the
upper story to go through the bedrooms, and, it was while they
were doing this, that Coombe chose to linger behind with Dowson.

He remained entirely expressionless for a few moments. Dowson did
not in the least gather whether he meant to speak to her or not.
But he did.

"You meant," he scarcely glanced at her, "that she was old enough
for a governess."

"Yes, my lord," rather breathless in her hurry to speak before
she heard the high heels tapping on the staircase again. "And one
that's a good woman as well as clever, if I may take the liberty.
A good one if--"

"If a good one would take the place?"

Dowson did not attempt refutation or apology. She knew better.

He said no more, but sauntered out of the room.

As he did so, Robin stood up and made the little "charity bob" of
a curtsey which had been part of her nursery education. She was
too old now to have refused him her hand, but he never made any
advances to her. He acknowledged her curtsey with the briefest
nod.

Not three minutes later the high heels came tapping down the
staircase and the small gust of visitors swept away also.






CHAPTER XVI





The interview which took place between Feather and Lord Coombe a
few days later had its own special character.

"A governess will come here tomorrow at eleven o'clock," he said.
"She is a Mademoiselle Valle. She is accustomed to the educating
of young children. She will present herself for your approval.
Benby has done all the rest."

Feather flushed to her fine-spun ash-gold hair.

"What on earth can it matter!" she cried.

"It does not matter to you," he answered; "it chances--for the
time being--to matter to ME."

"Chances!" she flamed forth--it was really