ght in that prairie land--and there was that in it which made her
feel that she must not give way any further.  In Orlando's veins was
Southern sap, mixed with Northern blood; in Orlando's eyes was a sudden
look belonging to that which defies the law.

"Don't--don't look like that," she exclaimed.  "Oh, Orlando!"

Once more he heard her speak his name, and it was like salve to a wound.
He put a hand upon himself.  "I'll go to Tralee," he said, "if you don't
mind waiting here alone."

"I can't.  I will not wait alone.  If you go, then I'll go too
somehow....  It's twelve miles.  You couldn't get there till midnight,
and you couldn't get back here with a wagon for another couple of hours
from that.  It would be daylight then.  I can't stay here alone.  I'm
frightened, and I'm cold."

"Wait a minute," said Orlando.

He ran back to the dead horse, unloosed the saddle from its back,
detached from it a rain-coat strapped to the pommel, and brought it to
her.

"This will keep you warm," he said.  "It isn't cold to-night.  You only
feel cold because you're upset and nervous."

"I'm frightened," she answered; "frightened of everything.  Listen!
Don't you hear something stirring--there!"  She peered fearfully into
the dusk behind them.

"Probably," he answered.  "There are lots of prairie dogs and things
about.  The more you listen, the more you hear on the prairie, especially
at night."

There was silence for a moment, and then he added: "My broncho'll steer
straight for Slow Down Ranch, and that'll bring my men.  You can be quite
sure there'll be a search-party out from Tralee, too, at the first streak
of dawn.  You can't make the journey, so the only thing to be done is to
wait here.  That coat will keep you from getting cold, and I'll cut a lot
of long grass and make you a bed here.  Also, the grass is warm, and I'll
cover you with it and with pine branches."

"I can't lie down," she answered.  "No, I can't; I'm afraid.  It's all so
strange, and to-morrow, he--"

"There's nothing to be frightened about," he interrupted.  "Nothing at
all, Louise."

It was the first time he had ever addressed her by name, and it made her
shiver with a new feeling.  It seemed to tell a long, long story without
words.

"You must do what I ask you to do--whatever I ask you to do," he
repeated.  "Will you?"

"Yes, anything you ask me I'll do," she answered, and then added quickly,
"For you won't ask me to do anything I don't want to do.  That's the
difference.  You understand, Orlando."

A few minutes later he had found a suitable place to make a kind of bed
of grass for her, and had prepared it, with his knife, cutting the
branches of small shrubs and grass and the scanty branches of the pine.
When it was finished, he came to her and said:

"It's all ready.  Come and lie down, and I'll cover you up."

She got to her feet slowly, for she was in pain greater than she knew, so
absorbed was her mind in this new life suddenly enveloping her, and then
she said in a low voice: "No, not yet; I can't yet.  I want to sit here.
I've never felt the night like this before.  It's wonderful, and I'm not
nearly so cold now.  I know I oughtn't to be cold at all, in the middle
of summer like this."  She paused, and seemed lost in contemplation of
the sky.  After a moment she added: "I never knew I could feel so far
away from all the world as I do tonight.  But the sky seems so near, and
the moon and the stars so friendly."

"You haven't slept out of doors as I have hundreds of times," he
answered.  "The night and I are brothers; the stars are my little
cousins; and the moon"--he giggled in his boyish way--"is my maiden aunt.
She's so prudish and so kind and friendly, as you say.  She's like an
aunt I had--Aunt Samantha.  She was my father's sister.  I used to love
her to visit my mother.  She always brought me things, and she gave them
to me as if they were on silver dishes--like a ceremony.  She was so
prim, I used to call her Aunt Primrose.  She made me feel as if I could
do anything I liked and break any law I pleased.  But all the time, like
a saint in a stained-glass window, she always seemed to be saying, 'Yes,
you'd like to, but you mustn't.'  She was just like the moon.  I'm well
acquainted with the moon, and--"

"Hush!" Louise interrupted.  "Don't you hear something stirring--there,
behind us?"

He laughed.  "Of course something's always 'stirring behind us' on the
prairie, and things you can't hear at all in the day are almost loud at
night.  There are thousands of sounds that never get to your ears when
the sun is busy, but when Aunt Primrose Moon is saying, 'Hush!  Hush!' to
the naughty children of this world, you can hear a whole new population
at work, cracking away like mad.  Say, ain't I letting myself go to-
night?" he added, giggling again and sitting down beside her.  "I'm
going to give you just half an hour, and at the end of that half-hour
you've got to go to sleep."

"I can't--I can't," she said scarcely above a whisper.  As though in
response to an unspoken thought, he said casually: "I'm going to walk
awhile when you've lain down, and then--" He pointed to a spot about
twenty yards away.  "Do you see the two big stones there?  Well, when
I've finished my walk and my talk with Aunty Primrose"--he laughed up
at the moon--"I'm going to sit down there and snooze till daylight."  He
pointed again: "Right over there beside those two rocks.  That's my bed.
Do you see?"

She did not reply at once, but a long sigh came from her lips.  "You'll
be cold," she said.

"No, it's a hot night," he answered.  "I'm too hot as it is."  And he
loosened his heavy red shirt at the throat.

"If I've got to go to bed in half an hour," she said presently, "tell me
more about your Aunt Samantha, and about yourself, and your home before
you came out here, and what you did when you were a little boy--tell me
everything about yourself."

She was forgetting Tralee for the moment, and the man who raised his hand
against her yesterday, and the life she had lived.  Or was it only that
she had grown young during these last two months, and the young can so
easily forget!

"You want to hear?  You really want to hear?" he asked.  "Say, it won't
be a very interesting story.  Better let me tell you about the broncho-
busting today."

"No, I want to hear about yourself."  She looked intently at him for an
instant, and then her eyes closed and the long lashes touched her cheek.
There was something very wilful in her beauty, and her body too had
delicate, melancholy lines strange in one so young.  She was not
conscious that, in her dreamy abstraction, she was leaning towards him.

It was but an instant, though it seemed to him an interminable time, in
which he fought the fierce desire to clasp her in his arms, and kiss the
lips which, to his ears, said things more wonderful than he had ever
dreamed of in his friendship with the night and the primrose moon.  He
knew, however, that if he did, she would not go back to Tralee to-morrow;
that tomorrow she would defy the leviathan; and that tomorrow he would
not have the courage to say the things he must say to the evil-hearted
master of Tralee, who, he knew, would challenge them with ugly
accusations.  He must be able to look old Mazarine fearlessly in the
face; he would not be the slave of opportunity.  He was going to fight
clean.  She was here beside him in the warm loneliness of the northern
world, and he was full-grown in body and brain, with all the human
emotions alive in him; yet he would fight clean.

Not for a half-hour, but for nearly an hour he told her what she wished
to know, while she listened in a happy dream; and when at last she lay
down, she refused his coverlet of dry grass, saying that she was quite
warm.  She declared that she did not even need the coat he had taken from
the saddle of the dead horse, but he wrapped it around her, and, saying
"Goodnight" almost brusquely, marched away in the light of the dying
moon.

The night wore on.  At first Louise's ears were sensitive to every sound,
and there were stirrings in the hillock by which she slept, but she
comforted herself with the thought that they were the stirrings of
lonely little waifs of nature like herself.  Though she dared not let the
thought take form, yet she feared, too, the sound of human footsteps.  By
and by, however, in the sweet quiet of the night and the somnolent light
of the moon, sleep captured her.  When at last Orlando's footsteps did
crush the dry grass, the sound failed to reach her ears, for it was then
not very far from daylight, and she had slept for several hours.  Sleep
had not touched Orlando's eyes when, sitting down by the stones which
were to mark his resting-place, he waited for Louise to wake.





ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Highsterics, they call it
World was only the size of four walls to a sick person






WILD YOUTH

By Gilbert Parker


Volume 2.


X.        THE MOON WAS NOT ALONE
XI.       LOUISE
XII.      MAN UNNATURAL
XIII.     ORLANDO GIVES A WARNING
XIV.      FILION AND FIONA--ALSO PATSY KERNAGHAN
XV.       OUTWARD BOUND
XVI.      AT THE CROSS TRAILS
XVII.     THE SUPERIOR MAN
XVIII.    YOUTH HAS ITS WAY




CHAPTER X

THE MOON WAS NOT ALONE

Out on the prairie under the light of the stars a man had fought the
first great battle of his life, and had emerged victorious.  There are no
drawn battles in the struggles of the soul.  As Orlando fought, he was
tortured by the thought that none would believe the truth to-morrow when
it was told; and that there would be penalty though there was no crime.

As for Louise, she could have returned, almost blindly defiant, to her
world, hand in hand with Orlando; and yet, when morning came, and her
eyes opened on the prairie at day-break, with life stirring everywhere,
she was glad of the victory--though the shadow of a great trouble to come
was showing in her eyes.

She knew what she had to face at Tralee, and that she had no proof of
her perfect innocence.  It was of little use for them to call upon Heaven
to witness what the night had been; and Joel Mazarine, who distrusted
every man and woman, would distrust her with a sternness which guilt
only could effectively defy!

Orlando's enforced gaiety as he invited her to a breakfast of a couple of
biscuits, left from yesterday's broncho-busting, heartened her; yet both
were conscious of the make-believe.  They realized they were helpless in
the grip of harsh circumstance.  It was almost enough to make them take
advantage of calumny and the traps set for them by Fate, and join hands
for ever.

As they looked into each other's eyes, the same hopeless yet reckless
thought flickered--flickered, and vanished.  Yet as they looked out over
the prairie towards Tralee, to which Louise must presently return, a
rebellious sort of joy possessed them.

                    .........................

The discord of their thoughts was like music beside what had passed at
Tralee.  There nothing relieved the black, sullen rage of Joel Mazarine.
He had returned to the house where his voice had always been able to
summon his slaves, and to know that they would come--Chinaman, half-
breed, wife.  Now he called, and the wife did not come.  On the new
chestnut she had ridden away on the prairie, so the halfbreed woman had
said, as hard as he could go.  He had scanned the prairie till night
came, without seeing a sign of her.

His black imagination instantly conceived the worst that Louise might do.
It was not in him ever to have the decent alternative.  He questioned the
half-breed woman closely; he savagely interrogated the Chinaman; and then
he declared that they lied to him, that they knew more than they said;
and when he was unable to bear it any longer, he mounted his horse and
galloped over to Slow Down Ranch.  As he went, he kept swearing to
himself that Louise had flown thither; and anger made his brain
malignant.  He could scarcely frame his words intelligibly when he
arrived at Slow Down Ranch.

There he was presently convinced that his worst suspicions were true, for
Orlando also had not returned.  He saw it all.  They had agreed to meet;
they had met; they had eloped and were gone!  His beady eyes were those
of serpents watching for the instant to strike, and his words burst over
the head of Orlando's mother like shrapnel.

For once, however, the futile, fantastic mother rose higher than herself,
and declared that her son had never run away from, or with, anything in
his life; that he--Joel Mazarine--had never had anything worth her son's
running away with; and that her son, when he came back, would make him
ask forgiveness as he had never asked it of his God.

Indeed, the gaudy little lady stood in her doorway and chattered her
maledictions after him, as he rode back again towards Tralee muttering
curses which no class leader in the Methodist Church ought even to quote
for pious purposes.

Joel Mazarine had flattered himself that he had everything life could
give--money, property and a garden of youth in which his old age could
loiter and be glad; and that he should be defied suddenly and his garden
made desolate, that the lines of his good fortune should be crossed,
caused him to rage like any heathen.  His monstrous egotism made him like
some infuriated bull in the arena, with the banderillos sticking in his
hot hide.

The two people whom he cursed were in Elysium compared to the place where
he tortured himself.  There are desert birds that silently surround a
rattlesnake, as he sleeps, with little bundles of cactus-heads and their
million needles, so that, when the reptile wakes, it cannot escape
through the palisade of bristling weapons by which it is surrounded; and
in ghoulish anger it strikes its fangs into its own body until it dies.
Just such a helpless rage held Joel Mazarine, and his religion did not
suggest seeking comfort at that Throne of Grace to which he had so
publicly prayed on occasions.

Night held him prowling in his own coverts; morning found him yellow and
mottled, malicious, but now silent.  He somehow felt that he would know
the truth and the whole truth soon.  He ate his pork and beans for
breakfast with the appetite of a ravenous animal.  He put pieces of the
pork chop in his mouth with his fingers; he gulped his coffee; but all
the time he kept his eyes on the open door, as though he expected some
messenger to announce that Providence had stricken his rebellious wife
by sudden death.  It seemed to him that Nature and Jehovah must unite to
avenge him.

After three hours of further waiting he determined to go into Askatoon.
He would have bills printed advertising for Louise as he had done for
stray cattle; he would have notices put in the newspapers proclaiming
that his wife was strayed or stolen and must be put in pound when
discovered.  At the moment he decided thus, he caught sight of a wagon
approaching from the north.  It was near enough for him to see that there
was a woman in it; and the eyes of the half-breed hired woman, possessing
the Indian far-sight, saw that it was Louise, and told her master so.

Ten minutes later Louise stood in front of the Master of Tralee, and the
Master of Tralee filled the doorway.  "What you want here?" he asked of
her with blurred rage in his voice.

"I want to go to my room," Louise answered quietly but firmly.  "Please
stand aside."

Now that Louise was face to face with her foe, a new spirit had suddenly
possessed her; and standing beside his broncho, a hand on its neck,
Orlando almost smiled, for this was Louise with a new nature.  There was
defiance and courage in her face, not the apprehension which had almost
overwhelmed her as they started back to Tralee, having been rescued by
the search-party from Slow Down Ranch.  The night had done something to
Louise which was making itself felt.

"You think you can come back here after what you've done--after where
you've been--the likes of you!" Mazarine snarled unmoving.  "You think
you can!"

Louise turned swiftly to look at Orlando and the three men, one riding
and two in the wagon, as though to call them in evidence of her
innocence; but there came to her eyes a sudden fire of courage, and she
turned again to Mazarine and said:

"I'm your wife by the law--just as much your wife to-day as yesterday.
You treat me before strangers as if I were a criminal.  I'm not going to
be treated that way.  I've got my rights.  Stand back and let me in--
stand back, Joel Mazarine," she said, and she took a step forward, child
though she was, as if she would strike him.  Something had transformed
her.

To Orlando she seemed scarcely real.  The shrinking, colourless child of
a few weeks had suddenly become a woman--and such a woman!

"I'll tell you in my own time where I've been and what I've done," she
continued.  "I want to go upstairs.  Stand out of the doorway."

There was a movement behind her.  A man in the wagon and the one on his
horse seemed to grow angry and threatening.  The ranchman dropped from
his horse.  Only Orlando stood cool, quiet and ominously watchful.
Mazarine did not fail to notice the movement of the two men.

Presently Orlando's voice said slowly and calmly: "Stand back, Mazarine.
Let her go to her room.  This is a free country, and she's free in her
own house.  It's her house until you've proved she's got no right there."
Then he added with sharp insistence and menace: "Stand back--damn you,
Mazarine!"

Orlando did not move as he spoke, but there was a look in his face which
an enemy would not care to see.  Mazarine, in spite of his rage, quailed
before the sharp, menacing voice so little in tune with its reputation
for giggling, and stepping back, he let Louise pass.  Then he plunged
forward out of the doorway.

"That's right.  Come outside," said Orlando scornfully.  "Come out into
the open."  His voice became lower.  There was something deadly in it,
boy as he was.  "Come out, you hypocrite, and listen to what I've got to
say.  Listen to the truth I've got to tell you.  If you don't listen,
I'll horsewhip you, that'd horsewhip a woman, till you can't stand--you
loathsome old dog.  .  .  .  Yes, he took his horsewhip to her
yesterday," he added to the spectators, who muttered angrily, for the
West is chivalrous towards women.

Something near to madness possessed Orlando.  No one had ever seen him
as he was at that moment.  Down through generations had come to him some
iron thing that suddenly revealed itself in him, as something had just
suddenly revealed itself in Louise.

The other three men--two in the wagon and one beside his horse-stared at
him as though they had seen him for the first time.  They were unready
for the passion that possessed him.  Not a muscle of his body appeared to
move; he was as motionless as the trunk of a tree.  But in his eyes and
his voice there was, as one of the ranchers said afterwards, "Hell--and
then some more."

"Listen to me," he said again, and his voice was low and husky now.
"Yesterday I was broncho-busting--"

Thereupon he told the whole story of what had happened since he had seen
Louise thrown from her chestnut on the prairie.  He told how Louise was
too shaken and ill to attempt the journey back to Tralee, and how they
had camped where they were, near the dead horse.

As Orlando talked, the old man was seized by terrible hatred and
jealousy.  "You needn't tell me the rest," he broke in, his hands
savagely opening and shutting.  "I guess I understand everything."

The words had scarcely left his mouth when from the wagon a man said:
"Wait--wait, Mister.  I got something to say."

He sprang to the ground, and ran between Mazarine and Orlando.

"This is where I come in," he said, as Louise's face appeared at an upper
window, and she listened.  "You don't know me.  Well, I know you.
Everybody knows you, and nobody likes you.  I know what happened last
night.  I'm a brother of your fellow Christian Rigby, the druggist, over
there in Askatoon.  He's a Methodist.  I'm not.  I'm only good.  I been a
lot o' things, and nothing in the end.  Well, you hearken to my tale.

"I was tramping with my bundle on my back acrost the prairie to Askatoon
from Waterway.  I'm a sundowner, as they say in Australia.  When the sun
goes down, I down to my bed wherever I be on the prairie.  I was asleep-
I'd been half drunk--when the chestnut threw your wife and broke its leg;
but I was awake when he rode up."  He pointed to Orlando.  "I was awake,
and so I watched.  I knew who she was; I knew who he was."  He pointed to
Orlando again.  "I guessed I'd see something.  I did.

"I watched them two people all night.  There was a moon.  I could see.
I wasn't fifteen feet from her all night, and I jined the others when
they come to rescue.  I guess I got the truth, and I guess if you want
any evidence about me you can get it.  Lots of people know me out here.
I ain't got any house or any home, and I get drunk sometimes, and I ain't
got money to buy meals with, lots of times, but nobody ever knowed me
lie.  That's what ruined me--I been too truthful.  Well, I'm not lying
now, Mister.  I'm telling you the God-help-me truth.  He's a gentleman."
He pointed again to Orlando.  "He's a gentleman from away back in God's
country, wherever that is, and she's the best of the best of the very
best.

"You can bet your greasy old boots and ugly face that you've got a bigger
fortune in that wife of yours than you've any right to.  Say, she's a
queen, Mister, and don't you forget it, and"--he drawled out his words--
"you go inside your house and get down on your knees, same as you do in
the Meeting House, and thank the Lord you love so well for all his
blessings.  As my friend here said a little while back"--he pointed to
Orlando again--"'Damn you, Mazarine!'  Go and hide yourself."

The old man stood for a moment dumbfounded; then, without a word, he
turned and hunched inside the house.

"He raised his horsewhip ag'in' a woman, did he?" said one of Orlando's
ranchmen.  "Ain't that a matter we got to take notice of?"

"Boys," said Orlando as he motioned them to be off, "Mrs. Mazarine can
take care of herself.  You'll forget what's happened, if you want to play
up to her.  If she needs you, she'll be sure to let you know."

A moment afterwards they were all on their way on the road leading to
Slow Down Ranch.

"He didn't giggle much that time," said one of the ranchmen of Orlando,
as they moved on.




CHAPTER XI

LOUISE

The Young Doctor had had a trying day.  Certain of his cases had given
him anxiety; his drives had been long and fatiguing; he had had little
sleep for several nights; and he was what Patsy Kernaghan had called
"brittle"; for when Patsy was in a vexed condition, he used to say, "I'm
so brittle I'll break if you look at me."  As the Young Doctor drew his
chair up to the supper-table and looked at his food with a critical air,
he was very brittle.

For one born in Enniskillen he had an even nature, but its evenness was
more the result of mental control than temperament.  He sighed as he
looked at the marrow bones which, as a rule, gave him joy when their turn
came in the weekly menu; he eyed askance the baked potatoes; and the
salad waiting for his skilled hand only gave him an extra feeling of
fatigue.

Most men in a like state say, "I don't know what's the matter with me,"
and yet many a one has been stimulated out of it, away from it, by the
soft voice and friendly hand of a woman.

There was, however, no woman to distract the overworked Young Doctor by
her freshness, drawn from the reservoir of her vitality; and that was a
pity, because, as Patsy Kernaghan many a time said: "Aw, Doctor dear,
what's the good of a tongue to a wagon if there's only wan horse to draw
it!  Shure, you'll think a lot more of yourself whin you're able to stand
at the head of your own table and say grace for two at least, and
thanksgiving for manny, if it's the will of God."

The Young Doctor did not know why he was so brittle, but the truth is he
was feeding on himself, and that is a poor business.  Every dog knows it
is good to feed on the knuckle of a goat if he hasn't got a beefbone, and
every real man knows--though to know anything at all he must have been
married--that any marriage is better than no marriage at all; because
whether it's happy or unhappy, it makes you concerned for some one
besides yourself, if you have any soul or sense at all.

The Young Doctor was under the delusion that he loved his lonely table
and the making of a simple salad for a simple man, but then he came from
Ireland and had imagination; and that is always a curse when it isn't a
blessing, for there is nothing between the two.  At the end of his
troubled day he almost cursed the salad as it crinkled in the dish just
slightly rubbed with garlic.  He was turning away in apathy from it--from
the bones with the marrow oozing out of the ends, from the bursting baked
potatoes, from the beautiful crusts of brown bread, when he heard the
door-bell ring.  At the sound his face set as though it were mortar.  He
wanted no patients this night; but from the peremptory sound of the bell
he was sure some one had come who needed medicine or the knife, and he
could refuse neither; for was he not at everybody's beck and call, the
Medicine Man whose door was everybody's door!

"Damnation!" he said aloud, and turned towards the door expectantly.

Then he bitted himself to wait; and he did not wait long.  Presently he
heard a voice say, "I must see him," and the door opened wide, and Louise
Mazarine stepped into the room.  Her face was pale and distraught; her
blue eyes, with their long, melancholy lashes, stared at him in appealing
apprehension.  Her lips were almost white; her hands trembled out towards
him.

"I've come--I've come!" she said.  It had the finality of the last
chapter of a book.

The Young Doctor closed the door, ignoring for the instant the hands held
out to him.  After all, he was a very sane Young Doctor, and he had the
faculty of keeping his head, and his heart, and his own counsel.  Also he
knew there was an inquisitive old servant in the hallway.

When the door was closed, he turned round on Louise slowly, and then he
held out his hands to her, for she was shrinking away, as though he had
repulsed her.  He pressed her trembling hands in the way that only
faithful friendship shows, and said:

"Yes, I know you've come, but tell me what you've come for."

"I couldn't bear it any longer," she said brokenly.  "I'm not made of
steel or stone.  It's been terrible.  He doesn't speak to me except to
order me to do this or that.  I haven't done anything wrong, and I won't
be treated so.  I won't!  When he made me kneel down by him in the trail
and tried to make me pray to be forgiven of my sins, I couldn't stand it.
I don't know what my sins are, and I won't be converted if I don't want
to.  I'm not a slave.  I'm of age.  I'm twenty."

There was no sign of fatigue now in the Young Doctor's face.  Something
had called him out of himself, and this human need had done what a wife's
hand might have done, or the welcome of a child.

"No, you're not twenty," he declared, with a friendly smile.  "You aren't
ten.  You are only one.  In fact, I think you're only just born!"

He did not speak as lightly as the words read.  In his voice there was
that compassionate irony with which men shield those for whom they care.
It means protection and defence.  Somehow she seemed to him like a small
bird on its first flight from the nest, or, as Patsy Kernaghan would have
said, "a tame lamb loose in a zoolyogical gardin."

"So because you won't pray and can't bear it any longer, you run away
from him, and come to me!" the other remarked with a sorry smile, pouring
out a glass of wine from a decanter that stood on the table.

"Drink this," he said presently, pushing her down gently into a chair
with one hand and holding the glass to her lips.  "Drink it every drop.
As I said, you've only run away from one master to fall into another
master's hands.  You're a wicked girl.  Drink it--every drop.  .  .  .
That's right."

He took the empty glass from her, put it on the table, and then stood and
looked at her meditatively, fastening her eyes with his own.  More than
her eyes were fastened, however.  Her mind was also under control: but
that was because she believed in him so.

"Yes, you're a wicked girl," he said decisively.

She shuddered and shrank back.  In her eyes was a helpless look, very
different from that which she had given not so many days before when,
with Orlando Guise behind her, she had defied her aged husband in his
doorway, and her defiance had moved him from her path.  Then she had been
inspired by the fact that the man she loved was near her, that she had
been wrongfully accused and was ready to fight.  Afterwards, however,
when she was alone, the sterile presence of Joel Mazarine, his merciless
eyes, his hopeless religious tyranny, had worn upon her as his past
violence had never done.

"Wicked!"  Did this man, then, believe her guilty?  Did he, of all men,
think that the night upon the prairie alone with Orlando had been her
undoing?  Had not the brother of Rigby the chemist borne witness with his
own eyes to her complete innocence?  If the Young Doctor disbelieved,
then indeed she was undone.

"You don't think that of me--of me!" she gasped, her lips all white
again.  She got to her feet excitedly.  "You shall not believe it of me."

"No, I did not say I believed that," the other remarked almost casually.
"But if I did believe it, I don't know that it would make much difference
to me.  Fate, or God Almighty, or whatever it was, had stacked the cards
against you.  When I said it was wicked, I meant you did wrong in rushing
away from your husband and coming to me.  I suppose you have definitely
left your husband--eh?  You've 'left' him, as they say?"

He had an incorrigible sense of humour, as well as an infinite common
sense.  He wanted to break this spell of tense emotion which possessed
her.  So he pursued a new course.

"Don't you think it's rather hard on me?" he continued.  "I'm a lone man
in this house, with only one old woman to protect me, and I'm unmarried.
I've a reputation to lose, and there are lots of mothers and daughters
hereabouts.  Besides, a medical practice is hard to get and not easy to
keep.  What do you mean by making a refuge of me, when there's nothing
for me in it, not even the satisfaction of going into the Divorce Court
with you?  You wicked Mrs. Mazarine!"

"Oh, don't speak like that!" Louise interjected.  "Please don't.  Don't
scold me.  I had to come.  I was going mad."

The Young Doctor had the case well in hand.  He had eased the terrible
tension; he was slowly reducing her to the normal.  It was the only thing
to do.

"What did Mazarine do or say to you that made you run away?  Come now,
didn't you first make up your mind to go to Slow Down Ranch--to Orlando?"

She flushed.  "Yes, but only for a minute.  Then I thought of you,
because I knew you could help me as no one else could.  Everybody
believes in you.  But then Li Choo--"

"Oh, Li Choo!  So Li Choo comes into this, eh?  So he said fly to
Orlando, eh?  Well, that's what he would do.  But why Li Choo--
a Chinaman?  Tell me, what does Li Choo know?"

Quickly she told him the story of the day when Joel Mazarine had almost
surprised her in Orlando's room; how Li Choo had saved the situation by
falling down the staircase with the priceless porcelain, and how Mazarine
had kicked him--"manhandled" him, as they say in the West.

"Chinamen don't like being kicked, especially Chinamen of Li Choo's
station," remarked the Young Doctor meditatively.  "You don't know, of
course, that Li Choo was a prince or a big bug of some sort in his own
country.  Why he left China I don't know, but I do chance to know that
if another Chinky meets Li Choo carrying a basket on his shoulders, or a
package in his hand, he kow-tows, and takes it away from him, and carries
it himself.  .  .  .  No, I don't know why Li Choo is here in Askatoon,
or why he's such a slave to Mrs. Mazarine; but I do know that he's a
different-looking man when a Chinky runs up against him than when he's
choring at Tralee.  A sick Chinaman told me only a week ago that Li Choo
was 'once big high boss Chinaman in Pekin.' .  .  .  And so the mandarin
advised you to fly to Orlando, did he?  I wonder if it's a way they have
in China."

"But I wouldn't go.  I've come to you--Patsy Kernaghan brought me,"
Louise urged.

"Yes, I see you've come to me," remarked the Young Doctor dryly, "and
you've stayed about long enough for me to feel your pulse and diagnose
your case.  And now you're going back with Patsy Kernaghan to your own
home."

She trembled; then she seemed to strengthen herself in defiance.  What a
change it was from the child of a few weeks ago--indeed, of a few moments
ago!  The same passionate determination which seized her when she faced
Mazarine with Orlando, possessed her again.  With her whole being
palpitating, she said: "I will not go back.  I will not go back.  I will
kill myself first."

"That would be a useless sacrifice of yourself and others," the Young
Doctor answered quietly.  Seeing that the new thing in her was not to be
conquered in a moment, he quickly made up his mind what to do.

"See," he continued, "you needn't go back to Tralee to-night, but you're
not going to stay here, dear child.  I'll take you over to Nolan Doyle's
ranch, to Mrs. Doyle.  You'll spend the night there, and we'll think
about to-morrow when to-morrow comes.  You certainly can't stay here.
I'm not going to have it.

"Bless you, you're neither so young nor so old as all that!"

Suddenly he grasped both her arms and looked her in the face.  "My dear
young lady," he said gently, "I'm not your only friend, but I'm a stout
friend--so stout that there isn't a mount can carry us both together.
When you ride, I walk; when I ride, you walk--you understand?  We don't
walk or ride together.  I'm taking care of you.  Your life is too good to
be ruined by rashness.  You're in a 'state,' as my old housekeeper would
say, but you'll be all right presently.  As soon as I've made a salad,
and had a marrowbone, you and I and Patsy Kernaghan are going to Nolan
Doyle's ranch.  .  .  .  My dear, you must do what I say, and if you do,
you'll be happy yet.  I don't see how, quite, but it is so; and
meanwhile, you mustn't make any mistakes.  You must play the game.
And now come and have some supper."

She waved her hand in protest.  "I can't eat," she said.  "Indeed, I
can't."

"Well, you can drink," he answered.  "You shall not leave this house
alive unless you have a pint of milk with a little dash of what Patsy
calls 'oh-be-joyful' in it."

He left the room for a moment, while she sat watching the door as a
prisoner might watch for the return of a friendly jailer.  He had a
curious influence over her.  It was wholly different from that of
Orlando.  Presently he returned.

"It's all right," he said.  "Patsy and you and I will be at Nolan Doyle's
ranch in another hour.  I've sent word to Mrs. Doyle.  I've ordered your
milk-punch too, and now I think I'll make my salad.  You never saw me
make a salad," he added, smiling.  "I've done some successful operations
in my day; I've played about with bones and sinews, proud of my work
sometimes, but the making of a perfect salad is the proud achievement of
a master-mind."  He laughed like a boy.  "'Come hither, come hither, my
little daughter, and do not tremble so,'" he said so cheerfully as to be
almost jeering.

His cheerfulness was not in vain, for a smile stole to her lips, though
it only flickered for an instant and was gone.  For all that, he knew he
had saved the situation, and that another chapter of the life-history of
Orlando and Louise had been ended.  A fresh chapter would begin tomorrow;
but sufficient unto the day was the evil thereof.




CHAPTER XII

MAN UNNATURAL

Mazarine discovered the flight of Louise soon after she had gone.
He had not been five hundred yards from the house since she returned with
Orlando after the night spent upon the prairie, save when he had been
obliged to go in to Askatoon and had taken her with him, dumb and
passive.  She had been a prisoner, tied to the stirrups of her captor;
and he had berated her, had preached at her.  As Louise had said, once on
the way to Askatoon, he had even tried to make her kneel down in the dust
of the trail and plead with Heaven to convict her of sin.

On the evening of Louise's flight, however, he had been forced to go to
a neighbouring ranch, and had commanded Li Choo to keep a strict watch at
the windows of her room to see that she did not attempt escape.  She
could not escape by the door of the room because he had the key in his
pocket.  Li Choo was not a stern jailer, however.  Mazarine had not been
gone three minutes before the Chinaman had touch with Louise.  He did
more; he threw up into the open window of her room a screw-driver, with
which she took the old-fashioned door off its hinges, after half an
hour's work.  Then, leaving a note on the table of the dining-room, to
say that she could not bear it any longer, that she would never come
back, and that she meant to be free, she summoned Patsy Kernaghan and
fled to the Young Doctor.

When Mazarine returned and found her note, he plunged up the stairs to
her bedroom, his pious wrath gurgling in his throat, only to find the
door locked; for Li Choo had promptly restored it to its hinges after
Louise had gone, afterwards dropping from the high window like a cat,
without hurt.

Li Choo, blinking, opaque, immobile, save for his piercing and mysterious
eyes, had no explanation to give.  All he said was, "Me no see all sides
house same time"; so suggesting that, as the room had windows on all
three sides, Louise must have escaped while he made his supposed sentry-
go, slip-slopping round the house.  Mazarine showed what he thought by
spitting in Li Choo's face, and then rushing into the house to get the
raw-hide whip with which he had punished the Chinaman before, and with
which he had threatened his wife.

When he returned a moment afterwards, Li Choo was nowhere to be seen; but
in his place were two other Chinamen who had, as it were, fallen from the
skies, standing where Li Choo had stood, immobile, blinking and passive
like Li Choo, their hands lost in the long sleeves of their coats, their
pigtails so tightly braided as, in seeming, to draw their slanting
eyelids still to greater incline, and to give a look of petrified
intentness to their faces.

Something in their attitude gave Mazarine apprehension.  It was as though
Li Choo had been transformed by some hellish magic into two other
Chinamen.  The rage of his being seemed to stupefy him; he could not
resist the sensation of the unnatural.

"What do you want?  How did you come here?" he asked of the two in a
husky voice.

"We want speak Li Choo.  We come see Li Choo," answered one of the
Chinamen impassively.

"He was here a minute ago," answered Mazarine gruffly.

Then he turned away, going swiftly toward the kitchen, and calling to Li
Choo.  As he went, he was conscious of low, cackling laughter, but when
he turned to look, the two Chinamen stood where he had left them,
blinking and immobile.

The uncanny feeling possessing him increased; the thing was unnatural.
He lurched on, however, looking for Li Choo.  The Chinaman was not to be
found in the kitchen, in the woodshed, in the cellar, in the loft, or in
his own attic room; and the half-breed, Rada, declared she had not seen
him.  He could not be at the stables, for they were too far away to be
reached in the time; and there were no signs of him between the house and
the stables.  When Mazarine returned to the front of the house, the two
Chinamen also had vanished; there were no signs of them anywhere.  Search
did not discover them.

Mingled anger and fear now possessed Mazarine.  He would search no
longer.  No doubt the other two Chinamen had joined Li Choo in his
hiding-place, wherever it was.  Why had the Chinamen come?  What were
they after?  It did not matter for the moment.  What he wanted was
Louise, his bad child-wife, who had broken from her cage and flown from
him.  Where would she go?  Where, but to Slow Down Ranch?  Where, but to
her lover, the circus-rider, the boy with the head of brown curls, with
the ring on his finger and the Cupid mouth!  Where would she go but to
the man with whom she had spent the night on the prairie!

Now he believed altogether that she was guilty, that everybody had
conspired to deceive him, that he was in a net of dark deception.  Even
the two Chinamen, mysteriously coming and going, had laughed at him like
two heathen gods, and had vanished suddenly like heathen gods.

A weakness came over him, and the skin of his face became creased and
clammy like that of a drowned man; his limbs trembled, so desperate was
his passion.  He stumbled into the house and into the dining-room,
where he kept a little black-bound Bible once belonging to his great-
grandfather.  He had thumbed it well in past years, searching it for
passages of violence and denunciation.  Now holy superstition seized him
in the midst of the work of the devil, surrounding him with an almost
medieval instinct.  He seized the ancient book, as it were to deliver its
incantations against everyone destroying his peace, stealing from him
that which he prized beyond all earthly things.

Take this woman away from him, this child-wife from his sixty-five years,
and what was left for him?  She was the garden of spring in which his old
age roamed at ease luxuriously.  She was the fruit of the tree of
pleasure.  She was that which made him young again, renewed in him youth
and the joys of youth.  Take her away, the flower that smelled so sweet
and luscious, the thing that he had held so often to his lips and to his
breast?  Take away what was his, by every holy right, because it was all
according to the law of the land and of the Holy Gospel, and what was
left?  Only old age, the empty house bereft of a fair young mistress,
something to smile at and to curse, if need be, since it was his own by
the laws of God and man.

Take her away, and the two wives that he had buried long years ago, with
their gray heads and lank, sour faces, from which the light of youth had
fled with the first child come to them--their ghosts would seek him out.
They would sit at his table, and taunt him with his vanished Louise,
asking him if he thought she was anything more than one of the trolls
that tempted men aforetime; one of the devil's wenches that lured him
into the secret garden, only at last to leave him scorned and alone.

Where had she gone, his troll, with the face of an angel?  Where had she
gone?  Where would she go, except to her devil's lover at Slow Down Ranch?

He had just started for Slow Down Ranch armed with his greasy, well-
thumbed Bible like a weapon in his pocket, when he heard a voice call
him.  It was full of the devil's laughter.  It was the voice of
Burlingame, the lawyer, on his horse.  Burlingame had had a weary day
and was refreshing himself by a canter on the prairie.

"Where are you going?" asked Burlingame, as he cantered up to Mazarine's
wagon.

"To Slow Down Ranch?"

He saw the look of the drowned man in the face of Mazarine, over whom the
flood of disaster had passed, and he guessed at once the cause of it; for
Burlingame had the philosophy of a Satanic mind, and he knew the things
that happen to human nature.

"So, she's gone again, has she?" he added deliberately, with intent to
put a knife into the old man's feelings and to turn it in the thick of
them.  He wanted to hurt, because Mazarine had only a short time before
dispensed with his services as a lawyer, and had blocked the way to that
intimacy which he had hoped to establish with Tralee and its mistress.
Besides, his pride as a professional man had been hurt, and he had been
deprived of income which now went to his most hated professional rival.
Mazarine's jealous soul had cut him off, on coming to know Burlingame's
dark reputation.  He had not liked the look Burlingame had given Louise
when they met.

"Gone again, has she?" Burlingame repeated sarcastically.  "Well, you
needn't go to Slow Down Ranch to find her.  She isn't there, and you
won't find him there either, for I saw him come by the Lark River Trail
into Askatoon as I left, and a lady was with him.  He booked this morning
for the sleeper of the express going East to-night; so, if I were you,
I'd turn my horse's nose to Askatoon, Mr. Mazarine.  I don't know why I
tell you this, as you're not my client now, but I go about the world
doing good, Mr. Mazarine--only doing good."

There was a look in Burlingame's face which Heaven would not have
accepted as goodness, and there was that in his voice which did not
belong to the Courts of the Lord.  Malice, though veiled, showed in face
and sounded in voice.  Even as he spoke, Joel Mazarine turned his horse's
head towards Askatoon.

"You're sure a woman was with him?  You're sure she was with him?" he
asked in chaos of passion.

"I couldn't see her face; it was too far away," answered Burlingame
suggestively, "but you can form your own conclusions--and the express
is due in thirty minutes!"

He looked at his watch complacently.  "What's the good, Mazarine?  Why
don't you say, 'Go and sin no more?'  Or why don't you divorce her with
the evidence about that night on the prairie?  I could have got you a
verdict and damages.  Yes, I could have got you plenty of damages.  He's
rich.  You took her back and condoned; you condoned, Mazarine, and now
you'll neither have damages nor wife--and the express goes in thirty
minutes!"

"The express won't take Mrs. Mazarine away tonight," the old man said, a
look of jungle fierceness filling his face.

Burlingame laughed unpleasantly.  "Yes, you'll foul your own nest,
Mazarine, and then bring her back to live in it.  I know you.  It isn't
the love of God in your heart, because you'll never forgive her; but
you'll bring her back to the nest you fouled, just because you want her
--'You damned and luxurious mountain goat,' as Shakespeare called your
kind."

With another laugh, which somewhat resembled that of the two strange
vanished Chinamen, Burlingame flicked his horse and cantered away.  A
little time afterwards, however, he turned and looked toward Askatoon,
and he saw the old man whipping his horse into a gallop to reach Askatoon
railway station before the express went East.

"It's true, Mazarine," he said aloud.  "Orlando booked for the sleeper
going East in thirty minutes; but the sleeper was for one only, and that
one was his mother, you old hippopotamus.  .  .  .  But I wonder where
she is--where the divine Louise is?  She hasn't levanted with her
Orlando.  .  .  .  Now, I wonder!" he added.

Then, with a sudden impulse, he dug heels into his horse's sides, and
galloped back towards Askatoon.  He wanted to see what would happen
before the express went East.




CHAPTER XIII

ORLANDO GIVES A WARNING

Askatoon had never lost its interest for Mazarine and his wife since the
day the Mayor had welcomed them at the railway station.  Askatoon was not
a petty town.  Its career had been chequered and interesting, and it had
given haven to a large number of uncommon people.  Unusual happenings had
been its portion ever since it had been the rail-head of the Great
Transcontinental Line, and many enterprising men, instead of moving on
with the railway, when it ceased to be the rail-head, settled there and
gave the place its character.  The town had never been lawless, although
some lawless people had sojourned there.

It was too busy a place to be fussing about little things, or tearing
people's characters to pieces, or gossiping even to the usual degree;
yet in its history it had never gossiped so much as it had done since
the Mazarines had come.

From the first the vast majority of folk had sided with Louise and
denounced Mazarine.  They knew well she had married too young to be self-
seeking or intriguing; and, in any case, no woman in Askatoon or yet in
the West, could have conceived of a girl marrying "the ancient one from
the jungle," as Burlingame had called him.

Burlingame could never have been on the side of the Ten Commandments
himself, even with a sure and certain hope of happiness on earth, and in
Heaven also, guaranteed to him.  Nothing could have condemned Mazarine so
utterly as the coalition between the "holy good people," as Burlingame
called them, and himself; and between the holy good people and himself
were many who in their secret hearts would never have shunned Louise if,
after the night on the prairie with Orlando, release had been found for
her in the Divorce Court.  Jonas Billings had put the matter in a
nutshell when he said:

"It ain't natural, them two, at Tralee.  For marrying her he ought to be
tarred and feathered, and for the way he treats her he ought to be let
loose in the ha'nts of the grizzlies.  What he done to that girl is a
crime ag'in' the law.  If there was any real spunk in the Methodists,
they'd spit him out like pus."

That was exactly what the Methodist body had decided to do on the very
day that Louise had fled from Tralee and the old man pursued her in the
wrong direction.  The Methodist body had determined to discipline
Mazarine, to eject him from their communion, because he had raised a whip
against his wife; because he had maltreated Li Choo; and because he had
used language unbecoming a Christian.  They had decided that Mazarine had
not shown the righteous anger of a Christian man, but of one who had
backslided, and who, in the words of Rigby the chemist, "Must be spewed
out of the mouth of the righteous into the dust of shame."

That was the situation when Joel Mazarine drove furiously into the town
and made for the railway station.  Men like Jonas Billings, who saw him,
and had the scent for sensation, passed the word on downtown, as it is
called, that something "was up" with Mazarine, and the railway station
was the place where what was up could be seen.  Therefore; a quarter of
an hour before the arrival of the express which was to carry Orlando
Guise's mother to her sick sister three hundred miles down the line,
a goodly number of citizens had gathered at the station-far more than
usually watched the entrance or exit of the express.

Mazarine's wagon and steaming horses were tied up outside the station,
and inside on the platform Moses-not-much, as Mazarine had been called by
Jonas Billings, marched up and down, his snaky little eyes blinking at
the doorway of the station reception-room.  People came and some of them
nodded to him derisively.  Some, with more hardihood, asked him if he was
going East; if he was expecting anyone; if he was seeing somebody off.

A good many asked him the last question, because, as the minutes had
passed, Burlingame had arrived.  He had also disclosed his great joke to
those who would carry it far and near, together with the news that Louise
had taken flight.  The last fact, however, was known to several people,
because more than one had seen the Young Doctor and Patsy Kernaghan
taking Louise to Nolan Doyle's ranch.

It was dusk.  The lamps of the station were being lighted five minutes
before the express arrived, and as the lights flared up, Orlando entered
the waiting-room of the station, with a lady on his arm, and presently
showed at the platform doorway, smiling and cheerful.  He did not blench
when Mazarine came towards him.  Mazarine had seen the flutter of a blue
skirt in the waiting-room, and his wife had worn blue that day!

Orlando saw the heavy, offensive figure of Mazarine making for him.  He,
however, appeared to take no notice, though he watched his outrageous
pursuer out of the corner of his eye, as he quietly gave orders to a
porter concerning a little heap of luggage.  When he had finished this,
he turned, as it were casually, to Mazarine.  Then he giggled in the face
of the Master of Tralee.  It was like the matador's waving of the scarlet
cloth in the face of the enraged bull.  Having thus relieved his
feelings, Orlando turned and walked to the door of the reception-room,
but was stopped by the old man rushing at him.  Swinging round, Orlando
almost filled the doorway.

"You devil's spawn," Mazarine almost shouted," get out of that doorway.
I want my wife.  You needn't try to hide her.  You thief!  You lecherous
circus rider!  Stand aside--leper!"

Orlando coolly stretched out his elbows till they touched the sides of
the door, and as the crowd pressed, he said to them mockingly:

"Get back, boys.  Give him air.  Can't you see he's gasping for breath."
Then he giggled again.

The old man looked round at the crowd, but he saw no sympathy--only
aversion and ridicule.  Suddenly he snatched his little black-bound Bible
from his pocket, and held it up.

"What does this Book say?" he thundered.  "It says that a wife shall
cleave unto her husband until death.  For the seducer and the betrayer
death is the portion."

The whistle of the incoming train was heard in the distance.

The old man was desperate.  It was clear he meant to assault Orlando.
"You will only take her away over my dead body," he ground out in his
passion.  "The Lord gave, and only the Lord shall take away."  He
gathered himself together for the attack.

Orlando waved a hand at him as one would at a troublesome child.  At that
instant, his mother stepped up behind him in the reception-room.

"Orlando," she said in her mincing, piping little voice, "Orlando, dear,
the train is coming.  Let me out.  I'm not afraid of that bad man.  I
want to catch my train."

Orlando stepped aside, and his mother passed through, to the
consternation of Mazarine, who fell back.  The old man now realized that
Burlingame had tricked him.  Laughter went up from the crowd.  They had
had a great show at no cost.

"'If at first you don't succeed, try, try again,' Mr. Mazarine!" called
someone from the crowd.

"It's the next train she's going by, old Moses-not-much," shouted a
friend of Jonas Billings.

"She's had enough of you, Joel!" sneered another mocker.

"Wouldn't you like to know where she is, yellow-lugs?" queried a fat
washerwoman.

For an instant Mazarine stood demused, and then, thrusting the Bible into
his pocket, he drew himself up in an effort of pride and defiance.

"Judases!  Jezebels!" he burst out at them all.  Then he lunged through
the doorway of the reception-room; but at the door opening on the street
his courage gave way, and hunched up like one in pain, he ran towards the
hitching-post where he had left his horses and wagon.  They were not
there.  With a groan which was also a malediction, he went up the street
like a wounded elephant, and made his way to the police-station through a
town which had no pity for him.

During the hour he remained in the town, Mazarine searched in vain for
his horses and wagon.  He looked everywhere except the shed behind the
Methodist Church.  It was there the two wags who had played the trick on
him had carefully hitched the horses, and presently they announced in
town that they did it because they knew Mazarine would want to go to the
prayer-meeting to lay his crimes before the Mercy Seat!

It was quite true that it was prayer-meeting night, and as the merciless
wags left the shed, the voice of brother Rigby the chemist was narrating
for the hundredth time the story of his conversion, when, as he said,
"the pains of hell gat hold of him."  Brother Rigby loved to relate the
tortures of the day when he was convicted of sin; but on this night his
ancient story seemed appropriate, as he had dealt with great severity on
the doings of the backslider, Joel Mazarine.

When the two wags returned to the front street of Askatoon, they were
just in time to see the second meeting of Orlando and Mazarine.  Mazarine
had not been able to find his horses at any hotel or livery stable, or in
any street.  It was at the moment, when, in his distraction, he had
decided to walk back to Tralee, that Orlando, driving up the street, saw
him.  Orlando reined in his horses dropped from his buggy and approached
him.

There was a look in Orlando's eyes which was a reflection from a remote
past, from ancestors who had settled their troubles with the first weapon
and the best opportunity to their hands.  "The furrin element in him," as
Jonas Billings called it, had been at full flood ever since he had bade
his mother good-bye.  A storm of anger had been raised in him.  As he
said to himself, he had had enough; he had been filled up to the chin by
the Mazarine business; and his impulsive youth wanted to end it by some
smashing act which would be sensational and decisive.  So it was that
Fate offered the opportunity, as he came up the front street of Askatoon,
and found himself face to face with Mazarine, over against the offices of
Burlingame.

"A word with you, Mr. Mazarine," he said, with the air of a man who wants
to ease his mind of its trouble by action.  "Back there at the station,
I kept my tongue and let you down easy enough, because my mother was
present.  She is old and sensitive, and she doesn't like to see her son
doing the dirty work every man must do some time or other, when there's
street cleaning to be done.  Now, let me tell you this: you've slandered
as good a girl, you've libelled as straight a wife, as the best man in
the world ever had.  You've made a public scandal of your private home.
You've treated the pure thing as if it were the foul thing; and yet, you
want to keep the pure thing that you treat like a foul thing, under your
rawhide whip, because it's young and beautiful and good.  You don't want
to save her soul"--he pointed to the Bible, which the old man had
snatched from his pocket again--"you don't want to save her soul.  You
don't care whether she's happy in this world or the next; what you want
is what you can see of her, for your life in this world only.
You want--"

The old man interrupted him with a savage emotion which Jonas Billings
said made him look like "a satyre."

"I want to save her from the wrath to come," he said.  "This here holy
Book gives me my rights.  It says, 'Thou shalt not steal,' and the
trouble I have comes from you that's stole my wife, that's put her soul
in jeopardy, robbed my home--"

"Robbed your home!" interjected Orlando quietly, but with a voice of
suppressed passion.  "Robbed your home!  Why, the other day you tried
to prevent her entering it.  You wanted to shut her out.  After she had
lived with you all those years, you believed she lied to you when she
told you the truth about that night on the prairie; but her innocence was
proved by one who was there all the time, and for shame's sake you had to
let her in.  But she couldn't stand it.  I don't wonder.  A lark wouldn't
be at home where a vulture roosted."

"And so the lark flies away to the cuckoo," snarled the old man, with
flecks of froth gathering at the corners of his mouth; for the sight of
this handsome, long-limbed youth enraged him.

"Give her back to me.  You know where she is," he persisted.  "You've got
her hid away.  That's why you've sent your mother East--so's she wouldn't
know, though from what I see, I shouldn't think it'd have made much
difference to her."

Exclamations broke from the crowd.  It was the wild West.  It was a
country where, not twenty years before, men did justice upon men without
the assistance of the law; and the West understood that the dark insult
just uttered would in days not far gone have meant death.  The onlookers
exclaimed, and then became silent, because a subtle sense of tragedy
suddenly smothered their voices.  Upon the silence there broke a little
giggling laugh.  It came from lips that were one in paleness with a face
grown stony.

"I ought to kill you," Orlando said quietly after a moment, yet scarcely
above a whisper.  "I ought to kill you, Mazarine, but that would only be
playing your game, for the law would get hold of me, and the girl that
has left you would be sorrowful, for she knows I love her, though I never
told her so.  She'd be sorry to see the law get at me.  She's going to be
mine some day, in the right way.  I'm not going behind your back to say
it; I'm announcing it to all and sundry.  I never did a thing to her that
couldn't have been seen by all the world, and I never said a thing to her
that couldn't be heard by all the world; but I hope she'll never go back
to you.  You've made a sewer for her to live in, not a home.  As I said,
I ought to kill you, but that would play your game, so I won't, not now.
But I tell you this, Mazarine: if I ever meet you again--and I'm sure to
do so--and you don't get off the road I'm travelling on, or the side-walk
I'm walking on, when I meet you or when I pass you, I'll let you have
what'll send you to hell, before you can wink twice.

"As for Louise--as for her: I don't know where she is, but I'll find her.
One thing is sure: if I see her, I'll tell her never to go back to you;
and she won't.  You've drunk at the waters of Canaan for the last time.
For a Christian you're pretty filthy.  Go and wash in the pool of Siloam
and be clean--damn you, Mazarine!"

With that he turned, almost unheeding the hands thrust out to grip his,
the voices murmuring approval.  In a moment he had swung his horses
round.  He did not go beyond ten yards, however, before someone, running
beside his wagon, whispered up to him: "She's out at Nolan Doyle's ranch.
She went with the Young Doctor and Patsy Kernaghan."

Behind, in the street, a young boy came running through the crowd and
shouting: "I know where they are!  I know where they are!"  He stopped
before Mazarine.  "Gimme half a dollar, and I'll tell you where your
horses are.  Gimme half a dollar.  Gimme half a dollar, and I'll tell
you."

An instant later, with the half-dollar in his hand, he said: "They're up
to the shed of the Meetin' House."

"Yes, go along up to the Meetin' House, Mr. Mazarine," said one of the
miscreants who had driven the horses there.  "They're holding a post-
mortem on you at the prayer meetin'.  They say you're dead in trespasses
and sins.  Get along, Joel."

The crowd started to follow him to the shed where his horses were, but
after a moment he turned on them and said:

"Ain't you heerd and seen enough?  Ain't there no law to protect a man?"

A hoe was leaning against a fence.  He saw it, and with sudden fury,
seizing it, swung it round his head as if to throw it into the crowd.  At
that moment a stalwart constable ran forward, raised a hand towards
Mazarine, and then addressed the crowd.

"We've had enough of this," he said.  "I'll lock up any man that goes a
step further towards the Meetin' House.  Where do you think you are?
This is Askatoon, the place of peace and happiness, and we're going to be
happy, if I have to lock up the hull lot of you.  I guess you can go
right on, Mr. Mazarine," he added.  "Go right on and git your wagon."

A moment later Mazarine was walking alone towards the Meeting House; but
no, not alone, for a hundred devils were with him.




CHAPTER XIV

FILION AND FIONA--ALSO PATSY KERNAGHAN

Patsy Kernaghan was in his element in the garden with which Norah Doyle
had decorated the brown bosom of the prairie.  It had verdant shrubs,
green turf, thick fringes of flowers, and one solitary elmtree in the
centre whose branches spread like a cedar of Lebanon.  In the moonlight
Patsy had the telling of a wonderful story to such an audience as he had
never had before in his life, and he had had them from Bundoran to
Limerick, from Limerick to the foothills of the Rockies.

The seance of love and legend had been Patsy's own idea.  At the supper-
table spread by Norah Doyle, in spite of the protests of her visitors--
the Young Doctor, Louise and Patsy--Nolan Doyle, who had a fine gift for
playful talk, had tried to keep the situation free from melodrama.  Yet
Patsy had observed that, in spite of all efforts, Louise's eyes now and
then filled with tears.  Also, he saw that her senses seemed alert for
something outside their little circle.  It was as though she expected
someone to arrive.  She was in that state which is not normal and yet not
abnormal--a kind of trance in which she did ordinary things in a natural
way, yet mechanically, without full consciousness.

There was no one at the table who did not realize what, and for whom,
she was waiting.  To her primitive spirit, now that she was in trouble
because of him, it seemed inevitable that Orlando should come.  One thing
was fixed in her mind: she would never return to Tralee or to the man
whose odious presence made her feel as though she was in a cage with an
animal.

Jonas Billings had called him "The ancient one from the jungle," and that
was how at last he appeared to her.  His arms and breast were thick with
hair; the hair on his face grew almost up to the eyes; the fingers of his
splayed hands were blunt and broad; and his hair was like a nest for
things of the jungle undergrowth.

Since she had been awakened, the memory of his hot breath in her face, of
his clumsy fevered embraces was a torment to her; for always in contrast
there were the fresh clean-shaven cheeks and chin of a young Berserker
with honest, wondering blue eyes, the curly head of a child, and body and
limbs like a young lean stag.

Orlando's touch was never either clammy or fevered.  She could recall
every time that he had touched her: when her fingers and his met on the
afternoon that Li Choo had thrown himself down the staircase with the
priceless porcelain; also the evening of the night spent on the prairie
when, after the accident, her hand had been linked into his arm; also
when he had clasped her fingers at their meeting in the morning.  On each
occasion she had felt a thrill like that of music--persuasive, living
vibrations passing to remote recesses of her being.

No nearer had she ever come to the man she loved, no nearer had he sought
to come.  Once, the evening after the night spent on the prairie, when
old Joel Mazarine had tried to make her pray and ask God's forgiveness,
and he had kissed her with the lips of hungry old age, she had suddenly
sat up in bed, her heart beating hard, every nerve palpitating, because
in imagination she had seen herself in Orlando's arms, with his lips
pressed to hers.

Poor neophyte in life's mysteries, having served as a slave at false
altars of which she did not even know the ritual, it was no wonder that,
after all she had suffered, she could not now bring herself into tune
with the commonplace intercourse of life.  Not that her friends utterly
failed to lure her into it.  She might well have been the victim of
hysterics, but she was only distrait, pensive and gently smiling, with
the smile of a good heart.  Smiling with her had ever taken the place of
conversation.  It was an apology for not speaking when she could not
speak what she felt.

Once during the meal she seemed to start slightly, as though she heard
a familiar sound, and for some minutes afterwards she seemed to be
listening, as it were, for a knock at the door, which did not come.
Immediately after that, Patsy, happy in sitting down to table with "the
quality"--for such they were to him--because he saw that Louise must be
distracted, and because he had seen story-telling, many a time, draw
people away from their troubles even more than music, said:

"Did you remember the day it is, anny of you?  Shure, it's St. Droid's
Day!  Aw, then, don't you know who he was?  You don't!  Well, well,
there's no tellin' how ignorant the wurruld can be.  St. Droid--aw, he
was a good man that brought the two children of Chief Diarmid and Queen
Moira together.  You didn't know about them two?  You niver h'ard of
Chief Diarmid and Queen Moira and their two lovely children?  Well, there
it is, there's no sayin' how ignorant y'are if y'are not Irish.  Aw no,
they wasn't man and wife.  Diarmid was a widower and Moira was a widow.
Diarmid's boy was Filion and Moira's girl was Fiona, an' the troubles of
the two'd make a book for ivry day of the week, an' two for Sunday.  An'
the way that St. Droid brought them two together  Aw, come outside in the
gardin where the moon's to the full, an' it's warm enough for anny man or
woman that's got a warm heart, an' I'll tell you the story of Filion and
Fiona.  You'll not be forgettin' the names of them now, will ye?  And
while I'm tellin' you, all the time you'll be thinkin' of St. Droid, for
it's his day.  It was nothin' till him, St. Droid, that he lived in a
cave, you understan'?  Wasn't his face like the sun comin' up over the
lake at Ballinhoe in the month of June!  Well, it doesn't matter if
you've niver seen Ballinhoe--you understan' what I mean.  Well, then come
out intil the gardin, darlins.  Shure, I'm achin' to tell you the story--
as fine a love-story as iver was told to man and woman."

So it was that Louise with eyes alight-for Patsy had a voice that could
stir imagination in the dullest--so it was that Louise and the others
went out into the moonlit garden, the prairie around them like an endless
waste of sea.  There they placed themselves in a half circle around
Patsy, who sat upon a little bench, with his back to the big spreading
elm-tree, which by some special gift had grown alone over the myriad
years, defying storm and winter's frost, until it seemed to have an
honoured permanence, as stable as the prairie earth itself.

As they seated themselves, there was renewed in Louise the feeling she
had at supper-time, when she had imagined--or had her senses accurately
divined? that Orlando was near, so sure had been the sensation that she
had expected Orlando to enter the room where they sat.  Now it was on her
again, and somehow she felt him there with her.  He was Filion and she
was Fiona.

Since the day she had first seen Orlando, she had awakened to life's
realities.  There had grown in her an alertness and a delicate sense of
things, which, though natural to one born with a soul that cared little
for sordid things, was not common, except in Celtic circles where the
unseen thing is more real than the seen; where gold and precious stones
are only valued in so far as they can purchase freedom, dreams and
desire.

Louise had not been thrilled without cause.  Orlando, the real material
Orlando, had driven out to Nolan Doyle's ranch, but having come, could
not at first bring himself to enter.  Something in him kept saying that
it was not fair to her; kept admonishing him to let things take their
course; that now was not the time to see her; that it might place her in
a false position.  Blameless though she was, she might be blamed by the
world, if he and she, on the night that she fled from Joel Mazarine
should meet, and, above all, meet alone--and what was the good of meeting
at all, if they did not meet alone!  What could two voiceless people say
to each other, people who only spoke with their hearts and souls, when
others were staring at them, watching every act, listening for every
word.  His better sense kept telling him to go back to Slow Down Ranch.

But there she was inside Nolan Doyle's house, and he had come
deliberately to see her.

He stood outside in the garden near the great spreading elm-tree, torn by
a sense of duty and a sense of desire; but the desire was to let her see
by his presence that he would be a tower of strength to her, no matter
what happened.  It was not the desire which had possessed him whom Patsy
Kernaghan had called the keeper of the "zoolyogical" garden.

He had just made up his mind that courage was the right thing: that he
must see her in the presence of others for one minute, whatever the
issue, when she came out with Patsy Kernaghan, the Young Doctor, and
Norah and Nolan Doyle.  None saw him, and, as they seated themselves, he
stepped noiselessly under the spreading branches of the elm-tree.  He
would not speak to them yet; he would wait.  In the shade made by the
drooping branches he could not be seen, yet he could hear and see all.

There was silence for a moment, and then Patsy began the tale of St.
Droid--"whoever he was," as Patsy said to himself; for he was going to
make up out of his head this story of St. Droid and St. Droid's Day, and
Queen Moira, Filion and Fiona.  It was a bold idea, but it gave Patsy the
opportunity of his life.

His description of Black Brian, the rich, ruthless King, to whom Queen
Moira gave her daughter Fiona, despite the girl's bitter sorrow, was a
masterpiece.  It was modelled on Joel Mazarine.  It was the behemoth
transferred to Ireland, to the cromlechs and castles, to the causeways,
the caves, and the stony hillsides; to the bogs and the quicksands and
the Little Men; but it could not be recognized as a portrait, though
everyone felt how wonderful it was that a legend of a thousand years
should be so close to the life of Askatoon.

Patsy had no knowledge of what the mother of Louise was like, but the
likeness between her cruel, material, selfish spirit and Queen Moira, in
the sacrifice of their offspring, provoked the admiration of the Young
Doctor, whose philosophical mind had soon discovered that Patsy was
making up the tale.

That did not matter.  Having got the thing started, Patsy gave reins to
his imagination; and storm, terror, danger, and the capture of Fiona by
Filion, from Black Brian's castle in the hills, was told with primitive
force and passion.  But the most wonderful part of the story described
how a strange dwarfed Little Man came out of the hills in the East,
across the land, to the Western fastness of Black Brian, and there slew
that evil man, because of an ancient feud--slew him in a situation of
great indignity, and left him lying on the sands for the tide to wash him
out to the deep and hungry sea.  Even here Patsy had his inspiration from
real life; and yet he disguised it all so well that no one except the
Young Doctor even imagined what he meant.

Under the tree Orlando listened with strained attention, absorbed and, at
times, almost overcome.  His long sigh of relief was joined to the sighs
of the others when Patsy finished.  The Young Doctor rose to go, and the
others rose also.

"That's a wonderful story, Patsy," said the Young Doctor to him; and he
added quizzically: "You tell it so well because you've told it so often
before, I suppose?"

"Aw, well, that's it, I expect," answered the Irishman coolly.

"I thought so," responded the Young Doctor.  "Now, how many times do you
think you've told that story before, Patsy?"

"About a hundred, I should think; or no--I should think about two hundred
times," answered Patsy shamelessly.

"I thought so," said the Young Doctor, but before turning to go into the
house, he leaned and whispered in his ear: "Patsy, you're the most
beautiful liar that ever come out of Ireland."

"Aw, Doctor dear!" said Patsy softly.

They all moved towards the house, save Louise.  "Please, I want to stay
behind a minute or two," she said, as she held out a hand to the Young
Doctor.  "Don't wait for me.  I want to be alone a little while."  Once
more the Young Doctor felt the trembling appeal of her palm as on the
first day they met, and he gripped her hand warmly.

"It will all come right.  Good-night, my dear," he said cheerfully.
"Have a good sleep on it."

Louise remained in the garden alone, the moon shining on her face lifted
to the sky.  For a moment she stood so, wrapped in the peace of the
night, but her body was almost panting from the thrill of the legend
which Patsy Kernaghan had told.  As he had meant it to do, it gave her
hope; although before her eyes was the picture that Patsy had drawn of
Black Brian with his great sword beside him lying on the sands, waiting
for the hungry sea to claim him.

Presently there stole through the warm air of the night the sound of her
own name.  She did not start.  It seemed to her part of the dream in
which she was.  Her hand went to her heart, however.

Again in Orlando's voice came the word "Louise," a little louder now.
She turned towards the tree, and there beside it stood Orlando.

For an instant there was a sense of unreality, of ghostliness, and then
she gave a little cry of pain and joy.  As she ran towards him, with
sudden impulse, his arms spread out and he caught her to his breast.

His lips swept her hair.  "Louise!  Louise!" he whispered passionately.
For an instant they stood so, and then he gently pressed her away from
him.

"I had to come," he said.  "I want you to know that whatever happens, you
may depend on me.  When you call, I will come.  I must go now.  For your
sake I must not stay.  I had to see you, I had to tell you what I had
never told you."

"You've always told me," she murmured.

He stretched out his hand to clasp hers.  He did not dare to open his
arms again.  The lips which he had never kissed were very near, and ah,
so sweet!  She must not come to him now.

One swift clasp of the hand, and then he vaulted over the fence and was
gone.  A few moments afterwards she heard the rumble of his wagon on the
prairie--he had tied up his horses some distance from the house.

As the Young Doctor drove homeward with Patsy Kernaghan, he also heard
the rumble of the wagon not far in front of him.  Then he began to wonder
why Louise had waited behind in the garden.  He put the thought away from
him, however.  There was no deceit in Louise; he was sure of that.




CHAPTER XV

OUTWARD BOUND

Joel Mazarine did not take the trail to Tralee immediately after he found
his wagon and horses in the shed of the Methodist Meeting House.  As he
drove through the main street of Askatoon again, his lawyer--Burlingame's
rival--waved a hand towards him in greeting.  An idea suddenly possessed
the old man, and he stopped the horses and beckoned.

"Get in and come to your office with me," he said to the lawyer.
"There's some business to do right off."

The unpopularity of a client in no way affects a lawyer.  Indeed, the
most notorious criminal is the greatest legal advertisement, and the
fortunate part of the business is that no lawyer is ever identified with
the morals, crimes or virtues of his client, yet has particular advantage
from his crimes.  So it was that Mazarine's lawyer enjoyed the public
attention given to his drive through the town with Mazarine.  He could
hear this man say, "Hello, what's up!" or another remark that the Law
and the Gospel were out for war.

Just as they were about to enter the office, however, Jonas Billings, who
had a faculty for being everywhere at the interesting moment, said, so as
to be heard by Mazarine and his lawyer, and all others standing near.

"Goin' to leave his property away from his wife!  Makin' a new will--eh?
That's it, stamp on a girl when she's down!  When you can't win the
woman, keep the cash.  Woe is me, Willy, but the wild one rageth!"

Jonas' drawling, nasal, high-pitched sarcasm reached Mazarine's ears and
stung him.  He lurched round, and with beady eyes blinking with malice,
said roughly: "The fool is known by his folly."

"You don't need to label yourself, Mr. Mazarine," retorted Jonas with a
grin.

The crowd laughed in approval.  The loose lower lip of the Master of
Tralee quivered.  The leviathan was being tortured by the little sharks.

Presently the door of the lawyer's office slammed on the street, and
Mazarine proceeded to make a new will, which should leave everything away
from Louise.  After he had slowly dictated the terms of the will, with a
glutinous solemnity he said:

"There; that's what comes of breaking the laws of God and man.  That's
what a woman loses who doesn't do her duty by the man that can give her
everything, and that's give her everything, while she plays the Jezebel."

"I'll complete this for you, and you can sign it now," remarked the
lawyer evasively, not without shrinking; "but it won't stand as it is,
or as you want it to stand, because Mrs. Mazarine has her legal claims in
spite of it!  She's got a wife's dower-rights according to the law.
That's one-third of your property.  It's the law of the land, and you
can't sign it away from her, Mr. Mazarine."

The old man's face darkened still more; his crooked fingers twisted in
his beard.

"I see you forgot that," added the lawyer.  "There's only one way to
dispossess her, and that's to put her through Divorce--if you think you
can.  Of course this document'll stand as far as it goes, and it's
perfectly legal, but it isn't what you intend, and she'd get her one-
third in spite of it."

"I'll come back to-morrow," said the old man, rising to his feet.  "You
make it out, and I'll come back and sign it to-morrow.  I'll make a sure
thing of so much, anyway.  The divorce'll settle the rest.  You have it
ready at noon to-morrow, and you can start divorce proceedings to-morrow
too.  There's plenty of evidence.  She run away from me to go to him.
She stayed with him a whole night on the prairie.  I want the divorce,
and I can get the evidence.  Everybody knows.  This is the Lord's
business, and I mean to see it through.  Shame has come to the house of a
servant of the Lord, and there must be purging.  In the days of David she
would have been stoned to death, and not so far back as that, either."

A moment afterwards he was gone, slamming the door behind him.  His blood
was up-a turgid, angry flood almost bursting his veins.  He now made his
way to the house of the Methodist minister.  There he announced that if
he was disciplined at Quarterly Meeting, as was talked about in the
streets, he would go to law against every class-leader for defamation of
character.

By the time this was done the evening was well advanced.  He did not
leave Askatoon until the moment which coincided with that in which
Orlando left Nolan Doyle's garden and took the trail to Slow Down Ranch.
Orlando would strike the trail from Askatoon to Tralee at a point where
another trail also joined.

Mazarine drove fast through the town, as though eager to put it behind
him, but when he reached the trail on the prairie he slackened his pace,
and drove steadily homewards, lost in the darkest reflections he had ever
known; and that was saying much.  The reins lay loose in his fingers, and
he became so absorbed that he was conscious of nothing save movement.

The heart of Black Brian, the King, of whom Patsy Kernaghan told his
mythical story in Nolan Doyle's garden, had never housed more repulsive
thoughts than were in Mazarine's heart in this unfortunate hour of his
own making.  No single feeling of kindness was in his spirit.  He heard
nothing, was conscious of nothing, save his own grim, fantastic
imaginings.

A jealousy and hatred as terrible as ever possessed a man were on him.
An egregious self-will, a dreadful spirit of unholy old age in him, was
turned hatefully upon the youth long since gone from himself--the youth
which, in its wild, innocent ardours, had brought two young people
together, one of them his own captive for years.

The peace of the prairie, the shining, infant moon, the kindly darkness,
were all at variance with the soul of the man, whose only possession was
what money could buy; and what money had bought in the way of human flesh
and blood, beauty and sweet youth he had not been able to hold.  To his
mind, what was the good of having riches and power, if you could not also
have love, licence and the loot of the conqueror!

He had wrestled with the Lord in prayer; he had been a class-leader
and a lay-preacher; he had exhorted and denounced; he had pleaded and
proscribed; yet never in all his days of professed religion had a heart
for others really moved Joel Mazarine.

He had given now and then of gold and silver, because of the glow of mind
which the upraised hands of admiration brought him, mistaking it for the
real thing; but his life had been barren because it had not emptied
itself for others, at any time, or anywhere.

He had been a professed Christian, not because of Olivet, but because of
Sinai.  It was the stormy authority of the sword of the Lord of Gideon of
the Old Testament which had drawn him into the fold of religion.  It was
some strain of heredity, his upbringing, the life into which he was born,
pious, pedantic and preposterously prayerful, which had made him a
professional Christian, as he was a professional farmer, rancher and
money-maker.  For such a man there never could be peace.

In his own world of wanton inhumanity, oblivious of all except his
torturing thoughts, he did not know that, as he neared the Cross Trails
on his way homewards, something shadowy, stooping, sprang up from the
roadside and slip-slopped after his wagon--slip-slopped--slip-slopped--
catching the thud of the horses' hoofs, and making its footsteps
coincide.

All at once the shadowy figure swung itself up softly and remained for an
instant, half-kneeling, in the body of the wagon.  Then suddenly,
noiselessly, it rose up, leaned over the absorbed Joel Mazarine, and with
long, hooked, steely fingers caught the throat of the Master of Tralee
under the grayish beard.  They clenched there with a power like that of
three men; for this was the kind of grip which, far away in the country
of the Yang-tse-kiang, Li Choo had learned in the days when he had made
youth a thing to be remembered.

No convulsive effort on the part of the victim could loosen that terrible
grip; but the horses, responding to the first jerk of the reins following
the attack, stood still, while a human soul was being wrenched out of the
world behind them.

No word was spoken.  From the moment the fingers clutched his throat Joel
Mazarine could not speak, and Li Choo did his swift work in grim and
ghastly silence.

It did not take long.  When the vain struggles had ceased and the fingers
were loosened, Li Choo's tongue clucked in his mouth, once, twice,
thrice; and that was all.  It was a ghastly sort of mirth, and it had in
it a multitude of things.  Among them was vengeance and wild justice, and
the thing that comes down through innumerable years in the Oriental mind
--that the East is greater than the West; that now and then the East must
prove itself against the West with all the cruelty of the world's prime.

For a moment Li Choo stood and looked at the motionless figure, with the
head fallen on the breast; then he put the reins carefully in the hands
of the dead man, placed the fallen hat on his head, climbed down from the
wagon, patted a horse as he slip-slopped by, and disappeared towards
Tralee into the night, leaving what was left of Joel Mazarine in his
wagon at the crossing of the trails.

As Li Choo stole swiftly away, he met two other figures, silent and
shadowy, and somehow strangely unreal, like his own.  After a moment's
whisperings, they all three turned their faces again towards Tralee.

Once they stopped and listened.  There was the sound of wagons.  One was
coming from the north--that is, from the direction of Tralee; the other
was coming from the south-east-that is, Nolan Doyle's ranch.

Li Choo's tongue clucked in his mouth; then he made an exclamation in
Chinese, at which the others clucked also, and then they moved on again.




CHAPTER XVI

THE CROSS TRAILS

Like Joel Mazarine on his journey from Askatoon, Orlando, on his journey
from Nolan Doyle's ranch, was absorbed, but his reflections were as
different from those of the Master of Tralee as sunrise is from midnight;
indeed, so bright was the light within Orlando's spirit that the very
prairie around him seemed aflame.  The moment with Louise in the garden
lighted by the dim moon, the passing instant of perfect understanding,
the touch of her hair upon his lips, her supple form yielding to his as
he clasped her in his arms, had dropped like a curtain between him and
the fateful episode in the main street of Askatoon.

That wonderful elation of youth on its first excursion into perfumed
meads of Love possessed him.  He had never had flutterings of the heart
for any woman until his eyes met the eyes of Louise at their first
meeting, and a new world had been opened up to him.  He had been as naive
and native a human being with all his apparent foppishness, as had ever
moved among men.  What seemed his vanity had nothing to do with thoughts
of womankind.  It had been a decorative sense come honestly from
picturesque forebears, and indeed from his own mother.

In truth, until the day he had met Louise, or rather until the day of the
broncho-busting, and the fateful night on the prairie, he had never grown
up.  He was wise with the wisdom of a child--sheer instinct, rightness
of mind, real decision of character.  His giggling laugh had been the
undisciplined simplicity of the child, which, when he had reached
manhood, had never been formalized by conventions.  Something indefinite
had marked him until Louise had come, and now he was definite,
determined, alive with a new feeling which made his spirit sing--his
spirit and his lips; for, as he came from Nolan Doyle's ranch to the
Cross Trails, he kept humming to himself, between moments of silence in
which he visualized Louise in a hundred attitudes, as he had seen her.
There had come to him, without the asking even, that which Joel Mazarine,
had he been as rich as any man alive or dead, could not have bought.
That was why he hummed to himself in happiness.

Youth answering to youth had claimed its own; love springing from the
dawn, brave and bright-eyed, had waved its wand towards that good country
called Home.  Never from the first had any thought come into the minds of
either of these two that was not linked with the idea of home.  Nothing
of the jungle had been in their thoughts, though they had been tempted,
and love and the moment's despair had stung them to take revenge in each
other's arms; yet they had kept the narrow path.  There was in their love
something primeval, that belonged to the beginning of the world.

Orlando had almost reached the Cross Trails before he saw Mazarine's
wagon standing in the way.  At first he did not recognize the horses, and
he called to the driver sitting motionless to move aside.  He thought it
to be some drunken ranchman.

Presently, however, coming nearer, he recognized the horses and the man.
Standing up, Orlando was about to call out again in peremptory tones,
when, suddenly, the spirit of death touched his senses, and his heart
stood still for an instant.

As he looked at the motionless figure, he was only subconsciously aware
of the thud of horses' hoofs coming down one of the side-trails.
Springing to the ground, he approached Mazarine's wagon.

The horses neighed; it was a curious, lonely sound.  For a moment he
stood with his hand on the wheel looking at the still figure; then he
reached out and touched Mazarine's knee.

"Hi, there!" he said.

There was no reply.  He mounted the wagon, touched the dead man's
shoulder, and then, with one hand, loosened the waistcoat and felt the
heart.  It was still.  He examined the body.  There was no wound.  He
peered into the face, and saw the distortion there.  "Dead--dead!" he
said in an awed voice.

The husband of Louise was dead.  How he died, in one sense, did not
matter.  Louise's husband was dead; he would torture her no more.  Louise
was free!

Slowly he got down from the wagon, vaguely wondering what to do, so had
the tragedy confused his brain for the moment.  As he did so, he was
conscious of another wagon and horses a few yards away.

"Who goes there?" called the voice of the newcomer.

"A friend," answered Orlando mechanically.  Presently the new-comer
sprang down from his wagon and came over to Orlando.

"What is it, Mr. Guise?" he asked.  "What's the trouble?  .  .  .  Who's
that?" he added, pointing to the dead body.

"It's Mazarine.  He's dead," answered Orlando quietly.

"Oh, good God!" said the other.

He was an insurance agent of the town of Askatoon, who, that very
evening, had heard Orlando threaten the Master of Tralee--that if ever he
passed him or met him, and Mazarine did not get out of the way, it would
be the worse for him.  Well, here in the trail were Orlando and Mazarine
--and Mazarine was dead!

"Good God!" the new-comer repeated.  Scarsdale was his name.

Then Orlando explained.  "It's not what you think," he said.  Then he
told the story--such as there was to tell--of what had happened during
the last few moments.

Scarsdale climbed up into the wagon, struck a light, looked at the body
of Mazarine, at his face, and then lifted up the beard and examined the
neck.  There were finger-marks in the flesh.

"So, that's it," he said.  "Strangled!  He seems to have took it easy,
sittin' there like that," he added as he climbed down.

"I don't understand it," remarked Orlando.  "As you say, it's weird, his
sitting there like that with the reins in his hands.  I don't understand
it!"

"I saw you getting down from the wagon," remarked Scarsdale meaningly.

"Say, do you really believe--?" began Orlando without agitation, but
with a sudden sense of his own false position.

"It ain't a matter of belief," the other declared.  "If there's an
inquest, I've got to tell what I've seen.  You know that, don't you?"

"That's all right," replied Orlando.  "You've got to tell what you've
seen, and so have I.  I guess the truth will out.  Come, let's move him
on to Tralee.  We'll lay him down in the bottom of the wagon, and I'll
lead his horses with a halter.  .  .  .  No," he added, changing his
mind, "you lead my horses, and I'll drive him home."

A moment afterwards, as the procession made its way to Tralee, Scarsdale
said to himself:

"He must have nerves like iron to drive Mazarine home, if he killed him.
Well, he's got them, and still they call him Giggles as if he was a silly
girl!"




CHAPTER XVII

THE SUPERIOR MAN

Students of life have noticed constantly that moral distinctions are not
matters of principle but of certain peremptory rules found on nice
calculations of the social mind.  In the field of crime, responsibility
is most often calculated, not upon the crime itself, but upon how the
thing is done.

In Askatoon, no one would have been greatly shocked if, when Orlando
Guise and Joel Mazarine met at the railway-station or in the main street,
Orlando had killed Mazarine.

Mazarine would have been dead in either case; and he would have been
killed by another hand in either case; but the attitude of the public
would not have been the same in either case.  The public would have
considered the killing of Mazarine before the eyes of the world as
justifiable homicide; its dislike of the man would have induced it to
add the word justifiable.

But that Joel Mazarine should be killed by night without an audience,
secretly--however righteously--shocked the people of Askatoon.

Had they seen the thing done, there would have been sensation, but no
mystery; but night, secrecy, distance, mystery, all begot, not a reaction
in Mazarine's favour, but a protest against the thing being done under
cover, as it were, unhelped by popular observation.  Also, to the
Askatoon mind, that one man should kill another in open quarrel was
courageous, or might be courageous,--but for one man to kill another,
whoever that other was, in a hidden way, was a barbarian business.

It seemed impossible to have any doubt as to who killed the man, though
Orlando had not waited a moment after the body had been brought to
Tralee, but had gone straight to the police, and told what had happened,
so far as he knew it.  He stated the exact facts.

The insurance man, Scarsdale, would not open his mouth until the inquest,
which took place on the afternoon after the crime had been committed.  It
was held at Tralee.  Great crowds surrounded the house, but only a few
found entrance to the inquest room.

Immediately on opening the inquest, Orlando was called to tell his story.
Every eye was fixed upon him intently; every ear was strained as he
described his coming upon the isolated wagon and the dead man with the
reins in his hands.  It is hard to say if all believed his story, but the
Coroner did, and Burlingame, his lawyer, also did.

Burlingame was present, not to defend Orlando, because it was not a
trial, but to watch his interests in the face of staggering
circumstantial evidence.  To Burlingame's mind Orlando was not the man to
kill another by strangling him to death.  It was not in keeping with his
character.  It was too aboriginal.

The Coroner believed the story solely because Orlando's frankness and
straightforwardness filled him with confidence.  Also men of rude sense,
like Jonas Billings, were willing to take bets, five to one, that Orlando
was innocent.

The Young Doctor had not an instant's doubt, but he could not at first
fix his suspicions in a likely quarter.  He had examined the body, and
there were no marks save bruises at the throat.  In his evidence he said
that enormous strength of hands had been necessary to kill so quickly,
for it was clear the attack was so overpowering that there was little
struggle.

The Coroner here interposed a question as to whether it would have been
possible for anyone but a man to commit the crime.  At his words
everybody moved impatiently.  It was certain he was referring to the
absent wife.  The idea of Louise committing such a crime, or being able
to commit it, was ridiculous.  The Coroner presently stated that he had
only asked the question so as to remove this possibility from
consideration.

The Young Doctor immediately said that probably no woman in the
hemisphere could have committed the crime, which needed enormous strength
of hands.

The Coroner looked round the room.  "The widow, Mrs. Mazarine, is not
here?" he said questioningly.

Nolan Doyle interposed.  "Mrs. Mazarine is at my ranch.  She came there
yesterday evening at eight o'clock and remained with my wife and myself
until twelve o'clock.  The murder was committed before twelve o'clock.
Mrs. Mazarine does not even know that her husband is dead.  She is not
well to-day, and we have kept the knowledge from her."

"Is she under medical care?" asked the Coroner.  Nolan Doyle nodded
towards the Young Doctor, who said: "I saw Mrs. Mazarine at the house of
Mr. Doyle last evening between the hours of eight and ten o'clock.  To-
day at noon also I visited her.  She has a slight illness, and is not fit
to take part in these proceedings."

At this point, Scarsdale, who had come upon Orlando and the dead man at
the Cross Trails the night before, told his story.  He did it with
evident reluctance.

He spoke with hesitation, yet firmly and straightforwardly.  He described
how he saw Orlando climb down from the wagon where the dead man was.  He
added, however, that he had seen no struggle of any kind, though he had
seen Orlando close to the corpse.  Questioned by the Coroner, he
described the scenes between Orlando and Mazarine in the main street of
Askatoon and at the railway-station, both of which he had seen.  He
repeated Orlando's threat to Mazarine.

He was pressed as to whether Orlando showed agitation at the Cross
Trails.  He replied that Orlando seemed stunned but not agitated.

He was asked whether Orlando had shown the greater agitation at the Cross
Trails or in the town when he threatened Mazarine.  The answer was that
he showed agitation only in the town.  He was asked to repeat what
Orlando had said to him.  This he did accurately.

He was then asked by counsel whether he had arrived at any conclusion,
when at the Cross Trails or afterwards, as to who committed the crime;
but the Coroner would not permit the question.  The Coroner added that it
was only the duty of the witness to state what he had seen.  Opinions
were not permissible as evidence.  The facts were in possession of the
Court, and the Court could form its own judgment.

It was clear to everyone that the jury must return a verdict of wilful
murder, and it was equally clear that the evidence was sufficient to fix
suspicion upon Orlando, which must lead to his arrest.  Two constables
were in close attendance, and were ready to take charge of the man who,
above all others, or so it was thought, had most reason to wish Mazarine
out of the way.  Indeed, Orlando had resigned himself to the situation,
having realized how all the evidence was against him.

Recalling Orlando, the Coroner asked if it was the case that the death of
Mazarine might be an advantage to him in any way.  Orlando replied that
it might be an advantage to him, but he was not sure.  He added, however,
that if, as the Coroner seemed to suggest, he himself was under
suspicion, it ought to appear to all that to have murdered Mazarine in
the circumstances would have put in jeopardy any possible advantage.
That seemed logical enough, but it was presently pointed out to the
Coroner that the same consideration had existed when Orlando had
threatened Mazarine in the streets of Askatoon.

Presently the Coroner said: "There's a half-breed woman and a Chinaman,
servants of the late Mr. Mazarine.  Have the woman called."

It was at this moment that the Young Doctor and Orlando also were
suddenly seized with a suspicion of their own.  Orlando remembered how
Mazarine had horsewhipped and maltreated Li Choo.  The Young Doctor fixed
his eyes intently on the body, and presently went to it again, raised the
beard and looked at the neck.  Coming back to his place, he nodded to
himself.  He had a clue.  Now he understood about the enormous strength
which had killed Mazarine practically without a struggle.  He had noticed
more than once the sinewy fingers of the Chinaman.  As the inquest went
on, he had again and again looked at the hands and arms of Orlando, and
it had seemed impossible that, strong as he was, his fingers had the
particular strength which could have done this thing.

The Coroner stood waiting for Rada to come, when suddenly the door opened
and a Chinaman entered--one of the two who had appeared so strangely on
the scene the day before.  He advanced to the Coroner with both hands
loosely hanging in the great sleeves of his blue padded coat, his eyes
blinking slowly underneath the brown forehead and the little black
skullcap, and after making salutation with his arms, in curious,
monotonous English with a quaint accent he said:

"Li Choo--Li Choo--he speak.  He have to say.  He send."

Holding up a piece of paper, he handed it to the Coroner and then stood
blinking and immobile.

A few moments afterwards, the Coroner said: "I have received this note
from Li Choo the Chinaman, sometime employed by the deceased Joel
Mazarine.  I will read it to you."  Slowly he read:

"I say gloddam.  That Orlando he not kill Mazaline.  I say gloddam
Mazaline.  That Mazaline he Chlistian.  He says Chlist his brother.
Chlist not save him when Li Choo's fingers had Mazaline's thloat.  That
gloddam Mazaline I kill.  That Mazaline kicked me, hit me with whip;
where he kick, I sick all time.  I not sleep no more since then.  That
Louise, it no good she stay with Mazaline.  Confucius speak like this:
'Young woman go to young man; young bird is for green leaves, not dry
branch.' That Louise good woman; that Orlando hell-fellow good.  I kill
Mazaline--gloddam, with my hands I kill.  You want know all why Li Choo
kill?  You want kill Li Choo?  You come!"

As the Coroner stopped reading, amid gasps of excitement, the Chinaman
who had brought the notewith brown skin polished like a kettle,
expressionless, save for the twinkling mystery of the brown eyesmade
three motions of obeisance up and down with his hands clasped in the
great sleeves, and then said:

"He not come you; you come him.  He gleat man.  He speak all--come.  I
show where."

"Where is he?" asked the Coroner.

The Chinaman did not reply for a moment.  Then he said: "He sacrifice
before you take him.  He gleat man--come."  He slip-slopped towards the
door as though confident he would be followed.

Two minutes afterwards the Coroner, Orlando, the Young Doctor, Nolan
Doyle and the rest stood at the low doorway of what looked like a great
grave.  It was, however, a big root-house used for storing vegetables in
the winter-time.  It had not been used since Mazarine arrived at Tralee.
Into this place, nor far from the house, Li Choo and his two fellow
countrymen had gone the day before, when Mazarine, in his rage, had come
forth with the horsewhip to punish the "Chinky," as Li Choo was
familiarly known on the ranch.

As they arrived at the vault-like place in the ground, which would hold
many tons of roots, another Chinaman came to the doorway.  He was one of
the two who, in their sudden coming and going, had seemed like magic
people to Mazarine the day before.  He made upward and downward motions
of respect with clasped hands in the blue sleeves, and presently, in
perfect English, he said:

"In one minute Li Choo will receive you.  It is the moment of sacrifice.
You wish him to die for the death of Mazarine.  So be it.  It is right
for him to die.  You will hang him; that is your law.  He will not
prevent you.  He has told the truth, but he is making the sacrifice.
When that is done you will enter and take him to prison."

The two constables standing beside the Coroner made a move forward, as
though to show they meant to enforce the law without any palaver.

The Chinaman raised the palms of both hands at them.  "Not yet," he said.
Then he looked at the Coroner.  "You are master.  Will you not prevent
them?"

The Coroner motioned the constables back.  "All right," he said.  "You
seem to speak good English."

"I come from England-from Oxford University," answered the Chinaman with
dignity.  "I have learned English for many years.  I am the son of Duke
Ki.  I came to see my uncle, the brother of Duke Ki.  He is making
sacrifice before you take him."

"Well, I'm blasted," said Jonas Billings from the crowd.  "Chinese dukes,
eh!  What's it all about?"  "Reg'lar hocus-pocus," remarked the vagabond
brother of Rigby the chemist.

At that moment little coloured lights suddenly showed in the darkness of
the root-house, and there was the tinkling of a bell.  Then a voice
seemed calling, but softly, with a long, monotonous, thrilling note.

"Many may not come," said the Chinaman at the door to the Coroner, as he
turned and entered the low doorway.

A minute afterwards the two constables held back the crowd from the
doorway of the root-house, from the threshold of which a few wooden steps
descended to the ground inside.

A strange sight greeted the eyes of those permitted to enter.

The root-house had been transformed.  What had been a semi-underground
place composed of scantlings, branches of trees and mother earth, with a
kind of vaulted roof, had been made into a sort of Chinese temple.  All
round the walls were hung curtains of black and yellow, decorated with
dragons in gold, and above, suspended by cords at the four corners, was a
rug or banner of white ornamented with a great tortoise--the sacred
animal of Chinese religion--with gold eyes and claws.  All round the side
of the room were set coloured lights, shaded and dim.  Coming from the
bright outer sunlight, the place in its shadowed state seemed half-
sepulchral.

When the Coroner, Orlando, the Young Doctor and the others had accustomed
themselves to the dimness, they saw at the end of the chamber--for such,
in effect, it had been made with its trappings and decorations--a figure
seated upon the ground.  Near by the figure, on either hand, there were
standards bearing banners, and the staffs holding the banners were, bound
in white silk, with long streamers hanging down.  Half enclosing the
banners were fanlike screens.  Along the walls also were flags with
toothed edges.  The figure was seated on a mat of fine bamboo in the
midst of this strange scheme of decoration.  Behind him, and drawn
straight across the chamber, was a sheet of fine white cloth, embroidered
with strange designs.  He was clothed in a rich jacket of blue, and a
pair of sandal-like shoes was placed neatly in front of the bamboo mat.
On either side and in front of all, raised a little from the ground, were
bowls or calabashes containing fruit, grain and dried and pickled meats.
It was all orderly, circumspect, weird, and even stately though the place
was small.  Finally, in front of the motionless figure was a tiny brazier
in which was a small fire.

Before the spectators had taken in the whole picture, the Chinaman who
had entered with them came and stood on the right of the space occupied
by the mat, near to the banners and the screens, and under a yellow light
which hung from the vaulted roof.

The figure on the fine bamboo mat was Li Choo, but not the Li Choo which
Tralee and Askatoon had known.  He was seated with legs crossed in
Oriental fashion and with head slightly bowed.  His face was calm and
dignified.  It had an impassiveness which made an interminable distance
between him and those who had till now looked upon him as a poor Chinky,
doing a roustabout's work on a ranch, the handy-man, the Jack-of-all-
trades.  Yet in spite of the menial work which he had done, it was now to
be seen that the despised Li Choo had still lived his own life, removed
by centuries and innumerable leagues from his daily slavery.

As they looked at him, brooding, immobile, strange, he lifted his head,
and the excessive brightness of his black eyes struck with a sense of awe
all who saw.  It was absurd that Li Choo, the hireling, "Yellowphiz," as
he had also been called, should here command a situation with the
authority of one who ruled.

Presently he spoke, not in broken English, but in Chinese.  It was
interpreted by the Chinaman standing on the right by the screens, in well
cadenced, cultured English.

"I have to tell you," said Li Choo--the other's voice repeated the words
after him--"that I am the son of greatness, of a ruler in my own land.
It was by the Yang-tze-kiang, and there were riches and pleasant things
in the days of my youth.  In the hunt, at the tavern, I was first amongst
them all.  I had great strength.  I once killed a bear with my bare
hands.  My hands had fame.

"I had office in the city where my cousin ruled.  He was a bad man, and
was soon forgotten, though his children mourn for him as is the custom.
I killed him.  He gave counsel concerning the city when there was war,
but his counsel was that of a traitor, and the city was lost.  Now
behold, it is written that he who has given counsel about the country or
its capital should perish with it when it comes into peril.  He would not
die--so I killed him; but not before he had heaped upon me baseness and
shame.  So I killed him.

"Yet it is written that when a minister kills his ruler, all who are in
office with him shall without mercy kill him who did the deed.  That is
the law.  It was the word of the Son of Heaven that this should be.  But
those who were in office with me would not kill me, because they approved
of what I did.  Yet they must kill me, since it was the law.  What was
there to do but in the night to flee, so that they who should kill me
might not obey the law?  Had I remained, and they had not obeyed the law,
they also would have been slain."

He paused for a moment and then went on.  "So I fled, and it is many
years since by the Yang-tze-kiang I killed my ruler and saved my friends.
Yet I had not been faithful to the ancient law, and so through the long
years I have done low work among a low people.  This was for atonement,
for long ago by the Yang-tzekiang I should have died, and behold, I have
lived until now.  To save my friends from the pain of killing me I fled
and lived; but at last here at this place I said to myself that I must
die.  So, secretly, I made this cellar into a temple.

"That was a year ago, and I sent to my brother the Duke Ki to speak to
him what was in my mind, so that he might send my kinsmen to me, that
when I came to die, it should be after the manner ordained by the Son of
Heaven; that my body should be clothed according to the ancient rites by
my own people, my mouth filled with rice, and the meats, and grains and
fruits of sacrifice be placed on a mat at the east of my body when I
died; that the curtain should be hung before my corpse; that I should be
laid upon a mat of fine bamboo, and dressed, and prepared for my grave,
and put into a noble coffin as becomes a superior man.  Did not the Son
of Heaven say that we speak of the end of a superior man, but we speak of
the death of a small man?  I was a superior man, but I have lived as a
small man these many days; and now, behold, I am drawing near to my end
as a superior man.

"I wished that nothing should be forgotten; that all should be done when
I, of the house of the Duke Ki, came to my superior end.  So, these my
kinsmen came, these of my family, to be with me at my going, to call my
spirit back from the roof-top with face turned to the north, to leap
before my death-mat, to wail and bare the shoulders and bind the
sackcloth about the head.

"I have served among the low people doing low things, and now I would
die, but in the correct way.  Once to the listeners Confucius said: 'The
great mountain must crumble; the strong beam must break; the wise man
must wither away like a plant.'  So it is.  It is my duty to go to my
end, for the time is far spent, and I should do what my friends must have
done had I stayed in my ancestral city."

Again he paused, and now he rocked his body backwards and forwards for a
moment; then presently he continued: "Yet I would not go without doing
good.  There should be some act among the low people by which I should be
remembered.  So, once again, I killed a man.  He could not withstand the
strength of my fingers--they were like steel upon his throat.  As a young
man my fingers were like those of three men.

"Shall a man treat his wife as she, Louise, was treated?  Shall a man
raise his hand against his wife, and live?  also, was he to live--the low
man--that struck a high man like me with his hands, with the whip, with
his feet, stamping upon me on the ground?  Was that to be, and he live?
Were the young that should have but one nest to be parted, to have only
sorrow, if Joel lived?  So I killed him with my hands" (he slightly
raised his clasped hands, as though to emphasize what he said, but the
gesture was grave and quiet)"--so I killed him, and so I must die.

"It was the duty of my friends to kill me by the Yang-tze-kiang.  It is
your duty, you of the low people, to kill me who has killed a low man;
but my friends by the Yang-tze-kiang were glad that the ruler died, and
you of the low people are glad that Joel is dead.  Yet it is your duty to
kill me.  .  .  .  But it shall not be."

He quickly reached out his hands and drew the burning brazier close to
his feet; then, suddenly, from a sleeve of his robe he took a little box
of the sacred tortoise-shell, pressed his lips to it, opened it, poured
its contents upon the flame, leaned over with his face close to the
brazier and inhaled the little puff of smoke that came from it.

So for a few seconds--and then he raised himself and sat still with eyes
closed and hands clasped in his long sleeves.  Presently his head fell
forward on his breast.

A pungent smell passed through the chamber.  It produced for the moment
dizziness in all present.  Then the sensation cleared away.  The Chinaman
at the right of Li Choo looked steadfastly at him; then, all at once, he
bared his shoulders and quickly bound a piece of sackcloth round his
head.  This done, he raised his voice and cried out with a monotonous
ululation, and at once a second voice cried out in a long wailing call.

Outside Li Choo's kinsman, with his face turned to the north, was calling
his spirit back, though he knew it would not come.

At the first sound of the voice crying outside, the Chinaman beside Li
Choo leaped thrice in front of the brazier, the mat and the moveless
body.

At that moment the Young Doctor came forward.  He who had leaped stood
between him and the body of Li Choo.

"You must not come.  Li Choo, the superior man, is dead," he protested.

"I am a doctor," was the reply.  "If he is dead, the law will not touch
him, and you shall be alone with him, but the law must know that he is
dead.  That is the way that prevails among the 'low people,'" he added
ironically.

The Chinaman stood aside, and the Young Doctor stooped, felt the pulse,
touched the heart and lifted up the head and looked into Li Choo's
sightless eyes.

"He is dead," he said, and he came back again to the Coroner and the
others.  "Let's get out of this," he added.  "He is beyond our reach now.
No need for an inquest here.  He has killed himself."  Then he caught
Orlando's hand in a warm grip.

As they left the chamber, the kinsman of Li Choo was gently laying the
body down upon the bamboo mat.  At the doorway the other son of the Duke
Ki was still monotonously calling back the departed spirit.

The inquest on Joel Mazarine was ended presently, and Nolan Doyle and the
Young Doctor set out to tell Louise that a "low man," once her husband,
had paid a high price for all that he had bought of the fruits of life
out of due season.




CHAPTER XVIII

YOUTH HAS ITS WAY

"Aw, Doctor dear, there's manny that's less use in the wurruld than
Chinamen, and I'd like to see more o' them here-away," remarked Patsy
Kernaghan to the Young Doctor in the springtime of another year.
"Stren'th of mind is all right, but stren'th of fingers is better still."

"You're a bloodthirsty pagan, Patsy," returned the Young Doctor.

"Hell to me sowl, then, didn't Li Choo pull things straight?  I'm not
much of a murd'ring man meself--I haven't the stren'th with me fingers,
but there's manny a time I'd like to do what Li Choo done.  .  .  .
Shure, I don't want to be sp'akin' ill of the dead, but look at it now.
There was ould Mazarine, breakin' the poor child's heart, as fine a fella
as iver trod the wurruld achin' for her, and his life bein' spoilt by the
goin's on at Tralee.  Then in steps the Chinky and with stren'th of mind
and stren'th of fingers puts things right."

"No, no, Patsy, you've got bad logic and worse morals in your head.  As
you say, things were put right, but trouble enough came of it."

"Divils me darlin', Doctor, it was bound to come all right some time.
Shure, wasn't it natural the child should be all crumpled up like and
lose her head for a while?  Wasn't it natural she should fight out agin'
takin' the property the leviathin left her, whin she knew there was
another will he'd spoke on a paper to the lawyer the night he died,
though he hadn't signed it?  And isn't it so that yourself it was talked
her round!"

The Young Doctor waved a hand reprovingly, but Patsy continued:

"Now, lookin' back on it, don't ye think it was clever enough what you
said till her?  'Do justice to yourself and to others, little lady,' sez
you.  'Be just--divide the place up; give two-thirds of it away to the
children of Joel's first two wives and keep one-third, which is yours by
law in anny case.  For why should it be that you should give iverythin'
and get nothin'?  He had the best of you-of your girlhood and your
youth,' sez you.  'Shure y'are entitled to bread and meat, and a roof
over you, as a wife, and as one that got nothin' from your married life
of what ought to be got by honest girls like you, or by anny woman, if it
comes to that,' sez you.  Aw, shure then, I know you said it, because,
didn't she tell it all to Norah Doyle, and didn't Norah tell Nolan, and
me sittin' by and glad enough that the cleverest man betune here and the
other side of the wurruld talked her round!  Aw, how you talk, y'r anner!
Shure, isn't it the wonder that you don't talk the dead back to the
wurruld out of which you help them?  I might ha' been a great man meself"
--he grinned--"if I'd had your eddication, but here I am, a 'low man' as
Li Choo said, takin' me place simple as a babe."

"Patsy, you save my life," remarked the Young Doctor.  "You save my life
daily.  That's why I'm glad you're getting a good home at last."

"At Slow Down Ranch, with her that's to be its queen!  Well, isn't that
like her to be thinkin' of others?  As a rule the rich is so busy lookin'
afther what they've got that they're not worryin' about the poor; but she
thought of me, didn't she?"

The Young Doctor nodded, and Patsy pursued his tale.  "Haven't I see her
day in, day out, at Nolan Doyle's ranch, and don't I understan' why it is
she's not set foot in Tralee since the ould one left it feet foremost,
for his new seven-foot home, housed in a bit of wood-him that had had the
run of the wurruld?  She'll set no foot in Tralee at all anny time, if
she can help it--that's the breed of her.

"Well, it is as it is, and what's goin' to be will plaze every mother's
son in Askatoon.  Giggles they called him!  A bit of a girl they thought
him!  What's he turned out to be, though he's giggling still?  Why, a man
that's got the double cinch on Askatoon.  Even that fella Burlingame had
nothin' to say ag'in' him; and when Burlingame hasn't anny mud to throw,
then you must stop and look hard.  Shure, the blessed Virgin, or the
Almighty himself, couldn't escape the tongue of Augustus Burlingame--not
even you."

The Young Doctor burst out laughing.  "'The Blessed Mary, or the Almighty
himself--not even you!'  Well, Patsy, you're a wonder," he said.

"Aw, you're not goin' to get off by scoffin' at me," remarked Patsy.
"Shure, what did Augustus Burlingame say of you?--well now, what did he
say?"

"Yes, Patsy, what was it?" urged the other.  "Shure, he criticized you.
He called you 'Squills,' and said you'd helped more people intil the
wurruld than out of it."

"You call that criticism.  Patsy?"

"Whichever way you look at it, hasn't it an ugly face?  Is it a kindness
to man to bring him into the wurruld?  That's wan way of lookin' at it.
But suppose he meant the other thing, that not being married, you--"

"Patsy Kernaghan," interjected the Young Doctor sternly, "you're not fit
company.  Take care, or there'll be no Slow Down Ranch for you.  An evil
mind----"

Now it was Patsy's turn to interrupt: "Watch me now, I think that wan of
the most beautiful things I iver saw was them two young people comin'
together.  Five long months it was, afther Mazarine was put away before
she spoke with him.  It was in the gardin at Nolan's ranch, and even then
it wasn't aisy till her.  Not that she didn't want to see him all the
time; not, I'll be bound, that she didn't say, when you and Nolan first
told her the mastodon was dead, 'Thank God, I'm free!'  But, there he
was, flung out of the wurruld without a minute's notice, and with the
black thing in his heart.  Shure you'll be understandin' it a thousand
times better than meself, y'r anner."

He took a pinch of snuff from a little box, offered it to the Young
Doctor and continued his story.

"Well, as I said, whin five months had gone by they met.  By chanct I saw
the meetin'.  Watch me now, I'll tell you how it was.  She was sittin' on
a bench in the gardin, lookin' in front of her and seein' nothin' but
what was in her mind's eye, and who can tell what she would be seein'!
There she sat sweet as a saint, very straight up, the palms of her hands
laid on the bench on either side, as though they was supporfin' her--like
a statue she looked.  I watched her manny a minute, but she niver moved.
Well, there she was, lookin'--lookin' in front o' her, whin round the big
tree in the middle of the gardin he come and stood forninst her.  They
just looked and looked at each other without a word.  Like months it
seemed.  They looked, and looked, as though they was tryin' to read some
story in each other's eyes, and then she give a kind of joyful moan, and
intil his arms she went like a nestlin' bird.

"He raised up her head, and-well, now, y'r anner, I niver saw anything I
liked better.  There niver had been a girl in his life, and there niver
was a man in hers--not one that mattered, till they two took up with each
other, and it's a thing--well, y'r anner, I'd be a proud man if I could
write it down.  It's a story that'd take its place beside the ancient
ones."

The Young Doctor looked at Patsy meditatively.  "Patsy," said he, "the
difference between the north and the south of Ireland is that in the
south they are all poets--" He paused.

"Well, you haven't finished, y 'r anner," said Kernaghan.

"And in the north they think they are," continued the Young Doctor.
"I'd like to see those two as your eyes in front of your mind saw them,
Patsy."

"Aw, well then, you couldn't do it, Doctor dear, for you've niver been in
love.  Shure, there's no heart till ye!" answered the Irishman, and
took another pinch of snuff with a flourish.

                    ........................

Flamingo-like in her bright-coloured, figured gown, with a wild flower in
her hair and her gray curls dancing gently at her temples, a little old
lady trotted up and down the big sitting-room of Slow Down Ranch, talking
volubly and insistently.  One ironically minded would have said she
chirruped, for her words came out in not unmusical, if staccato, notes,
and she shook her shrivelled, ringed fingers reprovingly at a stalwart
young man.

Once or twice, as she seemed to threaten him with what the poet called
"The slow, unmoving finger of scorn," he giggled.  It was evident that he
was at once amused and troubled.  This voice had cherished and chided him
all his life, and he could measure accurately what was behind it.  It was
a wilful voice.  It had the insistance which power gives, and to a woman
--or to most women--power is either money or beauty, since, in the world
as it is, office and authority are denied them.  Beauty was gone from the
face of the ancient dame, but she still had much money, and, on rare
occasions, it gave her a little arrogance.  It did so now as she
admonished her beloved son, who at any time would have renounced fortune,
or hope of fortune, for some wilful idea of his own.  A less sordid
modern did not exist.

He was not very effective in the contest of tongue between his mother and
himself.  As the talk went on he foresaw that he was to be beaten; yet he
persisted, for he loved a joy-wrangle, as he called it, with his mother.
He had argued with her many a time, just to see her in a harmless
passion, and note how the youth of her came back, giving high colour to
the wrinkled face, and how the eyes shone with a brightness which had
been constant in them long ago.  They were now quarrelling over that
ever-fruitful cause of antagonism--the second woman in the life of a man.
Yet, strange to say, the flamingo-like Eugenie Guise, was fighting for
the second woman, not against her.

"I'll say it all again and again and again till you have sense, Orlando,"
she declared.  "Your old mother hasn't lived all these years for nothing.
I'm not thinking of you; I'm thinking of her."  She pointed towards the
door of another room, from which came sounds of laughter--happy laughter
--in which a man's and a woman's voices sounded.  "On the day she comes
into this house--and that's the day after to-morrow--I shall go.  I'll
stand at the door and welcome you, and see you have a good wedding-
breakfast and that it all goes off grand, then I shall vanish."

Orlando made a helpless gesture of the hand.  "Well, mother, as I said,
it will make us both unhappy--Louise as much as me.  You and I have never
been parted except for a few weeks at a time, and I'm sure I don't know
how I could stand it."

"Rather late to think about it," the other returned.  "You can't have two
women spoiling you in one house and being jealous of each other--oh, you
needn't toss your fingers!  Even two women that love each other can't
bear the competition.  Just because I love her and want her to be happy,
off I go to your Aunt Amelia to live with her.  She's poor, and I'll
still have someone to boss as I've bossed you.  I never knew how much I
loved Amelia till she got sick last year when everything terrible was
happening here.  I'm going, Orlando--

               Two birds hopping on one branch
               Would kill the joy of Slow Down Ranch--

"There, I made that up on the moment.  It's true, even if it is poetry."

"It isn't poetry, mother," was the reply, and there was an ironical look
in Orlando's eyes.  "Poetry's the truth of life," he hastened to add
carefully, "and it's not poetry to say that you could be a kill-joy."

The little lady tossed her head.  "Well, you'll never have a chance to
prove it, for I'm taking the express east on the night of your wedding.
That's settled.  Amelia needs me, and I'm going to her.  .  .  .  Your
wedding present will be the ranch and a hundred thousand dollars," she
added.

"You're the sun-dried fruit of Paradise, Mother," Orlando said, taking
her by the arms.

"I heard the Young Doctor call me a bird of Paradise once," she returned.
"People don't know how sharp my ears are.  .  .  .  But I never stored it
up against him.  Taste is born in you, and if people haven't got it in
the cradle, they never have it.  I suppose his mother went around in a
black alpaca and wore her hair like a wardress in a jail.  I'm sorry for
him--that's all."

"Suppose I should get homesick for you and run away from her!" remarked
Orlando slyly.

"Run away with her to me," chirruped Eugenie, with a vain little laugh.

Suddenly her manner changed, and she looked at her son with dreamy
intensity.  "You are so wonderfully young, my dear," she said, "and I am
very old.  I had much happiness with your father while he lived.  He was
such a wise man.  Always he gave in to me in the little things, and I
gave in to him in all the big things.  He almost made me a sensible
woman."

There was a strange wistfulness in her face.  Through all the years, down
beneath everything, there had been the helpless knowledge in her own
small, garish mind that she had little sense; now she realized that she
was given a chance to atone for all her pettiness by doing one great
sensible thing.

Orlando was about to embrace her, but she briskly, turned away.  She
could not endure that.  If he did it, the pent-up motherhood would break
forth, and her courage would take flight.  She was something more than
the "parokeet of Pernambukoko," as Patsy Kernaghan had called her.

She went to the door of the other room.  "I want to talk to the Young
Doctor about Amelia," she said.  "He's clever, and perhaps he could give
her a good prescription.  I'll send Louise to you.  It's nicer courting
in this room where you can see the garden and the grand hills.  You're
going to give Louise the little gray mare you lassooed last year, aren't
you?  I always think of Louise when I look at that gray mare.  You had to
break the pony's heart before she could be what she is--the nicest little
thing that ever was broken by a man's hand; and Louise, she had to have
her heart broken too.  Your father and I were almost of an age--he was
two years older, and we had our youth together.  And you and Louise are
so wonderfully young, too.  Be good to her, son.  She's never been
married.  She was only in prison with that old lizard.  What a horrible
mouth he had!  It's shut now," she added remorselessly.  Opening the door
of the other room, she disappeared.

A moment later, Louise entered upon Orlando.

The vanished months had worked wonders in her.  She was like the young
summer beyond the open windows, alive to her finger-tips, shyly radiant,
with shining eyes, yet in their depths an alluring pensiveness never to
leave them altogether.  Knowledge had come to her; an apprehending soul
was speaking in her face.  The sweetness of her smile, as she looked at
the man before her, was such as could only be distilled from the bitter
herbs of the desert.

"Oh, Orlando!" she said joyously, as she came forward.





ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS FOR THE ENTIRE "WILD YOUTH":

Highsterics, they call it
World was only the size of four walls to a sick person






NO DEFENSE

By Gilbert Parker



CONTENTS

BOOK I.
I.        THE TWO MEET
II.       THE COMING OF A MESSENGER
III.      THE QUARREL
IV.       THE DUEL
V.        THE KILLING OF ERRIS BOYNE
VI.       DYCK IN PRISON
VII.      MOTHER AND DAUGHTER
VIII.     DYCK'S FATHER VISITS HIM
IX.       A LETTER FROM SHEILA

BOOK II
X.        DYCK CALHOUN ENTERS THE WORLD AGAIN
XI.       WHITHER NOW?
XII.      THE HOUR BEFORE THE MUTINY
XIII.     TO THE WEST INDIES
XIV.      IN THE NICK OF TIME
XV.       THE ADMIRAL HAS HIS SAY

BOOK III
XVI.      A LETTER
XVII.     STRANGERS ARRIVE
XVIII.    AT SALEM
XIX.      LORD MALLOW INTERVENES
XX.       OUT OF THE HANDS OF THE PHILISTINES
XXI.      THE CLASH OF RACE
XXII.     SHEILA HAS HER SAY
XXIII.    THE COMING OF NOREEN
XXIV.     WITH THE GOVERNOR
XXV.      THEN WHAT HAPPENED




BOOK I


CHAPTER I

THE TWO MEET

"Well, good-bye, Dyck.  I'll meet you at the sessions, or before that at
the assizes."

It was only the impulsive, cheery, warning exclamation of a wild young
Irish spirit to his friend Dyck Calhoun, but it had behind it the humour
and incongruity of Irish life.

The man, Dyck Calhoun, after whom were sent the daring words about the
sessions and the assizes, was a year or two older than his friend, and,
as Michael Clones, his servant and friend, said, "the worst and best
scamp of them all"--just up to any harmless deviltry.

Influenced by no traditions or customs, under control of no stern records
of society, Calhoun had caused some trouble in his time by the harmless
deeds of a scapegrace, but morally--that is, in all relations of life
affected by the ten commandments--he was above reproach.  Yet he was of
the sort who, in days of agitation, then common in Ireland, might
possibly commit some act which would bring him to the sessions or the
assizes.  There never was in Ireland a cheerier, braver, handsomer
fellow, nor one with such variety of mind and complexity of purpose.

He was the only child of a high-placed gentleman; he spent all the money
that came his way, and occasionally loaded himself with debt, which his
angry father paid.  Yet there never was a gayer heart, a more generous
spirit, nor an easier-tempered man; though, after all, he was only
twenty-five when the words with which the tale opens were said to him.

He had been successful--yet none too successful--at school and Trinity
College, Dublin.  He had taken a pass degree, when he might have captured
the highest honours.  He had interested people of place in the country,
but he never used promptly the interest he excited.  A pretty face, a
fishing or a shooting expedition, a carouse in some secluded tavern, were
parts of his daily life.

At the time the story opens he was a figure of note among those who
spent their time in criticizing the government and damning the Irish
Parliament.  He even became a friend of some young hare-brained rebels of
the time; yet no one suspected him of anything except irresponsibility.
His record was clean; Dublin Castle was not after him.

When his young friend made the remark about the sessions and assizes,
Calhoun was making his way up the rocky hillside to take the homeward
path to his father's place, Playmore.  With the challenge and the
monstrous good-bye, a stone came flying up the hill after him and stopped
almost at his feet.  He made no reply, however, but waved a hand
downhill, and in his heart said:

"Well, maybe he's right.  I'm a damned dangerous fellow, there's no doubt
about that.  Perhaps I'll kill a rebel some day, and then they'll take me
to the sessions and the assizes.  Well, well, there's many a worse fate
than that, so there is."

After a minute he added:

"So there is, dear lad, so there is.  But if I ever kill, I'd like it to
be in open fight on the hills like this--like this, under the bright sun,
in the soft morning, with all the moor and valleys still, and the larks
singing--the larks singing!  Hooray, but it's a fine day, one of the best
that ever was!"

He laughed, and patted his gun gently.

"Not a feather, not a bird killed, not a shot fired; but the looking was
the thing--stalking the things that never turned up, the white heels we
never saw, for I'm not killing larks, God love you!"

He raised his head, looking up into the sky at some larks singing above
him in the heavens.

"Lord love you, little dears," he added aloud.  "I wish I might die with
your singing in my ears, but do you know what makes Ireland what it is?
Look at it now.  Years ago, just when the cotton-mills and the linen-
mills were doing well, they came over with their English legislation, and
made it hard going.  When we begin to get something, over the English
come and take the something away.  What have we done, we Irish people,
that we shouldn't have a chance in our own country?  Lord knows, we
deserve a chance, for it's hard paying the duties these days.  What with
France in revolution and reaching out her hand to Ireland to coax her
into rebellion; what with defeat in America and drink in Scotland; what
with Fox and Pitt at each other's throats, and the lord-lieutenant a
danger to the peace; what with poverty, and the cow and children and
father and mother living all in one room, with the chickens roosting in
the rafters; what with pointing the potato at the dried fish and gulping
it down as if it was fish itself; what with the smell and the dirt and
the poverty of Dublin and Derry, Limerick and Cork--ah, well!"  He threw
his eyes up again.

"Ah, well, my little love, sing on!  You're a blessing among a lot of
curses; but never mind, it's a fine world, and Ireland's the best part of
it.  Heaven knows it--and on this hill, how beautiful it is!"

He was now on the top of a hill where he could look out towards the bog
and in towards the mellow, waving hills.  He could drink in the yellowish
green, with here and there in the distance a little house; and about two
miles away smoke stealing up from the midst of the plantation where
Playmore was--Playmore, his father's house--to be his own one day.

How good it was!  There, within his sight, was the great escarpment of
rock known as the Devil's Ledge, and away to the east was the black spot
in the combe known as the Cave of Mary.  Still farther away, towards the
south, was the great cattle-pasture, where, as he looked, a thousand
cattle roamed.  Here and there in the wide prospect were plantations
where Irish landlords lived, and paid a heavy price for living.  Men did
not pay their rents.  Crops were spoiled, markets were bad, money was
scarce, yet--

"Please God, it will be better next year!"  Michael Clones said, and
there never was a man with a more hopeful heart than Michael Clones.

Dyck Calhoun had a soul of character, originality, and wayward
distinction.  He had all the impulses and enthusiasms of a poet, all the
thirst for excitement of the adventurer, all the latent patriotism of the
true Celt; but his life was undisciplined, and he had not ordered his
spirit into compartments of faith and hope.  He had gifts.  They were
gifts only to be borne by those who had ambitions.

Now, as he looked out upon the scene where nature was showing herself at
her best, some glimmer of a great future came to him.  He did not know
which way his feet were destined to travel in the business of life.  It
was too late to join the navy; but there was still time enough to be a
soldier, or to learn to be a lawyer.

As he gazed upon the scene, his wonderful deep blue eyes, his dark brown
hair thick upon his head, waving and luxuriant like a fine mattress, his
tall, slender, alert figure, his bony, capable hands, which neither sun
nor wind ever browned, his nervous yet interesting mouth, and his long
Roman nose, set in a complexion rich in its pink-and-cream hardness and
health--all this made him a figure good to see.

Suddenly, as he listened to the lark singing overhead, with his face
lifted to the sky, he heard a human voice singing; and presently there
ran up a little declivity to his left a girl--an Irish girl of about
seventeen years of age.

Her hat was hanging on her arm by a green ribbon.  Her head was covered
with the most wonderful brown, waving hair.  She had a broad, low
forehead, Greek in its proportions and lines.  The eyes were bluer even
than his own, and were shaded by lashes of great length, which slightly
modified the firm lines of the face, with its admirable chin, and mouth
somewhat large with a cupid's bow.

In spite of its ardent and luscious look, it was the mouth of one who
knew her own mind and could sustain her own course.  It was open when
Dyck first saw it, because she was singing little bits of wild lyrics of
the hills, little tragedies of Celtic life--just bursts of the Celtic
soul, as it were, cheerful yet sad, buoyant and passionate, eager yet
melancholy.  She was singing in Irish too.  They were the words of songs
taught her by her mother's maid.

She had been tramping over the hills for a couple of hours, virile,
beautiful, and alone.  She wore a gown of dark gold, with little green
ribbons here and there.  The gown was short, and her ankles showed.  In
spite of the strong boots she wore they were alert, delicate, and
shapely, and all her beauty had the slender fullness of a quail.

When she saw Dyck, she stopped suddenly, her mouth slightly open.  She
gave him a sidelong glance of wonder, interest, and speculation.  Then
she threw her head slightly back, and all the curls gathered in a bunch
and shook like bronze flowers.  It was a head of grace and power, of
charm and allurement--of danger.

Dyck was lost in admiration.  He looked at her as one might look at a
beautiful thing in a dream.  He did not speak; he only smiled as he gazed
into her eyes.  She was the first to speak.

"Well, who are you?" she asked with a slightly southern accent in her
voice, delicate and entrancing.  Her head gave a little modest toss, her
fine white teeth caught her lower lip with a little quirk of humour; for
she could see that he was a gentleman, and that she was safe from
anything that might trouble her.

He replied to her question with the words:

"My name?  Why, it's Dyck Calhoun.  That's all."

Her eyes brightened.  "Isn't that enough?" she asked gently.

She knew of his family.  She was only visiting in the district with her
mother, but she had lately heard of old Miles Calhoun and his wayward
boy, Dyck; and here was Dyck, with a humour in his eyes and a touch of
melancholy at his lips.  Somehow her heart went out to him.

Presently he said to her: "And what's your name?"

"I'm only Sheila Llyn, the daughter of my mother, a widow, visiting at
Loyland Towers.  Yes, I'm only Sheila!"

She laughed.

"Well, just be 'only Sheila,"' he answered admiringly, and he held out a
hand to her.  "I wouldn't have you be anything else, though it's none of
my business."

For one swift instant she hesitated; then she laid her hand in his.

"There's no reason why we should not," she said.  "Your father's
respectable."

She looked at him again with a sidelong glance, and with a whimsical,
reserved smile at her lips.

"Yes, he's respectable, I agree, but he's dull," answered Dyck.  "For an
Irishman, he's dull--and he's a tyrant, too.  I suppose I deserve that,
for I'm a handful."

"I think you are, and a big handful too!"

"Which way are you going?" he asked presently.

"And you?"

"Oh, I'm bound for home."  He pointed across the valley.  "Do you see
that smoke coming up from the plantation over there?"

"Yes, I know," she answered.  "I know.  That's Playmore, your father's
place.  Loyland Towers is between here and there.  Which way were you
going there?"

"Round to the left," he said, puzzled, but agreeable.

"Then we must say good-bye, because I go to the right.  That's my nearest
way."

"Well, if that's your nearest way, I'm going with you," he said,
"because--well, because--because--"

"If you won't talk very much!" she rejoined with a little air of
instinctive coquetry.

"I don't want to talk.  I'd like to listen.  Shall we start?"

A half-hour later they suddenly came upon an incident of the road.

It was, alas, no uncommon incident.  An aged peasant, in a sudden fit of
weakness, had stumbled on the road, and, in falling, had struck his head
on a stone and had lost consciousness.  He was an old peasant of the
usual Irish type, coarsely but cleanly dressed.  Lying beside him was a
leather bag, within which were odds and ends of food and some small books
of legend and ritual.  He was a peasant of a superior class, however.

In falling, he had thrown over on his back, and his haggard face was
exposed to the sun and sky.  At sight of him Dyck and Sheila ran forward.
Dyck dropped on one knee and placed a hand on the stricken man's heart.

"He's alive, all right," Dyck said.  "He's a figure in these parts.  His
name's Christopher Dogan."

"Where does he live?"

"Live?  Well, not three hundred yards from here, when he's at home, but
he's generally on the go.  He's what the American Indians would call a
medicine-man."

"He needs his own medicine now."

"He's over eighty, and he must have gone dizzy, stumbled, fallen, and
struck a stone.  There's the mark on his temple.  He's been lying here
unconscious ever since; but his pulse is all right, and we'll soon have
him fit again."

So saying, Dyck whipped out a horn containing spirit, and, while Sheila
lifted the injured head, he bathed the old man's face with the spirit,
then opened the mouth and let some liquor trickle down.

"He's the cleanest peasant I ever saw," remarked Sheila; "and he's coming
to.  Look at him!"

Yes, he was coming to.  There was a slight tremor of the eyelids, and
presently they slowly opened.  They were eyes of remarkable poignancy and
brightness--black, deep-set, direct, full of native intelligence.  For an
instant they stared as if they had no knowledge, then understanding came
to them.

"Oh, it's you, sir," his voice said tremblingly, looking at Dyck.  "And
very kind it is of ye !"  Then he looked at Sheila.  "I don't know ye,"
he said whisperingly, for his voice seemed suddenly to fail.  "I don't
know ye," he repeated, "but you look all right."

"Well, I'm Sheila Llyn," the girl said, taking her hand from the old
man's shoulder.

"I'm Sheila Llyn, and I'm all right in a way, perhaps."

The troubled, piercing eyes glanced from one to the other.

"No relation?"

"No--never met till a half-hour ago," remarked Dyck.

The old man drew himself to a sitting posture, then swayed slightly.  The
hands of the girl and Dyck went out behind his back.  As they touched his
back, their fingers met, and Dyck's covered the girl's.  Their eyes met,
too, and the story told by Dyck in that moment was the beginning of a
lifetime of experience, comedy, and tragedy.

He thought her fingers were wonderfully soft, warm, and full of life; and
she thought that his was the hand of a master-of a master in the field of
human effort.  That is, if she thought at all, for Dyck's warm, powerful
touch almost hypnotized her.

The old peasant understood, however.  He was standing on his feet now.
He was pale and uncertain.  He lifted up his bag, and threw it over his
shoulder.

"Well, I'm not needing you any more, thank God!" he said.

"So Heaven's blessing on ye, and I bid ye good-bye.  You've been kind to
me, and I won't forget either of ye.  If ever I can do ye a good turn,
I'll do it."

"No, we're not going to leave you until you're inside your home," said
Dyck.

The old man looked at Sheila in meditation.  He knew her name and her
history.  Behind the girl's life was a long prospect of mystery.  Llyn
was her mother's maiden name.  Sheila had never known her father.  Never
to her knowledge had she seen him, because when she was yet an infant her
mother had divorced him by Act of Parliament, against the wishes of her
church, and had resumed her maiden name.

Sheila's father's name was Erris Boyne, and he had been debauched,
drunken, and faithless; so at a time of unendurable hurt his wife had
freed herself.  Then, under her maiden name, she had brought up her
daughter without any knowledge of her father; had made her believe
he was dead; had hidden her tragedy with a skilful hand.

Only now, when Sheila was released from a governess, had she moved out of
the little wild area of the County Limerick where she lived; only now had
she come to visit an uncle whose hospitality she had for so many years
denied herself.  Sheila was two years old when her father disappeared,
and fifteen years had gone since then.

One on either side of the old man, they went with him up the hillside for
about three hundred yards, to the door of his house, which was little
more than a cave in a sudden lift of the hill.  He swayed as he walked,
but by the time they reached his cave-house he was alert again.

The house had two windows, one on either side of the unlocked doorway;
and when the old man slowly swung the door open, there was shown an
interior of humble character, but neat and well-ordered.  The floor was
earth, dry and clean.  There was a bed to the right, also wholesome and
dry, with horse-blankets for cover.  At the back, opposite the doorway,
was a fireplace of some size, and in it stood a kettle, a pot, and a few
small pans, together with a covered saucepan.  On either side of the
fireplace was a three-legged stool, and about the middle of the left-hand
wall of the room was a chair which had been made out of a barrel, some of
the staves having been sawn away to make a seat.

Once inside the house, Christopher Dogan laid his bag on the bed and
waved his hands in a formula of welcome.

"Well, I'm honoured," he said, "for no one has set foot inside this place
that I'd rather have here than the two of ye; and it's wonderful to me,
Mr. Calhoun, that ye've never been inside it before, because there's been
times when I've had food and drink in plenty.  I could have made ye
comfortable then and stroked ye all down yer gullet.  As for you, Miss
Llyn, you're as welcome as the shining of the stars of a night when
there's no moon.  I'm glad you're here, though I've nothing to give ye,
not a bite nor sup.  Ah, yes--but yes," he suddenly cried, touching his
head.  "Faith, then, I have!  I have a drap of somethin' that's as good
as annything dhrunk by the ancient kings of Ireland.  It's a wee cordial
that come from the cellars of the Bishop of Dunlany, when I cured his
cook of the evil-stone that was killing her.  Ah, thank God!"

He went into a corner on the left of the fireplace, opened an old jar,
thrust his arm down, and drew out a squat little bottle of cordial.  The
bottle was beautifully made.  It was round and hunched, and of glass,
with an old label from which the writing had faded.

With eyes bright now, Christopher uncorked the bottle and smelled the
contents.  As he did so, a smile crinkled his face.

"Thank the Lord!  There's enough for the two of ye--two fine
tablespoonfuls of the cordial that'd do anny man good, no matter how bad
he was, and turn an angel of a woman into an archangel.  Bless yer Bowl!"

When Christopher turned to lift down two pewter pots, Calhoun reached up
swiftly and took them from the shelf.  He placed them in the hands of the
old man, who drew a clean towel of coarse linen from a small cupboard in
the wall above his head.

She and Dyck held the pots for the old man to pour the cordial into them.
As he said, there was only a good porridge-spoon of liqueur for each.  He
divided it with anxious care.

"There's manny a man," he said, "and manny and manny a lady, too, born in
the purple, that'd be glad of a dhrink of this cordial from the cellar of
the bishop.

"Alpha, beta, gamma, delta is the code, and with the word delta," he
continued, "dhrink every drop of it, as if it was the last thing you were
dhrinking on earth; as if the Lord stooped down to give ye a cup of
blessing from His great flagon of eternal happiness.  Ye've got two kind
hearts, but there's manny a day of throuble will come between ye and the
end; and yet the end'll be right, God love ye!  Now-alpha, beta, gamma,
delta!"

With a merry laugh Dyck Calhoun turned up his cup and drained the liquid
to the last drop.  With a laugh not quite so merry, Sheila raised her mug
and slowly drained the green happiness away.

"Isn't it good--isn't it like the love of God?" asked the old man.
"Ain't I glad I had it for ye?  Why I said I hadn't annything for ye to
dhrink or eat, Lord only knows.  There's nothing to eat, and there's only
this to dhrink, and I hide it away under the bedclothes of time, as one
might say.  Ah, ye know, it's been there for three years, and I'd almost
forgot it.  It was a little angel from heaven whispered it to me whir ye
stepped inside this house.  I dunno why I kep' the stuff.  Manny's the
time I was tempted to dhrink it myself, and manny's the time something
said to me, 'Not yet.'  The Lord be praised, for I've had out of it more
than I deserve!"

He took the mugs from their hands, and for a minute stood like some
ancient priest who had performed a noble ritual.  As Sheila looked at
him, she kept saying to herself:

"He's a spirit; he isn't a man!"

Dyck's eye met that of Sheila, and he saw with the same feeling what was
working in her heart.

"Well, we must be going," he said to Christopher Dogan.  "We must get
homeward, and we've had a good drink--the best I ever tasted.  We're
proud to pay our respects to you in your own house; and goodbye to you
till we meet again."

His hand went out to the shoulder of the peasant and rested there for a
second in friendly feeling.  Then the girl stretched out her hand also.
The old man took the two cups in one hand, and, reaching out the other,
let Sheila's fingers fall upon his own.  He slowly crooked his neck, and
kissed her fingers with that distinction mostly to be found among those
few good people who live on the highest or the lowest social levels, or
in native tents.

"Ah, please God we meet again!  and that I be let to serve you, Miss
Sheila Llyn.  I have no doubt you could do with a little help some time
or another, the same as the rest of us.  For all that's come between us
three, may it be given me, humble and poor, to help ye both that's helped
me so!"

Dyck turned to go, and as he did so a thought came to him.

"If you hadn't food and drink for us, what have you for yourself,
Christopher?" he asked.  "Have you food to eat?"

"Ah, well--well, do ye think I'm no provider?  There was no food cooked
was what I was thinking; but come and let me show you."

He took the cover off a jar standing in a corner.  "Here's good flour,
and there's water, and there's manny a wild shrub and plant on the
hillside to make soup, and what more does a man want?  With the scone
cooked and inside ye, don't ye feel as well as though ye'd had a pound of
beef or a rasher of bacon?  Sure, ye do.  I know where there's clumps of
wild radishes, and with a little salt they're good--the best.  God bless
ye!"

A few moments later, as he stood in his doorway and looked along the
road, he saw two figures, the girl's head hardly higher than the man's
shoulder.  They walked as if they had much to get and were ready for it.

"Well, I dunno," he said to himself.  "I dunno about you, Dyck Calhoun.
You're wild, and ye have too manny mad friends, but you'll come all right
in the end; and that pretty girl--God save her!--she'll come with a smile
into your arms by and by, dear lad.  But ye have far to go and much to do
before that."

His head fell, his eyes stared out into the shining distance.

"I see for ye manny and manny a stroke of bad luck, and manny a wrong
thing said of ye, and she not believing wan of them.  But oh, my God, but
oh!"--his clenched hands went to his eyes.  "I wouldn't like to travel
the path that's before ye--no!"

Down the long road the two young people travelled, gossiping much, both
of them touched by something sad and mysterious, neither knowing why;
both of them happy, too, for somehow they had come nearer together than
years of ordinary life might have made possible.  They thought of the old
man and his hut, and then broke away into talk of their own countryside,
of the war with France, of the growing rebellious spirit in Ireland, of
riots in Dublin town, of trouble at Limerick, Cork, and Sligo.

At the gate of the mansion where Sheila was visiting, Dyck put into her
hands the wild flowers he had picked as they passed, and said:

"Well, it's been a great day.  I've never had a greater.  Let's meet
again, and soon!  I'm almost every day upon the hill with my gun, and
it'd be worth a lot to see you very soon."

"Oh, you'll be forgetting me by to-morrow," the girl said with a little
wistfulness at her lips, for she had a feeling they would not meet on the
morrow.  Suddenly she picked from the bunch of wild flowers he had given
her a little sprig of heather.

"Well, if we don't meet--wear that," she said, and, laughing over her
shoulder, turned and ran into the grounds of Loyland Towers.




CHAPTER II

THE COMING OF A MESSENGER

When Dyck entered the library of Playmore, the first words he heard were
these:

"Howe has downed the French at Brest.  He's smashed the French fleet and
dealt a sharp blow to the revolution.  Hurrah!"

The words were used by Miles Calhoun, Dyck's father, as a greeting to him
on his return from the day's sport.

Now, if there was a man in Ireland who had a narrow view and kept his
toes pointed to the front, it was Miles Calhoun.  His people had lived in
Connemara for hundreds of years; and he himself had only one passion in
life, which was the Protestant passion of prejudice.  He had ever been a
follower of Burke--a passionate follower, one who believed the French
Revolution was a crime against humanity, a danger to the future of
civilization.

He had resisted more vigorously than most men the progress of
revolutionary sentiments in Ireland.  He was aware that his son had far
less rigid opinions than himself; that he even defended Wolfe Tone and
Thomas Emmet against abuse and damnation.  That was why he had delight in
slapping his son in the face, whenever possible, with the hot pennant of
victory for British power.

He was a man of irascible temperament and stern views, given to fits of
exasperation.  He was small of stature, with a round face, eyes that
suddenly went red with feeling, and with none of the handsomeness of his
son, who resembled his mother's family.

The mother herself had been a beautiful and remarkable woman.  Dyck was,
in a sense, a reproduction of her in body and mind, for a more cheerful
and impetuous person never made a household happier or more imperfect
than she made hers.

Her beauty and continual cheerfulness had always been the joy of Dyck's
life, and because his mother had married his father--she was a woman of
sense, with all her lightsome ways--he tried to regard his father with
profound respect.  Since his wife's death, however, Miles Calhoun had
deteriorated; he had become unreasonable.

As the elder Calhoun made his announcement about the battle of Brest and
the English victory, a triumphant smile lighted his flushed face, and
under his heavy grey brows his eyes danced with malicious joy.

"Howe's a wonder!" he said.  "He'll make those mad, red republicans hunt
their holes.  Eh, isn't that your view, Ivy?" he asked of a naval captain
who had evidently brought the news.

Captain Ivy nodded.

"Yes, it's a heavy blow for the French bloodsuckers.  If their ideas
creep through Europe and get hold of England, God only knows what the
end will be!  In their view, to alter everything is the only way to put
things right.  No doubt they'll invent a new way to be born before
they've finished."

"Well, that wouldn't be a bad idea," remarked Dyck.  "The present way has
its demerits."

"Yes, it throws responsibility upon the man, and gives a heap of trouble
to the woman," said Captain Ivy with a laugh; "but they'll change it all,
you'll see."

Dyck poured himself a glass of port, held it up, sniffed the aroma, and
looked through the beautiful red tinge of the wine with a happy and
critical eye.

"Well, the world could be remade in a lot of ways," he declared.  "I
shouldn't mind seeing a bit of a revolution in Ireland--but in England
first," he hastened to add.  "They're a more outcast folk than the
Irish."  His father scoffed.

"Look out, Dyck, or they'll drop you in jail if you talk like that!" he
chided, his red face growing redder, his fingers nervously feeling the
buttons on his picturesque silk waistcoat.  "There's conspiracy in
Ireland, and you never truly know if the man that serves you at your
table, or brings you your horse, or puts a spade into your ground, isn't
a traitor."

At that moment the door opened, and a servant entered the room.  In his
hand he carried a letter which, with marked excitement, he brought to
Miles Calhoun.

"Sure, he's waiting, sir," he said.

"And who's he?" asked his master, turning the letter over, as though to
find out by looking at the seal.

"Oh, a man of consequence, if we're to judge by the way he's clothed."

"Fit company, then?" his master asked, as he opened the heavily sealed
letter.

"Well, I'm not saying that, for there's no company good enough for us,"
answered the higgledy-piggledy butler, with a quirk of the mouth; "but,
as messengers go, I never seen one with more style and point."

"Well, bring him to me," said Miles Calhoun.  "Bring him to me, and I'll
form my own judgment--though I have some confidence in yours."

"You could go further and fare worse, as the Papists say about
purgatory," answered the old man with respectful familiarity.

Captain Ivy and Dyck grinned, but the head of the house seemed none too
pleased at the freedom of the old butler.

"Bring him as he is," said Miles Calhoun.  "Good God!" he added, for he
just realized that the stamp of the seal was that of the Attorney-General
of Ireland.

Then he read the letter and a flush swept over his face, making its red
almost purple.

"Eternal damnation--eternal damnation!" he declared, holding the paper
at arm's length a moment, inspecting it.  He then handed it to Dyck.
"Read that, lad.  Then pack your bag, for we start for Dublin by daylight
or before."

Dyck read the brief document and whistled softly to himself.

"Well, well, you've got to obey orders like that, I suppose," Dyck said.
"They want to question us as to the state of the country here."

"I think we can tell them something.  I wonder if they know how wide your
travel is, how many people you see; and if they know, how did they come
to know?  There's spies all over the place.  How do I know but the man
who's just left this room isn't a spy, isn't the enemy of all of us
here?"

"I'd suspect Michael Clones," remarked Dyck, "just as soon as Mulvaney."

"Michael Clones," said his father, and he turned to Captain Ivy, "Michael
Clones I'd trust as I'd trust His blessed Majesty, George III.  He's a
rare scamp, is Michael Clones!  He's no thicker than a cardboard, but he
draws the pain out of your hurt like a mustard plaster.  A man of better
sense and greater roguery I've never met.  You must see him, Captain Ivy.
He's only about twelve years older than my son, but, like my son, there's
no holding him, there's no control of him that's any good.  He does what
he wants to do in his own way--talks when he wants to talk, fights when
he wants to fight.  He's a man of men, is Michael Clones."

At that moment the door opened and the butler entered, followed by a
tall, thin, Don Quixote sort of figure.

"His excellency," said Mulvaney, with a look slightly malevolent, for the
visitor had refused his name.  Then he turned and left the room.

At Mulvaney's words, an ironical smile crossed the face of the newcomer.
Then he advanced to Miles Calhoun.  Before speaking, however, he glanced
sharply at Captain Ivy, threw an inquisitive look at Dyck, and said:

"I seem to have hurt the feelings of your butler, sir, but that cannot be
helped.  I have come from the Attorney-General.  My name is Leonard
Mallow--I'm the eldest son of Lord Mallow.  I've been doing business in
Limerick, and I bring a message from the Attorney-General to ask you to
attend his office at the earliest moment."

Dyck Calhoun, noting his glance at a bottle of port, poured out a glass
of the good wine and handed it over, saying:

"It'll taste better to you because you've been travelling hard, but it's
good wine anyhow.  It's been in the cellar for forty years, and that's
something in a land like this."

Mallow accepted the glass of port, raised it with a little gesture of
respect, and said:

"Long life to the King, and cursed be his enemies!"  So saying he flung
the wine down his throat--which seemed to gulp it like a well--wiped his
lips with a handkerchief, and turned to Miles Calhoun again.

"Yes, it's good wine," he said; "as good as you'd get in the cellars of
the Viceroy.  I've seen strange things as I came.  I've seen lights on
the hills, and drunken rioters in the roads and behind hedges, and once a
shot was fired at me; but here I am, safe and sound, carrying out my
orders.  What time will you start?" he added.

He took it for granted that the summons did not admit of rejection, and
he was right.  The document contained these words:

     Trouble is brewing; indeed, it is at hand.  Come, please, at once to
     Dublin, and give the Lord-Lieutenant and the Government a report
     upon your district.  We do not hear altogether well of it, but no
     one has the knowledge you possess.  In the name of His Majesty you
     are to present yourself at once at these offices in Dublin, and be
     assured that the Lord-Lieutenant will give you warm welcome through
     me.  Your own loyalty gives much satisfaction here.  I am, sir,
                              Your obedient servant,
                                                  JOHN MCNOWELL.

"You have confidence in the people's loyalty here?" asked Mallow.

"As great as in my own," answered Dyck cheerily.  "Well, you ought to
know what that is.  At the same time, I've heard you're a friend of one
or two dark spirits in the land."

"I hold no friendships that would do hurt to my country," answered Dyck
sharply.

Mallow smiled satirically.  "As we're starting at daylight, I suppose, I
think I'll go to bed, if it may be you can put me up."

"Oh, Lord, yes!  We can put you up, Mr. Mallow," said the old man.
"You shall have as good a bed as you can find outside the Viceregal
Lodge--a fourposter, wide and long.  It's been slept in by many a man of
place and power.  But, Mr. Mallow, you haven't said you've had no dinner,
and you'll not be going to bed in this house without your food.  Did you
shoot anything to-day, Dyck?" he asked his son.

"I didn't bring home a feather.  There were no birds to-day, but there
are the ducks I shot yesterday, and the quail."

"Oh, yes," said his father, "and there's the little roast pig, too.  This
is a day when we celebrate the anniversary of Irish power and life."

"What's that?" asked Mallow.

"That's the battle of the Boyne," answered his host with a little
ostentation.

"Oh, you're one of the Peep-o'-Day Boys, then," remarked Mallow.

"I'm not saying that," answered the old man.  "I'm not an Ulsterman, but
I celebrate the coming of William to the Boyne.  Things were done that
day that'll be remembered when Ireland is whisked away into the Kingdom
of Heaven.  So you'll not go to bed till you've had dinner, Mr. Mallow!
By me soul, I think I smell the little porker now.  Dinner at five, to
bed at eight, up before daylight, and off to Dublin when the light
breaks.  That's the course!"  He turned to Captain Ivy.  "I'm sorry,
captain, but there's naught else to do, and you were going to-morrow at
noon, anyhow, so it won't make much difference to you."

"No difference whatever," replied the sailorman.  "I have to go to
Dublin, too, and from there to Queenstown to join my ship, and from
Queenstown to the coast of France to do some fighting."

"Please God!" remarked Miles Calhoun.  "So be it!" declared Mallow.

"Amen!" said Dyck.

Once again Dyck looked the visitor straight in the eyes, and back in the
horizon of Mallow's life-sky there shone the light of an evil star.

"There's the call to dinner," remarked Miles Calhoun, as a bell began
ringing in the tower outside.  "Come with me, Mr. Mallow, and I'll show
you your room.  You've had your horse put up, I hope?"

"Yes, and my bag brought in."

"Well, come along, then.  There's no time to lose.  I can smell the
porker crawling from the oven."

"You're a master of tempting thoughts," remarked Mallow enthusiastically.

"Sheila--Sheila!" said Dyck Calhoun to himself where he stood.




CHAPTER III

THE QUARREL

The journey to Dublin was made by the Calhouns, their two guests, and
Michael Clones, without incident of note.  Arrived there, Miles Calhoun
gave himself to examination by Government officials and to assisting the
designs of the Peep-o'-Day Boys; and indeed he was present at the
formation of the first Orange Lodge.

His narrow nature, his petty craft and malevolence, were useful in a time
of anxiety for the State.  Yet he had not enough ability to develop his
position by the chances offered him.  He had not a touch of genius; he
had only bursts of Celtic passion, which he had not mind enough to
control.

Indeed, as days, weeks and months went on, his position became less
valuable to himself, and his financial affairs suffered from his own and
his agent's bad management.  In his particular district he was a power;
in Dublin he soon showed the weaker side of his nature.  He had a bad
habit of making foes where he could easily have made friends.  In his
personal habits he was sober, but erratic.

Dyck had not his father's abstention from the luxuries of life.  He
drank, he gamed, he went where temptation was, and fell into it.  He
steadily diminished his powers of resistance to self-indulgence until one
day, at a tavern, he met a man who made a great impression upon him.

This man was brilliant, ebullient, full of humour, character and life,
knowing apparently all the lower world of Dublin, and moving with an
assured step.  It was Erris Boyne, the divorced husband of Mrs. Llyn and
the father of Sheila Llyn; but this fact was not known to Dyck.  There
was also a chance of its not becoming known, because so many years had
passed since Erris Boyne was divorced.

One day Erris Boyne said to Dyck:

"There's a supper to-night at the Breakneck Club.  Come along and have a
skinful.  You'll meet people worth knowing.  They're a damned fine lot of
fellows for you to meet, Calhoun !"

"The Breakneck Club isn't a good name for a first-class institution,"
remarked Dyck, with a pause and a laugh; "but I'll come, if you'll fetch
me."

Erris Boyne, who was eighteen years older than Dyck, laughed, flicked a
little pinch of snuff at his nose with his finger.

"Dear lad, of course I'll come and fetch you," he said.  "There's many a
man has done worse than lead a gay stripling like you into pleasant ways.
Bring along any loose change you have, for it may be a night of nights."

"Oh, they play cards, do they, at the Breakneck Club?" said Dyck, alive
with interest.

"Well, call it what you like, but men must do something when they get
together, and we can't be talking all the time.  So pocket your
shillings."

"Are they all the right sort?" asked Dyck, with a little touch of
malice.  "I mean, are they loyal and true?"

Erris Boyne laid a hand on Dyck's arm.

"Come and find out.  Do you think I'd lead you into bad company?  Of
course Emmet and Wolfe Tone won't be there, nor any of that lot; but
there'll be some men of the right stamp."  He watched Dyck carefully out
of the corner of his eye.  "It's funny," he added, "that in Ireland the
word loyal always means being true to the Union Jack, standing by King
George and his crowd."

"Well, what would you have?" said Dyck.  "For this is a day and age when
being loyal to the King is more than aught else in all the Irish world.
We're never two days alike, we Irish.  There are the United Irishmen and
the Defenders on one side, and the Peepo'-Day Boys, or Orangemen, on the
other--Catholic and Protestant, at each other's throats.  Then there's a
hand thrust in, and up goes the sword, and the rifles, pikes, and
bayonets; and those that were ready to mutilate or kill each other fall
into each other's arms."

Erris Boyne laughed.  "Well, there'll soon be an end to that.  The Irish
Parliament is slipping into disrepute.  It wouldn't surprise me if the
astute English bribe them into a union, to the ruin of Irish
Independence.  Yet maybe, before that comes, the French will have a try
for power here.  And upon my word, if I have to live under foreign rule,
I'd as leave have a French whip over me as an English!"  He came a step
nearer, his voice lowered a little.  "Have you heard the latest news from
France?  They're coming with a good-sized fleet down to the south coast.
Have you heard it?"

"Oh, there's plenty one hears one doesn't believe is gospel," answered
Dyck, his eyes half closing.  "I'm not believing all I hear, as if it was
a prayer-meeting.  Anything may happen here; Ireland's a woman--very
uncertain."

Dyck flicked some dust from his waistcoat, and dropped his eyes, because
he was thinking of two women he had known; one of them an angel now in
company of her sister angels--his mother; the other a girl he had met on
the hills of Connemara, a wonderfully pretty girl of seventeen.  How
should he know that the girl was Erris Boyne's daughter?--although there
were times when some gesture of Boyne, some quick look, some lifting of
the eyebrows, brought back the memory of Sheila Llyn, as it did now.

Since Dyck left his old home he had seen her twice; once at Loyland
Towers, and once at her home in Limerick.  The time he had spent with her
had been very brief, but full of life, interest, and character.  She was
like some piquant child, bold, beautiful, uncertain, caressing in her
manner one instant, and distant at another.

She had said radiant things, had rallied him, had shown him where a
twenty-nine-pound salmon had been caught in a stream, and had fired at
and brought down a pheasant outside the covert at Loyland Towers.
Whether at Loyland Towers, or at her mother's house in Limerick, there
was no touch of forwardness in her, or in anything she said or did.  She
was the most natural being, the freest from affectation, he had ever
known.

As Erris Boyne talked to him, the memory of Sheila flooded his mind,
and on the flood his senses swam like swans.  He had not her careful
composure.  He was just as real, but he had the wilfulness of man.  She
influenced him as no woman had ever yet done; but he saw no happy ending
to the dream.  He was too poor to marry; he had no trade or profession;
his father's affairs were in a bad way.  He could not bring himself to
join the army or the navy; and yet, as an Irishman moved by political
ideals, with views at once critical and yet devoted to the crown, he was
not in a state to settle down.

He did not know that Erris Boyne was set to capture him for the rebel
cause.  How could he know that Boyne was an agent of the most evil forces
in Ireland--an agent of skill and address, prepossessing, with the face
of a Celtic poet and the eye of an assassin?

Boyne's object was to bring about the downfall of Dyck Calhoun--that is,
his downfall as a patriot.  At the Breakneck Club this bad business
began.  Dyck had seen many people, representing the gaiety and deviltry
of life; but it was as though many doubtful people, many reckless ones,
all those with purposes, fads, and fancies, were there.  Here was an
irresponsible member of a Government department; there an officer of His
Majesty's troops; beyond, a profligate bachelor whose reputation for
traitorous diplomacy was known and feared.  Yet everywhere were men known
in the sporting, gaming, or political world, in sea life or land life,
most of whom had a character untouched by criticism.

It was at this club that Dyck again met that tall, ascetic messenger from
the Attorney-General, who had brought the message to Miles Calhoun.  It
was with this man--Leonard Mallow, eldest son of Lord Mallow--that Dyck,
with three others, played cards one afternoon.

The instinctive antipathy which had marked their first introduction was
carried on to this later meeting.  Dyck distrusted Mallow, and allowed
his distrust exercise.  It was unfortunate that Mallow won from him
three-fourths of the money he had brought to the club, and won it with a
smile not easy to forgive.

Dyck had at last secured sudden success in a scheme of his cards when
Mallow asked with a sneer:

"Did you learn that at your home in heaven?"

"Don't they teach it where you live in hell?" was Dyck's reply.

At this Mallow flicked Dyck across the face with his handkerchief.

"That's what they teach where I belong."

"Well, it's easy to learn, and we'll do the sum at any time or place you
please."  After a moment Dyck continued: "I wouldn't make a fuss over it.
Let's finish the game.  There's no good prancing till the sport's ready;
so I'll sit and learn more of what they teach in hell!"

Dyck had been drinking, or he would not have spoken so; and when he was
drunk daring was strong in him.  He hated profoundly this man-so self-
satisfied and satanic.

He kept a perfect coolness, however.  Leonard Mallow should not see that
he was upset.  His wanton wordiness came to his rescue, and until the end
of the game he played with sang-froid, daring, and skill.  He loved
cards; he loved the strife of skill against skill, of trick against
trick, of hand against hand.  He had never fought a duel in his life,
but he had no fear of doing so.

At length, having won back nearly all he had lost, he rose to his feet
and looked round.

"Is there any one here from whom I can ask a favour?"

Several stepped forward.  Dyck nodded.  One of them he knew.  It was Sir
Almeric Foyle.

"Thank you, Sir Almeric," he said; "thank you.  Shall it be swords or
pistols?" he asked his enemy, coolly.

"Swords, if you please," remarked Mallow grimly, for he had a gift with
the sword.

Dyck nodded again.

"As you will.  As you will!"




CHAPTER IV

THE DUEL

It was a morning such as could only be brought into existence by the
Maker of mornings in Ireland.  It was a day such as Dublin placed away
carefully into the pantechnicon of famous archives.

The city of Dublin was not always clean, but in the bright, gorgeous sun
her natural filth was no menace to the eye, no repulse to the senses.
Above the Liffey, even at so early an hour, the heat shimmers like a
silver mist.  The bells of churches were ringing, and the great cathedral
bells boomed in thrilling monotony over the peaceful city.  Here and
there in the shabby yet renowned streets, horsemen moved along; now and
then the costermonger raised his cry of fresh fruit, flowers, and
"distinguished vegetables."

People moved into church doorways on their way to mass or confession--
some bright and rather gorgeous beings, some in deep mourning, shy,
reserved, and obscure.  Here and there, also, in certain streets--where
officials lived or worked--were soldiers afoot; soldiers with carbines
and long bayonets, with tall, slightly peaked hats, smart red coats,
belts crossing their breasts, knee-breeches and leggings, and all with
epaulets shining.  They were in marked contrast to the peasant folk with
the high-peaked soft hat, knee-breeches, rough tail-coat, and stockings,
some with rifles, some with pikes, some with powder-horns slung under
their arms or in the small of the back.

Besides this show of foot-soldiers--that is, regulars and irregulars of
the Cornwallis Regiment, and men of the Defenders and the Peep-o'-Day
Boys--there were little groups of cavalry making their way to the parade-
ground, the castle, the barracks, or the courts.

Beyond these there was the jaunting-car trundling over the rough
cobblestone street, or bumping in and out of dangerous holes.  Whips
cracked, and the loud voices of jarveys shouted blatant humour and Irish
fun at horse and passenger.  Here and there, also, some stately coach,
bedizened with arms of the quality, made its way through the chief
streets, or across the bridges of the Liffey.

Then came the general population, moving cheerfully in the inspiriting
sun; for Irishmen move so much in a moist atmosphere that on a sunshiny
day all tristesse of life seems changed, as in a flash, into high spirits
and much activity.  Not that the country, at its worst, is slow-footed or
depressed; for wit is always at the elbow of want.

Never in all Ireland's years had she a more beautiful day than that
in which Dyck Calhoun and the Hon. Leonard Mallow met to settle their
account in a secluded corner of Phoenix Park.  It was not the usual place
for duels.  The seconds had taken care to keep the locale from the
knowledge of the public; especially as many who had come to know of
the event at the Breakneck Club were eager to be present.

The affair began an hour after sunrise.  Neither Dyck nor Leonard Mallow
slept at home the night before, but in separate taverns near Phoenix
Park.  Mallow came almost jauntily to the obscure spot.  Both men had
sensitiveness, and both entered the grounds with a certain sense of
pleasure.

Dyck moved and spoke like a man charged with some fluid which had
abstracted him from life's monotonous routine.  He had to consider the
chance of never leaving the grounds alive; yet as he entered the place,
where smooth grass between the trees made good footing for the work to be
done, the thrill of the greenery, the sound of the birds, the flick of a
lizard across the path, and the distant gay leap of a young deer, brought
to his senses a gust of joyous feeling.

"I never smelled such air!" he said to one of the seconds.  "I never saw
the sun so beautiful!"  He sniffed the air and turned his face towards
the sun.  "Well, it's a day for Ireland," he added, in response to a
gravely playful remark of Sir Almeric Foyle.  "Ireland never was so
sweet.  Nature's provoking us!"

"Yes, it's a pity," said Sir Almeric.  "But I'm not thinking of bad luck
for you, Calhoun."

Dyck's smile seemed to come from infinite distance.  He was not normal;
he was submerged.  He was in the great, consuming atmosphere of the
bigger world, and the greater life.  He even did not hate Mallow at the
moment.  The thing about to be done was to him a test of manhood.  It was
a call upon the courage of the soul, a challenge of life, strength, and
will.

As Mallow entered the grounds, the thought of Sheila Llyn crossed Dyck's
mind, and the mental sight of her gladdened the eyes of his soul.  For
one brief instant he stood lost in the mind's look; then he stepped
forward, saluted, shook hands with Mallow, and doffed his coat and
waistcoat.

As he did so, he was conscious of a curious coldness, even of dampness,
in the hand which had shaken that of Mallow.  Mallow's hand had a clammy
touch--clammy, but firm and sure.  There was no tremor in the long, thin
fingers nor at the lips--the thin, ascetic lips, as of a secret-service
man--but in his eyes was a dark fire of purpose.  The morning had touched
him, but not as it had thrown over Dyck its mantle of peace.  Mallow also
had enjoyed the smell and feeling of it all, but with this difference--it
had filled him with such material joy that he could not bear the thought
of leaving it.  It gave him strength of will, which would add security to
his arm and wrist.  Yet, as he looked at Dyck, he saw that his work was
cut out for him; for in all his days he had never seen a man so well-
possessed, so surely in hand.

Dyck had learned swordsmanship with as skilled a master as Ireland had
known, and he had shown, in getting knowledge of the weapon, a natural
instinct and a capacity worthy of the highest purpose.  He had handled
the sword since he was six, and his play was better than that of most
men; but this was, in fact, his first real duel.  In the troubled state
of Ireland, with internal discord, challenge, and attack, he had more
than once fought, and with success; but that was in the rough-and-tumble
of life's chances, as it were, with no deliberate plan to fight according
to the rules.  Many times, of course, in the process of his training, he
had fought as men fight in duels, but with this difference--that now he
was permitted to disable or kill his foe.

It was clear that one or the other would not leave this ground--this
verdant, beautiful piece of mother earth--exactly as he entered it.  He
would leave it wounded, incapable, or dead.  Indeed, both might leave it
wounded, and the chances of success were with the older man, Mallow,
whose experience would give him an advantage.

Physically, there was not a vast deal to choose between the two men.
Mallow was lank and tall, nervously self-contained, finely concentrated,
and vigorous.  Dyck was broad of shoulder, well set up, muscular, and
with a steadier eye than that of his foe.  Also, as the combat developed,
it was clear that he had a hand as steady as his eye.  What was more, his
wrist had superb strength and flexibility; it was as enduring and vital
as the forefoot and ankle of a tiger.  As a pair they were certainly
notable, and would give a good account of themselves.

No one of temperament who observed the scene could ever forget it.  The
light was perfect--evenly distributed, clear enough to permit accuracy of
distance in a stroke.  The air was still, gently bracing, and, like most
Irish air, adorably sweet.

The spot chosen for the fight was a sort of avenue between great trees,
whose broad leaves warded off the direct sun, and whose shade had as yet
no black shadows.  The turf was as elastic to the foot as a firm
mattress.  In the trees, birds were singing with liveliness; in the
distance, horned cattle browsed, and a pair of horses stood gazing at
the combatants, startled, no doubt, by this invasion of their pasturage.
From the distance came the faint, mellow booming of church-bells.

The two men fighting had almost the air of gladiators.  Their coats were
off, and the white linen of their shirts looked gracious; while the
upraised left hand of the fighters balancing the sword-thrust and the
weight of the body had an almost singular beauty.  Of the two, Dyck was
the more graceful, the steadier, the quicker in his motions.

Vigilant Dyck was, but not reckless.  He had made the first attack, on
the ground that the aggressor gains by boldness, if that boldness is
joined to skill; and Dyck's skill was of the best.  His heart was warm.
His momentary vision of Sheila Llyn remained with him--not as a vision,
rather as a warmth in his inmost being, something which made him
intensely alert, cheerful, defiant, exactly skilful.

He had need of all his skill, for Mallow was set to win the fight.
He felt instinctively what was working in Dyck's mind.  He had fought a
number of duels, and with a certain trick or art he had given the end to
the lives of several.  He became conscious, however, that Dyck had a
particular stroke in mind, which he himself was preventing by masterful
methods.  It might be one thing or another, but in view of Dyck's
training it would perhaps be the Enniscorthy touch.

Again and again Dyck pressed his antagonist backward, seeking to muddle
his defence and to clear an opening for his own deadly stroke; but the
other man also was a master, and parried successfully.

Presently, with a quick move, Mallow took the offensive, and tried to
unsettle Dyck's poise and disorganize his battle-plan.  For an instant
the tempestuous action, the brilliant, swift play of the sword, the
quivering flippancy of the steel, gave Dyck that which almost
disconcerted him.  Yet he had a grip of himself, and preserved his
defence intact; though once his enemy's steel caught his left shoulder,
making it bleed.  The seconds, however, decided that the thrust was not
serious, and made no attempt to interrupt the combat.

Dyck kept singularly cool.  As Mallow's face grew flushed, his own grew
paler, but it was the paleness of intensity and not of fear.  Each man's
remarkable skill in defence was a good guarantee against disaster due to
carelessness.  Seldom have men fought so long and accomplished so little
in the way of blood-letting.  At length, however, Dyck's tactics changed.
Once again he became aggressive, and he drove his foe to a point where
the skill of both men was tried to the uttermost.  It was clear the time
had come for something definite.  Suddenly Dyck threw himself back with
an agile step, lunged slightly to one side, and then in a gallant foray
got the steel point into the sword-arm of his enemy.  That was the
Enniscorthy stroke, which had been taught him by William Tandy, the
expert swordsman, and had been made famous by Lord Welling, of
Enniscorthy.  It succeeded, and it gave Dyck the victory, for Mallow's
sword dropped from his hand.

A fatigued smile came to Mallow's lips.  He clasped the wounded arm with
his left hand as the surgeon came forward.

"Well, you got it home," he said to Dyck; "and it's deftly done."

"I did my best," answered Dyck.  "Give me your hand, if you will."

With a wry look Mallow, now seated on the old stump of a tree, held out
his left hand.  It was covered with blood.

"I think we'll have to forego that courtesy, Calhoun," he said.  "Look at
the state of my hand!  It's good blood," he added grimly.  "It's damned
good blood, but--but it won't do, you see."

"I'm glad it was no worse," said Dyck, not touching the bloody hand.
"It's a clean thrust, and you'll be better from it soon.  These great
men"--he smiled towards the surgeons--"will soon put you right.  I got my
chance with the stroke, and took it, because I knew if I didn't you'd
have me presently."

"You'll have a great reputation in Dublin town now, and you'll deserve
it," Mallow added adroitly, the great paleness of his features, however,
made ghastly by the hatred in his eyes.

Dyck did not see this look, but he felt a note of malice--a distant note
--in Mallow's voice.  He saw that what Mallow had said was fresh evidence
of the man's arrogant character.  It did not offend him, however, for he
was victor, and could enter the Breakneck Club or Dublin society with a
tranquil eye.

Again Mallow's voice was heard.

"I'd have seen you damned to hell, Calhoun, before I'd have apologized at
the Breakneck Club; but after a fight with one of the best swordsmen in
Ireland I've learned a lot, and I'll apologize now--completely."

The surgeon had bound up the slight wound in Dyck's shoulder, had stopped
the bleeding, and was now helping him on with his coat.  The operation
had not been without pain, but this demonstration from his foe was too
much for him.  It drove the look of pain from his face; it brought a
smile to his lips.  He came a step nearer.

"I'm as obliged to you as if you'd paid for my board and lodging,
Mallow," he said; "and that's saying a good deal in these days.  I'll
never have a bigger fight.  You're a greater swordsman than your
reputation.  I must have provoked you beyond reason," he went on
gallantly.  "I think we'd better forget the whole thing."

"I'm a Loyalist," Mallow replied.  "I'm a Loyalist, and if you're one,
too, what reason should there be for our not being friends?"

A black cloud flooded Calhoun's face.

"If--if I'm a Loyalist, you say!  Have you any doubt of it?
If you have--"

"You wish your sword had gone into my heart instead of my arm, eh?"
interrupted Mallow.  "How easily I am misunderstood!  I meant nothing by
that 'if.'"  He smiled, and the smile had a touch of wickedness.  "I
meant nothing by it-nothing at all.  As we are both Loyalists, we must be
friends.  Good-bye, Calhoun!"

Dyck's face cleared very slowly.  Mallow was maddening, but the look of
the face was not that of a foe.  "Well, let us be friends," Dyck answered
with a cordial smile.  "Good-bye," he added.  "I'm damned sorry we had to
fight at all.  Good-bye!"




CHAPTER V

THE KILLING OF ERRIS BOYNE

"There's many a government has made a mess of things in Ireland," said
Erris Boyne; "but since the day of Cromwell the Accursed this is the
worst.  Is there a man in Ireland that believes in it, or trusts it?
There are men that support it, that are served by it, that fill their
pockets out of it; but by Joseph and by Mary, there's none thinks there
couldn't be a better!  Have a little more marsala, Calhoun?"

With these words, Boyne filled up the long glass out of which Dyck
Calhoun had been drinking--drinking too much.  Shortly before Dyck had
lost all his cash at the card-table.  He had turned from it penniless and
discomfited to see Boyne, smiling, and gay with wine, in front of him.

Boyne took him by the arm.

"Come with me," said he.  "There's no luck for you at the tables to-day.
Let's go where we can forget the world, where we can lift the banner of
freedom and beat the drums of purpose.  Come along, lad!"

Boyne had ceased to have his earlier allurement for Dyck Calhoun, but his
smile was friendly, his manner was hospitable, and he was on the spot.
The time was critical for Dyck--critical and dangerous.  He had lost
money heavily; he had even exhausted his mother's legacy.

Of late he had seen little of his father, and the little he had seen was
not fortunate.  They had quarrelled over Dyck's wayward doings.  Miles
Calhoun had said some hard things to him, and Dyck had replied that he
would cut out his own course, trim his own path, walk his own way.
He had angered his father terribly, and Miles, in a burst of temper,
had disclosed the fact that his own property was in peril.  They had
been, estranged ever since; but the time had come when Dyck must at least
secure the credit of his father's name at his bank to find the means of
living.

It was with this staring him in the face that Erris Boyne's company
seemed to offer at least a recovery of his good spirits.  Dissipated as
Boyne's look was, he had a natural handsomeness which, with good care of
himself personally, well-appointed clothes, a cheerful manner, and witty
talk, made him palatable to careless-living Dublin.

This Dublin knew little of Boyne's present domestic life.  It did not
know that he had injured his second wife as badly as he had wronged his
first--with this difference, however, that his first wife was a lady,
while his second wife, Noreen, was a beautiful, quick-tempered, lovable
eighteen-year-old girl, a graduate of the kitchen and dairy, when he took
her to himself.  He had married her in a mad moment after his first wife
--Mrs. Llyn, as she was now called--had divorced him; and after the first
thrill of married life was over, nothing remained with Boyne except
regret that he had sold his freedom for what he might, perhaps, have had
without marriage.

Then began a process of domestic torture which alienated Noreen from him,
and roused in her the worst passions of human nature.  She came to know
of his infidelities, and they maddened her.  They had no children, and in
the end he had threatened her with desertion.  When she had retorted in
strong words, he slapped her face, and left her with an ugly smile.

The house where they lived was outside Dublin, in a secluded spot, yet
not far from stores and shops.  There was this to be said for Noreen--
that she kept her home spotlessly clean, even with two indifferent
servants.  She had a gift for housewifery, which, at its best, was as
good as anything in the world, and far better than could be found in most
parts of Ireland.

Of visitors they had few, if any, and the young wife was left alone to
brood upon her wrongs.  Erris Boyne had slapped her face on the morning
of the day when he met Dyck Calhoun in the hour of his bad luck.  He did
not see the look in her face as he left the house.

Ruthless as he was, he realized the time had come when by bold effort he
might get young Calhoun wholly into his power.  He began by getting Dyck
into the street.  Then he took him by an indirect route to what was,
reputedly, a tavern of consequence.  There choice spirits met on
occasion, and dark souls, like Boyne, planned adventures.  Outwardly it
was a tavern of the old class, superficially sedate, and called the Harp
and Crown.  None save a very few conspirators knew how great a part it
played in the plan to break the government of Ireland and to ruin
England's position in the land.

The entrance was by two doors--one the ordinary public entrance, the
other at the side of the house, which was on a corner.  This could be
opened by a skeleton key owned by Erris Boyne.

He and Dyck entered, however, by the general entrance, because Boyne had
forgotten his key.  They passed through the bar-parlour, nodding to one
or two habitues, and presently were bestowed in a room, not large, but
well furnished.  It was quiet and alluring on this day when the world
seemed disconcerting.  So pleasantly did the place affect Dyck's spirits
that, as he sat down in the room which had often housed worse men than
himself, he gave a sigh of relief.

They played cards, and Dyck won.  He won five times what he had lost at
the club.  This made him companionable.

"It's a poor business-cards," he said at last.  "It puts one up in the
clouds and down in the ditch all at the same time.  I tell you this,
Boyne--I'm going to stop.  No man ought to play cards who hasn't a
fortune; and my fortune, I'm sorry to say, is only my face!"  He laughed
bitterly.

"And your sword--you've forgotten that, Calhoun.  You've a lot of luck in
your sword."

"Well, I've made no money out of it so far," Dyck retorted cynically.

"Yet you've put men with reputations out of the running, men like
Mallow."

"Oh, that was a bit of luck and a few tricks I've learned.  I can't start
a banking-account on that."

"But you can put yourself in the way of winning what can't be bought."

"No--no English army for me, thank you--if that's what you mean."

"It isn't what I mean.  In the English army a man's a slave.  He can
neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep without being under command.  He has to
do a lot of dirty work without having voice in the policy.  He's a child
of discipline and order."

"And a damned good thing that would be for most of us!" retorted Dyck.
"But I'm not one of the most."

"I know that.  Try a little more of this marsala, Calhoun.  It's the best
in the place, and it's got a lot of good stuff.  I've been coming to the
Harp and Crown for many years, and I've never had a bad drink all that
time.  The old landlord is a genius.  He doesn't put on airs.  He's a
good man, is old Swinton, and there's nothing good in the drink of France
that you can't get here."

"Well, if that's true, how does it happen?" asked Dyck, with a little
flash of interest.  "Why should this little twopenny, one-horse place--
I mean in size and furnishments--have such luck as to get the best there
is in France?  It means a lot of trouble, eh?"

"It means some trouble.  But let me tell you"--he leaned over the table
and laid a hand on Dyck's, which was a little nervous--"let me speak as
an old friend to you, if I may.  Here are the facts.  For many a year,
you know as well as I do, ships have been coming from France to Ireland
with the very best wines and liquors, and taking back the very best wool-
-smuggled, of course.  Well, our little landlord here is the damnedest
rogue of all.  The customs never touch him.  From the coast
the stuff comes up to Dublin without a check, and, as he's a special
favourite, he gets the best to be had in la belle France."

"Why is he such a favourite?" asked Dyck.

Erris Boyne laughed, not loudly, but suggestively.  "When a lady kisses a
man on the lips, of her own free will, and puts her arm around his neck,
is it done, do you think, because it's her duty to do it or die?  No,
it's because she likes the man; because the man is a good friend to her;
because it's money in her pocket.  That's the case with old Swinton.
France kisses him, as it were, because"--he paused, as though debating
what to say--"because France knows he'd rather be under her own
revolutionary government than under the monarchy of England."

His voice had resonance, and, as he said these words, it had insistence.

"Do you know, Calhoun, I think old Swinton is right.  We suffer here
because monarchy, with its cruel hand of iron, mistrusts us, brutalizes
us."

He did not see enlightenment come into the half-drunken eyes of Dyck.  He
only realized that Dyck was very still, and strangely, deeply interested.

"I tell you, Calhoun, we need in Ireland something of the spirit that's
alive in France to-day.  They've cleaned out the kings--Louis's and
Marie's heads have dropped into the basket.  They're sweeping the dirt
out of France; they're cleaning the dark places; they're whitewashing
Versailles and sawdusting the Tuileries; they're purging the aristocratic
guts of France; they're starting for the world a reformation which will
make it clean.  Not America alone, but England, and all Europe, will
become republics."

"England?" asked Dyck in a low, penetrating voice.  "Aye, England,
through Ireland.  Ireland will come first, then Wales, Scotland, and
England.  Dear lad, the great day is come--the greatest the world has
ever known.  France, the spirit of it, is alive.  It will purge and
cleanse the universe!"

The suspicious, alert look passed from Dyck's eyes, but his face had
become flushed.  He reached out and poured himself another glass of wine.

"What you say may be true, Boyne.  It may be true, but I wouldn't put
faith in it--not for one icy minute.  I don't want to see here in Ireland
the horrors and savagery of France.  I don't want to see the guillotine
up on St. Stephen's Green."

Boyne felt that he must march carefully.  He was sure of his game; but
there were difficulties, and he must not throw his chances away.  Dyck
was in a position where, with his inflammable nature, he could be
captured.

"Well, I'll tell you, Calhoun.  I don't know which is worse--Ireland
bloody with shootings and hangings, Ulster up in the north and Cork in
the south, from the Giant's Causeway to Tralee; no two sets of feet
dancing alike, with the bloody hand of England stretching out over the
Irish Parliament like death itself; or France ruling us.  How does the
English government live here?  Only by bribery and purchases.  It buys
its way.  Isn't that true?"

Dyck nodded.  "Yes, it's true in a way," he replied.  "It's so, because
we're what we are.  We've never been properly put in our places.  The
heel on our necks--that's the way to do it."

Boyne looked at the flushed, angry face.  In spite of Dyck's words, he
felt that his medicine was working well.

"Listen to me, Calhoun," he said softly.  "You've got to do something.
You're living an idle life.  You're in debt.  You've ruined your
independent fortune at the tables.  There are but two courses open to
you.  One is to join the British forces--to be a lieutenant, a captain,
a major, a colonel, or a general, in time; to shoot and cut and hang and
quarter, and rule with a heavy rod.  That's one way."

"So you think I'm fit for nothing but the sword, eh?" asked Dyck with
irony.  "You think I've got no brains for anything except the army."

Boyne laughed.  "Have another drink, Calhoun."  He poured out more wine.
"Oh, no, not the army alone; there's the navy--and there's the French
navy!  It's the best navy in the world, the freest and the greatest,
and with Bonaparte going at us, England will have enough to do--too much,
I'm thinking.  So there's a career in the French navy open.  And listen--
before you and I are two months older, the French navy will be in the
harbours of Ireland, and the French army will land here."  He reached out
and grasped Dyck's arm.  "There's no liberty of freedom under the Union
Jack.  What do you think of the tricolour?  It's a great flag, and under
it the world is going to be ruled--England, Spain, Italy, Holland,
Prussia, Austria, and Russia--all of them.  The time is ripe.  You've got
your chance.  Take it on, dear lad, take it on."

Dyck did not raise his head.  He was leaning forward with both arms on
the table, supporting himself firmly; his head was bowed as though with
deep interest in what Boyne said.  And, indeed, his interest was great--
so great that all his manhood, vigour, all his citizenship, were vitally
alive.  Yet he did not lift his head.

"What's that you say about French ships in the harbours of Ireland?" he
said in a tone that showed interest.  "Of course, I know there's been a
lot of talk of a French raid on Ireland, but I didn't know it was to be
so soon."

"Oh, it's near enough!  It's all been arranged," replied Boyne.
"There'll be ships-war-ships, commanded by Hoche.  They'll have orders
to land on the coast, to join the Irish patriots, to take control of
the operations, and then to march on--"

He was going to say "march on Dublin," but he stopped.  He was playing a
daring game.  If he had not been sure of his man, he would not have been
so frank and fearless.

He did not, however, mislead Dyck greatly.  Dyck had been drinking a good
deal, but this knowledge of a French invasion, and a sense of what Boyne
was trying to do, steadied his shaken emotions; held him firmly in the
grip of practical common sense.  He laughed, hiccuped a little, as though
he was very drunk, and said:

"Of course the French would like to come to Ireland; they'd like to seize
it and hold it.  Why, of course they would!  Don't we know all that's
been and gone?  Aren't Irishmen in France grown rich in industry there
after having lost every penny of their property here?  Aren't there
Irishmen there, always conniving to put England at defiance here by
breaking her laws, cheating her officers, seducing her patriots?  Of
course; but what astounds me is that a man of your standing should
believe the French are coming here now to Ireland.  No, no, Boyne; I'm
not taking your word for any of these things.  You're a gossip; you're a
damned, pertinacious, preposterous gossip, and I'll say it as often as
you like."

"So it's proof you want, is it?  Well, then, here it is."

Boyne drew from his pocket a small leather-bound case and took from it a
letter, which he laid on the table in front of Dyck.

Dyck looked at the document, then said:

"Ah, that's what you are, eh?--a captain in the French artillery!  Well,
that'd be a surprise in Ireland if it were told."

"It isn't going to be told unless you tell it, Calhoun, and you're too
much of a sportsman for that.  Besides:

"Why shouldn't you have one of these if you want it--if you want it!"

"What'd be the good of my wanting it?  I could get a commission here in
the army of George III, if I wanted it, but I don't want it; and any man
that offers it to me, I'll hand it back with thanks and be damned to
you!"

"Listen to me, then, Calhoun," remarked Boyne, reaching out a hand to lay
it on Dyck's arm.

Dyck saw the motion, however, and carefully drew back in his chair.  "I'm
not an adventurer," he said; "but if I were, what would there be in it
for me?"

Boyne misunderstood the look on Dyck's face.  He did not grasp the
meaning behind the words, and he said to him:

"Oh, a good salary--as good as that of a general, with a commission and
the spoils of war!  That's the thing in the French army that counts for
so much--spoils of war.  When they're out on a country like this, they
let their officers loose--their officers and men.  Did you ever hear tell
of a French army being pinched for fodder, or going thirsty for drink, or
losing its head for poverty or indigence?"

"No, I never did."

"Well, then, take the advice of an officer of the French army resident
now in Dublin," continued Boyne, laughing, "who has the honour of being
received as the friend of Mr. Dyck Calhoun of Playmore!  Take your hand
in the game that's going on!  For a man as young as you, with brains and
ambition, there's no height he mightn't reach in this country.  Think of
it--Ireland free from English control; Ireland, with all her dreams,
living her own life, fearless, independent, as it was in days of yore.
Why, what's to prevent you, Dyck Calhoun, from being president of the
Irish Republic?  You have brains, looks, skill, and a wonderful tongue.
None but a young man could take on the job, for it will require boldness,
skill, and the recklessness of perfect courage.  Isn't it good enough for
you?"

"What's the way to do it?" asked Dyck, still holding on to his old self
grimly.  "How is it to be done?"  He spoke a little thickly, for, in
spite of himself, the wine was clogging his senses.  It had been
artistically drugged by Boyne.

"Listen to me, Calhoun," continued Boyne.  "I've known you now some time.
We've come in and gone out together.  This day was inevitable.  You were
bound to come to it one way or another.  Man, you have a heart of iron;
you have the courage of Caesar or Alexander; you have the chance of doing
what no Englishman could ever do--Cromwell, or any other.  Well, then,
don't you see the fateful moment has come in Irish life and history?
Strife everywhere!  Alone, what can we do?  Alone, if we try to shake off
the yoke that binds us we shall be shattered, and our last end be worse
than our first.  But with French ships, French officers and soldiers,
French guns and ammunition, with the trained men of the French army to
take control here, what amelioration of our weakness, what confidence and
skill on our side!  Can you doubt what the end will be?  Answer me, man,
don't you see it all?  Isn't it clear to you?  Doesn't such a cause
enlist you?"

With a sudden burst of primitive anger, Dyck got to his feet, staggering
a little, but grasping the fatal meaning of the whole thing.  He looked
Erris Boyne in the eyes.  His own were bloodshot and dissipated, but
there was a look in them of which Boyne might well take heed.

Boyne had not counted on Dyck's refusal; or, if it had occurred to him,
the remedy, an ancient one, was ready to his fingers.  The wine was
drugged.  He had watched the decline of Dyck's fortunes with an eye of
appreciation; he had seen the clouds of poverty and anxiety closing in.
He had known of old Miles Calhoun's financial difficulties.  He had
observed Dyck's wayside loitering with revolutionists, and he had taken
it with too much seriousness.  He knew the condition of Dyck's purse.

He was not prepared for Dyck's indignant outburst.

"I tell you this, Erris Boyne, there's none has ever tried me as you have
done!  What do you think I am--a thing of the dirty street-corner,
something to be swept up and cast into the furnace of treason?  Look you,
after to-day you and I will never break bread or drink wine together.
No--by Heaven, no!  I don't know whether you've told me the truth or not,
but I think you have.  There's this to say--I shall go from this place to
Dublin Castle, and shall tell them there--without mentioning your name--
what you've told about the French raid.  Now, by God, you're a traitor!
You oughtn't to live, and if you'll send your seconds to me I'll try and
do with you as I did with Leonard Mallow.  Only mark me, Erris Boyne,
I'll put my sword into your heart.  You understand--into your filthy
heart!"

At that moment the door of the room opened, and a face looked in for an
instant-the face of old Swinton, the landlord of the Harp and Crown.
Suddenly Boyne's look changed.  He burst into a laugh, and brought his
fists down on the table between them with a bang.

"By Joseph and by Mary, but you're a patriot, Calhoun!  I was trying to
test you.  I was searching to find the innermost soul of you.  The French
fleet, my commission in the French army, and my story about the landlord
are all bosh.  If I meant what I told you, do you think I'd have been so
mad as to tell you so much, damn it?  Have you no sense, man?  I wanted
to find out exactly how you stood-faithful or unfaithful to the crown--
and I've found out.  Sit down, sit down, Calhoun, dear lad.  Take your
hand off your sword.  Remember, these are terrible days.  Everything I
said about Ireland is true.  What I said about France is false.  Sit
down, man, and if you're going to join the king's army--as I hope and
trust you will--then here's something to help you face the time between."
He threw on the table a packet of notes.  "They're good and healthy, and
will buy you what you need.  There's not much.  There's only a hundred
pounds, but I give it to you with all my heart, and you can pay it back
when the king's money comes to you, or when you marry a rich woman."

He said it all with a smile on his face.  It was done so cleverly, with
so much simulated sincerity, that Dyck, in his state of semi-drunkenness,
could not, at the instant, place him in his true light.  Besides, there
was something handsome and virile in Boyne's face--and untrue; but the
untruth Dyck did not at the moment see.

Never in his life had Boyne performed such prodigies of dissimulation.
He was suddenly like a schoolboy disclosing the deeds of some adventurous
knight.  He realized to the full the dangers he had run in disclosing the
truth; for it was the truth that he had told.

So serious was the situation, to his mind, that one thing seemed
inevitable.  Dyck must be kidnapped at once and carried out of Ireland.
It would be simple.  A little more drugged wine, and he would be asleep
and powerless--it had already tugged at him.  With the help of his
confreres in the tavern, Dyck could be carried out, put on a lugger, and
sent away to France.

There was nothing else to do.  Boyne had said truly that the French fleet
meant to come soon.  Dyck must not be able to give the thing away before
it happened.  The chief thing now was to prime him with the drugged wine
till he lost consciousness, and then carry him away to the land of the
guillotine.  Dyck's tempestuous nature, the poetry and imagination of
him, would quickly respond to French culture, to the new orders of the
new day in France.  Meanwhile, he must be soaked in drugged drink.

Already the wine had played havoc with him; already stupefaction was
coming over his senses.  With a good-natured, ribald laugh, Boyne poured
out another glass of marsala and pushed it gently over to Dyck's fingers.

"My gin to your marsala," he said, and he raised his own glass of gin,
looking playfully over the top to Dyck.

With a sudden loosening of all the fibres of his nature, Dyck raised the
glass of marsala to his lips and drained it off almost at a gulp.

"You're a prodigious liar, Boyne," he said.  "I didn't think any one
could lie so completely."

"I'll teach you how, Calhoun.  It's not hard.  I'll teach you how."

He passed a long cigar over the table to Dyck, who, however, did not
light it, but held it in his fingers.  Boyne struck a light and held it
out across the small table.  Dyck leaned forward, but, as he did so, the
wine took possession of his senses.  His head fell forward in sleep, and
the cigar dropped from his fingers.

"Ah, well--ah, well, we must do some business now!" remarked Boyne.  He
leaned over Dyck for a moment.  "Yes, sound asleep," he said, and laughed
scornfully to himself.  "Well, when it's dark we must get him away.
He'll sleep for four or five hours, and by that time he'll be out on the
way to France, and the rest is easy."

He was about to go to the door that led into the business part of the
house, when the door leading into the street opened softly, and a woman
stepped inside.  She had used the key which Boyne had forgotten at his
house.

At first he did not hear her.  Then, when he did turn round, it was too
late.  The knife she carried under her skirt flashed out and into Boyne's
heart.  He collapsed on the floor without a sound, save only a deep sigh.

Stooping over, Noreen drew the knife out with a little gurgling cry--a
smothered exclamation.  Then she opened the door again--the side-door
leading into the street-closed it softly, and was gone.

Two hours afterwards the landlord opened the door.  Erris Boyne lay in
his silence, stark and still.  At the table, with his head sunk in his
arms, sat Dyck Calhoun, snoring stertorously, his drawn sword by his
side.

With a cry the old man knelt on the floor beside the body of Erris Boyne.




CHAPTER VI

DYCK IN PRISON

When Dyck Calhoun waked, he was in the hands of the king's constables,
arrested for the murder of Erris Boyne.  It was hard to protest his
innocence, for the landlord was ready to swear concerning a quarrel he
had seen when he opened the door for a moment.  Dyck, with sudden
caution, only said he would make all clear at the trial.

Dublin and Ireland were shocked and thrilled; England imagined she had
come upon one of the most violent episodes of Irish history.  One journal
protested that it was not possible to believe in Dyck Calhoun's guilt;
that his outward habits were known to all, and were above suspicion,
although he had collogued--though never secretly, so far as the world
knew--with some of the advanced revolutionary spirits.  None of the loyal
papers seemed aware of Erris Boyne's treachery; and while none spoke of
him with approval, all condemned his ugly death.

Driven through the streets of Dublin in a jaunting-car between two of the
king's police, Dyck was a mark for abuse by tongue, but was here and
there cheered by partizans of the ultra-loyal group to which his father
adhered.  The effect of his potations was still upon him, and his mind
was bemused.  He remembered the quarrel, Boyne's explanation, and the
subsequent drinking, but he could recall nothing further.  He was sure
the wine had been drugged, but he realized that Swinton, the landlord,
would have made away with any signs of foul play, as he was himself an
agent of active disloyalty and a friend of Erris Boyne.  Dyck could not
believe he had killed Boyne; yet Boyne had been found with a wound in his
heart, and his own naked sword lying beside him on the table.  The
trouble was he could not absolutely swear innocence of the crime.

The situation was not eased by his stay in jail.  It began with a
revelation terribly repugnant to him.  He had not long been lodged in the
cell when there came a visit from Michael Clones, who stretched out his
hands in an agony of humiliation.

"Ah, you didn't do it--you didn't do it, sir!" he cried.  "I'm sure you
never killed him.  It wasn't your way.  He was for doing you harm if he
could.  An evil man he was, as all the world knows.  But there's one
thing that'll be worse than anything else to you.  You never knew it, and
I never knew it till an hour ago.  Did you know who Erris Boyne was?
Well, I'll tell you.  He was the father of Miss Sheila Llyn.  He was
divorced by Mrs. Llyn many years ago, for having to do with other women.
She took to her maiden name, and he married again.

"Good God!  Good God!"  Dyck Calhoun made a gesture of horror.  "He
Sheila Llyn's father!  Good God!"

Suddenly a passion of remorse roused him out of his semi-stupefaction.

"Michael, Michael!" he said, his voice hoarse, broken.  "Don't say such
a thing!  Are you sure?" Michael nodded.

"I'm sure.  I got it from one that's known Erris Boyne and his first wife
and girl--one that was a servant to them both in past days.  He's been
down to Limerick to see Mrs. Llyn and the beautiful daughter.  I met him
an hour ago, and he told me.  He told me more.  He told me Mrs. Llyn
spoke to him of your friendship with Erris Boyne, and how she meant to
tell you who and what he was.  She said her daughter didn't even know her
father's name.  She had been kept in ignorance."

Dyck seated himself on the rough bed of the cell, and stared at Michael,
his hands between his knees, his eyes perturbed.

"Michael," he said at last, "if it's true--what you've told me--I don't
see my way.  Every step in front of me is black.  To tell the whole truth
is to bring fresh shame upon Mrs. Llyn and her daughter, and not to tell
the whole truth is to take away my one chance of getting out of this
trouble.  I see that!"

"I don't know what you mean, sir, but I'll tell you this--none that knows
you would believe you'd murder Erris Boyne or anny other man."

Dyck wiped the sweat from his forehead.

"I suppose you speak the truth, Michael, but it isn't people who've known
me that'll try me; and I can't tell all."

"Why not, if it'll help you?"

"I can't--of course I can't.  It would be disgrace eternal."

"Why?  Tell me why, sir!"

Dyck looked closely, firmly, at the old servant and friend.  Should he
tell the truth--that Boyne had tried to induce him to sell himself to the
French, to invoke his aid against the English government, to share in
treason?  If he could have told it to anybody, he would have done so to
Michael; but if it was true that in his drunken blindness he had killed
Boyne, he would not seek to escape by proving Boyne a traitor.

He believed Boyne was a servant of the French; but unless the facts came
out in the trial, they should not have sure origin in himself.  He would
not add to his crime in killing the father of the only girl who had ever
touched his heart, the shame of proving that father to be one who should
have been shot as a traitor.

He had courage and daring, but not sufficient to carry him through that
dark chapter.  He would not try to save himself by turning public opinion
against Erris Boyne.  The man had been killed by some one, perhaps--and
the thing ached in his heart--by himself; but that was no reason why the
man's death should not be full punishment for all the wrong he had done.

Dyck had a foolish strain in him, after all.  Romance was his deadly foe;
it made him do a stupid, if chivalrous, thing.  Meanwhile he would warn
the government at once about the projected French naval raid.

"Michael," said Dyck, rising again, "see my father, but you're not to say
I didn't kill Boyne, for, to tell the truth, I don't know.  My head"--
he put his hand to it with a gesture of despair--"my head's a mass of
contradictions.  It seems a thousand years since I entered that tavern!
I can't get myself level with all that's happened.  That Erris Boyne
should be the father of the sweet girl at Limerick shakes me.  Don't you
see what it means?  If I killed him, it spoils everything--everything.
If I didn't kill him, I can only help myself by blackening still more the
life of one who gave being to--"

"Aye, to a young queen!" interrupted Michael.

"God knows, there's none like her in Ireland, or in any other country at
all!"

Suddenly Dyck regained his composure; and it was the composure of one who
had opened the door of hell and had realized that in time--perhaps not
far off--he also would dwell in the infernal place.

"Michael, I have no money, but I'm my father's heir.  My father will not
see me starve in prison, nor want for defence, though my attitude shall
be 'no defence.'  So bring me decent food and some clothes, and send to
me here Will McCormick, the lawyer.  He's as able a man as there is in
Dublin.  Listen, Michael, you're not to speak of Mrs. Llyn and Miss Llyn
as related to Erris Boyne.  What will come of what you and I know and
don't know, Heaven only has knowledge; but I'll see it through.  I've
spoiled as good chances as ever a young man had that wants to make his
way; but drink and cards, Michael, and the flare of this damned life at
the centre--it got hold of me.  It muddled, drowned the best that was in
me.  It's the witch's kitchen, is Dublin.  Ireland's the only place in
the world where they make saints of criminals and pray to them; where
they lose track of time and think they're in eternity; where emotion is
saturnine logic and death is the touchstone of life.  Michael, I don't
see any way to safety.  Those fellows down at the tavern were friends of
Erris Boyne.  They're against me.  They'll hang me if they can!"

"I don't believe they can do it, master.  Dublin and Ireland think more
of you than they did of Erris Boyne.  There's nothing behind you except
the wildness of youth--nothing at all.  If anny one had said to me at
Playmore that you'd do the things you've done with drink and cards since
you come to Dublin,

"I'd have swore they were liars.  Yet when all's said and done, I'd give
my last drop of blood as guarantee you didn't kill Erris Boyne!"

Dyck smiled.  "You've a lot of faith in me, Michael--but I'll tell you
this--I never was so thirsty in my life.  My mouth's like a red-hot iron.
Send me some water.  Give the warder sixpence, if you've got it, and send
me some water.  Then go to Will McCormick, and after that to my father."

Michael shook his head dolefully.

"Mr. McCormick's aisy--oh, aisy enough," he said.  "He'll lep up at the
idea of defendin' you, but I'm not takin' pleasure in goin' to Miles
Calhoun, for he's a hard man these days.  Aw, Mr. Dyck, he's had a lot
of trouble.  Things has been goin' wrong with Playmore.  'Pon honour, I
don't know whether anny of it'll last as long as Miles Calhoun lasts.
There'll be little left for you, Mr. Dyck.  That's what troubles me.  I
tell you it'd break my heart if that place should be lost to your father
and you.  I was born on it.  I'd give the best years of the life that's
left me to make sure the old house could stay in the hands of the
Calhouns.  I say to you that while I live all I am is yours, fair and
foul, good and bad."  He touched his breast with his right hand.  "In
here is the soul of Ireland that leps up for the things that matter.
There's a song--but never mind about a song; this is no place for songs.
It's a prison-house, and you're a prisoner charged--"

"Not charged yet, not charged," interrupted Dyck; "but suspected of and
arrested for a crime.  I'll fight--before God, I'll fight to the last!
Good-bye, Michael; bring me food and clothes, and send me cold water at
once."

When the door closed softly behind Michael Clones, Dyck sat down on the
bed where many a criminal patriot had lain.  He looked round the small
room, bare, unfurnished, severe-terribly severe; he looked at the blank
walls and the barred window, high up; he looked at the floor--it was
discoloured and damp.  He reached out and touched it with his hand.  He
looked at the solitary chair, the basin and pail, and he shuddered.

"How awful--how awful!" he murmured.  "But if it was her father, and if
I killed him"--his head sank low--"if I killed her father!"

"Water, sir."

He looked up.  It was the guard with a tin of water and a dipper.




CHAPTER VII

MOTHER AND DAUGHTER

"I don't believe he's guilty, mother."

The girl's fine eyes shone with feeling--with protest, indignation,
anguish.  As she spoke, she thrust her head forward with the vigour of a
passionate counsel.  Sheila Llyn was a champion who would fight to the
last gasp for any cause she loved.

A few moments before, she had found her mother, horror-stricken, gazing
at a newspaper paragraph sent from Dublin.

Sheila at once thought this to be the cause of her mother's agitation,
and she reached out a hand for it.  Her mother hesitated, then handed the
clipping to her.  Fortunately it contained no statement save the bare
facts connected with the killing of Erris Boyne, and no reference to the
earlier life of the dead man.  It said no more than that Dyck Calhoun
must take his trial at the sessions.

It also stated that Dyck, though he pleaded "not guilty," declared
frankly, through Will McCormick, the lawyer, that he had no memory of
aught that happened after he had drunk wine given him by Erris Boyne.  He
said that he and Boyne had quarrelled, but had become reconciled again,
and that the drink was a pledge of their understanding.  From the time he
had taken the drink until he waked in the hands of the king's constables,
he had no memory; but he was sure he had not killed Boyne.  The fact that
there was no blood on his sword was evidence.  Nevertheless, he had been
committed for trial.

Mrs. Llyn was sorely troubled.  She knew of her daughter's interest in
Dyck Calhoun, and of Dyck's regard for Sheila.  She had even looked
forward to marriage, and she wished for Sheila no better fate, because
nearly all she knew of Dyck was to his credit.  She was unaware that his
life in Dublin had been dissipated.

If Dyck was guilty--though she could not believe it--there would be an
end of romance between him and Sheila, and their friendship must be
severed for ever.  Her daughter did not know that Erris Boyne was her
father, and she must not know--in any case not yet; but if Dyck was
condemned, it was almost sure he would be hanged.

She wondered about Boyne's widow, whose name did not appear in the
paragraph she had seen.  She knew that Noreen was beautiful, but that he
had married far beneath him socially.  She had imagined Erris Boyne
living in suburban quiet, not drawing his wife into his social scheme.

That is what had happened.  The woman had lived apart from the daily
experiences of her husband's life in Dublin; and it had deepened her
bitterness against him.  When she had learned that Erris Boyne was no
more faithful to her than he had been to his previous wife, she had gone
mad; and Dyck Calhoun was paying the price of her madness.

Mrs. Llyn did not know this.  She was a woman of distinguished bearing,
though small, with a wan, sad look in her eyes always, but with a
cheerful smile.  She was not poor, but well-to-do, and it was not
necessary to deny herself or her daughter ordinary comforts, and even
many of the luxuries of life.

Her hair was darker than her daughter's, black and wavy, with here and
there streaks of grey.  These, however, only added dignity to a head
beautifully balanced, finely moulded, and, in the language of the day,
most genteelly hung.  She was slender, buoyant in movement yet composed,
and her voice was like her daughter's, clear, gentle, thrilling.

Her mind and heart were given up to Sheila and Sheila's future.  That was
why a knowledge of the tragedy that had come to Dyck Calhoun troubled her
as she had not been troubled since the day she first learned of Erris
Boyne's infidelity to herself.

"Let us go to Dublin, mother," said Sheila with a determined air, after
reading the clipping.

"Why, my dear?"

The woman's eyes, with their long lashes, looked searchingly into her
daughter's face.  She felt, as the years went on, that Sheila had gifts
granted to few.  She realized that the girl had resources which would
make her a governing influence in whatever sphere of life she should be
set.  Quietly, Sheila was taking control of their movements, and indeed
of her own daily life.  The girl had a dominating skill which came in
part from herself, and also to a degree from her father; but her
disposition was not her father's-it was her mother's.

Mrs. Llyn had never known Sheila to lie or twist the truth in all her
days.  No one was more obedient to wise argument; and her mother had a
feeling that now, perhaps, the time had come when they two must have a
struggle for mastery.  There was every reason why they should not go to
Dublin.  There Sheila might discover that Erris Boyne was her father, and
might learn the story of her mother's life.

Sheila had been told by her mother that her father had passed away abroad
when she was a little child.  She had never seen her father's picture,
and her mother had given her the impression that their last days together
had not been happy.  She had always felt that it was better not to
inquire too closely into her father's life.

The years had gone on and then had come the happy visit to Loyland
Towers, where she had met Dyck Calhoun.  Her life at that moment had been
free from troublesome emotions; but since the time she had met Dyck at
the top of the hill, a new set of feelings worked in her.

She was as bonny a lass as ever the old world produced--lithe, with a
body like that of a boy, strong and pleasant of face, with a haunting
beauty in the eyes, a majesty of the neck and chin, and a carriage which
had made Michael Clones call her a queen.

She saw Dyck only as, a happy, wild son of the hilltop.  To her he was a
man of mettle and worth, and irresponsible because he had been given no
responsibility.  He was a country gentleman of Ireland, with all the
interest and peril of the life of a country gentleman.

"Yes, we ought to go to Dublin, mother.  We could help him, perhaps,"
Sheila insisted.

The mother shook her head mournfully.

"My child, we could do him no good at all--none whatever.  Besides, I
can't afford to visit Dublin now.  It's an expensive journey, and the
repairs we've been doing here have run me close."

A look of indignation, almost of scorn, came into the girl's face.

"Well, if I were being tried for my life, as Dyck Calhoun is going to be,
and if I knew that friends of mine were standing off because of a few
pounds, shillings, and pence, I think I'd be a real murderer!"

The mother took her daughter's hand.  She found it cold.

"My dear," she said, clasping it gently, "you never saw him but three
times, and I've never seen him but twice except in the distance; but I
would do anything in my power to help him, if I could, for I like him.
The thing for us to do--"

"Yes, I know--sit here, twist our thumbs, and do nothing!"

"What more could we do if we went to Dublin, except listen to gossip,
read the papers and be jarred every moment?  My dear, our best place is
here.  If the spending of money could be of any use to him, I'd spend it
--indeed I would; but since it can't be of any use, we must stay in our
own home.  Of one thing I'm sure--if Dyck Calhoun killed Erris Boyne,
Boyne deserved it.  Of one thing I'm certain beyond all else--it was no
murder.  Mr. Calhoun wasn't a man to murder any one.  I don't believe"--
her voice became passionate--"he murdered, and I don't believe he will be
hanged."

The girl looked at her mother with surprise.  "Oh, dearest, dearest!"
she said.  "I believe you do care for him.  Is it because he has no
mother, and you have no son."

"It may be so, beloved."

Sheila swept her arms around her mother's neck and drew the fine head to
her breast.

At that moment they heard the clatter of hoofs, and presently they saw a
horse and rider pass the window.

"It's a government messenger, mother," Sheila said.

As Sheila said, it was a government messenger, bearing a packet to Mrs.
Llyn--a letter from her brother in America, whom she had not seen for
many years.

The brother, Bryan Llyn, had gone out there as a young man before the
Revolutionary War.  He had prospered, taking sides against England in the
war, and become a man of importance in the schemes of the new republican
government.  Only occasionally had letters come from him to his sister,
and for nearly eleven years she had not had a single word from him.

When she opened the packet now, she felt it would help to solve--she knew
not how--the trouble between herself and her daughter.  The letter had
been sent to a firm in Dublin with which Bryan Llyn had done business,
with instructions that it should be forwarded to his sister.  It had
reached the hands of a government official, who was a brother of a member
of the firm, and he had used the government messenger, who was going upon
other business to Limerick, to forward it with a friendly covering note,
which ended with the words:

     The recent tragedy you have no doubt seen in the papers must have
     shocked you; but to those who know the inside the end was
     inevitable, though there are many who do not think Calhoun is
     guilty.  I am one of them.  Nevertheless, it will go hard with him,
     as the evidence is strong against him.  He comes from your part of
     the country, and you will be concerned, of course.

Sheila watched her mother reading, and saw that great emotion possessed
her, though the girl could not know the cause.  Presently, however, Mrs.
Llyn, who had read the letter from her brother, made a joyful
exclamation.

"What is it, mother dear?" Sheila asked eagerly.  "Tell me!"

The mother made a passionate gesture of astonishment and joy; then she
leaned back in her chair and closed her eyes, with the letter--which was
closely written, in old-fashioned punctiliousness--in her hands.

"Oh, my dear, my dear!" she said.  "How strange it all is!  Your Uncle
Bryan is immensely rich.  He has no children and no family; his health is
failing."

She seemed able to get no further.

"Well, what is it, mother?" asked Sheila again.

For an instant Mrs. Llyn hesitated; then she put the letter into Sheila's
hands.

"Read it, my child," she said.  "It's for you as much as for me--indeed,
more for you than for me."  Sheila took the letter.  It ran as follows:

     DEAREST SISTER:

     It is eleven years since I wrote to you, and yet, though it may seem
     strange, there have not been eleven days in all that time in which I
     have not wished you and Sheila were here.  Sheila--why, she is a
     young woman!  She's about the age you were when I left Ireland, and
     you were one of the most beautiful and charming creatures God ever
     gave life to.  The last picture I have of you was a drawing made
     soon after your marriage--sad, bad, unhappy incident.  I have kept
     it by me always.  It warms my heart in winter; it cools my eyes in
     summer.

     My estate is neither North nor South, but farther South than North.
     In a sense it is always summer, but winter on my place would be like
     summer in Norway--just bitingly fresh, happily alert.  I'm writing
     in the summer now.  I look out of the window and see hundreds of
     acres of cotton-fields, with hundreds upon hundreds of negroes at
     work.  I hear the songs they sing, faint echoes of them, even as I
     write.  Yes, my black folk do sing, because they are well treated.

     Not that we haven't our troubles here.  You can't administer
     thousands of acres, control hundreds of slaves, and run an estate
     like a piece of clockwork without creaks in the machinery.  I've
     built it all up out of next to nothing.  I landed in this country
     with my little fortune of two thousand pounds.  This estate is worth
     at least a quarter of a million now.  I've an estate in Jamaica,
     too.  I took it for a debt.  What it'll be worth in another twenty
     years I don't know.  I shan't be here to see.  I'm not the man I was
     physically, and that's one of the reasons why I'm writing to you
     to-day.  I've often wished to write and say what I'm going to say
     now; but I've held back, because I wanted you to finish your girl's
     education before I said it

     What I say is this: I want you and Sheila to come here to me, to
     make my home your home, to take control of my household, and to let
     me see faces I love about me as the shadows enfold me.

     Like your married life, mine was unsuccessful, but not for the same
     reason.  The woman I married did not understand--probably could not
     understand.  She gave me no children.  We are born this way, or
     that.  To understand is pain and joy in one; to misconceive is to
     scatter broken glass for bare feet.  Yet when I laid her away, a few
     years ago, I had terrible pangs of regret, which must come to the
     heart that has striven in vain.  I did my best; I tried to make her
     understand, but she never did.  I used at first to feel angry; then
     I became patient.  But I waked up again, and went smiling along,
     active, vigorous, getting pleasure out of the infinitely small
     things, and happy in perfecting my organization.

     This place, which I have called Moira, is to be yours--or, rather,
     Sheila's.  So, in any case, you will want to come and see the home I
     have made this old colonial mansion, with its Corinthian pillars and
     verandah, high steps, hard-wood floors polished like a pan, every
     room hung in dimity and chintz, and the smell of fruit and flowers
     everywhere.  You will want to see it all, and you'll want to live
     here.

     There's little rain here, so it's not like Ireland, and the green is
     not so green; but the flowers are marvellously bright, and the birds
     sing almost as well as they sing in Ireland, though there's no lark.
     Strange it is, but true, the only things that draw me back to
     Ireland in my soul are you, and Sheila, whom I've never seen, and
     the lark singing as he rises until he becomes a grey-blue speck, and
     then vanishing in the sky.

     Well, you and the lark have sung in my heart these many days, and
     now you must come to me, because I need you.  I have placed to your
     credit in the Bank of Ireland a thousand pounds.  That will be the
     means of bringing you here--you and Sheila--to my door, to Moira.
     Let nothing save death prevent your coming.  As far as Sheila's eye
     can see-north, south, east, and west--the land will be hers when I'm
     gone.  Dearest sister, sell all things that are yours, and come to
     me.  You'll not forget Ireland here.  Whoever has breathed her air
     can never forget the hills and dells, the valleys and bogs, the
     mountains, with their mists of rain, the wild girls, with their bare
     ankles, their red petticoats, and their beautiful, reckless air.
     None who has ever breathed the air of Ireland can breathe in another
     land without memory of the ancient harp of Ireland.  But it is as a
     memory-deep, wonderful, and abiding, yet a memory.  I sometimes
     think I have forgotten, and then I hear coming through this Virginia
     the notes of some old Irish melody, the song of some wayfarer of
     Mayo or Connemara, and I know then that Ireland is persuasive and
     perpetual; but only as a memory, because it speaks in every pulse
     and beats in every nerve.

     Oh, believe me, I speak of what I know!  I have been away from
     Ireland for a long time, and I'm never going back, but I'll bring
     Ireland to me.  Come here, colleen, come to Virginia.  Write to me,
     on the day you get this letter, that you're coming soon.  Let it be
     soon, because I feel the cords binding me to my beloved fields
     growing thinner.  They'll soon crack, but, please God, they won't
     crack before you come here.

     Now with my love to you and Sheila I stretch out my hand to you.
     Take it.  All that it is has worked for is yours; all that it wants
     is you.

                              Your loving brother,

                                                       BRYAN.

As Sheila read, the tears started from her eyes; and at last she could
read no longer, so her mother took the letter and read the rest of it
aloud.  When she had finished, there was silence--a long warm silence;
then, at last, Mrs. Llyn rose to her feet.

"Sheila, when shall we go?"

With frightened eyes Sheila sprang up.

"I said we must go to Dublin!" she murmured.

"Yes, we will go to Dublin, Sheila, but it will be on our way to Uncle
Bryan's home."

Sheila caught her mother's hands.

"Mother," she said, after a moment of hesitation, "I must obey you."

"It is the one way, my child-the one thing to do.  Some one in prison
calls--perhaps; some one far away who loves you, and needs us, calls--
that we know.  Tell me, am I not right?  I ask you, where shall we go?"

"To Virginia, mother."

The girl's head dropped, and her eyes filled with tears.




CHAPTER VIII

DYCK'S FATHER VISITS HIM

In vain Dyck's lawyer, Will McCormick, urged him to deny absolutely
the killing of Erris Boyne.  Dyck would not do so.  He had, however,
immediately on being jailed, written to the government, telling of the
projected invasion of Ireland by the French fleet, and saying that it had
come to him from a sure source.  The government had at once taken action.

Regarding the death of Boyne, the only thing in his favour was that his
own sword-point was free from stain.  His lawyer made the utmost of this,
but to no avail.  The impression in the court was that both men had been
drinking; that they had quarrelled, and that without a duel being fought
Dyck had killed his enemy.

That there had been no duel was clear from the fact that Erris Boyne's
sword was undrawn.  The charge, however, on the instigation of the
Attorney-General, who was grateful for the information about France, had
been changed from murder to manslaughter; though it seemed clear that
Boyne had been ruthlessly killed by a man whom he had befriended.

On one of the days of the trial, Dyck's father, bowed, morose, and
obstinate, came to see him.  That Dyck and Boyne had quarrelled had been
stated in evidence by the landlord, Swinton, and Dyck had admitted it.
Miles Calhoun was bent upon finding what the story of the quarrel was;
for his own lawyer had told him that Dyck's refusal to give the cause of
the dispute would affect the jury adversely, and might bring him
imprisonment for life.  After the formalities of their meeting, Miles
Calhoun said:

"My son, things are black, but they're not so black they can't be
brightened.  If you killed Erris Boyne, he deserved it.  He was a bad
man, as the world knows.  That isn't the point.  Now, there's only one
kind of quarrel that warrants non-disclosure."

"You mean about a woman?" remarked Dyck coldly.

The old man took a pinch of snuff nervously.  "That's what I mean.  Boyne
was older than you, and perhaps you cut him out with a woman."

A wry smile wrinkled the corners of Dyck's mouth.  "You mean his wife?"
he asked with irony.  "Wife--no!" retorted the old man.  "Damn it, no!
He wasn't the man to remain true to his wife."

"So I understand," remarked Dyck; "but I don't know his wife.  I never
saw her, except at the trial, and I was so sorry for her I ceased to be
sorry for my self.  She had a beautiful, strange, isolated face."

"But that wouldn't influence Boyne," was the reply.  "His first wife had
a beautiful and interesting face, but it didn't hold him.  He went
marauding elsewhere, and she divorced him by act of parliament.  I don't
think you knew it, but his first wife was one of your acquaintances--
Mrs. Llyn, whose daughter you saw just before we left Playmore.
He wasn't particular where he made love--a barmaid or a housekeeper,
it was all the same to him."

"I hope the daughter doesn't know that Erris Boyne was her father," said
Dyck.

"There's plenty can tell her, and she'll hear it sooner or later."

Miles Calhoun looked at his son with dejection.

His eyes wandered over the grimly furnished cell.  His nose smelled the
damp of it, and suddenly the whole soul of him burst forth.

"You don't give yourself a chance of escape, Dyck You know what Irish
juries are.  Why don't you tell the truth about the quarrel?  What's the
good of keeping your mouth shut, when there's many that would profit by
your telling it?"

"Who would profit?" asked Dyck.

"Who would profit!" snarled the old man.  "Well, you would profit first,
for it might break the dark chain of circumstantial evidence.  Also, your
father would profit.  I'd be saved shame, perhaps; I'd get relief from
this disgrace.  Oh, man, think of others beside yourself!

"Think of others!" said Dyck, and a queer smile lighted his haggard
face.  "I'd save myself if I honourably could."

"The law must prove you guilty," the old man went on.  "It's not for you
to prove yourself innocent.  They haven't proved you guilty yet."

The old man fumbled with a waistcoat button.  His eyes blinked hard.

"You don't see," he continued, "the one thing that's plain to my eyes,
and it's this--that your only chance of escape is to tell the truth about
the quarrel.  If the truth were told, whatever it is, I believe it would
be to your credit--I'll say that for you.  If it was to your credit,
even if they believe you guilty of killing Erris Boyne, they'd touch you
lightly.  Ah, in the name of the mother you loved, I ask you to tell the
truth about that quarrel!  Give it into the hands of the jury, and let
them decide.  Haven't you got a heart in you?  In the name of God--"

"Don't speak to me like that," interrupted Dyck, with emotion.  "I've
thought of all those things.  I hold my peace because--because I hold my
peace.  To speak would be to hurt some one I love with all my soul."

"And you won't speak to save me--your father--because you don't love me
with all your soul!  Is that it?" asked Miles Calhoun.

"It's different--it's different."

"Ah, it's a woman!"

"Never mind what it is.  I will not tell.  There are things more shameful
than death."

"Yes," snarled the other.  "Rather than save yourself, you bring
dishonour upon him who gave you birth."

Dyck's face was submerged in colour.

"Father," said he, "on my honour I wouldn't hurt you if I could help it,
but I'll not tell the world of the quarrel between that man and myself.
My silence may hurt you, but some one else would be hurt far more if I
told."

"By God, I think you're some mad dreamer slipped out of the ancient fold!
Do you know where you are?  You're in jail.  If you're found guilty,
you'll be sent to prison at least for the years that'll spoil the making
of your life; and you do it because you think you'll spare somebody.
Well, I ask you to spare me.  I don't want the man that's going to
inherit my name, when my time comes, to bring foulness on it.  We've been
a rough race, we Calhouns; we've done mad, bad things, perhaps, but none
has shamed us before the world--none but you."

"I have never shamed you, Miles Calhoun," replied his son sharply.  "As
the ancients said, 'alis volat propriis'--I will fly with my own wings.
Come weal, come woe, come dark, come light, I have fixed my mind, and
nothing shall change it.  You loved my mother better than the rest of the
world.  You would have thought it no shame to have said so to your own
father.  Well, I say it to you--I'll stand by what my conscience and my
soul have dictated to me.  You call me a dreamer.  Let it be so.  I'm
Irish; I'm a Celt.  I've drunk deep of all that Ireland means.  All
that's behind me is my own, back to the shadowy kings of Ireland, who
lost life and gave it because they believed in what they did.  So will I.
If I'm to walk the hills no more on the estate where you are master, let
it be so.  I have no fear; I want no favour.  If it is to be prison, then
it shall be prison.  If it is to be shame, then let it be shame.  These
are days when men must suffer if they make mistakes.  Well, I will
suffer, fearlessly if helplessly, but I will not break the oath which I
have taken.  And so I will not do it--never--never--never!"

He picked up the cloak which the old man had dropped on the floor, and
handed it to him.

"There is no good in staying longer.  I must go into court again
to-morrow.  I have to think how my lawyer shall answer the evidence
given."

"But of one thing have you thought?" asked his father.  "You will not
tell the cause of the quarrel, for the reason that you might hurt
somebody.  If you don't tell the cause, and you are condemned, won't that
hurt somebody even more?"

For a moment Dyck stood silent, absorbed.  His face looked pinched,
his whole appearance shrivelled.  Then, with deliberation, he said:

"This is not a matter of expediency, but of principle. My heart tells
me what to do, and my heart has always been right."

There was silence for a long time.  At last the old man drew the cloak
about his shoulders and turned towards the door.

"Wait a minute, father," said Dyck.  "Don't go like that.  You'd better
not come and see me again.  If I'm condemned, go back to Playmore; if I'm
set free, go back to Playmore.  That's the place for you to be.  You've
got your own troubles there."

"And you--if you're acquitted?"

"If I'm acquitted, I'll take to the high seas--till I'm cured."

A moment later, without further words, Dyck was alone.  He heard the door
clang.

He sat for some time on the edge of his bed, buried in dejection.
Presently, however, the door opened.  "A letter for you, sir," said the
jailer.




CHAPTER IX

A LETTER FROM SHEILA

The light of the cell was dim, but Dyck managed to read the letter
without great difficulty, for the writing was almost as precise as print.
The sight of it caught his heart like a warm hand and pressed it.  This
was the substance of the letter:

     MY DEAR FRIEND:

     I have wanted to visit you in prison, but my mother has forbidden
     it, and so, even if I could be let to enter, I must not disobey her.
     I have not read the papers giving an account of your trial.  I only
     know you are charged with killing a bad man, notorious in Dublin
     life, and that many think he got his just deserts in being killed.

     I saw Christopher Dogan only a week ago, before we came to Dublin.
     His eyes, as he talked of you, shone like the secret hill-fires
     where the peasants make illegal drink.

     "Look you," he said to me, "I care not what a jury decides.  I know
     my man; and I also know that if the fellow Boyne died by his hand,
     it was in fair fight.  I have read Dyck Calhoun's story in the
     stars; and I know what his end will be.  It will be fair, not foul;
     good, not bad; great, not low.  Tell him that from me, miss," was
     what he said.

     I also will not believe that your fate is an evil one, that the law
     will grind you between the millstones of guilt and dishonour; but if
     the law should call you guilty, I still will not believe.  Far away
     I will think of you, and believe in you, dear, masterful, madman
     friend.  Yes, you are a madman, for Michael Clones told me--faith,
     he loves you well!--that you've been living a gay life in Dublin
     since you came here, and that the man you are accused of killing
     was in great part the cause of it.

     I think I never saw my mother so troubled in spirit as she is at
     this time.  Of course, she could not feel as I do about you.  It
     isn't that which makes her sad and haggard; it is that we are
     leaving Ireland behind.

     Yes, she and I are saying good-bye to Ireland.  That's why I think
     she might have let me see you before we went; but since it must not
     be, well, then, it must not.  But we shall meet again.  In my soul
     I know that on the hills somewhere far off, as on the first day we
     met, we shall meet each other once more.  Where are we going?  Oh,
     very far!  We are going to my Uncle Bryan--Bryan Llyn, in Virginia.
     A letter has come from him urging us to make our home with him.  You
     see, my friend--

Then followed the story which Bryan Llyn had told her mother and herself,
and she wrote of her mother's decision to go out to the new, great home
which her uncle had made among the cotton-fields of the South.  When she
had finished that part of the tale, she went on as follows:

     We shall know your fate only through the letters that will follow
     us, but I will not believe in your bad luck.  Listen to me--why
     don't you come to America also?  Oh, think it over!  Don't believe
     the worst will come.  When they release you from prison, innocent
     and acquitted, cross the ocean and set up your tent under the Stars
     and Stripes.  Think of it!  Nearly all those men in America who
     fought under Washington and won were born in these islands.  They
     took with them to that far land the memory and love of these old
     homes.  You and I would have fought for England and with the British
     troops, because we detest revolution.  Here, in Ireland, we have
     seen its evils; and yet if we had fought for the Union Jack beyond
     the mountains of Maine and in the lonely woods, we should, I
     believe, in the end have said that the freedom fought for by the
     American States was well won.

     So keep this matter in your mind, for my mother and I will soon be
     gone.  She would not let me come to you,--I think I have never seen
     her so disturbed as when I asked her, and she forbade me to write to
     you; but I disobey her.  Well, this is a sad business.  I know my
     mother has suffered.  I know her married life was unhappy, and that
     her husband--my father-died many a year ago, leaving a dark trail of
     regret behind him; but, you see, I never knew my father.  That was
     all long ago, and it is a hundred times best forgotten.

     Our ship sails for Virginia in three days, and I must go.  I will
     keep looking back to the prison where lies, charged with an evil
     crime, of which he is not guilty, a young man for whom I shall
     always carry the spirit of good friendship.

     Do not believe all will not go well.  Let us keep the courage of
     our hearts and the faith of our souls--and I hope I always shall!
     I believe in you, and, believing, I say good-bye.  I say farewell in
     the great hope that somehow, somewhere, we shall help each other on
     the way of life.  God be with you!
                                   I am your friend,
                                                  SHEILA LLYN.

     P. S.--I beg you to remember that America is a good place for a
     young man to live in and succeed.

Dyck read the letter with a wonderful slowness.  He realized that by
happy accident--it could be nothing else--Mrs. Llyn had been able to keep
from her daughter the fact that the man who had been killed in the tavern
by the river was her father.  It was clear that the girl was kept much to
herself, read no newspapers, and saw few people, and that those whom she
saw had been careful to hold their peace about her close relationship to
Erris Boyne.  None but the evil-minded would recall the fact to her.

Sheila's ignorance must not be broken by himself.  He had done the right
thing--he had held his peace for the girl's sake, and he would hold it to
the end.  Slowly he folded up the letter, pressed it to his lips, and put
it in the pocket over his heart.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Beginning of a lifetime of experience, comedy, and tragedy
Wit is always at the elbow of want






NO DEFENSE

By Gilbert Parker



BOOK II

X.        DYCK CALHOUN ENTERS THE WORLD AGAIN
XI.       WHITHER NOW?
XII.      THE HOUR BEFORE THE MUTINY
XIII.     TO THE WEST INDIES
XIV.      IN THE NICK OF TIME
XV.       THE ADMIRAL HAS HIS SAY



CHAPTER X

DYCK CALHOUN ENTERS THE WORLD AGAIN

"Is it near the time?" asked Michael Clones of his friend, as they stood
in front of the prison.

His companion, who was seated on a stone, wrapped in dark-green coverings
faded and worn, and looking pinched with cold in the dour November day,
said, without lifting his head:

"Seven minutes, an' he'll be out, God bless him!"  "And save him and
protect him!" said Michael.  "He deserved punishment no more than I did,
and it's broke him.  I've seen the grey gather at his temples, though
he's only been in prison four years.  He was condemned to eight, but
they've let him free, I don't know why.  Perhaps it was because of what
he told the government about the French navy.  I've seen the joy of life
sob itself down to the sour earth.  When I took him the news of his
father's death, and told him the creditors were swallowing what was left
of Playmore, what do you think he did?"

Old Christopher Dogan smiled; his eyes twinkled with a mirth which had
more pain than gaiety.  "God love you, I know what he did.  He flung out
his hands, and said: 'Let it go!  It's nothing to me.'  Michael, have I
said true?"

Michael nodded.

"Almost his very words you've used, and he flung out his hands, as you
said.

"Aye, he'll be changed; but they've kept the clothes he had when he went
to prison, and he'll come out in them, I'm thinking--"

"Ah, no!" interrupted Michael.  "That can't be, for his clothes was
stole.  Only a week ago he sent to me for a suit of my own.  I wouldn't
have him wear my clothes--he a gentleman!  It wasn't fitting.  So I sent
him a suit I bought from a shop, but he wouldn't have it.  He would leave
prison a poor man, as a peasant in peasant's clothes.  So he wrote to me.
Here is the letter."  He drew from his pocket a sheet of paper, and
spread it out.  "See-read it.  Ah, well, never mind," he added, as old
Christopher shook his head.  "Never mind, I'll read it to you!"
Thereupon he read the note, and added: "We'll see him of the Calhouns
risin' high beyant poverty and misfortune some day."

Old Christopher nodded.

"I'm glad Miles Calhoun was buried on the hilltop above Playmore.  He had
his day; he lived his life.  Things went wrong with him, and he paid the
price we all must pay for work ill-done."

"There you're right, Christopher Dogan, and I remember the day the
downfall began.  It was when him that's now Lord Mallow, Governor of
Jamaica, came to summon Miles Calhoun to Dublin.  Things were never the
same after that; but I well remember one talk I had with Miles Calhoun
just before his death.  'Michael,' he said to me, 'my family have had
many ups and downs, and some that bear my name have been in prison before
this, but never for killing a man out of fair fight.'  'One of your name
may be in prison, sir,' said I, 'but not for killing a man out of fair
fight.  If you believe he did, there's no death bad enough for you!'
He was silent for a while; then at last he whispered Mr. Dyck's name, and
said to me: 'Tell him that as a Calhoun I love him, and as his father I
love him ten times more.  For look you, Michael, though we never ran
together, but quarrelled and took our own paths, yet we are both
Calhouns, and my heart is warm to him.  If my son were a thousand
times a criminal, nevertheless I would ache to take him by the hand.'"

"Hush!  Look at the prison gate," said his companion, and stood up.

As the gates of the prison opened, the sun broke through the clouds and
gave a brilliant phase to the scene.  Out of the gates there came slowly,
yet firmly, dressed in peasant clothes, the stalwart but faded figure of
Dyck Calhoun.

Terribly changed he was.  He had entered prison with the flush upon his
cheek, the lilt of young manhood in his eyes, with hair black and hands
slender and handsome.  There was no look of youth in his face now.  It
was the face of a middle-aged man from which the dew of youth had
vanished, into which life's storms had come and gone.  Though the body
was held erect, yet the head was thrust slightly forward, and the heavy
eyebrows were like a pent-house.  The eyes were slightly feverish, and
round the mouth there crept a smile, half-cynical but a little happy.
All freshness was gone from his hands.  One hung at his side, listless,
corded; the other doffed his hat in reply to the salute of his two humble
friends.

As the gates closed behind him he looked gravely at the two men, who were
standing not a foot apart.  There swept slowly into his eyes, enlarging,
brightening them, the glamour of the Celtic soul.  Of all Ireland, or all
who had ever known him, these two were the only ones welcoming him into
the world again!  Michael Clones, with his oval red face, big nose,
steely eye, and steadfast bearing, had in him the soul of great kings.
His hat was set firmly on his head.  His knee-breeches were neat, if
coarse; his stockings were clean.  His feet were well shod, his coat
worn, and he had still the look that belongs to the well-to-do peasant.
He was a figure of courage and endurance.  Dyck's hand went out to him,
and a warm smile crept to his lips.

"Michael--ever--faithful Michael!"

A moisture came to Michael's eyes.  He did not speak as he clasped the
hand Dyck offered him.  Presently Dyck turned to old Christopher with a
kindly laugh.

"Well, old friend!  You, too, come to see the stag set loose again?
You're not many, that's sure."  A grim, hard look came into his face, but
both hands went out and caught the old man's shoulders affectionately.
"This is no day for you to be waiting at prison's gates, Christopher; but
there are two men who believe in me--two in all the world.  It isn't the
killing," he added after a moment's silence--"it isn't the killing that
hurts so.  If it's true that I killed Erris Boyne, what hurts most is the
reason why I killed him."

"One way or another--does it matter now?" asked Christopher gently.

"Is it that you think nothing matters since I've paid the price, sunk
myself in shame, lost my friends, and come out with not a penny left?"
asked Dyck.  "But yes," he added with a smile, wry and twisted, "yes, I
have a little left!"

He drew from his pocket four small pieces of gold, and gazed ironically
at them in his palm.

"Look at them!"  He held out his hand, so that the two men could see the
little coins.  "Those were taken from me when I entered prison.  They've
been in the hands of the head of the jail ever since.  They give them to
me now--all that's left of what I was."

"No, not all, sir," declared Michael.  "There's something left from
Playmore--there's ninety pounds, and it's in my pocket.  It was got from
the sale of your sporting-kit.  There was the boat upon the lake, the
gun, and all kinds of riffraff stuff not sold with Playmore."

Dyck nodded and smiled.  "Good Michael!"

Then he drew himself up stiffly, and blew in and out his breath as if
with the joy of living.  For four hard years he had been denied the free
air of free men.  Even when walking in the prison-yard, on cold or fair
days, when the air was like a knife or when it had the sun of summer in
it, it still had seemed to choke him.

In prison he had read, thought, and worked much.  They had at least done
that for him.  The Attorney-General had given him freedom to work with
his hands, and to slave in the workshop like one whose living depended on
it.  Some philanthropic official had started the idea of a workshop, and
the officials had given the best of the prisoners a chance to learn
trades and make a little money before they went out into the world.  All
that Dyck had earned went to purchase things he needed, and to help his
fellow prisoners or their families.

Where was he now?  The gap between the old life of nonchalance,
frivolity, fantasy, and excitement was as great as that between heaven
and hell.  Here he was, after four years of prison, walking the highway
with two of the humblest creatures of Ireland, and yet, as his soul said,
two of the best.

Stalking along in thought, he suddenly became conscious that Michael and
Christopher had fallen behind.  He turned round.

"Come on.  Come on with me."  But the two shook their heads.

"It's not fitting, you a Calhoun of Playmore!" Christopher answered.

"Well, then, list to me," said Dyck, for he saw the men could not bear
his new democracy.  "I'm hungry.  In four years I haven't had a meal that
came from the right place or went to the right spot.  Is the little
tavern, the Hen and Chickens, on the Liffeyside, still going?  I mean the
place where the seamen and the merchant-ship officers visit."

Michael nodded.

"Well, look you, Michael--get you both there, and order me as good a meal
of fish and chops and baked pudding as can be bought for money.  Aye, and
I'll have a bottle of red French wine, and you two will have what you
like best.  Mark me, we'll sit together there, for we're one of a kind.
I've got to take to a life that fits me, an ex-jailbird, a man that's
been in prison for killing!"

"There's the king's army," said Michael.  "They make good officers in
it."

A strange, half-sore smile came to Dyck's thin lips.

"Michael," said he, "give up these vain illusions.  I was condemned for
killing a man not in fair fight.

"I can't enter the army as an officer, and you should know it.  The king
himself could set me up again; but the distance between him and me is ten
times round the world and back again!"  But then Dyck nodded kindly.  It
was as if suddenly the martyr spirit had lifted him out of rigid, painful
isolation, and he was speaking from a hilltop.  "No, my friends, what is
in my mind now is that I'm hungry.  For four years I've eaten the bread
of prison, and it's soured my mouth and galled my belly.  Go you to that
inn and make ready a good meal."

The two men started to leave, but old Christopher turned and stretched a
hand up and out.

"Son of Ireland, bright and black and black and bright may be the picture
of your life, but I see for you brightness and sweet faces, and music and
song.  It's not Irish music, and it's not Irish song, but the soul of the
thing is Irish.  Grim things await you, but you will conquer where the
eagle sways to the shore, where the white mist flees from the hills,
where heroes meet, where the hand of Moira stirs the blue and the witches
flee from the voice of God.  There is honour coming to you in the world."

Having said his say, with hand outstretched, having thrilled the air with
the voice of one who had the soul of a prophet, the old man turned.  Head
bent forward, he shuffled away with Michael Clones along the stony
street.

Dyck watched them go, his heart beating hard, his spirit overwhelmed.

It was not far to the Castle, yet every footstep had a history.  Now and
again he met people who knew him.  Some bowed a little too profoundly,
some nodded; but not one stopped to speak to him, though a few among them
were people he had known well in days gone by.  Was it the clothes he
wore, or was it that his star had sunk so low that none could keep it
company?  He laughed to himself in scorn, and yet there kept ringing
through his brain all the time the bells of St. Anselm's, which he was
hearing:

              "Oh, God, who is the sinner's friend,
               Make clean my soul once more!"

When he arrived at the Castle walls he stood and looked long at them.

"No, I won't go in.  I won't try to see him," he said at last.  "God, how
strange Ireland is to me!  The soil of it, the trees of it, the grass of
it, are dearer than ever, but--I'll have no more of Ireland.  I'll ask
for nothing.  I'll get to England.  What's Ireland to me?  I must make my
way somewhere.  There's one in there"--he nodded towards the Castle--
"that owes me money at cards.  He should open his pockets to me, and see
me safe on a ship for Australia; but I've had my fill of every one in
Ireland.  There's nothing here for me but shame.  Well, back I'll go to
the Hen and Chickens, to find a good dinner there."

He turned and went back slowly along the streets by which he had come,
looking not to right nor left, thinking only of where he should go and
what he should do outside of Ireland.

At the door of the inn he sniffed the dinner Michael had ordered.

"Man alive!" he said as he entered the place and saw the two men with
their hands against the bright fire.  "There's only one way to live, and
that's the way I'm going to try."

"Well, you'll not try it alone, sir, if you please," said Michael.  "I'll
be with you, if I may."

"And I'll bless you as you go," said Christopher Dogan.




CHAPTER XI

WHITHER NOW?

England was in a state of unrest.  She had, as yet, been none too
successful in the war with France.  From the king's castle to the poorest
slum in Seven Dials there was a temper bordering on despair.  Ministries
came and went; statesmen rose and fell.  The army was indifferently
recruited and badly paid.  England's battles were fought by men of whom
many were only mercenaries, with no stake in England's rise or fall.

In the army and navy there were protests, many and powerful, against
the smallness of the pay, while the cost of living had vastly increased.
In more than one engagement on land England had had setbacks of a serious
kind, and there were those who saw in the blind-eyed naval policy, in
the general disregard of the seamen's position, in the means used for
recruiting, the omens of disaster.  The police courts furnished the navy
with the worst citizens of the country.  Quota men, the output of the
Irish prisons--seditious, conspiring, dangerous--were drafted for the
king's service.

The admiralty pursued its course of seizing men of the mercantile marine,
taking them aboard ships, keeping them away for months from the harbours
of the kingdom, and then, when their ships returned, denying them the
right of visiting their homes.  The press-gangs did not confine their
activities to the men of the mercantile marine.  From the streets after
dusk they caught and brought in, often after ill-treatment, torn from
their wives and sweethearts, knocked on the head for resisting, tradesmen
with businesses, young men studying for the professions, idlers, debtors,
out-of-work men.  The marvel is that the British fleets fought as well as
they did.

Poverty and sorrow, loss and bereavement, were in every street, peeped
mournfully out of every window, lurked at street corners.  From all parts
of the world adventurers came to renew their fortunes in the turmoil of
London, and every street was a kaleidoscope of faces and clothes and
colours, not British, not patriot, not national.

Among these outlanders were Dyck Calhoun and Michael Clones.  They had
left Ireland together in the late autumn, leaving behind them the
stirrings of the coming revolution, and plunging into another revolt
which was to prove the test and trial of English character.

Dyck had left Ireland with ninety pounds in his pocket and many tons'
weight of misery in his heart.  In his bones he felt tragedies on foot in
Ireland which concession and good government could not prevent.  He had
fled from it all.  When he set his face to Holyhead, he felt that he
would never live in Ireland again.  Yet his courage was firm as he made
his way to London, with Michael Clones--faithful, devoted, a friend and
yet a servant, treated like a comrade, yet always with a little
dominance.

The journey to London had been without event, yet as the coach rolled
through country where frost silvered the trees; where, in the early
morning, the grass was shining with dew; where the everlasting green
hedges and the red roofs of villages made a picture which pleased the eye
and stirred the soul, Dyck Calhoun kept wondering what would be his
future.  He had no profession, no trade, no skill except with his sword;
and as he neared London Town--when they left Hendon--he saw the smoke
rising in the early winter morning and the business of life spread out
before him, brave and buoyant.

As from the heights of Hampstead he looked down on the multitudinous area
called London, something throbbed at his heart which seemed like hope;
for what he saw was indeed inspiring.  When at last, in the Edgware Road,
he drew near to living London, he turned to Michael Clones and said:

"Michael, my lad, I think perhaps we'll find a footing here."

So they reached London, and quartered themselves in simple lodgings in
Soho.  Dyck walked the streets, and now and then he paid a visit to the
barracks where soldiers were, to satisfy the thought that perhaps in the
life of the common soldier he might, after all, find his future.  It was,
however, borne in upon him by a chance remark of Michael one day--"I'm
not young enough to be a recruit, and you wouldn't go alone without me,
would you?"--that this way to a livelihood was not open to him.

His faithful companion's remark had fixed Dyck's mind against entering
the army, and then, towards the end of the winter, a fateful thing
happened.  His purse containing what was left of the ninety pounds--two-
fifths of it--disappeared.  It had been stolen, and in all the bitter
days to come, when poverty and misery ground them down, no hint of the
thief, no sign of the robber, was ever revealed.

Then, at last, a day when a letter came from Ireland.  It was from the
firm in which Bryan Llyn of Virginia had been interested, for the letter
had been sent to their care, and Dyck had given them his address in
London on this very chance.  It reached Dyck's hands on the day after
the last penny had been paid out for their lodgings, and they faced the
streets, penniless, foodless--one was going to say friendless.  The
handwriting was that of Sheila Llyn.

At a street corner, by a chemist's shop where a red light burned, Dyck
opened and read the letter.  This is what Sheila had written to him.

     MY DEAR FRIEND:

     The time is near (I understand by a late letter to my mother from an
     official) when you will be freed from prison and will face the world
     again.  I have not written you since your trial, but I have never
     forgotten and never shall.  I have been forbidden to write to you or
     think of you, but I will take my own way about you.  I have known
     all that has happened since we left Ireland, through the letters my
     mother has received.  I know that Playmore has been sold, and I am
     sorry.

     Now that your day of release is near, and you are to be again a free
     man, have you decided about your future?  Is it to be in Ireland?
     No, I think not.  Ireland is no place for a sane and level man to
     fight for honour, fame, and name.  I hear that things are worse
     there in every way than they have been in our lifetime.

     After what has happened in any case, it is not a field that offers
     you a chance.  Listen to me.  Ireland and England are not the only
     places in the world.  My uncle came here to Virginia a poor man.
     He is now immensely rich.  He had little to begin with, but he was
     young like you--indeed, a little older than you--when he first came.
     He invested wisely, worked bravely, and his wealth grew fast.  No
     man needs a fortune to start the business of life in this country.
     He can get plenty of land for almost nothing; he can get credit for
     planting and furnishing his land, and, if he has friends, the credit
     is sure.

     All America is ready for "the likes of you."  Think it over, and
     meanwhile please know there has been placed with the firm in Dublin
     money enough to bring you here with comfort.  You must not refuse
     it.  Take it as a loan, for I know you will not take it as a gift.

     I do not know the story of the killing, even as it was told in
     court.  Well, some one killed the man, but not you, and the truth
     will out in time.  If one should come to me out of the courts of
     heaven, and say that there it was declared you were a rogue, I
     should say heaven was no place for me.  No, of one thing I am sure--
     you never killed an undefended man.  Wayward, wanton, reckless,
     dissipated you may have been, but you were never depraved--never!

     When you are free, lift up your shoulders to all the threats of
     time, then go straight to the old firm where the money is, draw it,
     take ship, and come here.  If you let me know you are coming, I will
     be there to meet you when you step ashore, to give you a firm hand-
     clasp; to tell you that in this land there is a good place for you,
     if you will win it.

     Here there is little crime, though the perils of life are many.
     There is Indian fighting; there are Indian depredations; and not a
     dozen miles from where I sit men have been shot for crimes
     committed.  The woods are full of fighters, and pirates harry the
     coast.  On the wall of the room where I write there are carbines
     that have done service in Indian wars and in the Revolutionary War;
     and here out of the window I can see hundreds of black heads-slaves,
     brought from Africa and the Indies, slaves whose devotion to my
     uncle is very great.  I hear them singing now; over the white-tipped
     cotton-fields there flows the sound of it.

     This plantation has none of the vices that belong to slavery.  Here
     life is complete.  The plantation is one great workshop where trades
     are learned and carried out-shoeing, blacksmithing, building,
     working in wood and metal.

     I am learning here--you see I am quite old, for I am twenty-one now
     --the art of management.  They tell me that when my uncle's day is
     done--I grieve to think it is not far off--I must take the rod of
     control.  I work very, very hard.  I have to learn figures and
     finance; I have to see how all the work is done, so that I shall
     know it is done right.  I have had to discipline the supervisors and
     bookkeepers, inspect and check the output, superintend the packing,
     and arrange for the sale of the crop-yes, I arranged for the sale of
     this year's crop myself.  So I live the practical life, and when I
     say that you could make your home here and win success, I do it with
     some knowledge.

     I beg you take ship for the Virginian coast.  Enter upon the new
     life here with faith and courage.  Have no fear.  Heaven that has
     thus far helped you will guide you to the end.

     I write without my mother's permission, but my uncle knows, and
     though he does not approve, he does not condemn.

     Once more good-bye, my dear friend, and God be with you.

                                        SHEILA LLYN.

     P. S.--I wonder where you will read this letter.  I hope it will
     find you before your release.  Please remember that she who wrote it
     summons you from the darkness where you are to light and freedom
     here.


Slowly Dyck folded up the letter, when he had read it, and put it in his
pocket.  Then he turned with pale face and gaunt look to Michael Clones.

"Michael," said he, "that letter is from a lady.  It comes from her new
home in Virginia."

Michael nodded.

"Aye, aye, sir, I understand you," he said.  "Then she doesn't know the
truth about her father?" Dyck sighed heavily.  "No, Michael, she doesn't
know the truth."

"I don't believe it would make any difference to her if she did know."

"It would make all the difference to me, Michael.  She says she wishes to
help me.  She tells me that money's been sent to the big firm in Dublin-
money to take me across the sea to Virginia."

Michael's face clouded.

"Yes, sir.  To Virginia--and what then?"

"Michael, we haven't a penny in the world, you and I, but if I took one
farthing of that money I should hope you would kill me.  I'm hungry;
we've had nothing to eat since yesterday; but if I could put my hands
upon that money here and now I wouldn't touch it.  Michael, it looks as
if we shall have to take to the trade of the footpad."




CHAPTER XII

THE HOUR BEFORE THE MUTINY

In the days when Dyck Calhoun was on the verge of starvation in London,
evil naval rumours were abroad.  Newspapers reported, one with
apprehension, another with tyrannous comment, mutinous troubles in the
fleet.

At first the only demand at Spithead and the Nore had been for an
increase of pay, which had not been made since the days of Charles II.
Then the sailors' wages were enough for comfortable support; but in 1797
through the rise in the cost of living, and with an advance of thirty per
cent. on slops, their families could barely maintain themselves.  It was
said in the streets, and with truth, that seamen who had fought with
unconquerable gallantry under Howe, Collingwood, Nelson, and the other
big sea-captains, who had borne suffering and wounds, and had been in the
shadow of death--that even these men damned a system which, in its stern
withdrawal of their class for long spaces of time from their own
womenfolk, brought evil results to the forecastle.

The soldier was always in touch with his own social world, and he had
leave sufficient to enable him to break the back of monotony.  He drank,
gambled, and orated; but his indulgences were little compared with the
debauches of able-bodied seamen when, after months of sea-life, they
reached port again.  A ship in port at such a time was not a scene of
evangelical habits.  Women of loose class, flower-girls, fruit-sellers,
and costermongers turned the forecastle into a pleasure-house where the
pleasures were not always secret; where native modesty suffered no
affright, and physical good cheer, with ribald paraphrase, was notable
everywhere.

"How did it happen, Michael?"

As he spoke, Dyck looked round the forecastle of the Ariadne with a
restless and inquisitive expression.  Michael was seated a few feet away,
his head bent forward, his hands clasped around his knees.

"Well, it don't matter one way or 'nother," he replied; "but it was like
this.  The night you got a letter from Virginia we was penniless; so at
last I went with my watch to the pawnbroker's.  You said you'd wait till
I got back, though you knew not where I was goin'.  When I got back, you
were still broodin'.  You were seated on a horse-block by the chemist's
lamp where you had read the letter.  It's not for me to say of what you
were thinkin'; but I could guess.  You'd been struck hard, and there had
come to you a letter from one who meant more to you than all the rest of
the world; and you couldn't answer it because things weren't right.
As I stood lookin' at you, wonderin' what to do, though, I had twelve
shillin's in my pocket from the watch I'd pawned, there came four men,
and I knew from their looks they were recruitin' officers of the navy.
I saw what was in their eyes.  They knew--as why shouldn't they, when
they saw a gentleman like you in peasant clothes?--that luck had been
agin' us.

"What the end would have been I don't know.  It was you that solved the
problem, not them.  You looked at the first man of them hard.  Then you
got to your feet.

"'Michael,' says you quietly, 'I'm goin' to sea.  England's at war, and
there's work to do.  So let's make for a king's ship, and have done with
misery and poverty.'

"Then you waved a hand to the man in command of the recruitin' gang, and
presently stepped up to him and his friends.

"'Sir,' I said to you, 'I'm not going to be pressed into the navy.'

"'There's no pressin', Michael,' you answered.  'We'll be quota men.
We'll do it for cash--for forty pounds each, and no other.  You let them
have you as you are.  But if you don't want to come,' you added, 'it's
all the same to me.'

"Faith, I knew that was only talk.  I knew you wanted me.  Also I knew
the king's navy needed me, for men are hard to get.  So, when they'd paid
us the cash--forty pounds apiece--I stepped in behind you, and here we
are--here we are!  Forty pounds apiece--equal to three years' wages of
an ordinary recruit of the army.  It ain't bad, but we're here for three
years, and no escape from it.  Yes, here we are!"

Dyck laughed.

"Aye, here we're likely to remain, Michael.  There's only this to be
said--we'll be fighting the French soon, and it's easy to die in the
midst of a great fight.  If we don't die, Michael, something else will
turn up, maybe."

"That's true, sir!  They'll make an officer of you, once they see you
fight.  This is no place for you, among the common herd.  It's the dregs
o' the world that comes to the ship's bottom in time of peace or war."

"Well, I'm the dregs of the world, Michael.  I'm the supreme dregs."

Somehow the letter from Virginia had decided Dyck Calhoun's fate for him.
Here he was--at sea, a common sailor in the navy.  He and Michael Clones
had eaten and drunk as sailors do, and they had realized that, as they
ate and drank on the River Thames, they would not eat and drink on the
watery fairway.  They had seen the tank foul with age, from which water
was drawn for men who could not live without it, and the smell of it had
revolted Dyck's senses.  They had seen the kegs of pickled meat, and they
had been told of the evil rations given to the sailors at sea.

The Ariadne had been a flag-ship in her day, the home of an admiral and
his staff.  She carried seventy-four guns, was easily obedient to her
swift sail, and had a reputation for gallantry.  From the first hour on
board, Dyck Calhoun had fitted in; with a discerning eye he had
understood the seamen's needs and the weaknesses of the system.

The months he had spent between his exit from prison and his entrance
into the Ariadne had roughened, though not coarsened, his outward
appearance.  From his first appearance among the seamen he had set
himself to become their leader.  His enlistment was for three years, and
he meant that these three should prove the final success of this naval
enterprise, or the stark period in a calendar of tragedy.

The life of the sailor, with its coarseness and drudgery, its inadequate
pay, its evil-smelling food, its maggoty bread, its beer drawn from casks
that once had held oil or fish, its stinking salt-meat barrels, the
hideous stench of the bilge-water--all this could in one sense be no
worse than his sufferings in jail.  In spite of self-control, jail had
been to him the degradation of his hopes, the humiliation of his manhood.

He had suffered cold, dampness, fever, and indigestion there, and it had
sapped the fresh fibre of life in him.  His days in London had been
cruel.  He had sought work in great commercial concerns, and had almost
been grateful when rejected.  When his money was stolen, there seemed
nothing to do, as he said to Michael Clones, but to become a footpad or a
pirate.  Then the stormy doors of the navy had opened wide to him; and as
many a man is tempted into folly or crime by tempestuous nature, so he,
forlorn, spiritually unkempt, but physically and mentally well-composed,
in a spirit of bravado, flung himself into the bowels of the fleet.

From the moment Dyck arrived on board the Ariadne he was a marked man.
Ferens, a disfranchised solicitor, who knew his story, spread the
unwholesome truth about him among the ship's people, and he received
attentions at once offensive and flattering.  The best-educated of the
ship's hands approached him on the grievances with which the whole navy
was stirring.

Something had put a new spirit into the life of his majesty's ships; it
was, in a sense, the reflection of the French Revolution and Tom Paine's
Age of Reason.  What the Americans had done in establishing a republic,
what France was doing by her revolution, got into the veins and minds of
some men in England, but it got into the veins and minds of the sailor
first; for, however low his origin, he had intercourse not given to the
average landsman.  He visited foreign ports, he came in touch with other
elements than those of British life and character.

Of all the ships in the navy the Ariadne was the best that Dyck Calhoun
could have entered.  Her officers were humane and friendly, yet firm; and
it was quite certain that if mutiny came they would be treated well.  The
agitation on the Ariadne in support of the grievances of the sailors was
so moderate that, from the first, Dyck threw in his lot with it.  Ferens,
the former solicitor, first came to him with a list of proposals, which
only repeated the demands made by the agitators at Spithead.

"You're new among us," said Ferens to Dyck.  "You don't quite know what
we've been doing, I suppose.  Some of us have been in the navy for two
years, and some for ten.  There are men on this ship who could tell
you stories that would make your blood run cold--take my word for it.
There's a lot of things goin' on that oughtn't to be goin' on.  The time
has come for reform.  Have a look at this paper, and tell me what you
think."

Dyck looked at the pockmarked face of Ferens, whose record in the courts
was a bad one, and what he saw did not disgust him.  It was as though
Ferens had stumbled and been badly hit in his fall, but there were no
signs of permanent evil in his countenance.  He was square-headed,
close-cropped, clear-eyed, though his face was yellow where it was not
red, and his tongue was soft in his head.

Dyck read the paper slowly and carefully.  Then he handed it back without
a word.

"Well, what have you got to say?" asked Ferens.  "Nothing?  Don't you
think that's a strong list of grievances and wrongs?"

Dyck nodded.  "Yes, it's pretty strong," he said, and he held up his
hand.  "Number One, wages and cost of living.  I'm sure we're right
there.  Cost of living was down in King Charles's time, and wages were
down accordingly.  Everything's gone up, and wages should go up.  Number
Two, the prize-money scandal.  I'm with you there.  I don't see why an
officer should get two thousand five hundred times as much as a seaman.
There ought to be a difference, but not so much.  Number Three, the food
ought to be better; the water ought to be better.  We can't live on rum,
maggoty bread, and foul water--that's sure.  The rum's all right; it's
powerful natural stuff, but we ought to have meat that doesn't stink,
and bread that isn't alive.  What's more, we ought to have lots of lime-
juice, or there's no protection for us when we're out at sea with the
best meat taken by the officers and the worst left to us; and with foul
water and rotten food, there's no hope or help.  But, if we're going in
for this sort of thing, we ought to do it decently.  We can't slap a
government in the mouth, and we can't kick an admiral without paying
heavy for it in the end.  If it's wholesome petitioning you're up to,
I'm with you; but I'm not if there's to be knuckle-dusting."

Ferens shrugged a shoulder.

"Things are movin', and we've got to take our stand now when the time is
ripe for it, or else lose it for ever.  Over at Spithead they're gettin'
their own way.  The government are goin' to send the Admiralty Board down
here, because our admiral say to them that it won't be safe goin' unless
they do."

"And what are we going to do here?" asked Dyck.  "What's the game of the
fleet at the Nore?"

Ferens replied in a low voice:

"Our men are goin' to send out petitions--to the Admiralty and to the
House of Commons."

"Why don't you try Lord Howe?"

"He's not in command of a fleet now.  Besides, petitions have been sent
him, and he's taken no notice."

"Howe?  No notice--the best admiral we ever had!  I don't believe it,"
declared Dyck savagely.  "Why, the whole navy believes in Howe.  They
haven't forgotten what he did in '94.  He's as near to the seaman as the
seaman is to his mother.  Who sent the petitions to him?"

"They weren't signed by names--they were anonymous."

Dyck laughed.

"Yes, and all written by the same hand, I suppose."  Ferens nodded.

"I think that's so."

"Can you wonder, then, that Lord Howe didn't acknowledge them?  But I'm
still sure he acted promptly.  He's a big enough friend of the sailor to
waste no time before doing his turn."

Ferens shook his head morosely.

"That may be," he said; "but the petitions were sent weeks ago, and
there's no sign from Lord Howe.  He was at Bath for gout.  My idea is he
referred them to the admiral commanding at Portsmouth, and was told that
behind the whole thing is conspiracy--French socialism and English
politics.  I give you my word there's no French agent in the fleet,
and if there were, it wouldn't have any effect.  Our men's grievances
are not new.  They're as old as Cromwell."

Suddenly a light of suspicion flashed into Ferens's face.

"You're with us, aren't you?  You see the wrongs we've suffered, and how
bad it all is!  Yet you haven't been on a voyage with us.  You've only
tasted the life in harbour.  Good God, this life is heaven to what we
have at sea!  We don't mind the fightin'.  We'd rather fight than eat."
An evil grin covered his face for a minute.  "Yes, we'd rather fight than
eat, for the stuff we get to eat is hell's broil, God knows!  Did you
ever think what the life of the sailor is, that swings at the top of a
mast with the frost freezin' his very soul, and because he's slow, owin'
to the cold, gets twenty lashes for not bein' quicker?  Well, I've seen
that, and a bad sight it is.  Did you ever see a man flogged?  It ain't a
pretty sight.  First the back takes the click of the whip like a damned
washboard, and you see the ridges rise and go purple and red, and the man
has his breath knocked clean out of him with every blow.  Nearly every
stroke takes off the skin and draws the blood, and a dozen will make the
back a ditch of murder.  Then the whipper stops, looks at the lashes,
feels them tender like, and out and down it comes again.  When all the
back is ridged and scarred, the flesh, that looked clean and beautiful,
becomes a bloody mass.  Some men get a hundred lashes, and that's torture
and death.

"A man I knew was flogged told me once that the first blow made his flesh
quiver in every nerve from his toe-nails to his finger-nails, and stung
his heart as if a knife had gone through his body.  There was agony in
his lungs, and the time between each stroke was terrible, and yet the
next came too soon.  He choked with the blood from his tongue, lacerated
with his teeth, and from his lungs, and went black in the face.  I saw
his back.  It looked like roasted meat; yet he had only had eighty
strokes.

"The punishments are bad.  Runnin' the gauntlet is one of them.  Each
member of the crew is armed with three tarry rope-yarns, knotted at the
ends.  Then between the master-at-arms with a drawn sword and two
corporals with drawn swords behind, the thief, stripped to the waist, is
placed.  The thing is started by a boatswain's mate givin' him a dozen
lashes.  Then he's slowly marched down the double line of men, who flog
him as he passes, and at the end of the line he receives another dose of
the cat from the boatswain's mate.  The poor devil's body and head are
flayed, and he's sent to hospital and rubbed with brine till he's healed.

"But the most horrible of all is flogging through the fleet.  That's
given for strikin' an officer, or tryin' to escape.  It's a sickenin'
thing.  The victim is lashed by his wrists to a capstan-bar in the ship's
long-boat, and all the ship's boats are lowered also, and each ship in
harbour sends a boat manned by marines to attend.  Then, with the master-
at-arms and the ship's surgeon, the boat is cast off.  The boatswain's
mate begins the floggin', and the boat rows away to the half-minute bell,
the drummer beatin' the rogue's march.  From ship to ship the long-boat
goes, and the punishment of floggin' is repeated.  If he faints, he gets
wine or rum, or is taken back to his ship to recover.  When his back is
healed he goes out to get the rest of his sentence.  Very few ever live
through it, or if they do it's only for a short time.  They'd better have
taken the hangin' that was the alternative.  Even a corpse with its back
bare of flesh to the bone has received the last lashes of a sentence, and
was then buried in the mud of the shore with no religious ceremony.

"Mind you, there's many a man gets fifty lashes that don't deserve them.
There's many men in the fleet that's stirred to anger at ill-treatment,
until now, in these days, the whole lot is ready to see the thing
through--to see the thing through--by heaven and by hell!"

The pockmarked face had taken on an almost ghastly fervour, until it
looked like a distorted cartoon-vindictive, fanatical; but Dyck, on the
edge of the river of tragedy, was not ready to lose himself in the stream
of it.

As he looked round the ship he felt a stir of excitement like nothing he
had ever known, though he had been brought up in a country where men were
by nature revolutionists, and where the sword was as often outside as
inside the scabbard.  There was something terrible in a shipboard
agitation not to be found in a land-rising.  On land there were a
thousand miles of open country, with woods and houses, caves and cliffs,
to which men could flee for hiding; and the danger of rebellion was less
dominant.  At sea, a rebellion was like some beastly struggle in one
room, beyond the walls of which was everlasting nothingness.  The thing
had to be fought out, as it were, man to man within four walls, and God
help the weaker!

"How many ships in the fleet are sworn to this agitation?" Dyck asked
presently.

"Every one.  It's been like a spread of infection; it's entered at every
door, looked out of every window.  All the ships are in it, from the
twenty-six-hundred-tonners to the little five-hundred-and-fifty-tonners.
Besides, there are the Delegates."

He lowered his voice as he used these last words.  "Yes, I know," Dyck
answered, though he did not really know.  "But who is at the head?"

"Why, as bold a man as can be--Richard Parker, an Irishman.  He was once
a junior naval officer, and left the navy and went into business; now he
is a quotaman, and leads the mutiny.  Let me tell you that unless there's
a good round answer to what we demand, the Nore fleet'll have it out with
the government.  He's a man of character, is Richard Parker, and the
fleet'll stand by him."

"How long has he been at it?" asked Dyck.

"Oh, weeks and weeks!  It doesn't all come at once, the grip of the
thing.  It began at Spithead, and it worked right there; and now it's
workin' at the Nore, and it'll work and work until there isn't a ship and
there isn't a man that won't be behind the Delegates.  Look.  Half the
seamen on this ship have tasted the inside of a jail; and the rest come
from the press-gang, and what's left are just the ragged ends of street
corners.  But"--and here the man drew himself up with a flush--"but
there's none of us that wouldn't fight to the last gasp of breath for the
navy that since the days of Elizabeth has sailed at the head of all the
world.  Don't think we mean harm to the fleet.  We mean to do it good.
All we want is that its masters shall remember we're human flesh and
blood; that we're as much entitled to good food and drink on sea as on
land; and that, if we risk our lives and shed our blood, we ought to have
some share in the spoils.  We're a great country and we're a great
people, but, by God, we're not good to our own!  Look at them there."

He turned and waved a hand to the bowels of the ship where sailors traded
with the slop-sellers, or chaffered with women, or sat in groups and
sang, or played rough games which had no vital meaning; while here and
there in groups, with hands gesticulating, some fanatics declared their
principles.  And the principles of every man in the Nore fleet so far
were embraced in the four words--wages, food, drink, prize-money.

Presently Ferens stopped short.  "Listen!" he said.

There was a cry from the ship's side not far away, and then came little
bursts of cheering.

"By Heaven, it's the Delegates comin' here!" he said.  He held up a
warning palm, as though commanding silence, while he listened intently.
"Yes, it's the Delegates.  Now look at that crowd of seamen!"  He swung
his hand towards the bowels of the ship.  Scores of men were springing to
their feet.  Presently there came a great shouting and cheers, and then
four new faces appeared on deck.  They were faces of intelligence, but
one of them had the enlightened look of leadership.

"By Judas, it's our leader, Richard Parker!" declared Ferens.

What Dyck now saw was good evidence of the progress of the agitation.
There were officers of the Ariadne to be seen, but they wisely took no
notice of the breaches of regulation which followed the arrival of the
Delegates.  Dyck saw Ferens speak to Richard Parker after the men had
been in conference with Parker and the Delegates, and then turn towards
himself.  Richard Parker came to him.

"We are fellow countrymen," he said genially.  "I know your history.
We are out to make the navy better--to get the men their rights.  I
understand you are with us?"

Dyck bowed.  "I will do all possible to get reforms in wages and food put
through, sir."

"That's good," said Parker.  "There are some petitions you can draft,
and some letters also to the Admiralty and to the Houses of Lords and
Commons."

"I am at your service," said Dyck.

He saw his chance to secure influence on the Ariadne, and also to do good
to the service.  Besides, he felt he might be able to check the worst
excesses of the agitation, if he got power under Parker.  He was free
from any wish for mutiny, but he was the friend of an agitation which
might end as successfully as the trouble at Spithead.




CHAPTER XIII

TO THE WEST INDIES

A fortnight later the mutiny at the Nore shook and bewildered the British
Isles.  In the public journals and in Parliament it was declared that
this outbreak, like that at Spithead, was due partly to political strife,
but more extensively to agents of revolution from France and Ireland.

The day after Richard Parker visited the Ariadne the fleet had been put
under the control of the seamen's Delegates, who were men of standing in
the ships, and of personal popularity.  Their first act was to declare
that the fleet should not leave port until the men's demands were
satisfied.

The King, Prime Minister, and government had received a shock greater
than that which had come with the announcement of American independence.
The government had armed the forts at Sheerness, had sent troops and guns
to Gravesend and Tilbury, and had declared war upon the rebellious fleet.

At the head of the Delegates, Richard Parker, with an officer's
knowledge, became a kind of bogus admiral, who, in interview with the
real admirals and the representatives of the Admiralty Board, talked like
one who, having power, meant to use it ruthlessly.  The government had
yielded to the Spithead mutineers, giving pardon to all except the
ringleaders, and granting demands for increased wages and better food,
with a promise to consider the question of prize-money; but the Nore
mutineers refused to accept that agreement, and enlarged the Spithead
demands.  Admiral Buckner arrived on board his flag-ship, the Sandwich,
without the deference due to an admiral, and then had to wait three hours
for Parker and the Delegates on the quarter-deck.  At the interview that
followed, while apologizing to the admiral for his discourtesy, Parker
wore his hat as quasi-admiral of the fleet.  The demands of the Delegates
were met by reasoning on the part of Buckner, but without effect: for the
seamen of the Nore believed that what Spithead could get by obstinacy the
Nore could increase by contumacy; and it was their firm will to bring the
Lords of the Admiralty to their knees.

The demands of the Nore Delegates, however, were rejected by the
Admiralty, and with the rejection two regiments of militia came from
Canterbury to reinforce the Sheerness garrison.  The mutineers were
allowed to parade the town, so long as their conduct was decent, as
Admiral Buckner admitted it to be; but Parker declared that the presence
of the militia was an insult to the seamen in the Nore fleet.

Then ensued the beginning of the terror.  When Buckner presented the
Admiralty's refusal to deal with the Delegates, there came quick
response.  The reply of the mutineers was to row into Sheerness harbour
and take away with them eight gunboats lying there, each of which fired a
shot at the fort, as if to announce that the mutineers were now the
avowed enemies of the government.

Thereupon the rebels ordered all their ships together at the Great Nore,
ranging them into two crescents, with the newly acquired gunboats at the
flanks.  The attitude of the authorities gave the violent mutineers their
opportunity.  Buckner's flag was struck from the mainmast-head of the
Sandwich, and the red flag was hoisted in its place.

The Delegates would not accept an official pardon for their mutiny
through Buckner.  They demanded a deputation from the Admiralty, Parker
saying that no accommodation could occur without the appearance of the
Lords of the Admiralty at the Nore.  Then followed threatening
arrangements, and the Delegates decided to blockade the Thames and the
Medway.

It was at this time that Dyck Calhoun--who, by consent of Richard Parker,
had taken control of the Ariadne--took action which was to alter the
course of his own life and that of many others.

Since the beginning of the mutiny he had acted with decision, judgment,
and strength.  He had agreed to the Ariadne joining the mutinous ships,
and he had skilfully constructed petitions to the Admiralty, the House of
Commons, and the King.  His habit of thought, his knowledge of life, made
him a power.  He believed that the main demands of the seamen were just,
and he made a useful organization to enforce them.  It was only when he
saw the mutineers would not accept the terms granted to the Spithead
rebels that a new spirit influenced him.

He had determined to get control of the Ariadne.  His gift as a speaker
had conquered his fellow-sailors, and the fact that he was an ex-convict
gave them confidence that he was no friend of the government.

One of the first things he did, after securing his own pre-eminence on
the ship, was to get the captain and officers safely ashore.  This he did
with skill, and the crew of the ship even cheered them as they left.

None of the regular officers of the Ariadne were left upon her, except
Greenock, the master of the ship, whose rank was below that of
lieutenant, and whose duties were many and varied under the orders of the
captain.  Greenock chose to stay, though Dyck said he could go if he
wished.  Greenock's reply was that it was his duty to stay, if the ship
was going to remain at sea, for no one else could perform his duties or
do his work.

Then, by vote, Dyck became captain of the ship.  He did not, however,
wear a captain's uniform--blue coat, with white cuffs, flat gold buttons;
with lace at the neck, a white-sleeved waistcoat, knee-breeches, white
silk stockings, and a three-cornered black hat edged with gold lace and
ornamented with a cockade; with a black cravat, a straight dress sword,
a powdered cue tied with a black-silk ribbon, and epaulets of heavy gold
stuff completing the equipment.  Dyck, to the end of his career at sea,
wore only the common seaman's uniform.

Dyck would not have accepted the doubtful honour had he not had long
purposes in view.  With Ferens, Michael Clones, and two others whom
Ferens could trust, a plan was arranged which Dyck explained to his
fellow-seamen on the Ariadne.

"We've come to the parting of the ways, brothers," he said.  "We've all
become liable to death for mutiny.  The pardon offered by the King has
been refused, and fresh demands are made.  There, I think, a real wrong
has been done by our people.  The Ariadne is well supplied with food and
water.  It is the only ship with sufficiency.  And why?  Because at the
beginning we got provisions from the shore in time; also we got
permission from Richard Parker to fill our holds from two stopped
merchant-ships.  Well, the rest of the fleet know what our food and drink
fitment is.  They know how safe we are, and to-day orders have come to
yield our provisions to the rest of the fleet.  That is, we, who have
taken time by the forelock, must yield up our good gettings to bad
receivers.  I am not prepared to do it.

"On shore the Admiralty have stopped the supply of provisions to us and
to all the fleet.  Our men have been arrested at Gravesend, Tilbury, and
Sheerness.  The fleet could not sail now if it wished; but one ship can
sail, and it is ours.  The fleet hasn't the food to sail.  On Richard
Parker's ship, the Sandwich, there is food only for a week.  The others
are almost as bad.  We are in danger of being attacked.  Sir Erasmus
Gower, of the Neptune, has a fleet of warships, gunboats, and amateur
armed vessels getting ready to attack us.  The North Sea fleet has come
to help us, but that doesn't save us.  I'll say this--we are loyal men in
this fleet, otherwise our ships would have joined the enemy in the waters
of France or Holland.  They can't go now, in any case.  The men have lost
heart.  Confidence in our cause has declined.  The government sent Lords
of the Admiralty here, and they offered pardon if we accepted the terms
of the Spithead settlement.  We declined the terms.  That was a bad day
for us, and put every one of our heads in a noose.

"For the moment we have a majority in men and ships; but we can't renew
our food or drink, or ammunition.  The end is sure against us.  Our
original agitation was just; our present obduracy is madness.  This ship
is suspected.  It is believed by the rest of the fleet--by ships like the
Invincible--that we're weak-kneed, selfish, and lacking in fidelity to
the cause.  That's not true; but we have either to fight or to run, and
perhaps to do both.

"Make no mistake.  The government are not cowards; the Admiralty are
gentlemen of determination.  If men like Admiral Howe support the
Admiralty--Howe, one of the best friends the seaman ever had--what do you
think the end will be?  Have you heard what happened at Spithead?  The
seamen chivvied Admiral Alan Gardner and his colleagues aboard a ship.
He caught hold of a seaman Delegate by the collar and shook him.  They
closed in on him.  They handled him roughly.  He sprang on the hammock-
nettings, put the noose of the hanging-rope round his neck, and said to
the men who advanced menacingly:

"'If you will return to your duty, you may hang me at the yard-arm!'

"That's the kind of stuff our admirals are made of.  We have no quarrel
with the majority of our officers.  They're straight, they're honest, and
they're true to their game.  Our quarrel is with Parliament and the
Admiralty; our struggle is with the people of the kingdom, who have not
seen to it that our wrongs are put right, that we have food to eat, water
to drink, and money to spend."

He waved a hand, as though to sweep away the criticisms he felt must be
rising against him.

"Don't think because I've spent four years in prison under the sternest
discipline the world offers, and have never been a seaman before, that
I'm not fitted to espouse your cause.  By heaven, I am--I am--I am--
I know the wrongs you've suffered.  I've smelled the water you drink.
I've tasted the rotten meat.  I've seen the honest seaman who has been
for years upon the main--I've seen the scars upon his back got from a
brutal officer who gave him too big a job to do, and flogged him for not
doing it.  I know of men who, fevered with bad food, have fallen, from
the mainmast-head, or have slipped overboard, glad to go, because of the
wrongs they'd suffered.

"I'll tell you what our fate will be, and then I'll put a question to
you.  We must either give up our stock of provisions or run for it.
Parker and the other Delegates proclaim their comradeship; yet they have
hidden from us the king's proclamation and the friendly resolutions of
the London merchants.  I say our only hope is to escape from the Thames.
I know that skill will be needed, but if we escape, what then?  I say if
we escape, because, as we sail out, orders will be given for the other
mutiny ships to attack us.  We shall be fired on; we shall risk our
lives.  You've done that before, however, and will do it again.

"We have to work out our own problem and fight our own fight.  Well,
what I want to know is this--are we to give in to the government, or do
we stand to be hammered by Sir Erasmus Gower?  Remember what that means.
It means that if we fight the government ships, we must either die in
battle, or die with the ropes round our necks.  There is another way.
I'm not inclined to surrender, or to stand by men who have botched our
business for us.  I'm for making for the sea, and, when I get there, I'm
for striking for the West Indies, where there's a British fleet fighting
Britain's enemies, and for joining in and fighting with them.  I'm for
getting out of this river and away from England.  It's a bold plan, but
it's a good one.  I want to know if you're with me.  Remember, there's
danger getting out, and there's danger when and if we get out.  The other
ships may pursue us.  The Portsmouth fleet may nab us.  We may be caught,
and, if we are, we must take the dose prepared for us; but I'm for making
a strong rush, going without fear, and asking no favour.  I won't
surrender here; it's too cowardly.  I want to know, will you come
to the open sea with me?"

There were many shouts of assent from the crowd, though here and there
came a growl of dissent.

"Not all of you are willing to come with me," Dyck continued vigorously.
"Tell me, what is it you expect to get by staying here?  You're famished
when you're not poisoned; you're badly clothed and badly fed; you're kept
together by flogging; you're treated worse than a convict in jail or a
victim in a plague hospital.  You're not paid as well as your
grandfathers were, and you're punished worse.  Here, on the Ariadne,
we're not skulkers.  We don't fear our duty; we are loyal men.  Many of
you, on past voyages, fighting the enemy, lived on burgoo and molasses
only, with rum and foul water to drink.  On the other ships there have
been terrible cruelty and offence.  Surgeons have neglected and ill-
treated sick men and embezzled provisions and drinks intended for the
invalids.  Many a man has died because of the neglect of the ship's
surgeons; many have been kicked about the head and beaten, and haven't
dared to go on the sick list for fear of their officers.  The Victualling
Board gets money to supply us with food and drink according to measure.
They get the money for a full pound and a full gallon, and we get
fourteen ounces of food and seven pints of liquor, or less.  Well, what
do you say, friends, to being our own Victualling Board out in the open
sea, if we can get there?

"We may have to fight when we get out; but I'm for taking the Ariadne
into the great world battle when we can find it.  This I want to ask--
isn't it worth while making a great fight in our own way, and showing
that British seamen can at once be mutineers and patriots?  We have a
pilot who knows the river.  We can go to the West Indian Islands, to the
British fleet there.  It's doom and death to stay here; and it may be
doom and death to go.  If we try to break free, and are fired on, the
Admiralty may approve of us, because we've broken away from the rest.
See now, isn't that the thing to do?  I'm for getting out.  Who's coming
with me?"

Suddenly a burly sailor pushed forward.  He had the head of a viking.
His eyes were strong with enterprise.  He had a hand like a ham, with
long, hairy fingers.

"Captain," said he, "you've put the thing so there can be only one answer
to it.  As for me, I'm sick of the way this mutiny has been bungled from
first to last.  There's been one good thing about it only--we've got
order without cruelty, we've rebelled without ravagement; but we've
missed the way, and we didn't deal with the Admiralty commissioners as
we ought.  So I'm for joining up with the captain here"--he waved a hand
towards Dyck--"and making for open sea.  As sure as God's above, they'll
try to hammer us; but it's the only way."

He held a handkerchief-a dirty, red silk thing.  "See," he continued,
"the wind is right to take us out.  The other ships won't know what we're
going to do until we start.  I'm for getting off.  I'm a pressed man.  I
haven't seen my girl for five years, and they won't let me free in port
to go and see her.  Nothing can be worse than what we have to suffer now,
so let's make a break for it.  That's what I say.  Come, now, lads, three
cheers for Captain Calhoun!"

A half-hour later, on the captain's deck, Dyck gave the order to pass
eastward.  It was sunset when they started, and they had not gone a
thousand yards before some of the mutineering ships opened fire on the
Ariadne.  The breeze was good, however, and she sailed bravely through
the leaden storm.  Once twice--thrice she was hit, but she sped on.  Two
men were killed and several were wounded.  Sails were torn, and the high
bulkheads were broken; but, without firing a shot in reply, the Ariadne
swung clear at last of the hostile ships and reached safe water.

On the edge of the open sea Dyck took stock of the position.  The Ariadne
had been hit several times, and the injury done her was marked.  Before
morning the dead seamen were sunk in watery graves, and the wounded were
started back to health again.  By daylight the Ariadne was well away from
the land.

The first thing Dyck had done, after escaping from the river, was to
study the wants of the Ariadne and make an estimate for the future with
Greenock, the master.  He calculated they had food and water enough to
last for three months, even with liberal provisioning.  Going among the
crew, he realized there was no depression among them; that they seemed to
care little where they were going.  It was, however, quite clear they
wished to fight--to fight the foes of England.

He knew his task was a hard one, and that all efforts at discipline
would have dangers.  He knew, also, that he could have no authority,
save personality and success.  He set himself, therefore, to win the
confidence of Greenock and the crew, and he began discipline at once.
He knew that a reaction must come; that the crew, loose upon their own
trail, would come to regret the absence of official command.  He realized
that many of them would wish to return to the fleet at the Nore, but
while the weather was good he did not fear serious trouble.  The danger
would come in rough weather or on a becalmed sea.

They had passed Beachy Head in the mist.  They had seen no battle-ship,
and had sighted no danger, as they made their way westward through the
Channel.  There had been one moment of anxiety.  That was when they
passed Portsmouth, and had seen in the far distance, to the right of
them, the mastheads of Admiral Gardner's fleet.

It was here that Dyck's orderly, Michael Clones, was useful.  He brought
word of murmuring among the more brutish of the crew, that some of them
wished to join Gardner's fleet.  At this news, Dyck went down among the
men.  It was an unusual thing to do, but it brought matters to an issue.

Among the few dissatisfied sailors was one Nick Swaine, who had been
the cause of more trouble on the Ariadne than any other.  He had a
quarrelsome mind; he had been influenced by the writings of Wolfe Tone,
the Irish rebel.  One of the secrets of Dyck's control of the crew was
the fact that he was a gentleman, and was born in the ruling class, and
this was anathema to Nick Swaine.  His view of democracy was ignorance
controlling ignorance.

By nature he was insolent, but under the system of control pursued by the
officers of the Ariadne, previous to the mutiny, he had not been able to
do much.  The system had bound him down.  He had been the slave of habit,
custom, and daily duty.  His record, therefore, was fairly clean until
two days after the escape from the Thames and the sighting of the
Portsmouth fleet.  Then all his revolutionary spirit ran riot in him.
Besides, the woman to whom he had become attached at the Nore had been
put ashore on the day Dyck gained control.  It roused his enmity now.

When Dyck came down, he had the gunners called to him, admonishing them
that drill must go on steadily, and promising them good work to do.  Then
he turned to the ordinary seamen.

At this moment Nick Swaine strode forward within a dozen feet of Dyck.

"Look there!" he said, and he jerked a finger towards the distant
Portsmouth fleet.  "Look there!  You've passed that."

Dyck shrugged a shoulder.

"I meant to pass it," he said quietly.

"Give orders to make for it," said Nick with a sullen eye.

"I shall not.  And look you, my man, keep a civil tongue to me, who
command this ship, or I'll have you put in irons."

"Have me put in irons!" Swaine cried hotly.  "This isn't Dublin jail.
You can't do what you like here.  Who made you captain of this ship?"

"Those who made me captain will see my orders carried out.  Now, get you
back with the rest, or I'll see if they still hold good."  Dyck waved a
hand.  "Get back when I tell you, Swaine !"

"When you've turned the ship to the Portsmouth fleet I'll get back, and
not till then."

Dyck made a motion of the hand to some boatswains standing by.  Before
they could arrest him, Swaine flung himself towards Dyck with a knife in
his hand.

Dyck's hand was quicker, however.  His pistol flung out, a shot was
fired, and the knife dropped from the battered fingers of Nick Swaine.

"Have his wounds dressed, then put him in irons," Dyck commanded.

From that moment, in good order and in good weather, the Ariadne sped on
her way westward and southward.



CHAPTER XIV

IN THE NICK OF TIME

Perhaps no mutineer in the history of the world ever succeeded, as did
Dyck Calhoun, in holding control over fellow-mutineers on the journey
from the English Channel to the Caribbean Sea.  As a boy, Dyck had been
an expert sailor, had studied the machinery of a man-of-war, and his love
of the sea was innate and deep-seated; but his present success was based
upon more than experience.  Quite apart from the honour of his nature,
prison had deepened in him the hatred of injustice.  In soul he was
bitter; in body he was healthy, powerful, and sane.

Slowly, sternly, yet tactfully, he had broken down the many customs of
ship life injurious to the welfare of the men.  Under his system the
sailors had good coffee for breakfast, instead of a horrible mixture made
of burnt biscuits cooked in foul water.  He gave the men pea-soup and
rice instead of burgoo and the wretched oatmeal mess which was the staple
thing for breakfast.  He saw to it that the meat was no longer a hateful,
repulsive mass, two-thirds bone and gristle, and before it came into the
cook's hands capable of being polished like mahogany.  He threatened the
cook with punishment if he found the meals ill-cooked.

In all the journey to the West Indian seas there had been only three
formal floggings.  His attitude was not that of the commander who
declared:

"I will see the man's backbone, by God!"

He wished to secure discipline without cruelty.  His greatest difficulty,
at the start, was in making lieutenants.  That he overcame by appointing
senior midshipmen before the Ariadne was out of the Channel.  He offered
a lieutenancy to Ferens, who had the courage to decline it.

"Make me purser," remarked Ferens.  "Make me purser, and I'll do the job
justly."

As the purser of the Ariadne had been sent to the sick-bay and was likely
to die (and did die subsequently), Ferens was put into his uniform-three-
cornered cocked hat, white knee-breeches, and white stockings.  The
purser of a man-of-war was generally a friend of the captain, going with
him from ship to ship.

Of the common sailors, on the whole, Dyck had little doubt.  He had
informed them that, whatever happened, they should not be in danger; that
the ship should not join the West Indian fleet unless every man except
himself received amnesty.  If the amnesty was not granted, then one of
two things should happen--the ship must make for a South American port,
or she must fight.  Fighting would not frighten these men.

It was rather among the midshipmen that Dyck looked for trouble.
Sometimes, with only two years' training at Gosport, a youngster became a
midshipman on first going to sea, and he could begin as early as eleven
years of age.  A second-rate ship like the Ariadne carried eighteen
midshipmen; and as six lieutenants were appointed from them, only twelve
remained.  From these twelve, in the dingy after-cockpit, where the
superficial area was not more than twelve square feet; where the air was
foul, and the bilges reeked with a pestilential stench; where the
purser's store-room near gave out the smell of rancid butter and
poisonous cheese; where the musty taint of old ropes came to them, there
was a spirit of danger.

Dyck was right in thinking that in the midshipmen's dismal berth the
first flowers of revolt to his rule would bloom.

Sailors, even as low as the pig-sty men, had some idea of fair play; and
as the weeks that had passed since they left the Thames had given them
better food and drink, and lessened the severity of those above them,
real obedience had come.

It was not strange that the ship ran well, for all the officers under the
new conditions, except Dyck himself, had had previous experience.  The
old lieutenants had gone, but midshipmen, who in any case were trained,
had taken their places.  The rest of the ship's staff were the same,
except the captain; and as Dyck had made a friend of Greenock the master,
a man of glumness, the days were peaceful enough during the voyage to the
Caribbean Sea.

The majority saw that every act of Dyck had proved him just and capable.
He had rigidly insisted on gun practice; he had keyed up the marines to a
better spirit, and churlishness had been promptly punished.  He was, in
effect, what the sailors called a "rogue," or a "taut one"--seldom
smiling, gaunt of face but fearless of eye, and with a body free from
fatigue.

As the weather grew warmer and the days longer, and they drew near to the
coast of Jamaica, a stir of excitement was shown.

"You'd like to know what I'm going to do, Michael, I suppose?" said Dyck
one morning, as he drank his coffee and watched the sun creeping up the
sky.

"Well, in three days we shall know what's to become of us, and I have no
doubt or fear.  This ship's a rebel, but it's returning to duty.  We've
shown them how a ship can be run with good food and drink and fair
dealing, and, please God, we'll have some work to do now that belongs to
a man-of-war!"

"Sir, I know what you mean to do," replied Michael.  "You mean to get all
of us off by giving yourself up."

"Well, some one has to pay for what we've done, Michael."  A dark,
ruthless light came into Dyck's eyes.  "Some one's got to pay."  A grim
smile crossed his face.  "We've done the forbidden thing; we've mutinied
and taken to the open sea.  We were fired on by the other mutiny ships,
and that will help our sailors, but it won't help me.  I'm the leader.
We ought, of course, to have taken refuge with the nearest squadron of
the king's ships.  Well, I've run my luck, and I'll have to pay."

He scratched his chin with a thumb-nail-a permanent physical trait.  "You
see, the government has pardoned all the sailors, and will hang only the
leaders.  I expect Parker is hung already.  Well, I'm the leader on the
Ariadne.  I'm taking this ship straight to his majesty's West Indian
fleet, in thorough discipline, and I'll hand it over well-found, well-
manned, well-officered, on condition that all go free except myself.  I
came aboard a common sailor, a quota man, a prison-bird, penniless.
Well, have I shown that I can run a ship?  Have I learned the game of
control?  During the weeks we've been at sea, bursting along, have I
proved myself?"

Michael smiled.  "What did I say to you the first night on board, sir?
Didn't I say they'd make an officer of you when they found out what
brains you had?  By St. Patrick, you've made yourself captain with the
good-will of all, and your iron hand has held the thing together.  You've
got a great head, too, sir."

Dyck looked at him with a face in which the far future showed.

"Michael, I've been lucky.  I've had good men about me.  God only knows
what would have happened to me if the master hadn't been what he is--a
gentleman who knows his job-aye, a gentleman through and through!  If he
had gone against me, Michael"--he flicked a finger to the sky--"well,
that much for my chances!  I'd have been dropped overboard, or stabbed in
my cabin, as was that famous Captain Pigot, son of an admiral, who had as
much soul as you'd find in a stone-quarry.  When two men had dropped from
the masts, hurrying to get down because of his threat that the last man
should be thrashed--when the two men lay smashed to pieces at his feet,
Pigot said: 'Heave the lubbers overboard.'  That night, Michael, the
seamen rose, crept to his cabin, stabbed him to death, pitched his body
overboard, put his lieutenants to sea in open boats, and then ran away to
South America.  Well, I've escaped that fate, because this was a good
ship, and all the officers knew their business, and did it without
cruelty.  I've been well served.  It was a great thing making the new
lieutenants from the midshipmen.  There never was a better lot on board a
ship."

Michael's face clouded.  "Sir, that's true.  The new lieutenants have
done their work well, but them that's left behind in the midshipmen's
berth--do you think they're content?  No, sir.  The only spot on board
this ship where there lurks an active spirit against you is in the
midshipmen's berth.  Mischief's there, and that's what's brought me to
you now."

Dyck smiled.  "I know that.  I've had my eye on the midshipmen.  I've
never trusted them.  They're a hard lot; but if the rest of the ship is
with me, I'll deal with them promptly.  They're not clever or bold enough
to do their job skilfully.  They've got some old hands down there--
hammock-men, old stagers of the sea that act as servants to them.  What
line do they take?"

Michael laughed softly.

"What I know I've got from two of them, and it is this--the young
gentlemen'll try to get control of the ship."

The cynicism deepened in Dyck's face.

"Get control of the ship, eh?  Well, it'll be a new situation on a king's
ship if midshipmen succeed where the rest dare not try.  Now, mark what
I'm going to do."

He called, and a marine showed himself.

"The captain's compliments to the master, and his presence here at once.
Michael," he continued presently, "what fools they are!  They're scarcely
a baker's dozen, and none of them has skill to lead.  Why, the humblest
sailor would have more sense than to start a revolt, the success of which
depends upon his personal influence, and the failure of which must end in
his own ruin.  Does any one think they're the kind to lead a mutiny
within a mutiny?  Listen to me I'm not cruel, but I'll put an end to this
plot.  We're seven hundred on this ship, and she's a first-class sailer.
I warrant no ship ever swam the seas that looks better going than she
does.  So we've got to see that her, record is kept clean as a mutineer."

At that moment the master appeared.  He saluted.  "Greenock," said Dyck,
"I wonder if you've noticed the wind blowing chilly from the midshipmen's
berth."  A lurking devilish humour shot from Greenock's eyes.

"Aye, I've smelled that wind."

"Greenock, we're near the West Indian Islands.  Before we eat many meals
we'll see land.  We may pass French ships, and we may have to fight.
Well, we've had a good running, master; so I'll tell you what I mean to
do."

He then briefly repeated what he had said to Michael, and added

"Greenock, in this last to-do, I shall be the only man in danger.  The
king's amnesty covers every one except the leaders--that lets you off.
The Delegate of the Ariadne is aboard the Invincible, if he's not been
hanged.  I'm the only one left on the Ariadne.  I've had a good time,
Greenock--thanks to you, chiefly.  I think the men are ready for anything
that'll come; but I also think we should guard against a revolt of the
midshipmen by healthy discipline now.  Therefore I'll instruct the
lieutenants to spread-eagle every midshipman for twelve hours.  There's a
stiff wind; there's a good stout spray, and the wind and spray should
cool their hot souls.  Meanwhile, though without food, they shall have
water as they need it.  If at the end of the twelve hours any still seems
to be difficult, give him another twelve.  Look!"

He stretched out a hand to the porthole on his right.  "Far away in front
are islands.  You cannot see them yet, but those little thickening mists
in the distance mean land.  Those are the islands in front of the
Windward Passage.  I think it would be a good lesson for the young
gentlemen to be spread-eagled against the mists of their future.  It
shall be' done at once; and pass the word why it's done."

An hour later there was laughter in every portion of the ship, for the
least popular members of the whole personnel were being dragooned into
discipline.  The sailors had seen individual midshipmen spread-eagled and
mastheaded, while all save those they could bribe were forbidden to bring
them drink or food; but here was a whole body of junior officers,
punished en masse, as it were, lashed to the rigging and taking the wind
and the spray in their teeth.

Before the day was over, the whole ship was alive with anticipation, for,
in the far distance, could be seen the dark blue and purplish shadows
which told of land; and this brought the minds of all to the end of their
journey, with thoughts of the crisis near.

Word had been passed that all on board were considered safe--all except
the captain who had manoeuvred them to the entrance of the Caribbean Sea.
Had he been of their own origin, they would not have placed so much
credence in the rumour; but coming as he did of an ancient Irish family,
although he had been in jail for killing, the traditional respect for the
word of a gentleman influenced them.  When a man like Ferens, on the one
hand, and the mutineer whose fingers had been mutilated by Dyck in the
Channel, on the other--when these agreed to bend themselves to the rule
of a usurper, some idea of Calhoun's power may be got.

On this day, with the glimmer of land in the far distance, the charges of
all the guns were renewed.  Also word was passed that at any moment the
ship must be cleared for action.  Down in the cockpit the tables were got
ready by the surgeon and the loblolly-boys; the magazines were opened,
and the guards were put on duty.

Orders were issued that none should be allowed to escape active share in
the coming battle; that none should retreat to the orlop deck or the
lower deck; that the boys should carry the cartridge-cases handed to them
from the magazine under the cover of their coats, running hard to the
guns.  The twenty-four-pounders-the largest guns in use at the time-the
eighteen-pounders, and the twelve-pounder guns were all in good order.

The bags of iron balls called grape-shot-the worst of all--varying in
size from sixteen to nine balls in a bag, were prepared.  Then the
canister, which produced ghastly murder, chain-shot to bring down masts
and spars, langrel to fire at masts and rigging, and the dismantling shot
to tear off sails, were all made ready.  The muskets for the marines, the
musketoons, the pistols, the cutlasses, the boarding-pikes, the axes or
tomahawks, the bayonets and sailors' knives, were placed conveniently for
use.  A bevy of men were kept busy cleaning the round shot of rust, and
there was not a man on the ship who did not look with pride at the guns,
in their paint of grey-blue steel, with a scarlet band round the muzzle.

To the right of the Ariadne was the coast of Cuba; to the left was the
coast of Haiti, both invisible to the eye.  Although the knowledge that
they were nearing land had already given the officers and men a feeling
of elation, the feeling was greatly intensified as they came through the
Turk Island Passage, which is a kind of gateway to the Windward Passage
between Cuba and Haiti.  The glory of the sunny, tropical world was upon
the ship and upon the sea; it crept into the blood of every man, and the
sweet summer weather gave confidence to their minds.  It was a day which
only those who know tropical and semitropical seas can understand.  It
had the sense of soaking luxury.

In his cabin, with the ship's chart on the table before him, Dyck Calhoun
studied the course of the Ariadne.  The wind was fair and good, the sea-
birds hovered overhead.  From a distant part of the ship came the sound
of men's voices in song.  They were singing "Spanish Ladies":

         "We hove our ship to when the wind was sou'west, boys,
          We hove our ship to for to strike soundings clear;
          Then we filled our main tops'l and bore right away, boys,
          And right up the Channel our course did we steer.

         "We'll rant and we'll roar like true British sailors,
          We'll range and we'll roam over all the salt seas,
          Until we strike soundings in the Channel of old England
          From Ushant to Scilly 'tis thirty-five leagues."

Dyck raised his head, and a smile came to his lips.

"Yes, you sing of a Channel, my lads, but it's a long way there, as
you'll find.  I hope to God they give us some fighting!  .  .  .  Well,
what is it?" he asked of a marine who appeared in his doorway.

"The master of the ship begs to see you, sir," was the reply.

A moment afterwards Greenock entered.  He asked Dyck several questions
concerning the possible fighting, the disposition of ammunition and all
that, and said at last:

"I think we shall be of use, sir.  The ship's all right now."

"As right as anything human can be.  I've got faith in my star, master."

A light came into the other man's dour face.  "I wish you'd get into
uniform, sir."

"Uniform?  No, Greenock!  No, I use the borrowed power, but not the
borrowed clothes.  I'm a common sailor, and I wear the common sailor's
clothes.  You've earned your uniform, and it suits you.  Stick to it; and
when I've earned a captain's uniform I'll wear it.  I owe you the success
of this voyage so far, and my heart is full of it, up to the brim.  Hark,
what's that?"

"By God, it's guns, sir!  There's fighting on!"

"Fighting!"

Dyck stood for a minute with head thrust forward, eyes fixed upon the
distant mists ahead.  The rumble of the guns came faintly through the
air.  An exultant look came into his face.

"Master, the game's with us--it is fighting!  I know the difference
between the two sets of guns, English and French.  Listen--that quick,
spasmodic firing is French; the steady-as-thunder is English.  Well,
we've got all sail on.  Now, make ready the ship for fighting."

"She's almost ready, sir."

An hour later the light mist had risen, and almost suddenly the Ariadne
seemed to come into the field of battle.  Dyck Calhoun could see the
struggle going on.  The two sets of enemy ships had come to close
quarters, and some were locked in deadly conflict.  Other ships, still
apart, fired at point-blank range, and all the horrors of slaughter were
in full swing.  From the square blue flag at the mizzen top gallant
masthead of one of the British ships engaged, Dyck saw that the admiral's
own craft was in some peril.  The way lay open for the Ariadne to bear
down upon the French ship, engaged with the admiral's smaller ship, and
help to end the struggle successfully for the British cause.

While still too far away for point-blank range, the Ariadne's guns began
upon the French ships distinguishable by their shape and their colours.
Before the first shot was fired, however, Dyck made a tour of the decks
and gave some word of cheer to the men, The Ariadne lost no time in
getting into the thick of the fight.  The seamen were stripped to the
waist, and black silk handkerchiefs were tightly bound round their heads
and over their ears.

What the French thought of the coming of the Ariadne was shown by the
reply they made presently to her firing.  The number of French ships in
action was greater than the British by six, and the Ariadne arrived just
when she could be of greatest service.  The boldness of her seamanship,
and the favour of the wind, gave her an advantage which good fortune
helped to justify.

As she drew in upon the action, she gave herself up to great danger; she
was coming in upon the rear of the French ships, and was subject to
fierce attack.  To the French she seemed like a fugitive warrior
returning to his camp just when he was most needed, as was indeed the
case.  Two of her shots settled one of the enemy's vessels; and before
the others could converge upon her, she had crawled slowly up against the
off side of the French admiral's ship, which was closely engaged with the
Beatitude, the British flagship, on the other side.

The canister, chain-shot, and langrel of the French foe had caused much
injury to the Ariadne, and her canvas was in a sore plight.  Fifty of her
seamen had been killed, and a hundred and fifty were wounded by the time
she reached the starboard side of the Aquitaine.  She would have lost
many more were it not that her onset demoralized the French gunners,
while the cheers of the British sailors aboard the Beatitude gave
confidence to their mutineer comrades.

On his own deck, Dyck watched the progress of the battle with the joy of
a natural fighter.  He had carried the thing to an almost impossible
success.  There had only been this in his favour, that his was an
unexpected entrance--a fact which had been worth another ship at least.
He saw his boarders struggle for the Aquitaine.  He saw them discharge
their pistols, and then resort to the cutlass and the dagger; and the
marines bringing down their victims from the masts of the French flag-
ship.

Presently he heard the savagely buoyant shouts of the Beatitude men, and
he realized that, by his coming, the admiral of the French fleet had been
obliged to yield up his sword, and to signal to his ships--such as could
--to get away.  That half of them succeeded in doing so was because the
British fleet had been heavily handled in the fight, and would have been
defeated had it not been for the arrival of the Ariadne.

Never, perhaps, in the history of the navy had British ships clamped the
enemy as the Aquitaine was clamped by the Beatitude and the Ariadne.
Certain it is that no admiral of the British fleet had ever to perform
two such acts in one day as receiving the submission of a French admiral
and offering thanks to the captain of a British man-of-war whom, while
thanking, he must at once place under arrest as a mutineer.  What might
have chanced further to Dyck's disadvantage can never be known, because
there appeared on the deck of the Beatitude, as its captain under the
rear-admiral, Captain Ivy, who, five years before, had visited Dyck and
his father at Playmore, and had gone with them to Dublin.

The admiral had sent word to the Ariadne for its captain to come to the
Beatitude.  When the captain's gig arrived, and a man in seaman's clothes
essayed to climb the side of the flag-ship, he was at first prevented.
Captain Ivy, however, immediately gave orders for Dyck to be admitted,
but without honours.

On the deck of the Beatitude, Dyck looked into the eyes of Captain Ivy.
He saluted; but the captain held out a friendly hand.

"You're a mutineer, Calhoun, but your ship has given us victory.  I'd
like to shake hands with one that's done so good a stroke for England."

A queer smile played about Calhoun's lips.

"I've brought the Ariadne back to the fleet, Captain Ivy.  The men have
fought as well as men ever did since Britain had a navy.  I've brought
her back to the king's fleet to be pardoned."

"But you must be placed under arrest, Calhoun.  Those are the orders--
that wherever the Ariadne should be found she should be seized, and that
you should be tried by court-martial."

Dyck nodded.  "I understand.  When did you get word?"

"About forty-eight hours ago.  The king's mail came by a fast frigate."

"We took our time, but we came straight from the Channel to find this
fleet.  At the mouth of the Thames we willed to find it, and to fight
with it--and by good luck so we have done."

"Let me take you to the admiral," said Captain Ivy.

He walked beside Dyck to the admiral's cabin.  "You've made a terrible
mess of things, Calhoun, but you've put a lot right to-day," he said at
the entrance to the cabin.  "Tell me one thing honestly before we part
now--did you kill Erris Boyne?" Dyck looked at him long and hard.

"I don't know--on my honour I don't know!  I don't remember--I was drunk
and drugged."

"Calhoun, I don't believe you did; but if you did, you've paid the price
--and the price of mutiny, too."  In the clear blue eyes of Captain Ivy
there was a look of friendliness.  "I notice you don't wear uniform,
Calhoun," he added.  "I mean a captain's uniform."  Dyck smiled.  "I
never have."

The next moment the door of the admiral's cabin was opened.

"Mr. Dyck Calhoun of the Ariadne, sir," said Captain Ivy.




CHAPTER XV

THE ADMIRAL HAS HIS SAY

The admiral's face was naturally vigorous and cheerful, but, as he looked
at Dyck Calhoun, a steely hardness came into it, and gave a cynical twist
to the lips.  He was a short man, and spare, but his bearing had dignity
and every motion significance.

He had had his high moment with the French admiral, had given his
commands to the fleet and had arranged the disposition of the captured
French ships.  He was in good spirits, and the wreckage in the fleet
seemed not to shake his nerve, for he had lost in men far less than the
enemy, and had captured many ships--a good day's work, due finally to the
man in sailor's clothes standing there with Captain Ivy.  The admiral
took in the dress of Calhoun at a glance--the trousers of blue cloth, the
sheath-knife belt, the stockings of white silk, the white shirt with the
horizontal stripes, the loose, unstarched, collar, the fine black silk
handkerchief at the throat, the waistcoat of red kerseymere, the shoes
like dancing-pumps, and the short, round blue jacket, with the flat gold
buttons--a seaman complete.  He smiled broadly; he liked this mutineer
and ex-convict.

"Captain Calhoun, eh!" he remarked mockingly, and bowed satirically.
"Well, you've played a strong game, and you've plunged us into great
difficulty."

Dyck did not lose his opportunity.  "Happily, I've done what I planned to
do when we left the Thames, admiral," he said.  "We came to get the
chance of doing what, by favour of fate, we have accomplished.  Now, sir,
as I'm under arrest, and the ship which I controlled has done good
service, may I beg that the Ariadne's personnel shall have amnesty, and
that I alone be made to pay--if that must be--for the mutiny at the
Nore."

The admiral nodded.  "We know of your breaking away from the mutinous
fleet, and of their firing on you as you passed, and that is in your
favour.  I can also say this: that bringing the ship here was masterly
work, for I understand there were no officers on the Ariadne.  She always
had the reputation of being one of the best-trained ships in the navy,
and she has splendidly upheld that reputation.  How did you manage it,
Mr. Calhoun?"

Dyck briefly told how the lieutenants were made, and how he himself had
been enormously indebted to Greenock, the master of the ship, and all the
subordinate officers.

The admiral smiled sourly.  "I have little power until I get instructions
from the Admiralty, and that will take some time.  Meanwhile, the Ariadne
shall go on as she is, and as if she were--and had been from the first, a
member of my own squadron."

Dyck bowed, explained what reforms he had created in the food and
provisions of the Ariadne, and expressed a hope that nothing should be
altered.  He said the ship had proved herself, chiefly because of his
reforms.

"Besides, she's been badly hammered.  She's got great numbers of wounded
and dead, and for many a day the men will be busy with repairs."

"For a man without naval experience, for a mutineer, an ex-convict and a
usurper, you've done quite well, Mr. Calhoun; but my instructions were,
if I captured your ship, and you fell into my hands, to try you, and hang
you."

At this point Captain Ivy intervened.

"Sir," he said, "the instructions you received were general.  They could
not anticipate the special service which the Ariadne has rendered to the
king's fleet.  I have known Mr. Calhoun; I have visited at his father's
house; I was with him on his journey to Dublin, which was the beginning
of his bad luck.  I would beg of you, sir, to give Mr. Calhoun his parole
on sea and land until word comes from the Admiralty as to what, in the
circumstances, his fate shall be."

"To be kept on the Beatitude on parole!" exclaimed the admiral.

"Land or sea, Captain Ivy said.  I'm as well-born as any man in the
king's fleet," declared Dyck.  "I've as clean a record as any officer in
his majesty's navy, save for the dark fact that I was put in prison for
killing a man; and I will say here, in the secrecy of an admiral's cabin,
that the man I killed--or was supposed to kill--was a traitor.  If I did
kill him, he deserved death by whatever hand it came.  I care not what
you do with me"--his hands clenched, his shoulders drew up, his eyes
blackened with the dark fire of his soul--"whether you put me on parole,
or try me by court-martial, or hang me from the yard-arm.  I've done a
piece of work of which I'm not ashamed.  I've brought a mutinous ship out
of mutiny, sailed her down the seas for many weeks, disciplined her,
drilled her, trained her, fought her; helped to give the admiral of the
West Indian squadron his victory.  I enlisted; I was a quota man.  I
became a common sailor--I and my servant and friend, Michael Clones.  I
shared the feelings of the sailors who mutinied.  I wrote petitions and
appeals for them.  I mutinied with them.  Then at last, having been made
leader of the ship, with the captain and the lieutenants sent safely
ashore, and disagreeing with the policy of the Delegates in not accepting
the terms offered, I brought the ship out, commanding it from the
captain's cabin, and have so continued until to-day.  If I'm put ashore
at Jamaica, I'll keep my parole; if I stay a prisoner here, I'll keep my
parole.  If I've done you service, admiral, be sure of this, it was done
with clear intent.  My object was to save the men who, having mutinied
and fled from Admiralty control, are subject to capital punishment."

"Your thinking came late.  You should have thought before you mutinied,"
was the sharp reply.

"As a common sailor I acted on my conscience, and what we asked for the
Admiralty has granted.  Only by mutiny did the Admiralty yield to our
demands.  What I did I would do again!  We took our risks in the Thames
against the guns that were levelled at us; we've taken our risks down
here against the French to help save your squadron, and we've done it.
The men have done it, because they've been loyal to the flag, and from
first to last set to make the Admiralty and the people know they have
rights which must be cherished.  If all your men were as faithful to the
Crown as are the men on the Ariadne, then they deserve well of the King.
But will you put for me on paper the written word that every man now
aboard the Ariadne shall be held guiltless in the eyes of the admiral of
this fleet; that the present officers shall remain officers, that the
reforms I have made shall become permanent?  For myself, I care not; but
for the men who have fought under me, I want their amnesty.  And I want
Michael Clones to be kept with me, and Greenock, the master, and Ferens,
the purser, to be kept where they are.  Admiral, I think you know my
demands are just.  Over there on the Ariadne are a hundred and fifty
wounded at least, and fifty have been killed.  Let the living not
suffer."

"You want it all on the nail, don't you?"

"I want it at this moment when the men who have fought under me have
helped to win your battle, sir."  There was something so set in Dyck's
voice that the admiral had a sudden revulsion against him, yet, after a
moment of thought, he made a sign to Captain Ivy.  Then he dictated the
terms which Dyck had asked, except as to the reforms he had made, which
was not in his power to do, save for the present.

When the document had been signed by the admiral, Dyck read the contents
aloud.  It embodied nearly all he had asked.

"Now I ask permission for one more thing only, sir--for the new captain
of the Ariadne to go with me to her, and there I will read this paper to
the crew.  I will give a copy of it to the new captain, whoever he may
be."

The admiral stood for a moment in thought.  Then he said:

"Ivy, I transfer you to the Ariadne.  It's better that some one who
understands, as you do, should be in control after Calhoun has gone.
Go with him now, and have your belongings sent to you.  I appoint you
temporary captain of the Ariadne, because I think no one could deal with
the situation there so wisely.  Ivy, every ship in the squadron must
treat the Ariadne respectfully.  Within two days, Mr. Calhoun, you shall
be landed at Jamaica, there to await the Admiralty decree.  I will say
this: that as the sure victory of our fleet has come through you, you
shall not suffer in my report.  Fighting is not an easy trade, and to
fight according to the rules is a very hard trade.  Let me ask you to
conduct yourself as a prisoner of war on parole."






NO DEFENSE

By Gilbert Parker


BOOK III

XVI.      A LETTER
XVII.     STRANGERS ARRIVE
XVIII.    AT SALEM
XIX.      LORD MALLOW INTERVENES
XX.       OUT OF THE HANDS OF THE PHILISTINES
XXI.      THE CLASH OF RACE
XXII.     SHEILA HAS HER SAY
XXIII.    THE COMING OF NOREEN
XXIV.     WITH THE GOVERNOR
XXV.      THEN WHAT HAPPENED



CHAPTER XVI

A LETTER

With a deep sigh, the planter raised his head from the table where he was
writing, and looked out upon the lands he had made his own.  They lay on
the Thomas River, a few hours' horseback travelling from Spanish Town,
the capital, and they had the advantage of a plateau formation, with
mountains in the far distance and ravines everywhere.

It was Christmas Day, and he had done his duty to his slaves and the folk
on his plantation.  He had given presents, had attended a seven o'clock
breakfast of his people, had seen festivities of his negroes, and the
feast given by his manager in Creole style to all who came--planting
attorneys, buccras, overseers, bookkeepers, the subordinates of the local
provost-marshal, small planters, and a few junior officers of the army
and navy.

He had turned away with cynicism from the overladen table, with its
shoulder of stewed wild boar in the centre; with its chocolate, coffee,
tea, spruce-beer, cassava-cakes, pigeon-pies, tongues, round of beef,
barbecued hog, fried conchs, black crab pepper-pod, mountain mullet, and
acid fruits.  It was so unlike what his past had known, so "damnable
luxurious!"  Now his eyes wandered over the space where were the
grandilla, with its blossom like a passion-flower, the black Tahiti plum,
with its bright pink tassel-blossom, and the fine mango trees, loaded
half with fruit and half with bud.  In the distance were the guinea
cornfields of brownish hue, the cotton-fields, the long ranges of negro
houses like thatched cottages, the penguin hedges, with their beautiful
red, blue, and white convolvuluses; the lime, logwood, and breadfruit
trees, the avocado-pear, the feathery bamboo, and the jack-fruit tree;
and between the mountains and his own sugar-estates, negro settlements
and pens.  He heard the flight of parrots chattering, he watched the
floating humming-bird, and at last he fixed his eyes upon the cabbage
tree down in the garden, and he had an instant desire for it.  It was a
natural and human taste--the cabbage from the tree-top boiled for a
simple yet sumptuous meal.

He liked simplicity.  He did not, as so many did in Jamaica, drink claret
or punch at breakfast soon after sunrise.  In a land where all were bon-
vivants, where the lowest tradesmen drank wine after dinner, and rum,
brandy and water, or sangaree in the forenoon, a somewhat lightsome view
of table-virtues might have been expected of the young unmarried planter.
For such was he who, from the windows of his "castle," saw his domain
shimmering in the sun of a hot December day.

It was Dyck Calhoun.

With an impatient air he took up the sheets that he had been reading.
Christmas Day was on his nerves.  The whole town of Kingston, with its
twenty to thirty thousand inhabitants, had but one church.  If he entered
it, even to-day, he would have seen no more than a hundred and fifty to
two hundred people; mostly mulattoes--"bronze ornaments"--and peasants in
shag trousers, jackets of coarse blue cloth, and no waistcoats, with one
or two magistrates, a dozen gentlemen or so, and probably twice that
number of ladies.  It was not an island given over to piety, or to
religious habits.

Not that this troubled Dyck Calhoun; nor, indeed, was he shocked by the
fact that nearly every unmarried white man in the island, and many
married white men, had black mistresses and families born to the black
women, and that the girls had no married future.  They would become the
temporary wives of white men, to whom they were on the whole faithful and
devoted.  It did not even vex him that a wretched mulatto might be
whipped in the market-square for laying his hands upon a white man, and
that if he was a negro-slave he could be shot for the same liberty.

It all belonged to the abnormal conditions of an island where black and
white were in relations impossible in the countries from which the white
man had come.  It did not even startle Dyck that all the planters, and
the people generally in the island, from the chief justice and custos
rotulorum down to the deckswabber, cultivated amplitude of living.

But let Dyck tell his own story.  The papers he held were sheets of a
letter he was writing to one from whom he had heard nothing since the
night he enlisted in the navy, and that was nearly three years before.
This was the letter:

     MY DEAR FRIEND:

     You will see I address you as you have done me in the two letters I
     have had from you in the past.  You will never read this letter, but
     I write it as if you would.  For you must know I may never hope for
     personal intercourse with you.  I was imprisoned for killing your
     father, Erris Boyne, and that separates us like an abysss.  It
     matters little whether I killed him or not; the law says I did, and
     the law has taken its toll of me.  I was in prison for four years,
     and when freed I enlisted in the king's navy, a quota man, with my
     servant-friend, Michael Clones.  That was the beginning of painful
     and wonderful days for me.  I was one of the mutineers of the Nore,
     and--

Here followed a description of the days he had spent on the Ariadne and
before, and of all that happened down to the time when he was arrested by
the admiral in the West Indian Sea.  He told how he was sent over to the
Ariadne with Captain Ivy to read the admiral's letter to the seamen, and
then, by consent of the admiral, to leave again with Michael Clones for
Jamaica, where he was set ashore with twenty pounds in his pocket--and
not on parole, by the admiral's command.  Here the letter shall again
take up the story, and be a narrative of Dyck Calhoun's life from that
time until this Christmas Day.

     What to do was the question.  I knew no one in Jamaica--no one at
     all except the governor, Lord Mallow, and him I had fought with
     swords in Phoenix Park five years before.  I had not known he was
     governor here.  I came to know it when I first saw him riding over
     the unpaved street into Kingston from Spanish Town with his suite,
     ornate with his governorship.  He was a startling figure in scarlet,
     with huge epaulets on his lieutenant-general's uniform, as big a pot
     as ever boiled on any fire-chancellor, head of the government and of
     the army, master of the legislature, judging like one o'clock in the
     court of chancery, controller of the affairs of civil life, and
     maker of a policy of which he alone can judge who knows what
     interests clash in the West Indies.

     English, French, Spanish, and Dutch are all hereabout.  All struggle
     for place above the other in the world of commerce and society,
     though chiefly it is the English versus the French in these days;
     and the policy of the governor is the policy of the country.  He
     never knows whether there will be a French naval descent or whether
     the blacks in his own island will do as the blacks in St. Domingo
     did--massacre the white people in thousands.  Or whether the free
     blacks, the Maroons, who got their freedom by treaty with Governor
     Trelawney, when the British commander changed hats with Cudjoe, the
     Maroon chief, as the sealing of the bargain--whether they will rise
     again, as they before have risen, and bring terror into the white
     settlement; and whether, in that case, all negro-slaves will join
     them, and Jamaica become a land of revolution.

     Of what good, then, will be the laws lately passed regulating the
     control of slaves, securing them rights never given before, even
     forbidding lashes beyond forty-nine!  Of what use, then, the
     punishment of owners who have ill-used the slaves?  The local
     councils who have power to punish never proceed against white men
     with rigour; and to preserve a fair balance between the white man up
     above and the black down below is the responsibility of the fair-
     minded governor.  If, like Mallow, he is not fair-minded, then is
     the lash the heavier, and the governor has burdens greater than
     could easily be borne in lands where the climate is more friendly.

     Lord Mallow did not see me when I passed him in the street, but he
     soon came to know of me from the admiral and Captain Ivy, who told
     him all my story since I was freed from jail.  Then he said I should
     be confined in a narrow space near to Kingston, and should have no
     freedom; but the admiral had his way, and I was given freedom of the
     whole island till word should come from the Admiralty what should be
     done with me.  To the governor's mind it was dangerous allowing me
     freedom, a man convicted of crime, who had been imprisoned, had been
     a mutineer, had stolen one of his majesty's ships, and had fled to
     the Caribbean Sea.  He thought I should well be at the bottom of the
     ocean, where he would soon have put me, I make no doubt, if it had
     not been for the admiral, and Captain Ivy--you do not know him, I
     think--who played a good part to me, when men once close friends
     have deserted me.

     Well, we had, Michael and I, but twenty pounds between us; and if
     there was not plenty of free food in the island, God knows what
     would have become of us!  But there it was, fresh in every field, by
     every wayside, at every doorway.  We could not starve, or die of
     thirst, or faint for lack of sleep, since every bush was a bed in
     spite of the garapatos or wood-ticks, the snore of the tree-toad,
     the hoarse shriek of the macaw, and the shrill gird of the guinea-
     fowl.  Every bed was thus free, and there was land to be got for a
     song, enough to grow what would suffice for two men's daily wants.
     But we did not rest long upon the land--I have it still, land which
     cost me five pounds out of the twenty, and for the rest there was an
     old but on the little place--five acres it was, and good land too,
     where you could grow anything at all.  Heaven knows what we might
     have become in that tiny plantation, for I was sick of life, and the
     mosquitos and flying ants, and the chattering parroquets, the grim
     gallinazo, and the quatre, or native bed--a wooden frame and canvas;
     but one day at Kingston I met a man, one Cassandro Biatt, who had an
     obsession for adventure, and he spoke to me privately.  He said he
     knew me from people's talk, and would I listen to him?  What was
     there to do?  He was a clean-cut rogue, if ever there was one, but
     a rogue of parts, as he proved; and I lent an ear.

     Now, what think you was his story?  Well, but this--that off the
     coast of Haiti, there was a ship which had been sunk with every man
     on board, and with the ship was treasure without counting-jewels
     belonging once to a Spaniard of high place, who was taking them to
     Paris.  His box had been kept in the captain's cabin, and it could
     be found, no doubt, and brought to the surface.  Even if that were
     not possible, there was plenty of gold on the ship, and every piece
     of it was good money.  There had been searching for the ship, but
     none had found it; but he, Cassandro Biatt, had sure knowledge, got
     from an obi-man, of the place where it lay.  It would not be an
     expensive business, but, cheap as it was, he had no means of raising
     cash for the purpose; while I could, no doubt, raise the needed
     money if I set about it.  That was how he put it to me.  Would I do
     it?  It was not with me a case of "no shots left in the locker, no
     copper to tinkle on a tombstone."  I was not down to my last
     macaroni, or quarter-dollar; but I drank some sangaree and set about
     to do it.  I got my courage from a look towards Rodney's statue in
     its temple--Rodney did a great work for Jamaica against Admiral de
     Grasse.

     Why should I tell Biatt the truth about myself?  He knew it.
     Cassandro was an accomplished liar, and a man of merit of his kind.
     This obi-man's story I have never believed; yet how Biatt came to
     know where that treasure-ship was I do not know now.

     Yes, out we went through the harbour of Kingston, beyond the
     splendid defences of Port Royal and the men-of-war there, past the
     Palisadoes and Rock Fort, and away to the place of treasure-trove.
     We found it--that lost galleon; and we found the treasure-box of the
     captain's cabin.  We found gold too; but the treasure-box was the
     chief thing; and we made it ours after many a hard day.  Three
     months it was from the day Biatt first spoke to me to the day when,
     with an expert diver, we brought the box to the surface and opened
     it.

     How I induced one of the big men of Jamaica to be banker and skipper
     for us need not be told; but he is one of whom men have dark
     sayings--chiefly, I take it, because he does bold, incomprehensible
     things.  That business paid him well, for when the rent of the ship
     was met, and the few men on it paid--slaves they were chiefly--he
     pocketed ten thousand pounds, while Biatt and I each pouched forty
     thousand, and Michael two thousand.  Aye, to be sure, Michael was in
     it!  He is in all I do, and is as good as men of ten times his birth
     and history.  Michael will be a rich man one day.  In two years his
     two thousand have grown to four, and he misses no chance.

     But those days when Biatt and I went treasure-ship hunting were not
     without their trials.  If we had failed, then no more could this
     land have been home or resting-place for us.  We should only have
     been sojourners with no name, in debt, in disgrace, a pair of
     braggart adventurers, who had worked a master-man of the island for
     a ship, and money and men, and had lost all except the ship!  Though
     to be sure, the money was not a big thing--a, few hundred pounds;
     but the ship was no flea-bite.  It was a biggish thing, for it could
     be rented to carry sugar--it was, in truth, a sugar-ship of four
     hundred tons--but it never carried so big a cargo of sugar as it did
     on the day when that treasure-box was brought to the surface of the
     sea.

     I'm bound to say this--one of the straightest men I ever met, liar
     withal, was Cassandro Biatt.  He took his jewels and vanished up the
     seas in a flourish.  He would not even have another try at the gold
     in the bowels of the ship.

     "I've got plenty to fill my paunch, and I'll go while I've enough.
     It's the men not going in time that get left in the end"--that's
     what he said.

     And he was right; for other men went after the gold and got some of
     it, and were caught by French and South American pirates and lost
     all they had gained.  Still another group went and brought away ten
     thousand pounds, and lost it in fighting with Spanish buccaneers.
     So Biatt was right, and went away content, while I stayed here--
     because I must--and bought the land and house where I have my great
     sugar-plantation.  It is an enterprise of volume, and all would be
     well if I were normal in mind and body; but I am not.  I have a past
     that stinks to heaven, as Shakespeare says, and I am an outlaw of
     the one land which has all my soul and name and heritage.  Yes, that
     is what they have done to me--made a convict, an outlaw of me.  I
     may live--but not in the British Isles; and if any man kills me, he
     is not liable to the law.

     Men do not treat me badly here, for I have property and money, and
     this is a land where these two things mean more than anywhere else,
     even more than in a republic like that where you live.  Here men
     live according to the law of the knife, fork, and bottle, yet
     nowhere in the world is there deeper national morality or wider
     faith or endurance.  It is a land where the sea is master, where
     naval might is the chief factor, and weighs down all else.

     Here the navies of the great powers meet and settle their disputes,
     and every being in the island knows that life is only worth what a
     hundred-ton brig-of-war permits.  I have seen here in Jamaica the
     off-scourings of the French and Spanish fleets on parole; have seen
     them entering King's House like loyal citizens; have even known of
     French prisoners being used as guards at the entrance of King's
     House, and I have informed the chief justice of dismal facts which
     ought to have moved him.  But what can you expect of a chief justice
     who need not be a lawyer, as this one is not, and has other means of
     earning income which, though not disloyal, are lowering to the
     status of a chief justice?  And not the chief justice alone.  I have
     seen French officers entertained at Government House who were guilty
     of shocking inhumanities and cruelties.  The governor, Lord Mallow,
     is much to blame.  On him lies the responsibility; to him must go
     the discredit.  For myself, I feel his enmity on every hand.  I
     suffer from his suggestions; I am the victim of his dark moods.

     If I want a concession from a local council, his hand is at work
     against me; if I see him in the street, I get a courtesy tossed, as
     you would toss a bone to a dog.  If I appear at the king's ball,
     which is open to all on the island who are respectable, I am treated
     with such disdain by the viceroy of the king that all the island is
     agog.  I went one day to the king's ball the same as the rest of the
     world, and I went purposely in dress contrary to the regulations.
     Here was the announcement of the affair in the Royal Gazette, which
     was reproduced in the Chronicle, the one important newspaper in the
     island:

                                        KING'S HOUSE,
                                        October 27th, 1797.

          KING'S BALL.

          There will be a Ball given by His Honour the Lieutenant-
          Governor, on Tuesday evening, the 6th day of December next,
          in honour of

                         HIS MAJESTY'S BIRTHDAY.

          To prevent confusion, Ladies and Gentlemen are requested to
          order their carriages to come by the Old Court House, and go
          off by the Long Room.

          N.B.--No gentlemen can possibly be admitted in boots, or
          otherwise improperly dressed.


     Well, in a spirit of mutiny--in which I am, in a sense, an expert--
     I went in boots and otherwise "improperly dressed," for I wore my
     hair in a queue, like a peasant.  What is more, I danced with a
     negress in the great quadrille, and thereby offended the governor
     and his lady aunt, who presides at his palace.  It matters naught to
     me.  On my own estate it was popular enough, and that meant more to
     me than this goodwill of Lord Mallow.

     He does not spare me in his recitals to his friends, who carry his
     speech abroad.  His rancour against me is the greater, I know,
     because of the wealth I got in the treasure-ship, to prevent which
     he tried to prohibit my leaving the island, through the withholding
     of a leave-ticket to me.  His argument to the local authorities was
     that I had no rights, that I am a murderer and a mutineer, and
     confined to the island, though not on parole.  He almost succeeded;
     but the man to whom I went, the big rich man intervened,
     successfully--how I know not--and I was let go with my permit-
     ticket.

     What big things hang on small issues!  If my Lord Mallow had
     prevented me leaving the island, I shouldn't now own a great
     plantation and three hundred negroes.  I shouldn't be able to pay
     my creditors in good gold Portuguese half-johannes and Spanish
     doubloons, and be free of Spanish silver, and give no heed to the
     bitt, which, as you perhaps know, is equal to fivepence in British
     money, such as you and I used to spend when you were Queen of
     Ireland and I was your slave.

     Then I worshipped you as few women have been worshipped in all the
     days of the world--oh, cursed spite of life and time that I should
     have been jailed for killing your bad father!  Aye, he was a bad
     man, and he is better in his grave than out of it, but it puts a
     gulf between you and me which nothing will ever bridge--unless it
     should some day be known I did not kill him, and then, no doubt, it
     will be too late.

     On my soul, I don't believe I put my sword into him; but if I did,
     he well deserved it, for he was worse than faithless to your mother,
     he was faithless to his country--he was a traitor!  I did not tell
     that story of his treachery in court--I did not tell it because of
     you.  You did not deserve such infamy, and the truth came not out at
     the trial.  I, in my view, dared not, lest it might injure you, and
     you had suffered enough--nay, more than enough--through him.

     I wonder how you are, and if you have changed--I mean in appearance.
     I am sure you are not married; I should have felt it in my bones,
     if you were.  No, no, my sweet lass, you are not married.  But
     think--it is more than seven long years since we met on the hills
     above Playmore, and you put your hand in mine and said we should be
     friends for all time.  It is near three years since a letter came to
     me from you, and in the time I have made progress.

     I did not go to the United States, as you asked me to do.  Is it not
     plain I could not?  My only course was to avoid you.  You see, your
     mother knows the truth--knows that I was jailed for killing your
     father and her divorced husband.  Therefore, the only way to do was
     as I did.  I could not go where you were.  There should be hid from
     you the fact that Erris Boyne was a traitor.  This is your right, in
     my mind.  Looking back, I feel sure I could have escaped jail if I
     had told what I knew of Erris Boyne; and perhaps it would have been
     better, for I should, no doubt, have been acquitted.  Yet I could
     not have gone to you, for I am not sure I did not kill him.

     So it is best as it is.  We are as we are, and nothing can make all
     different for us.  I am a dissolute planter of Jamaica who has
     snatched from destiny a living and some riches.  I have a bad name
     in the world.  Yet by saving the king's navy from defeat out here I
     did a good turn for my country and the empire.

     So much to the good.  It brought me freedom from the rope and pardon
     for my chief offence.  Then, in company with a rogue, I got wealth
     from the depths of the sea, and here I am in the bottom of my
     luxury, drunken and obscene--yes, obscene, for I permit my overseers
     and my manager to keep black women and have children by them.  That
     I do not do so myself is no virtue on my part, but the virtue of a
     girl whom I knew in Connemara.  I fill myself with drink.  I have a
     bottle of madeira or port every night, and pints of beer or claret.
     I am a creature of low habits, a man sodden with self-indulgence.
     And when I am in drink, no slaver can be more cruel and ruthless.

     Yet I am moderate in eating.  The meals that people devour here
     almost revolt me.  They eat like cormorants and drink like dry
     ground; but at my table I am careful, save with the bottle.  This
     is a land of wonderful fruits, and I eat in quantities pineapple,
     tamarind, papaw, guava, sweet-sop, star-apple, granadilla, hog-plum,
     Spanish-gooseberry, and pindal-nut.  These are native, but there are
     also the orange, lemon, lime, shaddock, melon, fig, pomegranate,
     cinnamon, and mango, brought chiefly from the Spanish lands of South
     America.  The fruit-market here is good, Heaven knows, and I have my
     run of it.  Perhaps that is why my drink does not fatten me greatly.
     Yes, I am thin--thinner even than when you saw me last.  How
     wonderful a day it was!  You remember it, I'm sure.

     We stood on the high hills, you and I, looking to the west.  It was
     a true Irish day.  A little in front of us, in the sky, were great
     clusters of clouds, and beyond them, as far as eye could see, were
     hills so delicately green, so spotted with settlements, so misty and
     full of glamour, and so cheerful with the western light.  And the
     storm broke--do you remember it?  It broke, but not on us.  It fell
     on the middle of the prospect before us, and we saw beyond it the
     bright area of sunny country where men work and prophesy and slave,
     and pray to the ancient gods and acclaim the saints, and die and
     fructify the mould; where such as Christopher Dogan live, and men a
     thousand times lower than he.  Christopher came to the jail the day
     I was released--with Michael Clones he came.  He read me my bill of
     life's health--what was to become of me--the black and the white of
     it, the good and the bad, the fair and the foul.  Even the good
     fortune of the treasure from the sea he foresaw, and much else that
     has not come to me, and, as I think, will never come; for it is too
     full a cup for me so little worthy of it.

     It seems strange to me that I am as near to the United States here
     in Jamaica, or almost as near, as one in London is to one in Dublin;
     and yet one might as well be ten thousand leagues distant for all it
     means to her one loves in the United States.  Yes, dear Sheila, I
     love you, and I would tear out the heart of the world for you.  I
     bathe my whole being in your beauty and your charm.  I hunger for
     you--to stand beside you, to listen to your voice, to dip my prison
     fingers into the pure cauldron of your soul and feel my own soul
     expand.  I wonder why it is that to-day I feel more than I ever felt
     before the rare splendour of your person.

     I have always admired you and loved you, always heard you calling
     me, as if from some sacred corner of a perfect world.  Is it that
     yesterday's dissipation--yes, I was drunk yesternight, drunk in a
     new way.  I was drunk with the thought of you, the longing for you.
     I picked a big handful of roses, and in my mind gave them into your
     hands.  And I thought you smiled and said:

     "Well done, good and faithful servant.  Enter Paradise."  So I
     followed you to your home there in the Virginian country.  It was a
     dream, all except the roses, and those I laid in front of the box
     where I keep your letters and a sketch I made of you when we were
     young and glad--when I was young and glad.  For I am an old man,
     Sheila, in all that makes men old.  My step is quick still, my eye
     is sharp, and my brain beats fast, but my heart is ancient.  I am an
     ancient of days, without hope or pleasure, save what pleasure comes
     in thinking of one whom I worship, yet must ever worship from afar.

     I wonder why I seem to feel you very near to-day!  Perhaps it's
     because 'tis Christmas Day.  I am not a religious man but Christmas
     is a day of memories.

     Is it because of the past in Ireland?  Am I only--God, am I only to
     be what I am for the rest of my days, a planter denied the pleasure
     of home by his own acts!  Am I only a helpless fragment of a world
     of lost things?

     I have no friends--but yes, I have.  I have Michael Clones and
     Captain Ivy, though he's far away-aye, he's a friend of friends, is
     Captain Ivy.  These naval folk have had so much of the world, have
     got the bearings of so many seas, that they lose all littleness, and
     form their own minds.  They are not like the people who knew me in
     Ireland--the governor here is one of them--and who believe the worst
     of me.  The governor--faugh, he was made for bigger and better
     things!  He is one of the best swordsmen in the world, and he is
     out against me here as if I was a man of importance, and not a
     commonplace planter on an obscure river.  I have no social home
     life, and yet I live in what is called a castle.  A Jamaica castle
     has none of the marks of antiquity, chivalry, and distinction which
     castles that you and I know in the old land possess.

     What is my castle like?  Well, it is a squarish building, of
     bungalow type, set on a hill.  It has stories and an attic, with a
     jutting dormer-window in the front of the roof; and above the lowest
     story there is a great verandah, on which the livingrooms and
     bedrooms open.  It is commodious, and yet from a broad standpoint it
     is without style or distinction.  It has none of those Corinthian
     pillars which your homesteads in America have.  Yet there is in it a
     simple elegance.  It has no carpets, but a shining mahogany floor,
     for there are few carpets in this land of heat.  It is a place where
     music and mirth and family voices would be fitting; but there are no
     family voices here, save such as speak with a negro lisp and
     oracularly.

     I can hear music at this moment, and inside my castle.  It comes
     from the irrepressible throats of my cook and my housemaid, who have
     more joy in the language of the plantation than you could have in
     the songs of St. Angelus.  The only person in this castle out of
     spirits is its owner.

     My castle is embowered in a loose grove of palms and acacias,
     pimento shrubs, spendid star-apples, and bully-trees, with wild
     lemon, mahogany, dogwood, Jerusalem-thorn, and the waving plumes of
     bamboo canes.  There is nothing British in it--nothing at all.  It
     stands on brick pillars, is reached by a stair of marble slabs, and
     has a great piazza on the front.  You enter a fine, big hall, dark-
     you will understand that, though it is not so hot in Virginia, for
     the darkness makes for coolness.  From the hall the bedrooms open
     all round.  We are not so barbaric here as you might think, for my
     dining-room, which lies beyond the hall, with jalousies or movable
     blinds, exposed to all the winds, is comfortable, even ornate.
     There you shall see waxlights on the table, and finger-glasses with
     green leaves, and fine linen and napkins, and plenty of silver--even
     silver wine-coolers, and beakers of fame and beauty, and flowers,
     flowers everywhere, and fruit of exquisite charm.  I have to live
     in outward seeming as do my neighbours, even to keeping a black
     footman, gorgeously dressed, with bare legs.

     Here at my window grows a wild aloe, and it is in flower.  Once only
     in fifty years does this aloe flower, and I pick its sweet verdure
     now and offer it to you.  There it lies, beside this letter that I
     am writing.  It is typical of myself, for only once has my heart
     flowered, and it will be only once in fifty years.  The perfume of
     the flower is like an everlasting bud from the last tree of Time.
     See, my Sheila, your drunken, reckless lover pulls this sweet
     offering from his garden and offers it to you.  He has no virtues;
     and yet he would have been a thousand times worse, if you had not
     come into his life.  He had in him the seeds of trouble, the
     sproutings of shame, for even in the first days of his love there in
     Dublin he would not restrain himself.  He drank, he played cards, he
     fought and went with bad company--not women, never that; but he kept
     the company of those through whom he came at last to punishment for
     manslaughter.

     Yet, without you, who can tell what he might have been?  He might
     have fallen so low that not the wealth of ten thousand treasure-
     boxes could give him even the appearance of honesty.  And now he
     offers you what you cannot accept--can never accept--a love as deep
     as the life from which he came; a love that would throttle the world
     for you, that would force the doors of hell to bring you what you
     want.

     What do you want?  I know not.  Perhaps you have inherited the vast
     property to which you were the heir.  If you have, what can you want
     that you have not means to procure?  Ah, I have learned one thing,
     my friend 'one can get nearly everything with money.  It is the
     hidden machinery which makes the world of success go round.  With
     brains, you say?  Yes, money and brains, but without the money
     brains seldom win alone.  Do not I know?  When I was in prison, with
     estate vanished and home gone and my father in his grave, who was
     concerned about me?

     Only the humblest of all God's Irish people; but with them I have
     somehow managed to win back lost ground.  I am a stronger man than I
     was in all that men count of value in the world.  I have an estate
     where I work like any youth who has everything before him.  I have
     nothing before me, yet I shall go on working to the end.  Why?
     Because I have some faculties which are more than bread and butter,
     and I must give them opportunity.

     Yet I am not always sane.  Sometimes I feel I could march out and
     sweep into the sea one of the towns that dot the coast of this
     island.  I have the bloody thirst, as said the great Spanish
     conquistador.  I would like--yes, sometimes I would like to sweep
     to a watery grave one of the towns that are a glory to this island,
     as Savanna la Mar was swept to oblivion in the year 1780 by a
     hurricane.  You can still see the ruins of the town at the bottom of
     the sea--I have sailed over it in what is now the harbour, and there
     beneath, on the deep sands, lost to time and trouble, is the slain
     and tortured town of Savanna la Mar.  Was the Master of the World
     angry that day when, with a besom of wind and a tidal wave, He swept
     the place into the sea?  Or was it some devil's work while the Lord
     of All slept?  As the Spanish say, Quien sabe?

     Then there was that other enormous incident which made a man to be
     swallowed by an earthquake, then belched out again into the sea and
     picked up and restored to life again, and to live for many years.
     Indeed, yes, it is so.  His tombstone may be seen even at this day
     at Green Bay, Kingston.  His name was Lewis Galdy, and he is held in
     high repute in this land.

     I feel sometimes as Beelzebub may feel, and I long to do what
     Beelzebub might do as part of his mission.  Sometimes a madness
     of revolt comes over me, and I long to ravage all the places I see,
     all the people I know--or nearly all.  Why I do not have negroes
     thrashed and mutilated, as some do, I know not.  Over against the
     southern shore in the parish of St. Elizabeth is an estate called
     Salem, owned, it is said, by an American, where the manager does
     such things.  I am told that savageries are found there.  There
     are too many absentee owners of land in this island, and the wrongs
     done by agents who have no personal honour at stake are all too
     plentiful.  If I could, I would have no slavery, would set all the
     blacks free, making full compensation to the owners, and less to the
     absentee owners.

     I look out on a world of summer beauty and of heat.  I see the sheep
     in hundreds on the far hills of pasturage--sheep with short hair,
     small and sweet as any that ever came from the South Downs.  I see
     the natives in their Madras handkerchiefs.  I see upon the road some
     planter in his ketureen--a sort of sedan chair; I see a negro
     funeral, with its strange ceremony and its gumbies of African drums.
     I see yam-fed planters, on their horses, making for the burning,
     sandy streets of the capital.  I see the Scots grass growing five
     and six feet high, food unsurpassed for horses--all the foliage too
     --beautiful tropical trees and shrubs, and here and there a huge
     breeding-farm.  Yet I know that out beyond my sight there is the
     region known as Trelawney, and Trelawney Town, the headquarters of
     the Maroons, the free negroes--they who fled after the Spanish had
     been conquered and the British came, and who were later freed and
     secured by the Trelawney Treaty.  I know that now they are ready to
     rise, that they are working among the slaves; and if they rise the
     danger is great to the white population of the island, who are
     outnumbered ten to one.

     The governor has been warned, but he gives no heed, or treats it all
     lightly, pointing out how few the Maroons are.  He forgets that a
     few determined men can demoralize a whole state, can fight and
     murder and fly to dark coverts in the tropical woods, where they
     cannot be tracked down and destroyed; and, if they have made
     supporters of the slaves, what consequences may not follow!

     What do the Maroons look like?  They are ferocious and isolated,
     they are proud and overbearing, they are horribly cruel, but they
     are potent, and are difficult to reach.  They are not small and
     meagre, but are big, brawny fellows, clothed in wide duck trousers
     and shirts, and they are well-armed--cutlass, powder-horn,
     haversack, sling, shot-gun, and pouch for ball.  They dress as the
     country requires, and they are strong fighters against our soldiers
     who are burdened with heavy muskets, and who defy the climate, with
     their stuffed coats, their weighty caps, and their tight cross-
     belts.  The Maroons are not to be despised.  They have brains, the
     insolence of freedom among natives who are not free, and vast
     cruelty.  They can be mastered and kept in subjection, can be made
     allies, if properly handled; but Lord Mallow goes the wrong way
     about it all.  He permits things that inflame the Maroons.

     One thing is clear to me--only by hounds can these people be
     defeated.  So sure am I upon this point, that I have sent to Cuba
     for sixty hounds, with which, when the trouble comes--and it is not
     far off--we shall be able to hunt the Maroons with the only weapon
     they really fear--the dog's sharp tooth.  It may be the governor may
     intervene on the arrival of the dogs; but I have made friends with
     the provost-marshal-general and some members of the Jamaica
     legislature; also I have a friend in the deputy of the provost-
     marshal-general in my parish of Clarendon here, and I will make a
     good bet that the dogs will be let come into the island, governor
     or no governor.

     When one sets oneself against the Crown one must be sure of one's
     ground, and fear no foe, however great and high.  Well, I have won
     so far, and I shall win in the end.  Mallow should have some respect
     for one that beat him at Phoenix Park with the sword; that beat him
     when he would have me imprisoned here; that beat him in the matter
     of the ship for Haiti, and that will beat him on every hazard he
     sets, unless he stoops to underhand acts, which he will not do.
     That much must be said for him.  He plays his part in no small way,
     and he is more a bigot and a fanatic loyalist than a rogue.
     Suppose--but no, I will not suppose.  I will lay my plans, I will
     keep faith with people here who trust me, and who know that if I am
     stern I am also just, and I will play according to the rules made by
     better men than myself.

But what is this I see?  Michael Clones--in his white jean waistcoat,
white neckcloth and trousers, and blue coat--is coming up the drive in
hot haste, bearing a letter.  He rides too hard.  He has never carried
himself easily in this climate.  He treats it as if it was Ireland.  He
will not protect himself, and, if penalty followed folly, should now be
in his grave.  I like you, Michael.  You are a boon, but--




CHAPTER XVII

STRANGERS ARRIVE

Dyck Calhoun's letter was never ended.  It was only a relic of the years
spent in Jamaica, only a sign of his well-being, though it gave no real
picture of himself.  He did not know how like a tyrant he had become in
some small ways, while in the large things he remained generous, urbane,
and resourceful.  He was in appearance thin, dark-favoured, buoyant in
manner, and stern of face, with splendid eyes.  Had he dwelt on Olympus,
he might have been summoned to judge and chastise the sons of men.

When Michael Clones came to the doorway, Dyck laid down his quill-pen and
eyed the flushed servant in disapproval.

"What is it, Michael?  Wherefore this starkness?  Is some one come from
heaven?"

"Not precisely from heaven, y'r honour, but--"

"But--yes, Michael!  Have done with but-ing, and come to the real
matter."

"Well, sir, they've come from Virginia."

Dyck Calhoun slowly got to his feet, his face paling, his body
stiffening.  From Virginia!  Who should be come from Virginia, save she
to whom he had just been writing?

"Who has come from Virginia?"  He knew, but he wanted it said.

"Sure, you knew a vessel came from America last night.  Well, in her was
one that was called the Queen of Ireland long ago."

"Queen of Ireland--well, what then?"  Dyck's voice was tuneless, his
manner rigid, his eyes burning.  "Well, she--Miss Sheila Llyn and her
mother are going to the Salem Plantation, down by the Essex Valley
Mountain.  It is her plantation now.  It belonged to her uncle, Bryan
Llyn.  He got it in payment of a debt.  He's dead now, and all his lands
and wealth have come to her.  Her mother, Mrs. Llyn, is with her, and
they start to-morrow or the next day for Salem.  There'll be different
doings at Salem henceforward, y'r honour.  She's not the woman to see
slaves treated as the manager at Salem treated 'em."

Dyck Calhoun made an impatient gesture at this last remark.

"Yes, yes, Michael.  Where are they now?"

"They're at Charlotte Bedford's lodgings in Spanish Town.  The governor
waited on them this morning.  The governor sent them flowers and--"

"Flowers--Lord Mallow sent them flowers!  Hell's fiend, man, suppose he
did?"

"There are better flowers here than in any Spanish Town."

"Well, take them, Michael; but if you do, come here again no more while
you live, for I'll have none of you.  Do you think I'm entering the lists
against the king's governor?"

"You've done it before, sir, and there's no harm in doing it again.  One
good turn deserves another.  I've also to tell you, sir, that Lord Mallow
has asked them to stay at King's House."


"Lord Mallow has asked Americans to stay at King's House!"

"But they're Irish, and he knew them in Ireland, y 'r honour."

"Well, he knew me in Ireland, and I'm proscribed!"

"Ah, that's different, as you know.  There's no war on now, and they're
only good American citizens who own land in this dominion of the king; so
why shouldn't he give them courtesy?"

"From whom do you get your information?" asked Dyck Calhoun with an air
of suspicion.

"From Darius Boland, y'r honour," answered Michael, with a smile.  "Who
is Darius Boland, you're askin' in y'r mind?  Well, he's the new manager
come from the Llyn plantations in Virginia; and right good stuff he is,
with a tongue that's as dry as cut-wheat in August.  And there's humour
in him, plenty-aye, plenty.  When did I see him, and how?  Well, I saw
him this mornin', on the quay at Kingston.  He was orderin' the porters
about with an air--oh, bedad, an air!  I saw the name upon the parcels--
Miss Sheila Llyn, of Moira, Virginia, and so I spoke to him.  The rest
was aisy.  He looked me up and down in a flash, like a searchlight
playin' on an enemy ship, and then he smiled.  'Well,' said he, 'who
might you be?  For there's queer folks in Jamaica, I'm told.'  So I said
I was Michael Clones, and at that he doffed his hat and held out a hand.
'Well, here's luck,' said he.  'Luck at the very start!  I've heard of
you from my mistress.  You're servant to Mr. Dyck Calhoun--ain't that
it?'  And I nodded, and he smiled again--a smile that'd cost money
annywhere else than in Jamaica.  He smiled again, and give a slow hitch
to his breeches as though they was fallin' down.  Why, sir, he's the
longest bit of man you ever saw, with a pointed beard, and a nose that's
as long as a midshipman's tongue-dry, lean, and elastic.  He's quick and
slow all at once.  His small eyes twinkle like stars beatin' up against
bad weather, and his skin's the colour of Scots grass in the dead of
summer-yaller, he'd call it if he called it anything, and yaller was what
he called the look of the sky above the hills.  Queer way of talk he has,
that man, as queer as--"

"I understand, Michael.  But what else?  How did you come to talk about
the affairs of Mrs. and Miss Llyn?  He didn't just spit it out, did he?"

"Sure, not so quick and free as spittin', y'r honour; but when he'd
sorted me out, as it were, he said Miss Llyn had come out here to take
charge of Salem; her own estate in Virginia bein' in such good runnin'
order, and her mind bein' active.  Word had come of the trouble with the
manager here, and one of the provost-marshal's deputies had written
accounts of the flogging and ill-treatment of slaves, and that's why
she come--to put things right at Salem!"

"To put things wrong in Jamaica, Michael, that's why she's come.  To
loose the ball of confusion and free the flood of tragedy--that's why
she's come!  Man, Michael, you know her history--who she was and what
happened to her father.  Well, do you think there's no tragedy in her
coming here?  I killed her father, they say, Michael.  I was punished for
it.  I came here to be free of all those things--lifted out and away from
them all.  I longed to forget the past, which is only shame and torture;
and here it is all spread out at my door again like a mat, which I must
see as I go in and out.  Essex Valley--why, it's less than a day's ride
from here, far less than a day's ride!  It can be ridden in four or five
hours at a trot.  Michael, it's all a damnable business.  And here she is
in Jamaica with her Darius Boland!  There was no talk on Boland's part of
their coming here, was there Michael?"

"None at all, sir, but there was that in the man's eye, and that in his
tone, which made me sure he thought Miss Llyn and you would meet."

"That would be strange, wouldn't it, in this immense continent!"  Dyck
remarked cynically.

"She knew I was here before she came?"

"Aye, she knew.  She had seen your name in the papers--English and
Jamaican.  She knew you had regained your life and place, and was a man
of mark here."

"A marked man, you mean, Michael--a man whom the king has had to pardon
of a crime because of an act done that served the State.  I am forbidden
to return to the British Isles or to the land of my birth, forbidden free
traffic as a citizen, hammered out of recognition by the strokes of
enmity.  A man of mark, indeed!  Aye, with the broad arrow on me, with
the shame of prison and mutiny on my name!"

"But if she don't believe?"

"If she don't believe!  Well, she must be told the truth at last.  I
wonder her mother let her come here.  Her mother knew part of the truth.
She hid it all from the girl--and now they are here!  I must see it
through, but it's a wretched fate, Michael."

"Perhaps her mother didn't know you were here, sir."

Dyck laughed grimly.  "Michael, you've a lawyer's mind.  Perhaps you're
right.  The girl may have hid from her mother all newspapers referring to
me.  That may well be; but it's not the way that will bring
understanding."

"I think it's the truth, sir, for Darius Boland spoke naught of the
mother--indeed, he said only what would make me think the girl came with
her own ends in view.  Faith, I'm sure the mother did not know."

"She will know now.  Your Darius Boland will tell her."

"By St. Peter, it doesn't matter who tells her, sir.  The business must
be faced."

"Michael, order my horse, and I will go to Spanish Town.  This matter
must be brought to a head.  The truth must be told.  Order my horse!"
"It is the very heat of the day, sir."

"Then at five o'clock, after dinner, have my horse here."

"Am I to ride with you, sir?"

Dyck nodded.  "Yes, Michael.  There's only one thing to do--face all the
facts with all the evidence, and you are fact and evidence too.  You know
more of the truth than any one else."

Several hours later, when the sun was abating its force a little, after
travelling the burning roads through yams and cocoa, grenadillas and all
kinds of herbs and roots and vagrant trees, Dyck Calhoun and Michael
Clones came into Spanish Town.  Dyck rode the unpaved streets on his
horse with its high demipicque Spanish saddle, with its silver stirrups
and heavy bit, and made his way towards Charlotte Bedford's lodgings.

Dyck looked round upon the town with new eyes.  He saw it like one for
the first time visiting it.  He saw the people passing through the wide
verandahs of the houses, like a vast colonnade, down the street, to be
happily sheltered from the fierce sun.  As he had come down from the
hills he thought he had never seen the houses look more beautiful in
their gardens of wild tamarinds, kennips, cocoa-nuts, pimentos, and
palms, backed by negro huts.  He had seen all sorts of people at the
draw-wells of the houses-British, Spanish, French, South American,
Creoles, and here and there a Maroon, and the everlasting negro who sang
as he worked:

                   "Come along o' me, my buccra brave,
                    You see de shild de Lord he gave:
                    You drink de sangaree,
                    I make de frichassee--"

Here a face peeped out from the glazed sash of the jalousies of the
balconies above--a face that could never be said to be white, though it
had only a tinge of black in its coaxing beauty.  There a workman with
long hair and shag trousers painted the prevailing two-storied house the
prevailing colour, white and green.  There was a young naval officer in
full dress, gold-buckled shoes, white trousers, short jacket with gold
swab on shoulders, dress-sword and smart gait making for supper at King's
House.

A long-legged "son of a gun" of a Yankee had a "clapper-claw," or
handshake, with a planting attorney in a kind of four-posted gig,
canopied in leather and curtained clumsily.  The Yankee laughed at the
heavy straight shafts and the mule that drew the volante, as the gig was
called, and the vehicle creaked and cried as it rolled along over the
road, which was like a dry river-bed.  There a French officer in Hessian
boots, white trousers, blue uniform, and much-embroidered scarlet cuffs
watched with amusement a slave carrying a goglet, or earthen jar, upon
his head like an Egyptian, untouched by the hand, so adding dignity to
carriage.  He was holding a "round-aboutation" with an old hag who was
telling his fortune.

As they passed King's House, they saw troops of the viceroy's guests
issuing from the palace-officers of the king's navy and army, officers
and men of the Jamaica militia, pale-faced, big-eyed men of the Creole
class, mulattoes, quadroons and octoroons, Samboes with their wives in
loose skirts, white stockings, and pinnacle hats.  There also passed, in
the streets, black servants with tin cases on their heads, or carrying
parcels in their arms, and here and there processions of servants, each
with something that belonged to their mistresses, who would presently be
attending the king's ball.

Snatches of song were heard, and voices of men who had had a full meal
and had "taken observations"--as looking through the bottom of a glass of
liquor was called by people with naval spirit--were mixed in careless
carousal.

All this jarred on Dyck Calhoun and gave revolt to his senses.  Yet he
was only half-conscious of the great sensuousness of the scene as he
passed through it.  Now and then some one doffed a hat to him, and very
occasionally some half-drunken citizen tossed at him a remark meant to
wound; but he took no notice, and let things pleasant and provocative
pass down the long ranges of indifference.

All was brought to focus at last, however, by their arrival at Charlotte
Bedford's lodgings, which, like most houses in the town, had a lookout or
belfry fitted with green blinds and a telescope, and had a green-painted
wooden railing round it.

At the very entrance, inside the gate, in the garden, they saw Sheila
Llyn, her mother, and Darius Boland, who seemed to be enduring from the
mother some sharp reprimand, to the amusement of the daughter.  As the
gate closed behind Dyck and Michael, the three from Virginia turned round
and faced them.  As Dyck came forward, Sheila flushed and trembled.  She
was no longer a young girl, but her slim straightness and the soft lines
of her figure, gave her a dignity and charm which made her young
womanhood distinguished--for she was now twenty-five, and had a carriage
of which a princess might have been proud.  Yet it was plain that the
entrance of Dyck at this moment was disturbing.  It was not what she had
foreseen.

She showed no hesitation, however, but came forward to meet her visitor,
while Michael fell back, as also did Darius Boland.  Both these seemed to
realize that the less they saw and heard the better; and they presently
got together in another part of the garden, as Dyck Calhoun came near
enough almost to touch Sheila.

Surely, he thought, she was supreme in appearance and design.  She was
like some rare flower of the field, alert, gentle, strong, intrepid, with
buoyant face, brown hair, blue eyes and cream-like skin.  She was touched
by a rose on each cheek and made womanly by firm and yet generous
breasts, tenderly imprisoned by the white chiffon of her blouse in which
was one bright sprig of the buds of a cherry-tree-a touch of modest
luxuriance on a person sparsely ornamented.  It was not tropical, this
picture of Sheila Llyn; it was a flick of northern life in a summer sky.
It was at once cheerful and apart.  It had no August in it; no oil and
wine.  It was the little twig that grew by a running spring.  It was
fresh, dominant and serene.  It was Connemara on the Amazon!  It was
Sheila herself, whom time had enriched with far more than years and
experience.  It was a personality which would anywhere have taken place
and held it.  It was undefeatable, persistent and permanent; it was the
spirit of Ireland loose in a world that was as far apart from Ireland as
she was from her dead, dishonoured father.

And Dyck?  At first she felt she must fly to him--yes, in spite of the
fact that he had suffered prison for manslaughter.  But a nearer look at
him stopped the impulse at its birth.  Here was the Dyck Calhoun she had
known in days gone by, but not the Dyck she had looked to see; for this
man was like one who had come from a hanging, who had seen his dearest
swinging at the end of a rope.  His face was set in coldness; his hair
was streaked with grey; his forehead had a line in the middle; his manner
was rigid, almost frigid, indeed.  Only in his eyes was there that which
denied all that his face and manner said--a hungry, absorbing, hopeless
look, the look of one who searches for a friend in the denying desert.

Somehow, when he bowed low to her, and looked her in the eyes as no one
in all her life had ever done, she had an almost agonized understanding
of what a man feels who has been imprisoned--that is, never the same
again.  He was an ex-convict, and yet she did not feel repelled by him.
She did not believe he had killed Erris Boyne.  As for the later crime
of mutiny, that did not concern her much.  She was Irish; but, more than
that, she was in sympathy with the mutineers.  She understood why Dyck
Calhoun, enlisting as a common sailor, should take up their cause and run
risk to advance it.  That he had advanced it was known to all the world;
that he had paid the price of his mutiny by saving the king's navy with
a stolen ship had brought him pardon for his theft of a ship and mutiny;
and that he had won wealth was but another proof of the man's power.

"You would not come to America, so I came here, and--"  She paused, her
voice trembling slightly.  "There is much to do at Salem," he added
calmly, and yet with his heart beating, as it had not beaten since the
day he had first met her at Playmore.

"You would not take the money I sent to Dublin for you--the gift of a
believing friend, and you would not come to America!"

"I shall have to tell you why one day," he answered slowly, "but I'll pay
my respects to your mother now."  So saying he went forward and bowed low
to Mrs. Llyn.  Unlike her daughter, Mrs. Llyn did not offer her hand.
She was pale, distraught, troubled--and vexed.  She, however, murmured
his name and bowed.  "You did not expect to see me here in Jamaica," he
said boldly.

"Frankly, I did not, Mr. Calhoun," she said.

"You resent my coming here to see you?  You think it bold, at least."

She looked at him closely and firmly.  "You know why I cannot welcome
you."

"Yet I have paid the account demanded by the law.  And you had no regard
for him.  You divorced him."

Sheila had drawn near, and Dyck made a gesture in her direction.  "She
does not know," he said, "and she should not hear what we say now?"

Mrs. Llyn nodded, and in a low tone told Sheila that she wished to be
alone with Dyck for a little while.  In Dyck's eyes, as he watched Sheila
go, was a thing deeper than he had ever known or shown before.  In her
white gown, and with her light step, Sheila seemed to float away--a
picture graceful, stately, buoyant, "keen and small."  As she was about
to pass beyond a clump of pimento bushes, she turned her head towards the
two, and there was that in her eyes which few ever see and seeing are
afterwards the same.  It was a look of inquiry, or revelation, of emotion
which went to Dyck's heart.

"No, she does not know the truth," Mrs. Llyn said.  "But it has been hard
hiding it from her.  One never knew whether some chance remark, some
allusion in the papers, would tell her you had killed her father."

"Did I kill her father?" asked Dyck helplessly.  "Did I?  I was found
guilty of it, but on my honour, Mrs. Llyn, I do not know, and I do not
think I did.  I have no memory of it.  We quarrelled.  I drew my sword on
him, then he made an explanation and I madly, stupidly drank drugged wine
in reconciliation with him, and then I remember nothing more--nothing at
all."

"What was the cause of your quarrel?"

Dyck looked at her long before answering.  "I hid that from my father
even, and hid it from the world--did not even mention it in court at the
trial.  If I had, perhaps I should not have gone to jail.  If I had,
perhaps I should not be here in Jamaica.  If I had--"  He paused, a flood
of reflection drowning his face, making his eyes shine with black sorrow.

"Well, if you had!  .  .  .  Why did you not?  Wasn't it your duty to
save yourself and save your friends, if you could?  Wasn't that your
plain duty?"

"Yes, and that was why I did not tell what the quarrel was.  If I had,
even had I killed Erris Boyne, the jury would not have convicted me.
Of that I am sure.  It was a loyalist jury."

"Then why did you not?"

"Isn't it strange that now after all these years, when I have settled the
account with judge and jury, with state and law--that now I feel I must
tell you the truth.  Madam, your ex-husband, Erris Boyne, was a traitor.
He was an officer in the French army, and he offered to make me an
officer also and pay me well in French Government money, if I would break
my allegiance and serve the French cause--Ah, don't start!  He knew I was
on my last legs financially.  He knew I had acquaintance with young rebel
leaders like Emmet, and he felt I could be won.  So he made his proposal.
Because of your daughter I held my peace, for she could bear it less than
you.  I did not tell the cause of the quarrel.  If I had, there would
have been for her the double shame.  That was why I held my peace--a
fool, but so it was!"

The woman seemed almost robbed of understanding.  His story overwhelmed
her.  Yet what the man had done was so quixotic, so Celtic, that her
senses were almost paralysed.

"So mad--so mad and bad and wild you were," she said.  "Could you not see
it was your duty to tell all, no matter what the consequences.  The man
was a villain.  But what madness you were guilty of, what cruel madness!
Only you could have done a thing like that.  Erris Boyne deserved death
--I care not who killed him--you or another.  He deserved death, and it
was right he should die.  But that you should kill him, apart from all
else--why, indeed, oh, indeed, it is a tragedy, for you loved my
daughter, and the killing made a gulf between you!  There could be
no marriage in such a case.  She could not bear it, nor could you.  But
please know this, Mr. Calhoun, that she never believed you killed Erris
Boyne.  She has said so again and again.  You are the only man who has
ever touched her mind or her senses, though many have sought her.
Wherever she goes men try to win her, but she has no thought for any.
Her mind goes back to you.  Just when you entered the garden I learned--
and only then-that you were here.  She hid it from me, but Darius Boland
knew, and he had seen your man, Michael Clones, and she had then made him
tell me.  I was incensed.  I was her mother, and yet she had hid the
thing from me.  I thought she came to this island for the sake of Salem,
and I found that she came not for Salem, but for you.  .  .  .  Ah, Mr.
Calhoun, she deserves what you did to save her, but you should not have
done it."

"She deserves all that any better man might do.  Why don't you marry her
to some great man in your Republic?  It would settle my trouble for me
and free her mind from anxiety.  Mrs. Llyn, we are not children, you and
I.  You know life, and so do I, and--"

She interrupted him.  "Be sure of this, Mr. Calhoun, she knows life even
better than either of us.  She is, and has always been, a girl of sense
and judgment.  When she was a child she was my master, even in Ireland.
Yet she was obedient and faithful, and kept her head in all vexed things.
She will have her way, and she will have it as she wants it, and in no
other manner.  She is one of the world's great women.  She is unique.
Child as she is, she still understands all that men do, and does it.
Under her hands the estates in Virginia have developed even more than
under the hands of my brother.  She controls like another Elizabeth.
She has made those estates run like a spool of thread, and she will
do the same here with Salem.  Be sure of that."

"Why does she not marry?  Is there no man she can bear?  She could have
the highest, that's sure."  He spoke with passion and insistence.  If she
were married his trouble would be over.  The worst would have come to
him--like death.  His eyes were only two dark fires in a face that was as
near to tragic pain crystallized as any the world has seen.  Yet there
was in it some big commanding thing, that gave it a ghastly handsomeness
almost; that bathed his look in dignity and power, albeit a reckless
power, a thing that would not be stayed by any blandishments.  He had the
look of a lost angel, one who fell with Belial in the first days of sin.

"There is no man she can bear--except here in Jamaica.  It is no use.
Your governor, Lord Mallow, whom she knew in Ireland, who is distant kin
of mine, he has already made advances here to her, as he did in Ireland
--you did not know that.  Even before we left for Virginia he came to see
us, and brought her books and flowers, and here, on our arrival, he
brought her choicest blooms of his garden.  She is rich, and he would be
glad of an estate that brings in scores of thousands of pounds yearly.
He has asked us to stay at King's House, but we have declined.  We start
for Salem in a few hours.  She wants her hand on the wheel."

"Lord Mallow--he courts her, does he?"  His face grew grimmer.  "Well,
she might do worse, though if she were one of my family I would rather
see her in her grave than wedded to him.  For he is selfish--aye, as few
men are!  He would eat and keep his apple too.  His theory is that life
is but a game, and it must be played with steel.  He would squeeze the
life out of a flower, and give the flower to his dog to eat.  He thinks
first and always of himself.  He would--but there, he would make a good
husband as husbands go for some women, but not for this woman!  It is not
because he is my enemy I say this.  It is because there is only one woman
like your daughter, and that is herself; and I would rather see her
married to a hedger that really loved her than to Lord Mallow, who loves
only one being on earth--himself.  But see, Mrs. Llyn, now that you know
all, now that we three have met again, and this island is small and
tragedy is at our doors, don't you think your daughter should be told the
truth.  It will end everything for me.  But it would be better so.  It is
now only cruelty to hide the truth, harsh to continue a friendship which
will only appal her in the end.  If we had not met again like this, then
silence might have been best; but as she is not cured of her tender
friendship made upon the hills at Playmore, isn't it well to end it all?
Your conscience will be clearer, and so will mine.  We shall have done
the right thing at last.  Why did you not tell her who her father was?
Then why blame me!  You held your peace to save your daughter, as you
thought.  I held my tongue for the same reason; but she is so much a
woman now, that she will understand, as she could not have understood
years ago in Limerick.  In God's name, let us speak.  One of us should
tell her, and I think it should be you.  And see, though I know I did
right in withholding the facts about the quarrel with Erris Boyne, yet I
favour telling her that he was a traitor.  The whole truth now, or
nothing.  That is my view."

He saw how lined and sunken was her face, he noted the weakness of her
carriage, he realized the task he was putting on her, and his heart
relented.  "No, I will do it," he added, with sudden will, "and I will do
it now, if I may."

"Oh, not to-day-not to-day!" she said with a piteous look.  "Let it
not be to-day.  It is our first day here, and we are due at King's House
to-night, even in an hour from now."

"You want her at her glorious best, is that it?"  It seemed too strange
that the pure feminine should show at a time of crisis like this, but
there it was.  It was this woman's way.  But he added presently: "When
she asks you what we have talked about, what will you say?"

"Is it not easy?  I am a mother," she said meaningly.

"And I am an ex-convict, and a mutineer--is that it?"

She inclined her head.  "It should not be difficult to explain.  When you
came I was speaking as I felt, and she will not think it strange if I
give that as my reason."

"But is it wise?  Isn't it better to end it all now?  Suppose Lord Mallow
tells her."

"He did not before.  He is not likely now," was the vexed reply.  "Is it
a thing a gentleman will speak of to a lady?"

"But you do not know Mallow.  If he thought she had seen me to-day, he
would not hesitate.  What would you do if you were Lord Mallow?"

"No, not to-day," she persisted.  "It is all so many years ago.  It can
hurt naught to wait a little longer."

"When and where shall it be?" he asked gloomily.  "At Salem--at Salem.
We shall be settled then--and steady.  There is every reason why you
should consider me.  I have suffered as few women have suffered,
and I do not hate you.  I am only sorry."

Far down at the other end of the garden he saw Sheila.  Her face was in
profile--an exquisite silhouette.  She moved slowly among the pimento
bushes.

"As you wish," he said with a heavy sigh.  The sight of the girl
anguished his soul.




CHAPTER XVIII

AT SALEM

The plantation of Salem was in a region below the Pedro Plains in the
parish of St. Elizabeth, where grow the aloe, and torch-thistle, and
clumps of wood which alter the appearance of the plain from the South
Downs of England, but where thousands of cattle and horses even in those
days were maintained.  The air of the district was dry and elastic, and
it filtered down to the valleys near like that where Salem was with its
clusters of negro huts and offices, its mills and distilleries where
sugar and rum were made.  Salem was situated on the Black River,
accessible by boats and canoes.  The huts of negro slaves were near the
sugar mills, without regard to order, but in clusters of banana, avocado-
pear, limes and oranges, and with the cultivated land round their huts
made an effective picture.

One day every fortnight was allowed the negroes to cultivate their crops,
and give them a chance to manufacture mats for beds, bark-ropes, wicker-
chairs and baskets, earthen jars, pans, and that kind of thing.  The huts
themselves were primitive to a degree, the floor being earth, the roof,
of palm-thatch or the leaves of the cocoa-nut tree, the sides hard-posts
driven in the ground and interlaced with wattle and plaster, and inside
scarcely high enough for its owner to walk upright.  The furniture was
scant--a quatre, or bed, made of a platform of boards, with a mat and a
blanket, some low stools, a small table, an earthen water-jar, and some
smaller ones, a pail and an iron pot, and calabashes which did duty for
plates, dishes and bowls.  In one of the two rooms making the hut, there
were always the ashes of the night-fire, without which negroes could not
sleep in comfort.

These were the huts of the lowest grade of negro-slaves of the fields.
The small merchants and the domestics had larger houses with boarded
floors, some even with linen sheets and mosquito nets, and shelves with
plates and dishes of good ware.  Every negro received a yearly allowance
of Osnaburgh linen, woollen, baize and checks for clothes, and some
planters also gave them hats and handkerchiefs, knives, needles and
thread, and so on.

Every plantation had a surgeon who received a small sum for attendance on
every slave, while special cases of midwifery, inoculation, etc., had a
particular allowance.  The surgeon had to attend to about four hundred to
five hundred negroes, on an income of L150 per annum, and board and
lodging and washing, besides what he made from his practice with the
whites.

Salem was no worse than some other plantations on the island, but it was
far behind such plantations as that owned by Dyck Calhoun, and had been
notorious for the cruelties committed on it.  To such an estate a lady
like Sheila Llyn would be a boon.  She was not on the place a day before
she started reforms which would turn the plantation into a model scheme.
Houses, food, treatment of the negroes, became at once a study to her,
and her experience in Virginia was invaluable.  She had learned there not
to work the slaves too hard in the warm period of the day; and she showed
her interest by having served at her own table the favourite olio the
slaves made of plantains, bananas, yams, calalue, eddoes, cassavi, and
sweet potatoes boiled with salt fish and flavoured with cayenne pepper.
This, with the unripe roasted plantain as bread, was a native relish and
health-giving food.

Ever since the day when she had seen Dyck Calhoun at Spanish Town she had
been disturbed in mind.  Dyck had shown a reserve which she felt was not
wholly due to his having been imprisoned for manslaughter.  In one way he
looked little older.  His physique was as good, or better than when she
first saw him on the hills of Playmore.  It was athletic, strenuous,
elastic.  Yet there was about it the abandonment of despair--at least
of recklessness.  The face was older, the head more powerful, the hair
slightly touched with grey-rather there was one spot in the hair almost
pure white; a strand of winter in the foliage of summer.  It gave a touch
of the bizarre to a distinguished head, it lent an air of the singular to
a personality which had flare and force--an almost devilish force.  That
much was to be said for him, that he had not sought to influence her to
his own advantage.  She was so surrounded in America by men who knew her
wealth and prized her beauty, she was so much a figure in Virginia, that
any reserve with regard to herself was noticeable.  She was enough
feminine to have pleasure in the fact that she was thought desirable
by men; yet it played an insignificant part in her life.

It did not give her conceit.  It was only like a frill on the skirts
of life.  It did not play any part in her character.  Certainly Dyck
Calhoun had not flattered her.  That one to whom she had written, as she
had done, should remove himself so from the place of the deserving
friend, one whom she had not deserted while he was in jail as a criminal
--that he should treat her so, gave every nerve a thrill of protest.
Sometimes she trembled in indignation, and then afterwards gave herself
to the work on the estate or in the household--its reform and its
rearrangement; though the house was like most in Jamaica, had adequate
plate, linen, glass and furniture.  At the lodgings in Spanish Town,
after Dyck Calhoun had left, her mother had briefly said that she had
told Dyck he could not expect the conditions of the Playmore friendship
should be renewed; that, in effect, she had warned him off.  To this
Sheila had said that the killing of a man whose life was bad might be
punishable.  In any case, that was in another land, under abnormal
conditions; and, with lack of logic, she saw no reason why he should be
socially punished in Jamaica for what he had been legally punished for
in Ireland.  As for the mutiny, he had done what any honest man of spirit
would do; also, he had by great bravery and skill brought victory to the
king's fleet in West Indian waters.

Then it was she told her mother how she had always disobeyed her commands
where Dyck was concerned, that she had written to him while he was in
jail; that she had come to Jamaica more to see him than to reform Salem;
that she had the old Celtic spirit of brotherhood, and she would not be
driven from it.  In a sudden burst of anger her mother had charged her
with deceit; but the girl said she had followed her conscience, and she
dismissed it all with a gesture as emphatic as her mother's anger.

That night they had dined with Lord Mallow, and she saw that his
attentions had behind them the deep purpose of marriage.  She had not
been overcome by the splendour of his retinue and table, or by the
magnificence of his guests; though the military commander-in-chief and
the temporary admiral on the station did their utmost to entertain her,
and some of the local big-wigs were pompous.  Lord Mallow had ability and
knew how to use it; and he was never so brilliant as on this afternoon,
for they dined while it was still daylight and hardly evening.  He told
her of the customs of the country, of the people; and slyly and
effectively he satirized some of his grandiloquent guests.  Not unduly,
for one of them, the most renowned in the island, came to him after
dinner as he sat talking to Sheila, and said: "I'm very sorry, your
honour, but good Almighty God, I must go home and cool coppers."  Then he
gave Sheila a hot yet clammy hand, and bade her welcome as a citizen to
the island, "alien but respected, beautiful but capable!"  Sheila had
seen a few of the Creole ladies present at their best-large-eyed, simple,
not to say primitive in speech, and very unaffected in manner.  She had
learned also that the way to the Jamaican heart was by a full table and a
little flattery.

One incident at dinner had impressed her greatly.  Not far away from
her was a young lady, beautiful in face and person, and she had seen a
scorpion suddenly shoot into her sleeve and ruthlessly strike and strike
the arm of the girl, who gave one cry only and then was still.  Sheila
saw the man next to the girl--he was a native officer--secure the
scorpion, and then whip from his pocket a little bag of indigo, dip it in
water, and apply the bag to the wounded arm, immediately easing the
wound.  This had all been done so quickly that it was over before the
table had been upset, almost.

"That is the kind of thing we have here," said Lord Mallow.  "There is a
lady present who has seen in one day a favourite black child bitten by a
congereel, a large centipede in her nursery, a snake crawl from under her
child's pillow, and her son nearly die from a bite of the black spider
with the red spot on its tail.  It is a life that has its trials--and its
compensations."

"I saw a man's head on a pole on my way to King's House.  You have to use
firm methods here," Sheila said in reply.  "It is not all a rose-garden.
You have to apply force."

Lord Mallow smiled grimly.  "C'est la force morale toujours."

"Ah, I should not have thought it was moral force always," was the
ironical reply.

"We have criminals here," declared the governor with aplomb, "and they
need some handling, I assure you.  We have in this island one of the
worst criminals in the British Empire."

"Ah, I thought he was in the United States!" answered the girl sedately.

"You mean General George Washington," remarked the governor.  "No, it is
one who was a friend and fellow-countryman of yours before he took to
killing unarmed men."

"You refer to Mr. Dyck Calhoun, I doubt not, sir?  Well, he is still a
friend of mine, and I saw him today--this afternoon, before I came here.
I understood that the Crown had pardoned his mutiny."

The governor started.  He was plainly annoyed.

"The crime is there just the same," he replied.  "He mutinied, and he
stole a king's ship, and took command of it, and brought it out here."

"And saved you and your island, I understand."

"Ah, he said that, did he?"

"He said nothing at all to me about it.  I have been reading the Jamaica
Cornwall Chronicle the last three years."

"He is ever a source of anxiety to me," declared the governor.

"I knew he was once in Phoenix Park years ago," was the demure yet sharp
reply, "but I thought he was a good citizen here--a good and well-to-do
citizen."

Lord Mallow flushed slightly.  "Phoenix Park--ah, he was a capable fellow
with the sword!  I said so always, and I'd back him now against a
champion; but many a bad man has been a good swordsman."

"So, that's what good swordsmanship does, is it?  I wondered what it was
that did it.  I hear you fight him still--but with a bludgeon, and he
dodges it."

"I do not understand," declared Lord Mallow tartly.  "Ah, wasn't there
some difference over his going for the treasure to Haiti?  Some one told
me, I think, that you were not in favour of his getting his ticket-of-
leave, or whatever it is called, and that the provost-marshal gave it to
him, as he had the right to do."

"You have wide sources of information in this case.  I wonder--"

"No, your honour need not wonder.  I was told that by a gentleman on the
steamer coming here.  He was a native of the island, I think--or perhaps
it was the captain, or the mate, or the boatswain.  I can't recall.  Or
maybe it came to me from my manager, Darius Boland, who hears things
wherever he is, one doesn't know how; but he hears them.  He is to me
what your aide-de-camp is to you," she nodded towards a young man near by
at the table.

"And do you dress your Darius Boland as I dress my aide in scarlet, with
blue facings and golden embroidery, and put a stiff hat with a feather on
his head?"

"But no, he does not need such things.  I am a Republican now.  I am a
citizen of the United States, where men have no need of uniform to tell
the world what they are.  You shall see my Darius Boland--indeed, you
have seen him.  He was there to-day when you gave me the distinction of
your presence."

"That dry, lean, cartridge of a fellow, that pair of pincers with a
face!"

"And a tongue, your honour.  If you did not hear it yet, you will hear
it.  He is to be my manager here.  So he will be under your control--
if I permit him."

"If you permit him, mistress?"

"If I permit him, yes.  You are a power, but you are not stronger than
the laws and rules you make.  For instance, there was the case of Mr.
Dyck Calhoun.  When he came, you were for tying him up in one little
corner of this island--the hottest part, I know, near to Kingston, where
it averages ninety degrees in the shade at any time of the year.  But the
King you represent had not restricted his liberties so, and you being the
King, that is, yourself, were forced to abide by your own regulations.
So it may be the same with Darius Boland.  He may want something, and
you, high up, looking down, will say, "What devilry is here!" and
decline.  He will then turn to your chief-justice or provost-marshal-
general, or a deputy of the provost-marshal, and they will say that
Darius Boland shall have what he wants, because it is the will of the
will you represent."

Almost the last words the governor used to her were these: "Those only
live at peace here who are at peace with me"; and her reply had been:
"But Mr. Dyck Calhoun lives at peace, does he not, your honour?"

To that he had replied: "No man is at peace while he has yet desires."
He paused a minute and then added: "That Erris Boyne killed by Dyck
Calhoun--did you ever see him that you remember?"

"Not that I remember," she replied quickly.  "I never lived in Dublin."

"That may be.  But did you never know his history?"  She shook her head
in negation.  His eyes searched her face carefully, and he was astonished
when he saw no sign of confusion there.  "Good God, she doesn't know.
She's never been told!" he said to himself.  "This is too startling.
I'll speak to the mother."

A little later he turned from the mother with astonishment.  "It's
madness," he remarked to himself.  "She will find out.  Some one will
tell her.  .  .  .  By heaven, I'll tell her first," he hastily said.
"When she knows the truth, Calhoun will have no chance on earth.  Yes,
I'll tell her myself.  But I'll tell no one else," he added; for he felt
that Sheila, once she knew the truth, would resent his having told abroad
the true story of the Erris Boyne affair.

So Sheila and her mother had gone to their lodgings with depression, but
each with a clear purpose in her mind.  Mrs. Llyn was determined to tell
her daughter what she ought to have known long before; and Sheila was
firm to make the one man who had ever interested her understand that he
was losing much that was worth while keeping.

Then had followed the journey to Salem.  Yet all the while for Sheila
one dark thought kept hovering over everything.  Why should life be so
complicated?  Why should this one man who seemed capable and had the
temperament of the Irish hills and vales be the victim of punishment and
shame--why should he shame her?

Suddenly, without her mother's knowledge, she sent Darius Boland through
the hills in the early morning to Enniskillen, Dyck Calhoun's place, with
a letter which said only this: "Is it not time that you came to wish us
well in our new home?  We shall expect you to-morrow."

When Dyck read this note he thought it was written by Sheila, but
inspired by the mother; and he lost no time in making his way down across
the country to Salem, which he reached a few hours after sunrise.  At the
doorway of the house he met Mrs. Llyn.

"Have you told her?" he asked in anxiety.  Astonished at his presence
she could make no reply for a moment.  "I have told her nothing," she
answered.  "I meant to do so this morning.  I meant to do it--I must."

"She sent me a letter asking if it was not time I came to wish you well
in your house, and you and she would expect me to-day."

"I knew naught of her writing you," was the reply--"naught at all.  But
now that you are here, will you not tell her all?"

Dyck smiled grimly.  "Where is she?" he asked.  "I will tell her."

The mother pointed down the garden.  "Yonder by the clump of palms I saw
her a moment ago.  If you go that way you will find her."

In another moment Dyck Calhoun was on his way to the clump of palms, and
before he reached it, the girl came out into the path.  She was dressed
in a black silk skirt with a white bodice and lace, as he had seen her on
her arrival in Kingston, and at her throat was a sprig of the wild pear-
tree.  When she saw him, she gave a slight start, then stood still, and
he came to her.

"I have your letter," he said, "and I came to say what I ought to say
about your living here: you will bring blessings to the place."

She looked at him steadfastly.  "Shall we talk here," she said,
"or inside the house?  There is a little shelter here in the trees"--
pointing to the right--"a shelter built by the late manager.  It has the
covering of a hut, but it is open at two sides.  Will you come?"  As she
went on ahead, he could not fail to notice how slim and trim she was, how
perfectly her figure seemed to fit her gown-as though she had been poured
into it; and yet the folds of her skirt waved and floated like silky
clouds around her!  Under cover of the shelter, she turned and smiled at
him.

"You have seen my mother?"

"I have just come from her," he answered.  "She bade me tell you what
ought to have been told long ago, and you were not, for there seemed no
reason that you should.  You were young and ignorant and happy.  You had
no cares, no sorrows.  The sorrows that had come to your mother belonged
to days when you were scarce out of the cradle.  But you did not know.
You were not aware that your mother had divorced your father for crime
against marital fidelity and great cruelty.  You did not know even who
that father was.  Well, I must tell you.  Your father was a handsome man,
a friend of mine until I knew the truth about him, and then he died--I
killed him, so the court said."

Her face became ghastly pale.  After a moment of anguished bewilderment,
she said: "You mean that Erris Boyne was my father?"

"Yes, I mean that.  They say I killed him.  They say that he was found
with no sword drawn, but that my open sword lay on the table beside me
while I was asleep, and that it had let out his life-blood."

"Why was he killed?" she asked, horror-stricken and with pale lips.

"I do not know, but if I killed him, it was because I revolted from the
proposals he made to me.  I--"  He paused, for the look on her face was
painful to see, and her body was as that of one who had been struck by
lightning.  It had a crumpled, stricken look, and all force seemed to be
driven from it.  It had the look of crushed vitality.  Her face was set
in paleness, her eyes were frightened, her whole person was, as it were,
in ghastly captivity.  His heart smote him, and he pulled himself
together to tell her all.

"Go on," she said.  "I want to hear.  I want--to know all.  I ought to
have known--long ago; but that can't be helped now.  Continue--please."

Her words had come slowly, in gasps almost, and her voice was so frayed
he could scarcely recognize it.  All the pride of her nature seemed
shattered.

"If I killed him," he said presently, "it was because he tried to tempt
me from my allegiance to the Crown to become a servant of France, to--"

He stopped short, for a cry came from her lips which appalled him.

"My God--my God!" she said with bloodless lips, her eyes fastened on his
face, her every look and motion the inflection of despair.  "Go on--tell
all," she added presently with more composure.

Swiftly he described what happened in the little room at the traitor's
tavern, of the momentary reconciliation and the wine that he drank,
drugged wine poured out but not drunk by Erris Boyne, and of his later
unconsciousness.  At last he paused.

"Why did these things not come out at the trial?" she asked in hushed
tones.

He made a helpless gesture.  "I did not speak of them because I thought
of you.  I hid it--I did not want you to know what your father was."

Something like a smile gathered at her pale lips.  "You saved me for the
moment, and condemned yourself for ever," she said in a voice of torture.
"If you had told what he was--if you had told that, the jury would not
have condemned you, they would not have sent you to prison."

"I believe I did the right thing," he said.  "If I killed your father,
prison was my proper punishment.  But I can't remember.  There was no
other clue, no other guide to judgment.  So the law said I killed him,
and--he had evidently not drawn his sword.  It was clear he was killed
defenceless."

"You killed a defenceless man!"  Her voice was sharp with agony.  "That
was mentioned at the trial--but I did not believe it then--in that long
ago."  She trembled to her feet from the bench where she was sitting.
"And I do not believe it now--no, on my soul, I do not."

"But it makes no difference, you see.  I was condemned for killing your
father, and the world knows that Erris Boyne was your father, and here
Lord Mallow, the governor, knows it; and there is no chance of friendship
between you and me.  Since the day he was found dead in the room, there
was no hope for our friendship, for anything at all between us that I had
wished to be there.  You dare not be friends with me--"

Her face suddenly suffused and she held herself upright with an effort.
She was about to say, "I dare, Dyck--I do dare!" but he stopped her with
a reproving gesture.

"No, no, you dare not, and I would not let you if you would.  I am an
ex-convict.  They say I killed your father, and the way to understanding
between us is closed."

She made a protesting gesture.  "Closed!  Closed!--But is it closed?  No,
no, some one else killed him, not you.  You couldn't have done it.  You
would have fought him--fought him as you did Lord Mallow, and in fighting
you might have killed him, but your sword never let out his life when he
was defenceless--never."

A look of intense relief, almost of happiness, came to Dyck's face.
"That is like you, Sheila, but it does not cure the trouble.  You and I
are as far apart as noon and midnight.  The law has said the only thing
that can be said upon it."

She sank down again upon the wooden bench.  "Oh, how mad you were, not to
tell the whole truth long ago!  You would not have been condemned, and
then--"

She paused overcome, and his self-control almost deserted him.  With
strong feeling he burst out: "And then, we might have come together?
No, your mother--your friends, myself, could not have let that be.  See,
Sheila, I will tell you the whole truth now--aye, the whole absolute
truth.  I have loved you since the first day I saw you on the hills when
you and I rescued Christopher Dogan.  Not a day has passed since then
when you were not more to me than any other woman in all the world."

A new light came into her face, the shadows left her eyes, and the pallor
fled from her lips.  "You loved me?" she said in a voice grown soft-
husky still, but soft as the light in a summer heaven.  "You loved me
--and have always loved me since we first met?"

Her look was so appealing, so passionate and so womanly, that he longed
to reach out his arms to her, and say, "Come--come home, Sheila," but the
situation did not permit that, and only his eyes told the story of what
was in his mind.

"I have always loved you, Sheila, and shall do so while I have breath and
life.  I have always given you the best that is in me, tried to do what
was good for us both, since my misfortune--crime, Lord Mallow calls it,
as does the world.  Never a sunrise that does not find you in the
forefront of all the lighted world; never a flower have I seen that does
not seem sweeter--it brings thoughts of you; never a crime that does not
deepen its shame because you are in the world.  In prison, when I used to
mop my floor and clean down the walls; when I swept the dust from the
corners; when I folded up my convict clothes; when I ate the prison food
and sang the prison hymns; when I placed myself beside the bench in the
workshop to make things that would bring cash to my fellow-prisoners in
their need; when I saw a minister of religion or heard the Litany; when I
counted up the days, first that I had spent in jail and then the days I
had still to spend in jail; when I read the books from the prison library
of the land where you had gone, and of the struggle there; when I saw
you, in my mind's eye, in the cotton-fields or on the verandah of your
house in Virginia--I had but one thought, and that was the look in your
face at Playmore and Limerick, the sound of your voice as you came
singing up the hill just before I first met you, the joyous beauty of
your body."

"And at sea?" she whispered with a gesture at once beautiful and
pathetic, for it had the motion of helplessness and hopelessness.  What
she had heard had stirred her soul, and she wanted to hear more--or was
it that she wished to drain the cup now that it was held to her lips?
-drain it to the last drop of feeling.

"At sea," he answered, with his eyes full of intense feeling--"at sea, I
was free at last, doomed as I thought, anguished in spirit, and yet with
a wild hope that out of it would come deliverance.  I expected to lose my
life, and I lived each day as though it would be my last.  I was chief
rogue in a shipful of rogues, chief sinner in a hell of sinners, and yet
I had no remorse and no regret.  I had done all with an honest purpose,
with the good of the sailors in my mind; and so I lived in daily touch
with death, honour, and dishonour.  Yet I never saw a sailor in the
shrouds, or heard the night watch call 'All's well!' in the midst of
night and mutiny, that I did not long for a word from you that would take
away the sting of death.  Those days at sea for ten long weeks were never
free from anxiety, not anxiety for myself, only for the men who had put
me where I was, had given me captain's rank, had--"

Suddenly he stopped, and took from his pocket the letter he was writing
on the very day she landed in Jamaica.  He opened it and studied it for a
moment with a dark look in his face.

"This I wrote even as you were landing in Jamaica, and I knew naught of
your coming.  It was an outbreak of my soul.  It was the truth written
to you and for you, and yet with the feeling that you would never see it.
I was still writing it when Michael Clones came up the drive to tell me
you and your mother were here.  Now, I know not what Christopher Dogan
would say of it, but I say it is amazing that in the hour you were first
come to this land I should be moved to tell you the story of my life
since I left prison; since, on receiving your letter in London, forwarded
from Dublin, I joined the navy.  But here it is with all the truth and
terror in it.--Aye, there was terror, for it gave the soul of my life to
one I never thought to see again; and, if seeing, should be compelled to
do what I have done--tell her the whole truth at once and so have it
over.

"But do not think that in telling it now I repent of my secrecy.
I repent of nothing; I would not alter anything.  What was to be is, and
what is has its place in the book of destiny.  No, I repent nothing, yet
here now I give you this to read while still my story of the days of
which you know is in your ears.  Here it is.  It will tell the whole
story; for when you have read it and do understand, then we part to meet
no more as friends.  You will go back to Virginia, and I will stay here.
You will forgive the unwilling wrong I have done you, but you will make
your place in life without thought of me.  You will marry some one--not
worthy of you, for that could not be; but you will take to yourself some
man from among the men of this world.  You will set him apart from all
other men as yours, and he will be happy, having been blessed beyond
deserving.  You will not regret coming here; but you will desire our
friendship to cease; and what has been to be no more, while the tincture
of life is in your veins.  Sheila, read this thing, for it is the rest of
the story until now."

He handed her the papers, and she took them with an inclination of the
head which said: "Give it to me.  I will read it now while my eyes can
still bear to read it.  I have laid on my heart the nettle of shame, and
while it is still burning there I will read all that you have to teach
me."

"I will go out in the garden while you read it," he said.  "In a half-
hour I will come back, and then we can say good-bye," he added, with pain
in his voice, but firmly.

"No, do not go," she urged.  "Sit here on the bench--at the end of it
here," she said, motioning with her hand.

He shook his head in negation.  "No, I will go and say to your mother
that I have told you, and ease her mind, for I know she herself meant to
tell you."

As he went he looked at her face closely.  It was so young, so pathetic,
so pale, yet so strangely beautiful, and her forehead was serene.  That
was one of her characteristics.  In all her life, her forehead remained
untroubled and unlined.  Only at her mouth and in her eyes did misery or
sorrow show.  He looked into her eyes now, and he was pleased with what
he saw; for they had in them the glow of understanding and the note of
will which said: "You and I are parted, but I believe in you, and I will
not show I am a weak woman by futile horror.  We shall meet no more, but
I shall remember you."

That was what he saw, and it was what he wished to see.  He knew her
character would stand the test of any trial, and it had done so.  Horror
had struck her, but had not overwhelmed her.  She had cried out in her
agony, but she had not been swept out into chaos.  She had no weak
passions and no futilities.  But as he turned away now, it was with the
sharp conviction that he had dealt a blow from which the girl would
recover, but would never be the same again.  She was rich "beyond the
dreams of avarice," but that would not console her.  She had resources
within herself, had what would keep her steady.  Her real power and
force, her real hope, were in her regnant soul which was not to be
cajoled by life's subterfuges.  Her lips opened now, as though she would
say something, but nothing came from them.  She only shook her head
sadly, as if to say: "You understand.  Go, and when you come again, it
will be for us to part in peace--at least in peace."

Out in the garden he found her mother.  After the first agitated
greeting-agitated on her part, he said: "The story has been told, and she
is now reading--"

He told her the story of the manuscript, and added that Sheila had
carried herself with courage.  Presently the woman said to him: "She
never believed you killed Erris Boyne.  Well, it may not help the
situation, but I say too, that I do not believe you did.  I cannot
understand why you did not deny having killed him."

"I could not deny.  In any case, the law punished me for it, and the book
is closed for ever."

"Have you never thought that some one--"

"Yes, I have thought, but who is there?  The crowd at the Dublin hotel
where the thing was done were secret, and they would lie the apron off a
bishop.  No, there is no light, and, to tell the truth, I care not now."

"But if you are not guilty--it is not too late; there is my girl!  If the
real criminal should appear--can you not see?"

The poor woman, distressedly pale, her hair still abundant, her eyes
still bright, her pulses aglow, as they had ever been, made a gesture of
appeal with hands that were worn and thin.  She had charm still, in a way
as great as her daughter's.

"I can see--but, Mrs. Llyn, I have no hope.  I am a man whom some men
fear--"

"Lord Mallow!" she interjected.

"He does not fear me.  Why do you say that?"

"I speak with a woman's intuition.  I don't know what he fears, but he
does fear you.  You are a son of history; you had a duel with him, and
beat him; you have always beaten him, even here where he has been supreme
as governor--from first to last, you have beaten him."

"I hope I shall be even with him at the last--at the very last," was Dyck
Calhoun's reply.  "We were made to be foes.  We were from the first.  I
felt it when I saw him at Playmore.  Nothing has changed since then.  He
will try to destroy me here, but I will see it through.  I will try and
turn his rapier-points.  I will not be the target of his arrows without
making some play against him.  The man is a fool.  I could help him here,
but he will have none of it, and he is running great risks.  He has been
warned that the Maroons are restive, that the black slaves will rise if
the Maroons have any initial success, and he will listen to no advice.
He would not listen to me, but, knowing that, I got the provost-marshal
to approach him, and when he knew my hand was in it, he stiffened.  He
would have naught to do with it, and so no preparations are made.  And up
there"--he turned and pointed--"up there in Trelawney the Maroons are
plotting and planning, and any day an explosion may occur.  If it occurs
no one will be safe, especially if the blacks rise too--I mean the black
slaves.  There will be no safety then for any one."

"For us as well, you mean?"

"For you as well as all others, and you are nearer to Trelawney than most
others.  You are in their path.  So be wise, Mrs. Llyn, and get back to
Virginia as soon as may be.  It is a better place than this."

"My daughter is mistress here," was the sorrowful reply.  "She will have
her own way."

"Your daughter will not care to stay here now," he answered firmly.

"She will do what she thinks her duty in spite of her own feelings, or
yours, or mine.  It is her way, and it has always been her way."

"I will tell her what I fear, and she may change her mind."

"But the governor may want her to stay," answered Mrs. Llyn none too
sagely, but with that in her mind which seemed to justify her.

"Lord Mallow--oh, if you think there is any influence in him to keep
her, that is another question," said Dyck with a grim smile.  "But,
nevertheless, I think you should leave here and go back to Virginia.
It is no safe place for two ladies, in all senses.  Whatever Lord Mallow
thinks or does, this is no place for you.  This place is your daughter's
for her to do what she chooses with it, and I think she ought to sell it.
There would be no trouble in getting a purchaser.  It is a fine
property."

"But the governor might not think as you do; he might not wish it sold."

Mrs. Llyn was playing a bold, indeed a reckless game.  She wanted to show
Dyck there were others who would interest themselves in Sheila even if
he, Dyck, were blotted from the equation; that the girl could look high,
if her mind turned towards marriage.  Also she felt that Dyck should know
the facts before any one else, so that he would not be shocked in the
future, if anything happened.  Yet in her deepest heart she wished him
well.  She liked him as she had never liked any of Sheila's admirers, and
if the problem of Erris Boyne had been solved, she would gladly have seen
him wedded to Sheila.

"What has the governor to do with it!" he declared.  "It is your
daughter's own property, and she is free to hold or to part with it.
There is no Crown consent to ask, no vice-regal approval needed."

Suddenly he became angry, almost excited.  His blood pounded in his
veins.  Was this man, Mallow, to come between his and her fate always,
come into his problem at the most critical moment?  "God in heaven!" he
said in a burst of passion, "is this a land of the British Empire or is
it not?  Why should that man break in on every crisis?  Why should he do
this or that--say yea or nay, give or take away!  He is the king's
representative, but he is bound by laws as rigid as any that bind you or
me.  What has he to do with your daughter or what concerns her?  Is there
not enough trouble in the world without bringing in Lord Mallow?
If he--"

He stopped short, for he saw coming from the summerhouse, Sheila with his
paper in her hand.  She walked slowly and with dignity.  She carried her
head high and firmly, and the skin of her face was shining with light
as she came on.  Dyck noticed how her wide skirts flicked against the
flowers that bordered the path, and how her feet seemed scarcely to touch
the ground as she walked--a spirit, a regnant spirit of summer she
seemed.  But in her face there was no summer, there was only autumn and
winter, only the bright frost of purpose.  As she came, her mother turned
as though to leave Dyck Calhoun.  She called to her to wait, and Mrs.
Llyn stood still, anxious.  As Sheila came near she kept her eyes fixed
on Dyck.  When she reached them, she held out the paper to him.

"It is wonderful," she said quietly, "that which you have written, but it
does not tell all; it does not say that you did not kill my father.  You
are punished for the crime, and we must abide by it, even though you did
not kill Erris Boyne.  It is the law that has done it, and we cannot
abash the law."

"We shall meet no more then!" said Dyck with decision.

Her lips tightened, her face paled.  "There are some things one may not
do, and one of them is to be openly your friend--at present."

He put the letter carefully away in his pocket, his hand shaking, then
flicking an insect from the collar of his coat, he said gently, yet with
an air of warning: "I have been telling Mrs. Llyn about the Maroons up
there"--he pointed towards Trelawney--"and I have advised your going back
to Virginia.  The Maroons may rise at any moment, and no care is being
taken by Lord Mallow to meet the danger.  If they rise, you, here, would
be in their way, and I could not guarantee your safety.  Besides,
Virginia is a better place--a safer place than this," he added with
meaning.

"You wish to frighten me out of Jamaica," she replied with pain in her
voice.  "Well, I will not go till I have put this place in order and
brought discipline and good living here.  I shall stay here in Jamaica
till I have done my task.  There is no reason why we should meet.  This
place is not so large as Ireland or America, but it is large enough to
give assurance we shall not meet.  And if we meet, there is no reason why
we should talk.  As for the Maroons, when the trouble comes, I shall not
be unprepared."  She smiled sadly.  "The governor may not take your
advice, but I shall.  And remember that I come from a land not without
its dangers.  We have Red Indians and black men there, and I can shoot."

He waved a hand abruptly and then made a gesture--such as an ascetic
might make-of reflection, of submission.  "I shall remember every word
you have said, and every note of your voice will be with me in all the
lonely years to come.  Good-bye--but no, let me say this before I go:
I did not know that Erris Boyne was your father until after he was dead.
So, if I killed him, it was in complete ignorance.  I did not know.  But
we have outlived our friendship, and we must put strangeness in its
place.  Good-bye--God protect you!" he added, looking into Sheila's
eyes.

She looked at him with sorrow.  Her lips opened but no words came forth.
He passed on out of the garden, and presently they heard his horse's
hoofs on the sand.

"He is a great gentleman," said Mrs. Llyn.

Her daughter's eyes were dry and fevered.  Her lips were drawn.  "We must
begin the world again," she said brokenly.  Then suddenly she sank upon
the ground.  "My God--oh, my God!" she said.




CHAPTER XIX

LORD MALLOW INTERVENES

Two months went by.  In that time Sheila and Dyck did not meet, though
Dyck saw her more than once in the distance at Kingston.  Yet they had
never met since that wonderful day at Salem, when they had parted, as
it might seem, for ever.  Dyck had had news of her, however, for Darius
Boland had come and gone between the two plantations, and had won Michael
Clones' confidence.  He knew more perhaps than he ever conveyed to Dyck,
who saw him and talked with him, gave him advice as to the customs of
Jamaica, and let him see the details in the management of Enniskillen.

Yet Dyck made no inquiries as to how Mrs. Llyn and Sheila were; first
because he chose not to do so, and also because Darius Boland, at one
time or another, would of his own accord tell what Mrs. Llyn and Sheila
were doing.  One day Boland brought word that the governor had, more than
once, visited Salem with his suite; that he had sat in judgment on a case
in Kingston concerning the estate of Salem, and had given decision in its
favour; and that Mrs. Llyn and Sheila visited him at Spanish Town and
were entertained at King's House at second breakfast and dinner--in
short, that Lord Mallow was making hay in Salem Plantation.  This was no
surprise to Dyck.  He had full intuition of the foray the governor would
make on Sheila, her estate and wealth.

Lord Mallow had acted with discretion, and yet with sufficient passion to
warrant some success.  He was trying to make for himself a future which
might mean the control of a greater colony even.  If he had wealth, that
would be almost a certainty, and he counted Sheila's gold as a guarantee
of power.  He knew well how great effect could be produced at Westminster
and at the Royal Palace by a discreet display of wealth.  He was also
aware that no scandal could be made through an alliance with Sheila, for
she had inherited long after the revolutionary war and with her skirts
free from responsibility.  England certainly would welcome wealth got
through an Irish girl inheriting her American uncle's estates.  So,
steadily and happily, he pressed his suit.  At his dinner-parties he
gave her first place nearly always, and even broke the code controlling
precedence when his secretary could be overruled.  Thus Sheila was given
honour when she did not covet it, and so it was that one day at Salem
when the governor came to court her she was able to help Dyck Calhoun.

"Then you go to Enniskillen?" Lord Mallow said to Darius Boland, as he
entered the plantation, being met by the astute American.

"Sometimes, your honour," was the careful reply.  "I suppose you know
what Mr. Calhoun's career has been, eh?"

"Oh, in a way, your honour.  They tell me he is a good swordsman."

The governor flushed.  "He told you that, did he?"

"No, no, your honour, never.  He told me naught.  He does not boast.
He's as modest as a man from Virginia.  He does not brag at all."

"Who told you, then?"

"Ah, well, I heard it in the town!  They speak of him there.  They all
know that Kingston and Spanish Town, and all the other places, would have
been French by now, if it hadn't been for him.  Oh, they talk a lot about
him in Kingston and thereabouts!"

"What swordsmanship do they speak of that was remarkable?"

"Has your honour forgotten, then?  Sure, seven years is a poor limit for
a good memory."  The blow was a shrewd one, for Darius Boland knew that
Phoenix Park must be a galling memory to his honour.  But Darius did not
care.  He guessed why the governor was coming to Salem, and he could not
shirk having his hand in it.  He had no fear of the results.

"Aye, seven years is a poor limit," he repeated.

The governor showed no feeling.  He had been hit, and he took it as part
of the game.  "Ah, you mean the affair in Phoenix Park?" he said with no
apparent feeling.

Darius tossed his head a little.  "Wasn't it a clever bit of work?
Didn't he get fame there by defeating one of the best swordsmen--in
Ireland?"

Lord Mallow nodded.  "He got fame, which he lost in time," he answered.

"You mean he put the sword that had done such good work against a
champion into a man's bowels, without 'by your leave,' or 'will you draw
and fight'?"

"Something like that," answered the governor sagely.

"Is it true you believed he'd strike a man that wasn't armed, sir?"

The governor winced, but showed nothing.  "He'd been drinking--he is a
heavy drinker.  Do you never drink with him?"

Darius Boland's face took on a strange look.  Here was an intended insult
to Dyck Calhoun.  Right well the governor knew their relative social
positions.  Darius pulled at the hair on his chin reflectively.  "Yes,
I've drunk his liquor, but not as you mean, your honour.  He'd drink with
any man at all: he has no nasty pride.  But he doesn't drink with me."
"Modest enough he is to be a good republican, eh, Boland?"

"Since your honour puts it so, it must stand.  I'll not dispute it, me
being what I am and employed by whom I am."

Darius Boland had a gift of saying the right thing in the right way, and
he had said it now.  The governor was not so dense as to put this man
against him, for women were curious folk.  They often attach importance
to the opinion of a faithful servant and let it weigh against great men.
He had once lost a possible fortune by spurning a little terrier of the
daughter of the Earl of Shallow, and the lesson had sunk deep into his
mind.  He was high-placed, but not so high as to be sure of success where
a woman was concerned, and he had made up his mind to capture Sheila
Llyn, if so be she could be caught flying, or settled, or sleeping.

"Ah, well, he has drunk with worse men than republicans.  Boland.  He was
a common sailor.  He drank what was given him with whom it chanced in the
fo'castle."

Darius sniffed a little, and kept his head.  "But he changed all that,
your honour, and gave sailormen better drink than they ever had, I hear.
In Jamaica he treats his slaves as though they were men and not
Mohicans."

"Well, he'll have less freedom in future, Boland, for word has come from
London that he's to keep to his estate and never leave it."

Darius looked concerned, and his dry face wrinkled still more.  "Ah, and
when was this word come, your honour?"

"But yesterday, Boland, and he'll do well to obey, for I have no choice
but to take him in hand if he goes gallivanting."

"Gallivanting--here, in Jamaica!  Does your honour remember where we
are?"

"Not in a bishop's close, Boland."

"No, not in a bishop's close, nor in an archdeacon's garden.  For of all
places on earth where they defy religion, this is the worst, your honour.
There's as much religion here as you'll find in a last year's bird's-
nest.  Gallivanting--where should he gallivant?"

The governor waved a contemptuous hand.  "It doesn't need ingenuity to
find a place, for some do it on their own estate.  I have seen it."

Darius spoke sharply.  "Your honour, there's naught on Mr. Calhoun's
estate that's got the taint, and he's not the man to go hunting for it.
Drink--well, suppose a gentleman does take his quartern, is it a crime?
I ask your honour, is that a crime in Jamaica?"

"It's no crime, Boland; nevertheless, your Mr. Calhoun will have to take
his fill on his own land from the day I send him the command of the
London Government."

"And what day will that be, your honour?"

To be questioned by one who had been a revolutionary was distasteful to
the governor.  "That day will be when I find the occasion opportune, my
brave Boland," he said sourly.

"Why 'brave,' your honour?"  There was an ominous light in Darius' eye.

"Did you not fight with George Washington against the King of England--
against King George?  And if you did, was that not brave?"

"It was true, your honour," came the firm reply.  "It was the one right
good thing to do, as we proved it by the victory we had.  We did what we
set out to do.  But see, if you will let a poor man speak his mind, if I
were you I'd not impose the command on Mr. Calhoun."

"Why, Boland?"

Darius spoke courageously.  "Your honour, he has many friends in Jamaica,
and they won't stand it.  Besides, he won't stand it.  And if he contests
your honour, the island will be with him."

"Is he popular here as all that?" asked the governor with a shrug of the
shoulders.

"They don't give their faith and confidence to order, your honour,"
answered Darius with a dry inflection.

The burr in the voice did not escape the other's attentive ear.  He swung
a glance sharply at Darius.  "What is the secret of his popularity--how
has it been made?" he asked morosely.

Darius' face took on a caustic look.  "He's only been in the island a
short time, your honour, and I don't know that I'm a good judge, but I'll
say the people here have great respect for bravery and character."

"Character!  Character!" sniffed the governor.  "Where did he get that?"

"Well, I don't know his age, but it's as old as he is--his character.
Say, I'm afraid I'm talking too much, your honour.  We speak our minds
in Virginia; we never count the cost."

The governor waved a deprecating hand.  "You'll find the measure of your
speech in good time, Boland, I've no doubt.  Meanwhile, you've got the
pleasure of hunting it.  Character, you say.  Well, that isn't what the
judge and jury said."

Darius took courage again.  Couldn't Lord Mallow have any decency?

"Judge and jury be damned, your honour," he answered boldly.  "It was an
Irish verdict.  It had no sense.  It was a bit of ballyhack.  He did not
kill an unarmed man.  It isn't his way.  Why, he didn't kill you when he
had you at his mercy in Phoenix Park, now, did he, governor?"

A flush stole up the governor's face from his chin.  Then he turned to
Boland and looked him straight in the eyes.  "That's true.  He had me at
his mercy, and he did not take my life."

"Then, why do you head the cabal against him?  Why do you take joy in
commanding him to stay on his estate?  Is that grateful, your honour?"

The governor winced, but he said: "It's what I am ordered to do, my man.
I'm a servant of the Crown, and the Crown has ordained it."

Again Darius grew stronger in speech.  "But why do you have pleasure in
it?  Is nothing left to your judgment?  Do you say to me that if he keeps
the freedom such as he has enjoyed, you'd punish him?  Must the governor
be as ruthless as his master?  Look, your honour, I wouldn't impose that
command--not till I'd taken his advice about the Maroons anyway.  There's
trouble brewing, and Mr. Calhoun knows it.  He has warned you through the
provost-marshal.  I'd heed his warning, your honour, or it may injure
your reputation as a ruler.  No, I'd see myself in nethermost hell before
I'd meddle with Mr. Calhoun.  He's a dangerous man, when he's moved."

"Boland, you'll succeed as a schoolmaster, when all else fails.  You
teach persistently."

"Your honour is clever enough to know what's what, but I'd like to see
the Maroons dealt with.  This is not my country, but I've got interests
here, or my mistress has, and that's the same to me.  .  .  .  Does your
honour travel often without a suite?"

The governor waved a hand behind him.  "I left them at the last
plantation, and rode on alone.  I felt safe enough till I saw you,
Boland."

He smiled grimly, and a grimmer smile stole to the lean lips of the
manager of Salem.  "Fear is a good thing for forward minds, your honour,"
he said with respect in the tone of his voice and challenge in the words.

"I'll say this, Boland, your mistress has been fortunate in her staff.
You have a ready tongue."

"Oh, I'm readier in other things, your honour, as you'd find on occasion.
But I thank you for the compliment in a land where compliments are few.
For a planter's country it has few who speak as well as they entertain.
I'll say this for the land you govern, the hospitality is rich and rare."

"In what way, Boland?"

"Why, your honour, it is the custom for a man and his whole family to go
on a visit to a neighbour, perhaps twenty or forty miles away, bring
their servants--maybe a dozen or more--and sit down on their neighbour's
hearthstone.  There they eat his food, drink his wine, exhaust his fowl-
yard and debilitate his cook--till all the resources of the place are
played out; then with both hands round his friend's neck the man and his
people will say adieu, and go back to their own accumulated larder and
await the return visit.  The wonder is Jamaica is so rich, for truly the
waste is harmful.  We have the door open in Virginia, but not in that
way.  We welcome, but we don't debauch."

The governor smiled.  "As you haven't old friends here, you should make
your life a success--ah, there is the open door, Boland, and your
mistress standing in it.  But I come without my family, and with no fell
purposes.  I will not debilitate the cook; I will not exhaust the fowl-
yard.  A roasted plantain is good enough for me."

Darius' looks quickened, and he jerked his chin up.  "So, your honour,
so.  But might I ask that you weigh carefully the warning of Mr. Calhoun.
There's trouble at Trelawny.  I have it from good sources, and Mr.
Calhoun has made preparations against the sure risings.  I'd take heed of
what he says.  He knows.  Your honour, it is not my mistress in the
doorway, it is Mrs. Llyn; she is shorter than my mistress."

The governor shaded his brow with his hands.  Then he touched up his
horse.  "Yes, you are right, Boland.  It is Mrs. Llyn.  And look you,
Boland, I'll think over what you've said about the Maroons and Mr.
Calhoun.  He's doing no harm as he is, that's sure.  So why shouldn't he
go on as he is?  That's your argument, isn't it?"

Boland nodded.  "It's part of my argument, not all of it.  Of course he's
doing no harm; he's doing good every day.  He's got a stiff hand for the
shirker and the wanton, but he's a man that knows his mind, and that's a
good thing in Jamaica."

"Does he come here-ever?"

"He has been here only once since our arrival.  There are reasons why he
does not come, as your honour kens, knowing the history of Erris Boyne."

A quarter of an hour later Darius Boland said to Sheila: "He's got an
order from England to keep Mr. Calhoun to his estate and to punish him,
if he infringes the order."

Sheila started.  "He will infringe the order if it's made, Boland.  But
the governor will be unwise to try and impose it.  I will tell him so."

"But, mistress, he should not be told that this news comes from me."

"No, he should not, Boland.  I can tempt him to speak of it, I think.
He hates Mr. Calhoun, and will not need much prompting."

Sheila had changed since she saw Dyck Calhoun last.  Her face was
thinner, but her form was even fuller than it was when she had bade him
good-bye, as it seemed to him for ever, and as it at first seemed to her.
Through anxious days and nights she had fought with the old passion; and
at last it seemed the only way to escape from the torture was by making
all thought of him impossible.  How could this be done?  Well, Lord
Mallow would offer a way.  Lord Mallow was a man of ancient Irish family,
was a governor, had ability, was distinguished-looking in a curious lean
way; and he had a real gift with his tongue.  He stood high in the
opinion of the big folk at Westminster, and had a future.  He had a
winning way with women--a subtle, perniciously attractive way with her
sex, and to herself he had been delicately persuasive.  He had the
ancient gift of picturesqueness without ornamentation.  He had a strong
will and a healthy imagination.  He was a man of mettle and decision.

Of all who had entered her field outside of Dyck Calhoun he was the most
attractive; he was the nearest to the possible husband which she must one
day take.  And if at any day at all, why not now when she needed a man as
she had never done--when she needed to forget?  The sardonic critic might
ask why she did not seek forgetfulness in flight; why she remained in
Jamaica where was what she wished to forget.  There was no valid reason,
save a business one, why she should remain in Jamaica, and she was in a
quandary when she put the question.  There were, however, other reasons
which she used when all else failed to satisfy her exigeant mind.  There
was the question of vessels to Virginia or New York.  They were few and
not good, and in any case they could have no comfortable journey to the
United States for several weeks at least, for, since the revolutionary
war, commerce with the United States was sparse.

Also, there was the question of Salem.  She did not feel she ought to
waste the property which her Uncle Bryan had nurtured with care.  In
justice to his memory, and in fairness to Darius Boland, she felt she
ought to stay--for a time.  It did not occur to her that these reasons
would vanish like mist--that a wilful woman would sweep them into the
basket of forgetfulness, and do what she wished in spite of reason: that
all else would be sacrificed, if the spirit so possessed her.  Truth was
that, far back in her consciousness, there was a vision of better days
and things.  It was as though some angel touched the elbow of her spirit
and said: "Stay on, for things will be better than they seem.  You will
find your destiny here.  Stay on."

So she had stayed.  She was deluding herself to believe that what she was
doing was all for the best; that the clouds were rising; that her fate
had fairer aspects than had seemed possible when Dyck Calhoun told her
the terrible tale of the death of her father, Erris Boyne.  Yet memory
gave a touch of misery and bitterness to all she thought and did.  For
twenty-five years she had lived in ignorance as to her paternity.  It
surely was futile that her mother should have suffered all those years,
with little to cheer her, while her daughter should be radiant in health
and with a mind free from care or sadness.  Yet the bitterest thing of
all was the thought that her father was a traitor, and had died
sacrificing another man.  When Dyck had told her first, she had shivered
with anger and shame--but anger and shame had gone.  Only one thing gave
her any comfort--the man who knew Erris Boyne was a traitor, and could
profit by telling it, held his tongue for her own sake, kept his own
counsel, and went to prison for four years as the price of his silence.
He was now her neighbour and he loved her, and, if the shadow of a grave
was not between them, would offer himself in marriage to her.  This she
knew beyond all doubt.  He had given all a man can give--had saved her
and killed her father--in ignorance had killed her father; in love had
saved herself.  What was to be done?

In a strange spirit Sheila entered the room where the governor sat with
her mother.  She had reached the limit of her powers of suffering.  Soon
after her mother had left the room, the governor said:

"Why do you think I have come here to-day?"

He added to the words a note of sympathy, even of passion in his voice.

"It was to visit my mother and myself, and to see how Salem looks after
our stay on it, was it not?"

"Yes, to see your mother and yourself, but chiefly the latter.  As for
Salem, it looks as though a mastermind had been at work, I see it in
everything.  The slaves are singing.  Listen!"

He held up a finger as though to indicate attention and direction.

                        "One, two, three,
                         All de same;
                         Black, white, brown,
                         All de same;
                         All de same.
                         One, two, three--"

They could hear the words indistinctly.

"What do the words mean?" asked Sheila.  "I don't understand them."

"No more do I, but I think they refer to the march of pestilence or
plague.  Numbers, colour, race, nothing matters, the plague sweeps all
away.  Ah, then, I was right," he added.  "There is the story in other
words.  Listen again."

To clapping of hands in unison, the following words were sung:

                        "New-come buckra,
                         He get sick,
                         He tak fever,
                         He be die;
                         He be die.
                         New-come buckra--"

"Well, it may be a chant of the plague, but it's lacking in poetry," she
remarked.  "Doesn't it seem so to you?"

"No, I certainly shouldn't go so far as that.  Think of how much of a
story is crowded into those few words.  No waste, nothing thrown away.
It's all epic, or that's my view, anyhow," said the governor.  "If you
look out on those who are singing it, you'd see they are resting from
their labours; that they are fighting the ennui which most of us feel
when we rest from our labours.  Let us look at them."

The governor stood up and came to the open French windows that faced the
fields of sugar-cane.  In the near distance were clumps of fruit trees,
of hedges of lime and flowering shrubs, rows of orange trees, mangoes,
red and purple, forbidden-fruit and grapefruit, the large scarlet fruit
of the acqui, the avocado-pear, the feathering bamboo, and the Jack-fruit
tree, with its enormous fruit like pumpkins.  Parrots were chattering in
the acacia and in the Otaheite plum tree, with its bright pink blossoms
like tassels, and flanking the negro huts by the river were bowers of
grenadilla fruit.  Around the negro huts were small individual
plantations kept by the slaves, for which they had one day a fortnight,
besides Sundays, free to work on their own account.  Here and there also
were patches of "ground-fruit," as the underground vegetables were
called, while there passed by on their way to the open road leading to
Kingston wains loaded with sugar-casks, drawn by oxen, and in two cases
by sumpter mules.

"Is there anything finer than that in Virginia?" asked the governor.
"I have never been in Virginia, but I take this to be in some ways like
that state.  Is it?"

"In some ways only.  We have not the same profusion of wild fruits and
trees, but we have our share--and it is not so hot as here.  It is a
better country, though."

"In what way is it better?" the governor asked almost acidly.

"It is better governed."

"What do you mean by that?  Isn't Jamaica well governed?"

"Not so well that it couldn't be improved," was Sheila's reply.

"What improvements would you suggest?" Lord Mallow asked urbanely, for
he was set to play his cards carefully to-day.

"More wisdom in the governor," was the cheerful and bright reply.

"Is he lacking in wisdom?"

"In some ways, yes."

"Will you mind specifying some of the things?"

"I think he is careless."

"Careless--as to what?"

Sheila smiled.  "He is indifferent to good advice.  He has been told of
trouble among the Maroons, that they mean to rise; he has been advised to
make preparations, and he makes none, and he is deceived by a show of
loyalty on the part of the slaves.  Lord Mallow, if the free Maroons
rise, why should not the black slaves rise at the same time?  Why do you
not act?"

"Is everybody whose good opinion is worth having mad?" answered the
governor.  "I have sent my inspectors to Trelawney.  I have had reports
from them.  I have used every care--what would you have me do?"

"Used every care?  Why don't you ensure the Maroons peaceableness by
advancing on them?  Why don't you take them prisoners?  They are enraged
that two of their herdsmen should be whipped by a negro-slave under the
order of one of your captains.  They are angry and disturbed and have
ambushed the roads to Trelawney, so I'm told."

"Did Mr. Calhoun tell you that when he was here?"

"It was not that which Mr. Calhoun told me the only time he came here.
But who Erris Boyne was.  I never knew till, in his honour, he told me,
coming here for that purpose.  I never knew who my father was till he
told me.  My mother had kept it from me all my life."

The governor looked alert.  "And you have not seen him since that day?"

"I have seen him, but I have not spoken to him.  It was in the distance
only."

"I understand your manager, Mr. Boland, sees him."

"My manager does not share my private interests--or troubles.  He is free
to go where he will, to speak to whom he chooses.  He visits Enniskillen,
I suppose--it is a well-managed plantation on Jamaican lines, and its
owner is a man of mark."

Sheila spoke without agitation of any kind; her face was firm and calm,
her manner composed, her voice even.  As she talked, she seemed to be
probing the centre of a flower which she had caught from a basket at the
window, and her whole personality was alight and vivifying, her good
temper and spirit complete.  As he looked at her, he had an overmastering
desire to make her his own--his wife.  She was worth hundreds of
thousands of pounds; she had beauty, ability and authority.  She was the
acme of charm and good bearing.  With her he could climb high on the
ladder of life.  He might be a really great figure in the British world-
if she gave her will to help him, to hold up his hands.  It had never
occurred to him that Dyck Calhoun could be a rival, till he had heard of
Dyck's visit to Sheila and her mother, till he had heard Sheila praise
him at the first dinner he had given to the two ladies on Christmas Day.

On that day it was clear Sheila did not know who her father was; but
stranger things had happened than that she should take up with, and even
marry, a man imprisoned for killing another, even one who had been
condemned as a mutineer, and had won freedom by saving the king's navy.
But now that Sheila knew the truth there could be no danger!  Dyck
Calhoun would be relegated to his proper place in the scheme of things.
Who was there to stand between him and his desire?  What was there to
stay the great event?  He himself was a peer and high-placed, for it
was a time when the West Indian Islands were a centre of the world's
fighting, where men like Rodney had made everlasting fame; where the
currents of world-controversy challenged, met and fought for control.

The West Indies was as much a cock-pit of the fighting powers as ever
Belgium was; and in those islands there was wealth and the power which
wealth buys; the clash of white and black and coloured peoples; the naval
contests on the sea; the horrible massacres and enslavement of free white
peoples, as in St. Domingo and Grenada; the dominating attacks of people
fighting for control--peoples of old empires like France and Spain, and
new empires like that of Britain.  These were a centre of colonial life
as important as had been the life in Virginia and New York and the New
England States and Canada--indeed, more important than Canada in one
sense, for the West Indies brought wealth to the British Isles, and had a
big export trade.  He lost no time in bringing matters to an issue.

He got to his feet and came near to her.  His eyes were inflamed with
passion, his manner was impressive.  He had a distinguished face, become
more distinguished since his assumption of governorship, and authority
had increased his personality.

"A man of mark!" he said.  "You mean a marked man.  Let me tell you I
have an order from the British Government to confine him to his estate;
not to permit him to leave it; and, if he does, to arrest him.  That is
my commanded duty.  You approve, do you not?  Or are you like most women,
soft at heart to bold criminals?"

Sheila did not reply at once.  The news was no news to her, for Darius
Boland had told her; but she thought it well to let the governor think
he had made a new, sensational statement.

"No," she said at last, looking him calmly in the eyes.  "I have no soft
feelings for criminals as criminals, none at all.  And there is every
reason why I should be adamant to this man, Dyck Calhoun.  But, Lord
Mallow, I would go carefully about this, if I were you.  He is a man who
takes no heed of people, high or low, and has no fear of consequences.
Have you thought of the consequences to yourself?  Suppose he resists,
what will you do?"

"If he resists I will attack him with due force."

"You mean you will send your military and police to attack him?"  The
gibe was covered, but it found the governor's breast.  He knew what she
was meaning.

"You would not expect me to do police work, would you?  Is that what your
president does?  What your great George Washington does?  Does he make
the state arrests with his own hand?"

"I have no doubt he would if the circumstances were such as to warrant
it.  He has no small vices, and no false feelings.  He has proved
himself," she answered boldly.

"Well, in that case," responded Lord Mallow irritably, "the event will be
as is due.  The man is condemned by my masters, and he must submit to my
authority.  He is twice a criminal, and--"

"And yet a hero and a good swordsman, and as honest as men are made in a
dishonest world.  Your Admiralty and your government first pardoned the
man, and then gave him freedom on the island which you tried to prevent;
and now they turn round and confine him to his acres.  Is that pardon in
a real sense?  Did you write to the government and say he ought not to be
free to roam, lest he should discover more treasure-chests and buy
another estate?  Was it you?"

The governor shook his head.  "No, not I.  I told the government in
careful and unrhetorical language the incident of his coming here, and
what I did, and my reasons for doing it--that was all."

"And you being governor they took your advice.  See, my lord, if this
thing is done to him it will be to your own discomfiture.  It will hurt
you in the public service."

"Why, to hear you speak, mistress, it would almost seem you had a
fondness for the man who killed your father, who went to jail for it,
and--"

"And became a mutineer," intervened the girl flushing.  "Why not say all?
Why not catalogue his offences?  Fondness for the man who killed my
father, you say!  Yes, I had a deep and sincere fondness for him ever
since I met him at Playmore over seven years ago.  Yes, a fondness which
only his crime makes impossible.  But in all that really matters I am
still his friend.  He did not know he was killing my father, who had no
claims upon me, none at all, except that through him I have life and
being; but it is enough to separate us for ever in the eyes of the world,
and in my eyes.  Not morally, of course, but legally and actually.  He
and I are as far apart as winter and summer; we are parted for ever and
ever and ever."

Now at last she was inflamed.  Every nerve in her was alive.  All she had
ever felt for Dyck Calhoun came rushing to the surface, demanding
recognition, reasserting itself.  As she used the words, "ever and ever
and ever," it was like a Cordelia bidding farewell to Lear, her father,
for ever, for there was that in her voice which said: "It is final
separation, it is the judgment of Jehovah, and I must submit.  It is the
last word."

Lord Mallow saw his opportunity, and did not hesitate.  "No, you are
wrong, wholly wrong," he said.  "I did not bias what I said in my report
--a report I was bound to make--by any covert prejudice against Mr.
Calhoun.  I guarded myself especially"--there he lied, but he was an
incomparable liar--"lest it should be used against him.  It would appear,
however, that the new admiral's report with mine were laid together, and
the government came to its conclusion accordingly.  So I am bound to do
my duty."

"If you--oh, if you did your duty, you would not obey the command of the
government.  Are there not times when to obey is a crime, and is not this
one of them?  Lord Mallow, you would be doing as great a crime as Mr.
Dyck Calhoun ever committed, or could commit, if you put this order into
actual fact.  You are governor here, and your judgment would be accepted
--remember it is an eight weeks' journey to London at the least, and what
might not happen in that time!  Are you not given discretion?"

The governor nodded.  "Yes, I am given discretion, but this is an order."

"An order!" she commented.  "Then if it should not be fulfilled, break
it and take the consequences.  The principle should be--Do what is right,
and have no fear."

"I will think it over," answered the governor.  "What you say has immense
weight with me--more even than I have words to say.  Yes, I will think it
over--I promise you.  You are a genius--you prevail."

Her face softened, a new something came into her manner.  "You do truly
mean it?" she asked with lips that almost trembled.

It seemed to her that to do this thing for Dyck Calhoun was the least
that was possible, and it was perhaps the last thing she might ever be
able to do.  She realized how terrible it would be for him to be shorn of
the liberty he had always had; how dangerous it might be in many ways;
and how the people of the island might become excited by it--and
troublesome.

"Yes, I mean it," answered Lord Mallow.  "I mean it exactly as I say it."

She smiled.  "Well, that should recommend you for promotion," she said
happily.  "I am sure you will decide not to enforce the order, if you
think about it.  You shall be promoted, your honour, to a better place,"
she repeated, half-satirically.

"Shall I then?" he asked with a warm smile and drawing close to her.
"Shall I?  Then it can only be by your recommendation.  Ah, my dear, my
beautiful dear one," he hastened to add, "my life is possible
henceforward only through you.  You have taught me by your life and
person, by your beauty and truth, by your nobility of mind and character
how life should be lived.  I have not always deserved your good opinion
nor that of others.  I have fought duels and killed men; I have aspired
to place; I have connived at appointment; I have been vain, overbearing
and insistent on my rights or privileges; I have played the dictator here
in Jamaica; I have not been satisfied save to get my own way; but you
have altered all that.  Your coming here has given me a new outlook.
Sheila, you have changed me, and you can change me infinitely more.
I who have been a master wish to become your slave.  I want you--beloved,
I want you for my wife."

He reached out as though to take her hand, but she drew back from him.
His thrilling words had touched her, as she had seldom been touched, as
she had never been touched by any one save the man that must never be
hers; she was submerged for the moment in the flood of his eloquence, and
his yielding to her on the point of Dyck's imprisonment gave fresh accent
to his words.  Yet she could not, she dared not yet say yes to his
demand.

"My lord," she said, "oh, you have stirred me!  Yet I dare not reply to
you as you wish.  Life is hard as it is, and you have suddenly made it
harder.  What is more, I do not, I cannot, believe you.  You have loved
many.  Your life has been a covert menace.  Oh, I know what they said of
you in Ireland.  I know not of your life here.  I suppose it is
circumspect now; but in Ireland it was declared you were notorious with
women."

"It is a lie," he answered.  "I was not notorious.  I was no better and
no worse than many another man.  I played, I danced attendance, I said
soft nothings, but I was tied to no woman in all Ireland.  I was
frolicsome and adventurous, but no more.  There is no woman who can
say I used her ill or took from her what I did not--"

"Atone for, Lord Mallow?"

"Atone--no.  What I did not give return for, was what I was going to
say."

The situation was intense.  She was in a place from which there was no
escape except by flight or refusal.  She did not really wish to refuse.
Somehow, there had come upon her the desire to put all t