ill
be killed. A large crowd will gather. Then let the Guilford Grays charge
one side, the Reidsville Light Infantry the other, with fixed bayonets,
and a man with a hat commence taking up a collection in the rear. By
this means they can be readily driven into the hall and the door locked.

I have studied a long time about devising a plan for obtaining pay from
the audience and have finally struck upon the only feasible one I think.

After the performance let some one come out on the stage and announce
that James Forbis will speak two hours. The result, easily explainable
by philosophical and psychological reasons, will be as follows: The
minds of the audience, elated and inspired by the hope of immediate
departure when confronted by such a terror-inspiring and dismal
prospect, will collapse with the fearful reaction which will take place,
and for a space of time they will remain in a kind of comatose,
farewell-vain-world condition. Now, as this is the time when the
interest of the evening is at its highest pitch, let the melodious
strains of the orchestra steal forth as a committee appointed by the
managers of lawyers, druggists, doctors, and revenue officers, go around
and relieve the audience of the price of admission for each one. Where
one person has no money let it be made up from another, but on no
account let the whole sum taken be more than the just amount at usual
rates.

As I said before, the characters in the play are purely imaginary, and
therefore not to be confounded with real persons. But lest any one,
feeling some of the idiosyncrasies and characteristics apply too
forcibly to his own high moral and irreproachable self, should allow his
warlike and combative spirits to arise, you might as you go, kind of
casually like, produce the impression that I rarely miss my aim with a
Colt's forty-five, but if that does not have the effect of quieting the
splenetic individual, and be still thirsts for Bill Slax's gore, just
inform him that if he comes out Here he can't get any whiskey within two
days' journey of my present abode, and water will have to be his only
beverage while on the warpath. This, I am sure, will avert the bloody
and direful conflict.

Accept my lasting regards and professions of respect.

Ever yours,

Bill Slax


            *       *       *       *


To Dr. W. P. Beall

My Dear Doctor: I wish you a happy, &c., and all that sort of thing,
don't you know, &c., &c. I send you a few little productions in the way
of poetry, &c, which, of course, were struck off in an idle moment. Some
of the pictures are not good likenesses, and so I have not labelled
them, which you may do as fast [as] you discover whom they represent, as
some of them resemble others more than themselves, but the poems are
good without exception, and will compare favorably with Baron Alfred's
latest on spring.

I have just come from a hunt, in which I mortally wounded a wild hog,
and as my boots are full of thorns I can't write any longer than this
paper will contain, for it's all I've got, because I'm too tired to
write any more for the reason that I have no news to tell.

I see by the Patriot that you are Superintendent of Public Health, and
assure you that all such upward rise as you make like that will ever be
witnessed with interest and pleasure by me, &c., &c. Give my regards to
Dr. and Mrs. Hall. It would be uncomplimentary to your powers of
perception as well as superfluous to say that I will now close and
remain, yours truly,

W. S. Porter


            *       *       *       *


Letter to Dr. W. P. Beall

La Salle County, Texas, February 27, 1884

My Dear Doctor: Your appreciated epistle of the 18th received. I was
very glad to hear from you. I hope to hear again if such irrelevant
correspondence will not interfere with your duties as Public Health
Eradicator, which I believe is the office you hold under county
authority. I supposed the very dramatic Shakespearian comedy to be the
last, as I heard nothing from you previous before your letter, and was
about to write another of a more exciting character, introducing several
bloody single combats, a dynamite explosion, a ladies' oyster supper for
charitable purposes, &c., also comprising some mysterious sub rosa
transactions known only to myself and a select few, new songs and
dances, and the Greensboro Poker Club. Having picked up a few points
myself relative to this latter amusement, I feel competent to give a
lucid, glittering portrait of the scenes presented under its auspices.
But if the former drama has reached you safely, I will refrain from
burdening you any more with the labors of general stage manager, &c.

If long hair, part of a sombrero, Mexican spurs, &c., would make a
fellow famous, I already occupy a topmost niche in the Temple Frame. If
my wild, untamed aspect had not been counteracted by my well-known
benevolent and amiable expression of countenance, I would have been
arrested long ago by the Rangers on general suspicions of murder and
horse stealing. In fact, I owe all my present means of lugubrious living
to my desperate and bloodthirsty appearance, combined with the confident
and easy way in which I tackle a Winchester rifle. There is a gentleman
who lives about fifteen miles from the ranch, who for amusement and
recreation, and not altogether without an eye to the profit, keeps a
general merchandise store. This gent, for the first few months has been
trying very earnestly to sell me a little paper, which I would like much
to have, but am not anxious to purchase. Said paper is my account,
receipted. Occasionally he is absent, and the welcome news coming to my
ear, I mount my fiery boss and gallop wildly up to the store, enter with
something of the sang froid, grace, abandon and recherche nonchalance
with which Charles Yates ushers ladies and gentlemen to their seats in
the opera-house, and, nervously fingering my butcher knife, fiercely
demand goods and chattels of the clerk. This plan always succeeds. This
is by way of explanation of this vast and unnecessary stationery of
which this letter is composed. I am always in too big a hurry to demur
at kind and quality, but when I get to town I will write you on small
gilt-edged paper that would suit even the fastidious and discriminating
taste of a Logan.

When I get to the city, which will be shortly, I will send you some
account of this country and its inmates. You are right, I have almost
forgotten what a regular old, gum-chewing, ice-cream destroying, opera
ticket vortex, ivory-clawing girl looks like. Last summer a very fair
specimen of this kind ranged over about Fort Snell, and I used to ride
over twice a week on mail days and chew the end of my riding whip while
she "Stood on the Bridge" and "Gathered up Shells on the Sea Shore" and
wore the "Golden Slippers." But she has vamoosed, and my ideas on the
subject are again growing dim.

If you see anybody about to start to Texas to live, especially to this
part, if you will take your scalpyouler and sever the jugular vein, cut
the brachiopod artery and hamstring him, after he knows what you have
done for him he will rise and call you blessed. This country is a silent
but eloquent refutation of Bob Ingersoll's theory: a man here gets
prematurely insane, melancholy and unreliable and finally dies of lead
poisoning, in his boots, while in a good old land like Greensboro a man
can die, as they do every day, with all the benefits of the clergy.

W. S. Porter


            *       *       *       *


Austin, Texas, April 21, 1885.

Dear Dave: I take my pen in hand to let you know that I am well, and
hope these few lines will find you as well as can be expected.

I carried out your parting injunction of a floral nature with all the
solemnity and sacredness that I would have bestowed upon a dying man's
last request. Promptly at half-past three I repaired to the robbers'
den, commonly known as Radams Horticultural and Vegetable Emporium, and
secured the high-priced offerings, according to promise. I asked if the
bouquets were ready, and the polite but piratical gentleman in charge
pointed proudly to two objects on the counter reposing in a couple of
vases, and said they were.

I then told him I feared there was some mistake, as no buttonhole
bouquets had been ordered, but he insisted on his former declaration,
and so I brought them away and sent them to their respective
destinations.

I thought it a pity to spoil a good deck of cards by taking out only
one, so I bundled up the whole deck, and inserted them in the bouquet,
but finally concluded it would not be right to violet (JOKE) my promise
and I rose (JOKE) superior to such a mean trick and sent only one as
directed.

I have a holiday to-day, as it is San Jacinto day. Thermopylae had its
messenger of defeat, but the Alamo had none. Mr. President and fellow
citizens, those glorious heroes who fell for their country on the bloody
field of San Jacinto, etc.

There is a bazaar to-night in the representatives' hall. You people out
in Colorado don't know anything. A bazaar is cedar and tacks and girls
and raw-cake and step-ladders and Austin Grays and a bass solo by Bill
Stacy, and net profits $2.65.

Albert has got his new uniform and Alf Menille is in town, and tile
store needs the "fine Italian hand" of the bookkeeper very much, besides
some of his plain Anglo-Saxon conversation.

Was interviewed yesterday by Gen'l Smith, Clay's father. He wants Jim S.
and me to represent a manufactory in Jeff. City: Convict labor. Says
parties in Galveston and Houston are making good thing of it. Have taken
him up. Hope to be at work soon. Glad, by jingo! Shake. What'll you
have? Claret and sugar? Better come home. Colorado no good.

Strange thing happened in Episcopal Church Sunday Big crowd. Choir had
sung jolly tune and preacher come from behind scenes. Everything quiet.
Suddenly fellow comes down aisle. Late. Everybody looks. Disappointment.
It is a stranger. Jones and I didn't go. Service proceeds.

Jones talks about his mashes and Mirabeau B. Lamar, daily. Yet there is
hope. Cholera infantum; Walsh's crutch; Harvey, or softening of the
brain may carry him off yet.

Society notes are few. Bill Stacey is undecided where to spend the
summer. Henry Harrison will resort at Wayland and Crisers. Charlie Cook
will not go near a watering place if he can help it.

If you don't strike a good thing out West, I hope we will see you soon.

Yours as ever,

W. S. P.


            *       *       *       *



Austin, Texas, April 28, 1885

Dear Dave: I received your letter in answer to mine, which you never got
till sometime after you had written.

I snatch a few moments from my arduous labors to reply. The Colorado has
been on the biggest boom I have seen since '39. In the pyrotechnical and
not strictly grammatical language of the Statesman--"The cruel,
devastating flood swept, on a dreadful holocaust of swollen, turbid
waters, surging and dashing in mad fury which have never been equalled
in human history. A pitiable sight was seen the morning after the flood.
Six hundred men, out of employment, were seen standing on the banks of
the river, gazing at the rushing stream, laden with debris of every
description. A wealthy New York Banker, who was present, noticing the
forlorn appearance of these men, at once began to collect a subscription
for them, appealing in eloquent terms for help for these poor sufferers
by the flood. He collected one dollar, and five horn buttons. The dollar
he had given himself. He learned on inquiry that these men had not been
at any employment in six years, and all they had lost by the flood was a
few fishing poles. The Banker put his dollar in his pocket and stepped
up to the Pearl Saloon."

As you will see by this morning's paper, there is to be a minstrel show
next Wednesday for benefit of Austin Grays.

I attended the rehearsal last night, but am better this morning, and the
doctor thinks I will pull through with careful attention.

The jokes are mostly mildewed, rockribbed, and ancient as the sun. I can
give you no better idea of the tout ensemble and sine die of the affair
than to state that Scuddy is going to sing a song.

Mrs. Harrell brought a lot of crystallized fruits from New Orleans for
you. She wants to know if she shall send them around on Bois d'arc or
keep them 'til you return. Answer.

Write to your father. He thinks you are leaving him out, writing to
everybody else first. Write.

We have the boss trick here now. Have sold about ten boxes of cigars
betting on it in the store.

Take four nickels, and solder them together so the solder will not
appear. Then cut out of three of them, square hole like this:
(Illustration.) Take about twelve other nickels, and on top of them you
lay a small die with the six up, that will fit easily in the hole
without being noticed. You lay the four nickels over this, and all
presents the appearance of a stack of nickels. You do all this privately
so everybody will suppose it is nothing but a stack of five-cent pieces.
You then lay another small die on top of the stack with the ace up. You
have a small tin cup shaped like this (Illustration) made for the
purpose. You let everybody see the ace, and then say you propose to turn
the ace into a six. You lay the tin cup carefully over the stack this
way, and feel around in your pocket for a pencil and not finding one.

(The rest of this letter is lost)



            *       *       *       *


AUSTIN, Texas, May 10, 1885.

Dear Dave: I received your two letters and have commenced two or three
in reply, but always failed to say what I wanted to, and destroyed them
all. I heard from Joe that you would probably remain in Colorado. I hope
you will succeed in making a good thing out of it, if you conclude to do
so, but would like to see you back again in Austin. If there is anything
I can do for you here, let me know.

Town is fearfully dull, except for the frequent raids of the Servant
Girl Annihilators, who make things lively during the dead hours of the
night; if it were not for them, items of interest would be very scarce,
as you may see by the STATESMAN.

Our serenading party has developed new and alarming modes of torture for
our helpless and sleeping victims. Last Thursday night we loaded up a
small organ on a hack and with our other usual instruments made an
assault upon the quiet air of midnight that made the atmosphere turn
pale.

After going the rounds we were halted on the Avenue by Fritz Hartkopf
and ordered into his salon. We went in, carrying the organ, etc. A large
crowd of bums immediately gathered, prominent among which, were to be
seen Percy James, Theodore Hillyer, Randolph Burmond, Charlie Hicks, and
after partaking freely of lemonade we wended our way down, and were duly
halted and treated in the same manner by other hospitable gentlemen.

We were called in at several places while wit and champagne, Rhein Wine,
etc., flowed in a most joyous and hilarious manner. It was one of the
most recherche and per diem affairs ever known in the city. Nothing
occurred to mar the pleasure of the hour, except a trifling incident
that might be construed as malapropos and post-meridian by the
hypercritical. Mr. Charles Sims on attempting to introduce Mr. Charles
Hicks and your humble servant to young ladies, where we had been invited
inside, forgot our names and required to be informed on the subject
before proceeding.

Yours

W. S. P.


            *       *       *       *



AUSTIN, Texas, December 22, 1885.

Dear Dave: Everything wept at your departure. Especially the clouds.
Last night the clouds had a silver lining, three dollars and a half's
worth. I fulfilled your engagement in grand, tout ensemble style, but
there is a sad bon jour look about the thirty-eight cents left in my
vest pocket that would make a hired man weep. All day long the heavens
wept, and the heavy, sombre clouds went drifting about over head, and
the north wind howled in maniacal derision, and the hack drivers danced
on the pavements in wild, fierce glee, for they knew too well what the
stormy day betokened. The hack was to call for me at eight. At five
minutes to eight I went upstairs and dressed in my usual bijou and
operatic style, and rolled away to the opera. Emma sang finely. I
applauded at the wrong times, and praised her rendering of the chromatic
scale when she was performing on "c" flat andante pianissimo, but
otherwise the occasion passed off without anything to mar the joyousness
of the hour. Everybody was there. Isidor Moses and John Ireland, and
Fritz Hartkopf and Prof. Herzog and Bill Stacy and all the bong ton
elight. You will receive a draft to-day through the First National Bank
of Colorado for $3.65, which you will please honor.

There is no news, or there are no news, either you like to tell. Lavaca
Street is very happy and quiet and enjoys life, for Jones was sat on by
his Uncle Wash and feels humble and don't sing any more, and the spirit
of peace and repose broods over its halls. Martha rings the matin bell,
it seems to me before cock crow or ere the first faint streaks of dawn
are limned in the eastern sky by the rosy fingers of Aurora. At noon the
foul ogre cribbage stalks rampant, and seven-up for dim, distant oysters
that only the eye of faith can see.

The hour grows late. The clock strikes! Another day has vanished. Gone
into the dim recesses of the past, leaving its record of misspent hours,
false hopes, and disappointed expectations. May a morrow dawn that will
bring recompense and requital for the sorrows of the days gone by, and a
new order of things when there will be more starch in cuff and collar,
and less in handkerchiefs.

Come with me out into the starlight night. So calm, so serene, ye lights
of heaven, so high above earth; so pure and majestic and mysterious;
looking down on the mad struggle of life here below, is there no pity in
your never closing eyes for us mortals on which you shine?

Come with me on to the bridge. Ah, see there, far below, the dark,
turbid stream. Rushing and whirling and eddying under the dark pillars
with ghostly murmur and siren whisper. What shall we find in your
depths? The stars do not reflect themselves in your waters, they are too
dark and troubled and swift! What shall we find in your depths?
Rest?--Peace?--catfish? Who knows? 'Tis but a moment. A leap! A
plunge!--and--then oblivion or another world? Who can tell? A man once
dived into your depths and brought up a horse collar and a hoop-skirt.
Ah! what do we know of the beyond? We know that death comes, and we
return no more to our world of trouble and care-but where do we go? Are
there lands where no traveler has been? A chaos-perhaps where no human
foot has trod--perhaps Bastrop--perhaps New Jersey! Who knows? Where do
people go who are in McDade? Do they go where they have to fare worse?
They cannot go where they have worse fare!

Let us leave the river. The night grows cold. We could not pierce the
future or pay the tell. Come, the ice factory is deserted! No one sees
us. My partner, W. I. Anderson, will never destroy himself. Why? His
credit is good. No one will sue a side-partner of mine! You have heard
of a brook murmuring, but you never knew a sewer sighed! But we digress!
We will no longer pursue a side issue like this. Au reevoir. I will see
you later. Yours truly,

    WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE INGOMAR JUNIUS
    BRUTUS CALLIOPE SIX-HANDED EUCHRE
    GROVER CLEVELAND HILL CITY QUARTETTE JOHNSON.


            *       *       *       *




AN EARLY PARABLE

In one of his early letters, written from Austin, O. Henry wrote a long
parable that was evidently to tell his correspondent some of the local
gossip. Here it is Once upon a time there was a maiden in a land not fax
away--a maiden of much beauty and rare accomplishments. She was beloved
by all on account of her goodness of heart, and her many charms of
disposition. Her father was a great lord, rich and powerful, and a
mighty man, and he loved his daughter with exceeding great love, and he
cared for her with jealous and loving watchfulness, lest any harm should
befall her, or even the least discomfort should mar her happiness and
cause any trouble in her smooth and peaceful life. The cunningest
masters were engaged to teach her from her youngest days; she played
upon the harpsichord the loveliest and sweetest music; she wrought fancy
work in divers strange and wonderful forms that might puzzle all
beholders as to what manner of things they might be; she sang; and all
listeners hearkened thereunto, as to the voice of an angel; she danced
stately minuets with the gay knights as graceful as a queen and as light
as the thistledown borne above the clover blossoms by the wind; she
could paint upon china, rare and unknown flowers the like unto which man
never saw in colors, crimson and blue and yellow, glorious to behold;
she conversed in unknown tongues whereof no man knew the meaning and
sense; and created wild admiration in all, by the ease and grace with
which she did play upon a new and strange instrument of wondrous sound
and structure which she called a banjo.

She had gone into a strange land, far away beyond the rivers that flowed
through her father's dominion--farther than one could see from the
highest castle tower--up into the land of ice and snow, where wise men,
famous for learning and ancient lore had gathered together from many
lands and countries the daughters of great men. Kings and powerful
rulers, railroad men, bankers, mighty men who wished to bring up their
children to be wise and versed in all things old and new. Here, the
Princess abode for many seasons, and she sat at the feet of old wise
men, who could tell of the world's birth, and the stars, and read the
meaning of the forms of the rocks that make the high mountains and knew
the history of all created things that are; and here she learned to
speak strange tongues, and studied the deep mysteries of the past--the
secrets of the ancients; Chaldic lore; Etruscan inscription; hidden and
mystic sciences, and knew the names of all the flowers and things that
grow in fields or wood; even unto the tiniest weed by the brook.

In due time the Princess came back to her father's castle. The big bell
boomed from the high tower; the heavy iron gates were thrown open;
banners floated all along the battlemented walls, and in the grand hall,
servants and retainers hurried to and fro, bearing gold dishes, and
great bowls of flaming smoking punch, while oxen were roasted whole and
hogsheads of ale tapped on the common by the castle walls, and thither
hied them the villagers one and all to make merry at the corning of the
dear Princess again. "She will come back so wise and learned," they
said, "so far above us that she will not notice us as she did once," but
not so: the Princess with a red rose in her hair, and dressed so plain
and neat that she looked more like a farmer's daughter than a great
king's, came down among them from her father's side with nods of love
and welcome on her lips, and a smile upon her face, and took them by the
hands as in the old days, and none among them so lowly or so poor but
what received a kind word from the gracious Princess, and carried away
in their hearts glad feelings that she was still the same noble and
gracious lady she always was. Then night came, and torches by thousands
lit up the great forest, and musicians played and bonfires glowed, with
sparks flying like myriads of stars among the gloomy trees.

In the great castle hall were gathered the brave knights and the fairest
ladies in the kingdom. The jolly old King, surrounded by the wise men
and officers of state moved about among his guests, stately and
courteous, ravishing music burst forth from all sides, and down the hall
moved the fair Princess in the mazy dance, on the arm of a Knight who
gazed upon her face in rapt devotion and love. Who was he that dared to
look thus upon the daughter of the King, sovereign prince of the
kingdom, and the heiress of her father's wealth and lands.

He had no title, no proud name to place beside a royal one, beyond that
of an honorable knight, but who says that that is not a title that,
borne worthily, makes a man the peer of any that wears a crown?

He had loved her long. When a boy they had roamed together in the great
forest about the castle, and played among the fountains of the court
like brother and sister, The King saw them together often and smiled and
went his way and said nothing. The years went on and they were together
as much as they could be. The summer days when the court went forth into
the forest mounted on prancing steeds to chase the stags with hounds;
all clad in green and gold with waving plumes and shining silver and
ribbons of gay colors, this Knight was by the Princess' side to guide
her through the pathless swamps where the hunt ranged, and saw that no
harm came to her. And now that she had come back after years of absence,
he went to her with fear lest she should have changed for her old self,
and would not be to him as she was when they were boy and girl together.
But no, there was the same old kindly welcome, the same smiling
greeting, the warm pressure of the hand, the glad look in the eyes as of
yore. The Knight's heart beat wildly and a dim new-awakened hope arose
in him. Was she too far away, after all?

He felt worthy of her, and of any one in fact, but he was without
riches, only a knight-errant with his sword for his fortune, and his
great love his only title; and he had always refrained from ever telling
her anything of his love, for his pride prevented him, and you know a
poor girl even though she be a princess cannot say to a man, "I am rich,
but, let that be no bar between us, I am yours and will let my wealth
pass if you will give up your pride." No princess can say this, and the
Knight's pride would not let him say anything of the kind and so you see
there was small chance of their ever coming to an understanding.

Well, the feasting and dancing went on, and the Knight and the Princess
danced and sang together, and walked out where the moon was making a
white wonder of the great fountain, and wandered under the rows of great
oaks, but spoke no word of love, though no mortal man knows what
thoughts passed in their heads; and she gave long accounts of the
wonders she had seen in the far, icy north, in the great school of wise
men, and the Knight talked of the wild and savage men he had seen in the
Far West, where he had been in battles with the heathen in a wild and
dreary land; and she heard with pity his tales of suffering and trials
in the desert among wild animals and fierce human kings; and inside the
castle the music died away and the lights grew dim and the villagers had
long since gone to their homes and the Knight and the Princess still
talked of old times, and the moon climbed high in the eastern sky.

One day there came news from a country far to the west where lay the
possessions of the Knight. The enemy had robbed him of his treasure,
driven away his cattle, and he found it was best to hie him away and
rescue his inheritance and goods. He buckled on his sword and mounted
his good war-horse. He rode to the postern gate of the castle to make
his adieus to the Princess. When he told her he was going away to the
wild western country to do battle with the heathen, she grew pale and
her eyes took on a look of such pain and fear that the Knight's heart
leaped and then sank in his bosom, a his pride still kept him from
speaking the words that might have made all well.

She bade him farewell in a low voice, and tears even stood in leer eyes,
but what could she say or do?

The Knight put spurs to his horse, and dashed away over the hills
without ever looking back, and the Princess stood looking over the gate
at him till the last sight of his plume below the brow of the hill. The
Knight was gone. Many suitors flocked about the Princess. Mighty lords
and barons of great wealth were at her feet and attended her every
journey. They came and offered themselves and their fortunes again and
again, but none of them found favor in her eyes. "Will the Princess
listen to no one?" they began to say among themselves. "Has she given
her heart to some one who is not among us?" No one could say.

A great and mighty physician, young and of wondrous power in his art,
telephoned to her every night if he might come down. How his suit
prospered no one could tell, but he persevered with great and
astonishing diligence. A powerful baron who assisted in regulating the
finances of the kingdom and who was a direct descendant of a great
prince who was cast into a lion's den, knelt at her feet.

A gay and lively lord who lived in a castle hung with ribbons and
streamers and gay devices of all kinds, with other nobles of like
character, prostrated themselves before her, but she would listen to
none of them.

The Princess rode about in quiet ways in the cool evenings upon a gray
palfrey, alone and very quiet, and she seemed to grow silent and
thoughtful as time went on and no news came from the western wars, and
the Knight came not back again.

[Written to his daughter Margaret.]


            *       *       *       *



TOLEDO, Ohio, Oct. 1, 1900.

Dear Margaret: I got your very nice, long letter a good many days ago.
It didn't come straight to me, but went to a wrong address first. I was
very glad indeed to hear from you, and very, very sorry to learn of your
getting your finger so badly hurt. I don't think you were to blame at
all, as you couldn't know just how that villainous old "hoss" was going
to bite. I do hope that it will heal up nicely and leave your finger
strong. I am learning to play the mandolin, and we must get you a
guitar, and we will learn a lot of duets together when I come home which
will certainly not be later than next summer, and maybe earlier.

I suppose you have started to school again some time ago. I hope you
like to go, and don't have to study too hard. When one grows up, a thing
they never regret is that they went to school long enough to learn all
they could. It makes everything easier for them, and if they like books
and study they can always content and amuse themselves that way even if
other people are cross and tiresome, and the world doesn't go to suit
them. You mustn't think that I've forgotten somebody's birthday. I
couldn't find just the thing I wanted to send, but I know where it can
be had, and it will reach you in a few days. So, when it comes you'll
know it is for a birthday remembrance.

I think you write the prettiest hand of any little girl (or big one,
either) I ever knew. The letters you make are as even and regular as
printed ones. The next time you write, tell me how far you have to go to
school and whether you go alone or not.

I am busy all the time writing for the papers and magazines all over the
country, so I don't have a chance to come home, but I'm going to try to
come this winter. If I don't I will by summer SURE, and then you'll have
somebody to boss and make trot around with you.

Write me a letter whenever you have some time to spare, for I am always
glad and anxious to hear from you. Be careful when you are on the
streets not to feed shucks to strange dogs, or pat snakes on the head or
shake hands with cats you haven't been introduced to, or stroke the
noses of electric car horses.

Hoping you are well and your finger is getting all right, I am, with
much love, as ever, PAPA.


            *       *       *       *



My Dear Margaret: Here it is summertime, and the bees are blooming and
the flowers are singing and the birds making honey, and we haven't been
fishing yet. Well, there's only one more month till July, and then we'll
go, and no mistake. I thought you would write and tell me about the high
water around Pittsburg some time ago, and whether it came up to where
you live, or not. And I haven't heard a thing about Easter, and about
the rabbit's eggs--but I suppose you have learned by this time that eggs
grow on egg plants and are not laid by rabbits.

I would like very much to hear from you oftener, it has been more than a
month now since you wrote. Write soon and tell me how you are, and when
school will be out, for we want plenty of holidays in July so we can
have a good time. I am going to send you something nice the last of this
week. What do you guess it will be?

                            Lovingly,
                            PAPA.


            *       *       *       *


The Caledonia

WEDNESDAY.

My Dear Mr. Jack:

I owe Gilman Hall $175 (or mighty close to it) pussonally--so he tells
me. I thought it was only about $30, but he has been keeping the
account. He's just got to have it to-day. McClure's will pay me some
money on the 15th of June, but I can't get it until then. I was
expecting it before this--anyhow before Gilman left, but they stick to
the letter.

I wonder if you could give me a check for that much to pay him to-day.
If you will I'll hold up my right hand--thus: that I'll have you a
first-class story on your desk before the last of this week.

I reckon I'm pretty well overdrawn, but I've sure got to see that Hall
gets his before he leaves. I don't want anything for myself.

Please, sir, let me know right away, by return boy if you'll do it.

If you can't, I'll have to make a quick dash at the three-ball
magazines; and I do hate to tie up with them for a story.

The Same

MR. J. O. H. COSGRAVE,    SYDNEY PORTER.

at this time editor of Everybody's Magazine.


            *       *       *       *


A letter to Gilman Hall, written just before the
writer's marriage to Miss Sara Lindsay Coleman of
Asheville, N. C.

                                                WEDNESDAY.
Dear Gilman:

Your two letters received this A.M. Mighty good letters, too, and
cheering.

Mrs. Jas. Coleman is writing Mrs. Ball to-day. She is practically the
hostess at Wynn Cottage where the hullabaloo will occur.

Say, won't you please do one or two little things for me before you
leave, as you have so kindly offered?

(1) Please go to Tiffany's and get a wedding ring, size 5 1/4. Sara says
the bands worn now are quite narrow--and that's the kind she wants.

(2) And bring me a couple of dress collars, size 16 1/2. I have ties.

(3) And go to a florist's--there is one named Mackintosh (or something
like that) on Broadway, East side of street five or site doors north of
26th St., where I used to buy a good many times. He told me he could
ship flowers in good shape to Asheville--you might remind him that I
used to send flowers to 36 West 17th Street some time ago. I am told by
the mistress of ceremonies that I am to furnish two bouquets--one of
lilies of the valley and one of pale pink roses. Get plenty of each--
say enough lilies to make a large bunch to be carried in the hand, and
say three or four dozen of the roses.

I note what you say about hard times and will take heed. I'm not going
into any extravagances at all, and I'm going to pitch into hard work
just as soon as I get the rice grains out of my ear.

I wired you to-day "MS. mailed to-day, please rush one century by wire."

That will exhaust the Reader check--if it isn't too exhausted itself to
come. You, of course, will keep the check when it arrives--I don't think
they will fall down on it surely. I wrote Howland a pretty sharp letter
and ordered him to send it at once care of Everybody's.

When this story reaches you it will cut down the overdraft "right
smart," but if the house is willing I'd mighty well like to run it up to
the limit again, because cash is sure scarce, and I'll have to have
something like $300 more to see me through. The story I am sending is a
new one; I still have another partly written for you, which I shall
finish and turn in before I get back to New York and then we'll begin to
clean up all debts.

Just after the wedding we are going to Hot Spring, N. C., only
thirty-five miles from Asheville, where there is a big winter resort
hotel, and stay there about a week or ten days. Then back to New York.

Please look over the story and arrange for bringing me the $300 when you
come--it will still keep me below the allowed limit and thereafter I
will cut down instead of raising it.

Just had a 'phone message from S. L. C. saying how pleased she was with
your letter to her.

I'm right with you on the question of the "home-like" system of having
fun. I think we'll all agree beautifully on that. I've had all the cheap
bohemia that I want. I can tell you, none of the "climbers" and the
cocktail crowd are going to bring their vaporings into my house. It's
for the clean, merry life, with your best friends in the game and a
general concentration of energies and aims. I am having a cedarwood club
cut from the mountains with knots on it, and I am going to stand in my
hallway (when I have one) and edit with it the cards of all callers. You
and Mrs. will have latchkeys, of course.

Yes, I think you'd better stay at the hotel ---- Of course they'd want
you out at Mrs. C's. But suppose we take Mrs. Hall out there, and you
and I remain at the B. P. We'll be out at the Cottage every day anyhow,
and it'll be scrumptious all round.

I'm simply tickled to death that "you all" are coming. The protoplasm is
in Heaven; all's right with the world. Pippa passes.

                    Yours as ever,

                        BILL.


            *       *       *       *



My Dear Col. Griffith:     FRIDAY.

Keep your shirt on. I found I had to re-write the story when it came in.
I am sending you part of it just so you will have something tangible to
remind you that you can't measure the water from the Pierian Spring in
spoonfuls.

I've got the story in much better form; and I'll have the rest of it
ready this evening.

I'm sorry to have delayed it; but it's best for both of us to have it a
little late and a good deal better.

I'll send over the rest before closing time this afternoon or the
first thing in the morning.

In its revised form I'm much better pleased with it.

Yours truly,

SYDNEY PORTER.


            *       *       *       *



Mr. Al. Jennings, of Oklahoma City, was an early friend of O. Henry's.
Now, in 1.9122, a prominent attorney, Mr. Jennings, in his youth, held
up trains.

28 W. 26.                                       N. Y. SUNDAY.
ALGIE JENNINGS, ESQ., THE WEST.

DEAR BILL:

Glad you've been sick too. I'm well again. Are you? Well, as I had
nothing to do I thought I would write you a letter; and as I have
nothing to say I will close. How are ye, Bill? How's old Initiative and
Referendum? When you cming back to Manhattan? You wouldn't know the old
town now. Main Street is building up, and there is talk of an English
firm putting up a new hotel. I saw Duffy a few days ago. He looks kind
of thoughtful as if he were trying to calculate how much he'd have been
ahead on Gerald's board and clothes by now if you bad taken him with
you. Mrs. Hale is up in Maine for a 3 weeks' vacation.

Say, Bill, I'm sending your MS. back by mail to-day. I kept it a little
longer after you sent for it because one of the McClure & Phillips firm
wanted to see it first. Everybody says it is full of good stuff, but
thinks it should be put in a more connected shape by some skilful writer
who has been trained to that sort work.

It seems to me that you ought to do better with it out there than you
could here. If you can get somebody out there to publish it it ought to
sell all right. N. Y. is a pretty cold proposition and it can't see as
far as the Oklahoma country when it is looking for sales. How about
trying Indianapolis or Chicago? Duffy told me about the other MS sent
out by your friend Abbott. Kind of a bum friendly trick, wasn't it?

Why don't you get "Arizona's Hand" done and send it on? Seems to me you
could handle a short story all right.

My regards to Mrs. Jennings and Bro. Frank. Write some more.

Still
BILL.


            *       *       *       *


Dear Jennings:

N. Y., May 23, '05.

Got your letter all right. Hope you'll follow it soon. I'd advise you
not to build any high hopes on your book--just consider that you're on a
little pleasure trip, and taking it along as a side line. Mighty few
MSS. ever get to be books, and mighty few books pay.

I have to go to Pittsburg the first of next week to be gone about 3 or 4
days. If you decide to come here any time after the latter part of next
week I will be ready to meet you. Let me know in advance a day or two.

Gallot is in Grand Rapids--maybe he will run over for a day or two.

In haste and truly yours,
W. S. P.


            *       *       *       *


[It was hard to get O. Henry to take an interest in his books. He
was always eager to be at the undone work, to be writing a new
story instead of collecting old ones. This letter came from North
Carolina. It shows how much thought he gave always to titles.]

LAND o' THE SKY, Monday, 1909.

My dear Colonel Steger: As I wired you to-day, I like "Man About Town"
for a title.

But I am sending in a few others for you to look at; and if any other
suits you better, I'm agreeable. Here they are, in preferred order:

    The Venturers.
    Transfers.
    Merry-Go-Rounds.
    Babylonica.
    Brickdust from Babel.
    Babes in the Jungle.

If none of these hit you right, let me know and I'll get busy again. But
I think "Man About Town" is about the right thing. It gives the city
idea without using the old hackneyed words.

I am going to write you a letter in a day or so "touchin' on and
appertainin' to" other matters and topics. I am still improving and
feeling pretty good. Colonel Bingham has put in a new ash-sifter and
expects you to come down and see that it works all right.

All send regards to you. You seem to have made quite a hit down here for
a Yankee.

Salutations and good wishes. Yours, S. P.


[This letter was found unfinished, among his papers after his
death. His publishers had discussed many times his writing of a
novel, but the following letter constitutes the only record of his
own opinions in the matter. The date is surely 1909 or 1910.]

My Dear Mr. Steger: My idea is to write the story of a man--an
individual, not a type--but a man who, at the same time, I want to
represent a "human nature type," if such a person could exist. The story
will teach no lesson, inculcate no moral, advance no theory. I want it
to be something that it won't or can't be--but as near as I can make
it--the true record of a man's thoughts, his description of his
mischances and adventures, his TRUE opinions of life as he has seen it
and his ABSOLUTELY HONEST deductions, comments, and views upon the
different phases of life that he passes through.

I do not remember ever to have read an autobiography, a biography, or a
piece of fiction that told the TRUTH. Of course, I have read stuff such
as Rousseau and Zola and George Moore and various memoirs that were
supposed to be window panes in their respective breasts; but, mostly,
all of them were either liars, actors, or posers. (Of course, I'm not
trying to belittle the greatness of their literary expression.)

All of us have to be prevaricators, hypocrites and liars every day of
our lives; otherwise the social structure would fall into pieces the
first day. We must act in one another's presence just as we must wear
clothes. It is for the best.

The trouble about writing the truth has been that the writers have kept
in their minds one or another or all of three thoughts that made a
handicap--they were trying either to do a piece of immortal literature,
or to shock the public or to please editors. Some of them succeeded in
all three, but they did not write the TRUTH. Most autobiographies are
insincere from beginning to end. About the only chance for the truth to
be told is in fiction. It is well understood that "all the truth" cannot
be told in print--but how about "nothing but the truth"? That's what I
want to do.

I want the man who is telling the story to tell it--not as he would to a
reading public or to a confessor--but something in this way: Suppose he
were marooned on an island in mid-ocean with no hope of ever being
rescued; and, in order to pass away some of the time he should tell a
story to HIMSELF embodying his adventure and experiences and opinions.
Having a certain respect for himself (let us hope) he would leave out
the "realism" that he would have no chance of selling in the market; he
would omit the lies and self-conscious poses, and would turn out to his
one auditor something real and true.

So, as truth is not to be found in history, autobiography, press reports
(nor at the bottom of an H. G. Wells), let us hope that fiction may be
the means of bringing out a few grains of it.

The "hero" of the story will be a man born and "raised" in a somnolent
little southern town. His education is about a common school one, but he
learns afterward from reading and life. I'm going to try to give him a
"style" in narrative and speech--the best I've got in the shop. I'm
going to take him through all the main phases of life--wild adventure,
city, society, something of the "under world," and among many
characteristic planes of the phases. I want him to acquire all the
sophistication that experience can give him, and always preserve his
individual honest HUMAN view, and have him tell the TRUTH about
everything.

It is time to say now, that by the "truth" I don't mean the
objectionable stuff that so often masquerades under the name. I mean
true opinions a true estimate of all things as they seem to the "hero."
If you find a word or a suggestive line or sentence in any of my copy,
you cut it out and deduct it from the royalties.

I want this man to be a man of natural intelligence, of individual
character, absolutely open and broad minded; and show how the Creator of
the earth has got him in a rat trap--put him here "willy nilly" (you
know the Omar verse); and then I want to show what he does about it.
There is always the eternal question from the Primal Source--"What are
you going to do about it?" Please don't think for the half of a moment
that the story is going to be anything of an autobiography. I have a
distinct character in my mind for the part, and he does not at all.

(Here the letter ends. He never finished it.)


            *       *       *       *


THE STORY OF "HOLDING UP A TRAIN"

In "Sixes and Sevens" there appears an article entitled "Holding Up a
Train." Now the facts were given to O. Henry by an old and dear friend
who, in his wild avenging youth, had actually held up trains. To-day he
is Mr. Al. Jennings, of Oklahoma City, Okla., a prominent attorney. He
has permitted the publication of two letters O. Henry wrote him, the
first outlining the story as he thought his friend Jennings ought to
write it, and the second announcing that, with O. Henry's revision, the
manuscript had been accepted.


From W. S. Porter to Al. Jennings, September 21st
(year not given but probably 1902).

DEAR PARD:

In regard to that article--I will give you my idea of what is wanted.
Say we take for a title "The Art and Humor of the Hold-up"--or something
like that. I would suggest that in writing you assume a character. We
have got to respect the conventions and delusions of the public to a
certain extent. An article written as you would naturally write it would
be regarded as a fake and an imposition. Remember that the traditions
must be preserved wherever they will not interfere with the truth. Write
in as simple, plain and unembellished a style as you know how. Make your
sentences short. Put in as much realism and as many facts as possible.
Where you want to express an opinion or comment on the matter do it as
practically and plainly as you can. Give it LIFE and the vitality of
FACTS.

Now, I will give you a sort of general synopsis of my idea--of course,
everything is subject to your own revision and change. The article, we
will say, is written by a TYPICAL train hoister--one without your
education and powers of expression (bouquet) but intelligent enough to
convey his ideas from HIS STANDPOINT--not from John Wanamaker's. Yet, in
order to please John, we will have to assume a virtue that we do not
possess. Comment on the moral side of the proposition as little as
possible. Do not claim that holding up trains is the only business a
gentleman would engage in, and, on the contrary, do not depreciate a
profession that is really only fnanciering with spurs on. Describe the
FACTS and DETAILS--all that part of the proceedings that the passenger
sitting with his hands up in a Pullman looking into the end of a tunnel
in the hands of one of the performers does not see. Here is a rough
draft of my idea: Begin abruptly, without any philosophizing, with your
idea of the best times, places and conditions for the hold-up---compare
your opinions of this with those of others--mention some poorly
conceived attempts and failures of others, giving your opinion why--as
far as possible refer to actual occurrences, and incidents--describe the
manner of a hold-up, how many men is best, where they are stationed, how
do they generally go into it, nervous? or joking? or solemnly. The
details of stopping the train, the duties of each man of the gang--the
behavior of the train crew and passengers (here give as many brief odd
and humorous incidents as you can think of). Your opinions on going
through the passengers, when is it done and when not done. How is the
boodle gotten at? How does the express clerk generally take it? Anything
done with the mail car? UNDER WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES WILL A TRAIN ROBBER
SHOOT A PASSENGER OR A TRAIN MAN--suppose a man refuses to throw up his
hands? Queer articles found on passengers (a chance here for some
imaginative work)--queer and laughable incidents of any kind. Refer
whenever apropos to actual hold-ups and facts concerning them of
interest. What could two or three brave and determined passengers do if
they were to try? Why don't they try? How long does it take to do the
business. Does the train man ever stand in with the hold-up? Best means
of getting away--how and when is the money divided. How is it mostly
spent. Best way to manoeuvre afterward. How to get caught and how not
to. Comment on the methods of officials who try to capture. (Here's your
chance to get even.)

These ideas are some that occur to me casually. You will, of course,
have many far better. I suggest that you make the article anywhere from
4,000 to 6,000 words. Get as much meat in it as you can, and, by the
way--stuff it full of western, GENUINE slang--(not the eastern story
paper kind). Get all the quaint cowboy expressions and terms of speech
you can think of.

INFORMATION is what we want, clothed in the peculiar western style of
the character we want to present. The main idea is to be NATURAL,
DIRECT, AND CONCISE.

I hope you will understand what I say. I don't. But try her a whack and
send it along as soon as you can, and let's see what we can do. By the
way, Mr. "Everybody" pays good prices. I thought I would, when I get
your story, put it into the shape my judgment decides upon, and then
send both your MS. and mine to the magazine. If he uses mine, we'll
whack up shares on the proceeds. If he uses yours, you get the check
direct. If he uses neither, we are out only a few stamps.

Sincerely your friend,
W. S. P.


            *       *       *       *


And here is the letter telling his "pard" that the article
had been bought by Everybody's Magazine. This is
dated Pittsburg, October 24th, obviously the same year:

DEAR PARD.

You're It. I always told you you were a genius. All you need is to
succeed in order to make a success.

I enclose your letter which explains itself. When you see your baby in
print don't blame me if you find strange ear marks and brands on it. I
slashed it and cut it and added lots of stuff that never happened, but I
followed your facts and ideas, and that is what made it valuable. I'll
think up some other idea for an article and we'll collaborate again some
time--eh?

I have all the work I can do, and am selling it right along. Have
averaged about $150 per month since August 1st. And yet I don't
overwork--don't think I ever will. I commence about 9 A. M. and
generally knock off about 4 or 5 P. M.

As soon as check mentioned in letter comes I'll send you your "sheer" of
the boodle.

By the way, please keep my nom de plume strictly to yourself. I don't
want any one to know, just yet.

Give my big regards to Billy. Reason with him and try to convince him
that we believe him to be pure merino and of more than average width.
With the kindest remembrances to yourself I remain,

Your friend,
W. S. P.

At this time O. Henry was unknown and thought himself lucky to sell a
story at any price.

THE END









This etext was produced by Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










SPIRIT OF THE AGE SERIES: NO. II.
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON:
BY E. BLANTYRE SIMPSON




ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON
BY E. BLANTYRE SIMPSON
JOHN W. LUCE & CO. BOSTON AND LONDON 1906


Copyright, 1906,
by JOHN W. LUCE & COMPANY Boston,
Mass., IT. S. A.
All rights reserved




Lakeview Press Boston and South Framingham U. S. A.




ILLUSTRATIONS

1875 AS ADVOCATE frontispiece

AN EDINBURGH STUDENT page thirty-two

THE TELLER OF TALES page forty-eight

1892 PORTRAIT PAINTED BY COUNT NERLI IN SAMOA
Reproduced by kind permission of Mrs. Turnbull page sixty-four




SPIRIT OF THE AGE SERIES

The publishers desire to announce that it is their purpose to
comprise in this series a collection of little books uniform in
general style and appearance to the present volume and having for
their subjects men and women, whose work and influence, in whatever
field of literature or art was their chosen one, may be said to
faintly reflect the spirit or tendencies of cultivated thought at
the present time.

The treatment of the subject matter will not be conventional, the
chief aim being to present to the readers a living, marching
personality breathing with the individuality characteristic of the
person.

Volume I of this series is Whistler
 by Haldane Macfall

Volume II, Robert Louis Stevenson
 by Eve Blantyre Simpson

Additional volumes to be announced shortly.





     "A spirit all sunshine, graceful from
     every gladness, useful because
     bright."     Carlyle.


The mother of Robert Louis Stevenson, when asked to inscribe a motto
on a guest list, wrote:--

   "The world is so full of a number of things,
    I am sure we should all be happy as kings."


"That," she said, "includes the whole gospel of R. L. S." These
lines are certainly a concise statement of the spirit in which her
son undertook to expound the benefits to be derived from "performing
our petty round of irritating concerns and duties with laughter and
kind faces." Before he could walk steadily, it had been discovered
he was heavily handicapped by the burden of ill-health. Still the
good fairy who came to his christening endowed him with "sweet
content," a gift which carried him triumphantly through all
hampering difficulties. He never faltered in the task he set
himself--the task of happiness. He began to preach his gospel as a
child. He would not have his tawdry toy sword disparaged even by his
father. "I tell you," he said, "the sword is of gold, the sheath of
silver, and the boy who has it is quite contented." In the same
manner he transformed a coddling shawl into a wrap fit for a soldier
on a night march. To the end of his days he was eager to be happy.
We are told

    "Two men looked out from prison bars;
     One saw mud, the other stars."

When bodily ailments held Stevenson as a captive in bonds, his keen
sight pierced through the obstructions which held him caged. We are
not left in doubt, when we read his books, as to whether his gaze
was earthwards or to heaven's distant lamps. He taught others to see
with his clear vision, and he expounded his gospel in so taking a
manner, even if the import of it had savoured more of mud than
stars, it would have been studied for its style. He had the true
artist soul within him. He wished to create or represent what came
within the range of those brilliant dark eyes of his, so, with
infinite care and effort, he strove to attune his words to the even
cadence and harmony with which he wished to amaze us, for, as A.J.
Balfour said, "he was a man of the finest and most delicate
imagination, a style which, for grace and suppleness, for its power
of being at once turned to any purpose which the author desired, has
seldom been matched." It is difficult for those who knew him before
he had, by pure hard work, won his way to fame, to realise how one
physically so fragile, of so light-somely versatile and whimsical a
nature, apparently so ready to be diverted from the main high-road
by a desire to explore any brambly lane, had in him the deliberate
goal-winning gait of the tortoise. His stubborn tenacity of purpose
he owed to his antecedents. The Scot's inalienable prerogative of
pedigree exercised an influence over him, though he appeared as a
foreign ingraft upon his Scotch family tree. In his record of his
father's kinsfolk, A Family of Engineers, and in many of his essays,
he engages his readers' attention by confiding to them his own and
his forebears' history. "I am a rogue at egotism myself; and to be
plain, I have rarely or never liked any man who was not," he says.

This Benjamin of Edinburgh's literary sons, the youngest, not the
least, was born in the very middle of last century, 1850. This babe,
that was to do Edinburgh honour yet, had been named after his two
grandfathers, Robert Lewis. He was a mixture of both, the inevitable
result of their diverse qualities, which he inherited. The Robert (a
name he was seldom known by in his youth) was from the Stevenson
side. They were a race of men of sterling metal, who lit our
Northern Lights, and from the besieging sea wrung footholds for
harbours. From them Robert Louis Stevenson inherited that tenacity
of purpose which made him write and rewrite chapters till his
phrases concisely expressed his meaning, and toilsomely labour till
his work was perfected. His minister grandfather he etched with the
"Old Manse." All his mother's people, the Balfours, were of a
sanguine, hopeful strain, retaining an elasticity of spirit which
never lessened under the burden of years. Stevenson writes of "that
wise youth, my uncle," who was a grey-bearded doctor when his nephew
thus referred to him. So from the daughter of the Herd of Men at
Colinton he inherited his perennial youthfulness. "He was ever the
spirit of boyhood," says Barrie, "tugging at the skirts of this old
world, and compelling it to come back and play."

It was well for the boy that his mother had gifted him with her
hopeful nature, for his father had Celtic traits in his character,
and was oppressed with a morbid sense of his own unworthiness. It is
Carlyle who vouches for the fact "that wondrous is the strength of
cheerfulness, altogether past calculation its power of endurance."
Little store of bodily vigour had Robert Lewis; but with his
buoyant, enthusiastic, inquisitive spirit he accomplished a strong
man's task, "weaving his garlands when his mood was gay, mocking his
sorrows with a solemn jest." This treasured only son, worshipped by
his doting parents and his nurse, Alison Cunningham, who was a
second mother to him, reports himself to have been a good child. He
also says he had a covenanting childhood. In the mid-Victorian era,
a stricter discipline reigned over nurseries in Scotland's capital
than now. "The serviceable pause" in the week's work on Sunday was
not without real benefits, for the children of these times, if
sermons were long and the Sabbath devoid of toys, learned to sit
still and to endure, and very useful lessons they were to R. L. S.
and others. Despite being an extra model little soul," eminently
religious," he says, he was much like other children. His nurse
tells how, during one of the many feverish, wakeful nights he
suffered from, when he lay wearying for the carts coming (a sign to
him of morning), she read to him for hours at his request the Bible.
He fell asleep, soothed by her kind voice, to awake when the sun was
bright on the window pane. Again he commanded, "Read to me, Cummie."
"And what chapter would my laddie like?" she asked. "Why, it's
daylight now," he answered; "I'm not afraid any longer; put away the
Bible, and go on with Ballantyne's story."

"I am one of the few people in the world who do not forget their own
lives," he boasted. His Garden of Verses testifies to the truth of
this statement. When he was a man over thirty, he bridged the gulf
of years, and wrote of the golden days of childhood. Not only do the
little people joy to hear his piping, but those who sit in the
elders' seat hearken to these happy songs of merry cheer coming to
them as echoes from the well-nigh forgotten past. His father often
sat by his sick-bed, and beguiled his small son from fears and pains
by tales "of ship-wreck on outlying iron skerries' pitiless
breakers, and great sea-lights, clothed in language apt, droll and
emphatic." His mother and Cummie read to him day and night. Thus
early the instinct of authorship was fired within him.

One evening the young Stevenson realised that the printed page was
intelligible to him. It was as if a rock that barred his entrance
into the cave of treasure had melted, or swung back at his command.
Till then Louis had been keen, like other youngsters, on adopting
many professions when he grew up. Soldiering, even in the Crimean
War time, did not appeal to the girlishly gentle little chap, for,
as he shrewdly remarked, he neither wanted to kill anybody nor be
killed himself. When he learned to read, he saw before him all the
rows of books which he was told had finer stirring stories in them
than even those his father told him, and he resolved he, too, would
be a maker of tales.

Those wide apart but penetrating eyes of his had caught sight of an
ideal guiding star to follow, viz., Literature. His juvenile
ambition to be a "Leerie licht the lamp" faded. To reach the gleam
which had enamoured him, he knew he must build with care and
patience, like his family of engineers, a tower to enclose or a
ladder to reach to this will-o'-the-wisp which inveigled him upward.
His mind teemed with ideas; but he saw he would have to serve an
apprenticeship to learn to weave smoothly together the web of his
fancy, till, in his verbal fabric, he had the charm of all the muses
flowering in a single word.

He describes to us how he became a skilled artificer with his pen,
and how with obstinate persistence he taught himself daintiness of
diction. In his first book of travels he mentions how the branch of
a tree caught him, and the flooded Oise bereft him of his canoe. "On
my tomb, if ever I have one," he wrote, "I mean to get these words
inscribed, HE CLUNG TO HIS PADDLE." The paddle he chose was his pen.
It was the motive power which forwarded him along the river of life,
through shoals and rapids. When but a wee toddling bairn, he drew
his nurse aside and commanded her to write, as he had a story to
tell. He dictated to his mother, too, when a boy of six, an essay on
Moses. As a housebound child, he had to amuse himself. Skelt's
dramas were then his delight; but the life of every child is a
prophecy for those who know how to interpret it. His mother was
prescient, and fore-told her white-faced Louis had the light of
genius in those windows of the soul--the eyes. "Talent," she knew,
"was the result of human labor and culture." He dreamed, when but
four, he "heard the noise of pens writing." She took it and his
childish "Songstries" he sung as an earnest of his future.

Louis' father, despite being, like Dr. John Brown's Rab, "fu' o'
seriousness," had odd whims, among others, an objection to schools
and lessons, so he raised no objection to his son's regulation
school-days being intermittent. When barely in his teens, Stevenson
was ordered South, and spent two winters abroad. He was a pupil at
Edinburgh Academy for a few years. Andrew Lang was there at the same
time; but, he explains, the future Tusitala,--"the lover of
children, the teller of tales, giver of counsel, and dreams, a
wonder, a world's delight,"--and he did not meet there, for Louis
was "but a little whey-faced urchin, the despicable member of some
lower class," when his future brother author was "an elderly boy of
seventeen." The pity was that the cosseted only son never rubbed
against his compatriot children in the discipline of the play-
fields, but in some of his summer holidays he tasted of the doubtful
pleasures of lantern-bearing and other boyish "glories of
existence."

When the lad was seventeen, his parents leased Swanston Cottage,
which became their summer home, and a big factor in their boy's
education. It is a spot peculiarly secluded, to be within sight and
sound of Edinburgh, lying hidden in the lap of the hills, sheltered
"frae nirly nippin' Eas'lan' breeze and haar o' seas." It was there
Stevenson began deliberately to educate himself to become the Master
Stylist--the "Virgil of prose" of his contemporaries. These
Pentlands were to him always the hills of home. He lifted his eyes
to them from the old manse of Colinton, when he played there in his
grandfather's garden. He longingly, in gaps between the tall, grey
houses, looked for their familiar outline when winter prisoned him
in Auld Reekie.

These pastoral hills, with their sweeps of heathy moorlands, appear
from first to last in his works. Two of his initial Memories and
Portraits depict his hill-folk neighbors, the Shepherd and the
Gardener. It was at a church "atween the muckle Pentland's knees"
that Archie Weir of Hermiston noted young Kirsty, and that same
"little cruciform place" was the scene of his "PETIT POEME EN
PROSE," where we can all spend a peaceful "Lowden Sabbath morning"
with his "living Scotch" sounding in our ears. However far away
Louis Stevenson roved, there was mirrored on the tablets of his
memory his own country, its speech, its very atmosphere. He wrote a
New Arabian Nights, but from the old (he tells us how his minister
grandfather envied him his first reading thereof) he had acquired
the secret of the magic carpet, and could be transported at will
from the tropics back to where the curlews and the plovers wailed
and swooped above the whins and the heather on his hills of sheep.




STEVENSON'S APPRENTICESHIP


In his early days, Louis was sociable, pleased when he met
compatriot children, ready to be dressed and go to parties. But
after he left school, his mood changed. He had been completely
sheltered from rebuffs, so, when he stood in the "palace porch of
life," and the peculiar accents of his mind were jeered at, he, who
had never tasted of a whipping, felt the smart of humankind, and
suffered sorely from "maladies incident to only sons." In the
"coiled perplexities of youth" he "sorrowed, sobbed, and feared"
alone. Blackford's uncultured breast had been meet nurse for Sir
Walter when he roamed a truant boy, but further south of the
becastled capital, topmost Allermuir or steep Caerketton became the
cradle of the next poet and master of Romance that Edinburgh reared.
There, in woody folds of the hills, he found, as he said, "bright is
the ring of words," and there he taught himself to be the right man
to ring them. When Swanston became the Stevensons' summer home, the
undisciplined Robert kicked with his fullest vigour against what he
called the Bastille of Civilisation and the bowing down before "the
bestial Goddesses, Comfort and Respectability." He was loudly
rebellious, and too impatient to follow the ordinary rules of life
or the sage advice, "Jowk and let the jaw gae by."

An impression has arisen, because of his revolt in these years
against convention and creeds, that he was thwarted and
unappreciated in his home and its surroundings. On the contrary, he
was at liberty to indulge his Bohemian tastes and do much as he
listed. His father gave him a seemingly inadequate allowance. Yet
Thomas Stevenson was not a miserly man. He begged his son to go to
his tailor's, for he disapproved of the youth's scuffy, mounte-
bankish appearance. He supplied him with an allowance for travel--in
fact, R. L. S. had all his bills paid, and his own study in a very
hospitable home. R, L. S. owned books, and jewels were the only
things he felt tempted to buy. The 1 pound a month allowance, when
he left school, raised soon after to 82 pounds a year, was to keep
the money from dropping out of that hole in the pocket of his ragged
jacket, which never seemed to get sewed up. Books he had in plenty,
but his parents naturally did not treat him to strings of flashing
stones to wear over his shabby velvet coat, or twine round his
battered straw hat. His money affairs, like the table of Weir of
Hermiston, were likely all his life "just mismanaged." By the time
he settled in Samoa, his literary earnings were thousands a year;
and by then his quiet-living, hard-working father was dead, leaving
an ample fortune. Still he seemed haunted by fear of lack of means.

Louis' love and admiration for his father was deep and sincere. At
his home, when guests gathered round the engineer's table, the boy,
with his eyes sparkling, listened to his father's "strange, humorous
vein of talk," then glanced round with a smile of expectation to see
how much others appreciated their host's well-told tales. "My father
was always my dearest," he wrote. This was a high certificate of
appreciation, when we remember he had the most devoted of mothers.
It hurt the son to the quick to deal his "dearest" a staggering
blow, and decline to follow his hereditary profession. Louis had
tried to be an engineer. He liked the swinging, smoking seas on
which they struggled for a site for sheltering masonry. As in the
case of other Stevensons, the romance of the work was welcome to
him, but the office stool frightened him. When the would-be author
had refused to follow in his kinsmen's footsteps, he promised to
study as an advocate to satisfy his father, who urged his son to
follow a recognised profession. Owing to his easy-going schooling
and lack of a settled course of study, the law classes were
excellent training for the erratic, mercurial-notioned youth.
Stevenson had the good fortune in 1869 to be elected a member of the
Speculative, the famed Debating Society where Jeffrey first met
Scott. There Stevenson encountered his contemporaries in years and
social standing, his superiors in debate, and he, "the lean, ugly,
idle, unpopular student," as he calls himself, enjoyed "its
atmosphere of good-fellowship, its vivid and varied interests, its
traditions of honourable labour and success." "Speculative
evenings," says R. L. S., "form pretty salient milestones on our
intellectual journey." He had gripped a deal of the foundations of
his hereditary trade when seemingly but a consistent idler. He
mastered the intricacies of law, and took to the abhorred office
stool so as to learn the better the workings of its slow machinery.
He tells us he only obtained the mastery of his pen by toiling
faithfully, but inborn in him was the art of talking. Even as a
petti-coated child, we read he gesticulated to aid his glib tongue.
W. E. Henley (whose acquaintance Louis made about 1875, and who
helped Stevenson with his chary praise and frank criticism) says of
his friend, "He radiates talk. He will discourse with you of morals,
music, marbles, men, manners, meta-physics, medicine, mangold-
wurzel, with equal insight into essentials and equal pregnancy and
felicity of utterance."

Along with this ready affluence of speech, the youth had what good
talkers often lack, viz., the patience to hearken to others.
Stevenson shone best in what he called a little committee of
talkers, though his father and he used to argue a question together
for days; but, in the Speculative, he had at first to be a listener.
A candid fellow-member says, "I cannot remember that Stevenson was
ever anything as a speaker. He was nervous and ineffective, and had
no power of debate; but his papers were successful." In one of his
essays, touching on this select assemblage, Louis sketches what the
editor of the History of the Speculative Society, just published,
calls "a little Dutch picture; it focuses in vivid colour the
associations which rise in the memory at the name of the Spec.--the
stately old room aglow with many candles, the books, the portraits,
the pious commemoration of the dead,--famous men and our fathers
that begat us." "Stevenson," Mr Dickson goes on to say, "is the most
famous man of letters who has belonged to the Society since Scott.
No more interesting personality has ever been of our number, and no
one has in the public eye been more closely identified with the
Society." "Oh, I do think the Spec, is about the best thing in
Edinburgh," Louis exclaims, and twice he was President of the
"worshipful society."

A contemporary of Stevenson's, Sheriff Guthrie, wrote in 1899, "I
knew Louis first in the Speculative Society; second, as a fellow
student in the University Law Classes; third, being called to the
Scottish Bar about the same time as a brother-in-law; and last, as a
friend with many interests in common. In the Speculative he spoke
frequently, and read some papers. We recognised his brilliancy, and
we delighted in his vivacity; but we misread the horoscope of his
future. We voted him a light horseman, lacking two essentials for
success--diligence and health. We wondered where he had got the
deftness and rhythm of his style, not knowing that the labour out of
which it was evoked was of itself sufficient to refute our estimate
of his powers of work. As to his health, we forgot behind that
slender, angular frame was not only a father's iron constitution and
a mother's nervous vitality, but his own cheerful spirit and
indomitable will." The Sheriff, in this letter to me, recalls
several reminiscences of Stevenson-some in a playful or contrariwise
vein, and another memory illustrates, he says, "the sweet
reasonableness which mingled with his wayward Bohemianism"; but
space does not allow me to quote more than how, "It seems but
yesterday that I met Louis in the Parliament House, and said I heard
he had got a case. And I seem to see the twinkle in his eye and the
toss of his arms as he answered, 'Yes, my boy, you'll see how I'll
stick in, now that I've tasted blood.'"

Louis' mother showed this friend, Mr. Guthrie, a succession of her
boy's photographs, ending in wig and gown as an advocate. "That is
what I call from Baby to Bar," she said; and then added, beginning
with a smile, and ending with a break in her voice, "I said to Louis
once that the next collection would be from Bar to Baronet, and he
replied, 'It will be from Bar to Burial.'" Except at the "dear old
Spec.," he mixed little his equals in Edinburgh. As a writer in
Blackwood points out, at the period he had grown into swallow-tails,
Edinburgh was by no means devoid of intellectual company, which even
a famed Robert Louis need not have despised. But he abhorred
constraint and codes of rules. He was a born adventurer and
practical experimentist in life, and he explains he spent much of
his time scraping acquaintance with all classes of men and
womenkind. His insatiable curiosity made him thirst to taste of the
bitter as well as the sweet, to be pricked by the thorn as well as
smell the rose. He was quick to see the humorous side of a tale or
episode, but he was tenderly sensitive to ridicule. When he appeared
among his legal brothers-in-law in the Parliament House, a wit there
among the unemployed advocates in the old hall called him the Gifted
Boy. He winced under the laugh, and fled from "the interminable
patter of legal feet." He had cultivated notoriety by his shabby
dress and lank locks. He did not realise, as an American says, "If
you look as if you had slept in your clothes most men will jump to
the conclusion that you have, and you will never get to know them
well enough to explain that your head is so full of noble thoughts
that you haven't time to bother with the dandruff on your
shoulders." In a corridor in the Parliament House, where the men
called to the Bar keep open-mouthed boxes for documents to be
slipped in, one bore on its plate the inscription R. L. Stevenson.
When that alien-looking advocate with unsuspected gifts had cast off
the wig and gown, and had busied himself for years filling up reams
of paper with his thoughts and studies on people, places, and
things, sightseers going through the Courts would be shown this
unused box, which remained so empty while those around it of his old
rivals at the Spec, were full, as they were scaling the heights
which lead to titles and the Bench.

Stevenson wrote of Edinburgh and her climate in a carping spirit,
nevertheless he accorded due praise to her unsurpassed beauty. "No
place so brands a man," he declared; and, in his turn, Stevenson
left his brand on the romantic city of his birth, for now no book on
Scotland's capital is written without mention of the haunts and
homes of that changeling-looking son of hers. The door-plate of 17
Heriot Row bore the inscription of R. L. Stevenson, Advocate. No
blue-bag laden clerk dropped briefs then into its letter-box. In one
of its sun-facing drawing-room windows there stood a big Australian
vine, carefully tended and trained. It was behind it, in the far
window, the eighteen-year-old lad sat when, in the winter's
gloamin', Mrs. Fleeming Jenkin, calling on his mother, was startled
by his voice joining in the conversation. The visitor says, "I
listened in perplexity and arnasement. Who was this son who talked
as Charles Lamb wrote? this young Heine with the Scotch accent? When
I came away the unseen converser came down with me to the front door
to let me out. As he opened it, the light of the gas lamp outside
('For we are very lucky with a lamp before the door,' he says) fell
on him, and I saw a slender, brown, long-haired lad, with great dark
eyes, a brilliant smile, and a gentle, deprecating bend of the head.
I asked him to come and see us. He said, 'Shall I come to-morrow?'"
He called next day, for Louis grasped at anything or any person that
he felt drawn to. He took part in their theatricals, but otherwise
eschewed social functions in Edinburgh. An old friend of his
father's asked him to come to fill a gap at his table, though his
own son had informed him Louis never went to prearranged feasts.
Louis himself replied to this invitation: "C. is textually correct,
only there are exceptions everywhere to prove the rule. I do not
hate dining at your house. At seven, on Wednesday, his temples
wreathed with some appropriate garland, you will behold the victim
come smiling to the altar." The last words are characteristic of his
attitude when he was lured into society,--he went a willing victim,
with no affectation of martyrdom. The few who met him in Edinburgh
drawing-rooms found him prodigal of tongue, somewhat puzzling with
his wholesale enthusiasms, absurd flights of fancy, theories he had
to propound, and ever ready to change like a chameleon to tone with
his surroundings. The spritish, fantastic youth impressed those he
encountered, even when he was one of the unfledged eaglets hatched
in the ancient eyrie of his precipitous city, whom Browning tells us
are not counted "till there is a rush of wings, and lo! they are
flown," "What was so taking in him, and how is one to analyse that
dazzling surface of pleasantry, that changeful, shining humour, wit,
wisdom, recklessness, beneath which beat the most kind and tolerant
of hearts?" asks Andrew Lang. But not only through the magnetism of
his personal presence did he attract even strangers, but through his
pen has he held in thrall all the reading public who liked his work.
"He has put into his books a great deal of all that went to the
making of his life," wrote his cousin, "though he had the art of
confiding a good deal, but not telling everything." It would have
been interesting to see, if Stevenson had taken it into his elfin-
locked head to learn to shine in debate, and, instead of incubating
a budding Scott, as he said, "the Spec." had trained an able
advocate, if the glamour of his personality would have extended to
the judges, and made him, with his well-chosen words, a successful
pleader. The boards of the Parliament House were too well worn a
road for so tramp-blooded a man. The tune "Over the Hills and Far
Away" was for ever humming in his head. He left the venerable city
of his birth, which he vowed he must always think of as home, and
steered a course on his way to fame "far ayont the muckle sea" which
led him from the Bar to Burial.




ACROSS THE SEAS


As an advocate, Stevenson found ample time to pursue his chosen
profession of letters, for, during the winters in Edinburgh, he
wrote much, and gradually his essays, etc., appeared in magazines,
and are now gathered into happily named volumes. He spent the long
vacations, when the Courts had risen, abroad, mostly frequenting an
artist-colony in Fontainebleau. At that time he was full of a
project, in company with some congenial spirits, to form a
peripatetic club, buy a barge, and glide leisurely through Europe by
calm waterways. He had gone yachting one summer with a sea-loving
brother advocate up the west coast of Scotland. The memory of that
trip inhabited his mind, and he made his hero, David Balfour, when
"Kidnapped" sail by the self-same islands and seas. Louis was
persuaded by his boating friend, the following season, to embark
with him on a canoe trip through Belgium; and the log of that tour
became immortalised as An Inland Voyage, Stevenson's first book. His
travels did not end when he left his frail craft at Pontoise, for,
returning to Gretz, on the skirts of Fontainebleau, he first met his
future wife, and that led a few years later to his following her to
San Francisco, when she was free to remarry.

He crossed the Atlantic and America as an Emigrant. That mode of
life proved too hard for him. He had sailed and paddled without hurt
in his fleet and footless beast of burden, the Arethusa. In the
ensuing year (1877), he travelled "Through the Cevennes with a
Donkey," slept under starry skies, or camped in plumping rain. Often
at home he buckled on his knapsack and tramped along the open road,
but in these trips, as in his two longer outdoor journeys, he had
the heavens above him. The Emigrant was crowded with his fellows, so
Louis arrived sick and sorry on the other side of the Atlantic,
where he had to support himself, having left his home against his
father's wishes. The rising author found his market value in America
low-priced, and his curiosity as to how it felt to be ill and
penniless was satisfied. After his marriage in 1880, Louis, his
wife, and her son became "Silverado Squatters," which proved a
happier venture, both for purse and constitution, than being an
"Amateur Emmigrant"; also, Mr Stevenson generously settled an income
on his son.

In a perpetual pursuit of health, the writer and his hostages to
fortune rambled from the snows of Switzerland to the vineyards of
France, and finally settled for three years at Bournemouth.
Stevenson's undermined health grew worse; but he laboured on at his
work, from his sick bed. Some summers he spent in Scotland, and at
Braemar wrote Treasure Island: then Jekyll and Hyde brought him
notoriety. He was anxious to return to his Alma Mater, and be there
a Professor of History. A house in the cup-like dell of Colinton,
where every twig had a chorister, would have sheltered him from the
purgatorial climate; and the College, like the Courts, allowed long
vacations, spring and summer, to journey off to bask in the South.
But this plan, like the barge one, came to naught, for he was not
elected. The tales of tropic islands in the South Seas--"beautiful
places green for ever, perfect climate, perfect shapes of men and
women with red flowers in their hair and nothing to do but study
oratory and etiquette, sit in the sun and pick up the fruits as they
fall,"--remained in his tenacious memory. A guest at his father's in
1874 spoke of them, and the young Stevenson had stored the
description away in his mind, to be unearthed when he willed, as was
his habit. When first he heard of those favored spots, he had two
anchors which kept him bound to Edinburgh--his parents. The good
engineer died in 1887; and the other anchor, his mother, he found
could be lifted, and became the best of ballast. When he elected to
become a world wanderer, she left her Edinburgh home and, without
hesitation, went off with her son and his household when they turned
their backs on Europe in 1887. Her journal to her sister tells of
these travels "From Saranac to Marquesas." She simply but racily
describes their course, which ended in the cruise on the Casco. In
her book we enjoy genuine glimpses of the author, not so much as the
man who has written himself into fame, but her happy-tempered, hero-
hearted, eager-minded boy, who for forty-five years was all the
world to her. The invigorating cold of the Adirondacks had its
drawbacks, as had Davos; and Stevenson, who, a few years before had
felt the sharp pinch of poverty at San Francisco, now chartered from
there a ship of his own, and sailed away out of the Golden Gate, on
his South Sea Odyssey, to those islands he had heard of years
before, little thinking, as he listened "till he was sick with
desire to go there," that talk was to be as a sign-post to him where
to travel to. "For Louis' sake," his mother explains in her racy
journal letters, speaking of having chartered the Casco, "I can't
but be glad, for his heart has so long been set upon it, it must
surely be good for his health to have such a desire granted." Louis
warned his mother years before she had a nomad for a son, but she
had never objected, and sat knitting on deck, well content not to be
"in turret pent," but to go forth with the bright sword she had
forged. "She adapted herself," her brother says, "to her strange
surroundings, went about barefoot, found no heat too great for her,
and at an age when her sisters at home were old ladies, learnt to
ride!" After many wanderings through the warm ocean waters, with
"green days in forest and blue days at sea," the yachters finally
saw Samoa, and to the author it was the El Dorado of his dreams.
"When the Casco cast anchor," he avers, "my soul went down with
these moorings, whence no windless may extract nor any diver fish it
up." It was indeed a unique experience for one of the master workers
of the world, one whose subtle mintage of words had made his readers
his friends, to settle in an uttermost isle of the Pacific. He
throve there, and was able to enjoy the flavour of the life of
adventure he had craved for, and to look into the bright face of
danger. He built for himself a palace in the wild named Vailima.
From Edinburgh came out the familiar furniture he had been brought
up among, which had been the stage scenery of his chimney-corner
days, when the back bed-room chairs became a ship, and the sofa-back
was his hunter's camp. At Vailima he, like Ibsen's Peer Gynt,
received "a race gift from his childhood's home." He had in olden
times played at being a minister like his grandfather, to wile away
a toyless Sunday. When he grew into his unorthodox dark shirt and
velvet-jacket stage, he had been a rebellious, rather atheistical
youth; but at Samoa, maybe to please his truly good, uncanting
mother, or the sight of the belongings from his old home, made him
bethink himself of his father's reverent conducting of family
worship. He would have the same, but set to work and composed
prayers for himself. Beautifully worded they are, full of his gospel
of kindliness and gladness, and he read them with effective fervour
in the hall of Vailima, with his betartaned servants gathered round.
These devotional exercises of his have been quoted by the "unco
guid" to make him into what Henley severely styled "a Seraph in
Chocolate, a barley-sugar effigy of a real man." The religious faith
of Stevenson was the same as Ben Adhem's in Leigh Hunt's poem, who,
when he found his name was not among those who loved the Lord,
cheerily asked the angel to write him as one who loved his fellow-
men. The heavenly messenger returned

    "And showed the names whom love of God had blessed,"
     And "lo! Ben Adhem's led all the rest"

To Stevenson, throughout his life, all the world was truly a stage.
He went gaily along playing his part, and when he came to Samoa, he,
on whose brows the dews of youth still sparkled, gleefully revelled
in the pomp and circumstance which allow him to make believe he was
a chieftain. He could go flower-bedecked and garlanded without
comment in among his adopted subjects. He paid deference to Samoan
codes of manners, a thing he had scorned to do in his native land.

All his life he indulged in too few relaxations. The grim Scots
divines, whose "damnatory creed" Louis objected to so strongly, in
their studies, we read, reserved a corner for rod and gun. In his
library there was never a sign of sporting tools, not even a golf-
club. He was not effeminate; in fact, if "the man had been dowered
with better health, we would have lost the author," says one speaker
of him; but he simply never let go the pen, and, doubtless, his
singleness of purpose, his want of toil-resting hobbies, was
hampering to his health. Walking-tours, during which he was busy all
the while taking mental notes for some article, was no brain
holiday. In Samoa, he enjoyed the purest of pleasures, gardening.
"Nothing is so interesting," he says, in his VAILIMA LETTERS, "as
weeding, clearing, and path-making. It does make you feel so well."
But despite warring with weeds and forest rides, in an enervating
country, he wrote persistently through the swooningly hot days of
damp heat.

"I have done my fiddling so long under Vesuvius, that I have almost
forgotten to play, and can only wait for the eruption and think it
long of coming," he wrote; and shortly after, in December 1894, it
came and smote him down to the earth with merciful painlessness. His
wife, his step-children, and his mother were beside him when, at the
highest water-mark his craftsmanship had reached, he paid the debt
to overstrain, and laid him down with a will. The closing act of his
life's drama befitted his instinct for effective staging. As he lay
shrouded in his nation's flag, the Samoans, who loved him, came to
pay their tribute and take farewell of their honey-tongued playmate
and counsellor, Tusitala. They counted it an honour to be asked to
hew a track through the tropic forest up which they bore him to his
chosen resting-place on the mountain top of Vaea, overlooking
Vailima, There a table tombstone, like that over the martyrs' graves
on the hills of home, marks where this kindly Scot is laid, with the
Pacific for ever booming his dirge. Samoa, heretofore, to most was
but a speck on a great ocean of another hemisphere. Stevenson
transformed it into a "Mecca of the Mind," where pilgrims, bearing
his name in remembrance, send their thoughts to do reverence at that
shrine where,

    "High on his Patmos of the Southern Seas,
     Our Northern dreamer sleeps"

no longer separated from his own country and kindred by a world of
waters, but, as another friend and poet said, divided from us now
only by the unbridged river of Death.

Of his writings the list is long and varied, and forms a goodly
heritage. Like himself, they are compounded of many parts, for he
was essayist, poet, novelist, traveller, moralist, biographer, and
historian, and a Master of his Tools at all. Beside his own books,
through many of which we may make his intimate acquaintance, his
letters, and others telling the story of his life, form many
volumes. Stevenson advised every one to read often, not only the
Waverley Novels, but the biography of good Sir Walter. "His life,"
he affirmed, "was perhaps more unique than his work," and that
remark applies to R. L. S. himself, as well as to his great
predecessor. Having burned his immature efforts when he was
following his own "private determination to be an author," when
ostensibly studying engineering, there are but two pamphlets,
printed in his boyhood, which are not written when he had acquired
his finished style. Louis' last creation, Weir of Hermiston, he
himself thought was his master-piece, and he was always his own
surest and severest critic. The portrait of the judge on whom he
modelled Hermiston, i.e., Braxfield, was not in Stevenson's advocate
days bequeathed to the Parliament House, but he had seen it in a
Raeburn Exhibition he reviewed. He recollected the outward semblance
of the man in his receptive memory till he resurrected Braxfield as
Hermiston. The half-told tale is in itself a monument which,
unfinished though it be, shows us how clever an artificer Louis had
become.

And what manner of man to the outward eye was this gypsily-inclined
descendant of square-headed Scottish engineers? With his dark eyes
looking as if they had drunk in the sunshine in some southern land,
his uncut hair, his odd, shabby clothes clinging to his attenuated
frame, his elaborate manners and habit of gesticulating as he spoke,
he was often mistaken for a starving musician or foreign mountebank.
It is not surprising that continental officials doubted his
passport's statement that he was a Briton. In France he was
imprisoned, and he complains he could not pass a frontier or visit a
bank without suspicion. "A slender, boyish presence, with a
graceful, somewhat fantastic bearing, and a singular power of
attraction in the eyes and a smile were the first things that
impressed you," says his biographer. Like his mother, he remained to
the end of his life perennially young in appearance and spirits. The
burden of years never weighed him down or dimmed his outlook. His
face kindled and flushed with pleasure when he heard of a doughty
deed, a spice of wit, or some tale to his liking. Few drew him on
canvas in his lifetime, though he summered among artists. Sargent,
in 1885, did a small full-length portrait of him, which "is said to
verge on caricature, and is in Boston. W. B. Richmond, R. A., about
the same time, at Bournemouth, began another in oils, not much more
than laid in in two sittings." Louis sat to an Italian, Count Nerli,
in Samoa; but in this last portrait he looks painfully haggard,
reminding us of his own words, "the practice of letters is miserably
harassing." Because of the too brilliant light elsewhere in Vailima,
he was painted in a room which was close, and the air fatigued him.
While sitting, he wiled away an hour by making doggerel lines all to
rhyme with the artist's name, Nerli. The portrait was bought by a
Scotch-woman travelling in New Zeal and, where, after the author's
death, it had remained unsold. His mother, on returning to Scotland
when bereft of her boy, asked to see the picture again. She had
disapproved of it in Samoa, as it was over true a likeness,
representing him sadly emaciated. Seeing it again, she revoked her
former judgment, and wished to possess it, but the purchaser also
had grown to prize it. So it hangs in her drawing-room, near by
where the Eildons stand sentinel over Scott's resting-place. This
picture of him who lies on Vaea's crest looks down with a slightly
quizzical expression, as if amused at finding himself ensconced in a
place of honour in the house of strangers on Tweedside. Photographs
there are in plenty of Stevenson, and one snapshot, enlarged in the
Edinburgh Edition, recalls him looking up with "long, hatchet face,
black hair, and haunting gaze, that follows as you move about the
room." But his likeness was as difficult for the photographer, or
the sun, to catch, as for the painter to put on canvas, for the
peculiar fascination of the living man lay in himself, in the
elusive charm of his smile, and in his manner of speech. However,
his contemporaries have left their printed records of his appearance
and his peculiar personality. Henley's perfect description in verse
is too well known to need quotation. Ugly, Stevenson called himself,
but this was not so. He was original in looks and mind, his lank
brown hair straggled over his high forehead, and framed his thin,
high-cheeked, sallow, oval face. His brown eyes and full red lips
gave a dash of colour to his features. His schoolmate, Mr. Baildon,
says truly, "his eyes were always genial, however gaily the lights
danced in them; but about the mouth there was something of trickery
and mocking, as of a spirit that had already peeped behind the
scenes of Life's pageant, and more than guessed its unrealities."

Repose he never tasted of, for his zest in life, his adventurous
inclination to explore, his insatiable curiosity, kept him ever
moving at topmost speed. To understand the mainspring which affected
the man's character--the machinery that supplied him with an
inexhaustible nerve force and vitality--Mr Colvin explains, "besides
humour, which kept wholesome laughter always ready at his lips, was
a perfectly warm, loyal, and tender heart, which, through all his
experiments and agitations, made the law of kindness the one ruling
law of his life." He marvelled, on his way through the Pilgrim's
Progress, why the man with the muck-rake grovelled in straws and
dust, and never looked up to the glittering crown held out for his
acceptance. This mulish blindness puzzled the boy, and when he grew
up, he opened the eyes, and illumined by his work and his example
the dreary-hearted who wasted their opportunities, not seeing the
number of beautiful things which made the world into a royal
pleasance. With tuneful words he persuaded those who plodded with
dusty feet along the high-road to pause for a while and saunter
among the greener fields of earth, and through the stimulating
courage that shone through every chapter he wrote, he, like his
sires, "the ready and the strong of word," has, by his works, left
lights to shine upon the paths of men.




[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





Produced by Jim Tinsley <jtinsley@pobox.com> with help from the
distributed proofreaders at http://charlz.dynip.com/gutenberg





Arms and the Man

by George Bernard Shaw




INTRODUCTION

To the irreverent--and which of us will claim entire exemption from that
comfortable classification?--there is something very amusing in the
attitude of the orthodox criticism toward Bernard Shaw. He so obviously
disregards all the canons and unities and other things which every
well-bred dramatist is bound to respect that his work is really unworthy
of serious criticism (orthodox). Indeed he knows no more about the
dramatic art than, according to his own story in "The Man of Destiny,"
Napoleon at Tavazzano knew of the Art of War. But both men were
successes each in his way--the latter won victories and the former
gained audiences, in the very teeth of the accepted theories of war and
the theatre. Shaw does not know that it is unpardonable sin to have his
characters make long speeches at one another, apparently thinking that
this embargo applies only to long speeches which consist mainly of
bombast and rhetoric. There never was an author who showed less
predilection for a specific medium by which to accomplish his results.
He recognized, early in his days, many things awry in the world and he
assumed the task of mundane reformation with a confident spirit. It
seems such a small job at twenty to set the times aright. He began as an
Essayist, but who reads essays now-a-days?--he then turned novelist with
no better success, for no one would read such preposterous stuff as he
chose to emit. He only succeeded in proving that absolutely rational men
and women--although he has created few of the latter--can be most
extremely disagreeable to our conventional way of thinking.

As a last resort, he turned to the stage, not that he cared for the
dramatic art, for no man seems to care less about "Art for Art's sake,"
being in this a perfect foil to his brilliant compatriot and
contemporary, Wilde. He cast his theories in dramatic forms merely
because no other course except silence or physical revolt was open to
him. For a long time it seemed as if this resource too was doomed to
fail him. But finally he has attained a hearing and now attempts at
suppression merely serve to advertise their victim.

It will repay those who seek analogies in literature to compare Shaw
with Cervantes. After a life of heroic endeavor, disappointment,
slavery, and poverty, the author of "Don Quixote" gave the world a
serious work which caused to be laughed off the world's stage forever
the final vestiges of decadent chivalry.

The institution had long been outgrown, but its vernacular continued to
be the speech and to express the thought "of the world and among the
vulgar," as the quaint, old novelist puts it, just as to-day the novel
intended for the consumption of the unenlightened must deal with peers
and millionaires and be dressed in stilted language. Marvellously he
succeeded, but in a way he least intended. We have not yet, after so
many years, determined whether it is a work to laugh or cry over. "It is
our joyfullest modern book," says Carlyle, while Landor thinks that
"readers who see nothing more than a burlesque in 'Don Quixote' have but
shallow appreciation of the work."

Shaw in like manner comes upon the scene when many of our social usages
are outworn. He sees the fact, announces it, and we burst into guffaws.
The continuous laughter which greets Shaw's plays arises from a real
contrast in the point of view of the dramatist and his audiences. When
Pinero or Jones describes a whimsical situation we never doubt for a
moment that the author's point of view is our own and that the abnormal
predicament of his characters appeals to him in the same light as to his
audience. With Shaw this sense of community of feeling is wholly
lacking. He describes things as he sees them, and the house is in a
roar. Who is right? If we were really using our own senses and not
gazing through the glasses of convention and romance and make-believe,
should we see things as Shaw does?

Must it not cause Shaw to doubt his own or the public's sanity to hear
audiences laughing boisterously over tragic situations? And yet, if they
did not come to laugh, they would not come at all. Mockery is the price
he must pay for a hearing. Or has he calculated to a nicety the power of
reaction? Does he seek to drive us to aspiration by the portrayal of
sordidness, to disinterestedness by the picture of selfishness, to
illusion by disillusionment? It is impossible to believe that he is
unconscious of the humor of his dramatic situations, yet he stoically
gives no sign. He even dares the charge, terrible in proportion to its
truth, which the most serious of us shrinks from--the lack of a sense of
humor. Men would rather have their integrity impugned.

In "Arms and the Man" the subject which occupies the dramatist's
attention is that survival of barbarity--militarism--which raises its
horrid head from time to time to cast a doubt on the reality of our
civilization. No more hoary superstition survives than that the donning
of a uniform changes the nature of the wearer. This notion pervades
society to such an extent that when we find some soldiers placed upon
the stage acting rationally, our conventionalized senses are shocked.
The only men who have no illusions about war are those who have recently
been there, and, of course, Mr. Shaw, who has no illusions about
anything.

It is hard to speak too highly of "Candida." No equally subtle and
incisive study of domestic relations exists in the English drama. One
has to turn to George Meredith's "The Egoist" to find such character
dissection. The central note of the play is, that with the true woman,
weakness which appeals to the maternal instinct is more powerful than
strength which offers protection. Candida is quite unpoetic, as, indeed,
with rare exceptions, women are prone to be. They have small delight in
poetry, but are the stuff of which poems and dreams are made. The
husband glorying in his strength but convicted of his weakness, the poet
pitiful in his physical impotence but strong in his perception of truth,
the hopelessly de-moralized manufacturer, the conventional and hence
emotional typist make up a group which the drama of any language may be
challenged to rival.

In "The Man of Destiny" the object of the dramatist is not so much the
destruction as the explanation of the Napoleonic tradition, which has so
powerfully influenced generation after generation for a century. However
the man may be regarded, he was a miracle. Shaw shows that he achieved
his extraordinary career by suspending, for himself, the pressure of the
moral and conventional atmosphere, while leaving it operative for
others. Those who study this play--extravaganza, that it is--will attain
a clearer comprehension of Napoleon than they can get from all the
biographies.

"You Never Can Tell" offers an amusing study of the play of social
conventions. The "twins" illustrate the disconcerting effects of that
perfect frankness which would make life intolerable. Gloria demonstrates
the powerlessness of reason to overcome natural instincts. The idea that
parental duties and functions can be fulfilled by the light of such
knowledge as man and woman attain by intuition is brilliantly lampooned.
Crampton, the father, typifies the common superstition that among the
privileges of parenthood are inflexibility, tyranny, and respect, the
last entirely regardless of whether it has been deserved.

The waiter, William, is the best illustration of the man "who knows his
place" that the stage has seen. He is the most pathetic figure of the
play. One touch of verisimilitude is lacking; none of the guests gives
him a tip, yet he maintains his urbanity. As Mr. Shaw has not yet
visited America he may be unaware of the improbability of this
situation.

To those who regard literary men merely as purveyors of amusement for
people who have not wit enough to entertain themselves, Ibsen and Shaw,
Maeterlinck and Gorky must remain enigmas. It is so much pleasanter to
ignore than to face unpleasant realities--to take Riverside Drive and
not Mulberry Street as the exponent of our life and the expression of
our civilization. These men are the sappers and miners of the advancing
army of justice. The audience which demands the truth and despises the
contemptible conventions that dominate alike our stage and our life is
daily growing. Shaw and men like him--if indeed he is not absolutely
unique--will not for the future lack a hearing.

M.






ARMS AND THE MAN

ACT I

    Night. A lady's bedchamber in Bulgaria, in a small
    town near the Dragoman Pass. It is late in
    November in the year 1885, and through an open
    window with a little balcony on the left can be
    seen a peak of the Balkans, wonderfully white and
    beautiful in the starlit snow. The interior of the
    room is not like anything to be seen in the east
    of Europe. It is half rich Bulgarian, half cheap
    Viennese. The counterpane and hangings of the bed,
    the window curtains, the little carpet, and all
    the ornamental textile fabrics in the room are
    oriental and gorgeous: the paper on the walls is
    occidental and paltry. Above the head of the bed,
    which stands against a little wall cutting off the
    right hand corner of the room diagonally, is a
    painted wooden shrine, blue and gold, with an
    ivory image of Christ, and a light hanging before
    it in a pierced metal ball suspended by three
    chains. On the left, further forward, is an
    ottoman. The washstand, against the wall on the
    left, consists of an enamelled iron basin with a
    pail beneath it in a painted metal frame, and a
    single towel on the rail at the side. A chair near
    it is Austrian bent wood, with cane seat. The
    dressing table, between the bed and the window, is
    an ordinary pine table, covered with a cloth of
    many colors, but with an expensive toilet mirror
    on it. The door is on the right; and there is a
    chest of drawers between the door and the bed.
    This chest of drawers is also covered by a
    variegated native cloth, and on it there is a pile
    of paper backed novels, a box of chocolate creams,
    and a miniature easel, on which is a large
    photograph of an extremely handsome officer, whose
    lofty bearing and magnetic glance can be felt even
    from the portrait. The room is lighted by a candle
    on the chest of drawers, and another on the
    dressing table, with a box of matches beside it.

    The window is hinged doorwise and stands wide
    open, folding back to the left. Outside a pair of
    wooden shutters, opening outwards, also stand
    open. On the balcony, a young lady, intensely
    conscious of the romantic beauty of the night, and
    of the fact that her own youth and beauty is a part
    of it, is on the balcony, gazing at the snowy
    Balkans. She is covered by a long mantle of furs,
    worth, on a moderate estimate, about three times
    the furniture of her room.

    Her reverie is interrupted by her mother,
    Catherine Petkoff, a woman over forty, imperiously
    energetic, with magnificent black hair and eyes,
    who might be a very splendid specimen of the wife
    of a mountain farmer, but is determined to be a
    Viennese lady, and to that end wears a fashionable
    tea gown on all occasions.

CATHERINE (entering hastily, full of good news). Raina--(she
pronounces it Rah-eena, with the stress on the ee) Raina--(she
goes to the bed, expecting to find Raina there.) Why,
where--(Raina looks into the room.) Heavens! child, are you out
in the night air instead of in your bed? You'll catch your
death. Louka told me you were asleep.

RAINA (coming in). I sent her away. I wanted to be alone. The
stars are so beautiful! What is the matter?

CATHERINE. Such news. There has been a battle!

RAINA (her eyes dilating). Ah! (She throws the cloak on the
ottoman, and comes eagerly to Catherine in her nightgown, a
pretty garment, but evidently the only one she has on.)

CATHERINE. A great battle at Slivnitza! A victory! And it was
won by Sergius.

RAINA (with a cry of delight). Ah! (Rapturously.) Oh, mother!
(Then, with sudden anxiety) Is father safe?

CATHERINE. Of course: he sent me the news. Sergius is the hero
of the hour, the idol of the regiment.

RAINA. Tell me, tell me. How was it! (Ecstatically) Oh, mother,
mother, mother! (Raina pulls her mother down on the ottoman; and
they kiss one another frantically.)

CATHERINE (with surging enthusiasm). You can't guess how
splendid it is. A cavalry charge--think of that! He defied our
Russian commanders--acted without orders--led a charge on his
own responsibility--headed it himself--was the first man to
sweep through their guns. Can't you see it, Raina; our gallant
splendid Bulgarians with their swords and eyes flashing,
thundering down like an avalanche and scattering the wretched
Servian dandies like chaff. And you--you kept Sergius waiting a
year before you would be betrothed to him. Oh, if you have a
drop of Bulgarian blood in your veins, you will worship him when
he comes back.

RAINA. What will he care for my poor little worship after the
acclamations of a whole army of heroes? But no matter: I am so
happy--so proud! (She rises and walks about excitedly.) It
proves that all our ideas were real after all.

CATHERINE (indignantly). Our ideas real! What do you mean?

RAINA. Our ideas of what Sergius would do--our patriotism--our
heroic ideals. Oh, what faithless little creatures girls are!--I
sometimes used to doubt whether they were anything but dreams.
When I buckled on Sergius's sword he looked so noble: it was
treason to think of disillusion or humiliation or failure. And
yet--and yet--(Quickly.) Promise me you'll never tell him.

CATHERINE. Don't ask me for promises until I know what I am
promising.

RAINA. Well, it came into my head just as he was holding me in
his arms and looking into my eyes, that perhaps we only had our
heroic ideas because we are so fond of reading Byron and
Pushkin, and because we were so delighted with the opera that
season at Bucharest. Real life is so seldom like that--indeed
never, as far as I knew it then. (Remorsefully.) Only think,
mother, I doubted him: I wondered whether all his heroic
qualities and his soldiership might not prove mere imagination
when he went into a real battle. I had an uneasy fear that he
might cut a poor figure there beside all those clever Russian
officers.

CATHERINE. A poor figure! Shame on you! The Servians have
Austrian officers who are just as clever as our Russians; but we
have beaten them in every battle for all that.

RAINA (laughing and sitting down again). Yes, I was only a
prosaic little coward. Oh, to think that it was all true--that
Sergius is just as splendid and noble as he looks--that the
world is really a glorious world for women who can see its glory
and men who can act its romance! What happiness! what
unspeakable fulfilment! Ah! (She throws herself on her knees
beside her mother and flings her arms passionately round her.
They are interrupted by the entry of Louka, a handsome, proud
girl in a pretty Bulgarian peasant's dress with double apron, so
defiant that her servility to Raina is almost insolent. She is
afraid of Catherine, but even with her goes as far as she dares.
She is just now excited like the others; but she has no sympathy
for Raina's raptures and looks contemptuously at the ecstasies
of the two before she addresses them.)

LOUKA. If you please, madam, all the windows are to be closed
and the shutters made fast. They say there may be shooting in
the streets. (Raina and Catherine rise together, alarmed.) The
Servians are being chased right back through the pass; and they
say they may run into the town. Our cavalry will be after them;
and our people will be ready for them you may be sure, now that
they are running away. (She goes out on the balcony and pulls
the outside shutters to; then steps back into the room.)

RAINA. I wish our people were not so cruel. What glory is there
in killing wretched fugitives?

CATHERINE (business-like, her housekeeping instincts aroused).
I must see that everything is made safe downstairs.

RAINA (to Louka). Leave the shutters so that I can just close
them if I hear any noise.

CATHERINE (authoritatively, turning on her way to the door).
Oh, no, dear, you must keep them fastened. You would be sure to
drop off to sleep and leave them open. Make them fast, Louka.

LOUKA. Yes, madam. (She fastens them.)

RAINA. Don't be anxious about me. The moment I hear a shot, I
shall blow out the candles and roll myself up in bed with my
ears well covered.

CATHERINE. Quite the wisest thing you can do, my love.
Good-night.

RAINA. Good-night. (They kiss one another, and Raina's emotion
comes back for a moment.) Wish me joy of the happiest night of
my life--if only there are no fugitives.

CATHERINE. Go to bed, dear; and don't think of them. (She goes
out.)

LOUKA (secretly, to Raina). If you would like the shutters
open, just give them a push like this. (She pushes them: they
open: she pulls them to again.) One of them ought to be bolted
at the bottom; but the bolt's gone.

RAINA (with dignity, reproving her). Thanks, Louka; but we must
do what we are told. (Louka makes a grimace.) Good-night.

LOUKA (carelessly). Good-night. (She goes out, swaggering.)

   (Raina, left alone, goes to the chest of drawers,
    and adores the portrait there with feelings that
    are beyond all expression. She does not kiss it or
    press it to her breast, or shew it any mark of
    bodily affection; but she takes it in her hands
    and elevates it like a priestess.)

RAINA (looking up at the picture with worship.) Oh, I shall
never be unworthy of you any more, my hero--never, never, never.

    (She replaces it reverently, and selects a novel
    from the little pile of books. She turns over the
    leaves dreamily; finds her page; turns the book
    inside out at it; and then, with a happy sigh,
    gets into bed and prepares to read herself to
    sleep. But before abandoning herself to fiction,
    she raises her eyes once more, thinking of the
    blessed reality and murmurs)

My hero! my hero!

    (A distant shot breaks the quiet of the night
    outside. She starts, listening; and two more
    shots, much nearer, follow, startling her so that
    she scrambles out of bed, and hastily blows out
    the candle on the chest of drawers. Then, putting
    her fingers in her ears, she runs to the
    dressing-table and blows out the light there, and
    hurries back to bed. The room is now in darkness:
    nothing is visible but the glimmer of the light in
    the pierced ball before the image, and the
    starlight seen through the slits at the top of the
    shutters. The firing breaks out again: there is a
    startling fusillade quite close at hand. Whilst it
    is still echoing, the shutters disappear, pulled
    open from without, and for an instant the
    rectangle of snowy starlight flashes out with the
    figure of a man in black upon it. The shutters
    close immediately and the room is dark again. But
    the silence is now broken by the sound of panting.
    Then there is a scrape; and the flame of a match
    is seen in the middle of the room.)

RAINA (crouching on the bed). Who's there? (The match is out
instantly.) Who's there? Who is that?

A MAN'S VOICE (in the darkness, subduedly, but threateningly).
Sh--sh! Don't call out or you'll be shot. Be good; and no harm
will happen to you. (She is heard leaving her bed, and making
for the door.) Take care, there's no use in trying to run away.
Remember, if you raise your voice my pistol will go off.
(Commandingly.) Strike a light and let me see you. Do you hear?
(Another moment of silence and darkness. Then she is heard
retreating to the dressing-table. She lights a candle, and the
mystery is at an end. A man of about 35, in a deplorable plight,
bespattered with mud and blood and snow, his belt and the strap
of his revolver case keeping together the torn ruins of the blue
coat of a Servian artillery officer. As far as the candlelight
and his unwashed, unkempt condition make it possible to judge,
he is a man of middling stature and undistinguished appearance,
with strong neck and shoulders, a roundish, obstinate looking
head covered with short crisp bronze curls, clear quick blue
eyes and good brows and mouth, a hopelessly prosaic nose like
that of a strong-minded baby, trim soldierlike carriage and
energetic manner, and with all his wits about him in spite of
his desperate predicament--even with a sense of humor of it,
without, however, the least intention of trifling with it or
throwing away a chance. He reckons up what he can guess about
Raina--her age, her social position, her character, the extent
to which she is frightened--at a glance, and continues, more
politely but still most determinedly) Excuse my disturbing you;
but you recognise my uniform--Servian. If I'm caught I shall be
killed. (Determinedly.) Do you understand that?

RAINA. Yes.

MAN. Well, I don't intend to get killed if I can help it. (Still
more determinedly.) Do you understand that? (He locks the door
with a snap.)

RAINA (disdainfully). I suppose not. (She draws herself up
superbly, and looks him straight in the face, saying with
emphasis) Some soldiers, I know, are afraid of death.

MAN (with grim goodhumor). All of them, dear lady, all of them,
believe me. It is our duty to live as long as we can, and kill
as many of the enemy as we can. Now if you raise an alarm--

RAINA (cutting him short). You will shoot me. How do you know
that I am afraid to die?

MAN (cunningly). Ah; but suppose I don't shoot you, what will
happen then? Why, a lot of your cavalry--the greatest
blackguards in your army--will burst into this pretty room of
yours and slaughter me here like a pig; for I'll fight like a
demon: they shan't get me into the street to amuse themselves
with: I know what they are. Are you prepared to receive that
sort of company in your present undress? (Raina, suddenly
conscious of her nightgown, instinctively shrinks and gathers it
more closely about her. He watches her, and adds, pitilessly)
It's rather scanty, eh? (She turns to the ottoman. He raises his
pistol instantly, and cries) Stop! (She stops.) Where are you
going?

RAINA (with dignified patience). Only to get my cloak.

MAN (darting to the ottoman and snatching the cloak). A good
idea. No: I'll keep the cloak: and you will take care that
nobody comes in and sees you without it. This is a better weapon
than the pistol. (He throws the pistol down on the ottoman.)

RAINA (revolted). It is not the weapon of a gentleman!

MAN. It's good enough for a man with only you to stand between
him and death. (As they look at one another for a moment, Raina
hardly able to believe that even a Servian officer can be so
cynically and selfishly unchivalrous, they are startled by a
sharp fusillade in the street. The chill of imminent death
hushes the man's voice as he adds) Do you hear? If you are going
to bring those scoundrels in on me you shall receive them as you
are. (Raina meets his eye with unflinching scorn. Suddenly he
starts, listening. There is a step outside. Someone tries the
door, and then knocks hurriedly and urgently at it. Raina looks
at the man, breathless. He throws up his head with the gesture
of a man who sees that it is all over with him, and, dropping
the manner which he has been assuming to intimidate her, flings
the cloak to her, exclaiming, sincerely and kindly) No use: I'm
done for. Quick! wrap yourself up: they're coming!

RAINA (catching the cloak eagerly). Oh, thank you. (She wraps
herself up with great relief. He draws his sabre and turns to
the door, waiting.)

LOUKA (outside, knocking). My lady, my lady! Get up, quick, and
open the door.

RAINA (anxiously). What will you do?

MAN (grimly). Never mind. Keep out of the way. It will not last
long.

RAINA (impulsively). I'll help you. Hide yourself, oh, hide
yourself, quick, behind the curtain. (She seizes him by a torn
strip of his sleeve, and pulls him towards the window.)

MAN (yielding to her). There is just half a chance, if you keep
your head. Remember: nine soldiers out of ten are born fools.
(He hides behind the curtain, looking out for a moment to say,
finally) If they find me, I promise you a fight--a devil of a
fight! (He disappears. Raina takes of the cloak and throws it
across the foot of the bed. Then with a sleepy, disturbed air,
she opens the door. Louka enters excitedly.)

LOUKA. A man has been seen climbing up the water-pipe to your
balcony--a Servian. The soldiers want to search for him; and
they are so wild and drunk and furious. My lady says you are to
dress at once.

RAINA (as if annoyed at being disturbed). They shall not search
here. Why have they been let in?

CATHERINE (coming in hastily). Raina, darling, are you safe?
Have you seen anyone or heard anything?

RAINA. I heard the shooting. Surely the soldiers will not dare
come in here?

CATHERINE. I have found a Russian officer, thank Heaven: he
knows Sergius. (Speaking through the door to someone outside.)
Sir, will you come in now! My daughter is ready.

    (A young Russian officer, in Bulgarian uniform,
     enters, sword in hand.)

THE OFFICER. (with soft, feline politeness and stiff military
carriage). Good evening, gracious lady; I am sorry to intrude,
but there is a fugitive hiding on the balcony. Will you and the
gracious lady your mother please to withdraw whilst we search?

RAINA (petulantly). Nonsense, sir, you can see that there is no
one on the balcony. (She throws the shutters wide open and
stands with her back to the curtain where the man is hidden,
pointing to the moonlit balcony. A couple of shots are fired
right under the window, and a bullet shatters the glass opposite
Raina, who winks and gasps, but stands her ground, whilst
Catherine screams, and the officer rushes to the balcony.)

THE OFFICER. (on the balcony, shouting savagely down to the
street). Cease firing there, you fools: do you hear? Cease
firing, damn you. (He glares down for a moment; then turns to
Raina, trying to resume his polite manner.) Could anyone have
got in without your knowledge? Were you asleep?

RAINA. No, I have not been to bed.

THE OFFICER. (impatiently, coming back into the room). Your
neighbours have their heads so full of runaway Servians that
they see them everywhere. (Politely.) Gracious lady, a thousand
pardons. Good-night. (Military bow, which Raina returns coldly.
Another to Catherine, who follows him out. Raina closes the
shutters. She turns and sees Louka, who has been watching the
scene curiously.)

RAINA. Don't leave my mother, Louka, whilst the soldiers are
here. (Louka glances at Raina, at the ottoman, at the curtain;
then purses her lips secretively, laughs to herself, and goes
out. Raina follows her to the door, shuts it behind her with a
slam, and locks it violently. The man immediately steps out from
behind the curtain, sheathing his sabre, and dismissing the
danger from his mind in a businesslike way.)

MAN. A narrow shave; but a miss is as good as a mile. Dear young
lady, your servant until death. I wish for your sake I had
joined the Bulgarian army instead of the Servian. I am not a
native Servian.

RAINA (haughtily). No, you are one of the Austrians who set the
Servians on to rob us of our national liberty, and who officer
their army for them. We hate them!

MAN. Austrian! not I. Don't hate me, dear young lady. I am only
a Swiss, fighting merely as a professional soldier. I joined
Servia because it was nearest to me. Be generous: you've beaten
us hollow.

RAINA. Have I not been generous?

MAN. Noble!--heroic! But I'm not saved yet. This particular rush
will soon pass through; but the pursuit will go on all night by
fits and starts. I must take my chance to get off during a quiet
interval. You don't mind my waiting just a minute or two, do
you?

RAINA. Oh, no: I am sorry you will have to go into danger again.
(Motioning towards ottoman.) Won't you sit--(She breaks off
with an irrepressible cry of alarm as she catches sight of the
pistol. The man, all nerves, shies like a frightened horse.)

MAN (irritably). Don't frighten me like that. What is it?

RAINA. Your pistol! It was staring that officer in the face all
the time. What an escape!

MAN (vexed at being unnecessarily terrified). Oh, is that all?

RAINA (staring at him rather superciliously, conceiving a
poorer and poorer opinion of him, and feeling proportionately
more and more at her ease with him). I am sorry I frightened
you. (She takes up the pistol and hands it to him.) Pray take it
to protect yourself against me.

MAN (grinning wearily at the sarcasm as he takes the pistol).
No use, dear young lady: there's nothing in it. It's not loaded.
(He makes a grimace at it, and drops it disparagingly into his
revolver case.)

RAINA. Load it by all means.

MAN. I've no ammunition. What use are cartridges in battle? I
always carry chocolate instead; and I finished the last cake of
that yesterday.

RAINA (outraged in her most cherished ideals of manhood).
Chocolate! Do you stuff your pockets with sweets--like a
schoolboy--even in the field?

MAN. Yes. Isn't it contemptible?

   (Raina stares at him, unable to utter her
    feelings. Then she sails away scornfully to the
    chest of drawers, and returns with the box of
    confectionery in her hand.)

RAINA. Allow me. I am sorry I have eaten them all except these.
(She offers him the box.)

MAN (ravenously). You're an angel! (He gobbles the comfits.)
Creams! Delicious! (He looks anxiously to see whether there are
any more. There are none. He accepts the inevitable with
pathetic goodhumor, and says, with grateful emotion) Bless you,
dear lady. You can always tell an old soldier by the inside of
his holsters and cartridge boxes. The young ones carry pistols
and cartridges; the old ones, grub. Thank you. (He hands back
the box. She snatches it contemptuously from him and throws it
away. This impatient action is so sudden that he shies again.)
Ugh! Don't do things so suddenly, gracious lady. Don't revenge
yourself because I frightened you just now.

RAINA (superbly). Frighten me! Do you know, sir, that though I
am only a woman, I think I am at heart as brave as you.

MAN. I should think so. You haven't been under fire for three
days as I have. I can stand two days without shewing it much;
but no man can stand three days: I'm as nervous as a mouse. (He
sits down on the ottoman, and takes his head in his hands.)
Would you like to see me cry?

RAINA (quickly). No.

MAN. If you would, all you have to do is to scold me just as if
I were a little boy and you my nurse. If I were in camp now
they'd play all sorts of tricks on me.

RAINA (a little moved). I'm sorry. I won't scold you. (Touched
by the sympathy in her tone, he raises his head and looks
gratefully at her: she immediately draws hack and says stiffly)
You must excuse me: our soldiers are not like that. (She moves
away from the ottoman.)

MAN. Oh, yes, they are. There are only two sorts of soldiers:
old ones and young ones. I've served fourteen years: half of
your fellows never smelt powder before. Why, how is it that
you've just beaten us? Sheer ignorance of the art of war,
nothing else. (Indignantly.) I never saw anything so
unprofessional.

RAINA (ironically). Oh, was it unprofessional to beat you?

MAN. Well, come, is it professional to throw a regiment of
cavalry on a battery of machine guns, with the dead certainty
that if the guns go off not a horse or man will ever get within
fifty yards of the fire? I couldn't believe my eyes when I saw
it.

RAINA (eagerly turning to him, as all her enthusiasm and her
dream of glory rush back on her). Did you see the great cavalry
charge? Oh, tell me about it. Describe it to me.

MAN. You never saw a cavalry charge, did you?

RAINA. How could I?

MAN. Ah, perhaps not--of course. Well, it's a funny sight. It's
like slinging a handful of peas against a window pane: first one
comes; then two or three close behind him; and then all the rest
in a lump.

RAINA (her eyes dilating as she raises her clasped hands
ecstatically). Yes, first One!--the bravest of the brave!

MAN (prosaically). Hm! you should see the poor devil pulling at
his horse.

RAINA. Why should he pull at his horse?

MAN (impatient of so stupid a question). It's running away with
him, of course: do you suppose the fellow wants to get there
before the others and be killed? Then they all come. You can
tell the young ones by their wildness and their slashing. The
old ones come bunched up under the number one guard: they know
that they are mere projectiles, and that it's no use trying to
fight. The wounds are mostly broken knees, from the horses
cannoning together.

RAINA. Ugh! But I don't believe the first man is a coward. I
believe he is a hero!

MAN (goodhumoredly). That's what you'd have said if you'd seen
the first man in the charge to-day.

RAINA (breathless). Ah, I knew it! Tell me--tell me about him.

MAN. He did it like an operatic tenor--a regular handsome
fellow, with flashing eyes and lovely moustache, shouting a
war-cry and charging like Don Quixote at the windmills. We
nearly burst with laughter at him; but when the sergeant ran up
as white as a sheet, and told us they'd sent us the wrong
cartridges, and that we couldn't fire a shot for the next ten
minutes, we laughed at the other side of our mouths. I never
felt so sick in my life, though I've been in one or two very
tight places. And I hadn't even a revolver cartridge--nothing
but chocolate. We'd no bayonets--nothing. Of course, they just
cut us to bits. And there was Don Quixote flourishing like a
drum major, thinking he'd done the cleverest thing ever known,
whereas he ought to be courtmartialled for it. Of all the fools
ever let loose on a field of battle, that man must be the very
maddest. He and his regiment simply committed suicide--only the
pistol missed fire, that's all.

RAINA (deeply wounded, but steadfastly loyal to her ideals).
Indeed! Would you know him again if you saw him?

MAN. Shall I ever forget him. (She again goes to the chest of
drawers. He watches her with a vague hope that she may have
something else for him to eat. She takes the portrait from its
stand and brings it to him.)

RAINA. That is a photograph of the gentleman--the patriot and
hero--to whom I am betrothed.

MAN (looking at it). I'm really very sorry. (Looking at her.)
Was it fair to lead me on? (He looks at the portrait again.)
Yes: that's him: not a doubt of it. (He stifles a laugh.)

RAINA (quickly). Why do you laugh?

MAN (shamefacedly, but still greatly tickled). I didn't laugh,
I assure you. At least I didn't mean to. But when I think of him
charging the windmills and thinking he was doing the finest
thing--(chokes with suppressed laughter).

RAINA (sternly). Give me back the portrait, sir.

MAN (with sincere remorse). Of course. Certainly. I'm really
very sorry. (She deliberately kisses it, and looks him straight
in the face, before returning to the chest of drawers to replace
it. He follows her, apologizing.) Perhaps I'm quite wrong, you
know: no doubt I am. Most likely he had got wind of the
cartridge business somehow, and knew it was a safe job.

RAINA. That is to say, he was a pretender and a coward! You did
not dare say that before.

MAN (with a comic gesture of despair). It's no use, dear lady:
I can't make you see it from the professional point of view. (As
he turns away to get back to the ottoman, the firing begins
again in the distance.)

RAINA (sternly, as she sees him listening to the shots). So
much the better for you.

MAN (turning). How?

RAINA. You are my enemy; and you are at my mercy. What would I
do if I were a professional soldier?

MAN. Ah, true, dear young lady: you're always right. I know how
good you have been to me: to my last hour I shall remember those
three chocolate creams. It was unsoldierly; but it was angelic.

RAINA (coldly). Thank you. And now I will do a soldierly thing.
You cannot stay here after what you have just said about my
future husband; but I will go out on the balcony and see whether
it is safe for you to climb down into the street. (She turns to
the window.)

MAN (changing countenance). Down that waterpipe! Stop! Wait! I
can't! I daren't! The very thought of it makes me giddy. I came
up it fast enough with death behind me. But to face it now in
cold blood!--(He sinks on the ottoman.) It's no use: I give up:
I'm beaten. Give the alarm. (He drops his head in his hands in
the deepest dejection.)

RAINA (disarmed by pity). Come, don't be disheartened. (She
stoops over him almost maternally: he shakes his head.) Oh, you
are a very poor soldier--a chocolate cream soldier. Come, cheer
up: it takes less courage to climb down than to face
capture--remember that.

MAN (dreamily, lulled by her voice). No, capture only means
death; and death is sleep--oh, sleep, sleep, sleep, undisturbed
sleep! Climbing down the pipe means doing something--exerting
myself--thinking! Death ten times over first.

RAINA (softly and wonderingly, catching the rhythm of his
weariness). Are you so sleepy as that?

MAN. I've not had two hours' undisturbed sleep since the war
began. I'm on the staff: you don't know what that means. I
haven't closed my eyes for thirty-six hours.

RAINA (desperately). But what am I to do with you.

MAN (staggering up). Of course I must do something. (He shakes
himself; pulls himself together; and speaks with rallied vigour
and courage.) You see, sleep or no sleep, hunger or no hunger,
tired or not tired, you can always do a thing when you know it
must be done. Well, that pipe must be got down--(He hits himself
on the chest, and adds)--Do you hear that, you chocolate cream
soldier? (He turns to the window.)

RAINA (anxiously). But if you fall?

MAN. I shall sleep as if the stones were a feather bed.
Good-bye. (He makes boldly for the window, and his hand is on
the shutter when there is a terrible burst of firing in the
street beneath.)

RAINA (rushing to him). Stop! (She catches him by the shoulder,
and turns him quite round.) They'll kill you.

MAN (coolly, but attentively). Never mind: this sort of thing
is all in my day's work. I'm bound to take my chance.
(Decisively.) Now do what I tell you. Put out the candles, so
that they shan't see the light when I open the shutters. And
keep away from the window, whatever you do. If they see me,
they're sure to have a shot at me.

RAINA (clinging to him). They're sure to see you: it's bright
moonlight. I'll save you--oh, how can you be so indifferent? You
want me to save you, don't you?

MAN. I really don't want to be troublesome. (She shakes him in
her impatience.) I am not indifferent, dear young lady, I assure
you. But how is it to be done?

RAINA. Come away from the window--please. (She coaxes him back
to the middle of the room. He submits humbly. She releases him,
and addresses him patronizingly.) Now listen. You must trust to
our hospitality. You do not yet know in whose house you are. I
am a Petkoff.

MAN. What's that?

RAINA (rather indignantly). I mean that I belong to the family
of the Petkoffs, the richest and best known in our country.

MAN. Oh, yes, of course. I beg your pardon. The Petkoffs, to be
sure. How stupid of me!

RAINA. You know you never heard of them until this minute. How
can you stoop to pretend?

MAN. Forgive me: I'm too tired to think; and the change of
subject was too much for me. Don't scold me.

RAINA. I forgot. It might make you cry. (He nods, quite
seriously. She pouts and then resumes her patronizing tone.) I
must tell you that my father holds the highest command of any
Bulgarian in our army. He is (proudly) a Major.

MAN (pretending to be deeply impressed). A Major! Bless me!
Think of that!

RAINA. You shewed great ignorance in thinking that it was
necessary to climb up to the balcony, because ours is the only
private house that has two rows of windows. There is a flight of
stairs inside to get up and down by.

MAN. Stairs! How grand! You live in great luxury indeed, dear
young lady.

RAINA. Do you know what a library is?

MAN. A library? A roomful of books.

RAINA. Yes, we have one, the only one in Bulgaria.

MAN. Actually a real library! I should like to see that.

RAINA (affectedly). I tell you these things to shew you that
you are not in the house of ignorant country folk who would kill
you the moment they saw your Servian uniform, but among
civilized people. We go to Bucharest every year for the opera
season; and I have spent a whole month in Vienna.

MAN. I saw that, dear young lady. I saw at once that you knew
the world.

RAINA. Have you ever seen the opera of Ernani?

MAN. Is that the one with the devil in it in red velvet, and a
soldier's chorus?

RAINA (contemptuously). No!

MAN (stifling a heavy sigh of weariness). Then I don't know it.

RAINA. I thought you might have remembered the great scene where
Ernani, flying from his foes just as you are tonight, takes
refuge in the castle of his bitterest enemy, an old Castilian
noble. The noble refuses to give him up. His guest is sacred to
him.

MAN (quickly waking up a little). Have your people got that
notion?

RAINA (with dignity). My mother and I can understand that
notion, as you call it. And if instead of threatening me with
your pistol as you did, you had simply thrown yourself as a
fugitive on our hospitality, you would have been as safe as in
your father's house.

MAN. Quite sure?

RAINA (turning her back on him in disgust.) Oh, it is useless
to try and make you understand.

MAN. Don't be angry: you see how awkward it would be for me if
there was any mistake. My father is a very hospitable man: he
keeps six hotels; but I couldn't trust him as far as that. What
about YOUR father?

RAINA. He is away at Slivnitza fighting for his country. I
answer for your safety. There is my hand in pledge of it. Will
that reassure you? (She offers him her hand.)

MAN (looking dubiously at his own hand). Better not touch my
hand, dear young lady. I must have a wash first.

RAINA (touched). That is very nice of you. I see that you are a
gentleman.

MAN (puzzled). Eh?

RAINA. You must not think I am surprised. Bulgarians of really
good standing--people in OUR position--wash their hands nearly
every day. But I appreciate your delicacy. You may take my hand.
(She offers it again.)

MAN (kissing it with his hands behind his back). Thanks,
gracious young lady: I feel safe at last. And now would you mind
breaking the news to your mother? I had better not stay here
secretly longer than is necessary.

RAINA. If you will be so good as to keep perfectly still whilst
I am away.

MAN. Certainly. (He sits down on the ottoman.)

   (Raina goes to the bed and wraps herself in the
    fur cloak. His eyes close. She goes to the door,
    but on turning for a last look at him, sees that
    he is dropping of to sleep.)

RAINA (at the door). You are not going asleep, are you?
(He murmurs inarticulately: she runs to him and shakes him.)
Do you hear? Wake up: you are falling asleep.

MAN. Eh? Falling aslee--? Oh, no, not the least in
the world: I was only thinking. It's all right: I'm wide
awake.

RAINA (severely). Will you please stand up while I am
away. (He rises reluctantly.) All the time, mind.

MAN (standing unsteadily). Certainly--certainly: you
may depend on me.

    (Raina looks doubtfully at him. He smiles
     foolishly. She goes reluctantly, turning
     again at the door, and almost catching him
     in the act of yawning. She goes out.)

MAN (drowsily). Sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, slee--(The
words trail of into a murmur. He wakes again with a
shock on the point of falling.) Where am I? That's what
I want to know: where am I? Must keep awake. Nothing
keeps me awake except danger--remember that--(intently)
danger, danger, danger, dan-- Where's danger? Must
find it. (He starts of vaguely around the room in search of
it.) What am I looking for? Sleep--danger--don't know.
(He stumbles against the bed.) Ah, yes: now I know. All
right now. I'm to go to bed, but not to sleep--be sure
not to sleep--because of danger. Not to lie down, either,
only sit down. (He sits on the bed. A blissful expression
comes into his face.) Ah! (With a happy sigh he sinks back
at full length; lifts his boots into the bed with a final
effort; and falls fast asleep instantly.)

    (Catherine comes in, followed by Raina.)

RAINA (looking at the ottoman). He's gone! I left him
here.

CATHERINE, Here! Then he must have climbed down from the--

RAINA (seeing him). Oh! (She points.)

CATHERINE (scandalized). Well! (She strides to the left
side of the bed, Raina following and standing opposite her on
the right.) He's fast asleep. The brute!

RAINA (anxiously). Sh!

CATHERINE (shaking him). Sir! (Shaking him again,
harder.) Sir!! (Vehemently shaking very bard.) Sir!!!

RAINA (catching her arm). Don't, mamma: the poor dear
is worn out. Let him sleep.

CATHERINE (letting him go and turning amazed to Raina).
The poor dear! Raina!!! (She looks sternly at her
daughter. The man sleeps profoundly.)






ACT II

    The sixth of March, 1886. In the garden of major
    Petkoff's house. It is a fine spring morning; and
    the garden looks fresh and pretty. Beyond the
    paling the tops of a couple of minarets can he
    seen, shewing that there it a valley there, with
    the little town in it. A few miles further the
    Balkan mountains rise and shut in the view. Within
    the garden the side of the house is seen on the
    right, with a garden door reached by a little
    flight of steps. On the left the stable yard, with
    its gateway, encroaches on the garden. There are
    fruit bushes along the paling and house, covered
    with washing hung out to dry. A path runs by the
    house, and rises by two steps at the corner where
    it turns out of the right along the front. In the
    middle a small table, with two bent wood chairs at
    it, is laid for breakfast with Turkish coffee pot,
    cups, rolls, etc.; but the cups have been used and
    the bread broken. There is a wooden garden seat
    against the wall on the left.

    Louka, smoking a cigaret, is standing between the
    table and the house, turning her back with angry
    disdain on a man-servant who is lecturing her. He
    is a middle-aged man of cool temperament and low
    but clear and keen intelligence, with the
    complacency of the servant who values himself on
    his rank in servility, and the imperturbability of
    the accurate calculator who has no illusions. He
    wears a white Bulgarian costume jacket with
    decorated harder, sash, wide knickerbockers, and
    decorated gaiters. His head is shaved up to the
    crown, giving him a high Japanese forehead. His
    name is Nicola.

NICOLA. Be warned in time, Louka: mend your manners. I know the
mistress. She is so grand that she never dreams that any servant
could dare to be disrespectful to her; but if she once suspects
that you are defying her, out you go.

LOUKA. I do defy her. I will defy her. What do I care for her?

NICOLA. If you quarrel with the family, I never can marry you.
It's the same as if you quarrelled with me!

LOUKA. You take her part against me, do you?

NICOLA (sedately). I shall always be dependent on the good will
of the family. When I leave their service and start a shop in
Sofea, their custom will be half my capital: their bad word
would ruin me.

LOUKA. You have no spirit. I should like to see them dare say a
word against me!

NICOLA (pityingly). I should have expected more sense from you,
Louka. But you're young, you're young!

LOUKA. Yes; and you like me the better for it, don't you? But I
know some family secrets they wouldn't care to have told, young
as I am. Let them quarrel with me if they dare!

NICOLA (with compassionate superiority). Do you know what they
would do if they heard you talk like that?

LOUKA. What could they do?

NICOLA. Discharge you for untruthfulness. Who would believe any
stories you told after that? Who would give you another
situation? Who in this house would dare be seen speaking to you
ever again? How long would your father be left on his little
farm? (She impatiently throws away the end of her cigaret, and
stamps on it.) Child, you don't know the power such high people
have over the like of you and me when we try to rise out of our
poverty against them. (He goes close to her and lowers his
voice.) Look at me, ten years in their service. Do you think I
know no secrets? I know things about the mistress that she
wouldn't have the master know for a thousand levas. I know
things about him that she wouldn't let him hear the last of for
six months if I blabbed them to her. I know things about Raina
that would break off her match with Sergius if--

LOUKA (turning on him quickly). How do you know? I never told
you!

NICOLA (opening his eyes cunningly). So that's your little
secret, is it? I thought it might be something like that. Well,
you take my advice, and be respectful; and make the mistress
feel that no matter what you know or don't know, they can depend
on you to hold your tongue and serve the family faithfully.
That's what they like; and that's how you'll make most out of
them.

LOUKA (with searching scorn). You have the soul of a servant,
Nicola.

NICOLA (complacently). Yes: that's the secret of success in
service.

    (A loud knocking with a whip handle on a wooden
     door, outside on the left, is heard.)

MALE VOICE OUTSIDE. Hollo! Hollo there! Nicola!

LOUKA. Master! back from the war!

NICOLA (quickly). My word for it, Louka, the war's over. Off
with you and get some fresh coffee. (He runs out into the stable
yard.)

LOUKA (as she puts the coffee pot and the cups upon the tray,
and carries it into the house). You'll never put the soul of a
servant into me.

   (Major Petkoff comes from the stable yard,
    followed by Nicola. He is a cheerful, excitable,
    insignificant, unpolished man of about 50,
    naturally unambitious except as to his income and
    his importance in local society, but just now
    greatly pleased with the military rank which the
    war has thrust on him as a man of consequence in
    his town. The fever of plucky patriotism which the
    Servian attack roused in all the Bulgarians has
    pulled him through the war; but he is obviously
    glad to be home again.)

PETKOFF (pointing to the table with his whip). Breakfast out
here, eh?

NICOLA. Yes, sir. The mistress and Miss Raina have just gone in.

PETKOFF (fitting down and taking a roll). Go in and say I've
come; and get me some fresh coffee.

NICOLA. It's coming, sir. (He goes to the house door. Louka,
with fresh coffee, a clean cup, and a brandy bottle on her tray
meets him.) Have you told the mistress?

LOUKA. Yes: she's coming.

    (Nicola goes into the house. Louka brings the
     coffee to the table.)

PETKOFF. Well, the Servians haven't run away with you, have
they?

LOUKA. No, sir.

PETKOFF. That's right. Have you brought me some cognac?

LOUKA (putting the bottle on the table). Here, sir.

PETKOFF. That's right. (He pours some into his coffee.)

   (Catherine who has at this early hour made only a
    very perfunctory toilet, and wears a Bulgarian
    apron over a once brilliant, but now half worn out
    red dressing gown, and a colored handkerchief tied
    over her thick black hair, with Turkish slippers
    on her bare feet, comes from the house, looking
    astonishingly handsome and stately under all the
    circumstances. Louka goes into the house.)

CATHERINE. My dear Paul, what a surprise for us. (She stoops
over the back of his chair to kiss him.) Have they brought you
fresh coffee?

PETKOFF. Yes, Louka's been looking after me. The war's over. The
treaty was signed three days ago at Bucharest; and the decree
for our army to demobilize was issued yesterday.

CATHERINE (springing erect, with flashing eyes). The war over!
Paul: have you let the Austrians force you to make peace?

PETKOFF (submissively). My dear: they didn't consult me. What
could _I_ do? (She sits down and turns away from him.) But of
course we saw to it that the treaty was an honorable one. It
declares peace--

CATHERINE (outraged). Peace!

PETKOFF (appeasing her).--but not friendly relations: remember
that. They wanted to put that in; but I insisted on its being
struck out. What more could I do?

CATHERINE. You could have annexed Servia and made Prince
Alexander Emperor of the Balkans. That's what I would have done.

PETKOFF. I don't doubt it in the least, my dear. But I should
have had to subdue the whole Austrian Empire first; and that
would have kept me too long away from you. I missed you greatly.

CATHERINE (relenting). Ah! (Stretches her hand affectionately
across the table to squeeze his.)

PETKOFF. And how have you been, my dear?

CATHERINE. Oh, my usual sore throats, that's all.

PETKOFF (with conviction). That comes from washing your neck
every day. I've often told you so.

CATHERINE. Nonsense, Paul!

PETKOFF (over his coffee and cigaret). I don't believe in going
too far with these modern customs. All this washing can't be
good for the health: it's not natural. There was an Englishman
at Phillipopolis who used to wet himself all over with cold
water every morning when he got up. Disgusting! It all comes
from the English: their climate makes them so dirty that they
have to be perpetually washing themselves. Look at my father: he
never had a bath in his life; and he lived to be ninety-eight,
the healthiest man in Bulgaria. I don't mind a good wash once a
week to keep up my position; but once a day is carrying the
thing to a ridiculous extreme.

CATHERINE. You are a barbarian at heart still, Paul. I hope you
behaved yourself before all those Russian officers.

PETKOFF. I did my best. I took care to let them know that we had
a library.

CATHERINE. Ah; but you didn't tell them that we have an electric
bell in it? I have had one put up.

PETKOFF. What's an electric bell?

CATHERINE. You touch a button; something tinkles in the kitchen;
and then Nicola comes up.

PETKOFF. Why not shout for him?

CATHERINE. Civilized people never shout for their servants. I've
learnt that while you were away.

PETKOFF. Well, I'll tell you something I've learnt, too.
Civilized people don't hang out their washing to dry where
visitors can see it; so you'd better have all that (indicating
the clothes on the bushes) put somewhere else.

CATHERINE. Oh, that's absurd, Paul: I don't believe really
refined people notice such things.

    (Someone is heard knocking at the stable gates.)

PETKOFF. There's Sergius. (Shouting.) Hollo, Nicola!

CATHERINE. Oh, don't shout, Paul: it really isn't nice.

PETKOFF. Bosh! (He shouts louder than before.) Nicola!

NICOLA (appearing at the house door). Yes, sir.

PETKOFF. If that is Major Saranoff, bring him round this way.
(He pronounces the name with the stress on the second
syllable--Sarah-noff.)

NICOLA. Yes, sir. (He goes into the stable yard.)

PETKOFF. You must talk to him, my dear, until Raina takes him
off our hands. He bores my life out about our not promoting
him--over my head, mind you.

CATHERINE. He certainly ought to be promoted when he marries
Raina. Besides, the country should insist on having at least one
native general.

PETKOFF. Yes, so that he could throw away whole brigades instead
of regiments. It's no use, my dear: he has not the slightest
chance of promotion until we are quite sure that the peace will
be a lasting one.

NICOLA (at the gate, announcing). Major Sergius Saranoff! (He
goes into the house and returns presently with a third chair,
which he places at the table. He then withdraws.)

   (Major Sergius Saranoff, the original of the
    portrait in Raina's room, is a tall, romantically
    handsome man, with the physical hardihood, the
    high spirit, and the susceptible imagination of an
    untamed mountaineer chieftain. But his remarkable
    personal distinction is of a characteristically
    civilized type. The ridges of his eyebrows,
    curving with a ram's-horn twist round the marked
    projections at the outer corners, his jealously
    observant eye, his nose, thin, keen, and
    apprehensive in spite of the pugnacious high
    bridge and large nostril, his assertive chin,
    would not be out of place in a Paris salon. In
    short, the clever, imaginative barbarian has an
    acute critical faculty which has been thrown into
    intense activity by the arrival of western
    civilization in the Balkans; and the result is
    precisely what the advent of nineteenth-century
    thought first produced in England: to-wit,
    Byronism. By his brooding on the perpetual
    failure, not only of others, but of himself, to
    live up to his imaginative ideals, his consequent
    cynical scorn for humanity, the jejune credulity
    as to the absolute validity of his ideals and the
    unworthiness of the world in disregarding them,
    his wincings and mockeries under the sting of the
    petty disillusions which every hour spent among
    men brings to his infallibly quick observation, he
    has acquired the half tragic, half ironic air, the
    mysterious moodiness, the suggestion of a strange
    and terrible history that has left him nothing but
    undying remorse, by which Childe Harold fascinated
    the grandmothers of his English contemporaries.
    Altogether it is clear that here or nowhere is
    Raina's ideal hero. Catherine is hardly less
    enthusiastic, and much less reserved in shewing
    her enthusiasm. As he enters from the stable gate,
    she rises effusively to greet him. Petkoff is
    distinctly less disposed to make a fuss about
    him.)

PETKOFF. Here already, Sergius. Glad to see you!

CATHERINE. My dear Sergius!(She holds out both her hands.)

SERGIUS (kissing them with scrupulous gallantry). My dear
mother, if I may call you so.

PETKOFF (drily). Mother-in-law, Sergius; mother-in-law! Sit
down, and have some coffee.

SERGIUS. Thank you, none for me. (He gets away from the table
with a certain distaste for Petkoff's enjoyment of it, and posts
himself with conscious grace against the rail of the steps
leading to the house.)

CATHERINE. You look superb--splendid. The campaign has improved
you. Everybody here is mad about you. We were all wild with
enthusiasm about that magnificent cavalry charge.

SERGIUS (with grave irony). Madam: it was the cradle and the
grave of my military reputation.

CATHERINE. How so?

SERGIUS. I won the battle the wrong way when our worthy Russian
generals were losing it the right way. That upset their plans,
and wounded their self-esteem. Two of their colonels got their
regiments driven back on the correct principles of scientific
warfare. Two major-generals got killed strictly according to
military etiquette. Those two colonels are now major-generals;
and I am still a simple major.

CATHERINE. You shall not remain so, Sergius. The women are on
your side; and they will see that justice is done you.

SERGIUS. It is too late. I have only waited for the peace to
send in my resignation.

PETKOFF (dropping his cup in his amazement). Your resignation!

CATHERINE. Oh, you must withdraw it!

SERGIUS (with resolute, measured emphasis, folding his arms). I
never withdraw!

PETKOFF (vexed). Now who could have supposed you were going to
do such a thing?

SERGIUS (with fire). Everyone that knew me. But enough of
myself and my affairs. How is Raina; and where is Raina?

RAINA (suddenly coming round the corner of the house and
standing at the top of the steps in the path). Raina is here.
(She makes a charming picture as they all turn to look at her.
She wears an underdress of pale green silk, draped with an
overdress of thin ecru canvas embroidered with gold. On her head
she wears a pretty Phrygian cap of gold tinsel. Sergius, with an
exclamation of pleasure, goes impulsively to meet her. She
stretches out her hand: he drops chivalrously on one knee and
kisses it.)

PETKOFF (aside to Catherine, beaming with parental pride).
Pretty, isn't it? She always appears at the right moment.

CATHERINE (impatiently). Yes: she listens for it. It is an
abominable habit.

    (Sergius leads Raina forward with splendid gallantry,
     as if she were a queen. When they come to the
     table, she turns to him with a bend of the head;
     he bows; and thus they separate, he coming to his
     place, and she going behind her father's chair.)

RAINA (stooping and kissing her father). Dear father! Welcome
home!

PETKOFF (patting her cheek). My little pet girl. (He kisses
her; she goes to the chair left by Nicola for Sergius, and sits
down.)

CATHERINE. And so you're no longer a soldier, Sergius.

SERGIUS. I am no longer a soldier. Soldiering, my dear madam, is
the coward's art of attacking mercilessly when you are strong,
and keeping out of harm's way when you are weak. That is the
whole secret of successful fighting. Get your enemy at a
disadvantage; and never, on any account, fight him on equal
terms. Eh, Major!

PETKOFF. They wouldn't let us make a fair stand-up fight of it.
However, I suppose soldiering has to be a trade like any other
trade.

SERGIUS. Precisely. But I have no ambition to succeed as a
tradesman; so I have taken the advice of that bagman of a
captain that settled the exchange of prisoners with us at
Peerot, and given it up.

PETKOFF. What, that Swiss fellow? Sergius: I've often thought of
that exchange since. He over-reached us about those horses.

SERGIUS. Of course he over-reached us. His father was a hotel
and livery stable keeper; and he owed his first step to his
knowledge of horse-dealing. (With mock enthusiasm.) Ah, he was a
soldier--every inch a soldier! If only I had bought the horses
for my regiment instead of foolishly leading it into danger, I
should have been a field-marshal now!

CATHERINE. A Swiss? What was he doing in the Servian army?

PETKOFF. A volunteer of course--keen on picking up his
profession. (Chuckling.) We shouldn't have been able to begin
fighting if these foreigners hadn't shewn us how to do it: we
knew nothing about it; and neither did the Servians. Egad,
there'd have been no war without them.

RAINA. Are there many Swiss officers in the Servian Army?

PETKOFF. No--all Austrians, just as our officers were all
Russians. This was the only Swiss I came across. I'll never
trust a Swiss again. He cheated us--humbugged us into giving
him fifty able bodied men for two hundred confounded worn out
chargers. They weren't even eatable!

SERGIUS. We were two children in the hands of that consummate
soldier, Major: simply two innocent little children.

RAINA. What was he like?

CATHERINE. Oh, Raina, what a silly question!

SERGIUS. He was like a commercial traveller in uniform.
Bourgeois to his boots.

PETKOFF (grinning). Sergius: tell Catherine that queer story
his friend told us about him--how he escaped after Slivnitza.
You remember?--about his being hid by two women.

SERGIUS (with bitter irony). Oh, yes, quite a romance. He was
serving in the very battery I so unprofessionally charged. Being
a thorough soldier, he ran away like the rest of them, with our
cavalry at his heels. To escape their attentions, he had the
good taste to take refuge in the chamber of some patriotic young
Bulgarian lady. The young lady was enchanted by his persuasive
commercial traveller's manners. She very modestly entertained
him for an hour or so and then called in her mother lest her
conduct should appear unmaidenly. The old lady was equally
fascinated; and the fugitive was sent on his way in the morning,
disguised in an old coat belonging to the master of the house,
who was away at the war.

RAINA (rising with marked stateliness). Your life in the camp
has made you coarse, Sergius. I did not think you would have
repeated such a story before me. (She turns away coldly.)

CATHERINE (also rising). She is right, Sergius. If such women
exist, we should be spared the knowledge of them.

PETKOFF. Pooh! nonsense! what does it matter?

SERGIUS (ashamed). No, Petkoff: I was wrong. (To Raina, with
earnest humility.) I beg your pardon. I have behaved abominably.
Forgive me, Raina. (She bows reservedly.) And you, too, madam.
(Catherine bows graciously and sits down. He proceeds solemnly,
again addressing Raina.) The glimpses I have had of the seamy
side of life during the last few months have made me cynical;
but I should not have brought my cynicism here--least of all
into your presence, Raina. I--(Here, turning to the others, he
is evidently about to begin a long speech when the Major
interrupts him.)

PETKOFF. Stuff and nonsense, Sergius. That's quite enough fuss
about nothing: a soldier's daughter should be able to stand up
without flinching to a little strong conversation. (He rises.)
Come: it's time for us to get to business. We have to make up
our minds how those three regiments are to get back to
Phillipopolis:--there's no forage for them on the Sophia route.
(He goes towards the house.) Come along. (Sergius is about to
follow him when Catherine rises and intervenes.)

CATHERINE. Oh, Paul, can't you spare Sergius for a few moments?
Raina has hardly seen him yet. Perhaps I can help you to settle
about the regiments.

SERGIUS (protesting). My dear madam, impossible: you--

CATHERINE (stopping him playfully). You stay here, my dear
Sergius: there's no hurry. I have a word or two to say to Paul.
(Sergius instantly bows and steps back.) Now, dear (taking
Petkoff's arm), come and see the electric bell.

PETKOFF. Oh, very well, very well. (They go into the house
together affectionately. Sergius, left alone with Raina, looks
anxiously at her, fearing that she may be still offended. She
smiles, and stretches out her arms to him.)

    (Exit R. into house, followed by Catherine.)

SERGIUS (hastening to her, but refraining from touching her
without express permission). Am I forgiven?

RAINA (placing her hands on his shoulder as she looks up at him
with admiration and worship). My hero! My king.

SERGIUS. My queen! (He kisses her on the forehead with holy
awe.)

RAINA. How I have envied you, Sergius! You have been out in the
world, on the field of battle, able to prove yourself there
worthy of any woman in the world; whilst I have had to sit at
home inactive,--dreaming--useless--doing nothing that could
give me the right to call myself worthy of any man.

SERGIUS. Dearest, all my deeds have been yours. You inspired me.
I have gone through the war like a knight in a tournament with
his lady looking on at him!

RAINA. And you have never been absent from my thoughts for a
moment. (Very solemnly.) Sergius: I think we two have found the
higher love. When I think of you, I feel that I could never do a
base deed, or think an ignoble thought.

SERGIUS. My lady, and my saint! (Clasping her reverently.)

RAINA (returning his embrace). My lord and my g--

SERGIUS. Sh--sh! Let me be the worshipper, dear. You little know
how unworthy even the best man is of a girl's pure passion!

RAINA. I trust you. I love you. You will never disappoint me,
Sergius. (Louka is heard singing within the house. They quickly
release each other.) Hush! I can't pretend to talk indifferently
before her: my heart is too full. (Louka comes from the house
with her tray. She goes to the table, and begins to clear it,
with her back turned to them.) I will go and get my hat; and
then we can go out until lunch time. Wouldn't you like that?

SERGIUS. Be quick. If you are away five minutes, it will seem
five hours. (Raina runs to the top of the steps and turns there
to exchange a look with him and wave him a kiss with both hands.
He looks after her with emotion for a moment, then turns slowly
away, his face radiant with the exultation of the scene which
has just passed. The movement shifts his field of vision, into
the corner of which there now comes the tail of Louka's double
apron. His eye gleams at once. He takes a stealthy look at her,
and begins to twirl his moustache nervously, with his left hand
akimbo on his hip. Finally, striking the ground with his heels
in something of a cavalry swagger, he strolls over to the left
of the table, opposite her, and says) Louka: do you know what
the higher love is?

LOUKA (astonished). No, sir.

SERGIUS. Very fatiguing thing to keep up for any length of time,
Louka. One feels the need of some relief after it.

LOUKA (innocently). Perhaps you would like some coffee, sir?
(She stretches her hand across the table for the coffee pot.)

SERGIUS (taking her hand). Thank you, Louka.

LOUKA (pretending to pull). Oh, sir, you know I didn't mean
that. I'm surprised at you!

SERGIUS (coming clear of the table and drawing her with him). I
am surprised at myself, Louka. What would Sergius, the hero of
Slivnitza, say if he saw me now? What would Sergius, the apostle
of the higher love, say if he saw me now? What would the half
dozen Sergiuses who keep popping in and out of this handsome
figure of mine say if they caught us here? (Letting go her hand
and slipping his arm dexterously round her waist.) Do you
consider my figure handsome, Louka?

LOUKA. Let me go, sir. I shall be disgraced. (She struggles: he
holds her inexorably.) Oh, will you let go?

SERGIUS (looking straight into her eyes). No.

LOUKA. Then stand back where we can't be seen. Have you no
common sense?

SERGIUS. Ah, that's reasonable. (He takes her into the
stableyard gateway, where they are hidden from the house.)

LOUKA (complaining). I may have been seen from the windows:
Miss Raina is sure to be spying about after you.

SERGIUS (stung--letting her go). Take care, Louka. I may be
worthless enough to betray the higher love; but do not you
insult it.

LOUKA (demurely). Not for the world, sir, I'm sure. May I go on
with my work please, now?

SERGIUS (again putting his arm round her). You are a provoking
little witch, Louka. If you were in love with me, would you spy
out of windows on me?

LOUKA. Well, you see, sir, since you say you are half a dozen
different gentlemen all at once, I should have a great deal to
look after.

SERGIUS (charmed). Witty as well as pretty. (He tries to kiss
her.)

LOUKA (avoiding him). No, I don't want your kisses. Gentlefolk
are all alike--you making love to me behind Miss Raina's back,
and she doing the same behind yours.

SERGIUS (recoiling a step). Louka!

LOUKA. It shews how little you really care!

SERGIUS (dropping his familiarity and speaking with freezing
politeness). If our conversation is to continue, Louka, you will
please remember that a gentleman does not discuss the conduct of
the lady he is engaged to with her maid.

LOUKA. It's so hard to know what a gentleman considers right. I
thought from your trying to kiss me that you had given up being
so particular.

SERGIUS (turning from her and striking his forehead as he comes
back into the garden from the gateway). Devil! devil!

LOUKA. Ha! ha! I expect one of the six of you is very like me,
sir, though I am only Miss Raina's maid. (She goes back to her
work at the table, taking no further notice of him.)

SERGIUS (speaking to himself). Which of the six is the real
man?--that's the question that torments me. One of them is a
hero, another a buffoon, another a humbug, another perhaps a
bit of a blackguard. (He pauses and looks furtively at Louka, as
he adds with deep bitterness) And one, at least, is a
coward--jealous, like all cowards. (He goes to the table.)
Louka.

LOUKA. Yes?

SERGIUS. Who is my rival?

LOUKA. You shall never get that out of me, for love or money.

SERGIUS. Why?

LOUKA. Never mind why. Besides, you would tell that I told you;
and I should lose my place.

SERGIUS (holding out his right hand in affirmation). No; on the
honor of a--(He checks himself, and his hand drops nerveless as
he concludes, sardonically)--of a man capable of behaving as I
have been behaving for the last five minutes. Who is he?

LOUKA. I don't know. I never saw him. I only heard his voice
through the door of her room.

SERGIUS. Damnation! How dare you?

LOUKA (retreating). Oh, I mean no harm: you've no right to take
up my words like that. The mistress knows all about it. And I
tell you that if that gentleman ever comes here again, Miss
Raina will marry him, whether he likes it or not. I know the
difference between the sort of manner you and she put on before
one another and the real manner. (Sergius shivers as if she had
stabbed him. Then, setting his face like iron, he strides grimly
to her, and grips her above the elbows with both bands.)

SERGIUS. Now listen you to me!

LOUKA (wincing). Not so tight: you're hurting me!

SERGIUS. That doesn't matter. You have stained my honor by
making me a party to your eavesdropping. And you have betrayed
your mistress--

LOUKA (writhing). Please--

SERGIUS. That shews that you are an abominable little clod of
common clay, with the soul of a servant. (He lets her go as if
she were an unclean thing, and turns away, dusting his hands of
her, to the bench by the wall, where he sits down with averted
head, meditating gloomily.)

LOUKA (whimpering angrily with her hands up her sleeves,
feeling her bruised arms). You know how to hurt with your tongue
as well as with your hands. But I don't care, now I've found out
that whatever clay I'm made of, you're made of the same. As for
her, she's a liar; and her fine airs are a cheat; and I'm worth
six of her. (She shakes the pain off hardily; tosses her head;
and sets to work to put the things on the tray. He looks
doubtfully at her once or twice. She finishes packing the tray,
and laps the cloth over the edges, so as to carry all out
together. As she stoops to lift it, he rises.)

SERGIUS. Louka! (She stops and looks defiantly at him with the
tray in her hands.) A gentleman has no right to hurt a woman
under any circumstances. (With profound humility, uncovering his
head.) I beg your pardon.

LOUKA. That sort of apology may satisfy a lady. Of what use is
it to a servant?

SERGIUS (thus rudely crossed in his chivalry, throws it off
with a bitter laugh and says slightingly). Oh, you wish to be
paid for the hurt? (He puts on his shako, and takes some money
from his pocket.)

LOUKA (her eyes filling with tears in spite of herself). No, I
want my hurt made well.

SERGIUS (sobered by her tone). How?

   (She rolls up her left sleeve; clasps her arm with
    the thumb and fingers of her right hand; and looks
    down at the bruise. Then she raises her head and
    looks straight at him. Finally, with a superb
    gesture she presents her arm to be kissed. Amazed,
    he looks at her; at the arm; at her again;
    hesitates; and then, with shuddering intensity,
    exclaims)

SERGIUS. Never! (and gets away as far as possible from her.)

   (Her arm drops. Without a word, and with unaffected
    dignity, she takes her tray, and is approaching
    the house when Raina returns wearing a hat and
    jacket in the height of the Vienna fashion of the
    previous year, 1885. Louka makes way proudly for
    her, and then goes into the house.)

RAINA. I'm ready! What's the matter? (Gaily.) Have you been
flirting with Louka?

SERGIUS (hastily). No, no. How can you think such a thing?

RAINA (ashamed of herself). Forgive me, dear: it was only a
jest. I am so happy to-day.

    (He goes quickly to her, and kisses her hand
     remorsefully. Catherine comes out and calls
     to them from the top of the steps.)

CATHERINE (coming down to them). I am sorry to disturb you,
children; but Paul is distracted over those three regiments. He
does not know how to get them to Phillipopolis; and he objects
to every suggestion of mine. You must go and help him, Sergius.
He is in the library.

RAINA (disappointed). But we are just going out for a walk.

SERGIUS. I shall not be long. Wait for me just five minutes. (He
runs up the steps to the door.)

RAINA (following him to the foot of the steps and looking up at
him with timid coquetry). I shall go round and wait in full view
of the library windows. Be sure you draw father's attention to
me. If you are a moment longer than five minutes, I shall go in
and fetch you, regiments or no regiments.

SERGIUS (laughing). Very well. (He goes in. Raina watches him
until he is out of her right. Then, with a perceptible
relaxation of manner, she begins to pace up and down about the
garden in a brown study.)

CATHERINE. Imagine their meeting that Swiss and hearing the
whole story! The very first thing your father asked for was the
old coat we sent him off in. A nice mess you have got us into!

RAINA (gazing thoughtfully at the gravel as she walks). The
little beast!

CATHERINE. Little beast! What little beast?

RAINA. To go and tell! Oh, if I had him here, I'd stuff him with
chocolate creams till he couldn't ever speak again!

CATHERINE. Don't talk nonsense. Tell me the truth, Raina. How
long was he in your room before you came to me?

RAINA (whisking round and recommencing her march in the
opposite direction). Oh, I forget.

CATHERINE. You cannot forget! Did he really climb up after the
soldiers were gone, or was he there when that officer searched
the room?

RAINA. No. Yes, I think he must have been there then.

CATHERINE. You think! Oh, Raina, Raina! Will anything ever make
you straightforward? If Sergius finds out, it is all over
between you.

RAINA (with cool impertinence). Oh, I know Sergius is your pet.
I sometimes wish you could marry him instead of me. You would
just suit him. You would pet him, and spoil him, and mother him
to perfection.

CATHERINE (opening her eyes very widely indeed). Well, upon my
word!

RAINA (capriciously--half to herself). I always feel a longing
to do or say something dreadful to him--to shock his
propriety--to scandalize the five senses out of him! (To
Catherine perversely.) I don't care whether he finds out about
the chocolate cream soldier or not. I half hope he may. (She
again turns flippantly away and strolls up the path to the
corner of the house.)

CATHERINE. And what should I be able to say to your father,
pray?

RAINA (over her shoulder, from the top of the two steps). Oh,
poor father! As if he could help himself! (She turns the corner
and passes out of sight.)

CATHERINE (looking after her, her fingers itching). Oh, if you
were only ten years younger! (Louka comes from the house with a
salver, which she carries hanging down by her side.) Well?

LOUKA. There's a gentleman just called, madam--a Servian
officer--

CATHERINE (flaming). A Servian! How dare he--(Checking herself
bitterly.) Oh, I forgot. We are at peace now. I suppose we shall
have them calling every day to pay their compliments. Well, if
he is an officer why don't you tell your master? He is in the
library with Major Saranoff. Why do you come to me?

LOUKA. But he asks for you, madam. And I don't think he knows
who you are: he said the lady of the house. He gave me this
little ticket for you. (She takes a card out of her bosom; puts
it on the salver and offers it to Catherine.)

CATHERINE (reading). "Captain Bluntschli!" That's a German
name.

LOUKA. Swiss, madam, I think.

CATHERINE (with a bound that makes Louka jump back). Swiss!
What is he like?

LOUKA (timidly). He has a big carpet bag, madam.

CATHERINE. Oh, Heavens, he's come to return the coat! Send him
away--say we're not at home--ask him to leave his address and
I'll write to him--Oh, stop: that will never do. Wait! (She
throws herself into a chair to think it out. Louka waits.) The
master and Major Saranoff are busy in the library, aren't they?

LOUKA. Yes, madam.

CATHERINE (decisively). Bring the gentleman out here at once.
(Imperatively.) And be very polite to him. Don't delay. Here
(impatiently snatching the salver from her): leave that here;
and go straight back to him.

LOUKA. Yes, madam. (Going.)

CATHERINE. Louka!

LOUKA (stopping). Yes, madam.

CATHERINE. Is the library door shut?

LOUKA. I think so, madam.

CATHERINE. If not, shut it as you pass through.

LOUKA. Yes, madam. (Going.)

CATHERINE. Stop! (Louka stops.) He will have to go out that way
(indicating the gate of the stable yard). Tell Nicola to bring
his bag here after him. Don't forget.

LOUKA (surprised). His bag?

CATHERINE. Yes, here, as soon as possible. (Vehemently.) Be
quick! (Louka runs into the house. Catherine snatches her apron
off and throws it behind a bush. She then takes up the salver
and uses it as a mirror, with the result that the handkerchief
tied round her head follows the apron. A touch to her hair and a
shake to her dressing gown makes her presentable.) Oh,
how--how--how can a man be such a fool! Such a moment to select!
(Louka appears at the door of the house, announcing "Captain
Bluntschli;" and standing aside at the top of the steps to let
him pass before she goes in again. He is the man of the
adventure in Raina's room. He is now clean, well brushed,
smartly uniformed, and out of trouble, but still unmistakably
the same man. The moment Louka's back is turned, Catherine
swoops on him with hurried, urgent, coaxing appeal.) Captain
Bluntschli, I am very glad to see you; but you must leave this
house at once. (He raises his eyebrows.) My husband has just
returned, with my future son-in-law; and they know nothing. If
they did, the consequences would be terrible. You are a
foreigner: you do not feel our national animosities as we do. We
still hate the Servians: the only effect of the peace on my
husband is to make him feel like a lion baulked of his prey. If
he discovered our secret, he would never forgive me; and my
daughter's life would hardly be safe. Will you, like the
chivalrous gentleman and soldier you are, leave at once before
he finds you here?

BLUNTSCHLI (disappointed, but philosophical). At once, gracious
lady. I only came to thank you and return the coat you lent me.
If you will allow me to take it out of my bag and leave it with
your servant as I pass out, I need detain you no further. (He
turns to go into the house.)

CATHERINE (catching him by the sleeve). Oh, you must not think
of going back that way. (Coaxing him across to the stable
gates.) This is the shortest way out. Many thanks. So glad to
have been of service to you. Good-bye.

BLUNTSCHLI. But my bag?

CATHERINE. It will be sent on. You will leave me your address.

BLUNTSCHLI. True. Allow me. (He takes out his card-case, and
stops to write his address, keeping Catherine in an agony of
impatience. As he hands her the card, Petkoff, hatless, rushes
from the house in a fluster of hospitality, followed by
Sergius.)

PETKOFF (as he hurries down the steps). My dear Captain
Bluntschli--

CATHERINE. Oh Heavens! (She sinks on the seat against the wall.)

PETKOFF (too preoccupied to notice her as he shakes
Bluntschli's hand heartily). Those stupid people of mine thought
I was out here, instead of in the--haw!--library. (He cannot
mention the library without betraying how proud he is of it.) I
saw you through the window. I was wondering why you didn't come
in. Saranoff is with me: you remember him, don't you?

SERGIUS (saluting humorously, and then offering his hand with
great charm of manner). Welcome, our friend the enemy!

PETKOFF. No longer the enemy, happily. (Rather anxiously.) I
hope you've come as a friend, and not on business.

CATHERINE. Oh, quite as a friend, Paul. I was just asking
Captain Bluntschli to stay to lunch; but he declares he must go
at once.

SERGIUS (sardonically). Impossible, Bluntschli. We want you
here badly. We have to send on three cavalry regiments to
Phillipopolis; and we don't in the least know how to do it.

BLUNTSCHLI (suddenly attentive and business-like).
Phillipopolis! The forage is the trouble, eh?

PETKOFF (eagerly). Yes, that's it. (To Sergius.) He sees the
whole thing at once.

BLUNTSCHLI. I think I can shew you how to manage that.

SERGIUS. Invaluable man! Come along! (Towering over Bluntschli,
he puts his hand on his shoulder and takes him to the steps,
Petkoff following. As Bluntschli puts his foot on the first
step, Raina comes out of the house.)

RAINA (completely losing her presence of mind). Oh, the
chocolate cream soldier!

    (Bluntschli stands rigid. Sergius, amazed, looks
     at Raina, then at Petkoff, who looks back at him
     and then at his wife.)

CATHERINE (with commanding presence of mind). My dear Raina,
don't you see that we have a guest here--Captain Bluntschli, one
of our new Servian friends?

    (Raina bows; Bluntschli bows.)

RAINA. How silly of me! (She comes down into the centre of the
group, between Bluntschli and Petkoff) I made a beautiful
ornament this morning for the ice pudding; and that stupid
Nicola has just put down a pile of plates on it and spoiled it.
(To Bluntschli, winningly.) I hope you didn't think that you
were the chocolate cream soldier, Captain Bluntschli.

BLUNTSCHLI (laughing). I assure you I did. (Stealing a
whimsical glance at her.) Your explanation was a relief.

PETKOFF (suspiciously, to Raina). And since when, pray, have
you taken to cooking?

CATHERINE. Oh, whilst you were away. It is her latest fancy.

PETKOFF (testily). And has Nicola taken to drinking? He used to
be careful enough. First he shews Captain Bluntschli out here
when he knew quite well I was in the--hum!--library; and then
he goes downstairs and breaks Raina's chocolate soldier. He
must--(At this moment Nicola appears at the top of the steps R.,
with a carpet bag. He descends; places it respectfully before
Bluntschli; and waits for further orders. General amazement.
Nicola, unconscious of the effect he is producing, looks
perfectly satisfied with himself. When Petkoff recovers his
power of speech, he breaks out at him with) Are you mad, Nicola?

NICOLA (taken aback). Sir?

PETKOFF. What have you brought that for?

NICOLA. My lady's orders, sir. Louka told me that--

CATHERINE (interrupting him). My orders! Why should I order you
to bring Captain Bluntschli's luggage out here? What are you
thinking of, Nicola?

NICOLA (after a moment's bewilderment, picking up the bag as he
addresses Bluntschli with the very perfection of servile
discretion). I beg your pardon, sir, I am sure. (To Catherine.)
My fault, madam! I hope you'll overlook it! (He bows, and is
going to the steps with the bag, when Petkoff addresses him
angrily.)

PETKOFF. You'd better go and slam that bag, too, down on Miss
Raina's ice pudding! (This is too much for Nicola. The bag drops
from his hands on Petkoff's corns, eliciting a roar of anguish
from him.) Begone, you butter-fingered donkey.

NICOLA (snatching up the bag, and escaping into the house).
Yes, sir.

CATHERINE. Oh, never mind, Paul, don't be angry!

PETKOFF (muttering). Scoundrel. He's got out of hand while I
was away. I'll teach him. (Recollecting his guest.) Oh, well,
never mind. Come, Bluntschli, lets have no more nonsense about
you having to go away. You know very well you're not going back
to Switzerland yet. Until you do go back you'll stay with us.

RAINA. Oh, do, Captain Bluntschli.

PETKOFF (to Catherine). Now, Catherine, it's of you that he's
afraid. Press him and he'll stay.

CATHERINE. Of course I shall be only too delighted if
(appealingly) Captain Bluntschli really wishes to stay. He knows
my wishes.

BLUNTSCHLI (in his driest military manner). I am at madame's
orders.

SERGIUS (cordially). That settles it!

PETKOFF (heartily). Of course!

RAINA. You see, you must stay!

BLUNTSCHLI (smiling). Well, If I must, I must!
(Gesture of despair from Catherine.)




ACT III

    In the library after lunch. It is not much of a
    library, its literary equipment consisting of a
    single fixed shelf stocked with old paper-covered
    novels, broken backed, coffee stained, torn and
    thumbed, and a couple of little hanging shelves
    with a few gift books on them, the rest of the
    wall space being occupied by trophies of war and
    the chase. But it is a most comfortable
    sitting-room. A row of three large windows in the
    front of the house shew a mountain panorama, which
    is just now seen in one of its softest aspects in
    the mellowing afternoon light. In the left hand
    corner, a square earthenware stove, a perfect
    tower of colored pottery, rises nearly to the
    ceiling and guarantees plenty of warmth. The
    ottoman in the middle is a circular bank of
    decorated cushions, and the window seats are well
    upholstered divans. Little Turkish tables, one of
    them with an elaborate hookah on it, and a screen
    to match them, complete the handsome effect of the
    furnishing. There is one object, however, which is
    hopelessly out of keeping with its surroundings.
    This is a small kitchen table, much the worse for
    wear, fitted as a writing table with an old
    canister full of pens, an eggcup filled with ink,
    and a deplorable scrap of severely used pink
    blotting paper.

    At the side of this table, which stands on the
    right, Bluntschli is hard at work, with a couple
    of maps before him, writing orders. At the head of
    it sits Sergius, who is also supposed to be at
    work, but who is actually gnawing the feather of a
    pen, and contemplating Bluntschli's quick, sure,
    businesslike progress with a mixture of envious
    irritation at his own incapacity, and awestruck
    wonder at an ability which seems to him almost
    miraculous, though its prosaic character forbids
    him to esteem it. The major is comfortably
    established on the ottoman, with a newspaper in
    his hand and the tube of the hookah within his
    reach. Catherine sits at the stove, with her back
    to them, embroidering. Raina, reclining on the
    divan under the left hand window, is gazing in a
    daydream out at the Balkan landscape, with a
    neglected novel in her lap.

    The door is on the left. The button of the
    electric bell is between the door and the
    fireplace.

PETKOFF (looking up from his paper to watch how they are
getting on at the table). Are you sure I can't help you in any
way, Bluntschli?

BLUNTSCHLI (without interrupting his writing or looking up).
Quite sure, thank you. Saranoff and I will manage it.

SERGIUS (grimly). Yes: we'll manage it. He finds out what to
do; draws up the orders; and I sign 'em. Division of labour,
Major. (Bluntschli passes him a paper.) Another one? Thank you.
(He plants the papers squarely before him; sets his chair
carefully parallel to them; and signs with the air of a man
resolutely performing a difficult and dangerous feat.) This hand
is more accustomed to the sword than to the pen.

PETKOFF. It's very good of you, Bluntschli, it is indeed, to let
yourself be put upon in this way. Now are you quite sure I can
do nothing?

CATHERINE (in a low, warning tone). You can stop interrupting,
Paul.

PETKOFF (starting and looking round at her). Eh? Oh! Quite
right, my love, quite right. (He takes his newspaper up, but
lets it drop again.) Ah, you haven't been campaigning,
Catherine: you don't know how pleasant it is for us to sit here,
after a good lunch, with nothing to do but enjoy ourselves.
There's only one thing I want to make me thoroughly comfortable.

CATHERINE. What is that?

PETKOFF. My old coat. I'm not at home in this one: I feel as if
I were on parade.

CATHERINE. My dear Paul, how absurd you are about that old coat!
It must be hanging in the blue closet where you left it.

PETKOFF. My dear Catherine, I tell you I've looked there. Am I
to believe my own eyes or not? (Catherine quietly rises and
presses the button of the electric bell by the fireplace.) What
are you shewing off that bell for? (She looks at him majestically,
and silently resumes her chair and her needlework.) My dear: if
you think the obstinacy of your sex can make a coat out of two
old dressing gowns of Raina's, your waterproof, and my
mackintosh, you're mistaken. That's exactly what the blue closet
contains at present. (Nicola presents himself.)

CATHERINE (unmoved by Petkoff's sally). Nicola: go to the blue
closet and bring your master's old coat here--the braided one he
usually wears in the house.

NICOLA. Yes, madam. (Nicola goes out.)

PETKOFF. Catherine.

CATHERINE. Yes, Paul?

PETKOFF. I bet you any piece of jewellery you like to order from
Sophia against a week's housekeeping money, that the coat isn't
there.

CATHERINE. Done, Paul.

PETKOFF (excited by the prospect of a gamble). Come: here's an
opportunity for some sport. Who'll bet on it? Bluntschli: I'll
give you six to one.

BLUNTSCHLI (imperturbably). It would be robbing you, Major.
Madame is sure to be right. (Without looking up, he passes
another batch of papers to Sergius.)

SERGIUS (also excited). Bravo, Switzerland! Major: I bet my
best charger against an Arab mare for Raina that Nicola finds
the coat in the blue closet.

PETKOFF (eagerly). Your best char--

CATHERINE (hastily interrupting him). Don't be foolish, Paul.
An Arabian mare will cost you 50,000 levas.

RAINA (suddenly coming out of her picturesque revery). Really,
mother, if you are going to take the jewellery, I don't see why
you should grudge me my Arab.

   (Nicola comes back with the coat and brings it
    to Petkoff, who can hardly believe his eyes.)

CATHERINE. Where was it, Nicola?

NICOLA. Hanging in the blue closet, madam.

PETKOFF. Well, I am d--

CATHERINE (stopping him). Paul!

PETKOFF. I could have sworn it wasn't there. Age is beginning to
tell on me. I'm getting hallucinations. (To Nicola.) Here: help
me to change. Excuse me, Bluntschli. (He begins changing coats,
Nicola acting as valet.) Remember: I didn't take that bet of
yours, Sergius. You'd better give Raina that Arab steed
yourself, since you've roused her expectations. Eh, Raina? (He
looks round at her; but she is again rapt in the landscape. With
a little gush of paternal affection and pride, he points her out
to them and says) She's dreaming, as usual.

SERGIUS. Assuredly she shall not be the loser.

PETKOFF. So much the better for her. I shan't come off so cheap,
I expect. (The change is now complete. Nicola goes out with the
discarded coat.) Ah, now I feel at home at last. (He sits down
and takes his newspaper with a grunt of relief.)

BLUNTSCHLI (to Sergius, handing a paper). That's the last
order.

PETKOFF (jumping up). What! finished?

BLUNTSCHLI. Finished. (Petkoff goes beside Sergius; looks
curiously over his left shoulder as he signs; and says with
childlike envy) Haven't you anything for me to sign?

BLUNTSCHLI. Not necessary. His signature will do.

PETKOFF. Ah, well, I think we've done a thundering good day's
work. (He goes away from the table.) Can I do anything more?

BLUNTSCHLI. You had better both see the fellows that are to take
these. (To Sergius.) Pack them off at once; and shew them that
I've marked on the orders the time they should hand them in by.
Tell them that if they stop to drink or tell stories--if they're
five minutes late, they'll have the skin taken off their backs.

SERGIUS (rising indignantly). I'll say so. And if one of them
is man enough to spit in my face for insulting him, I'll buy his
discharge and give him a pension. (He strides out, his humanity
deeply outraged.)

BLUNTSCHLI (confidentially). Just see that he talks to them
properly, Major, will you?

PETKOFF (officiously). Quite right, Bluntschli, quite right.
I'll see to it. (He goes to the door importantly, but hesitates
on the threshold.) By the bye, Catherine, you may as well come,
too. They'll be far more frightened of you than of me.

CATHERINE (putting down her embroidery). I daresay I had
better. You will only splutter at them. (She goes out, Petkoff
holding the door for her and following her.)

BLUNTSCHLI. What a country! They make cannons out of cherry
trees; and the officers send for their wives to keep discipline!
(He begins to fold and docket the papers. Raina, who has risen
from the divan, strolls down the room with her hands clasped
behind her, and looks mischievously at him.)

RAINA. You look ever so much nicer than when we last met. (He
looks up, surprised.) What have you done to yourself?

BLUNTSCHLI. Washed; brushed; good night's sleep and breakfast.
That's all.

RAINA. Did you get back safely that morning?

BLUNTSCHLI. Quite, thanks.

RAINA. Were they angry with you for running away from Sergius's
charge?

BLUNTSCHLI. No, they were glad; because they'd all just run away
themselves.

RAINA (going to the table, and leaning over it towards him). It
must have made a lovely story for them--all that about me and my
room.

BLUNTSCHLI. Capital story. But I only told it to one of them--a
particular friend.

RAINA. On whose discretion you could absolutely rely?

BLUNTSCHLI. Absolutely.

RAINA. Hm! He told it all to my father and Sergius the day you
exchanged the prisoners. (She turns away and strolls carelessly
across to the other side of the room.)

BLUNTSCHLI (deeply concerned and half incredulous). No! you
don't mean that, do you?

RAINA (turning, with sudden earnestness). I do indeed. But they
don't know that it was in this house that you hid. If Sergius
knew, he would challenge you and kill you in a duel.

BLUNTSCHLI. Bless me! then don't tell him.

RAINA (full of reproach for his levity). Can you realize what
it is to me to deceive him? I want to be quite perfect with
Sergius--no meanness, no smallness, no deceit. My relation to
him is the one really beautiful and noble part of my life. I
hope you can understand that.

BLUNTSCHLI (sceptically). You mean that you wouldn't like him
to find out that the story about the ice pudding was
a--a--a--You know.

RAINA (wincing). Ah, don't talk of it in that flippant way. I
lied: I know it. But I did it to save your life. He would have
killed you. That was the second time I ever uttered a falsehood.
(Bluntschli rises quickly and looks doubtfully and somewhat
severely at her.) Do you remember the first time?

BLUNTSCHLI. I! No. Was I present?

RAINA. Yes; and I told the officer who was searching for you
that you were not present.

BLUNTSCHLI. True. I should have remembered it.

RAINA (greatly encouraged). Ah, it is natural that you should
forget it first. It cost you nothing: it cost me a lie!--a lie!!
(She sits down on the ottoman, looking straight before her with
her hands clasped on her knee. Bluntschli, quite touched, goes
to the ottoman with a particularly reassuring and considerate
air, and sits down beside her.)

BLUNTSCHLI. My dear young lady, don't let this worry you.
Remember: I'm a soldier. Now what are the two things that happen
to a soldier so often that he comes to think nothing of them?
One is hearing people tell lies (Raina recoils): the other is
getting his life saved in all sorts of ways by all sorts of
people.

RAINA (rising in indignant protest). And so he becomes a
creature incapable of faith and of gratitude.

BLUNTSCHLI (making a wry face). Do you like gratitude? I don't.
If pity is akin to love, gratitude is akin to the other thing.

RAINA. Gratitude! (Turning on him.) If you are incapable of
gratitude you are incapable of any noble sentiment. Even animals
are grateful. Oh, I see now exactly what you think of me! You
were not surprised to hear me lie. To you it was something I
probably did every day--every hour. That is how men think of
women. (She walks up the room melodramatically.)

BLUNTSCHLI (dubiously). There's reason in everything. You said
you'd told only two lies in your whole life. Dear young lady:
isn't that rather a short allowance? I'm quite a straightforward
man myself; but it wouldn't last me a whole morning.

RAINA (staring haughtily at him). Do you know, sir, that you
are insulting me?

BLUNTSCHLI. I can't help it. When you get into that noble
attitude and speak in that thrilling voice, I admire you; but I
find it impossible to believe a single word you say.

RAINA (superbly). Captain Bluntschli!

BLUNTSCHLI (unmoved). Yes?

RAINA (coming a little towards him, as if she could not believe
her senses). Do you mean what you said just now? Do you know
what you said just now?

BLUNTSCHLI. I do.

RAINA (gasping). I! I!!! (She points to herself incredulously,
meaning "I, Raina Petkoff, tell lies!" He meets her gaze
unflinchingly. She suddenly sits down beside him, and adds, with
a complete change of manner from the heroic to the familiar) How
did you find me out?

BLUNTSCHLI (promptly). Instinct, dear young lady. Instinct, and
experience of the world.

RAINA (wonderingly). Do you know, you are the first man I ever
met who did not take me seriously?

BLUNTSCHLI. You mean, don't you, that I am the first man that
has ever taken you quite seriously?

RAINA. Yes, I suppose I do mean that. (Cosily, quite at her ease
with him.) How strange it is to be talked to in such a way! You
know, I've always gone on like that--I mean the noble attitude
and the thrilling voice. I did it when I was a tiny child to my
nurse. She believed in it. I do it before my parents. They
believe in it. I do it before Sergius. He believes in it.

BLUNTSCHLI. Yes: he's a little in that line himself, isn't he?

RAINA (startled). Do you think so?

BLUNTSCHLI. You know him better than I do.

RAINA. I wonder--I wonder is he? If I thought that--!
(Discouraged.) Ah, well, what does it matter? I suppose, now
that you've found me out, you despise me.

BLUNTSCHLI (warmly, rising). No, my dear young lady, no, no, no
a thousand times. It's part of your youth--part of your charm.
I'm like all the rest of them--the nurse--your
parents--Sergius: I'm your infatuated admirer.

RAINA (pleased). Really?

BLUNTSCHLI (slapping his breast smartly with his hand, German
fashion). Hand aufs Herz! Really and truly.

RAINA (very happy). But what did you think of me for giving you
my portrait?

BLUNTSCHLI (astonished). Your portrait! You never gave me your
portrait.

RAINA (quickly). Do you mean to say you never got it?

BLUNTSCHLI. No. (He sits down beside her, with renewed interest,
and says, with some complacency.) When did you send it to me?

RAINA (indignantly). I did not send it to you. (She turns her
head away, and adds, reluctantly.) It was in the pocket of that
coat.

BLUNTSCHLI (pursing his lips and rounding his eyes). Oh-o-oh! I
never found it. It must be there still.

RAINA (springing up). There still!--for my father to find the
first time he puts his hand in his pocket! Oh, how could you be
so stupid?

BLUNTSCHLI (rising also). It doesn't matter: it's only a
photograph: how can he tell who it was intended for? Tell him he
put it there himself.

RAINA (impatiently). Yes, that is so clever--so clever! What
shall I do?

BLUNTSCHLI. Ah, I see. You wrote something on it. That was rash!

RAINA (annoyed almost to tears). Oh, to have done such a thing
for you, who care no more--except to laugh at me--oh! Are you
sure nobody has touched it?

BLUNTSCHLI. Well, I can't be quite sure. You see I couldn't
carry it about with me all the time: one can't take much luggage
on active service.

RAINA. What did you do with it?

BLUNTSCHLI. When I got through to Peerot I had to put it in safe
keeping somehow. I thought of the railway cloak room; but that's
the surest place to get looted in modern warfare. So I pawned
it.

RAINA. Pawned it!!!

BLUNTSCHLI. I know it doesn't sound nice; but it was much the
safest plan. I redeemed it the day before yesterday. Heaven only
knows whether the pawnbroker cleared out the pockets or not.

RAINA (furious--throwing the words right into his face). You
have a low, shopkeeping mind. You think of things that would
never come into a gentleman's head.

BLUNTSCHLI (phlegmatically). That's the Swiss national
character, dear lady.

RAINA. Oh, I wish I had never met you. (She flounces away and
sits at the window fuming.)

   (Louka comes in with a heap of letters and
    telegrams on her salver, and crosses, with her
    bold, free gait, to the table. Her left sleeve is
    looped up to the shoulder with a brooch, shewing
    her naked arm, with a broad gilt bracelet covering
    the bruise.)

LOUKA (to Bluntschli). For you. (She empties the salver
recklessly on the table.) The messenger is waiting. (She is
determined not to be civil to a Servian, even if she must bring
him his letters.)

BLUNTSCHLI (to Raina). Will you excuse me: the last postal
delivery that reached me was three weeks ago. These are the
subsequent accumulations. Four telegrams--a week old. (He opens
one.) Oho! Bad news!

RAINA (rising and advancing a little remorsefully). Bad news?

BLUNTSCHLI. My father's dead. (He looks at the telegram with his
lips pursed, musing on the unexpected change in his
arrangements.)

RAINA. Oh, how very sad!

BLUNTSCHLI. Yes: I shall have to start for home in an hour. He
has left a lot of big hotels behind him to be looked after.
(Takes up a heavy letter in a long blue envelope.) Here's a
whacking letter from the family solicitor. (He pulls out the
enclosures and glances over them.) Great Heavens! Seventy! Two
hundred! (In a crescendo of dismay.) Four hundred! Four
thousand!! Nine thousand six hundred!!! What on earth shall I do
with them all?

RAINA (timidly). Nine thousand hotels?

BLUNTSCHLI. Hotels! Nonsense. If you only knew!--oh, it's too
ridiculous! Excuse me: I must give my fellow orders about
starting. (He leaves the room hastily, with the documents in his
hand.)

LOUKA (tauntingly). He has not much heart, that Swiss, though
he is so fond of the Servians. He has not a word of grief for
his poor father.

RAINA (bitterly). Grief!--a man who has been doing nothing but
killing people for years! What does he care? What does any
soldier care? (She goes to the door, evidently restraining her
tears with difficulty.)

LOUKA. Major Saranoff has been fighting, too; and he has plenty
of heart left. (Raina, at the door, looks haughtily at her and
goes out.) Aha! I thought you wouldn't get much feeling out of
your soldier. (She is following Raina when Nicola enters with an
armful of logs for the fire.)

NICOLA (grinning amorously at her). I've been trying all the
afternoon to get a minute alone with you, my girl. (His
countenance changes as he notices her arm.) Why, what fashion is
that of wearing your sleeve, child?

LOUKA (proudly). My own fashion.

NICOLA. Indeed! If the mistress catches you, she'll talk to you.
(He throws the logs down on the ottoman, and sits comfortably
beside them.)

LOUKA. Is that any reason why you should take it on yourself to
talk to me?

NICOLA. Come: don't be so contrary with me. I've some good news
for you. (He takes out some paper money. Louka, with an eager
gleam in her eyes, comes close to look at it.) See, a twenty
leva bill! Sergius gave me that out of pure swagger. A fool and
his money are soon parted. There's ten levas more. The Swiss
gave me that for backing up the mistress's and Raina's lies
about him. He's no fool, he isn't. You should have heard old
Catherine downstairs as polite as you please to me, telling me
not to mind the Major being a little impatient; for they knew
what a good servant I was--after making a fool and a liar of me
before them all! The twenty will go to our savings; and you
shall have the ten to spend if you'll only talk to me so as to
remind me I'm a human being. I get tired of being a servant
occasionally.

LOUKA (scornfully). Yes: sell your manhood for thirty levas,
and buy me for ten! Keep your money. You were born to be a
servant. I was not. When you set up your shop you will only be
everybody's servant instead of somebody's servant.

NICOLA (picking up his logs, and going to the stove). Ah, wait
till you see. We shall have our evenings to ourselves; and I
shall be master in my own house, I promise you. (He throws the
logs down and kneels at the stove.)

LOUKA. You shall never be master in mine. (She sits down on
Sergius's chair.)

NICOLA (turning, still on his knees, and squatting down rather
forlornly, on his calves, daunted by her implacable disdain).
You have a great ambition in you, Louka. Remember: if any luck
comes to you, it was I that made a woman of you.

LOUKA. You!

NICOLA (with dogged self-assertion). Yes, me. Who was it made
you give up wearing a couple of pounds of false black hair on
your head and reddening your lips and cheeks like any other
Bulgarian girl? I did. Who taught you to trim your nails, and
keep your hands clean, and be dainty about yourself, like a fine
Russian lady? Me! do you hear that? me! (She tosses her head
defiantly; and he rises, ill-humoredly, adding more coolly) I've
often thought that if Raina were out of the way, and you just a
little less of a fool and Sergius just a little more of one, you
might come to be one of my grandest customers, instead of only
being my wife and costing me money.

LOUKA. I believe you would rather be my servant than my husband.
You would make more out of me. Oh, I know that soul of yours.

NICOLA (going up close to her for greater emphasis). Never you
mind my soul; but just listen to my advice. If you want to be a
lady, your present behaviour to me won't do at all, unless when
we're alone. It's too sharp and imprudent; and impudence is a
sort of familiarity: it shews affection for me. And don't you
try being high and mighty with me either. You're like all
country girls: you think it's genteel to treat a servant the way
I treat a stable-boy. That's only your ignorance; and don't you
forget it. And don't be so ready to defy everybody. Act as if
you expected to have your own way, not as if you expected to be
ordered about. The way to get on as a lady is the same as the
way to get on as a servant: you've got to know your place;
that's the secret of it. And you may depend on me to know my
place if you get promoted. Think over it, my girl. I'll stand by
you: one servant should always stand by another.

LOUKA (rising impatiently). Oh, I must behave in my own way.
You take all the courage out of me with your cold-blooded
wisdom. Go and put those logs on the fire: that's the sort of
thing you understand. (Before Nicola can retort, Sergius comes
in. He checks himself a moment on seeing Louka; then goes to the
stove.)

SERGIUS (to Nicola). I am not in the way of your work, I hope.

NICOLA (in a smooth, elderly manner). Oh, no, sir, thank you
kindly. I was only speaking to this foolish girl about her habit
of running up here to the library whenever she gets a chance, to
look at the books. That's the worst of her education, sir: it
gives her habits above her station. (To Louka.) Make that table
tidy, Louka, for the Major. (He goes out sedately.)

    (Louka, without looking at Sergius, begins to
     arrange the papers on the table. He crosses slowly
     to her, and studies the arrangement of her sleeve
     reflectively.)

SERGIUS. Let me see: is there a mark there? (He turns up the
bracelet and sees the bruise made by his grasp. She stands
motionless, not looking at him: fascinated, but on her guard.)
Ffff! Does it hurt?

LOUKA. Yes.

SERGIUS. Shall I cure it?

LOUKA (instantly withdrawing herself proudly, but still not
looking at him). No. You cannot cure it now.

SERGIUS (masterfully). Quite sure? (He makes a movement as if
to take her in his arms.)

LOUKA. Don't trifle with me, please. An officer should not
trifle with a servant.

SERGIUS (touching the arm with a merciless stroke of his
forefinger). That was no trifle, Louka.

LOUKA. No. (Looking at him for the first time.) Are you sorry?

SERGIUS (with measured emphasis, folding his arms). I am never
sorry.

LOUKA (wistfully). I wish I could believe a man could be so
unlike a woman as that. I wonder are you really a brave man?

SERGIUS (unaffectedly, relaxing his attitude). Yes: I am a
brave man. My heart jumped like a woman's at the first shot; but
in the charge I found that I was brave. Yes: that at least is
real about me.

LOUKA. Did you find in the charge that the men whose fathers are
poor like mine were any less brave than the men who are rich
like you?

SERGIUS (with bitter levity.) Not a bit. They all slashed and
cursed and yelled like heroes. Psha! the courage to rage and
kill is cheap. I have an English bull terrier who has as much of
that sort of courage as the whole Bulgarian nation, and the
whole Russian nation at its back. But he lets my groom thrash
him, all the same. That's your soldier all over! No, Louka, your
poor men can cut throats; but they are afraid of their officers;
they put up with insults and blows; they stand by and see one
another punished like children---aye, and help to do it when
they are ordered. And the officers!---well (with a short, bitter
laugh) I am an officer. Oh, (fervently) give me the man who will
defy to the death any power on earth or in heaven that sets
itself up against his own will and conscience: he alone is the
brave man.

LOUKA. How easy it is to talk! Men never seem to me to grow up:
they all have schoolboy's ideas. You don't know what true
courage is.

SERGIUS (ironically). Indeed! I am willing to be instructed.

LOUKA. Look at me! how much am I allowed to have my own will? I
have to get your room ready for you--to sweep and dust, to fetch
and carry. How could that degrade me if it did not degrade you
to have it done for you? But (with subdued passion) if I were
Empress of Russia, above everyone in the world, then--ah, then,
though according to you I could shew no courage at all; you
should see, you should see.

SERGIUS. What would you do, most noble Empress?

LOUKA. I would marry the man I loved, which no other queen in
Europe has the courage to do. If I loved you, though you would
be as far beneath me as I am beneath you, I would dare to be the
equal of my inferior. Would you dare as much if you loved me?
No: if you felt the beginnings of love for me you would not let
it grow. You dare not: you would marry a rich man's daughter
because you would be afraid of what other people would say of
you.

SERGIUS (carried away). You lie: it is not so, by all the
stars! If I loved you, and I were the Czar himself, I would set
you on the throne by my side. You know that I love another
woman, a woman as high above you as heaven is above earth. And
you are jealous of her.

LOUKA. I have no reason to be. She will never marry you now. The
man I told you of has come back. She will marry the Swiss.

SERGIUS (recoiling). The Swiss!

LOUKA. A man worth ten of you. Then you can come to me; and I
will refuse you. You are not good enough for me. (She turns to
the door.)

SERGIUS (springing after her and catching her fiercely in his
arms). I will kill the Swiss; and afterwards I will do as I
please with you.

LOUKA (in his arms, passive and steadfast). The Swiss will kill
you, perhaps. He has beaten you in love. He may beat you in war.

SERGIUS (tormentedly). Do you think I believe that she--she!
whose worst thoughts are higher than your best ones, is capable
of trifling with another man behind my back?

LOUKA. Do you think she would believe the Swiss if he told her
now that I am in your arms?

SERGIUS (releasing her in despair). Damnation! Oh, damnation!
Mockery, mockery everywhere: everything I think is mocked by
everything I do. (He strikes himself frantically on the breast.)
Coward, liar, fool! Shall I kill myself like a man, or live and
pretend to laugh at myself? (She again turns to go.) Louka! (She
stops near the door.) Remember: you belong to me.

LOUKA (quietly). What does that mean--an insult?

SERGIUS (commandingly). It means that you love me, and that I
have had you here in my arms, and will perhaps have you there
again. Whether that is an insult I neither know nor care: take
it as you please. But (vehemently) I will not be a coward and a
trifler. If I choose to love you, I dare marry you, in spite of
all Bulgaria. If these hands ever touch you again, they shall
touch my affianced bride.

LOUKA. We shall see whether you dare keep your word. But take
care. I will not wait long.

SERGIUS (again folding his arms and standing motionless in the
middle of the room). Yes, we shall see. And you shall wait my
pleasure.

   (Bluntschli, much preoccupied, with his papers
    still in his hand, enters, leaving the door open
    for Louka to go out. He goes across to the table,
    glancing at her as he passes. Sergius, without
    altering his resolute attitude, watches him
    steadily. Louka goes out, leaving the door open.)

BLUNTSCHLI (absently, sitting at the table as before, and
putting down his papers). That's a remarkable looking young
woman.

SERGIUS (gravely, without moving). Captain Bluntschli.

BLUNTSCHLI. Eh?

SERGIUS. You have deceived me. You are my rival. I brook no
rivals. At six o'clock I shall be in the drilling-ground on the
Klissoura road, alone, on horseback, with my sabre. Do you
understand?

BLUNTSCHLI (staring, but sitting quite at his ease). Oh, thank
you: that's a cavalry man's proposal. I'm in the artillery; and
I have the choice of weapons. If I go, I shall take a machine
gun. And there shall be no mistake about the cartridges this
time.

SERGIUS (flushing, but with deadly coldness). Take care, sir.
It is not our custom in Bulgaria to allow invitations of that
kind to be trifled with.

BLUNTSCHLI (warmly). Pooh! don't talk to me about Bulgaria. You
don't know what fighting is. But have it your own way. Bring
your sabre along. I'll meet you.

SERGIUS (fiercely delighted to find his opponent a man of
spirit). Well said, Switzer. Shall I lend you my best horse?

BLUNTSCHLI. No: damn your horse!---thank you all the same, my
dear fellow. (Raina comes in, and hears the next sentence.) I
shall fight you on foot. Horseback's too dangerous: I don't want
to kill you if I can help it.

RAINA (hurrying forward anxiously). I have heard what Captain
Bluntschli said, Sergius. You are going to fight. Why? (Sergius
turns away in silence, and goes to the stove, where he stands
watching her as she continues, to Bluntschli) What about?

BLUNTSCHLI. I don't know: he hasn't told me. Better not
interfere, dear young lady. No harm will be done: I've often
acted as sword instructor. He won't be able to touch me; and
I'll not hurt him. It will save explanations. In the morning I
shall be off home; and you'll never see me or hear of me again.
You and he will then make it up and live happily ever after.

RAINA (turning away deeply hurt, almost with a sob in her
voice). I never said I wanted to see you again.

SERGIUS (striding forward). Ha! That is a confession.

RAINA (haughtily). What do you mean?

SERGIUS. You love that man!

RAINA (scandalized). Sergius!

SERGIUS. You allow him to make love to you behind my back, just
as you accept me as your affianced husband behind his.
Bluntschli: you knew our relations; and you deceived me. It is
for that that I call you to account, not for having received
favours that I never enjoyed.

BLUNTSCHLI (jumping up indignantly). Stuff! Rubbish! I have
received no favours. Why, the young lady doesn't even know
whether I'm married or not.

RAINA (forgetting herself). Oh! (Collapsing on the ottoman.)
Are you?

SERGIUS. You see the young lady's concern, Captain Bluntschli.
Denial is useless. You have enjoyed the privilege of being
received in her own room, late at night--

BLUNTSCHLI (interrupting him pepperily). Yes; you blockhead!
She received me with a pistol at her head. Your cavalry were at
my heels. I'd have blown out her brains if she'd uttered a cry.

SERGIUS (taken aback). Bluntschli! Raina: is this true?

RAINA (rising in wrathful majesty). Oh, how dare you, how dare
you?

BLUNTSCHLI. Apologize, man, apologize! (He resumes his seat at
the table.)

SERGIUS (with the old measured emphasis, folding his arms). I
never apologize.

RAINA (passionately). This is the doing of that friend of
yours, Captain Bluntschli. It is he who is spreading this
horrible story about me. (She walks about excitedly.)

BLUNTSCHLI. No: he's dead--burnt alive.

RAINA (stopping, shocked). Burnt alive!

BLUNTSCHLI. Shot in the hip in a wood yard. Couldn't drag
himself out. Your fellows' shells set the timber on fire and
burnt him, with half a dozen other poor devils in the same
predicament.

RAINA. How horrible!

SERGIUS. And how ridiculous! Oh, war! war! the dream of patriots
and heroes! A fraud, Bluntschli, a hollow sham, like love.

RAINA (outraged). Like love! You say that before me.

BLUNTSCHLI. Come, Saranoff: that matter is explained.

SERGIUS. A hollow sham, I say. Would you have come back here if
nothing had passed between you, except at the muzzle of your
pistol? Raina is mistaken about our friend who was burnt. He was
not my informant.

RAINA. Who then? (Suddenly guessing the truth.) Ah, Louka! my
maid, my servant! You were with her this morning all that time
after---after---Oh, what sort of god is this I have been
worshipping! (He meets her gaze with sardonic enjoyment of her
disenchantment. Angered all the more, she goes closer to him,
and says, in a lower, intenser tone) Do you know that I looked
out of the window as I went upstairs, to have another sight of
my hero; and I saw something that I did not understand then. I
know now that you were making love to her.

SERGIUS (with grim humor). You saw that?

RAINA. Only too well. (She turns away, and throws herself on the
divan under the centre window, quite overcome.)

SERGIUS (cynically). Raina: our romance is shattered. Life's a
farce.

BLUNTSCHLI (to Raina, goodhumoredly). You see: he's found
himself out now.

SERGIUS. Bluntschli: I have allowed you to call me a blockhead.
You may now call me a coward as well. I refuse to fight you. Do
you know why?

BLUNTSCHLI. No; but it doesn't matter. I didn't ask the reason
when you cried on; and I don't ask the reason now that you cry
off. I'm a professional soldier. I fight when I have to, and am
very glad to get out of it when I haven't to. You're only an
amateur: you think fighting's an amusement.

SERGIUS. You shall hear the reason all the same, my
professional. The reason is that it takes two men--real men--men
of heart, blood and honor--to make a genuine combat. I could no
more fight with you than I could make love to an ugly woman.
You've no magnetism: you're not a man, you're a machine.

BLUNTSCHLI (apologetically). Quite true, quite true. I always
was that sort of chap. I'm very sorry. But now that you've found
that life isn't a farce, but something quite sensible and
serious, what further obstacle is there to your happiness?

RAINA (riling). You are very solicitous about my happiness and
his. Do you forget his new love--Louka? It is not you that he
must fight now, but his rival, Nicola.

SERGIUS. Rival!! (Striking his forehead.)

RAINA. Did you not know that they are engaged?

SERGIUS. Nicola! Are fresh abysses opening! Nicola!!

RAINA (sarcastically). A shocking sacrifice, isn't it? Such
beauty, such intellect, such modesty, wasted on a middle-aged
servant man! Really, Sergius, you cannot stand by and allow such
a thing. It would be unworthy of your chivalry.

SERGIUS (losing all self-control). Viper! Viper! (He rushes to
and fro, raging.)

BLUNTSCHLI. Look here, Saranoff; you're getting the worst of
this.

RAINA (getting angrier). Do you realize what he has done,
Captain Bluntschli? He has set this girl as a spy on us; and her
reward is that he makes love to her.

SERGIUS. False! Monstrous!

RAINA. Monstrous! (Confronting him.) Do you deny that she told
you about Captain Bluntschli being in my room?

SERGIUS. No; but--

RAINA (interrupting). Do you deny that you were making love to
her when she told you?

SERGIUS. No; but I tell you--

RAINA (cutting him short contemptuously). It is unnecessary to
tell us anything more. That is quite enough for us. (She turns
her back on him and sweeps majestically back to the window.)

BLUNTSCHLI (quietly, as Sergius, in an agony of mortification,
rinks on the ottoman, clutching his averted head between his
fists). I told you you were getting the worst of it, Saranoff.

SERGIUS. Tiger cat!

RAINA (running excitedly to Bluntschli). You hear this man
calling me names, Captain Bluntschli?

BLUNTSCHLI. What else can he do, dear lady? He must defend
himself somehow. Come (very persuasively), don't quarrel. What
good does it do? (Raina, with a gasp, sits down on the ottoman,
and after a vain effort to look vexedly at Bluntschli, she falls
a victim to her sense of humor, and is attacked with a
disposition to laugh.)

SERGIUS. Engaged to Nicola! (He rises.) Ha! ha! (Going to the
stove and standing with his back to it.) Ah, well, Bluntschli,
you are right to take this huge imposture of a world coolly.

RAINA (to Bluntschli with an intuitive guess at his state of
mind). I daresay you think us a couple of grown up babies, don't
you?

SERGIUS (grinning a little). He does, he does. Swiss
civilization nursetending Bulgarian barbarism, eh?

BLUNTSCHLI (blushing). Not at all, I assure you. I'm only very
glad to get you two quieted. There now, let's be pleasant and
talk it over in a friendly way. Where is this other young lady?

RAINA. Listening at the door, probably.

SERGIUS (shivering as if a bullet had struck him, and speaking
with quiet but deep indignation). I will prove that that, at
least, is a calumny. (He goes with dignity to the door and opens
it. A yell of fury bursts from him as he looks out. He darts
into the passage, and returns dragging in Louka, whom he flings
against the table, R., as he cries) Judge her, Bluntschli--you,
the moderate, cautious man: judge the eavesdropper.

    (Louka stands her ground, proud and silent.)

BLUNTSCHLI (shaking his head). I mustn't judge her. I once
listened myself outside a tent when there was a mutiny brewing.
It's all a question of the degree of provocation. My life was at
stake.

LOUKA. My love was at stake. (Sergius flinches, ashamed of her
in spite of himself.) I am not ashamed.

RAINA (contemptuously). Your love! Your curiosity, you mean.

LOUKA (facing her and retorting her contempt with interest). My
love, stronger than anything you can feel, even for your
chocolate cream soldier.

SERGIUS (with quick suspicion--to Louka). What does that mean?

LOUKA (fiercely). It means--

SERGIUS (interrupting her slightingly). Oh, I remember, the ice
pudding. A paltry taunt, girl.

    (Major Petkoff enters, in his shirtsleeves.)

PETKOFF. Excuse my shirtsleeves, gentlemen. Raina: somebody has
been wearing that coat of mine: I'll swear it--somebody with
bigger shoulders than mine. It's all burst open at the back.
Your mother is mending it. I wish she'd make haste. I shall
catch cold. (He looks more attentively at them.) Is anything the
matter?

RAINA. No. (She sits down at the stove with a tranquil air.)

SERGIUS. Oh, no! (He sits down at the end of the table, as at
first.)

BLUNTSCHLI (who is already seated). Nothing, nothing.

PETKOFF (sitting down on the ottoman in his old place). That's
all right. (He notices Louka.) Anything the matter, Louka?

LOUKA. No, sir.

PETKOFF (genially). That's all right. (He sneezes.) Go and ask
your mistress for my coat, like a good girl, will you? (She
turns to obey; but Nicola enters with the coat; and she makes a
pretence of having business in the room by taking the little
table with the hookah away to the wall near the windows.)

RAINA (rising quickly, as she sees the coat on Nicola's arm).
Here it is, papa. Give it to me, Nicola; and do you put some
more wood on the fire. (She takes the coat, and brings it to the
Major, who stands up to put it on. Nicola attends to the fire.)

PETKOFF (to Raina, teasing her affectionately). Aha! Going to
be very good to poor old papa just for one day after his return
from the wars, eh?

RAINA (with solemn reproach). Ah, how can you say that to me,
father?

PETKOFF. Well, well, only a joke, little one. Come, give me a
kiss. (She kisses him.) Now give me the coat.

RAINA. Now, I am going to put it on for you. Turn your back. (He
turns his back and feels behind him with his arms for the
sleeves. She dexterously takes the photograph from the pocket
and throws it on the table before Bluntschli, who covers it with
a sheet of paper under the very nose of Sergius, who looks on
amazed, with his suspicions roused in the highest degree. She
then helps Petkoff on with his coat.) There, dear! Now are you
comfortable?

PETKOFF. Quite, little love. Thanks. (He sits down; and Raina
returns to her seat near the stove.) Oh, by the bye, I've found
something funny. What's the meaning of this? (He put his hand
into the picked pocket.) Eh? Hallo! (He tries the other pocket.)
Well, I could have sworn--(Much puzzled, he tries the breast
pocket.) I wonder--(Tries the original pocket.) Where can
it--(A light flashes on him; he rises, exclaiming) Your mother's
taken it.

RAINA (very red). Taken what?

PETKOFF. Your photograph, with the inscription: "Raina, to her
Chocolate Cream Soldier--a souvenir." Now you know there's
something more in this than meets the eye; and I'm going to find
it out. (Shouting) Nicola!

NICOLA (dropping a log, and turning). Sir!

PETKOFF. Did you spoil any pastry of Miss Raina's this morning?

NICOLA. You heard Miss Raina say that I did, sir.

PETKOFF. I know that, you idiot. Was it true?

NICOLA. I am sure Miss Raina is incapable of saying anything
that is not true, sir.

PETKOFF. Are you? Then I'm not. (Turning to the others.) Come:
do you think I don't see it all? (Goes to Sergius, and slaps him
on the shoulder.) Sergius: you're the chocolate cream soldier,
aren't you?

SERGIUS (starting up). I! a chocolate cream soldier! Certainly
not.

PETKOFF. Not! (He looks at them. They are all very serious and
very conscious.) Do you mean to tell me that Raina sends
photographic souvenirs to other men?

SERGIUS (enigmatically). The world is not such an innocent
place as we used to think, Petkoff.

BLUNTSCHLI (rising). It's all right, Major. I'm the chocolate
cream soldier. (Petkoff and Sergius are equally astonished.) The
gracious young lady saved my life by giving me chocolate creams
when I was starving--shall I ever forget their flavour! My late
friend Stolz told you the story at Peerot. I was the fugitive.

PETKOFF. You! (He gasps.) Sergius: do you remember how those two
women went on this morning when we mentioned it? (Sergius smiles
cynically. Petkoff confronts Raina severely.) You're a nice young
woman, aren't you?

RAINA (bitterly). Major Saranoff has changed his mind. And when
I wrote that on the photograph, I did not know that Captain
Bluntschli was married.

BLUNTSCHLI (much startled protesting vehemently). I'm not
married.

RAINA (with deep reproach). You said you were.

BLUNTSCHLI. I did not. I positively did not. I never was married
in my life.

PETKOFF (exasperated). Raina: will you kindly inform me, if I
am not asking too much, which gentleman you are engaged to?

RAINA. To neither of them. This young lady (introducing Louka,
who faces them all proudly) is the object of Major Saranoff's
affections at present.

PETKOFF. Louka! Are you mad, Sergius? Why, this girl's engaged
to Nicola.

NICOLA (coming forward ). I beg your pardon, sir. There is a
mistake. Louka is not engaged to me.

PETKOFF. Not engaged to you, you scoundrel! Why, you had
twenty-five levas from me on the day of your betrothal; and she
had that gilt bracelet from Miss Raina.

NICOLA (with cool unction). We gave it out so, sir. But it was
only to give Louka protection. She had a soul above her station;
and I have been no more than her confidential servant. I intend,
as you know, sir, to set up a shop later on in Sofea; and I look
forward to her custom and recommendation should she marry into
the nobility. (He goes out with impressive discretion, leaving
them all staring after him.)

PETKOFF (breaking the silence). Well, I am---hm!

SERGIUS. This is either the finest heroism or the most crawling
baseness. Which is it, Bluntschli?

BLUNTSCHLI. Never mind whether it's heroism or baseness.
Nicola's the ablest man I've met in Bulgaria. I'll make him
manager of a hotel if he can speak French and German.

LOUKA (suddenly breaking out at Sergius). I have been insulted
by everyone here. You set them the example. You owe me an
apology. (Sergius immediately, like a repeating clock of which
the spring has been touched, begins to fold his arms.)

BLUNTSCHLI (before he can speak). It's no use. He never
apologizes.

LOUKA. Not to you, his equal and his enemy. To me, his poor
servant, he will not refuse to apologize.

SERGIUS (approvingly). You are right. (He bends his knee in his
grandest manner.) Forgive me!

LOUKA. I forgive you. (She timidly gives him her hand, which he
kisses.) That touch makes me your affianced wife.

SERGIUS (springing up). Ah, I forgot that!

LOUKA (coldly). You can withdraw if you like.

SERGIUS. Withdraw! Never! You belong to me! (He puts his arm
about her and draws her to him.) (Catherine comes in and finds
Louka in Sergius's arms, and all the rest gazing at them in
bewildered astonishment.)

CATHERINE. What does this mean? (Sergius releases Louka.)

PETKOFF. Well, my dear, it appears that Sergius is going to
marry Louka instead of Raina. (She is about to break out
indignantly at him: he stops her by exclaiming testily.) Don't
blame me: I've nothing to do with it. (He retreats to the
stove.)

CATHERINE. Marry Louka! Sergius: you are bound by your word to
us!

SERGIUS (folding his arms). Nothing binds me.

BLUNTSCHLI (much pleased by this piece of common sense).
Saranoff: your hand. My congratulations. These heroics of yours
have their practical side after all. (To Louka.) Gracious young
lady: the best wishes of a good Republican! (He kisses her hand,
to Raina's great disgust.)

CATHERINE (threateningly). Louka: you have been telling
stories.

LOUKA. I have done Raina no harm.

CATHERINE (haughtily). Raina! (Raina is equally indignant at
the liberty.)

LOUKA. I have a right to call her Raina: she calls me Louka. I
told Major Saranoff she would never marry him if the Swiss
gentleman came back.

BLUNTSCHLI (surprised). Hallo!

LOUKA (turning to Raina). I thought you were fonder of him than
of Sergius. You know best whether I was right.

BLUNTSCHLI. What nonsense! I assure you, my dear Major, my dear
Madame, the gracious young lady simply saved my life, nothing
else. She never cared two straws for me. Why, bless my heart and
soul, look at the young lady and look at me. She, rich, young,
beautiful, with her imagination full of fairy princes and noble
natures and cavalry charges and goodness knows what! And I, a
common-place Swiss soldier who hardly knows what a decent life
is after fifteen years of barracks and battles--a vagabond--a
man who has spoiled all his chances in life through an incurably
romantic disposition--a man--

SERGIUS (starting as if a needle had pricked him and
interrupting Bluntschli in incredulous amazement). Excuse me,
Bluntschli: what did you say had spoiled your chances in life?

BLUNTSCHLI (promptly). An incurably romantic disposition. I ran
away from home twice when I was a boy. I went into the army
instead of into my father's business. I climbed the balcony of
this house when a man of sense would have dived into the nearest
cellar. I came sneaking back here to have another look at the
young lady when any other man of my age would have sent the coat
back--

PETKOFF. My coat!

BLUNTSCHLI.--Yes: that's the coat I mean--would have sent it
back and gone quietly home. Do you suppose I am the sort of
fellow a young girl falls in love with? Why, look at our ages!
I'm thirty-four: I don't suppose the young lady is much over
seventeen. (This estimate produces a marked sensation, all the
rest turning and staring at one another. He proceeds
innocently.) All that adventure which was life or death to me,
was only a schoolgirl's game to her--chocolate creams and hide
and seek. Here's the proof! (He takes the photograph from the
table.) Now, I ask you, would a woman who took the affair
seriously have sent me this and written on it: "Raina, to her
chocolate cream soldier--a souvenir"? (He exhibits the
photograph triumphantly, as if it settled the matter beyond all
possibility of refutation.)

PETKOFF. That's what I was looking for. How the deuce did it get
there?

BLUNTSCHLI (to Raina complacently). I have put everything
right, I hope, gracious young lady!

RAINA (in uncontrollable vexation). I quite agree with your
account of yourself. You are a romantic idiot. (Bluntschli is
unspeakably taken aback.) Next time I hope you will know the
difference between a schoolgirl of seventeen and a woman of
twenty-three.

BLUNTSCHLI (stupefied). Twenty-three! (She snaps the photograph
contemptuously from his hand; tears it across; and throws the
pieces at his feet.)

SERGIUS (with grim enjoyment of Bluntschli's discomfiture).
Bluntschli: my one last belief is gone. Your sagacity is a
fraud, like all the other things. You have less sense than even
I have.

BLUNTSCHLI (overwhelmed). Twenty-three! Twenty-three!! (He
considers.) Hm! (Swiftly making up his mind.) In that case,
Major Petkoff, I beg to propose formally to become a suitor for
your daughter's hand, in place of Major Saranoff retired.

RAINA. You dare!

BLUNTSCHLI. If you were twenty-three when you said those things
to me this afternoon, I shall take them seriously.

CATHERINE (loftily polite). I doubt, sir, whether you quite
realize either my daughter's position or that of Major Sergius
Saranoff, whose place you propose to take. The Petkoffs and the
Saranoffs are known as the richest and most important families
in the country. Our position is almost historical: we can go
back for nearly twenty years.

PETKOFF. Oh, never mind that, Catherine. (To Bluntschli.) We
should be most happy, Bluntschli, if it were only a question of
your position; but hang it, you know, Raina is accustomed to a
very comfortable establishment. Sergius keeps twenty horses.

BLUNTSCHLI. But what on earth is the use of twenty horses? Why,
it's a circus.

CATHERINE (severely). My daughter, sir, is accustomed to a
first-rate stable.

RAINA. Hush, mother, you're making me ridiculous.

BLUNTSCHLI. Oh, well, if it comes to a question of an
establishment, here goes! (He goes impetuously to the table and
seizes the papers in the blue envelope.) How many horses did you
say?

SERGIUS. Twenty, noble Switzer!

BLUNTSCHLI. I have two hundred horses. (They are amazed.) How
many carriages?

SERGIUS. Three.

BLUNTSCHLI. I have seventy. Twenty-four of them will hold twelve
inside, besides two on the box, without counting the driver and
conductor. How many tablecloths have you?

SERGIUS. How the deuce do I know?

BLUNTSCHLI. Have you four thousand?

SERGIUS. NO.

BLUNTSCHLI. I have. I have nine thousand six hundred pairs of
sheets and blankets, with two thousand four hundred eider-down
quilts. I have ten thousand knives and forks, and the same
quantity of dessert spoons. I have six hundred servants. I have
six palatial establishments, besides two livery stables, a tea
garden and a private house. I have four medals for distinguished
services; I have the rank of an officer and the standing of a
gentleman; and I have three native languages. Show me any man in
Bulgaria that can offer as much.

PETKOFF (with childish awe). Are you Emperor of Switzerland?

BLUNTSCHLI. My rank is the highest known in Switzerland: I'm a
free citizen.

CATHERINE. Then Captain Bluntschli, since you are my daughter's
choice, I shall not stand in the way of her happiness. (Petkoff
is about to speak.) That is Major Petkoff's feeling also.

PETKOFF. Oh, I shall be only too glad. Two hundred horses! Whew!

SERGIUS. What says the lady?

RAINA (pretending to sulk). The lady says that he can keep his
tablecloths and his omnibuses. I am not here to be sold to the
highest bidder.

BLUNTSCHLI. I won't take that answer. I appealed to you as a
fugitive, a beggar, and a starving man. You accepted me. You
gave me your hand to kiss, your bed to sleep in, and your roof
to shelter me--

RAINA (interrupting him). I did not give them to the Emperor of
Switzerland!

BLUNTSCHLI. That's just what I say. (He catches her hand quickly
and looks her straight in the face as he adds, with confident
mastery) Now tell us who you did give them to.

RAINA (succumbing with a shy smile). To my chocolate cream
soldier!

BLUNTSCHLI (with a boyish laugh of delight). That'll do. Thank
you. (Looks at his watch and suddenly becomes businesslike.)
Time's up, Major. You've managed those regiments so well that
you are sure to be asked to get rid of some of the Infantry of
the Teemok division. Send them home by way of Lom Palanka.
Saranoff: don't get married until I come back: I shall be here
punctually at five in the evening on Tuesday fortnight. Gracious
ladies--good evening. (He makes them a military bow, and goes.)

SERGIUS. What a man! What a man!











This etext was produced by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk,
from the 1889 Macmillan and Co. edition.





THE ROMAN AND THE TEUTON
A SERIES OF LECTURES DELIVERED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
BY CHARLES KINGSLEY, M.A.




Contents
   Preface by Professor F. Max Muller
   The Forest Children
   The Dying Empire
   Preface to Lecture III
   The Human Deluge
   The Gothic Civilizer
   Dietrich's End
   The Nemesis of the Goths
   Paulus Diaconus
   The Clergy and the Heathen
   The Monk a Civilizer
   The Lombard Laws
   The Popes and the Lombards
   The Strategy of Prividence
   Appendix--Inaugural Lecture:  The Limits of Exact Science as
Applied to History



PREFACE



Never shall I forget the moment when for the last time I gazed upon
the manly features of Charles Kingsley, features which Death had
rendered calm, grand, sublime.  The constant struggle that in life
seemed to allow no rest to his expression, the spirit, like a caged
lion, shaking the bars of his prison, the mind striving for
utterance, the soul wearying for loving response,--all that was over.
There remained only the satisfied expression of triumph and peace, as
of a soldier who had fought a good fight, and who, while sinking into
the stillness of the slumber of death, listens to the distant sounds
of music and to the shouts of victory.  One saw the ideal man, as
Nature had meant him to be, and one felt that there is no greater
sculptor than Death.

As one looked on that marble statue which only some weeks ago had so
warmly pressed one's hand, his whole life flashed through one's
thoughts.  One remembered the young curate and the Saint's Tragedy;
the chartist parson and Alton Locke; the happy poet and the Sands of
Dee; the brilliant novel-writer and Hypatia and Westward-Ho; the
Rector of Eversley and his Village Sermons; the beloved professor at
Cambridge, the busy canon at Chester, the powerful preacher in
Westminster Abbey.  One thought of him by the Berkshire chalk-streams
and on the Devonshire coast, watching the beauty and wisdom of
Nature, reading her solemn lessons, chuckling too over her inimitable
fun.  One saw him in town-alleys, preaching the Gospel of godliness
and cleanliness, while smoking his pipe with soldiers and navvies.
One heard him in drawing-rooms, listened to with patient silence,
till one of his vigorous or quaint speeches bounded forth, never to
be forgotten.  How children delighted in him!  How young, wild men
believed in him, and obeyed him too!  How women were captivated by
his chivalry, older men by his genuine humility and sympathy!

All that was now passing away--was gone.  But as one looked on him
for the last time on earth, one felt that greater than the curate,
the poet, the professor, the canon, had been the man himself, with
his warm heart, his honest purposes, his trust in his friends, his
readiness to spend himself, his chivalry and humility, worthy of a
better age.

Of all this the world knew little;--yet few men excited wider and
stronger sympathies.

Who can forget that funeral on the 28th Jan., 1875, and the large sad
throng that gathered round his grave?  There was the representative
of the Prince of Wales, and close by the gipsies of the Eversley
common, who used to call him their Patrico-rai, their Priest-King.
There was the old Squire of his village, and the labourers, young and
old, to whom he had been a friend and a father.  There were Governors
of distant Colonies, officers, and sailors, the Bishop of his
diocese, and the Dean of his abbey; there were the leading
Nonconformists of the neighbourhood, and his own devoted curates,
Peers and Members of the House of Commons, authors and publishers;
and outside the church-yard, the horses and the hounds and the
huntsman in pink, for though as good a clergyman as any, Charles
Kingsley had been a good sportsman too, and had taken in his life
many a fence as bravely as he took the last fence of all, without
fear or trembling.  All that he had loved, and all that had loved him
was there, and few eyes were dry when he was laid in his own yellow
gravel bed, the old trees which he had planted and cared for waving
their branches to him for the last time, and the grey sunny sky
looking down with calm pity on the deserted rectory, and on the short
joys and the shorter sufferings of mortal men.

All went home feeling that life was poorer, and every one knew that
he had lost a friend who had been, in some peculiar sense, his own.
Charles Kingsley will be missed in England, in the English colonies,
in America, where he spent his last happy year; aye, wherever Saxon
speech and Saxon thought is understood.  He will be mourned for,
yearned for, in every place in which he passed some days of his busy
life.  As to myself, I feel as if another cable had snapped that tied
me to this hospitable shore.

When an author or a poet dies, the better part of him, it is often
said, is left in his works.  So it is in many cases.  But with
Kingsley his life and his works were one.  All he wrote was meant for
the day when he wrote it.  That was enough for him.  He hardly gave
himself time to think of fame and the future.  Compared with a good
work done, with a good word spoken, with a silent grasp of the hand
from a young man he had saved from mischief, or with a 'Thank you,
Sir,' from a poor woman to whom he had been a comfort, he would have
despised what people call glory, like incense curling away in smoke.
He was, in one sense of the word, a careless writer.  He did his best
at the time and for the time.  He did it with a concentrated energy
of will which broke through all difficulties.  In his flights of
imagination, in the light and fire of his language he had few equals,
if any; but the perfection and classical finish which can be obtained
by a sustained effort only, and by a patience which shrinks from no
drudgery, these are wanting in most of his works.

However, fame, for which he cared so little, has come to him.  His
bust will stand in Westminster Abbey, in the Chapel of St. John the
Baptist, by the side of his friend, Frederick Maurice; and in the
Temple of Fame which will be consecrated to the period of Victoria
and Albert, there will be a niche for Charles Kingsley, the author of
Alton Locke and Hypatia.

Sooner or later a complete edition of his works will be wanted,
though we may doubt whether he himself would have wished all his
literary works to be preserved.  From what I knew of him and his
marvellous modesty, I should say decidedly not.  I doubt more
especially, whether he would have wished the present book, The Roman
and the Teuton, to be handed down to posterity.  None of his books
was so severely criticised as this volume of Lectures, delivered
before the University of Cambridge, and published in 1864.  He
himself did not republish it, and it seems impossible to speak in
more depreciatory terms of his own historical studies than he does
himself again and again in the course of his lectures.  Yet these
lectures, it should be remembered, were more largely attended than
almost any other lectures at Cambridge.  They produced a permanent
impression on many a young mind.  They are asked for again and again,
and when the publishers wished for my advice as to the expediency of
bringing out a new and cheaper edition, I could not hesitate as to
what answer to give.

I am not so blinded by my friendship for Kingsley as to say that
these lectures are throughout what academical lectures ought to be.
I only wish some one would tell me what academical lectures at Oxford
and Cambridge can be, as long as the present system of teaching and
examining is maintained.  It is easy to say what these lectures are
not.  They do not profess to contain the results of long continued
original research.  They are not based on a critical appreciation of
the authorities which had to be consulted.  They are not well
arranged, systematic or complete.  All this the suddenly elected
professor of history at Cambridge would have been the first to grant.
'I am not here,' he says, 'to teach you history.  I am here to teach
you how to teach yourselves history.'  I must say even more.  It
seems to me that these lectures were not always written in a
perfectly impartial and judicial spirit, and that occasionally they
are unjust to the historians who, from no other motive but a sincere
regard for truth, thought it their duty to withhold their assent from
many of the commonly received statements of mediaeval chroniclers.

But for all that, let us see what these Lectures are, and whether
there is not room for them by the side of other works.  First of all,
according to the unanimous testimony of those who heard them
delivered at Cambridge, they stirred up the interest of young men,
and made them ask for books which Undergraduates had never asked for
before at the University libraries.  They made many people who read
them afterwards, take a new interest in old and half-forgotten kings
and battles, and they extorted even from unfriendly critics the
admission that certain chapters, such as, for instance, 'The Monk as
a Civiliser,' displayed in an unexpected way his power of
appreciating the good points in characters, otherwise most antipathic
to the apostle of Manly Christianity.  They contain, in fact, the
thoughts of a poet, a moralist, a politician, a theologian, and,
before all, of a friend and counsellor of young men, while reading
for them and with them one of the most awful periods in the history
of mankind, the agonies of a dying Empire and the birth of new
nationalities.  History was but his text, his chief aim was that of
the teacher and preacher, and as an eloquent interpreter of the
purposes of history before an audience of young men to whom history
is but too often a mere succession of events to be learnt by heart,
and to be ready against periodical examinations, he achieved what he
wished to achieve.  Historians by profession would naturally be
incensed at some portions of this book, but even they would probably
admit by this time, that there are in it whole chapters full of
excellence, telling passages, happy delineations, shrewd remarks,
powerful outbreaks of real eloquence, which could not possibly be
consigned to oblivion.

Nor would it have been possible to attempt to introduce any
alterations, or to correct what may seem to be mistakes.  The book is
not meant as a text-book or as an authority, any more than Schiller's
History of the Thirty Years' War; it should be read in future, as
what it was meant to be from the first, Kingsley's thoughts on some
of the moral problems presented by the conflict between the Roman and
the Teuton.  One cannot help wishing that, instead of lectures,
Kingsley had given us another novel, like Hypatia, or a real
historical tragedy, a Dietrich von Bern, embodying in living
characters one of the fiercest struggles of humanity, the death of
the Roman, the birth of the German world.  Let me quote here what
Bunsen said of Kingsley's dramatic power many years ago:

'I do not hesitate (he writes) to call these two works, the Saint's
Tragedy and Hypatia, by far the most important and perfect of this
genial writer.  In these more particularly I find the justification
of a hope which I beg to be allowed to express--that Kingsley might
continue Shakspeare's historical plays.  I have for several years
made no secret of it, that Kingsley seems to me the genius of our
century, called to place by the side of that sublime dramatic series
from King John to Henry VIII, another series of equal rank, from
Edward VI to the Landing of William of Orange.  This is the only
historical development of Europe which unites in itself all vital
elements, and which we might look upon without overpowering pain.
The tragedy of St. Elizabeth shows that Kingsley can grapple, not
only with the novel, but with the more severe rules of dramatic art.
And Hypatia proves, on the largest scale, that he can discover in the
picture of the historical past, the truly human, the deep, the
permanent, and that he knows how to represent it.  How, with all
this, he can hit the fresh tone of popular life, and draw humourous
characters and complications with Shakspearian energy, is proved by
all his works.  And why should he not undertake this great task?
There is a time when the true poet, the prophet of the present, must
bid farewell to the questions of the day, which seem so great because
they are so near, but are, in truth, but small and unpoetical.  He
must say to himself, "Let the dead bury their dead"--and the time has
come that Kingsley should do so.'

A great deal has been written on mistakes which Kingsley was supposed
to have made in these Lectures, but I doubt whether these criticisms
were always perfectly judicial and fair.  For instance, Kingsley's
using the name of Dietrich, instead of Theodoric, was represented as
the very gem of a blunder, and some critics went so far as to hint
that he had taken Theodoric for a Greek word, as an adjective of
Theodorus.  This, of course, was only meant as a joke, for on page
120 Kingsley had said, in a note, that the name of Theodoric,
Theuderic, Dietrich, signifies 'king of nations.'  He therefore knew
perfectly well that Theodoric was simply a Greek adaptation of the
Gothic name Theode-reiks, theod meaning people, reiks, according to
Grimm, princeps {p1}.  But even if he had called the king Theodorus,
the mistake would not have been unpardonable, for he might have
appealed to the authority of Gregory of Tours, who uses not only
Theodoricus, but also Theodorus, as the same name.

A more serious charge, however, was brought against him for having
used the High-German form Dietrich, instead of the original form
Theodereiks or Theoderic, or even Theodoric.  Should I have altered
this?  I believe not; for it is clear to me that Kingsley had his
good reasons for preferring Dietrich to Theodoric.

He introduces him first to his hearers as 'Theodoric, known in German
song as Dietrich of Bern.'  He had spoken before of the Visi-Gothic
Theodoric, and of him he never speaks as Dietrich.  Then, why should
he have adopted this High-German name for the great Theodoric, and
why should he speak of Attila too as Etzel?

One of the greatest of German historians, Johannes von Muller, does
the same.  He always calls Theodoric, Dietrich of Bern; and though he
gives no reasons for it, his reasons can easily be guessed.  Soon
after Theodoric's death, the influence of the German legends on
history, and of history on the German legends, became so great that
it was impossible for a time to disentangle two characters,
originally totally distinct, viz. Thjodrekr of the Edda, the Dietrich
of the German poetry on one side, and the King of the Goths,
Theodoric, on the other.  What had long been said and sung about
Thjodrekr and Dietrich was believed to have happened to King
Theodoric, while at the same time historical and local elements in
the life of Theodoric, residing at Verona, were absorbed by the
legends of Thjodrekr and Dietrich.  The names of the legendary hero
and the historical king were probably identical, though even that is
not quite certain {p2}; but at all events, after Theodoric's death,
all the numerous dialectic varieties of the name, whether in High or
in Low-German, were understood by the people at large, both of the
hero and of the king.

Few names have had a larger number of alias'.  They have been
carefully collected by Graff, Grimm, Forstemann, Pott, and others.  I
here give the principal varieties of this name, as actually occurring
in MSS., and arranged according to the changes of the principal
consonants:-

(1)  With Th-d:  Theudoricus, Theudericus, [Greek text which cannot
be reproduced], Thiodiricus, Thiodericus, Thiodric, Thiodricus,
Thiodrih, Theodoricus, Theodericus, Theoderic, Theodrich, Thiadric,
Thiadrich, Thiedorik, Thiederic, Thiederik, Thiederich, Thiedorich,
Thiedric, Thiedrich, Thideric, Thiederich, Thidrich, Thodericus,
Thiaedric, Thieoderich, Thederich, Thedric.

(2)  With T-d Teudericus, Teudricus, Tiodericus, Teodoricus,
Teodericus, Teodric, Teodrich, Tiadric, Tiedrik, Tiedrich, Tiedric,
Tidericus, Tiderich, Tederich.

(3)  With D-d:  [Greek text], Diodericus, Deoderich, Deodrich,
Diederich, Diderich.

(4)  With Th-t:  Thiotiricus, Thiotirih, Thiotiricus, Thiotrih,
Theotoricus, Theotericus, Theoterih, Theotrih, Theotrich, Thiatric,
Thieterich, Thietrih, Thietrich, Theatrih.

(5)  With T-t:  Teutrich, Teoterih, Teotrich, Teotrih, Tieterich,
Teatrih, Tiheiterich.

(6)  With D-t:  Dioterih, Diotericus, Diotricus, Deotrich, Deotrih,
Dieterih, Dieterich, Dietrich, Diterih, Ditricus.

(7)  With Th-th:  Theotherich, Theothirich.

(8)  With T-th:  deest.

(9)  With D-th:  Dietherich.

It is quite true that, strictly speaking, the forms with Th-d, are
Low-German, and those with D-t, High-German, but before we trust
ourselves to this division for historical purposes, we must remember
three facts:  (1) that Proper Names frequently defy Grimm's Law; (2)
that in High-German MSS. much depends on the locality in which they
are written; (3) that High-German is not in the strict sense of the
word a corruption of Low-German, and, at all events, not, as Grimm
supposed, chronologically posterior to Low-German, but that the two
are parallel dialects, like Doric and Aeolic, the Low-German being
represented by the earliest literary documents, Gothic and Saxon, the
High-German asserting its literary presence later, not much before
the eighth century, but afterwards maintaining its literary and
political supremacy from the time of Charlemagne to the present day.

When Theodoric married Odeflede, the daughter of Childebert, and a
sister of Chlodwig, I have little doubt that, at the court of
Chlodwig or Clovis, his royal brother-in-law was spoken of in
conversation as Dioterih, although in official documents, and in the
history of Gregory of Tours, he appears under his classical name of
Theodoricus, in Jornandes Theodericus.  Those who, with Grimm {p3},
admit a transition of Low into High-German, and deny that the change
of Gothic Th into High-German D took place before the sixth or
seventh century, will find it difficult to account, in the first
century, for the name of Deudorix, a German captive, the nephew of
Melo the Sigambrian, mentioned by Strabo {p4}.  In the oldest German
poem in which the name of Dietrich occurs, the song of Hildebrand and
Hadebrand, written down in the beginning of the ninth century {p5},
we find both forms, the Low-German Theotrih, and the High-German
Deotrih, used side by side.

Very soon, however, when High-German became the more prevalent
language in Germany, German historians knew both of the old legendary
hero and of the Ost-gothic king, by one and the same name, the High-
German Dietrich.

If therefore Johannes von Muller spoke of Theodoric of Verona as
Dietrich von Bern, he simply intended to carry on the historical
tradition.  He meant to remind his readers of the popular name which
they all knew, and to tell them,--This Dietrich with whom you are all
acquainted from your childhood, this Dietrich of whom so much is said
and sung in your legendary stories and poems, the famous Dietrich of
Bern, this is really the Theoderic, the first German who ruled Italy
for thirty-three years, more gloriously than any Roman Emperor before
or after.  I see no harm in this, as long as it is done on purpose,
and as long as the purpose which Johannes von Muller had in his mind,
was attained.

No doubt the best plan for an historian to follow is to call every
man by the name by which he called himself.  Theodoric, we know,
could not write, but he had a gold plate {p6} made in which the first
four letters of his name were incised, and when it was fixed on the
paper, the King drew his pen through the intervals.  Those four
letters were [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], and though we
should expect that, as a Goth, he would have spelt his name
Thiudereik, yet we have no right to doubt, that the vowels were eo,
and not iu.  But again and again historians spell proper names, not
as they were written by the people themselves, but as they appear in
the historical documents through which they became chiefly known.  We
speak of Plato, because we have Roman literature between us and
Greece.  American names are accepted in history through a Spanish,
Indian names through an English medium.  The strictly Old High-German
form of Carolus Magnus would be Charal, A. S. Carl; yet even in the
Oaths of Strassburg (842) the name appears as Karlus and as Karl, and
has remained so ever since {p7}.  In the same document we find Ludher
for Lothar, Ludhuwig and Lodhuvig for Ludovicus, the oldest form
being Chlodowich:  and who would lay down the law, which of these
forms shall be used for historical purposes?

I have little doubt that Kingsley's object in retaining the name
Dietrich for the Ost-gothic king was much the same as Johannes von
Muller's.  You know, he meant to say, of Dietrich of Bern, of all the
wonderful things told of him in the Nibelunge and other German poems.
Well, that is the Dietrich of the German people, that is what the
Germans themselves have made of him, by transferring to their great
Gothic king some of the most incredible achievements of one of their
oldest legendary heroes.  They have changed even his name, and as the
children in the schools of Germany {p8} still speak of him as their
Dietrich von Bern, let him be to us too Dietrich, not simply the Ost-
gothic Theoderic, but the German Dietrich.

I confess I see no harm in that, though a few words on the strange
mixture of legend and history might have been useful, because the
case of Theodoric is one of the most luculent testimonies for that
blending of fact and fancy in strictly historical times which people
find it so difficult to believe, but which offers the key, and the
only true key, for many of the most perplexing problems, both of
history and of mythology.

Originally nothing could be more different than the Dietrich of the
old legend and the Dietrich of history.  The former is followed by
misfortune through the whole of his life.  He is oppressed in his
youth by his uncle, the famous Ermanrich {p9}; he has to spend the
greater part of his life (thirty years) in exile, and only returns to
his kingdom after the death of his enemy.  Yet whenever he is called
Dietrich of Bern, it is because the real Theodoric, the most
successful of Gothic conquerors, ruled at Verona.  When his enemy was
called Otacher, instead of Sibich, it is because the real Theodoric
conquered the real Odoacer.  When the king, at whose court he passes
his years of exile, is called Etzel, it is because many German heroes
had really taken refuge in the camp of Attila.  That Attila died two
years before Theodoric of Verona was born, is no difficulty to a
popular poet, nor even the still more glaring contradiction between
the daring and ferocious character of the real Attila and the
cowardice of his namesake Etzel, as represented in the poem of the
Nibelunge.  Thus was legend quickened by history.

On the other hand, if historians, such as Gregory I (Dial. iv. 36)
{p10}, tell us that an Italian hermit had been witness in a vision to
the damnation of Theodoric, whose soul was plunged, by the ministers
of divine vengeance, into the volcano of Lipari, one of the flaming
mouths of the infernal world, we may recognise in the heated
imagination of the orthodox monk some recollection of the mysterious
end of the legendary Dietrich {p11}.  Later on, the legendary and the
real hero were so firmly welded together that, as early as the
twelfth century, chroniclers are at their wits' end how to reconcile
facts and dates.

Ekkehard, in his Chronicon Universale {p12}, which ends 1126 A.D.,
points out the chronological contradiction between Jornandes, who
places the death of Ermanrich long before Attila, and the popular
story which makes him and Dietrich, the son of Dietmar, his
contemporaries.

Otto von Freising {p13}, in the first half of the twelfth century,
expresses the same perplexity when he finds that Theodoric is made a
contemporary of Hermanricus and Attila, though it is certain that
Attila ruled long after Hermanric, and that, after the death of
Attila, Theodoric, when eight years old, was given by his father as a
hostage to the emperor Leo.

Gottfried von Viterbo {p14}, in the second half of the twelfth
century, expresses his difficulties in similar words.

All these chroniclers who handed down the historical traditions of
Germany were High-Germans, and thus it has happened that in Germany
Theodoric the Great became Dietrich, as Strataburgum became
Strassburg, or Turicum, Zurich.  Whether because English belongs to
the Low German branch, it is less permissible to an English historian
than to a German to adopt these High-German names, I cannot say:  all
I wished to point out was that there was a very intelligible reason
why Kingsley should have preferred the popular and poetical name of
Dietrich, even though it was High-German, either to his real Gothic
name, Theodereik, or to its classical metamorphosis, Theodoricus or
Theodorus.

Some other mistakes, too, which have been pointed out, did not seem
to me so serious as to justify their correction in a posthumous
edition.  It was said, for instance, that Kingsley ought not to have
called Odoacer and Theodoric, Kings of Italy, as they were only
lieutenants of the Eastern Caesar.  Cassiodorus, however, tells us
that Odoacer assumed the name of king (nomen regis Odoacer
assumpsit), and though Gibbon points out that this may only mean that
he assumed the abstract title of a king, without applying it to any
particular nation or country, yet that great historian himself calls
Odoacer, King of Italy, and shows how he was determined to abolish
the useless and expensive office of vicegerent of the emperor.
Kingsley guesses very ingeniously, that Odoacer's assumed title, King
of nations, may have been the Gothic Theode-reiks, the very name of
Theodoric.  As to Theodoric himself, Kingsley surely knew his real
status, for he says:  'Why did he not set himself up as Caesar of
Rome?  Why did he always consider himself as son-in-arms, and quasi-
vassal of the Caesar of Constantinople?'

Lastly, in speaking of the extinction of the Western Empire with
Romulus Augustulus, Kingsley again simply followed the lead of Gibbon
and other historians; nor can it be said that the expression is not
perfectly legitimate, however clearly modern research may have shown
that the Roman Empire, though dead, lived.

So much in defence, or at all events, in explanation, of expressions
and statements which have been pointed out as most glaring mistakes
in Kingsley's lectures.  I think it must be clear that in all these
cases alterations would have been impossible.  There were other
passages, where I should gladly have altered or struck out whole
lines, particularly in the ethnological passages, and in the
attempted etymologies of German proper names.  Neither the one nor
the other, I believe, are Kingsley's own, though I have tried in vain
to find out whence he could possibly have taken them.

These, however, are minor matters which are mentioned chiefly in
order to guard against the impression that, because I left them
unchanged, I approved of them.  The permanent interest attaching to
these lectures does not spring from the facts which they give.  For
these, students will refer to Gibbon.  They will be valued chiefly
for the thoughts which they contain, for the imagination and
eloquence which they display, and last, not least, for the sake of
the man, a man, it is true, of a warm heart rather than of a cold
judgment, but a man whom, for that very reason, many admired, many
loved, and many will miss, almost every day of their life.

M. M.



LECTURE 1--THE FOREST CHILDREN.



I wish in this first lecture to give you some general conception of
the causes which urged our Teutonic race to attack and destroy Rome.
I shall take for this one lecture no special text-book:  but suppose
you all to be acquainted with the Germania of Tacitus, and with the
9th Chapter of Gibbon.  And I shall begin, if you will allow me, by a
parable, a myth, a saga, such as the men of whom I am going to tell
you loved; and if it seem to any of you childish, bear in mind that
what is childish need not therefore be shallow.  I know that it is
not history.  These lectures will not be, in the popular sense,
history at all.  But I beg you to bear in mind that I am not here to
teach you history.  No man can do that.  I am here to teach you how
to teach yourselves history.  I will give you the scaffolding as well
as I can; you must build the house.

Fancy to yourself a great Troll-garden, such as our forefathers
dreamed of often fifteen hundred years ago;--a fairy palace, with a
fairy garden; and all around the primaeval wood.  Inside the Trolls
dwell, cunning and wicked, watching their fairy treasures, working at
their magic forges, making and making always things rare and strange;
and outside, the forest is full of children; such children as the
world had never seen before, but children still:  children in
frankness, and purity, and affectionateness, and tenderness of
conscience, and devout awe of the unseen; and children too in fancy,
and silliness, and ignorance, and caprice, and jealousy, and
quarrelsomeness, and love of excitement and adventure, and the mere
sport of overflowing animal health.  They play unharmed among the
forest beasts, and conquer them in their play; but the forest is too
dull and too poor for them; and they wander to the walls of the
Troll-garden, and wonder what is inside.  One can conceive easily for
oneself what from that moment would begin to happen.  Some of the
more adventurous clamber in.  Some, too, the Trolls steal and carry
off into their palace.  Most never return:  but here and there one
escapes out again, and tells how the Trolls killed all his comrades:
but tells too, of the wonders he has seen inside, of shoes of
swiftness, and swords of sharpness, and caps of darkness; of charmed
harps, charmed jewels, and above all of the charmed wine:  and after
all, the Trolls were very kind to him--see what fine clothes they
have given him--and he struts about awhile among his companions; and
then returns, and not alone.  The Trolls have bewitched him, as they
will bewitch more.  So the fame of the Troll-garden spreads; and more
and more steal in, boys and maidens, and tempt their comrades over
the wall, and tell of the jewels, and the dresses, and the wine, the
joyous maddening wine, which equals men with gods; and forget to tell
how the Trolls have bought them, soul as well as body, and taught
them to be vain, and lustful, and slavish; and tempted them, too
often, to sins which have no name.

But their better nature flashes out at times.  They will not be the
slaves and brutes in human form, which the evil Trolls would have
them; and they rebel, and escape, and tell of the horrors of that
fair foul place.  And then arises a noble indignation, and war
between the Trolls and the forest-children.  But still the Trolls can
tempt and bribe the greedier or the more vain; and still the wonders
inside haunt their minds; till it becomes a fixed idea among them
all, to conquer the garden for themselves and bedizen themselves in
the fine clothes, and drink their fill of the wine.  Again and again
they break in:  but the Trolls drive them out, rebuild their walls,
keep off those outside by those whom they hold enslaved within; till
the boys grow to be youths, and the youths men:  and still the Troll-
garden is not conquered, and still it shall be.  And the Trolls have
grown old and weak, and their walls are crumbling away.  Perhaps they
may succeed this time--perhaps next.

And at last they do succeed--the fairy walls are breached, the fairy
palace stormed--and the Trolls are crouching at their feet, and now
all will be theirs, gold, jewels, dresses, arms, all that the Troll
possesses--except his cunning.

For as each struggles into the charmed ground, the spell of the place
falls on him.  He drinks the wine, and it maddens him.  He fills his
arms with precious trumpery, and another snatches it from his grasp.
Each envies the youth before him, each cries--Why had I not the luck
to enter first?  And the Trolls set them against each other, and
split them into parties, each mad with excitement, and jealousy, and
wine, till, they scarce know how, each falls upon his fellow, and all
upon those who are crowding in from the forest, and they fight and
fight, up and down the palace halls, till their triumph has become a
very feast of the Lapithae, and the Trolls look on, and laugh a
wicked laugh, as they tar them on to the unnatural fight, till the
gardens are all trampled, the finery torn, the halls dismantled, and
each pavement slippery with brothers' blood.  And then, when the wine
is gone out of them, the survivors come to their senses, and stare
shamefully and sadly round.  What an ugly, desolate, tottering ruin
the fairy palace has become!  Have they spoilt it themselves? or have
the Trolls bewitched it?  And all the fairy treasure--what has become
of it? no man knows.  Have they thrown it away in their quarrel? have
the cunningest hidden it? have the Trolls flown away with it, to the
fairy land beyond the Eastern mountains? who can tell?  Nothing is
left but recrimination and remorse.  And they wander back again into
the forest, away from the doleful ruin, carrion-strewn, to sulk each
apart over some petty spoil which he has saved from the general
wreck, hating and dreading each the sound of his neighbour's
footstep.

What will become of the forest children, unless some kind saint or
hermit comes among them, to bind them in the holy bonds of
brotherhood and law?

This is my saga, gentlemen; and it is a true one withal.  For it is
neither more nor less than the story of the Teutonic tribes, and how
they overthrew the Empire of Rome.

Menzel, who though he may not rank very high as a historian, has at
least a true German heart, opens his history with a striking passage.

'The sages of the East were teaching wisdom beneath the palms; the
merchants of Tyre and Carthage were weighing their heavy anchors, and
spreading their purple sails for far seas; the Greek was making the
earth fair by his art, and the Roman founding his colossal empire of
force, while the Teuton sat, yet a child, unknown and naked among the
forest beasts:  and yet unharmed and in his sport he lorded it over
them; for the child was of a royal race, and destined to win glory
for all time to come.'

To the strange and complicated education which God appointed for this
race; and by which he has fitted it to become, at least for many
centuries henceforth, the ruling race of the world, I wish to call
your attention in my future lectures.  To-day, I wish to impress
strongly on your minds this childishness of our forefathers.  For
good or for evil they were great boys; very noble boys; very often
very naughty boys--as boys with the strength of men might well be.
Try to conceive such to yourselves, and you have the old Markman,
Allman, Goth, Lombard, Saxon, Frank.  And the notion may be more than
a mere metaphor.  Races, like individuals, it has been often said,
may have their childhood, their youth, their manhood, their old age,
and natural death.  It is but a theory--perhaps nothing more.  But at
least, our race had its childhood.  Their virtues, and their sad
failings, and failures, I can understand on no other theory.  The
nearest type which we can see now is I fancy, the English sailor, or
the English navvy.  A great, simple, honest, baby--full of power and
fun, very coarse and plain spoken at times:  but if treated like a
human being, most affectionate, susceptible, even sentimental and
superstitious; fond of gambling, brute excitement, childish
amusements in the intervals of enormous exertion; quarrelsome among
themselves, as boys are, and with a spirit of wild independence which
seems to be strength; but which, till it be disciplined into loyal
obedience and self-sacrifice, is mere weakness; and beneath all a
deep practical shrewdness, an indomitable perseverance, when once
roused by need.  Such a spirit as we see to this day in the English
sailor--that is the nearest analogue I can find now.  One gets hints
here and there of what manner of men they were, from the evil day,
when, one hundred and two years before Christ, the Kempers and
Teutons, ranging over the Alps toward Italy, 300,000 armed men and
15,000 mailed knights with broad sword and lances, and in their
helmets the same bulls'-horns, wings, and feathers, which one sees
now in the crests of German princes, stumbled upon Marius and his
Romans, and were destroyed utterly, first the men, then the women,
who like true women as they were, rather than give up their honour to
the Romans, hung themselves on the horns of the waggon-oxen, and were
trampled to death beneath their feet; and then the very dogs, who
fought on when men and women were all slain--from that fatal day,
down to the glorious one, when, five hundred years after, Alaric
stood beneath the walls of Rome, and to their despairing boast of the
Roman numbers, answered, 'Come out to us then, the thicker the hay,
the easier mowed,'--for five hundred years, I say, the hints of their
character are all those of a boy-nature.

They were cruel at times:  but so are boys--much more cruel than
grown men, I hardly know why--perhaps because they have not felt
suffering so much themselves, and know not how hard it is to bear.
There were varieties of character among them.  The Franks were always
false, vain, capricious, selfish, taking part with the Romans
whenever their interest or vanity was at stake--the worst of all
Teutons, though by no means the weakest--and a miserable business
they made of it in France, for some five hundred years.  The Goths,
Salvian says, were the most ignavi of all of them; great lazy
lourdans; apt to be cruel, too, the Visigoths at least, as their
Spanish descendants proved to the horror of the world:  but men of
honour withal, as those old Spaniards were.  The Saxons were famed
for cruelty--I know not why, for our branch of the Saxons has been,
from the beginning of history, the least cruel people in Europe; but
they had the reputation--as the Vandals had also--of being the most
pure; Castitate venerandi.  And among the uncivilized people coldness
and cruelty go often together.  The less passionate and sensitive the
nature, the less open to pity.  The Caribs of the West Indies were
famed for both, in contrast to the profligate and gentle inhabitants
of Cuba and Hispaniola; and in double contrast to the Red Indian
tribes of North America, who combined, from our first acquaintance
with them, the two vices of cruelty and profligacy, to an extent
which has done more to extirpate them than all the fire-water of the
white man.

But we must be careful how we compare our forefathers with these, or
any other savages.  Those who, like Gibbon, have tried to draw a
parallel between the Red Indian and the Primaeval Teuton, have done
so at the expense of facts.  First, they have overlooked the broad
fact, that while the Red Indians have been, ever since we have known
them, a decreasing race, the Teutons have been a rapidly increasing
one; in spite of war, and famine, and all the ills of a precarious
forest life, proving their youthful strength and vitality by a
reproduction unparalleled, as far as I know, in history, save perhaps
by that noble and young race, the Russian.  These writers have not
known that the Teuton had his definite laws, more simple, doubtless,
in the time of Tacitus than in that of Justinian, but still founded
on abstract principles so deep and broad that they form the
groundwork of our English laws and constitution; that the Teuton
creed concerning the unseen world, and divine beings, was of a
loftiness and purity as far above the silly legends of Hiawatha as
the Teuton morals were above those of a Sioux or a Comanche.  Let any
one read honest accounts of the Red Indians; let him read Catlin,
James, Lewis and Clarke, Shoolbred; and first and best of all, the
old 'Travaile in Virginia,' published by the Hakluyt Society:  and
then let him read the Germania of Tacitus, and judge for himself.
For my part, I believe that if Gibbon was right, and if our
forefathers in the German forests had been like Powhattan's people as
we found them in the Virginian forests, the Romans would not have
been long in civilizing us off the face of the earth.

No.  All the notes which Tacitus gives us are notes of a young and
strong race; unconscious of its own capabilities, but possessing such
capabilities that the observant Romans saw at once with dread and awe
that they were face to face with such a people as they had never met
before; that in their hands, sooner or later, might be the fate of
Rome.  Mad Caracalla, aping the Teuton dress and hair, listening in
dread to the songs of the Allman Alrunas, telling the Teutons that
they ought to come over the Rhine and destroy the empire, and then,
murdering the interpreters, lest they should repeat his words, was
but babbling out in an insane shape the thought which was brooding in
the most far-seeing Roman minds.  He felt that they could have done
the deed; and he felt rightly, madman as he was.  They could have
done it then, if physical power and courage were all that was needed,
in the days of the Allman war.  They could have done it a few years
before, when the Markmen fought Marcus Aurelius Antoninus; on the day
when the Caesar, at the advice of his augurs, sent two lions to swim
across the Danube as a test of victory; and the simple Markmen took
them for big dogs, and killed them with their clubs.  From that day,
indeed, the Teutons began to conquer slowly, but surely.  Though
Antoninus beat the Markmen on the Danube, and recovered 100,000 Roman
prisoners, yet it was only by the help of the Vandals; from that day
the empire was doomed, and the Teutons only kept at bay by bribing
one tribe to fight another, or by enlisting their more adventurous
spirits into the Roman legions, to fight against men of their own
blood;--a short-sighted and suicidal policy; for by that very method
they were teaching the Teuton all he needed, the discipline and the
military science of the Roman.

But the Teutons might have done it a hundred years before that, when
Rome was in a death agony, and Vitellius and Vespasian were
struggling for the purple, and Civilis and the fair Velleda, like
Barak and Deborah of old, raised the Teuton tribes.  They might have
done it before that again, when Hermann slew Varus and his legions in
the Teutoburger Wald; or before that again, when the Kempers and
Teutons burst over the Alps, to madden themselves with the fatal
wines of the rich south.  And why did the Teutons NOT do it?  Because
they were boys fighting against cunning men.  Boiorich, the young
Kemper, riding down to Marius' camp, to bid him fix the place and
time of battle--for the Teuton thought it mean to use surprises and
stratagems, or to conquer save in fair and open fight--is the type of
the Teuton hero; and one which had no chance in a struggle with the
cool, false, politic Roman, grown grey in the experience of the forum
and of the camp, and still as physically brave as his young enemy.
Because, too, there was no unity among them; no feeling that they
were brethren of one blood.  Had the Teuton tribes, at any one of the
great crises I have mentioned, and at many a crisis afterwards,
united for but three years, under the feeling of a common blood,
language, interest, destiny, Rome would have perished.  But they
could not learn that lesson.  They could not put aside their boyish
quarrels.

They never learnt the lesson till after their final victory, when the
Gospel of Christ--of a Being to whom they all owed equal allegiance,
in whose sight they were all morally equal--came to unite them into a
Christendom.

And it was well that they did not learn it sooner.  Well for them and
for the world, that they did not unite on any false ground of
interest or ambition, but had to wait for the true ground of unity,
the knowledge of the God-man, King of all nations upon earth.

Had they destroyed Rome sooner, what would not they have lost?  What
would not the world have lost?  Christianity would have been stifled
in its very cradle; and with Christianity all chance--be sure of it--
of their own progress.  Roman law, order, and discipline, the very
things which they needed to acquire by a contact of five hundred
years, would have been swept away.  All classic literature and
classic art, which they learnt to admire with an almost superstitious
awe, would have perished likewise.  Greek philosophy, the germs of
physical science, and all that we owe to the ancients, would have
perished; and we should have truly had an invasion of the barbarians,
followed by truly dark ages, in which Europe would have had to begin
all anew, without the help of the generations which had gone before.

Therefore it was well as it was, and God was just and merciful to
them and to the human race.  They had a glorious destiny, and
glorious powers wherewith to fulfil it:  but they had, as every man
and people has, before whom there is a noble future, to be educated
by suffering.  There was before them a terrible experience of sorrow
and disappointment, sin and blood, by which they gained the first
consciousness of what they could do and what they could not.  Like
Adam of old, like every man unto this day, they ate of the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, and were driven out of the paradise
of unconsciousness; had to begin again sadder and wiser men, and eat
their bread in the sweat of their brow; and so to rise, after their
fall, into a nobler, wiser, more artificial, and therefore more truly
human and divine life, than that from which they had at first fallen,
when they left their German wilds.

One does not, of course, mean the parallel to fit in all details.
The fall of the Teuton from the noble simplicity in which Tacitus
beheld and honoured him, was a work of four centuries; perhaps it was
going on in Tacitus' own time.  But the culminating point was the
century which saw Italy conquered, and Rome sacked, by Visigoth, by
Ostrogoth, by Vandal, till nothing was left save fever-haunted ruins.
Then the ignorant and greedy child, who had been grasping so long
after the fair apples of Sodom, clutched them once and for all, and
found them turn to ashes in his hands.

Yes--it is thus that I wish you to look at the Invasion of the
Barbarians, Immigration of the Teutons, or whatsoever name you may
call it.  Before looking at questions of migration, of ethnology, of
laws, and of classes, look first at the thing itself; and see with
sacred pity--and awe, one of the saddest and grandest tragedies ever
performed on earth.  Poor souls!  And they were so simple withal.
One pities them, as one pities a child who steals apples, and makes
himself sick with them after all.  It is not the enormous loss of
life which is to me the most tragic part of the story; it is that
very simplicity of the Teutons.  Bloodshed is a bad thing, certainly;
but after all nature is prodigal of human life--killing her twenty
thousand and her fifty thousand by a single earthquake; and as for
death in battle--I sometimes am tempted to think, having sat by many
death beds, that our old forefathers may have been right, and that
death in battle may be a not unenviable method of passing out of this
troublesome world.  Besides, we have no right to blame those old
Teutons, while we are killing every year more of her Majesty's
subjects by preventible disease, than ever they killed in their
bloodiest battle.  Let us think of that, and mend that, ere we blame
the old German heroes.  No, there are more pitiful tragedies than any
battlefield can shew; and first among them, surely, is the
disappointment of young hopes, the degradation of young souls.

One pities them, I say.  And they pitied themselves.  Remorse, shame,
sadness, mark the few legends and songs of the days which followed
the fall of Rome.  They had done a great work.  They had destroyed a
mighty tyranny; they had parted between them the spoils wrung from
all the nations; they had rid the earth of a mighty man-devouring
ogre, whose hands had been stretched out for centuries over all the
earth, dragging all virgins to his den, butchering and torturing
thousands for his sport; foul, too, with crimes for which their
language, like our own (thank God) has scarcely found a name.
Babylon the Great, drunken with the blood of the saints, had fallen
at last before the simple foresters of the north:  but if it looks a
triumph to us, it looked not such to them.  They could only think how
they had stained their hands in their brothers' blood.  They had got
the fatal Nibelungen hoard:  but it had vanished between their hands,
and left them to kill each other, till none was left.

You know the Nibelungen Lied?  That expresses, I believe, the key-
note of the old Teuton's heart, after his work was done.  Siegfried
murdered by his brother-in-law; fair Chriemhild turned into an
avenging fury; the heroes hewing each other down, they scarce know
why, in Hunnish Etzel's hall, till Hagen and Gunther stand alone;
Dietrich of Bern going in, to bind the last surviving heroes;
Chriemhild shaking Hagen's gory head in Gunther's face, himself hewed
down by the old Hildebrand, till nothing is left but stark corpses
and vain tears: --while all the while the Nibelungen hoard, the cause
of all the woe, lies drowned in the deep Rhine until the judgment
day.--What is all this, but the true tale of the fall of Rome, of the
mad quarrels of the conquering Teutons?  The names are confused,
mythic; the dates and places all awry:  but the tale is true--too
true.  Mutato nomine fabula narratur.  Even so they went on, killing,
till none were left.  Deeds as strange, horrible, fratricidal, were
done, again and again, not only between Frank and Goth, Lombard and
Gepid, but between Lombard and Lombard, Frank and Frank.  Yes, they
were drunk with each other's blood, those elder brethren of ours.
Let us thank God that we did not share their booty, and perish, like
them, from the touch of the fatal Nibelungen hoard.  Happy for us
Englishmen, that we were forced to seek our adventures here, in this
lonely isle; to turn aside from the great stream of Teutonic
immigration; and settle here, each man on his forest-clearing, to
till the ground in comparative peace, keeping unbroken the old
Teutonic laws, unstained the old Teutonic faith and virtue, cursed
neither with poverty nor riches, but fed with food sufficient for us.
To us, indeed, after long centuries, peace brought sloth, and sloth
foreign invaders and bitter woes:  but better so, than that we should
have cast away alike our virtue and our lives, in that mad quarrel
over the fairy gold of Rome.



LECTURE II--THE DYING EMPIRE.



It is not for me to trace the rise, or even the fall of the Roman
Empire.  That would be the duty rather of a professor of ancient
history, than of modern.  All I need do is to sketch, as shortly as I
can, the state in which the young world found the old, when it came
in contact with it.

The Roman Empire, toward the latter part of the fourth century, was
in much the same condition as the Chinese or the Turkish Empire in
our own days.  Private morality (as Juvenal and Persius will tell
you), had vanished long before.  Public morality had, of course,
vanished likewise.  The only powers really recognised were force and
cunning.  The only aim was personal enjoyment.  The only God was the
Divus Caesar, the imperial demigod, whose illimitable brute force
gave him illimitable powers of self-enjoyment, and made him thus the
paragon and ideal of humanity, whom all envied, flattered, hated, and
obeyed.  The palace was a sink of corruption, where eunuchs,
concubines, spies, informers, freedmen, adventurers, struggled in the
basest plots, each for his share of the public plunder.  The senate
only existed to register the edicts of their tyrant, and if need be,
destroy each other, or any one else, by judicial murders, the willing
tools of imperial cruelty.  The government was administered (at least
since the time of Diocletian) by an official bureaucracy, of which
Professor Goldwin Smith well says, 'the earth swarmed with the
consuming hierarchy of extortion, so that it was said that they who
received taxes were more than those who paid them.'  The free middle
class had disappeared, or lingered in the cities, too proud to
labour, fed on government bounty, and amused by government
spectacles.  With them, arts and science had died likewise.  Such
things were left to slaves, and became therefore, literally, servile
imitations of the past.  What, indeed, was not left to slaves?  Drawn
without respect of rank, as well as of sex and age, from every nation
under heaven by an organized slave-trade, to which our late African
one was but a tiny streamlet compared with a mighty river; a slave-
trade which once bought 10,000 human beings in Delos in a single day;
the 'servorum nationes' were the only tillers of the soil, of those
'latifundia' or great estates, 'quae perdidere Romam.'  Denied the
rights of marriage, the very name of humanity; protected by no law,
save the interest or caprice of their masters; subjected, for slight
offences, to cruel torments, they were butchered by thousands in the
amphitheatres to make a Roman holiday, or wore out their lives in
'ergastula' or barracks, which were dens of darkness and horror.
Their owners, as 'senatores,' 'clarissimi,' or at least 'curiales,'
spent their lives in the cities, luxurious and effeminate, and left
their slaves to the tender mercy of 'villici,' stewards and gang-
drivers, who were themselves slaves likewise.

More pampered, yet more degraded, were the crowds of wretched beings,
cut off from all the hopes of humanity, who ministered to the wicked
pleasures of their masters, even in the palaces of nominally
Christian emperors--but over that side of Roman slavery I must draw a
veil, only saying, that the atrocities of the Romans toward their
slaves--especially of this last and darkest kind--notably drew down
on them the just wrath and revenge of those Teutonic nations, from
which so many of their slaves were taken. {p15}

And yet they called themselves Christians--to whom it had been said,
'Be not deceived, God is not mocked.  For these things cometh the
wrath of God on the children of disobedience.'  And the wrath did
come.

If such were the morals of the Empire, what was its political state?
One of complete disorganization.  The only uniting bond left seems to
have been that of the bureaucracy, the community of tax-gatherers,
who found it on the whole safer and more profitable to pay into the
imperial treasury a portion of their plunder, than to keep it all
themselves.  It stood by mere vi inertiae, just because it happened
to be there, and there was nothing else to put in its place.  Like an
old tree whose every root is decayed, it did not fall, simply because
the storm had not yet come.  Storms, indeed, had come; but they had
been partial and local.  One cannot look into the pages of Gibbon,
without seeing that the normal condition of the empire was one of
revolt, civil war, invasion--Pretenders, like Carausius and Allectus
in Britain, setting themselves up as emperors for awhile--Bands of
brigands, like the Bagaudae of Gaul, and the Circumcelliones of
Africa, wandering about, desperate with hunger and revenge, to slay
and pillage--Teutonic tribes making forays on the frontier, enlisted
into the Roman armies, and bought off, or hired to keep back the
tribes behind them, and perish by their brethren's swords.

What kept the empire standing, paradoxical as it may seem, was its
own innate weakness.  From within, at least, it could not be
overthrown.  The masses were too crushed to rise.  Without unity,
purpose, courage, they submitted to inevitable misery as to rain and
thunder.  At most they destroyed their own children from poverty, or,
as in Egypt, fled by thousands into the caves and quarries, and
turned monks and hermits; while the upper classes, equally without
unity or purpose, said each to himself, 'Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die.'

The state of things at Rome, and after the rise of Byzantium under
Constantine at Byzantium likewise, was one altogether fantastic,
abnormal, utterly unlike anything that we have seen, or can imagine
to ourselves without great effort.  I know no better method of
illustrating it, than quoting, from Mr. Sheppard's excellent book,
The Fall of Rome and the Rise of New Nationalities, a passage in
which he transfers the whole comi-tragedy from Italy of old to
England in 1861.

'I have not thought it necessary to give a separate and distinct
reply to the theory of Mr. Congreve, that Roman Imperialism was the
type of all good government, and a desirable precedent for ourselves.
Those who feel any penchant for the notion, I should strongly
recommend to read the answer of Professor G. Smith, in the Oxford
Essays for 1856, which is as complete and crushing as that
gentleman's performances usually are.  But in order to convey to the
uninitiated some idea of the state of society under Caesarian rule,
and which a Caesarian rule, so far as mere government is concerned,
if it does not produce, has never shewn any tendency to prevent, let
us give reins to imagination for a moment, and picture to ourselves a
few social and political analogies in our own England of the
nineteenth century.

'An entire revolution has taken place in our principles, manners, and
form of government.  Parliaments, meetings, and all the ordinary
expressions of the national will, are no longer in existence.  A free
press has shared their fate.  There is no accredited organ of public
opinion; indeed there is no public opinion to record.  Lords and
Commons have been swept away, though a number of the richest old
gentlemen in London meet daily at Westminster to receive orders from
Buckingham Palace.  But at the palace itself has broken out one of
those sanguinary conspiracies which have of late become unceasing.
The last heir of the house of Brunswick is lying dead with a dagger
in his heart, and everything is in frightful confusion.  The armed
force of the capital are of course "masters of the situation," and
the Guards, after a tumultuous meeting at Windsor or Knightsbridge,
have sold the throne to Baron Rothschild, for a handsome donation of
25 pounds a-piece.  Lord Clyde, however, we may be sure, is not
likely to stand this, and in a few months will be marching upon
London at the head of the Indian Army.  In the mean time the Channel
Fleet has declared for its own commander, has seized upon Plymouth
and Portsmouth, and intends to starve the metropolis by stopping the
imports of "bread-stuffs" at the mouth of the Thames.  And this has
become quite possible; for half the population of London, under the
present state of things, subsist upon free distributions of corn
dispensed by the occupant of the throne for the time being.  But a
more fatal change than even this has come over the population of the
capital and of the whole country.  The free citizens and 'prentices
of London; the sturdy labourers of Dorsetshire and the eastern
counties; and the skilful artizans of Manchester, Sheffield and
Birmingham; the mariners and shipwrights of Liverpool, have been long
ago drafted into marching regiments, and have left their bones to
bleach beneath Indian suns and Polar snows.  Their place has been
supplied by countless herds of negro slaves, who till the fields and
crowd the workshops of our towns, to the entire exclusion of free
labour; for the free population, or rather the miserable relics of
them, disdain all manual employment:  they divide their time between
starvation and a degrading debauchery, the means for which are
sedulously provided by the government.  The time-honoured
institutions of the bull-bait, the cockpit, and the ring, are in
daily operation, under the most distinguished patronage.  Hyde Park
has been converted into a gigantic arena, where criminals from
Newgate "set-to" with the animals from the Zoological Gardens.  Every
fortnight there is a Derby Day, and the whole population pour into
the Downs with frantic excitement, leaving the city to the slaves.
And then the moral condition of this immense mass!  Of the doings
about the palace we should be sorry to speak.  But the lady
patronesses of Almack's still more assiduously patronize the prize-
fights, and one of them has been seen within the ropes, in battle
array, by the side of Sayers himself.  No tongue may tell the orgies
enacted, with the aid of French cooks, Italian singers, and foreign
artists of all sorts, in the gilded saloons of Park Lane and Mayfair.
Suffice to say, that in them the worst passions of human nature have
full swing, unmodified by any thought of human or divine restraints,
and only dashed a little now and then by the apprehension that the
slaves may rise, and make a clean sweep of the metropolis with fire
and steel.  But n'importe--Vive la bagatelle!  Mario has just been
appointed prime minister, and has made a chorus singer from the Opera
Duke of Middlesex and Governor-General of India.  All wise men and
all good men despair of the state, but they are not permitted to say
anything, much less to act.  Mr. Disraeli lost his head a few days
ago; Lords Palmerston and Derby lie in the Tower under sentence of
death; Lord Brougham, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Mr.
Gladstone, opened their veins and died in a warm bath last week.
Foreign relations will make a still greater demand on the reader's
imagination.  We must conceive of England no longer as


"A precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a moat defensive of a house."


but rather as open to the inroad of every foe whom her aggressive and
colonizing genius has provoked.  The red man of the West, the Caffre,
the Sikh, and the Sepoy, Chinese braves, and fierce orientals of all
sorts, are hovering on her frontiers in "numbers numberless," as the
flakes of snow in the northern winter.  They are not the impotent
enemy which we know, but vigorous races, supplied from inexhaustible
founts of population, and animated by an insatiate appetite for the
gold and silver, purple and fine linen, rich meats and intoxicating
drinks of our effete civilization.  And we can no longer oppose them
with those victorious legions which have fought and conquered in all
regions of the world.  The men of Waterloo and Inkermann are no more.
We are compelled to recruit our armies from those very tribes before
whose swords we are receding!

'Doubtless the ordinary reader will believe this picture to be
overcharged, drawn with manifest exaggeration, and somewhat
questionable taste.  EVERY SINGLE STATEMENT WHICH IT CONTAINS may be
paralleled by the circumstances and events of the decadence of the
Roman Empire.  The analogous situation was with the subjects of this
type of all good government, ALWAYS A POSSIBLE, often an actual,
state of things.  We think this disposes of the theory of Mr.
Congreve.  With it may advantageously be contrasted the opinion of a
man of more statesman-like mind.  "The benefits of despotism are
short-lived; it poisons the very springs which it lays open; if it
display a merit, it is an exceptional one; if a virtue, it is created
of circumstances; and when once this better hour has passed away, all
the vices of its nature break forth with redoubled violence, and
weigh down society in every direction."  So writes M. Guizot.  Is it
the language of prophecy as well as of personal experience?'

Mr. Sheppard should have added, to make the picture complete, that
the Irish have just established popery across St. George's Channel,
by the aid of re-immigrants from America; that Free Kirk and National
Kirk are carrying on a sanguinary civil war in Scotland; that the
Devonshire Wesleyans have just sacked Exeter cathedral, and murdered
the Bishop at the altar, while the Bishop of London, supported by the
Jews and the rich churchmen (who are all mixed up in financial
operations with Baron Rothschild) has just commanded all Dissenters
to leave the metropolis within three days, under pain of death.

I must add yet one more feature to this fearful, but accurate
picture, and say how, a few generations forward, an even uglier thing
would be seen.  The English aristocracy would have been absorbed by
foreign adventurers.  The grandchildren of these slaves and
mercenaries would be holding the highest offices in the state and the
army, naming themselves after the masters who had freed them, or
disguising their barbarian names by English endings.  The De Fung-
Chowvilles would be Dukes, the Little-grizzly-bear-Joe-Smiths Earls,
and the Fitz-Stanleysons, descended from a king of the gipsies who
enlisted to avoid transportation, and in due time became Commander-
in-Chief, would rule at Knowsley in place of the Earl of Derby,
having inherited the same by the summary process of assassination.
Beggars on horseback, only too literally; married, most of them, to
Englishwomen of the highest rank; but looking on England merely as a
prey; without patriotism, without principle; they would destroy the
old aristocracy by legal murders, grind the people, fight against
their yet barbarian cousins outside, as long as they were in luck:
but the moment the luck turned against them, would call in those
barbarian cousins to help them, and invade England every ten years
with heathen hordes, armed no more with tulwar and matchlock, but
with Enfield rifle and Whitworth cannon.  And that, it must be
agreed, would be about the last phase of the British empire.  If you
will look through the names which figure in the high places of the
Roman empire, during the fourth and fifth centuries, you will see how
few of them are really Roman.  If you will try to investigate, not
their genealogies--for they have none--not a grandfather among them--
but the few facts of their lives which have come down to us; you will
see how that Nemesis had fallen on her which must at last fall on
every nation which attempts to establish itself on slavery as a legal
basis.  Rome had become the slave of her own slaves.

It is at this last period, the point when Rome has become the slave
of her own slaves, that I take up the story of our Teutonic race.

I do not think that anyone will call either Mr. Sheppard's
statements, or mine, exaggerated, who knows the bitter complaints of
the wickedness and folly of the time, which are to be found in the
writings of the Emperor Julian.  Pedant and apostate as he was, he
devoted his short life to one great idea, the restoration of the
Roman Empire to what it had been (as he fancied) in the days of the
virtuous stoic Emperors of the second century.  He found his dream a
dream, owing to the dead heap of frivolity, sensuality, brutality,
utter unbelief, not merely in the dead Pagan gods whom he vainly
tried to restore, but in any god at all, as a living, ruling,
judging, rewarding, punishing power.

No one, again, will call these statements exaggerated who knows the
Roman history of his faithful servant and soldier, Ammianus
Marcellinus, and especially the later books of it, in which he sets
forth the state of the Empire after Julian's death, under Jovian,
Procopius, Valentinian, (who kept close to his bed-chamber two she-
bears who used to eat men, one called Golden Camel, and the other
Innocence--which latter, when she had devoured a sufficiency of his
living victims, he set free in the forests as a reward for her
services--a brutal tyrant, whose only virtue seems to have been his
chastity); and Valens, the shameless extortioner who perished in that
great battle of Adrianople, of which more hereafter.  The last five
remaining books of the honest soldier's story are a tissue of
horrors, from reading which one turns away as from a slaughter-house
or a witches' sabbath.

No one, again, will think these statements exaggerated who knows
Salvian's De Gubernatione Dei.  It has been always and most justly
held in high esteem, as one great authority of the state of Gaul when
conquered by the Franks and Goths and Vandals.

Salvian was a Christian gentleman, born somewhere near Treves.  He
married a Pagan lady of Cologne, converted her, had by her a
daughter, and then persuaded her to devote herself to celibacy, while
he did the like.  His father-in-law, Hypatius, quarrelled with him on
this account; and the letter in which he tries to soothe the old man
is still extant, a curious specimen of the style of cultivated men in
that day.  Salvian then went down to the south of France and became a
priest at Marseilles, and tutor to the sons of Eucherius, the Bishop
of Lyons.  Eucherius, himself a good man, speaks in terms of
passionate admiration of Salvian, his goodness, sanctity, learning,
talents.  Gennadius (who describes him as still living when he wrote,
about 490) calls him among other encomiums, the Master of Bishops;
and both mention familiarly this very work, by which he became
notorious in his own day, and which he wrote about 450 or 455, during
the invasion of the Britons.  So that we may trust fully that we have
hold of an authentic contemporaneous work, written by a good man and
true.

Let me first say a few words on the fact of his having--as many good
men did then--separated from his wife in order to lead what was
called a religious life.  It has a direct bearing on the History of
those days.  One must not praise him because he (in common with all
Christians of his day) held, no doubt, the belief that marriage was a
degradation in itself; that though the Church might mend it somewhat
by exalting it into a sacrament, still, the less of a bad thing the
better: --a doctrine against which one need not use (thank God) in
England, the same language which Michelet has most justly used in
France.  We, being safe from the poison, can afford to talk of it
calmly.  But I boldly assert, that few more practically immoral
doctrines than that of the dignity of celibacy and the defilement of
marriage (which was the doctrine of all Christian devotees for 1000
years) have, as far as I know, ever been preached to man.  That is a
strong statement.  It will be answered perhaps, by the patent fact,
that during those very 1000 years the morality of Europe improved
more, and more rapidly, than it had ever done before.  I know it; and
I thank God for it.  But I adhere to my statement, and rejoin--And
how much more rapidly have the morals of Europe improved, since that
doctrine has been swept away; and woman, and the love of woman, have
been restored to their rightful place in the education of man?

But if we do not praise Salvian, we must not blame him, or any one
else who meant to be an honest and good man.  Such did not see to
what their celibate notions would lead.  If they had, we must believe
that they would have acted differently.  And what is more, their
preference for celibacy was not fancy, but common sense of a very
lofty kind.  Be sure that when two middle-aged Christian people
consider it best to part, they have very good reasons for such a
solemn step, at which only boys or cynics will laugh.  And the
reasons, in Salvian's case, and many more in his day, are patent to
common human understanding.  Do not fancy that he had any private
reason, such as we should very fairly assign now:  public reasons,
and those, such as God grant no living man may see, caused wise men
to thank God that they were not burdened with wife and child.
Remember the years in which Salvian lived--from 416 perhaps to 490.
It was a day of the Lord such as Joel saw; 'a day of clouds and of
thick darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains; a great
people and strong; there had not been ever the like, neither should
be any more after it:  the land was a garden of Eden before them, and
behind them a desolate wilderness:  Yea, and nothing should escape
them.'  All things were going to wrack; the country was overrun by
foreign invaders; bankruptcy, devastation, massacre, and captivity
were for perhaps 100 years the normal state of Gaul, and of most
other countries besides.  I have little doubt that Salvian was a
prudent man, when he thought fit to bring no more human beings into
the world.  That is an ugly thought--I trust that you feel how ugly,
unnatural, desperate a thought it is.  If you do not, think over it
till you do, till it frightens you.  You will gain a great step
thereby in human sympathy, and therefore in the understanding of
history.  For many times, and in many places, men have said, rightly
or wrongly, 'It is better to leave none behind me like myself.  The
miseries of life (and of what comes after this life) are greater than
its joys.  I commit an act of cruelty by bringing a fresh human being
into the world.'  I wish you to look at that thought steadily, and
apply it for yourselves.  It has many applications:  and has
therefore been a very common one.

But put to yourselves--it is too painful for me to put to you--the
case of a married gentleman who sees his country gradually devastated
and brought to utter ruin by foreign invaders; and who feels--as poor
Salvian felt, that there is no hope or escape; that the misery is
merited, deserved, fairly EARNED (for that is the true meaning of
those words), and therefore must come.  Conceive him seeing around
him estates destroyed, farms burnt, ladies and gentlemen, his own
friends and relations, reduced in an hour to beggary, plundered,
stript, driven off in gangs--I do not choose to finish the picture:
but ask yourselves, would an honourable man wish to bring sons--much
more daughters--into the world to endure that?

Put yourselves in Salvian's place.  Forget for a few minutes that you
are Englishmen, the freest and bravest nation upon earth, strong in
all that gives real strength, and with a volunteer army which is now
formidable by numbers and courage--which, did the terrible call come,
might be increased ten times in as many months.  Forget all that
awhile; and put yourselves in Salvian's place, the gentleman of Gaul,
while Franks and Goths, Burgunds and Vandals were sweeping, wave
after wave, over that lovely land; and judge him rationally, and talk
as little as possible of his superstition, and as much as possible of
his human feeling, prudence, self-control, and common sense.  Believe
me, neither celibacy, nor any other seemingly unnatural superstition
would have held its ground for a generation if there had not been
some practical considerations of common sense to back them.  We
wonder why men in old times went into monasteries.  The simplest
answer is, common sense sent them thither.  They were tired of being
the slaves of their own passions; they were tired of killing, and of
running the chance of being killed.  They saw society, the whole
world, going to wrack, as they thought, around them:  what could they
do better, than see that their own characters, morals, immortal souls
did not go to wrack with the rest.  We wonder why women, especially
women of rank, went into convents; why, as soon as a community of
monks was founded, a community of nuns sprung up near them.  The
simplest answer is, common sense sent them thither.  The men,
especially of the upper fighting classes, were killed off rapidly;
the women were not killed off, and a large number always remained,
who, if they had wished to marry, could not.  What better for them
than to seek in convents that peace which this world could not give?

They may have mixed up with that simple wish for peace the notion of
being handmaids of God, brides of Christ, and so forth.  Be it so.
Let us instead of complaining, thank heaven that there was some
motive, whether quite right or not, to keep alive in them self-
respect, and the feeling that they were not altogether useless and
aimless on earth.  Look at the question in this light, and you will
understand two things; first, how horrible the times were, and
secondly, why there grew up in the early middle age a passion for
celibacy.

Salvian, in a word, had already grown up to manhood and reason, when
he saw a time come to his native country, in which were fulfilled,
with fearful exactness, the words of the prophet Isaiah:-


'Behold, the Lord maketh the land empty, and maketh it waste, and
turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants
thereof.  And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as
with the slave, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her
mistress; as with the seller, so with the buyer; as with the lender,
so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver
of usury to him.  The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly
spoiled; for the Lord hath spoken this word.'


And Salvian desired to know the reason why the Lord had spoken that
word, and read his Bible till he found out, and wrote thereon his
book De Gubernatione Dei, of the government of God; and a very noble
book it is.  He takes his stand on the ground of Scripture, with
which he shews an admirable acquaintance.  The few good were
expecting the end of the world.  Christ was coming to put an end to
all these horrors:  but why did he delay his coming?  The many weak
were crying that God had given up the world; that Christ had deserted
his Church, and delivered over Christians to the cruelties of heathen
and Arian barbarians.  The many bad were openly blaspheming, throwing
off in despair all faith, all bonds of religion, all common decency,
and crying, Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.  Salvian
answers them like an old Hebrew prophet:  'The Lord's arm is not
shortened.  The Lord's eyes are not closed.  The Lord is still as
near as ever.  He is governing the world as He has always governed
it:  by the everlasting moral laws, by which the wages of sin are
death.  Your iniquities have withheld good things from you.  You have
earned exactly what God has paid you.  Yourselves are your own
punishment.  You have been wicked men, and therefore weak men; your
own vices, and not the Goths, have been your true conquerors.'  As I
said in my inaugural lecture--that is after all the true theory of
history.  Men may forget it in piping times of peace.  God grant that
in the dark hour of adversity, God may always raise up to them a
prophet, like good old Salvian, to preach to them once again the
everlasting judgments of God; and teach them that not faulty
constitutions, faulty laws, faulty circumstances of any kind, but the
faults of their own hearts and lives, are the causes of their misery.

M. Guizot, in his elaborate work on the History of Civilization in
France, has a few curious pages, on the causes of the decline of
civil society in Roman Gaul, and its consequent weakness and ruin.
He tells you how the Senators or Clarissimi did not constitute a true
aristocracy, able to lead and protect the people, being at the mercy
of the Emperor, and nominated and removed at his pleasure.  How the
Curiales, or wealthy middle class, who were bound by law to fulfil
all the municipal offices, and were responsible for the collection of
the revenue, found their responsibilities so great, that they by
every trick in their power, avoided office.  How, as M. Guizot well
puts it, the central despotism of Rome stript the Curiales of all
they earned, to pay its own functionaries and soldiers; and gave them
the power of appointing magistrates, who were only after all the
imperial agents of that despotism, for whose sake they robbed their
fellow-citizens.  How the plebs, comprising the small tradesmen and
free artizans, were utterly unable to assert their own opinions or
rights.  How the slave population, though their condition was much
improved, constituted a mere dead weight of helpless brutality.

And then he says, that the Roman Empire was dying.  Very true:  but
often as he quotes Salvian, he omits always to tell us what Roman
society was dying of.  Salvian says, that it was dying of vice.  Not
of bad laws and class arrangements, but of bad men.  M. Guizot
belongs to a school which is apt to impute human happiness and
prosperity too exclusively to the political constitution under which
they may happen to live, irrespectively of the morality of the people
themselves.  From that, the constitutionalist school, there has been
of late a strong reaction, the highest exponent, nay the very
coryphaeus of which is Mr. Carlyle.  He undervalues, even despises,
the influence of laws and constitutions:  with him private virtue,
from which springs public virtue, is the first and sole cause of
national prosperity.  My inaugural lecture has told you how deeply I
sympathize with his view--taking my stand, as Mr. Carlyle does, on
the Hebrew prophets.

There is, nevertheless, a side of truth in the constitutionalist
view, which Mr. Carlyle, I think, overlooks.  A bad political
constitution does produce poverty and weakness:  but only in as far
as it tends to produce moral evil; to make men bad.  That it can help
to do.  It can put a premium on vice, on falsehood, on peculation, on
laziness, on ignorance; and thus tempt the mass to moral degradation,
from the premier to the slave.  Russia has been, for two centuries
now but too patent a proof of the truth of this assertion.  But even
in this case, the moral element is the most important, and just the
one which is overlooked.  To have good laws, M. Guizot is apt to
forget, you must first have good men to make them; and second, you
must have good men to carry them out, after they are made.  Bad men
can abuse the best of laws, the best of constitutions.  Look at the
working of our parliaments during the reigns of William III and Anne,
and see how powerless good constitutions are, when the men who work
them are false and venal.  Look, on the other hand, at the Roman
Empire from the time of Vespasian to that of the Antonines, and see
how well even a bad constitution will succeed, when good men are
working it.

Bad laws, I say, will work tolerably under good men, if fitted to the
existing circumstances by men of the world, as all Roman laws were.
If they had not been such, how was the Roman Empire, at least in its
first years, a blessing to the safety, prosperity, and wealth of
every country it enslaved?  But when defective Roman laws began to be
worked by bad men, and that for 200 years, then indeed came times of
evil.  Let us take, then, Salvian's own account of the cause of Roman
decay.  He, an eye-witness, imputes it all to the morals of Roman
citizens.  They were, according to him, of the very worst.  To the
general dissoluteness he attributes, in plain words, the success of
the Frank and Gothic invaders.  And the facts which he gives, and
which there is no reason to doubt, are quite enough to prove him in
the right.  Every great man's house, he says, was a sink of
profligacy.  The women slaves were at the mercy of their master; and
the slaves copied his morals among themselves.  It is an ugly
picture:  but common sense will tell us, if we but think a little,
that such will, and must, be the case in slave-holding countries,
wherever Christianity is not present in its purest and strongest
form, to control the passions of arbitrary power.

But there was not merely profligacy among these Gauls.  That alone
would not have wrought their immediate ruin.  Morals were bad enough
in old Greece and Rome; as they were afterwards among the Turks:
nevertheless as long as a race is strong; as long as there is
prudence, energy, deep national feeling, outraged virtue does not
avenge itself at once by general ruin.  But it avenges itself at
last, as Salvian shews--as all experience shews.  As in individuals
so in nations, unbridled indulgence of the passions must produce, and
does produce, frivolity, effeminacy, slavery to the appetite of the
moment, a brutalized and reckless temper, before which, prudence,
energy, national feeling, any and every feeling which is not centered
in self, perishes utterly.  The old French noblesse gave a proof of
this law, which will last as a warning beacon to the end of time.
The Spanish population of America, I am told, gives now a fearful
proof of this same terrible penalty.  Has not Italy proved it
likewise, for centuries past?  It must be so, gentlemen.  For
national life is grounded on, is the development of, the life of the
family.  And where the root is corrupt, the tree must be corrupt
likewise.  It must be so.  For Asmodeus does not walk alone.  In his
train follow impatience and disappointment, suspicion and jealousy,
rage and cruelty, and all the passions which set man's hand against
his fellow-man.  It must be so.  For profligacy is selfishness; and
the family, and the society, the nation, exists only by casting away
selfishness and by obeying law:- not only the outward law, which says
in the name of God, 'Thou shalt not,' but the inward law, the Law of
Christ, which says, 'Thou must;' the law of self-sacrifice, which
selfish lust tramples under foot, till there is no more cohesion left
between man and man, no more trust, no more fellow-help, than between
the stags who fight for the hinds; and God help the nation which has
brought itself to that!

No wonder, therefore, if Salvian's accounts of Gaulish profligacy be
true, that Gaulish recklessness reached at last a pitch all but
incredible.  It is credible, however shocking, that as he says, he
himself saw, both at Treves, and another great city (probably
Cologne, Colonia Agrippina, or 'The Colony' par excellence) while the
destruction of the state was imminent, 'old men of rank, decrepit
Christians, slaves to gluttony and lust, rabid with clamour, furious
with bacchanalian orgies.'  It is credible, however shocking, that
all through Gaul the captivity was 'foreseen, yet never dreaded.'
And 'so when the barbarians had encamped almost in sight, there was
no terror among the people, no care of the cities.  All was possest
by carelessness and sloth, gluttony, drunkenness, sleep, according to
that which the prophet saith:  A sleep from the Lord had come over
them.'  It is credible, however shocking, that though Treves was four
times taken by the barbarians, it remained just as reckless as ever;
and that--I quote Salvian still--when the population was half
destroyed by fire and sword, the poor dying of famine, corpses of men
and women lying about the streets breeding pestilence, while the dogs
devoured them, the few nobles who were left comforted themselves by
sending to the Emperor to beg for Circensian games.

Those Circensian games, and indeed all the public spectacles, are
fresh proofs of what I said just now; that if a bad people earn bad
government, still a bad government makes a bad people.

They were the most extraordinary instance which the world ever saw,
of a government setting to work at a vast expense to debauch its
subjects.  Whether the Roman rulers set that purpose consciously
before them, one dare not affirm.  Their notion probably was (for
they were as worldly wise as they were unprincipled) that the more
frivolous and sensual the people were, the more quietly they would
submit to slavery; and the best way to keep them frivolous and
sensual, the Romans knew full well; so well, that after the Empire
became Christian, and many heathen matters were done away with, they
did not find it safe to do away with the public spectacles.  The
temples of the Gods might go:  but not the pantomimes.

In one respect, indeed, these government spectacles became worse, not
better, under Christianity.  They were less cruel, no doubt:  but
also they were less beautiful.  The old custom of exhibiting
representations of the old Greek myths, which had something of grace
and poetry about them, and would carry back the spectators' thoughts
to the nobler and purer heroic ages, disappeared before Christianity;
but the old vice did not.  That was left; and no longer ennobled by
the old heroic myths round which it had clustered itself, was simply
of the silliest and most vulgar kind.  We know in detail the
abominations, as shameless and ridiculous, which went on a century
after Salvian, in the theatres of Constantinople, under the eyes of
the most Christian Emperor Justinian, and which won for that most
infamous woman, Theodora, a share in his imperial crown, and the
right to dictate doctrine to the Christian Bishops of the East, and
to condemn the soul of Origen to everlasting damnation, for having
exprest hopes of the final pardon of sinners.  We can well believe,
therefore, Salvian's complaints of the wickedness of those pantomimes
of which he says, that 'honeste non possunt vel accusari;' he cannot
even accuse them without saying what he is ashamed to say; I believe
also his assertion, that they would not let people be modest, even if
they wished; that they inflamed the passions, and debauched the
imaginations of young and old, man and woman, and--but I am not here
to argue that sin is sin, or that the population of London would be
the worse if the most shameless persons among them were put by the
Government in possession of Drury Lane and Covent Garden; and that,
and nothing less than that, did the Roman pantomimes mean, from the
days of Juvenal till those of the most holy and orthodox Empress
Theodora.

'Who, knowing the judgment of God, that they who do such things are
worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that
do them.'

Now in contrast to all these abominations, old Salvian sets, boldly
and honestly, the superior morality of the barbarians.  That, he
says, is the cause of their strength and our weakness.  We,
professing orthodoxy, are profligate hypocrites.  They, half
heathens, half Arians, are honester men, purer men than we.  There is
no use, he says, in despising the Goths as heretics, while they are
better men than we.  They are better Christians than the Romans,
because they are better men.  They pray to God for success, and trust
in him, and we presumptuously trust in ourselves.  We swear by
Christ:  but what do we do but blaspheme him, when we swear 'Per
Christum tollo eum,' 'I will make away with him,' 'Per Christum hunc
jugulo,' 'I will cut his throat,' and then believe ourselves bound to
commit the murder which we have vowed? . . . 'The Saxons,' he says,
'are fierce, the Franks faithless, the Gepidae inhuman, the Huns
shameless.  But is the Frank's perfidy as blameable as ours?  Is the
Alman's drunkenness, or the Alan's rapacity, as damnable as a
Christian's?  If a Hun or a Gepid deceives you, what wonder?  He is
utterly ignorant that there is any sin in falsehood.  But what of the
Christian who does the same?  The Barbarians,' he says, 'are better
men than the Christians.  The Goths,' he says, 'are perfidious, but
chaste.  The Alans unchaste, but less perfidious.  The Franks are
liars, but hospitable; the Saxons ferociously cruel, but venerable
for their chastity.  The Visigoths who conquered Spain,' he says,
'were the most "ignavi" (heavy, I presume he means, and loutish) of
all the barbarians:  but they were chaste, and therefore they
conquered.'

In Africa, if we are to believe Salvian, things stood even worse, at
the time of the invasion of the Vandals.  In his violent invectives
against the Africans, however, allowance must be made.  Salvian was a
great lover of monks; and the Africans used, he says, to detest them,
and mob them wherever they appeared; for which offence, of course, he
can find no words too strong.  St. Augustine, however, himself a
countryman of theirs, who died, happily, just before the storm burst
on that hapless land, speaks bitterly of their exceeding profligacy--
of which he himself in his wild youth, had had but too sad
experience.  Salvian's assertion is, that the Africans were the most
profligate of all the Romans; and that while each barbarian tribe had
(as we have just seen) some good in them, the Africans had none.

But there were noble souls left among them, lights which shone all
the more brightly in the surrounding darkness.  In the pages of
Victor Vitensis, which tell the sad story of the persecution of the
African Catholics by the Arian Vandals, you will find many a moving
tale which shews that God had his own, even among those degraded
Carthaginians.

The causes of the Arian hatred to the Catholics is very obscure.  You
will find all that is known in Dean Milman's History of Latin
Christianity.  A simple explanation may be found in the fact that the
Catholics considered the Arians, and did not conceal their opinion,
as all literally and actually doomed to the torments of everlasting
fire; and that, as Gibbon puts it, 'The heroes of the north, who had
submitted with some reluctance, to believe that all their ancestors
were in hell, were astonished and exasperated to learn, that they
themselves had only changed the mode of their eternal condemnation.'
The Teutons were (Salvian himself confesses it) trying to serve God
devoutly, in chastity, sobriety, and honesty, according to their
light.  And they were told by the profligates of Africa, that this
and no less, was their doom.  It is not to be wondered at, again, if
they mistook the Catholic creed for the cause of Catholic immorality.
That may account for the Vandal custom of re-baptizing the Catholics.
It certainly accounts for the fact (if after all it be a fact) which
Victor states, that they tortured the nuns to extort from them
shameful confessions against the priests.  But the history of the
African persecution is the history of all persecutions, as confest
again and again by the old fathers, as proved by the analogies of
later times.  The sins of the Church draw down punishment, by making
her enemies confound her doctrine and her practice.  But in return,
the punishment of the Church purifies her, and brings out her
nobleness afresh, as the snake casts his skin in pain, and comes out
young and fair once more; and in every dark hour of the Church, there
flashes out some bright form of human heroism, to be a beacon and a
comfort to all future time.  Victor, for instance, tells the story of
Dionysia, the beautiful widow whom the Vandals tried to torture into
denying the Divinity of our Lord.--How when they saw that she was
bolder and fairer than all the other matrons, they seized her, and
went to strip her:  and she cried to them, 'Qualiter libet occidite:
verecunda tamen membra nolite nudare,' but in vain.  They hung her up
by the hands, and scourged her till streams of blood ran down every
limb.  Her only son, a delicate boy, stood by trembling, knowing that
his turn would come next; and she saw it, and called to him in the
midst of her shame and agony.  'He had been baptized into the name of
the Blessed Trinity; let him die in that name, and not lose the
wedding-garment.  Let him fear the pain that never ends, and cling to
the life that endures for ever.'  The boy took heart, and when his
turn came, died under the torture; and Dionysia took up the little
corpse, and buried it in her own house; and worshipped upon her boy's
grave to her dying day.

Yes.  God had his own left, even among those fallen Africans of
Carthage.

But neither there, nor in Spain, could the Vandals cure the evil.
'Now-a-days,' says Salvian, 'there are no profligates among the
Goths, save Romans; none among the Vandals, save Romans.  Blush,
Roman people, everywhere, blush for your morals.  There is hardly a
city free from dens of sin, and none at all from impurity, save those
which the barbarians have begun to occupy.  And do we wonder if we
are surpassed in power, by an enemy who surpasses us in decency?  It
is not the natural strength of their bodies which makes them conquer
us.  We have been conquered only by the vices of our own morals.'

Yes.  Salvian was right.  Those last words were no mere outburst of
national vanity, content to confess every sin, save that of being
cowards.  He was right.  It was not the mere muscle of the Teuton
which enabled him to crush the decrepit and debauched slave-nations,
Gaul and Briton, Iberian and African, as the ox crushes the frogs of
the marsh.  The 'sera juvenum Venus, ideoque inexhausta pubertas,'
had given him more than his lofty stature, and his mighty limbs.  Had
he had nought but them, he might have remained to the end a blind
Samson, grinding among the slaves in Caesar's mill, butchered to make
a Roman holiday.  But it had given him more, that purity of his; it
had given him, as it may give you, gentlemen, a calm and steady
brain, and a free and loyal heart; the energy which springs from
health; the self-respect which comes from self-restraint; and the
spirit which shrinks from neither God nor man, and feels it light to
die for wife and child, for people, and for Queen.



PREFACE TO LECTURE III.--ON DR. LATHAM'S 'GERMANIA.'



If I have followed in these lectures the better known and more widely
received etymology of the name Goth, I have done so out of no
disrespect to Dr. Latham; but simply because his theory seems to me
adhuc sub judice.  It is this, as far as I understand it.  That
'Goth' was not the aboriginal name of the race.  That they were
probably not so called till they came into the land of the Getae,
about the mouths of the Danube.  That the Teutonic name for the
Ostrogoths was Grutungs, and that of the Visigoths (which he does not
consider to mean West-Goths) Thervings, Thuringer.  That on reaching
the land of the Getae they took their name; 'just as the Kentings of
Anglo-Saxon England took name from the Keltic country of Kent;' and
that the names Goth, Gothones, Gothini were originally given to
Lithuanians by their Sclavonic neighbours.  I merely state the
theory, and leave it for the judgment of others.

The principal points which Dr. Latham considers himself to have
established, are -

That the area and population of the Teutonic tribes have been, on the
authority of Tacitus, much overrated; many tribes hitherto supposed
to be Teutonic being really Sclavonic, &c.

This need not shock our pride, if proved--as it seems to me to be.
The nations who have influenced the world's destiny have not been
great, in the modern American sense of 'big;' but great in heart, as
our forefathers were.  The Greeks were but a handful at Salamis; so
were the Romans of the Republic; so were the Spaniards of America;
so, probably, were the Aztecs and Incas whom they overthrew; and
surely our own conquerors and re-conquerers of Hindostan have shewn
enough that it is not numbers, but soul, which gives a race the power
to rule.

Neither need we object to Dr. Latham's opinion, that more than one of
the tribes which took part in the destruction of the Empire were not
aboriginal Germans, but Sclavonians Germanized, and under German
leaders.  It may be so.  The custom of enslaving captives would
render pure Teutonic blood among the lower classes of a tribe the
exception and not the rule; while the custom of chiefs choosing the
'thegns,' 'gesitha,' or 'comites,' who lived and died as their
companions-in-arms, from among the most valiant of the unfree, would
tend to produce a mixed blood in the upper classes also, and
gradually assimilate the whole mass to the manners and laws of their
Teutonic lords.  Only by some such actual superiority of the upper
classes to the lower can I explain the deep respect for rank and
blood, which distinguishes, and will perhaps always distinguish, the
Teutonic peoples.  Had there even been anything like a primaeval
equality among our race, a hereditary aristocracy could never have
arisen, or if arising for a while, never could have remained as a
fact which all believed in, from the lowest to the highest.  Just, or
unjust, the institution represented, I verily believe, an
ethnological fact.  The golden-haired hero said to his brown-haired
bondsman, 'I am a gentleman, who have a "gens," a stamm, a pedigree,
and know from whom I am sprung.  I am a Garding, an Amalung, a
Scylding, an Osing, or what not.  I am a son of the gods.  The blood
of the Asas is in my veins.  Do you not see it?  Am I not wiser,
stronger, more virtuous, more beautiful than you?  You must obey me,
and be my man, and follow me to the death.  Then, if you prove a
worthy thane, I will give you horse, weapons, bracelets, lands; and
marry you, it may be, to my daughter or my niece.  And if not, you
must remain a son of the earth, grubbing in the dust of which you
were made.'  And the bondsman believed him; and became his lord's
man, and followed him to the death; and was thereby not degraded, but
raised out of selfish savagery and brute independence into loyalty,
usefulness, and self-respect.  As a fact, that is the method by which
the thing was done:  done;--very ill indeed, as most human things are
done; but a method inevitable--and possibly right; till (as in
England now) the lower classes became ethnologically identical with
the upper, and equality became possible in law, simply because it
existed in fact.

But the part of Dr. Latham's 'Germania' to which I am bound to call
most attention, because I have not followed it, is that interesting
part of the Prolegomena, in which he combats the generally received
theory, that, between the time of Tacitus and that of Charlemagne,
vast masses of Germans had migrated southward from between the Elbe
and the Vistula; and that they had been replaced by the Sclavonians
who certainly were there in Charlemagne's days.

Dr. Latham argues against this theory with a great variety of facts
and reasons.  But has he not overstated his case on some points?

Need the migrations necessary for this theory have been of
'unparalleled magnitude and rapidity'?

As for the 'unparalleled completeness' on which he lays much stress,
from the fact that no remnants of Teutonic population are found in
the countries evacuated:

Is it the fact that 'history only tells us of German armies having
advanced south'?  Do we not find four famous cases--the irruption of
the Cimbri and Teutons into Italy; the passage of the Danube by the
Visigoths; and the invasions of Italy first by the Ostrogoths, then
by the Lombards--in which the nations came with men, women, and
children, horses, cattle, and dogs, bag and baggage?  May not this
have been the custom of the race, with its strong feeling for the
family tie; and may not this account for no traces of them being left
behind?

Does not Dr. Latham's theory proceed too much on an assumption that
the Sclavonians dispossest the Teutons by force?  And is not this
assumption his ground for objecting that the movement was effected
improbably 'by that division of the European population (the
Sclavonic and Lithuanian) which has, within the historic period,
receded before the Germanic'?

Are these migrations, though 'unrepresented in any history' (i.e.
contemporaneous), really 'unrepresented in any tradition'?  Do not
the traditions of Jornandes and Paulus Diaconus, that the Goths and
the Lombards came from Scandinavia, represent this very fact?--and
are they to be set aside as naught?  Surely not.  Myths of this kind
generally embody a nucleus of truth, and must be regarded with
respect; for they often, after all arguments about them are spent,
are found to contain the very pith of the matter.

Are the 'phenomena of replacement and substitution' so very strange--
I will not say upon the popular theory, but at least on one half-way
between it and Dr. Latham's?  Namely -

That the Teutonic races came originally, as some of them say they
did, from Scandinavia, Denmark, the South Baltic, &c.

That they forced their way down, wave after wave, on what would have
been the line of least resistance--the Marches between the Gauls,
Romanized or otherwise, and the Sclavonians.  And that the Alps and
the solid front of the Roman Empire turned them to the East, till
their vanguard found itself on the Danube.

This would agree with Dr. Latham's most valuable hint, that Markmen,
'Men of the Marches,' was perhaps the name of many German tribes
successively.

That they fought, as they went, with the Sclavonian and other tribes
(as their traditions seem to report), and rolled them back to the
eastward; and that as each Teutonic tribe past down the line, the
Sclavonians rolled back again, till the last column was past.

That the Teutons also carried down with them, as slaves or allies, a
portion of this old Sclavonic population (to which Dr. Latham will
perhaps agree); and that this fact caused a hiatus, which was
gradually filled by tribes who after all were little better than
nomad hunters, and would occupy (quite nominally) a very large tract
with a small population.

Would not this theory agree at once tolerably with the old traditions
and with Dr. Latham's new facts?

The question still remains--which is the question of all.  What put
these Germanic peoples on going South?  Were there no causes
sufficient to excite so desperate a resolve?

(1)  Did they all go?  Is not Paulus Diaconus' story that one-third
of the Lombards was to emigrate by lot, and two-thirds remain at
home, a rough type of what generally happened--what happens now in
our modern emigrations?  Was not the surplus population driven off by
famine toward warmer and more hopeful climes?

(2)  Are not the Teutonic populations of England, North Germany, and
the Baltic, the descendants, much intermixed, and with dialects much
changed, of the portions which were left behind?  This is the
opinion, I believe, of several great ethnologists.  Is it not true?
If philological objections are raised to this, I ask (but in all
humility), Did not these southward migrations commence long before
the time of Tacitus?  If so, may they not have commenced before the
different Teutonic dialects were as distinct as they were in the
historic period?  And are we to suppose that the dialects did not
alter during the long journeyings through many nations?  Is it
possible that the Thervings and Grutungs could have retained the same
tongue on the Danube, as their forefathers spoke in their native
land?  Would not the Moeso-Gothic of Ulfilas have been all but
unintelligible to the Goth who, upon the old theory, remained in
Gothland of Sweden?

(3)  But were there not more causes than mere want, which sent them
south?  Had the peculiar restlessness of the race nothing to do with
it?  A restlessness not nomadic, but migratory:  arising not from
carelessness of land and home, but from the longing to found a home
in a new land, like the restlessness of us, their children?  As soon
as we meet them in historic times, they are always moving, migrating,
invading.  Were they not doing the same in pre-historic times, by
fits and starts, no doubt with periods of excitement, periods of
collapse and rest?  When we recollect the invasion of the Normans;
the wholesale eastward migration of the Crusaders, men, women, and
children; and the later colonization by Teutonic peoples, of every
quarter of the globe, is there anything wonderful in the belief that
similar migratory manias may have seized the old tribes; that the
spirit of Woden, 'the mover,' may have moved them, and forced them to
go ahead, as now?  Doubtless the theory is strange.  But the Teutons
were and are a strange people; so strange, that they have conquered--
one may almost say that they are--all nations which are alive upon
the globe; and we may therefore expect them to have done strange
things even in their infancy.

The Romans saw them conquer the empire; and said, the good men among
them, that it was on account of their superior virtue.  But beside
the virtue which made them succeed, there must have been the
adventurousness which made them attempt.  They were a people fond of
'avanturen,' like their descendants; and they went out to seek them;
and found enough and to spare.

(4)  But more, had they never heard of Rome?  Surely they had, and at
a very early period of the empire.  We are apt to forget, that for
every discovery of the Germans by the Romans, there was a similar
discovery of the Romans by the Germans, and one which would tell
powerfully on their childish imagination.  Did not one single Kemper
or Teuton return from Marius' slaughter, to spread among the tribes
(niddering though he may have been called for coming back alive) the
fair land which they had found, fit for the gods of Valhalla; the
land of sunshine, fruits and wine, wherein his brothers' and sisters'
bones were bleaching unavenged?  Did no gay Gaul of the Legion of the
Lark, boast in a frontier wine-house to a German trapper, who came in
to sell his peltry, how he himself was a gentleman now, and a
civilized man, and a Roman; and how he had followed Julius Caesar,
the king of men, over the Rubicon, and on to a city of the like of
which man never dreamed, wherein was room for all the gods of heaven?
Did no captive tribune of Varus' legions, led with horrid shouts
round Thor's altar in the Teutoburger Wald, ere his corpse was hung
among the horses and goats on the primaeval oaks, turn to bay like a
Roman, and tell his wild captors of the Eternal City, and of the
might of that Caesar who would avenge every hair upon his head with a
German life; and receive for answer a shout of laughter, and the cry-
-'You have come to us:  and some day we will go to you?'  Did no
commissary, bargaining with a German for cattle to be sent over the
frontier by such a day of the week, and teaching him to mistranslate
into those names of Thor, Woden, Freya, and so forth, which they now
carry, the Jewish-Assyrian-Roman days of the se'nnight, amuse the
simple forester by telling him how the streets of Rome were paved
with gold, and no one had anything to do there but to eat and bathe
at the public expense, and to go to the theatre, and see 20,000
gladiators fight at once?  Did no German 'Regulus,' alderman, or
king, enter Rome on an embassy, and come back with uplifted eyes and
hands, declaring that he had seen things unspeakable--a 'very fine
plunder,' as Blucher said of London; and that if it were not for the
walls, they might get it all; for not only the ladies, but the
noblemen, went about in litters of silver and gold, and wore gauze
dresses, the shameless wretches, through which you might see every
limb, so that as for killing them, there was no more fear of them
than of a flock of sheep:  but that he did not see as well as he
could have wished how to enter the great city, for he was more or
less the worse for liquor the whole time, with wondrous stuff which
they called wine?  Or did no captive, escaped by miracle from the
butcheries of the amphitheatre, return to tell his countrymen how all
the rest had died like German men; and call on them to rise and
avenge their brothers' blood?  Yes, surely the Teutons knew well,
even in the time of Tacitus, of the 'micklegard,' the great city and
all its glory.  Every fresh tribe who passed along the frontier of
Gaul or of Noricum would hear more and more of it, see more and more
men who had actually been there.  If the glory of the city exercised
on its own inhabitants an intoxicating influence, as of a place
omnipotent, superhuman, divine--it would exercise (exaggerated as it
would be) a still stronger influence on the barbarians outside:  and
what wonder if they pressed southwards at first in the hope of taking
the mighty city; and afterwards, as her real strength became more
known, of at least seizing some of those colonial cities, which were
as superhuman in their eyes as Rome itself would have been?  In the
crusades, the children, whenever they came to a great town, asked
their parents if that was not Jerusalem.  And so, it may be, many a
gallant young Teuton, on entering for the first time such a city as
Cologne, Lyons, or Vienna, whispered half trembling to his lord--
'Surely this must be Rome.'

Some such arguments as these might surely be brought in favour of a
greater migration than Dr. Latham is inclined to allow:  but I must
leave the question for men of deeper research and wider learning,
than I possess.



LECTURE III.--THE HUMAN DELUGE



'I have taken in hand,' said Sir Francis Drake once to the crew of
the immortal Pelican, 'that which I know not how to accomplish.  Yea,
it hath even bereaved me of my wits to think of it.'

And so I must say on the subject of this lecture.  I wish to give you
some notion of the history of Italy for nearly one hundred years; say
from 400 to 500.  But it is very difficult.  How can a man draw a
picture of that which has no shape; or tell the order of absolute
disorder?  It is all a horrible 'fourmillement des nations,' like the
working of an ant-heap; like the insects devouring each other in a
drop of water.  Teuton tribes, Sclavonic tribes, Tartar tribes, Roman
generals, empresses, bishops, courtiers, adventurers, appear for a
moment out of the crowd, dim phantoms--nothing more, most of them--
with a name appended, and then vanish, proving their humanity only by
leaving behind them one more stain of blood.

And what became of the masses all the while? of the men, slaves the
greater part of them, if not all, who tilled the soil, and ground the
corn--for man must have eaten, then as now?  We have no hint.  One
trusts that God had mercy on them, if not in this world, still in the
world to come.  Man, at least, had none.

Taking one's stand at Rome, and looking toward the north, what does
one see for nearly one hundred years?  Wave after wave rising out of
the north, the land of night, and wonder, and the terrible unknown;
visible only as the light of Roman civilization strikes their crests,
and they dash against the Alps, and roll over through the mountain
passes, into the fertile plains below.  Then at last they are seen
but too well; and you discover that the waves are living men, women,
and children, horses, dogs, and cattle, all rushing headlong into
that great whirlpool of Italy:  and yet the gulf is never full.  The
earth drinks up the blood; the bones decay into the fruitful soil;
the very names and memories of whole tribes are washed away.  And the
result of an immigration which may be counted by hundreds of
thousands is this--that all the land is waste.

The best authorities which I can give you (though you will find many
more in Gibbon) are--for the main story, Jornandes, De Rebus Geticis.
Himself a Goth, he wrote the history of his race, and that of Attila
and his Huns, in good rugged Latin, not without force and sense.

Then Claudian, the poet, a bombastic panegyrist of contemporary Roman
scoundrels; but full of curious facts, if one could only depend on
them.

Then the earlier books of Procopius De Bello Gothico, and the
Chronicle of Zosimus.

Salvian, Ennodius and Sidonius Apollinaris, as Christians, will give
you curious details, especially as to South France and North Italy;
while many particulars of the first sack of Rome, with comments
thereon which express the highest intellects of that day, you will
find in St. Jerome's Letters, and St. Augustine's City of God.

But if you want these dreadful times EXPLAINED to you, I do not think
you can do better than to take your Bibles, and to read the
Revelations of St. John the Apostle.  I shall quote them, more than
once, in this lecture.  I cannot help quoting them.  The words come
naturally to my lips, as fitter to the facts than any words of my
own.

I do not come here to interpret the Book of Revelations.  I do not
understand that book.  But I do say plainly, though I cannot
interpret the book, that the book has interpreted those times to me.
Its awful metaphors give me more living and accurate pictures of what
went on than any that Gibbon's faithful details can give.

You may see, if you have spiritual eyes wherewith to see, the Dragon,
the serpent, symbol of political craft and the devilish wisdom of the
Roman, giving authority to the Beast, the symbol of brute power; to
mongrel AEtiuses and Bonifaces, barbarian Stilichos, Ricimers and
Aspars, and a host of similar adventurers, whose only strength was
force.

You may see the world wondering after the beast, and worshipping
brute force, as the only thing left to believe in.

You may see the nations of the world gnawing their tongues for pain,
and blaspheming God, but not repenting of their deeds.

You may see the faith and patience of the saints--men like Augustine,
Salvian, Epiphanius, Severinus, Deogratias of Carthage, and a host
more, no doubt, whose names the world will never hear--the salt of
the earth, which kept it all from rotting.

You may see Babylon the great fallen, and all the kings and merchants
of the earth bewailing her afar off, and watching the smoke of her
torment.

You may see, as St. John warns you, that--after her fall, mind--if
men would go on worshipping the beast, and much more his image--the
phantom and shadow of brute force, after the reality had passed away-
-they should drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and be tormented
for ever.  For you may see how those degenerate Romans did go on
worshipping the shadow of brute force, and how they were tormented
for ever; and had no rest day or night, because they worshipped the
Beast and his image.

You may see all the fowl of the heavens flocking together to the
feast of the great God, to eat the flesh of kings and captains, horse
and rider, bond and free.--All carrion-birds, human as well as brute-
-All greedy villains and adventurers, the scoundreldom of the whole
world, flocking in to get their share of the carcass of the dying
empire; as the vulture and the raven flock in to the carrion when the
royal eagles have gorged their fill.

And lastly, you may see, if God give you grace, One who is faithful
and true, with a name which no man knew, save Himself, making war in
righteousness against all evil; bringing order out of disorder, hope
out of despair, fresh health and life out of old disease and death;
executing just judgment among all the nations of the earth; and
sending down from heaven the city of God, in the light of which the
nations of those who are saved should walk, and the kings of the
earth should bring their power and their glory into it; with the tree
of life in the midst of it, whose leaves should be for the healing of
the nations.

Again, I say, I am not here to interpret the Book of Revelations; but
this I say, that that book interprets those times to me.

Leaving, for the present at least, to better historians than myself
the general subject of the Teutonic immigrations; the conquest of
North Gaul by the Franks, of Britain by the Saxons and Angles, of
Burgundy by the Burgundians, of Africa by the Vandals, I shall speak
rather of those Teutonic tribes which actually entered and conquered
Italy; and first, of course, of the Goths.  Especially interesting to
us English should their fortunes be, for they are said to be very
near of kin to us; at least to those Jutes who conquered Kent.  As
Goths, Geats, Getae, Juts, antiquarians find them in early and
altogether mythic times, in the Scandinavian peninsula, and the isles
and mainland of Denmark.

Their name, it is said, is the same as one name for the Supreme
Being.  Goth, Guth, Yuth, signifies war.  'God' is the highest
warrior, the Lord of hosts, and the progenitor of the race, whether
as an 'Eponym hero' or as the supreme Deity.  Physical force was
their rude notion of Divine power, and Tiu, Tiv, or Tyr, in like
manner, who was originally the god of the clear sky, the Zeus or Jove
of the Greeks and Romans, became by virtue of his warlike character,
identical with the Roman Mars, till the dies Martis of the Roman week
became the German Tuesday.

Working their way down from Gothland and Jutland, we know not why nor
when, thrusting aside the cognate Burgunds, and the Sclavonic tribes
whom they met on the road, they had spread themselves, in the third
century, over the whole South of Russia, and westward over the
Danubian Provinces, and Hungary.  The Ostrogoths (East-goths) lay
from the Volga to the Borysthenes, the Visigoths (West-goths?) from
the Borysthenes to the Theiss.  Behind them lay the Gepidae, a German
tribe, who had come south-eastward with them, and whose name is said
to signify the men who had 'bided' (remained) behind the rest.

What manner of men they were it is hard to say, so few details are
left to us.  But we may conceive them as a tall, fair-haired people,
clothed in shirts and smocks of embroidered linen, and gaiters cross-
strapped with hide; their arms and necks encircled with gold and
silver rings; the warriors, at least of the upper class, well horsed,
and armed with lance and heavy sword, with chain-mail, and helmets
surmounted with plumes, horns, towers, dragons, boars, and the other
strange devices which are still seen on the crests of German nobles.
This much we can guess; for in this way their ancestors, or at least
relations, the War-Geats, appear clothed in the grand old song of
Beowulf.  Their land must have been tilled principally by slaves,
usually captives taken in war:  but the noble mystery of the forge,
where arms and ornaments were made, was an honourable craft for men
of rank; and their ladies, as in the middle age, prided themselves on
their skill with the needle and the loom.  Their language has been
happily preserved to us in Ulfilas' Translation of the Scriptures.
For these Goths, the greater number of them at least, were by this
time Christians, or very nearly such.  Good Bishop Ulfilas, brought
up a Christian and consecrated by order of Constantine the Great, had
been labouring for years to convert his adopted countrymen from the
worship of Thor and Woden.  He had translated the Bible for them, and
had constructed a Gothic alphabet for that purpose.  He had omitted,
however (prudently as he considered) the books of Kings, with their
histories of the Jewish wars.  The Goths, he held, were only too fond
of fighting already, and 'needed in that matter the bit, rather than
the spur.'  He had now a large number of converts, some of whom had
even endured persecution from their heathen brethren.  Athanaric,
'judge,' or alderman of the Thervings, had sent through the camp--so
runs the story--the waggon which bore the idol of Woden, and had
burnt, with their tents and their families, those who refused to
worship.

They, like all other German tribes, were ruled over by two royal
races, sons of Woden and the Asas.  The Ostrogoth race was the
Amalungs--the 'heavenly,' or 'spotless' race; the Visigoth race was
the Balthungs--the 'bold' or 'valiant' race; and from these two
families, and from a few others, but all believed to be lineally
descended from Woden, and now much intermixed, are derived all the
old royal families of Europe, that of the House of Brunswick among
the rest.

That they were no savages, is shewn sufficiently by their names, at
least those of their chiefs.  Such names as Alaric, 'all rich' or
'all powerful,' Ataulf, 'the helping father,' Fridigern, 'the willing
peace-maker,' and so forth--all the names in fact, which can be put
back into their native form out of their Romanized distortions, are
tokens of a people far removed from that barbarous state in which men
are named after personal peculiarities, natural objects, or the
beasts of the field.  On this subject you may consult, as full of
interest and instruction, the list of Teutonic names given in
Muratori.

They had broken over the Roman frontier more than once, and taken
cities.  They had compelled the Emperor Gratian to buy them off.
They had built themselves flat-bottomed boats without iron in them
and sailed from the Crimea round the shores of the Black Sea, once
and again, plundering Trebizond, and at last the temple itself of
Diana at Ephesus.  They had even penetrated into Greece and Athens,
plundered the Parthenon, and threatened the capitol.  They had fought
the Emperor Decius, till he, and many of his legionaries, were
drowned in a bog in the moment of victory.  They had been driven with
difficulty back across the Danube by Aurelian, and walled out of the
Empire with the Allemanni by Probus's 'Teufels-Mauer,' stretching
from the Danube to the Rhine.  Their time was not yet come by a
hundred years.  But they had seen and tasted the fine things of the
sunny south, and did not forget them amid the steppes and snows.

At last a sore need came upon them.  About 350 there was a great king
among them, Ermanaric, 'the powerful warrior,' comparable, says
Jornandes, to Alexander himself, who had conquered all the conquered
tribes around.  When he was past 100 years old, a chief of the
Roxolani (Ugrians, according to Dr. Latham; men of Ros, or Russia),
one of these tribes, plotted against him, and sent for help to the
new people, the Huns, who had just appeared on the confines of Europe
and Asia.  Old Ermanaric tore the traitor's wife to pieces with wild
horses:  but the Huns came nevertheless.  A magic hind, the Goths
said, guided the new people over the steppes to the land of the
Goths, and then vanished.  They fought with the Goths, and defeated
them.  Old Ermanaric stabbed himself for shame, and the hearts of the
Goths became as water before the tempest of nations.  They were
supernatural creatures, the Goths believed, engendered of witches and
demons on the steppes; pig-eyed hideous beings, with cakes instead of
faces, 'offam magis quam faciem,' under ratskin caps, armed with
arrows tipped with bone, and lassos of cord, eating, marketing,
sleeping on horseback, so grown into the saddle that they could
hardly walk in their huge boots.  With them were Acatzirs, painted
blue, hair as well as skin; Alans, wandering with their waggons like
the Huns, armed with heavy cuirasses of plaited horn, their horses
decked with human scalps; Geloni armed with a scythe, wrapt in a
cloak of human skin; Bulgars who impaled their prisoners--savages
innumerable as the locust swarms.  Who could stand against them?

In the year 375, the West Goths came down to the Danube-bank and
entreated the Romans to let them cross.  There was a Christian party
among them, persecuted by the heathens, and hoping for protection
from Rome.  Athanaric had vowed never to set foot on Roman soil, and
after defending himself against the Huns, retired into the forests of
'Caucaland.'  Good Bishop Ulfilas and his converts looked longingly
toward the Christian Empire.  Surely the Christians would receive
them as brothers, welcome them, help them.  The simple German fancied
a Roman even such a one as themselves.

Ulfilas went on embassy to Antioch, to Valens the Emperor.  Valens,
low-born, cruel, and covetous, was an Arian, and could not lose the
opportunity of making converts.  He sent theologians to meet Ulfilas,
and torment him into Arianism.  When he arrived, Valens tormented him
himself.  While the Goths starved he argued, apostasy was the
absolute condition of his help, till Ulfilas, in a weak moment, gave
his word that the Goths should become Arians, if Valens would give
them lands on the South bank of the Danube.  Then they would be the
Emperor's men, and guard the marches against all foes.  From that
time Arianism became the creed, not only of the Goths, but of the
Vandals, the Sueves, and almost all the Teutonic tribes.

It was (if the story be true) a sinful and foolish compact, forced
from a good man by the sight of his countrymen's extreme danger and
misery.  It avenged itself, soon enough, upon both Goths and Romans.

To the Goths themselves the change must have seemed not only
unimportant, but imperceptible.  Unaccustomed to that accuracy of
thought, which is too often sneered at by Gibbon as 'metaphysical
subtlety,' all of which they would have been aware was the change of
a few letters in a creed written in an unknown tongue.  They could
not know, (Ulfilas himself could not have known, only two years after
the death of St. Athanasius at Alexandria; while the Nicaean Creed
was as yet received by only half of the Empire; and while he
meanwhile had been toiling for years in the Danubian wilds, ignorant
perhaps of the controversy which had meanwhile convulsed the Church)-
-neither the Goths nor he, I say, could have known that the Arianism,
which they embraced, was really the last, and as it were apologetic,
refuge of dying Polytheism; that it, and not the Catholic Faith,
denied the abysmal unity of the Godhead; that by making the Son
inferior to the Father, as touching his Godhead, it invented two
Gods, a greater and a lesser, thus denying the absoluteness, the
infinity, the illimitability, by any category of quantity, of that
One Eternal, of whom it is written, that God is a Spirit.  Still less
could they have guessed that when Arius, the handsome popular
preacher (whose very name, perhaps, Ulfilas never heard) asked the
fine ladies of Alexandria--'Had you a son before that son was born?'-
-'No.'  'Then God could have no son before that son was begotten,
&c.'--that he was mingling up the idea of Time with the idea of that
Eternal God who created Time, and debasing to the accidents of before
and after that Timeless and Eternal Generation, of which it is
written, 'Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.'  Still
less could Ulfilas, or his Goths, have known, that the natural human
tendency to condition God by Time, would be, in later ages, even long
after Arianism was crushed utterly, the parent of many a cruel,
gross, and stupid superstition.  To them it would have been a mere
question whether Woden, the All-father, was superior to one of his
sons, the Asas:  and the Catholic faith probably seemed to them an
impious assumption of equality, on the part of one of those Asas,
with Woden himself.

Of the battle between Arianism and Orthodoxy I have said enough to
shew you that I think it an internecine battle between truth and
falsehood.  But it has been long ago judged by wager of battle:  by
the success of that duel of time, of which we must believe (as our
forefathers believed of all fair duels) that God defends the right.

So the Goths were to come over the Danube stream:  but they must give
up their arms, and deliver their children (those of rank, one
supposes), as hostages, to be educated by the Romans, as Romans.

They crossed the fatal river; they were whole days in crossing; those
set to count them gave it up in despair; Ammianus says:  'He who
wishes to know their number,'


   'Libyci velit aequoris idem
Discere quam multae Zephyro volvuntur arenae.'


And when they were across, they gave up the children.  They had not
the heart to give up the beloved weapons.  The Roman commissioners
let them keep the arms, at the price of many a Gothic woman's honour.
Ugly and foul things happened, of which we have only hints.  Then
they had to be fed for the time being, till they could cultivate
their land.  Lupicinus and Maximus, the two governors of Thrace
pocketed the funds which Valens sent, and starved the Goths.  The
markets were full of carrion and dogs' flesh.  Anything was good
enough for a barbarian.  Their fringed carpets, their beautiful
linens, all went.  A little wholesome meat cost 10 pounds of silver.
When all was gone, they had to sell their children.  To establish a
slave-trade in the beautiful boys and girls was just what the wicked
Romans wanted.

At last the end came.  They began to rise.  Fridigern, their king,
kept them quiet till the time was ripe for revenge.  The Romans,
trying to keep the West Goths down, got so confused, it seems, that
they let the whole nation of the East Goths (of whom we shall hear
more hereafter) dash across the Danube, and establish themselves in
the north of the present Turkey, to the east of the West Goths.

Then at Marcianopolis, the capital of Lower Moesia, Lupicinus asked
Fridigern and his chiefs to a feast.  The starving Goths outside were
refused supplies from the market, and came to blows with the guards.
Lupicinus, half drunk, heard of it, and gave orders for a massacre.
Fridigern escaped from the palace, sword in hand.  The smouldering
embers burst into flame, the war-cry was raised, and the villain
Lupicinus fled for his life.

Then began war south of the Danube.  The Roman legions were defeated
by the Goths, who armed themselves with the weapons of the dead.
Moesia was overrun with fire and sword.  Adrianople was attacked, but
in vain.  The slaves in the gold mines were freed from their misery,
and shewed the Goths the mountain-passes and the stores of grain.  As
they went on, the Goths recovered their children.  The poor things
told horrid tales; and the Goths, maddened, avenged themselves on the
Romans of every age and sex.  'They left,' says St. Jerome, 'nothing
alive--not even the beasts of the field; till nothing was left but
growing brambles and thick forests.'

Valens, the Emperor, was at Antioch.  Now he hurried to
Constantinople, but too late.  The East Goths had joined the West
Goths; and hordes of Huns, Alans, and Taifalae (detestable savages,
of whom we know nothing but evil) had joined Fridigern's confederacy.

Gratian, Valens' colleague and nephew, son of Valentinian the bear-
ward, had just won a great victory over the Allemanni at Colmar in
Alsace; and Valens was jealous of his glory.  He is said to have been
a virtuous youth, whose monomania was shooting.  He fell in love with
the wild Alans, in spite of their horse-trappings of scalps, simply
because of their skill in archery; formed a body-guard of them, and
passed his time hunting with them round Paris.  Nevertheless, he won
this great victory by the help, it seems, of one Count Ricimer
('ever-powerful'), Count of the Domestics, whose name proclaims him a
German.

Valens was jealous of Gratian's fame; he was stung by the reproaches
of the mob of Constantinople; and he undervalued the Goths, on
account of some successes of his lieutenants, who had recovered much
of the plunder taken by them, and had utterly overpowered the foul
Taifalae, transporting them to lands about Modena and Parma in Italy.
He rejected Count Ricimer's advice to wait till Gratian reinforced
him with the victorious western legions, and determined to give
battle a few miles from Adrianople.  Had he waited for Gratian, the
history of the whole world might have been different.

For on the ninth of August, A.D. 378, the fatal day, the second
Cannae, from which Rome never recovered as from that first, the young
world and the old world met, and fought it out; and the young world
won.  The light Roman cavalry fled before the long lances and heavy
swords of the German knights.  The knights turned on the infantry,
broke them, hunted them down by charge after charge, and left the
footmen to finish the work.

Two-thirds of the Roman army were destroyed; four Counts of the
Empire; generals and officers without number.  Valens fled wounded to
a cottage.  The Goths set it on fire, and burned him and his staff
therein, ignorant that they had in their hands the Emperor of Rome.
Verily there is a God who judgeth the earth.

So thought the Catholics of that day, who saw in the fearful death of
Valens a punishment for his having forced the Goths to become Arians.
'It was just,' says one, 'that he should burn on earth, by whose
counsels so many barbarians will burn in hell for ever.'  There are
(as I have shewn) still darker counts in the conduct of the Romans
toward the Goths; enough (if we believe our Bibles) to draw down on
the guilty the swift and terrible judgments of God.

At least, this was the second Cannae, the death-wound of Rome.  From
that day the end was certain, however slow.  The Teuton had at last
tried his strength against the Roman.  The wild forest-child had
found himself suddenly at death-grips with the Enchanter whom he had
feared, and almost worshipped, for so long; and behold, to his own
wonder, he was no more a child, but grown into a man, and the
stronger, if not the cunninger of the two.  There had been a spell
upon him; the 'Romani nominis umbra.'  But from that day the spell
was broken.  He had faced a Roman Emperor, a Divus Caesar, the man-
god by whose head all nations swore, rich with the magic wealth, wise
with the magic cunning, of centuries of superhuman glory; and he had
killed him, and behold he died, like other men.  That he had done.
What was there left for him now that he could not do?

The stronger he was, but not yet the cunninger of the two.  The Goths
could do no more.  They had to leave Adrianople behind them, with the
Emperor's treasures safe within its walls; to gaze with childish
wonder at the Bosphorus and its palaces; to recoil in awe from the
'long walls' of Constantinople, and the great stones which the
engines thereon hurled at them by 'arsmetricke and nigromancy,' as
their descendants believed of the Roman mechanicians, even five
hundred years after; to hear (without being able to avenge) the
horrible news, that the Gothic lads distributed throughout Asia, to
be educated as Romans, had been decoyed into the cities by promises
of lands and honours, and then massacred in cold blood; and then to
settle down, leaving their children unavenged, for twenty years on
the rich land which we now call Turkey in Europe, waiting till the
time was come.

Waiting, I say, till the time was come.  The fixed idea that Rome, if
not Constantinople, could be taken at last, probably never left the
minds of the leading Goths after the battle of Adrianople.  The
altered policy of the Caesars was enough of itself to keep that idea
alive.  So far from expelling them from the country which they had
seized, the new Emperor began to flatter and to honour them.

They had been heretofore regarded as savages, either to be driven
back by main force, or tempted to enlist in the Roman ranks.
Theodosius regarded them as a nation, and one which it was his
interest to hire, to trust, to indulge at the expense of his Roman
subjects.

Theodosius has received the surname of Great--seemingly by
comparison; 'Inter caecos luscus rex;' and it was highly creditable
to a Roman Emperor in those days to be neither ruffian nor villain,
but a handsome, highbred, courteous gentleman, pure in his domestic
life, an orthodox Christian, and sufficiently obedient to the Church
to forgive the monks who had burnt a Jewish synagogue, and to do
penance in the Cathedral of Milan for the massacre of Thessalonica.
That the morals of the Empire (if Zosimus is to be at all believed)
grew more and more effeminate, corrupt, reckless; that the soldiers
(if Vegetius is to be believed) actually laid aside, by royal
permission, their helmets and cuirasses, as too heavy for their
degenerate bodies; that the Roman heavy infantry, which had conquered
the world, ceased to exist, while its place was taken by that
Teutonic heavy cavalry, which decided every battle in Europe till the
English yeoman, at Crecy and Poictiers, turned again the balance of
arms in favour of the men who fought on foot; that the Goths became
the 'foederati' or allies of the Empire, paid to fight its battles
against Maximus the Spaniard, and Arbogast the Frank, the rebels who,
after the murder of young Gratian, attempted to set up a separate
empire in the west; that Stilicho the Vandal was the Emperor's
trusted friend, and master of the horse; that Alaric the Balth, and
other noble Goths, were learning to combine with their native courage
those Roman tactics which they only needed to become masters of the
world; that in all cities, even in the Royal Palace, the huge Goth
swaggered in Roman costume, his neck and arms heavy with golden torcs
and bracelets; or even (as in the case of Fravitta and Priulf)
stabbed his enemy with impunity at the imperial table; that [Greek
text which cannot be reproduced], to disturb the Goths, was a deadly
offence throughout the Empire:  all these things did not prevent a
thousand new statues from rising in honour of the great Caesar, and
excited nothing more than grumblings of impotent jealousy from a
people whose maxim had become, 'Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow
we die.'

Three anecdotes will illustrate sufficiently the policy of Theodosius
toward his inconvenient guests.  Towards the beginning of his reign,
when the Goths, after the death of the great Fridigern, were broken
up, and quarreling among themselves, he tempted a royal Amal, Modar
by name, by the title of Master-General, to attack and slaughter in
their sleep a rival tribe of Goths, and carry off an immense spoil to
the imperial camp.  To destroy the German by the German was so old a
method of the Roman policy, that it was not considered derogatory to
the 'greatness' of Theodosius.

The old Athanaric, the Therving--he who had sworn never to set foot
on Roman soil, and had burnt them who would not fall down and worship
before Woden's waggon, came over the Danube, out of the forests of
'Caucaland,' and put himself at the head of the Goths.  The great
Caesar trembled before the heathen hero; and they made peace
together; and old Athanaric went to him at Constantinople, and they
became as friends.  And the Romani nominis umbra, the glamour of the
Roman name, fell on the old man, too feeble now to fight; and as he
looked, says Jornandes, on the site of the city, and on the fleets of
ships, and the world-famous walls, and the people from all the
nations upon earth, he said, 'Now I behold what I have often heard
tell, and never believed.  The Kaiser is a God on earth, and he who
shall lift his hand against him, is guilty of his own blood.'  The
old hero died in Constantinople, and the really good-natured Emperor
gave him a grand funeral, and a statue, and so delighted the simple
Goths, that the whole nation entered his service bodily, and became
the Emperor's men.

The famous massacre of Thessalonica, and the penance of Theodosius,
immortalized by the pencil of Vandyke, is another significant example
of the relation between Goth and Roman.  One Botheric (a Vandal or
other Teuton by his name) was military commandant of that important
post.  He put in prison a popular charioteer of the circus, for a
crime for which the Teutonic language had to borrow a foreign name,
and which the Teutons, like ourselves, punished with death, though it
was committed with impunity in any Roman city.  At the public games,
the base mob clamoured, but in vain, for the release of their
favourite; and not getting him, rose on Botheric, murdered him and
his officers, and dragged their corpses through the streets.

This was indeed [Greek text which cannot be reproduced]; and
Theodosius, partly in honest indignation, partly perhaps in fear of
the consequences, issued orders from Milan which seem to have
amounted to a permission to the Goths to avenge themselves.  The
populace were invited as usual to the games of the circus, and
crowded in, forgetful of their crime, heedless of danger, absorbed in
the one greed of frivolous, if not sinful pleasure.  The Gothic
troops concealed around entered, and then began a 'murder grim and
great.'  For three hours it lasted.  Every age and sex, innocent or
guilty, native or foreigner, to the number of at least 7,000,
perished, or are said to have perished; and the soul of Botheric had
'good company on its way to Valhalla.'

The Goths, doubtless, considered that they were performing an act of
public justice upon villains:  but the Bishops of the Church looked
at the matter in another light.  The circumstances of treachery, the
confusion of the innocent with the guilty, the want of any judicial
examination and sentence, aroused their sense of humanity and
justice.  The offence was aggravated by the thought that the victims
were Roman and orthodox, the murderers barbarians and Arians; St.
Ambrose, with a noble courage, stopped the Emperor at the door of the
Basilica of Milan, and forbad him to enter, till he had atoned for
the fatal order by public penance.  The Caesar submitted nobly to the
noble demand; and the repentance of Theodosius is the last scene in
the downward career of the Caesars, which can call forth a feeling of
admiration and respect.

In January 395 Theodosius died; and after him came the deluge.

The Empire was parted between his two worthless sons.  Honorius had
the west, Arcadius the east; while the real master of the Empire was
Stilicho the Vandal, whose virtues and valour and mighty stature are
sung (and not undeservedly) in the pompous verses of Claudian.  Of
the confusion which ensued; of the murder (well-deserved) of Rufinus,
the infamous minister whose devout hypocrisy had so long cajoled
Theodosius; of the revolt and atrocities of Gildo in Africa, you must
read in the pages of Gibbon.  These lectures confine themselves, at
present, to the history of the Goths.

In January 395, I said, Theodosius died.  Before the end of the
winter the Goths were in arms, with Alaric the Balth at their head.
They had been refused, at least for the time, the payment of their
usual subsidy.  He had been refused the command of the Roman armies.
Any excuse was sufficient.  The fruit was ripe for plucking.  The
wrongs of centuries were to be avenged.  Other tribes crost the
Danube on the ice, and joined the Goths; and the mighty host swept
down through Greece, passing Thermopylae unopposed, ransoming Athens
(where Alaric enjoyed a Greek bath and a public banquet, and tried to
behave for a day like a Roman gentleman); sacking Corinth, Argos,
Sparta, and all the cities and villages far and wide, and carrying
off plunder inestimable, and troops of captive women.

Stilicho threw himself into the Peloponnese at Corinth to cut off the
Goths, and after heavy fighting, Alaric, who seems to have been a
really great general, out-manoeuvred him, crost the Gulf of Corinth
at Rhium, with all his plunder and captives, and got safe away into
northern Greece.

There Arcadius, the terrified Emperor of the East, punished him for
having devastated Greece, by appointing him Master-General of the
very country which he had ravaged.  The end was coming very near.
The Goths lifted him on the shield, and proclaimed him King of the
West Goths; and there he staid, somewhere about the head of the
Adriatic, poised like an eagle in mid-air, watching Rome on one side,
and Byzant on the other, uncertain on which quarry he should swoop.

He made up his mind for Rome.  He would be the man to do the deed at
last.  There was a saga in which he trusted.  Claudian gives it in an
hexameter,


'Alpibus Italiae ruptis penetrabis ad urbem.'


Yes, he would take The City, and avenge the treachery of Valens, and
all the wrongs which Teutons had endured from the Romans for now four
centuries.  And he did it.

But not the first time.  He swept over the Alps.  Honorius fled to
Asta, and Alaric besieged him there.  The faithful Stilicho came to
the rescue; and Alaric was driven to extremities.  His warriors
counselled him to retreat.  No, he would take Rome, or die.  But at
Pollentia, Stilicho surprised him, while he and his Goths were
celebrating Easter Sunday, and a fearful battle followed.  The Romans
stormed his camp, recovered the spoils of Greece, and took his wife,
decked in the jewels in which she meant to enter Rome.  One longs to
know what became of her.

At least, so say the Romans:  the Goths tell a very different story;
and one suspects that Pollentia may be one more of those splendid
paper victories, in which the Teutons were utterly exterminated, only
to rise out of the ground, seemingly stronger and more numerous than
ever.  At least, instead of turning his head to the Alps, he went on
toward Rome.  Stilicho dared not fight him again, and bought him off.
He turned northward toward Gaul, and at Verona Stilicho got him at an
advantage, and fought him once more, and if we are to believe Rosino
and Claudian, beat him again.  'Taceo de Alarico, saepe victo, saepe
concluso, semperque dimisso.'  'It is ill work trapping an eagle,'
says some one.  When you have caught him, the safest thing very often
is to let him go again.

Meanwhile poured down into Italy, as far as Florence (a merely
unimportant episode in those fearful days), another wave of German
invaders under one Radogast, 200,000 strong.  Under the walls of
Florence they sat down, and perished of wine, and heat, and
dysentery.  Like water they flowed in, and like water they sank into
the soil:  and every one of them a human soul.

Stilicho and Honorius went to Rome, and celebrated their triumph over
the Goths, with (for the last time in history) gladiatorial sports.
Three years past, and then Stilicho was duly rewarded for having
saved Rome, in the approved method for every great barbarian who was
fool enough to help the treacherous Roman; namely, by being murdered.

Alaric rose instantly, and with him all the Gothic tribes.  Down
through Italy he past, almost without striking a blow.  Ravenna,
infamous, according to Sidonius, for its profligacy, where the
Emperor's court was, he past disdainfully, and sat down before the
walls of Rome.  He did not try to storm it.  Probably he could not.
He had no such machines, as those with which the Romans battered
walls.  Quietly he sat, he and his Goths, 'as wolves wait round the
dying buffalo;' waiting for the Romans within to starve and die.
They did starve and die; men murdered each other for food; mothers
ate their own babes; but they sent out embassies, boasting of their
strength and numbers.  Alaric laughed,--'The thicker the hay, the
easier it is mowed.'  What terms would he take?  'All your gold, all
your silver, the best of your precious things.  All your barbarian
slaves.'  That last is significant.  He would deliver his own flesh
and blood.  The Teuton man should be free.  The trolls should drag no
more of the forest children into their accursed den.  'What then will
you leave us?'  'Your lives.'

They bought him off with a quaint ransom:  5000 pounds weight of
gold, 30,000 of silver, 4000 robes of silk, 3000 pieces of scarlet
cloth, and 3000 lbs. of pepper, possibly spices of all kinds.  Gold,
and finery, and spices--gifts fit for children, such as those Goths
were.

But he got, too, 40,000 Teuton slaves safe out of the evil place, and
embodied them into his army.  He had now 100,000 fighting men.  Why
did he not set up as king of Italy?  Was it that the awe of the
place, the prestige of the Roman name, cowed him?  It cowed each of
the Teutonic invaders successively.  To make themselves emperors of
Rome was a thing of which they dared not dream.  Be that as it may,
all he asked was, to be received as some sort of vassal of the
Emperor.  The Master-Generalship of Italy, subsidies for his army, an
independent command in the Tyrolese country, whence he had come, were
his demand.

Overblown with self-conceit, the Romans refused him.  They would
listen to no conditions.  They were in a thoroughly Chinese temper.
You will find the Byzantine empire in the same temper centuries
after; blinded to present weakness by the traditions of their
forefathers' strength.  They had worshipped the beast.  Now that only
his image was left, they worshipped that.

Alaric seized Ostia, and cut off their supplies.  They tried to
appease him by dethroning Honorius, and setting up some puppet
Attalus.  Alaric found him plotting; or said that he had done so; and
degraded him publicly at Rimini before his whole army.  Again he
offered peace.  The insane Romans proclaimed that his guilt precluded
him for ever from the clemency of the Empire.

Then came the end.  He marched on Rome.  The Salarian gate was thrown
open at midnight, probably by German slaves within; and then, for
five dreadful days and nights, the wicked city expiated in agony the
sins of centuries.

And so at last the Nibelungen hoard was won.

'And the kings of the earth who had lived delicately with her, and
the merchants of the earth who were made rich by her, bewailed her,
standing afar off for the fear of her torment, and crying, Alas!
alas, that great Babylon! for in one hour is thy judgment come.'

St. John passes in those words from the region of symbol to that of
literal description.  A great horror fell upon all nations, when the
news came.  Rome taken?  Surely the end of all things was at hand.
The wretched fugitives poured into Egypt and Syria--especially to
Jerusalem; perhaps with some superstitious hope that Christ's tomb,
or even Christ himself, might save them.

St. Jerome, as he saw day by day patrician men and women who had
passed their lives in luxury, begging their bread around his
hermitage at Bethlehem, wrote of the fall of Rome as a man astonied.

St. Augustine, at Hippo, could only look on it as the end of all
human power and glory, perhaps of the earth itself.  Babylon the
great had fallen, and now Christ was coming in the clouds of heaven
to set up the city of God for ever.  In that thought he wrote his De
Civitate Dei.  Read it, gentlemen--especially you who are to be
priests--not merely for its details of the fall of Rome, but as the
noblest theodicy which has yet proceeded from a human pen.

Followed by long trains of captives, long trains of waggons bearing
the spoils of all the world, Alaric went on South, 'with the native
instinct of the barbarian,' as Dr. Sheppard well says.  Always toward
the sun.  Away from Muspelheim and the dark cold north, toward the
sun, and Valhalla, where Odin and the Asas dwell in everlasting
light.

He tried to cross into Sicily:  but a storm wrecked his boats, and
the Goths were afraid of the sea.  And after a while he died.  And
the wild men made a great mourning over him.  They had now no plan
left; no heart to go south, and look for Odin over the sea.  But of
one thing they were resolved, that the base Romans should not dig up
Alaric out of his barrow and scatter his bones to the winds.

So they put no barrow over the great king; but under the walls of
Cosenza they turned the river-bed, and in that river-bed they set
Alaric, armed and mailed, upright upon his horse, with gold, and
jewels, and arms, and it may be captive youths and maids, that he
might enter into Valhalla in royal pomp, and make a worthy show among
the heroes in Odin's hall.  And then they turned back the river into
its bed, and slew the slaves who had done the work, that no man might
know where Alaric lies:  and no man does know till this day.

As I said, they had no plan left now.  Two years they stayed in
Campania, basking in the villas and gardens, drinking their fill of
the wine; and then flowed away northward again, no one knows why.
They had no wish to settle, as they might have done.  They followed
some God-given instinct, undiscoverable now by us.  Ataulf, Alaric's
kinsman, married Placidia, the Emperor's beautiful young sister, and
accepted from him some sort of commission to fight against his
enemies in Gaul.  So to the south of Gaul they went, and then into
Spain, crushing before them Alans, Sueves, and Vandals, and
quarrelling among themselves.  Ataulf was murdered, and all his
children; Placidia put to shame.  Then she had her revenge.  To me it
is not so much horrible as pitiful.  They had got the Nibelungen
hoard; and with it the Nibelungen curse.

A hundred years afterwards, when the Franks pillaged the Gothic
palace of Narbonne, they found the remnants of it.  Things
inestimable, indescribable; tables of solid emerald; the Missorium, a
dish 2500 lbs. weight, covered with all the gems of India.  They had
been in Solomon's Temple, fancied the simple Franks--as indeed some
of them may well have been.  The Arabs got the great emerald table at
last, with its three rows of great pearls.  Where are they all now?
What is become, gentlemen, of the treasures of Rome?  Jewels,
recollect, are all but indestructible; recollect, too, that vast
quantities were buried from time to time, and their places forgotten.
Perhaps future generations will discover many such hoards.
Meanwhile, many of those same jewels must be in actual use even now.
Many a gem which hangs now on an English lady's wrist saw Alaric sack
Rome--and saw before and since--What not?  The palaces of the
Pharaohs, or of Darius; then the pomp of the Ptolemies, or of the
Seleucids--came into Europe on the neck of some vulgar drunken wife
of a Roman proconsul, to glitter for a few centuries at every
gladiator's butchery in the amphitheatre; then went away with
Placidia on a Gothic ox-waggon, to pass into an Arab seraglio at
Seville; and then, perhaps, back from Sultan to Sultan again to its
native India, to figure in the peacock-throne of the Great Mogul, and
be bought at last by some Armenian for a few rupees from an English
soldier, and come hither--and whither next?  When England shall be
what Alexandria and Rome are now, that little stone will be as bright
as ever.--An awful symbol, if you will take it so, of the permanence
of God's works and God's laws, amid the wild chance and change of
sinful man.

Then followed for Rome years of peace,--such peace as the wicked make
for themselves--A troubled sea, casting up mire and dirt.  Wicked
women, wicked counts (mayors of the palace, one may call them) like
Aetius and Boniface, the real rulers of a nominal Empire.

Puppet Valentinian succeeded his father, puppet Honorius.  In his
days appeared another great portent--another comet, sweeping down out
of infinite space, and back into infinite space again.--Attila and
his Huns.  They lay in innumerable hordes upon the Danube, until
Honoria, Valentinian's sister, confined in a convent at
Constantinople for some profligacy, sent her ring to Attila.  He must
be her champion, and deliver her.  He paused a while, like Alaric
before him, doubting whether to dash on Constantinople or Rome, and
at last decided for Rome.  But he would try Gaul first; and into Gaul
he poured, with all his Tartar hordes, and with them all the Teuton
tribes, who had gathered in his progress, as an avalanche gathers the
snow in its course.  At the great battle of Chalons, in the year 451,
he fought it out:  Hun, Sclav, Tartar, and Finn, backed by Teutonic
Gepid and Herule, Turkling, East Goth and Lombard, against Roman and
West Goth, Frank and Burgund, and the Bretons of Armorica.  Wicked
Aetius shewed himself that day, as always, a general and a hero--the
Marlborough of his time--and conquered.  Attila and his hordes rolled
away eastward, and into Italy for Rome.

That is the Hunnenschlacht; 'a battle,' as Jornandes calls it,
'atrox, multiplex, immane, pertinax.'  Antiquity, he says, tells of
nothing like it.  No man who had lost that sight could say that he
had seen aught worth seeing.--A fight gigantic, supernatural in
vastness and horror, and the legends which still hang about the
place.  You may see one of them in Von Kaulbach's immortal design--
the ghosts of the Huns and the ghosts of the Germans rising from
their graves on the battle-night in every year, to fight it over
again in the clouds, while the country far and wide trembles at their
ghostly hurrah.  No wonder men remember that Hunnenschlacht.  Many
consider that it saved Europe; that it was one of the decisive
battles of the world.

Not that Attila was ruined.  Within the year he had swept through
Germany, crossed the Alps, and devastated Italy almost to the walls
of Rome.  And there the great Pope Leo, 'the Cicero of preaching, the
Homer of theology, the Aristotle of true philosophy,' met the wild
heathen:  and a sacred horror fell upon Attila, and he turned, and
went his way, to die a year or two after no man knows how.  Over and
above his innumerable wives, he took a beautiful German girl.  When
his people came in the morning, the girl sat weeping, or seeming to
weep; but Etzel, the scourge of God, lay dead in a pool of gore.  She
said that he had burst a blood-vessel.  The Teutons whispered among
themselves, that like a free-born Teuton, she had slain her tyrant.
One longs to know what became of her.

And then the hordes broke up.  Ardarich raised the Teuton Gepids and
Ostrogoths.  The Teutons who had obeyed Attila, turned on their
Tartar conquerors, the only people who had ever subdued German men,
and then only by brute force of overpowering numbers.  At Netad, upon
the great plain between the Drave and the Danube, they fought the
second Hunnenschlacht, and the Germans conquered.  Thirty thousand
Huns fell on that dreadful day, and the rest streamed away into the
heart of Asia, into the infinite unknown deserts from whence the foul
miscreants had streamed forth, and left the Teutons masters of the
world.  The battle of Netad; that, and not Chalons, to my mind, was
the saving battle of Europe.

So Rome was saved; but only for a few years.  Puppet Valentinian
rewarded Aetius for saving Rome, by stabbing with his own hand in his
own palace, the hero of Chalons; and then went on to fill up the cup
of his iniquity.  It is all more like some horrible romance than
sober history.  Neglecting his own wife Eudoxia, he took it into his
wicked head to ravish her intimate friend, the wife of a senator.
Maximus stabbed him, retaliated on the beautiful empress, and made
himself Emperor.  She sent across the seas to Africa, to Genseric the
Vandal, the cruel tyrant and persecutor.  He must come and be her
champion, as Attila had been Honoria's.  And he came, with Vandals,
Moors, naked Ausurians from the Atlas.  The wretched Romans, in their
terror, tore Maximus in pieces; but it was too late.  Eudoxia met
Genseric at the gates in royal robes and jewels.  He stript her of
her jewels on the spot, and sacked Rome; and that was her reward.

This is the second sack.  More dreadful far than the first--455 is
its date.  Then it was that the statues, whose fragments are still
found, were hurled in vain on the barbarian assailants.  Not merely
gold and jewels, but the art-treasures of Rome were carried off to
the Vandal fleet, and with them the golden table and the seven-
branched candlestick which Titus took from the Temple of Jerusalem.

How had these things escaped the Goths forty years before?  We cannot
tell.  Perhaps the Gothic sack, which only lasted five days, was less
complete than this one, which went on for fourteen days of
unutterable horrors.  The plunderers were not this time sturdy honest
Goths; not even German slaves, mad to revenge themselves on their
masters:  they were Moors, Ausurian black savages, and all the
pirates and cut-throats of the Mediterranean.

Sixty thousand prisoners were carried off to Carthage.  All the
statues were wrecked on the voyage to Africa, and lost for ever.

And yet Rome did not die.  She lingered on; her Emperor still calling
himself an Emperor, her senate a senate; feeding her lazy plebs, as
best she could, with the remnant of those revenues which former
Emperors had set aside for their support--their public bread, public
pork, public oil, public wine, public baths,--and leaving them to
gamble and quarrel, and listen to the lawyers in rags and rascality,
and to rise and murder ruler after ruler, benefactor after
benefactor, out of base jealousy and fear of any one less base than
themselves.  And so 'the smoke of her torment went up continually.'

But if Rome would not die, still less would she repent; as it is
written--'The remnant of the people repented not of their deeds, but
gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven.'

As the century runs on, the confusion becomes more and more dreadful.
Anthemius, Olybrius, Orestes, and the other half-caste Romans with
Greek names who become quasi-emperors and get murdered; Ricimer the
Sueve, the king-maker and king-murderer; even good Majorian, who as
puppet Emperor set up by Ricimer, tries to pass a few respectable
laws, and is only murdered all the sooner.  None of these need detain
us.  They mean nothing, they represent no idea, they are simply kites
and crows quarrelling over the carcase, and cannot possibly teach us
anything, but the terrible lesson, that in all revolutions the worst
men are certain to rise to the top.

But only for a while, gentlemen, only for a while.  Villany is by its
very essence self-destructive, and if rogues have their day, the time
comes when rogues fall out, and honest men come by their own.

That day, however, was not come for wretched Rome.  A third time she
was sacked by Ricimer her own general; and then more villains ruled
her; and more kites and crows plundered her.  The last of them only
need keep us a while.  He is Odoacer, the giant Herule, Houd-y-
wacker, as some say his name really is, a soubriquet perhaps from his
war-cry, 'Hold ye stoutly,' 'Stand you steady.'  His father was
AEdecon, Attila's secretary, chief of the little Turkling tribe, who,
though Teutonic, had clung faithfully to Attila's sons, and after the
battle of Netad, came to ruin.  There are strange stories of Odoacer.
One from the Lives of St. Severinus, how Odoacer and his brothers
started over the Alps, knapsacks at back, to seek their fortunes in
Italy, and take service with the Romans; and how they came to St.
Severinus' cell near Vienna, and went in, heathens as they probably
were, to get a blessing from the holy hermit; and how Odoacer had to
stoop, and stand stooping, so huge he was.  And how the saint saw
that he was no common lad, and said, 'Go into Italy, clothed in thy
ragged sheep-skins:  thou shalt soon give greater gifts to thy
friends.'  So he went, and his brother with him.  One of them at
least ought to interest us.  He was Onulf, Hunwulf, Wulf, Guelph, the
Wolf-cub, who went away to Constantinople, and saw strange things,
and did strange things likewise, and at last got back to Germany, and
settled in Bavaria, and became the ancestor of all the Guelphs, and
of Victoria, queen of England.  His son, Wulfgang, fought under
Belisarius against the Goths; his son again, Ulgang, under Belisarius
against Persian and Lombard; his son or grandson was Queen
Brunhilda's confidant in France, and became Duke of Burgundy; and
after that the fortunes of his family were mixed up with the
Merovingian kings of France, and then again with the Lombards in
Italy, till one of them emerges as Guelf, count of Altorf, the
ancestor of our Guelphic line.

But to return to Odoacer.  He came to Rome, seeking his fortune.
There he found in power Orestes, his father's old colleague at
Attila's court, the most unprincipled turn-coat of his day; who had
been the Emperor's man, then Attila's man, and would be anybody's man
if needed:  but who was now his own man, being king-maker for the
time being, and father of the puppet Emperor, Romulus Augustulus, a
pretty little lad, with an ominous name.

Odoacer took service under Orestes in the bodyguards, became a great
warrior and popular; watched his time; and when Orestes refused the
mercenaries, Herules, Rugians, Scyrings, Turklings and Alans--all the
weak or half-caste frontier tribes who had as yet little or no share
in the spoils of Italy--their demand of the third of the lands of
Italy, he betrayed his benefactor; promised the mercenaries to do for
them what Orestes would not, and raises his famous band of
confederates.  At last he called himself King of Nations, burnt
Pavia, and murdered Orestes, as a due reward for his benefits.
Stript of his purple, the last Emperor of Rome knelt crying at the
feet of the German giant, and begged not to be murdered like his
father.  And the great wild beast's hard heart smote him, and he sent
the poor little lad away, to live in wealth and peace in Lucullus'
villa at Misenum, with plenty of money, and women, and gewgaws, to
dream away his foolish life looking out over the fair bay of Naples--
the last Emperor of Rome.

Then Odoacer set to work, and not altogether ill.  He gave his
confederates the third of Italy, in fief under himself as king, and
for fourteen years (not without the help of a few more murders) he
kept some sort of rude order and justice in the wretched land.
Remember him, for, bad man as he is, he does represent a principle.
He initiated, by that gift of the lands to his soldiers, the feudal
system in Italy.  I do not mean that he invented it.  It seems rather
to be a primaeval German form, as old as the days of Tacitus, who
describes, if you will recollect, the German war-kings as parting the
conquered lands among their 'comites,' thanes, or companions in arms.

So we leave Odoacer king of Italy, for fourteen years, little
dreaming, perhaps, of the day when as he had done unto others so
should it be done to him.  But for that tale of just and terrible
retribution you must wait till the next lecture.

And now, to refresh us with a gleam of wholesome humanity after all
these horrors, let us turn to our worthy West Goth cousins for a
while.  They have stopt cutting each other's throats, settled
themselves in North Spain and South France, and good bishop Sidonius
gets to like them.  They are just and honest men on the whole,
kindly, and respectable in morals, living according to their strange
old Gothic Law.  But above all Sidonius likes their king--Theodoric
is his name.  A man of blood he has been in his youth:  but he has
settled down, like his people; and here is a picture of him.  A real
photograph of a live old Goth, nearly 1400 years ago.  Gibbon gives a
good translation of it.  I will give you one, but Sidonius is prolix
and florid, and I have had to condense.

A middle-sized, stout man, of great breadth of chest, and thickness
of limb, a large hand, and a small foot, curly haired, bushy eye-
browed, with remarkably large eyes and eyelids, hook-nosed, thin-
lipped; brilliant, cheerful, impassioned, full of health and strength
in mind and body.  He goes to chapel before day-light, sits till
eight doing justice, while the crowd, let into a latticed enclosure,
is admitted one by one behind a curtain into the presence.  At eight
he leaves the throne, and goes either to count his money, or look at
his horses.  If he hunts, he thinks it undignified to carry his bow,
and womanish to keep it strung, a boy carries it behind him; and when
game gets up, he asks you (or the Bishop, who seems to have gone
hunting with him) what you would wish him to aim at; strings his bow,
and then (says Sidonius) never misses his shot.  He dines at noon,
quietly in general, magnificently on Saturdays; drinks very little,
and instead of sleeping after dinner, plays at tables and dice.  He
is passionately fond of his game, but never loses his temper, joking
and talking to the dice, and to every one round him, throwing aside
royal severity, and bidding all be merry (says the bishop); for, to
speak my mind, what he is afraid of is, that people should be afraid
of him.  If he wins he is in immense good humour; then is the time to
ask favours of him; and, says the crafty bishop, many a time have I
lost the game, and won my cause thereby.  At three begins again the
toil of state.  The knockers return, and those who shove them away
return too; everywhere the litigious crowd murmurs round; and follows
him at evening, when he goes to supper, or gets its matters settled
by the officers of the court, who have to stay there till bed-time.
At supper, though there are but rarely 'mimici sales,' which I cannot
translate--some sort of jesting:  but biting and cruel insults
(common at the feasts of the Roman Emperors) are never allowed.  His
taste in music is severe.  No water-organs, flute-player, lyrist,
cymbal or harp-playing woman is allowed.  All he delights in is the
old Teutonic music, whose virtue (says the bishop) soothes the soul
no less than does its sound the ear.  When he rises from table the
guards for the night are set, and armed men stand at all the doors,
to watch him through the first hours of sleep.



LECTURE IV.--THE GOTHIC CIVILIZER



Let us follow the fortunes of Italy and of Rome.  They are not only a
type of the fortunes of the whole western world, but the fortunes of
that world, as you will see, depend on Rome.

You must recollect, meanwhile, that by the middle of the fifth
century, the Western Empire had ceased to exist.  The Angles and
Saxons were fighting their way into Britain.  The Franks were settled
in north France and the lower Rhineland.  South of them, the centre
of Gaul still remained Roman, governed by Counts of cities, who were
all but independent sovereigns, while they confessed a nominal
allegiance to the Emperor of Constantinople.  Their power was
destined soon to be annihilated by the conquests of Clovis and his
Franks--as false and cruel ruffians as their sainted king, the first-
born son of the Church.  The history of Gaul for some centuries
becomes henceforth a tissue of internecine horrors, which you must
read for yourselves in the pages of M. Sismondi, or of Gregory of
Tours.  The Allemanni (whose name has become among the Franks the
general name for Germans) held the lands from the Maine to the
Rhaetian Alps.  The Burgunds, the lands to the south-west of them,
comprising the greater part of south-east Gaul.  The West Goths held
the south-west of Gaul, and the greater part of Spain, having thrust
the Sueves, and with them some Alans, into Gallicia, Asturias, and
Portugal; and thrust, also, the Vandals across the straits of
Gibraltar, to found a prosperous kingdom along the northern shore of
Africa.  The East Goths, meanwhile, after various wanderings to the
north of the Alps, lay in the present Austria and in the Danube
lands, resting after their great struggle with the Huns, and their
crowning victory of Netad.

To follow the fortunes of Italy, we must follow those of these East
Goths, and especially of one man among them, Theodoric, known in
German song as Dietrich of Bern or Verona.

Interesting exceedingly to us should this great hero be.  No man's
history better shows the strange relations between the Teutons and
the dying Empire:  but more; his life is the first instance of a
Teuton attempting to found a civilized and ordered state, upon
experience drawn from Roman sources; of the young world trying to
build itself up some sort of dwelling out of the ruins of the old.
Dietrich failed, it is true.  But if the thing had been then
possible, he seems to have been the man to have done it.  He lived
and laboured like what he was--a royal Amal, a true son of Woden.
Unable to write, he founded a great kingdom by native virtue and
common sense.  Called a barbarian, he restored prosperity to ruined
Italy, and gave to it (and with it to the greater part of the western
world), peace for three and thirty years.  Brought up among hostile
sects, he laid down that golden law of religious liberty which the
nineteenth century has not yet courage and humanity enough to accept.
But if his life was heroic, his death was tragic.  He failed after
all in his vast endeavours, from causes hidden from him, but visible,
and most instructive, to us; and after having toiled impartially for
the good of conquerors and of conquered alike, he died sadly, leaving
behind him a people who, most of them, believed gladly the news that
a holy hermit had seen his soul hurled down the crater of Stromboli,
as a just punishment for the inexpiable crime of being wiser than his
generation.

Some have complained of Gibbon's 'hero-worship' of Dietrich--I do
not.  The honest and accurate cynic so very seldom worshipped a hero,
or believed in the existence of any, that we may take his good
opinion as almost final and without appeal.  One author, for whose
opinion I have already exprest a very high respect, says that he was
but a wild man of the woods to the last; polished over skin-deep with
Roman civilization; 'Scratch him, and you found the barbarian
underneath {p101}.'  It may be true.  If it be true, it is a very
high compliment.  It was not from his Roman civilization, but from
his 'barbarian' mother and father, that he drew the 'vive
intelligence des choses morales, et ces inspirations elevees et
heroiques,' which M. Thierry truly attributes to him.  If there was,
as M. Thierry truly says, another nature struggling within him--is
there not such in every man?  And are not the struggles the more
painful, the temptations more dangerous, the inconsistencies too
often the more shameful, the capacities for evil as well as for good,
more huge, just in proportion to the native force and massiveness of
the soul?  The doctrine may seem dangerous.  It is dangerous, like
many truths; and woe to those who, being unlearned and unstable,
wrest it to their own destruction; and presume upon it to indulge
their own passions under Byronic excuses of 'genius,' or 'muscular
Christianity.'  But it is true nevertheless:  so at least the Bible
tells us, in its wonderful delineations of David, 'the man after
God's own heart,' and of St. Peter, the chief of the apostles.  And
there are points of likeness between the character of Dietrich, and
that of David, which will surely suggest themselves to any acute
student of human nature.  M. Thierry attributes to him, as his worse
self, 'les instincts les plus violents; la cruaute, l'astuce,
l'egoisme impitoyable.'  The two first counts are undeniable--at
least during his youth:  they were the common vices of the age.  The
two latter I must hold as not proven by facts:  but were they proven,
they would still be excusable, on the simple ground of his Greek
education.  'Cunning and pitiless egotism' were the only moral
qualities which Dietrich is likely to have seen exercised at the
court of Constantinople:  and what wonder, if he was somewhat
demoralized by the abominable atmosphere which he breathed from
childhood?  Dietrich is an illustration of the saga with which these
lectures began.  He is the very type of the forest child, bewitched
by the fine things of the wicked Troll garden.  The key to the man's
character, indeed the very glory of it, is the long struggle within
him, between the Teutonic and the Greek elements.  Dazzled and
debauched, at times, by the sinful glories of the Bosphorus, its
palaces, its gold, and its women, he will break the spell
desperately.  He will become a wild Goth and an honest man once more;
he will revenge his own degradation on that court and empire which he
knows well enough to despise, distrust and hate.  Again and again the
spell comes over him.  His vanity and his passions make him once more
a courtier among the Greeks; but the blood of Odin is strong within
him still; again and again he rises, with a noble shame, to virtue
and patriotism, trampling under foot selfish luxury and glory, till
the victory is complete; and he turns away in the very moment of the
greatest temptation, from the bewitching city, to wander, fight,
starve, and at last conquer a new land for himself and for his
nation; and shew, by thirty years of justice and wisdom, what that
true Dietrich was, which had been so long overlaid by the false
Dietrich of his sinful youth.

Look at the facts of his history, as they stand, and see whether they
do not bear out this, and no other, theory of his character.

The year was 455, two years after Attila's death.  Near Vienna a boy
was born, of Theodemir one of the Gothic kings and his favourite
Erleva.  He was sent when eight years old to Constantinople as a
hostage.  The Emperor Leo had agreed to pay the Goths 300 pounds of
gold every year, if they would but leave him in peace; and young
Dietrich was the pledge of the compact.  There he grew up amid all
the wisdom of the Romans, watching it all, and yet never even
learning to write.  It seems to some that the German did not care to
learn; it seems to me rather that they did not care to teach.  He
came back to his people at eighteen, delighted them by his strength
and stature, and became, to all appearance, a Goth of the Goths;
going adventures with six thousand volunteers against the Sarmatae,
who had just defeated the Greeks, and taken a city--which he retook,
but instead of restoring it to the Emperor, kept himself.  Food
becoming scarce in Austria, the Ostrogoths moved some into Italy,
some down on Illyria and Thessaly; and the Emperor gracefully
presented them with the country of which they had already taken
possession.

In every case, you see, this method went on.  The failing Emperors
bought off the Teutons where they could; submitted to them where they
could not; and readily enough turned on them when they had a chance.
The relations between the two parties can be hardly better explained,
than by comparing them to those between the English adventurers in
Hindostan and the falling Rajahs and Sultans of the last century.

After a while Theodoric, or Dietrich, found himself, at his father's
death, sole king of the Ostrogoths.  This period of his life is very
obscure:  but one hint at least we have, which may explain his whole
future career.  Side by side with him and with his father before him,
there was another Dietrich--Dietrich the One-eyed, son of Triar, a
low-born adventurer, who had got together the remnants of some low-
caste tribes, who were called the Goths of Thrace, and was swaggering
about the court of Constantinople, as, when the East Goths first met
him, what we call Warden of the Marches, with some annual pay for his
Goths.  He was insolent to Theodemir and his family, and they
retaliated by bitter hatred.  It was intolerable for them, Amals,
sons of Odin, to be insulted by this upstart.  So they went on for
years, till the miserable religious squabble fell out--you may read
it in Gibbon--which ended in the Emperor Zeno, a low-born and cunning
man, suspected of the murder of his own son by the princess Ariadne,
being driven out of Constantinople by Basiliscus.  We need not enter
into such matters, except as far as they bear on the history of
Dietrich the Amal.  Dietrich the One-eyed helped Basiliscus--and then
Zeno seems to have sent for Dietrich the Amal to help him.  He came,
but too late.  Basiliscus' party had already broken up; Basiliscus
and his family had taken refuge in a church, from whence Zeno enticed
him, on the promise of shedding no blood, which he did not:  but
instead, put him, his wife and children, in a dry cistern, walled it
up and left them.

Dietrich the Amal rose into power and great glory, and became 'son-
in-arms' to the Emperor.  But the young Amal longed for adventures.
He offered to take his Ostrogoths into Italy, drive out Odoacer, and
seat on the throne of the West, Nepos, one of the many puppets who
had been hurled off it a few years before.  Zeno had need of the
young hero nearer home, and persuaded him to stay in Constantinople,
eat, drink, and be merry.

Whereon Odoacer made Romulus Agustulus and the Roman Senate write to
Zeno that they wanted no Emperor save him at Constantinople; that
they were very happy under the excellent Odoacer, and that they
therefore sent to Zeno, as the rightful owner, all the Imperial
insignia and ornaments; things which may have been worn, some of
them, by Augustus himself.  And so ended, even in name, the Empire of
Rome.  All which the Amal saw, and, as will appear, did not forget.

Zeno gave the Amal all that the One-eyed had had before him, and paid
the Ostrogoths yearly as he had paid the One-eye's men.  The One-eyed
was banished to his cantonments, and of course revolted.  Zeno wanted
to buy him off, but the Amal would not hear of it; he would not help
the Romans against his rival, unless they swore perpetual enmity
against him.

They did so, and he marched to the assistance of the wretched Empire.
He was to be met by Roman reinforcements at the Haemus.  They never
came; and the Amal, disgusted and disheartened, found himself
entangled in the defiles of the Haemus, starving and worn out; with
the One-eyed entrenched on an inaccessible rock, where he dared not
attack him.

Then followed an extraordinary scene.  The One-eyed came down again
and again from his rock, and rode round the Amal's camp, shouting to
him words so true, that one must believe them to have been really
spoken.

'Perjured boy, madman, betrayer of your race--do you not see that the
Roman plan is as always to destroy Goths by Goths?  Whichever of us
falls, they, not we, will be the stronger.  They never met you as
they promised, at the cities, nor here.  They have sent you out here
to perish in the desert.'

Then the East Goths raised a cry.  'The One-eyed is right.  The Amal
cares not that these men are Goths like ourselves.'

Then the One-eyed appeals to the Goths themselves, as he curses the
Amal.

'Why are you killing your kinsmen?  Why have you made so many widows?
Where is all their wealth gone, they who set out to fight for you?
Each of them had two or three horses:  but now they are walking on
foot behind you like slaves,--free-men as well-born as yourself:- and
you promised to measure them out gold by the bushel.'

Was it not true?  If young Dietrich had in him (and he shewed that he
had in after years) a Teuton's heart, may not that strange interview
have opened his eyes to his own folly, and taught him that the Teuton
must be his own master, and not the mercenary of the Romans?

The men cried out that it was true.  He must make peace with the One-
eyed, or they would do it themselves; and peace was made.  They both
sent ambassadors to Zeno; the Amal complaining of treachery; the One-
eyed demanding indemnity for all his losses.  The Emperor was
furious.  He tried to buy off the Amal by marrying him to a princess
of the blood royal, and making him a Caesar.  Dietrich would not
consent; he felt that it was a snare.  Zeno proclaimed the One-eyed
an enemy to the Empire; and ended by reinstating him in his old
honours, and taking them from the Amal.  The Amal became furious,
burnt villages, slaughtered the peasants, even (the Greeks say) cut
off the hands of his captives.  He had broken with the Romans at
last.  The Roman was astride of him, and of all Teutons, like
Sindbad's old man of the sea.  The only question, as with Sindbad,
was whether he should get drunk, and give them a chance of throwing
the perfidious tyrant.  And now the time was come.  He was compelled
to ask himself, not--what shall I be in relation to myself:  but what
shall I be in relation to the Kaiser of the Romans--a mercenary, a
slave, or a conqueror--for one of the three I must be?

So it went on, year after year--sometimes with terrible reverses for
Dietrich, till the year 480.  Then the old One-eyed died, in a
strange way.  Mounting a wild horse at the tent-door, the beast
reared before he could get his seat; afraid of pulling it over by the
curb, he let it go.  A lance, in Gothic fashion, was hanging at the
tent-door, and the horse plunged the One-eyed against it.  The point
went deep into his side, and the old fighting man was at rest for
ever.

And then came a strange peripeteia for the Amal.  Zeno, we know not
why, sent instantly for him.  He had been ravaging, pursuing,
defeating Roman troops, or being defeated by them.  Now he must come
to Rome.  His Goths should have the Lower Danube.  He should have
glory and honour to spare.  He came.  His ideal, at this time, seems
actually to have been to live like a Roman citizen in Constantinople,
and help to govern the Empire.  Recollect, he was still little more
than five and twenty years old.

So he went to Constantinople, and I suppose with him the faithful
mother, and faithful sister, who had been with him in all his
wanderings.  He had a triumph decreed him at the Emperor's expense,
was made Consul Ordinarius ('which,' saith Jornandes, 'is accounted
the highest good and chief glory in the world') and Master-general,
and lodged in the palace.

What did it all mean?  Dietrich was dazzled by it, at least for a
while.  What it meant, he found out too soon.  He was to fight the
Emperor's battles against all rebels, and he fought them, to return
irritated, complaining (justly or unjustly) of plots against his
life; to be pacified, like a child, with the honour of an equestrian
statue; then to sink down into Byzantine luxury for seven inglorious
years, with only one flashing out of the ancient spirit, when he
demanded to go alone against the Bulgars, and killed their king with
his own hand.

What woke him from his dream?  The cry of his starving people.

The Goths, settled on the lower Danube, had been living, as wild men
and mercenaries live, recklessly from hand to mouth, drinking and
gambling till their families were in want.  They send to the Amal.
'While thou art revelling at Roman banquets, we are starving--come
back ere we are ruined.'

They were jealous, too, of the success of Odoacer and his
mercenaries.  He was growing now to be a great power; styling himself
'King of nations {p109},' giving away to the Visigoths the
Narbonnaise, the last remnant of the Western Empire; collecting round
him learned Romans like Symmachus, Boethius, and Cassiodorus;
respecting the Catholic clergy; and seemingly doing his best to
govern well.  His mercenaries, however, would not be governed.  Under
their violence and oppression agriculture and population were both
failing; till Pope Gelasius speaks of 'AEmilia, Tuscia, ceteraeque
provinciae in quibus nullus prope hominum existit.'

Meanwhile there seems to have been a deep hatred on the part of the
Goths to Odoacer and his mercenaries.  Dr. Sheppard thinks that they
despised him himself as a man of low birth.  But his father AEdecon
had been chief of the Turklings, and was most probably of royal
blood.  It is very unlikely, indeed, that so large a number of
Teutons would have followed any man who had not Odin's blood in his
veins.  Was there a stain on Odoacer from his early connexion with
Attila?  Or was the hatred against his men more than himself,
contempt especially of the low-caste Herules,--a question of race,
springing out of those miserable tribe-feuds, which kept the Teutons
always divided and weak?  Be that as it may, Odoacer had done a deed
which raised this hatred to open fury.  He had gone over the Alps
into Rugiland (then Noricum, and the neighbourhood of Vienna) and
utterly destroyed those of the Rugier who had not gone into Italy
under his banner.  They had plundered, it is said, the cell of his
old friend St. Severinus, as soon as the saint died, of the garments
laid up for the poor, and a silver cup, and the sacred vessels of the
mass.  Be that as it may, Odoacer utterly exterminated them, and
carried their king Feletheus, or Fava, back to Italy, with Gisa his
'noxious wife;' and with them many Roman Christians, and (seemingly)
the body of St. Severinus himself.  But this had been a small thing,
if he had not advised himself to have a regular Roman triumph, with
Fava, the captive king, walking beside his chariot; and afterwards,
in the approved fashion of the ancient Romans on such occasions, to
put Fava to death in cold blood.

The records of this feat are to be found, as far as I know them, in
one short chapter (I. xix.) of Paulus Diaconus, and in Muratori's
notes thereto; but however small the records, the deed decided the
fate of Italy.  Frederic, son of Fava, took refuge with the
Ostrogoths, and demanded revenge in the name of his royal race; and
it is easy to conceive that the sympathies of the Goths would be with
him.  An attack (seemingly unprovoked) on an ancient Teutonic nation
by a mere band of adventurers was--or could easily be made--a
grievous wrong, and clear casus belli, over and above the innate
Teutonic lust for fighting and adventures, simply for the sake of
'the sport.'

Dietrich went back, and from that day, the dream of eastern luxury
was broken, and young Dietrich was a Goth again, for good and for
evil.

He assembled the Goths, and marched straight on Constantinople,
burning and pillaging as he went.  So say, at least, the Greek
historians, of whom, all through this strange story, no one need
believe more than he likes.  Had the Goths had the writing of the
life of Dietrich, we should have heard another tale.  As it is, we
have, as it were, a life of Lord Clive composed by the court scribes
of Delhi.

To no Roman would he tell what was in his mind.  Five leagues from
Constantinople he paused.  Some say that he had compassion on the
city where he had been brought up.  Who can tell?  He demanded to
speak to Zeno alone, and the father in arms and his wild son met once
more.  There was still strong in him the old Teutonic feudal
instinct.  He was 'Zeno's man,' in spite of all.  He asked (says
Jornandes) Zeno's leave to march against Odoacer, and conquer Italy.
Procopius and the Valesian Fragment say that Zeno sent him, and that
in case of success, he was to reign there till Zeno came.  Zeno was,
no doubt, glad to get rid of him at any price.  As Ennodius well
says, 'Another's honour made him remember his own origin, and fear
the very legions which obeyed him--for that obedience is suspected
which serves the unworthy.'  Rome was only nominally under Zeno's
dominion; and it mattered little to him whether Herule or Gothic
adventurer called himself his representative.

Then was held a grand function.  Dietrich, solemnly appointed
'Patrician,' had Italy ceded to him by a 'Pragmatic' sanction, and
Zeno placed on his head the sacrum velamen, a square of purple,
signifying in Constantinople things wonderful, august, imperial--if
they could only be made to come to pass.  And he made them come to
pass.  He gathered all Teutonic heroes of every tribe, as well as his
own; and through Roumelia, and through the Alps, a long and dangerous
journey, went Dietrich and his Goths, with their wives and children,
and all they had, packed on waggons; living on their flocks and
herds, grinding their corn in hand-mills, and hunting as they went,
for seven hundred miles of march; fighting as they went with Bulgars
and Sarmatians, who had swarmed into the waste marches of Hungary and
Carniola, once populous, cultivated, and full of noble cities;
fighting a desperate battle with the Gepidae, up to their knees in a
morass; till over the passes of the Julian Alps, where icicles hung
upon their beards, and their clothes cracked with frost, they poured
into the Venetian plains.  It was a daring deed; and needed a spirit
like Dietrich's to carry it through.

Odoacer awaited him near the ruins of Aquileia.  On the morning of
the fight, as he was arming, Dietrich asked his noble mother to bring
him some specially fine mantle, which she had embroidered for him,
and put it over his armour, 'that all men may see how he goes gayer
into the fight than ever he did into feast.  For this day she shall
see whether she have brought a man-child into the world, or no.'

And in front of Verona (where the plain was long white with human
bones), he beat Odoacer, and after a short and sharp campaign, drove
him to Ravenna.  But there, Roman fortifications, and Roman
artillery, stopped, as usual, the Goth; and Odoacer fulfilled his
name so well, and stood so stout, that he could only be reduced by
famine; and at last surrendered on terms, difficult now to discover.

Gibbon says, that there was a regular compact that they should enjoy
equal authority, and refers to Procopius:  but Procopius only says,
that they should live together peaceably 'in that city.'  Be that as
it may, Odoacer and his party were detected, after awhile, conspiring
against Dietrich, and put to death in some dark fashion.  Gibbon, as
advocatus diaboli, of course gives the doubt against Dietrich, by his
usual enthymeme--All men are likely to be rogues, ergo, Dietrich was
one.  Rather hard measure, when one remembers that the very men who
tell the story are Dietrich's own enemies.  By far the most important
of them, the author of the Valesian Fragment, who considers Dietrich
damned as an Arian, and the murderer of Boethius and Symmachus, says
plainly that Odoacer plotted against his life.  But it was a dark
business at best.

Be that as it may, Dietrich the Amal found himself in one day king of
all Italy, without a peer.  And now followed a three and thirty
years' reign of wisdom, justice, and prosperity, unexampled in the
history of those centuries.  Between the days of the Antonines and
those of Charlemagne, I know no such bright spot in the dark history
of Europe.

As for his transferring the third of the lands of Italy, which had
been held by Odoacer's men, to his own Goths,--that was just or
unjust (even putting out of the question the rights of conquest),
according to what manner of men Odoacer's mercenaries were, and what
right they had to the lands.  At least it was done so, says
Cassiodorus, that it notoriously gave satisfaction to the Romans
themselves.  One can well conceive it.  Odoacer's men had been
lawless adventurers; and now law was installed as supreme.  Dietrich,
in his long sojourn at the Emperor's court, had discovered the true
secret of Roman power, which made the Empire terrible even in her
fallen fortunes; and that was Law.  Law, which tells every man what
to expect, and what is expected of him; and so gives, if not content,
still confidence, energy, industry.  The Goths were to live by the
Gothic law, the Romans by the Roman.  To amalgamate the two races
would have been as impossible as to amalgamate English and Hindoos.
The parallel is really tolerably exact.  The Goth was very English;
and the over-civilized, learned, false, profligate Roman was the very
counterpart of the modern Brahmin.  But there was to be equal justice
between man and man.  If the Goths were the masters of much of the
Roman soil, still spoliation and oppression were forbidden; and the
remarkable edict or code of Theodoric, shews how deeply into his
great mind had sunk the idea of the divineness of Law.  It is short,
and of Draconic severity, especially against spoliation, cheating,
false informers, abuse by the clergy of the rights of sanctuary, and
all offences against the honour of women.  I advise you all to study
it, as an example of what an early Teutonic king thought men ought to
do, and could be made to do.

The Romans were left to their luxury and laziness; and their country
villas (long deserted) were filled again by the owners.  The Goths
were expected to perform military service, and were drilled from
their youth in those military evolutions which had so often given the
disciplined Roman the victory over the undisciplined Goth, till every
pomoerium (boulevard), says Ennodius, might be seen full of boys and
lads, learning to be soldiers.  Everything meanwhile was done to
soothe the wounded pride of the conquered.  The senate of Rome was
still kept up in name (as by Odoacer), her nobles flattered by
sonorous titles, and the officers of the kingdom and the palace bore
the same names as they would have done under Roman emperors.  The
whole was an attempt to develop Dietrich's own Goths by the only
civilization which he knew, that of Constantinople:  but to engraft
on it an order, a justice, a freedom, a morality, which was the
'barbarian' element.  The treasures of Roman art were placed under
the care of government officers; baths, palaces, churches, aqueducts,
were repaired or founded; to build seems to have been Dietrich's
great delight; and we have left us, on a coin, some image of his own
palace at Verona, a strange building with domes and minarets,
something like a Turkish mosque; standing, seemingly, on the arcades
of some older Roman building.  Dietrich the Goth may, indeed, be
called the founder of 'Byzantine' architecture throughout the Western
world.

Meanwhile, agriculture prospered once more; the Pontine Marshes were
drained; the imperial ports restored, and new cities sprang up.  'The
new ones,' says Machiavelli, 'were Venice, Siena, Ferrara, Aquileia;
and those which became extended were Florence, Genoa, Pisa, Milan,
Naples, and Bologna.'  Of these the great sea-ports, especially
Venice, were founded not by Goths, but by Roman and Greek fugitives:
but it was the security and liberality of Dietrich's reign which made
their existence possible; and Venice really owes far more to the
barbarian hero, than to the fabled patronage of St. Mark.

'From this devastation and new population,' continues Machiavelli,
'arose new languages, which, partaking of the native idiom of the new
people, and of the old Roman, formed a new manner of discourse.
Besides, not only were the names of provinces changed, but also of
lakes, rivers, seas, and men; for France, Spain, and Italy are full
of fresh names, wholly different from the ancient.'

This reign of Dietrich was, in fact, the birth-hour of modern Italy;
and, as Machiavelli says, 'brought the country to such a state of
greatness, that her previous sufferings were unrecognizable.'  We
shall see hereafter how the great Goth's work was all undone; and (to
their everlasting shame) by whom it was undone.

The most interesting records of the time are, without doubt, the
letters of Cassiodorus, the king's secretary and chancellor, which
have come down to us in great numbers.  There are letters among them
on all questions of domestic and foreign policy:  to the kings of the
Varni, kings of the Herules, kings of the Thuringer (who were still
heathens beyond the Black forest), calling on them all to join him
and the Burgundians, and defend his son-in-law Alaric II., king of
the Visigoths, against Clovis and his Franks.  There are letters,
too, bearing on the religious feuds of the Roman population, and on
the morals and social state of Rome itself, of which I shall say
nothing in this lecture, having cause to refer to them hereafter.
But if you wish to know the times, you must read Cassiodorus
thoroughly.

In his letters you will remark how most of the so-called Roman names
are Greek.  You will remark, too, as a sign of the decadence of taste
and art, that though full of wisdom and practical morality, the
letters are couched in the most wonderful bombast to be met with,
even in that age of infimae Latinitatis.  One can only explain their
style by supposing that King Dietrich, having supplied the sense,
left it for Cassiodorus to shape it as he thought best; and when the
letter was read over to him, took for granted (being no scholar) that
that was the way in which Roman Caesars and other cultivated
personages ought to talk; admired his secretary's learning; and
probably laughed in his sleeve at the whole thing, thinking that ten
words of honest German would have said all that he meant.  As for
understanding these flights of rhetoric, it is impossible that
Dietrich could have done so:  perhaps not even Cassiodorus himself.
Take as one example, such a letter as this.--After a lofty moral
maxim, which I leave for you to construe--'In partem pietatis recidit
mitigata districtio; et sub beneficio praestat, qui poenam debitam
moderatione considerata palpaverit,'--Jovinus the curial is informed,
after the most complex method, that having first quarrelled with a
fellow-curial, and then proceeded to kill him, he is banished for
life to the isle of Volcano, among the Liparis.  As a curial is a
gentleman and a government magistrate, the punishment is just enough;
but why should Cassiodorus (certainly not King Dietrich) finish a
short letter by a long dissertation on volcanoes in general, and
Stromboli in particular, insisting on the wonder that the rocks,
though continually burnt, are continually renewed by 'the
inextricable potency of nature;' and only returning to Jovinus to
inform him that he will henceforth follow the example of a
salamander, which always lives in fire, 'being so contracted by
natural cold, that it is tempered by burning flame.  It is a thin and
small animal, connected with worms, and clothed with a yellow
colour;' . . . Cassiodorus then returns to the main subject of
volcanoes, and ends with a story of Stromboli having broken out just
as Hannibal poisoned himself at the court of Prusias;--information
which may have been interesting, though not consoling, to poor
Jovinus, in the prospect of living there; but of which one would like
to have had king Dietrich's opinion.  Did he felicitate himself like
a simple Teuton, on the wonderful learning and eloquence of his
Greek-Roman secretary?  Or did he laugh a royal laugh at the whole
letter, and crack a royal joke at Cassiodorus and all quill-driving
schoolmasters and lawyers--the two classes of men whom the Goths
hated especially, and at the end to which they by their pedantries
had brought imperial Rome?  One would like to know.  For not only was
Dietrich no scholar himself, but he had a contempt for the very
scholarship which he employed, and forbade the Goths to learn it--as
the event proved, a foolish and fatal prejudice.  But it was
connected in his mind with chicanery, effeminacy, and with the cruel
and degrading punishments of children.  Perhaps the ferula had been
applied to him at Constantinople in old days.  If so, no wonder that
he never learnt to write.  'The boy who trembles at a cane,' he used
to say, 'will never face a lance.'  His mother wit, meanwhile, was so
shrewd that 'many of his sayings (says the unknown author of the
invaluable Valesian Fragment) remain among us to this day.'  Two
only, as far as I know, have been preserved, quaint enough:


'He that hath gold, or a devil, cannot hide it.'


And


'The Roman, when poor, apes the Goth:  the Goth,
when rich, apes the Roman.'


There is a sort of Solomon's judgment, too, told of him, in the case
of a woman who refused to acknowledge her own son, which was
effectual enough; but somewhat too homely to repeat.

As for his personal appearance, it was given in a saga; but I have
not consulted it myself, and am no judge of its authenticity.  The
traditional description of him is that of a man almost beardless--a
rare case among the Goths--with masses of golden ringlets, and black
eyebrows over 'oculos caesios,' the blue grey eyes common to so many
conquerors.  A complexion so peculiar, that one must believe it to be
truly reported.

His tragic death, and the yet more tragic consequences thereof, will
be detailed in the next lecture.



LECTURE V--DIETRICH'S END.



I have now to speak to you on the latter end of Dietrich's reign--
made so sadly famous by the death of Boethius--the last Roman
philosopher, as he has been called for centuries, and not unjustly.
His De Consolatione Philosophiae is a book good for any man, full of
wholesome and godly doctrine.  For centuries it ranked as high as the
highest classics; higher perhaps at times than any book save the
Bible, among not merely scholars, but statesmen.  It is the last
legacy of the dying old world to the young world which was trampling
it out of life; and therefore it is full of sadness.  But beneath the
sadness there is faith and hope; for God is just, and virtue must be
triumphant and immortal, and the absolute and only good for man.  The
whole story is very sad.  Dietrich was one of those great men, who
like Henry VIII, Elizabeth, Napoleon, or the late Czar Nicholas, have
lived too long for their own honour.  The old heathen would have
attributed his misadventures to a [Greek text which cannot be
reproduced], an envy of the Gods, who will not abide to see men as
prosperous as they themselves are.  We may attribute it more simply
and more piously to the wear and tear of frail humanity.  For it may
be that very few human souls can stand for many years the strain of a
great rule.  I do not mean that they break down from overwork, but
that they are pulled out of shape by it; and that, especially, the
will becomes enormously developed at the expense of the other powers
of the soul, till the man becomes, as he grows older, imperious,
careless of, or irritated by counsel, determined to have his own way
because it is his own way.  We see the same tendency in all
accustomed for a long while to absolute rule, even in petty matters;-
-in the old ship's captain, the old head of a factory, the old master
of hounds; and we do not blame them for it.  It is a disease incident
to their calling, as pedantry is to that of a scholar, or astuteness
to that of an attorney.  But it is most dangerous in the greatest
minds, and in the highest places; and only to be kept off by them, as
by us, each in our place, by honest self-examination, diligent
prayer, and the grace of God which comes thereby.  Once or twice in
the world's history a great ruler, like Charles the Fifth, cuts the
Gordian knot, and escapes into a convent:  but how few can or ought
to do that?  There are those who must go on ruling, or see their
country ruined; for all depends on them.  So had Queen Elizabeth to
do; so had Dietrich of Bern likewise.  After them would come the
deluge, and did come; and they must endure to the last, whatever it
may cost to their own health of character, or peace of mind.

But most painful, and most dangerous to the veteran sovereign, is it
to have learnt to suspect, perhaps to despise, those whom he rules;
to have thrown away all his labour upon knaves and fools; to have
cast his pearls before swine, and find them turning again and rending
him.  That feeling, forced from Queen Elizabeth, in her old age, that
tragic cry, 'I am a miserable forlorn woman.  There is none about me
whom I can trust.'  She was a woman, always longing for some one to
love; and her heart broke under it all.  But do you not see that
where the ruler is not an affectionate woman, but a strong proud man,
the effect may be very different, and very terrible?--how, roused to
indignation, scorn, suspicion, rage, he may turn to bay against his
own subjects, with 'Scoundrels! you have seen the fair side of my
character, and in vain.  Now you shall see the foul, and beware for
yourselves.'

Even so, I fancy, did old Dietrich turn to bay, and did deeds which
have blackened his name for ever.  Heaven forgive him! for surely he
had provocation enough and to spare.

I have told you of the simple, half-superstitious respect which the
Teuton had for the prestige of Rome.  Dietrich seems to have partaken
of it, like the rest.  Else why did he not set himself up as Caesar
of Rome?  Why did he always consider himself as son-in-arms, and
quasi-vassal, of the Caesar of Constantinople?  He had been in youth
overawed by the cunning civilization which he had seen in the great
city.  He felt, with a noble modesty, that he could not emulate it.
He must copy it afar off.  He must take to his counsels men like
Cassiodorus, Symmachus, Boethius, born and bred in it; trained from
childhood in the craft by which, as a patent fact, the Kaisers of
Rome had been for centuries, even in their decay and degradation, the
rulers of the nations.  Yet beneath that there must have been a
perpetual under-current of contempt for it and for Rome--the
'colluvies gentium'--the sink of the nations, with its conceit, its
pomposity, its beggary, its profligacy, its superstition, its
pretence of preserving the Roman law and rights, while practically it
cared for no law nor right at all.  Dietrich had had to write letter
upon letter, to prevent the green and blue factions cutting each
other's throats at the public spectacles; letters to the tribunus
voluptatum, who had to look after the pantomimes and loose women,
telling him to keep the poor wretches in some decent order, and to
set them and the city an example of a better life, by being a chaste
and respectable man himself.  Letter upon letter of Cassiodorus',
written in Dietrich's name, disclose a state of things in Rome on
which a Goth could look only with disgust and contempt.

And what if he discovered (or thought that he discovered) that these
prating coxcombs--who were actually living on government bounty, and
had their daily bread, daily bath, daily oil, daily pork, daily wine,
found for them at government expense, while they lounged from the
theatre to the church, and the church to the theatre--were plotting
with Justin the scoundrel and upstart Emperor at Constantinople, to
restore forsooth the liberties of Rome?  And that that was their
answer to his three and thirty years of good government, respect,
indulgence, which had raised them up again out of all the miseries of
domestic anarchy and foreign invasion?

And what if he discovered (or thought that he discovered) that the
Catholic Clergy, with Pope John at their head, were in the very same
plot for bringing in the Emperor of Constantinople, on the grounds of
religion; because he was persecuting the Arian Goths at
Constantinople, and therefore would help them to persecute them in
Italy?  And that that was their answer to his three and thirty years
of unexampled religious liberty?  Would not those two facts (even the
belief that they were facts) have been enough to drive many a wise
man mad?

How far they were facts, we never shall exactly know.  Almost all our
information comes from Catholic historians--and he would be a rash
man who would pin his faith on any statement of theirs concerning the
actions of a heretic.  But I think, even with no other help than
theirs, we may see why Dietrich would have looked with horror on any
intimacy between the Church of Rome and the Court of Constantinople.

We must remember first what the Greek Empire was then, and who was
the new Emperor.  Anastasius the poor old Emperor, dying at eighty
with his heart broken by monks and priests, had an ugly dream; and
told it to Amantius the eunuch and lord chamberlain.  Whereon
Amantius said he had had a dream too;--how a great hog flew at him as
he was in waiting in the very presence, and threw him down and eat
him fairly up.  Which came true--though not in the way Amantius
expected.  On the death of Anastasius he determined to set up as
Emperor a creature of his own.  For this purpose he must buy the
guards; to which noble end he put a large sum of treasure into the
hands of Justin, senator, and commander-in-chief of the said guards,
who takes the money, and spends it on his own account; so that the
miserable eunuch finds, not his man, but Justin himself, Emperor, and
his hard-earned money spent against him.  The mere rise of this
unscrupulous swindler and his still more unscrupulous nephew,
Justinian, would have been enough to rouse Dietrich's suspicion, if
not fear.

Deep and unspeakable must have been the royal Amal's contempt for the
man.  For he must have known him well at Constantinople in his youth;
known how he was a Goth or other Teuton after all, though he was
called a Dardanian; how his real name was Uprauda (upright), the son
of Stock--which Uprauda he had latinized into Justinus.  The Amal
knew well how he had entered the Emperor's guard; how he had
intrigued and fought his way up (for the man did not lack courage and
conduct) to his general's commission; and now, by a crowning act of
roguery, to the Empire.  He had known too, most probably, the man's
vulgar peasant wife, who, in her efforts to ape royalty, was making
herself the laughing-stock of the people, and who was urging on her
already willing husband to persecute.  And this man he saw ready to
convulse his own Empire by beginning a violent persecution against
the Arians.  He was dangerous enough as a villain, doubly dangerous
as a bigot also.

We must remember next what the Greek Church was then; a chaos of
intrigue, villainy, slander, and wild fury, tearing to pieces itself
and the whole Empire by religious feuds, in which the doctrine in
question becomes invisible amid the passions and crimes of the
disputants, while the Lords of the Church were hordes of wild monks,
who swarm out of their dens to head the lowest mobs, or fight pitched
battles with each other.  The ecclesiastical history of the fifth
century in the Eastern Empire is one, which not even the genius of a
Gibbon or a Milman can make interesting, or even intelligible.

Recollect that Dietrich had seen much of this with his own eyes; had
seen actually, as I told you, the rebellion of Basiliscus and the
Eutychian Bishops headed by the mad Daniel the Stylite against his
foster father the Emperor Zeno; had seen that Emperor (as Dean Milman
forcibly puts it) 'flying before a naked hermit, who had lost the use
of his legs by standing sixteen years upon a column.'  Recollect that
Dietrich and his Goths had helped to restore that Emperor to his
throne; and then understand in what a school he had learnt his great
ideas of religious toleration:  how deep must have been the
determination to have no such doings in his kingdom; how deep, too,
the dread of any similar outbreak at Rome.

Recollect, also, that now in his old age he had just witnessed the
same iniquities again rending the Eastern Empire; the old Emperor
Anastasius hunted to death by armies of mad monks about the
Monophysite Heresy; the cities, even the holiest places of the East,
stained with Christian blood; everywhere mob-law, murder, treachery,
assassination even in the house of God; and now the new Emperor
Justin was throwing himself into the party of the Orthodox with all
the blind rage of an ignorant peasant; persecuting, expelling,
shutting up the Arian Churches of the Goths, refusing to hear
Dietrich's noble appeals; and evidently organizing a great movement
against those peaceable Arians, against whom, during the life-time of
Dietrich, their bitterest enemies do not allege a single case of
persecution.

Remember, too, that Dietrich had had experience of similar outbreaks
of fanaticism at Rome; that the ordination of two rival Popes had
once made the streets run with blood; that he had seen priests
murdered, monasteries fired, nuns insulted, and had had to interfere
with the strong arm of the law, and himself decide in favour of the
Pope who had the most votes, and was first chosen; and that in the
quarrels, intrigues, and slanders, which followed that election, he
had had too good proof that the ecclesiastics and the mob of Rome, if
he but let them, could behave as ill as that of Constantinople; and,
moreover, that this new Pope John, who seems to have been a hot-
headed fanatic, had begun his rule by whipping and banishing
Manichees--by whose permission, does not appear.

Recollect too, that for some reason or other, Dietrich, when he had
interfered in Eastern matters, had been always on the side of the
Orthodox and the Council of Chalcedon.  He had fought for the
Orthodox against Basiliscus.  He had backed the Orthodox and
Vitalianus their champion, against the late Emperor Anastasius; and
now as soon as the Orthodox got into power under Justin, this was the
reward of his impartiality.  If he did not distrust and despise the
Church and Emperor of the East, he must have been not a hero, but a
saint.

Recollect, too, that in those very days, Catholic bigotry had broken
out in a general plunder of the Jews.  At Rome, at Milan, and Genoa
their houses had been sacked, and their synagogues burnt; and
Dietrich, having compelled the Catholics to rebuild them at their own
expense, had earned the hatred of a large portion of his subjects.
And now Pope John was doing all he could to thwart him.  Dietrich
bade him go to Constantinople, and plead with Justin for the
persecuted Arians.  He refused.  Dietrich shipt him off, nolentem
volentem.  But when he got to Constantinople he threw his whole
weight into the Emperor's scale.  He was received by Justin as if he
was St. Peter himself, the Emperor coming out to meet him with
processions and wax-lights, imploring his blessing; he did exactly
the opposite to what Dietrich bade him do; and published on his
return a furious epistle to the bishops of Italy, calling upon them
to oppress and extirpate the Arian perfidy, so that no root of it is
left:  to consecrate the Arian churches wheresoever he found them,
pleading the advice of the most pious and Christian Emperor Justin,
talking of Dietrich as tainted inwardly and wrapt up outwardly with
the pest of heresy.  On which Cochlaeus (who religiously believes
that Dietrich was damned for his Arianism, and that all his virtues
went for nothing because he had not charity, which exists, he says,
alone within the pale of the Church), cannot help the naive comment,
that if the Pontiff did really write that letter, he cannot wonder at
Dietrich's being a little angry.  Kings now, it is true, can afford
to smile at such outbursts; they could not afford to do so in
Dietrich's days.  Such words meant murder, pillage, civil war,
dethronement, general anarchy; and so Dietrich threw Pope John into
prison.  He had been in bad health before he sailed to
Constantinople, and in a few months he died, and was worshipped as a
saint.

As for the political conspiracy, we shall never know the truth of it.
The 'Anonymus Valesii,' meanwhile says, that when Cyprian accused
Albinus, Boethius answered, 'It is false:  but if Albinus has done
it, so have I, and the whole senate, with one consent.  It is false,
my Lord King!'  Whatever such words may prove, they prove at least
this, that Boethius, as he says himself, was the victim of his own
chivalry.  To save Albinus, and the senate, he thrust himself into
the fore-front of the battle, and fell at least like a brave man.
Whether Albinus, Boethius, and Symmachus did plot to bring in Justin;
whether the senate did send a letter to him, I cannot tell.
Boethius, in his De Consolatione, denies it all; and Boethius was a
good man.  He says that the letters in which he hoped for the liberty
of Rome were forged; how could he hope for the impossible? but he
adds, 'would that any liberty could have been hoped for!  I would
have answered the king as Cassius did, when falsely accused of
conspiring by Caligula:  "If I had known of it, you should not."'
One knows not whether Dietrich ever saw those words:  but they prove
at least that all his confidence, justice, kindness to the patrician
philosopher, had not won him from the pardonable conceit about the
Romani nominis umbram.

Boethius' story is most probably true.  One cannot think that that
man would die with a lie in his mouth.  One cannot pass by, as the
utterances of a deliberate hypocrisy, those touching appeals to his
guiding mistress, that heavenly wisdom who has led him so long upon
the paths of truth and virtue, and who seems to him, in his miserable
cell, to have betrayed him in his hour of need.  Heaven forbid.
Better to believe that Dietrich committed once in his life, a fearful
crime, than that good Boethius' famous book is such another as the
Eikon Basilike.

Boethius, again, says that the Gothic courtiers hated him, and
suborned branded scoundrels to swear away his life and that of the
senate, because he had opposed 'the hounds of the palace,' Amigast,
Trigulla, and other greedy barbarians.  There was, of course, a
Gothic party and a Roman party about the court; and each hated the
other bitterly.  Dietrich had favoured the Romans.  But the Goths
could not have seen such men as Symmachus and Boethius the confidants
and counsellors of the Amal, without longing for their downfall; and
if, as Boethius and the Catholic historians say, the whole tragedy
arose out of a Gothic plot to destroy the Roman party, such things
have happened but too often in the world's history.  The only facts
which make against the story are, that Cyprianus the accuser was a
Roman, and that Cassiodorus, who must have belonged to the Roman
party, not only is never mentioned during the whole tragedy, but was
high in power under Theodatus and Athalaric afterwards.

Add to this, that there were vague but wide-spread reports that the
Goths were in danger; that Dietrich at least could not be ignorant of
the ambition and the talents of that terrible Justinian, Justin's
nephew, who was soon to alter, for a generation, the fortunes of the
whole Empire, and to sweep the Goths from Italy; that men's minds
must have been perplexed with fear of change, when they recollected
that Dietrich was seventy years old, without a son to succeed him,
and that a woman and a child would soon rule that great people in a
crisis, which they could not but foresee.  We know that the ruin
came; is it unreasonable to suppose that the Goths foresaw it, and
made a desperate, it may be a treacherous, effort to crush once and
for all, the proud and not less treacherous senators of Rome?

So, maddened with the fancied discovery that the man whom he had
honoured, trusted, loved, was conspiring against him, Dietrich sent
Boethius to prison.  He seems, however, not to have been eager for
his death; for Boethius remained there long enough to write his noble
book.

However, whether fresh proofs of his supposed guilt were discovered
or not, the day came when he must die.  A cord was twisted round his
head (probably to extort confession), till his eyes burst from their
sockets, and then he was put out of his misery by a club; and so
ended the last Roman philosopher.  Symmachus, his father-in-law, was
beheaded; and Pope John, as we have heard, was thrown into prison on
his return, and died after a few months.  These are the tragedies
which have stained for ever the name of 'Theodoric the Great.'

Pope John seems to have fairly earned his imprisonment.  For the two
others, we can only, I fear, join in the sacred pity in which their
memories have been embalmed to all succeeding generations.  But we
must recollect, that after all, we know but one side of the question.
The Romans could write; the Goths could not:  they may have been able
to make out a fair case for themselves; they may have believed truly
in the guilt of Boethius; and if they did, nothing less could have
happened, by such rules of public law and justice as were then in
vogue, than did happen.

Be that as it may, the deed was done; and the punishment, if
deserved, came soon enough.  Sitting at dinner (so the story runs),
the head of a fish took in Dietrich's fancy the shape of Symmachus'
head, the upper teeth biting the lip, the great eyes staring at him.
He sprang up in horror; took to his bed; and there, complaining of a
mortal chill, wrapping himself up in heaps of blankets, and bewailing
to his physician the death of his two victims, he died sadly in a few
days.  And a certain holy hermit, name not given, nor date of the
vision, saw the ghosts of Boethius and Symmachus lead the Amal's soul
up the cone of Stromboli, and hurl him in, as the English sailors saw
old Boots, the Wapping usurer, hurled into the same place, for
offences far more capable of proof.

So runs the story of Dietrich's death.  It is perfectly natural, and
very likely true.  His contemporaries, who all believed it, saw in it
proof of his enormous guilt, and the manifest judgment of God.  We
shall rather see in it a proof of the earnest, child-like, honest
nature of the man, startled into boundless horror and self-abasement,
by the sudden revelation of his crime.  Truly bad men die easier
deaths than that; and go down to the grave, for the most part, blind
and self-contented, and, as they think, unpunished; and perhaps
forgiven.

After Dietrich came the deluge.  The royal head was gone.  The royal
heart remained in Amalasuentha 'the heavenly beauty,' a daughter
worthy of her father.

One of her first acts was to restore to the widows and children of
the two victims the estates which Dietrich had confiscated.  That
may, or may not, prove that she thought the men innocent.  She may
have only felt it royal not to visit the sins of the fathers on the
children; and those fathers, too, her own friends and preceptors.
Beautiful, learned, and wise, she too was, like her father, before
her age.  She, the pupil of Boethius, would needs bring up her son
Athalaric in Roman learning, and favour the Romans in all ways; never
putting to death or even fining any of them, and keeping down the
rough Goths, who were ready enough, now Dietrich's hand was off them,
to ill-use the conquered Italians.  The Goths soon grew to dislike
her, and her Roman tendencies, her Roman education of the lad.  One
day she boxed his ears for some fault.  He ran crying out into the
Heldensaal, and complained to the heroes.  They sent a deputation to
Amalasuentha, insolent enough.  'The boy should not be made a scholar
of.'  'She meant to kill the boy and marry again.  Had not old
Dietrich forbidden free Goths to go to schoolmasters, and said, that
the boy who was taught to tremble at a cane, would never face a
lance?'  So they took the lad away from the women, and made a ruffian
of him.  What with drink, women, idleness, and the company of wild
young fellows like himself, he was early ruined, body and soul.  Poor
Amalasuentha, not knowing whither to turn, took the desperate
resolution of offering Italy to the Emperor Justinian.  She did not
know that her cousin Theodatus had been beforehand with her--a bad
old man, greedy and unjust, whose rapacity she had had to control
again and again, and who hated her in return.  Both send messages to
Justinian.  The wily Emperor gave no direct answer:  but sent his
ambassador to watch the course of events.  The young prince died of
debauchery, and the Goths whispered that his mother had poisoned him.
Meanwhile Theodatus went on from bad to worse; accusations flowed in
to Amalasuentha of his lawless rapacity:  but he was too strong for
her; and she, losing her head more and more, made the desperate
resolve of marrying him, as the only way to keep him quiet.  He was
the last male heir of the royal Amalungs.  The marriage would set him
right in the eyes of the Goths, while it would free her from the
suspicion of having murdered her son, in order to reign alone.
Theodatus meanwhile was to have the name of royalty; but she was to
keep the power and the money--a foolish, confused plan, which could
have but one ending.  Theodatus married her of course, and then cast
her into prison, seized all her treasures, and threw himself into the
arms of that party among the Goths, who hated Amalasuentha for having
punished their oppressions.  The end was swift and sad.  By the time
that Justinian's ambassador landed, Amalasuentha was strangled in her
bath; and all that Peter the ambassador had to do was, to catch at
the cause of quarrel, and declare 'inexpiable war' on the part of
Justinian, as the avenger of the Queen.

And then began that dreadful East Goth war, which you may read for
yourselves in the pages of an eye-witness, Procopius;--a war which
destroyed utterly the civilization of Dietrich's long and prosperous
reign, left Italy a desert, and exterminated the Roman people.

That was the last woe:  but of it I must tell you in my next Lecture.



LECTURE VI--THE NEMESIS OF THE GOTHS.



Of this truly dreadful Gothic war I can give you but a hasty sketch;
of some of the most important figures in it, not even a sketch.  I
cannot conceive to myself, and therefore cannot draw for you, the
famous Belisarius.  Was he really the strange compound of strength
and weakness which Procopius, and after him Gibbon, represent him?--a
caricature, for good and evil, of our own famous Marlborough?  You
must read and judge for yourselves.  I cannot, at least as yet, offer
you any solution of the enigma.

Still less can I conceive to myself Narses, living till his grey
hairs in the effeminate intrigues of the harem, and then springing
forth a general; the Warrior Eunuch; the misanthrope avenging his
great wrong upon all mankind in bloody battle-fields; dark of
counsel, and terrible of execution; him to whom in after years the
Empress Sophia sent word that he was more fit to spin among maids
than to command armies, and he answered, that he would spin her such
a thread as she could not unravel; and kept his word (as legends say)
by inviting the Lombards into Italy.

Least of all can I sketch Justinian the Great, the half-Teuton
peasant, whom his uncle Justin sent for out of the Dardanian hills,
to make him a demigod upon earth.  Men whispered in after years that
he was born of a demon, a demon himself, passing whole days without
food, wandering up and down his palace corridors all night, resolving
dark things, and labouring all day with Herculean force to carry them
out.  No wonder he was thought to be a demon, wedded to a demon-wife.
The man is unfathomable, inexplicable;--marrying deliberately the
wickedest of all women, plainly not for mere beauty's sake, but
possibly because he saw in her a congenial intellect;--faithful and
loving to her and she to him, amid all the crimes of their following
years;--pious with exceeding devotion and orthodoxy, and yet with a
piety utterly divorced from, unconscious of, the commonest morality;-
-discerning and using the greatest men, Belisarius and Narses for
example, and throwing them away again, surely not in weak caprice,
whenever they served him too well;--conquering Persians, Vandals,
Goths; all but re-conquering, in fact, the carcase Roman Empire;--and
then trying (with a deep discernment of the value of Roman law) to
put a galvanic life into the carcase by codifying that law.

In whatever work I find this man, during his long life, he is to me
inexplicable.  Louis XI of France is the man most like Justinian whom
I know, but he, too, is a man not to be fathomed by me.  All the
facts about Justinian you will find in Gibbon.  I have no theory by
which to arrange and explain them, and therefore can tell you no more
than Gibbon does.

So to this Gothic war; which, you must remember, became possible for
Justinian by Belisarius' having just destroyed the Vandals out of
Africa.  It began by Belisarius invading the south of Italy.  Witigis
was elected war-king of the Goths, 'the man of witty counsels,' who
did not fulfil his name; while Theodatus (Theod-aht 'esteemed by the
people' as his name meant) had fallen into utter disesteem, after
some last villainy about money; had been struck down in the road by
the man he had injured; and there had his throat cut, 'resupinus
instar victimae jugulatus.'

He had consulted a Jew diviner just before, who had given him a
warning.  Thirty pigs, signifying the unclean Gentiles, the Jew shut
up in three sties; naming ten Goths, ten Romans, and ten Imperialists
of Belisarius' army, and left them to starve.  At the end they found
dead all the Goths but two, hardly any of the Imperialists, and half
the Romans:  but the five Roman pigs who were left had lost their
bristles--bare to the skin, as the event proved.

After that Theodatus had no heart to fight, and ended his dog's life
by a dog's death, as we have seen.

Note also this, that there was a general feeling of coming ruin; that
there were quaint signs and omens.  We have heard of the pigs which
warned the Goths.  Here is another.  There was a Mosaic picture of
Theodoric at Naples; it had been crumbling to pieces at intervals,
and every fresh downfall had marked the death of an Amal.  Now the
last remains went down, to the very feet, and the Romans believed
that it foretold the end of the Amal dynasty.  There was a Sibylline
oracle too;


'Quintili mense Roma nihil Geticum metuet.'


Here, too, we find the last trace of heathenism, of that political
mythology which had so inextricably interwoven itself with the life
and history of the city.  The shrine of Janus was still standing, all
of bronze, only just large enough, Procopius says, to contain the
bronze image of Janus Bifrons.  The gates, during Christian
centuries, had never been opened, even in war time.  Now people went
by night, and tried to force them open:  but hardly succeeded.

Belisarius garrisoned Rome, and the Goths attacked it, but in vain.
You must read the story of that famous siege in the really brilliant
pages of old Procopius, the last good historian of the old world.

Moreover, and this is most important, Belisarius raised the native
population against the Goths.  As he had done in Africa, when in one
short campaign he utterly destroyed the now effeminate aristocracy of
the Vandals, so he did in Italy.  By real justice and kindness; by
proclaiming himself the deliverer of the conquered from the yoke of
foreign tyrants, he isolated the slave-holding aristocracy of the
Goths from the mass of the inhabitants of Italy.

Belisarius and the Goths met, and the Goths conquered.  But to take
Rome was beyond their power; and after that a long miserable war
struggled and wrangled up and down over the wretched land; city after
city was taken and destroyed, now by Roman, now by Goth.  The lands
lay waste, the people disappeared in tens of thousands.  All great
Dietrich's work of thirty years was trampled into mud.

There were horrible sieges and destructions by both parties;--sack of
Milan by Goths, sack of Rimini and the country round by Romans;
horrors of famine at Auximum; two women who kept an inn, killing and
eating seventeen men, till the eighteenth discovered the trap and
killed them.  Everywhere, as I say, good Dietrich's work of thirty
years trampled into gory mud.

Then Theudebert and his false Franks came down to see what they could
get; all (save a few knights round the king) on foot, without bow or
lance; but armed with sword, shield, and heavy short-handled double-
edged francisc, or battle-axe.  At the bridge over the Ticinus they
(nominal Catholics) sacrificed Gothic women and children with horrid
rites, fought alike Goths and Romans, lost a third of their army by
dysentery, and went home again.

At last, after more horrors, Vitigis and his Goths were driven into
Ravenna.  Justinian treated for peace; and then followed a strange
peripeteia, which we have, happily, from an eye-witness, Procopius
himself.  The Roman generals outside confessed their chance of
success hopeless.  The Goths inside, tired of the slow Vitigis, send
out to the great Belisarius, Will he be their king?  King over them
there in Italy?  He promised, meaning to break his promise; and to
the astonishment and delight of the Romans, the simple and honest
barbarians opened the gates of Ravenna, and let in him and his
Romans, to find themselves betrayed and enslaved.  'When I saw our
troops march in,' says Procopius, 'I felt it was God's doing, so to
turn their minds.  The Goths,' he says, 'were far superior in numbers
and in strength; and their women, who had fancied these Romans to be
mighty men of valour, spit in the faces of their huge husbands, and
pointing to the little Romans, reproached them with having
surrendered to such things as that.'  But the folly was committed.
Belisarius carried them away captive to Constantinople, and so ended
the first act of the Gothic war.

In the moment of victory the envy of the Byzantine court undid all
that it had done.  Belisarius returned with his captives to Rome, not
for a triumph, but for a disgrace; and Italy was left open to the
Goths, if they had men and heart to rise once more.

And they did rise.  Among the remnant of the race was left a hero,
Totila by name;--a Teuton of the ancient stamp.  Totilas, 'free from
death'--'the deathless one,' they say his name means.  Under him the
nation rose once more as out of the ground.

A Teuton of the ancient stamp he was, just and merciful exceedingly.
Take but two instances of him, and know the man by them.  He retook
Naples.  The Romans within were starving.  He fed them; but lest they
should die of the sudden repletion, he kept them in by guards at each
gate, and fed them up more and more each day, till it was safe to let
them out, to find food for themselves in the country.  A Roman came
to complain that a Goth had violated his daughter.  He shall die,
said Totila.  He shall not die, said the Goths.  He is a valiant
hero.  They came clamouring to the king.  He answered them quietly
and firmly.  They may choose to-day, whether to let this man go
unpunished, or to save the Gothic nation and win the victory.  Do
they not recollect how at the beginning of the war, they had brave
soldiers, famous generals, countless treasures, horses, weapons, and
all the forts of Italy?  And yet under Theodatus, a man who loved
gold better than justice, they had so angered God by their
unrighteous lives, that--what had happened they knew but too well.
Now God had seemed to have avenged himself on them enough.  He had
begun a new course with them.  They must begin a new course with him;
and justice was the only path.  As for the man's being a valiant
hero:  let them know that the unjust and the ravisher were never
brave in fight; but that according to a man's life, such was his luck
in battle.

His noble words came all but true.  The feeble generals who were
filling Belisarius's place were beaten one by one, and almost all
Italy was reconquered.  Belisarius had to be sent back again to
Italy:  but the envy, whether of Justinian himself, or of the two
wicked women who ruled his court, allowed him so small a force that
he could do nothing.

Totila and the Goths came down once more to Rome.  Belisarius in
agony sent for reinforcements, and got them; but too late.  He could
not relieve Rome.  The Goths had massed themselves round the city,
and Belisarius, having got to Ostia (Portus) at the Tiber's mouth,
could get no further.  This was the last woe; the actual death-agony
of ancient Rome.  The famine grew and grew.  The wretched Romans
cried to Bessas and his garrison, either to feed them or to kill them
out of their misery.  They would do neither.  They could hardly at
last feed themselves.  The Romans ate nettles off the ruins, and
worse things still.  There was not a dog or a rat left.  They even
killed themselves.  One father of five children could bear no longer
their cries for food.  He wrapped his head in his mantle, and sprang
into the Tiber, while the children looked on.  The survivors wandered
about like spectres, brown with hunger, and dropped dead with half-
chewed nettles between their lips.  To this, says Procopius, had
fortune brought the Roman senate and people.  Nay, not fortune, but
wickedness.  They had wished to play at being free, while they
themselves were the slaves of sin.

And still Belisarius was coming,--and still he did not come.  He was
forcing his way up the Tiber; he had broken Totila's chain, burnt a
tower full of Goths, and the city was on the point of being relieved,
when one Isaac made a fool of himself, and was taken by the Goths.
Belisarius fancied that Portus, his base of operations, with all his
supplies, and Antonia, the worthless wife on whom he doted, were
gone.  He lost his head, was beaten terribly, fell back on Ostia, and
then the end came.  Isaurians from within helped in Goths by night.
The Asinarian gate was opened, and Rome was in the hands of the
Goths.

And what was left?  What of all the pomp and glory, the spoils of the
world, the millions of inhabitants?

Five or six senators, who had taken refuge in St. Peter's, and some
five hundred of the plebs; Pope Pelagius crouching at Totila's feet,
and crying for mercy; and Rusticiana, daughter of Symmachus,
Boethius' widow, with other noble women, in slaves' rags, knocking
without shame at door after door to beg a bit of bread.  And that was
what was left of Rome.

Gentlemen, I make no comment.  I know no more awful page in the
history of Europe.  Through such facts as these God speaks.  Let man
be silent; and look on in fear and trembling, knowing that it was
written of old time--The wages of sin are death.

The Goths wanted to kill Rusticiana.  She had sent money to the Roman
generals; she had thrown down Dietrich's statues, in revenge for the
death of her father and her husband.  Totila would not let them touch
her.  Neither maid, wife, nor widow, says Procopius, was the worse
for any Goth.

Next day he called the heroes together.  He is going to tell them the
old tale, he says--How in Vitigis' time at Ravenna, 7000 Greeks had
conquered and robbed of kingdom and liberty 200,000 rich and well-
armed Goths.  And now that they were raw levies, few, naked,
wretched, they had conquered more than 20,000 of the enemy.  And why?
Because of old they had looked to everything rather than to justice;
they had sinned against each other and the Romans.  Therefore they
must choose, and be just men henceforth, and have God with them, or
unjust, and have God against them.

Then he sends for the wretched remnant of the senators and tells them
the plain truth:- How the great Dietrich and his successors had
heaped them with honour and wealth; and how they had returned his
benefits by bringing in the Greeks.  And what had they gained by
changing Dietrich for Justinian?  Logothetes, who forced them by
blows to pay up the money which they had already paid to their Gothic
rulers; and revenue exacted alike in war and in peace.  Slaves they
deserve to be; and slaves they shall be henceforth.

Then he sends to Justinian.  He shall withdraw his army from Italy,
and make peace with him.  He will be his ally and his son in arms, as
Dietrich had been to the Emperors before him, or if not, he will kill
the senate, destroy Rome, and march into Illyricum.

Justinian leaves it to Belisarius.

Then Totila begins to destroy Rome.  He batters down the walls, he is
ready to burn the town.  He will turn the evil place into a sheep-
pasture.  Belisarius flatters and cajoles him from his purpose, and
he marches away with all his captives, leaving not a living soul in
Rome.

But Totila shews himself a general unable to cope with that great
tactician.  He divides his forces, and allows Belisarius to start out
of Ostia and fortify himself in Rome.  The Goths are furious at his
rashness:  but it is too late, and the war begins again, up and down
the wretched land, till Belisarius is recalled by some fresh court
intrigue of his wicked wife, and another and even more terrible enemy
appears on the field, Narses the eunuch, avenging his wrong upon his
fellow-men by cunning and courage almost preternatural.  He comes
upon them with a mighty host:  but not of Romans alone.  He has
gathered the Teuton tribes;--Herules, the descendants probably of
Odoacer's confederates; Gepids, who have a long blood-feud against
the Goths; and most terrible of all, Alboin with his five thousand
more Burgundians, of whom you will hear enough hereafter.  We read
even of multitudes of Huns, and even of Persian deserters from the
Chosroo.  But Narses' policy is the old Roman one--Teuton must
destroy Teuton.  And it succeeds.

In spite of some trouble with the Franks, who are holding Venetia, he
marches down victorious through the wasted land, and Totila marches
to meet him in the Apennines.  The hero makes his last speech.  He
says, 'There will be no need to talk henceforth.  This day will end
the war.  They are not to fear these hired Huns, Herules, Lombards,
fighting for money.  Let them hold together like desperate men.'  So
they fight it out.  The Goths depending entirely on the lance, the
Romans on a due use of every kind of weapon.  The tremendous charge
of the Gothic knights is stopped by showers of Hun and Herule arrows,
and they roll back again and again in disorder on the foot:  but in
spite of the far superior numbers of the Romans, it is not till
nightfall that Narses orders a general advance of his line.  The
Goths try one last charge; but appalled by the numbers of the enemy,
break up, and, falling back on the foot, throw them into confusion,
and all is lost.

The foot are cut down flying.  The knights ride for their lives.
Totila and five horsemen are caught up by Asbad the Gepid chief.
Asbad puts his lance in rest, not knowing who was before him.  'Dog,'
cries Totila's page, 'wilt thou strike thy lord?'  But it is too
late.  Asbad's lance goes through his back, and he drops on his
horse's neck.  Scipwar (Shipward) the Goth wounds Asbad, and falls
wounded himself.  The rest carry off Totila.  He dies that night,
after reigning eleven stormy years.

The Goths flee across the Po.  There is one more struggle for life,
and one more hero left.  Teia by name, 'the slow one,' slow, but
strong.  He shall be king now.  They lift him on the shield, and
gather round him desperate, but determined to die hard.  He finds the
treasure of Totila, hid in Pisa.  He sends to Theudebald and his
Franks.  Will they help him against the Roman, and they shall have
the treasure; the last remnant of the Nibelungen hoard.  No.  The
Luegenfelden will not come.  They will stand by and see the butchery,
on the chance of getting all Italy for themselves.  Narses storms
Rome--or rather a little part of it round Hadrian's Mole, which the
Goths had fortified; and the Goths escape down into Campania, mad
with rage.

That victory of Narses, says Procopius, brought only a more dreadful
destruction on the Roman senate and people.  The Goths, as they go
down, murder every Roman they meet.  The day of grace which Totila
had given them is over.  The Teutons in Narses' army do much the
same.  What matter to Burgunds and Herules who was who, provided they
had any thing to be plundered of?  Totila has allowed many Roman
senators to live in Campania.  They hear that Narses has taken Rome,
they begin to flock to the ghastly ruin.  Perhaps there will be once
again a phantom senate, phantom consuls, under the Romani nominis
umbram.  The Goths catch them, and kill them to a man.  And there is
an end of the Senatus Populusque Romanus.

The end is near now.  And yet these terrible Goths cannot be killed
out of the way.  On the slopes of Vesuvius, by Nuceria, they fortify
a camp; and as long as they are masters of the neighbouring sea, for
two months they keep Narses at bay.  At last he brings up an
innumerable fleet, cuts off their supplies; and then the end comes.
The Goths will die like desperate men on foot.  They burst out of
camp, turn their horses loose, after the fashion of German knights--
One hears of the fashion again and again in the middle age,--and rush
upon the enemy in deep solid column.  The Romans have hardly time to
form some sort of line; and then not the real Romans, I presume, but
the Burgunds and Gepids, turn their horses loose like the Goths.
There is no need for tactics; the fight is hand to hand; every man,
says Procopius, rushing at the man nearest him.

For a third of the day Teia fights in front, sheltered by his long
pavisse, stabbing with a mighty lance at the mob which makes at him,
as dogs at a boar at bay.  Procopius is awed by the man.  Most
probably he saw him with his own eyes.  Second in valour, he says, to
none of the Heroes.

Again and again his shield is full of darts.  Without moving a foot,
without turning an inch right or left, says Procopius, he catches
another from his shield-bearer, and fights on.  At last he has twelve
lances in his shield, and cannot move it:  coolly he calls for a
fresh one, as if he were fixed to the soil, thrusts back the enemy
with his left hand, and stabs at them with his right.  But his time
is come.  As he shifts his shield for a moment his chest is exposed,
and a javelin is through him.  And so ends the last hero of the East
Goths.  They put his head upon a pole, and carry it round the lines
to frighten the Goths.  The Goths are long past frightening.

All day long, and all the next day, did the Germans fight on, Burgund
and Gepid against Goth, neither giving nor taking quarter, each man
dying where he stood, till human strength could bear up no longer,
while Narses sat by, like an ugly Troll as he was, smiling to see the
Teuton slay the Teuton, for the sake of their common enemy.  Then the
Goths sent down to Narses.  They were fighting against God.  They
would give in, and go their ways peaceably, and live with some other
Teuton nations after their own laws.  They had had enough of Italy,
poor fellows, and of the Nibelungen hoard.  Only Narses, that they
might buy food on the journey back, must let them have their money,
which he had taken in various towns of Italy.

Narses agreed.  There was no use fighting more with desperate men.
They should go in peace.  And he kept his faith with them.  Perhaps
he dared not break it.  He let them go, like a wounded lion crawling
away from the hunter, up through Italy, and over the Po, to vanish.
They and their name became absorbed in other nations, and history
knows the East Goths no more.

So perished, by their own sins, a noble nation; and in perishing,
destroyed utterly the Roman people.  After war and famine followed as
usual dreadful pestilence, and Italy lay waste for years.  Henceforth
the Italian population was not Roman, but a mixture of all races,
with a most powerful, but an entirely new type of character.  Rome
was no more Senatorial, but Papal.

And why did these Goths perish, in spite of all their valour and
patriotism, at the hands of mercenaries?

They were enervated, no doubt, as the Vandals had been in Africa, by
the luxurious southern climate, with its gardens, palaces, and wines.
But I have indicated a stronger reason already:- they perished
because they were a slave-holding aristocracy.

We must not blame them.  All men then held slaves:  but the original
sin was their ruin, though they knew it not.  It helped, doubtless,
to debauch them; to tempt them to the indulgence of those fierce and
greedy passions, which must, in the long run, lower the morality of
slaveholders; and which, as Totila told them, had drawn down on them
the anger of heaven.  But more; though they reformed their morals,
and that nobly, under the stern teaching of affliction, that could
not save them.  They were ruined by the inherent weakness of all
slaveholding states; the very weakness which had ruined, in past
years, the Roman Empire.  They had no middle class, who could keep up
their supplies, by exercising for them during war the arts of peace.
They had no lower class, whom they dare entrust with arms, and from
whom they might recruit their hosts.  They could not call a whole
population into the field, and when beaten in that field, carry on,
as Britain would when invaded, a guerilla warfare from wood to wood,
and hedge to hedge, as long as a coign of vantage-ground was left.
They found themselves a small army of gentlemen, chivalrous and
valiant, as slaveholders of our race have always been; but lessening
day by day from battle and disease, with no means of recruiting their
numbers; while below them and apart from them lay the great mass of
the population, helpless, unarmed, degraded, ready to side with any
or every one who would give them bread, or let them earn it for
themselves (for slaves must eat, even though their masters starve),
and careless of, if not even hostile to, their masters' interests,
the moment those masters were gone to the wars.

In such a case, nothing was before them, save certain defeat at last
by an enemy who could pour in ever fresh troops of mercenaries, and
who had the command of the seas.

I may seem to be describing the case of a modern and just as valiant
and noble a people.  I do not mention its name.  The parallel, I
fear, is too complete, not to have already suggested itself to you.



LECTURE VII--PAULUS DIACONUS



And now I come to the final settlement of Italy and the Lombard race;
and to do that well, I must introduce you to-day to an old
chronicler--a very valuable, and as far as we know, faithful writer--
Paul Warnefrid, alias Paul the Deacon.

I shall not trouble you with much commentary on him; but let him, as
much as possible, tell his own story.  He may not be always quite
accurate, but you will get no one more accurate.  In the long run,
you will know nothing about the matter, save what he tells you; so be
content with what you can get.  Let him shew you what sort of an
account of his nation, and the world in general, a Lombard gentleman
and clergyman could give, at the end of the 8th century.

You recollect the Lombards, of whom Tacitus says, 'Longobardos
paucitas nobilitat.'  Paulus Warnefrid was one of their descendants,
and his history carries out the exact truth of Tacitus' words.  He
too speaks of them as a very small tribe.  He could not foresee how
much the 'nobilitat' meant.  He knew his folk as a brave semi-feudal
race, who had conquered the greater part of Italy, and tilled and
ruled it well; who were now conquered by Charlemagne, and annexed to
the great Frank Empire, but without losing anything of their
distinctive national character.  He did not foresee that they would
become the architects, the merchants, the goldsmiths, the bankers,
the scientific agriculturists of all Europe.  We know it.  Whenever
in London or any other great city, you see a 'Lombard Street,' an old
street of goldsmiths and bankers--or the three golden balls of
Lombardy over a pawnbroker's shop--or in the country a field of rye-
grass, or a patch of lucerne--recollect this wise and noble people,
and thank the Lombards for what they have done for mankind.

Paulus is a garrulous historian, but a valuable one, just because he
is garrulous.  Though he turned monk and deacon in middle life, he
has not sunk the man in the monk, and become a cosmopolite, like most
Roman ecclesiastics, who have no love or hate for human beings save
as they are friends or enemies of the pope, or their own abbey.  He
has retained enough of the Lombard gentleman to be proud of his
family, his country, and the old legends of his race, which he tells,
half-ashamed, but with evident enjoyment.

He was born at beautiful Friuli, with the jagged snow-line of the
Alps behind him, and before him the sun and the sea, and the plains
of Po; he was a courtier as a boy in Desiderius' court at Pavia, and
then, when Charlemagne destroyed the Lombard monarchy, seems to have
been much with the great king at Aix.  He certainly ended his life as
a Benedictine monk, at Monte Casino, about 799; having written a Life
of St. Gregory; Homilies long and many; the Appendix to Eutropius
(the Historia Miscella, as it is usually called) up to Justinian's
time; and above all, this history of the Lombards, his forefathers,
which I shall take as my text.

To me, and I believe to the great German antiquaries, his history
seems a model history of a nation.  You watch the people and their
story rise before you out of fable into fact; out of the dreary
darkness of the unknown north, into the clear light of civilized
Roman history.

The first chapter is 'Of Germany, how it nourishes much people, and
therefore many nations go forth of it.'  The reason which he gives
for the immense population is significant.  The further to the north,
and the colder, the more healthy he considers the world to be, and
more fit for breeding human beings; whereas the south, being nearer
to the heat of the sun, always abounds with diseases.  The fact
really is, I presume, that Italy (all the south which he knew), and
perhaps most of the once Roman empire, were during the 6th and 7th
centuries pestilential.  Ruined cities, stopt watercourses,
cultivated land falling back into marsh and desert, a soil too often
saturated with human corpses--offered all the elements for
pestilence.  If the once populous Campagna of Rome be now
uninhabitable from malaria, what must it have been in Paul
Warnefrid's time?

Be that as it may, this is his theory.

Then he tells us how his people were at first called Winils; and how
they came out of Scania Insula.  Sweden is often, naturally, an
island with the early chroniclers; only the south was known to them.
The north was magical, unknown, Quenland, the dwelling-place of
Yotuns, Elves, Trolls, Scratlings, and all other uncanny
inhumanities.  The Winils find that they are growing too many for
Scanland, and they divide into three parties.  Two shall stay behind,
and the third go out to seek their fortunes.  Which shall go is to be
decided by lot.  The third on whom the lot falls choose as war-kings,
two brothers, Ayo and Ibor, and with them their mother, Gambara, the
Alruna-wife, prudent and wise exceedingly--and they go forth.

But before Paul can go too, he has a thing or two to say, which he
must not forget, about the wild mysterious north from which his
forefathers came.  First how, in those very extreme parts of Germany,
in a cave on the ocean shore, lie the seven sleepers.  How they got
thither from Ephesus, I cannot tell, still less how they should be at
once there on the Baltic shore, and at Ephesus--as Mohammed himself
believed, and Edward the Confessor taught--and at Marmoutier by
Tours, and probably elsewhere beside.  Be that as it may, there they
are, the seven martyrs, sleeping for ever in their Roman dresses,
which some wild fellow tried to pull off once, an