at don't laik de idea ob us goin'
dere arter dere diamonds," volunteered the colored man.

"Perhaps," admitted Jack, with a smile. "But certainly some one has
been around here who had no business to be, and we must find out who it
was. Better take a look around, Wash."

"I'll help him," said Andy, and, with his rifle in readiness for any
intruders, the old hunter followed the colored man outside the big
shed.

Meanwhile Professor Roumann and Mr. Henderson were carefully examining
the exploded motor.

"I should have looked at the breech plug before turning on the power,"
said the German, "but I had no reason to suspect that anything was
wrong." He went on to explain that the explosion was something like
that which occurs when the breech-block of a big navy gun is not
properly in place. The force of the Cardite, instead of being directed
against the piston-heads of the motor, shot out backward, and almost
into the face of the professor, who was operating the machine.

"But what could be their object?" asked Mark. "Who would want to injure
us, or damage the projectile?"

"Some enemy, of course," declared Jack. "But who? The crazy machinist
is out of it, and as for that man who sent the note to you, he seemed
too big a coward to attempt anything like this."

"Some one evidently sneaked in here and loosened the breech-plug," went
on Mark, "and it was evidently done with the idea of delaying us. The
enemy could not have desired to utterly disable the projectile, or else
he would have tampered with the large motor, instead of the small one."

"Yes, the object seems to have been to delay us," admitted Professor
Henderson; "yet, I can't understand why. Whoever did it evidently knows
something about machinery."

"I hope they did not discover the secret of my Cardite motor," said
Professor Roumann quickly.

"They hardly had time," declared Mark. "We have been in or around the
projectile nearly every minute of the day, and whoever it was, must
have watched his chance, slipped in, stayed a few seconds, and then
slipped out again."

They went carefully over the entire projectile, but could find no
further damage done. Nor were there any traces of the person who had so
nearly caused a tragedy. Washington and Andy, after a careful search
outside the shed, had to admit that they had no clews.

"Well, the only thing to do is to go to work and build a new small
motor," announced Professor Roumann, after once more looking over the
_debris_ of the one that had exploded.

"Will it take long?" asked Jack.

"About two weeks. Fortunately, I can use some of the parts of this one,
or we would be delayed longer."

"Still two weeks is quite a while," suggested Mark. "Perhaps there'll
be no diamonds left on the moon when we get there, Jack," and he smiled
jokingly.

"Oh, I fancy there will. The article in the paper from Mars says there
was a whole field of them."

"This brings up another matter," said Professor Henderson. "What will
happen if we bring back bushels and bushels of diamonds?--which, in
view of what the paper says, may be possible. We will swamp the market,
and the value of diamonds will drop."

"Then we must not throw them upon the market," decided Professor
Roumann. "The scarcity of an article determines its value. If we do
find plenty of diamonds, it will give me a chance to conduct some
experiments I have long postponed because of a lack of the precious
stones. We can use them for laboratory purposes, and need not sell
them. In fact, with the Cardite we brought back from Mars, we have no
lack of money, so we really do not need the diamonds."

It was decided, in view of the shock and upset caused by the explosion,
that no further work would be done that day, and so, after carefully
locking the shed, and posting Andy on guard with his gun, the boys and
the professor went into the house to discuss matters, and plan for work
the next day.

"Mark," said Jack in a low voice, as they followed the two scientists,
"I think it's up to us to try to find that mysterious man who sent the
note. I think he did this mean trick!"

"So do I, and we'll have a hunt for him. Let's go now."




CHAPTER VI

ON THE TRACK


The two boys gazed after Professors Henderson and Roumann. The
scientists were deep in a discussion of various technical matters,
which discussion, it was evident, made them oblivious to everything
else.

"Shall we ask them?" inquired Jack in a whisper.

"No; what's the use?" queried Mark. "Let's go off by ourselves, and
perhaps we can discover something. If we could once get on the trail of
the man who wrote the note, I think we could put our hands on the
person responsible for the blowing up of the motor."

"I agree with you. We won't bother them about our plans," and he waved
his hand toward the scientists, who had, by this time, entered the
house.

"In the first place," said Mark, as he and his chum turned from the
yard, and walked along a quiet country road, "I think our best plan
will be to find Dick Johnson, and ask him just where it was he met the
man who gave him a quarter to bring the note to me."

"What for?" asked Jack.

"Why, then, we can tell where to start from. Perhaps Dick can give us a
description of the man, or tell from what direction he came. Then we'll
know how to begin on the trail."

"That's a good idea, I guess. We know where he disappeared to, or,
rather, in nearly what direction, so that will help some."

"Sure. Well, then, let's find Dick."

To the inquiries of the two lads from the projectile, Dick Johnson
replied that, as he had asserted once before, that the man was a
stranger to him.

"He was tall, and had a big black mustache," Dick described, "but he
kept his hat pulled down over his eyes, so I couldn't see his face very
well. Anyhow, it was dark when I met him."

"Where did you meet him?" asked Mark.

"Not far from your house. He was standing on the corner, where you turn
down to go to the woollen mill, and, as I passed him, he asked me if I
wanted to earn a quarter."

"Of course you said you did," suggested Jack.

"Sure," replied Dick. "Then he gave me the note, and told me where to
take it, and I did. That wasn't wrong, was it?"

"No; only there seems to be something queer about the man, and we want
to find out what it is," replied Mark.

"What was the man doing when you saw him?" asked Jack.

"Standing, and sort of looking toward your house."

"Looking toward our house?" repeated Jack. "Was he anywhere near the
big shed where we build the machines?"

"Well, I couldn't say. Maybe he might have been."

"I guess that's all you can tell us," put in Mark, with a glance at his
chum, to warn him not to go too much into details with Dick, for they
did not want it known that some enemy had tried to wreck the
projectile.

"Yes, I can't tell you any more," admitted the small lad.

"Well, here's a quarter for what you did tell us," said Jack, "and if
you see that man again, and he gives you a note for us, just keep your
eye on him, watch where he goes, and tell us. Then you will get a half-
dollar."

"Gee! I'll be on the watch," promised Dick, his eyes shining at the
prospect of so much money.

"Come on," suggested Jack to his chum, after the small chap had
departed. "Let's go down by the white bridge and make some inquiries of
people living in that vicinity. They may have seen a stranger hanging
around, and, perhaps we can get on his trail that way."

"All right," agreed Mark, and they walked on together.

They had gone quite a distance away from the bridge, and had made
several inquiries, but had met with no success, and they were about to
give up and go back home.

"I know one person we haven't inquired of yet," said Mark, as they
tramped along.

"Who's that?"

"Old Bascomb, who lives alone in a shack on the edge of the creek. You
know the old codger who traps muskrats."

"Oh, sure; but I don't believe he'd know anything. If he did, he's so
cranky he wouldn't tell you."

"Maybe he would, if we gave him a little money for some smoking
tobacco. It's worth trying, anyhow. Bascomb goes around a great deal,
and he may have met a strange man in his travels."

"Well, go ahead; we'll ask him."

The muskrat trapper did not prove to be in a very pleasant frame of
mind, but, after Mark had given him a quarter, Bascomb consented to
answer a few questions. The boys told him about looking for a strange
man, describing him as best they could, though they did not tell why
they wanted to find him.

"Wa'al, now, I shouldn't be surprised but what I know the very fellow
you want," said the trapper. "I met him a couple of days back, an' I
think he's still hanging around. Fust I thought he was after some of my
traps, but when I found he wa'ant, I didn't pay no more attention to
him. He looked jest like you say."

"Where was he?" asked Jack eagerly.

"Walkin' along the creek, sort of absent-minded like."

"You don't know where he lives, or whether he is staying in this
vicinity, do you?" inquired Mark.

"Ya'as, I think I do," replied the trapper.

"Where?" cried Jack eagerly.

"Wa'al, you know the old Preakness homestead, down by the bend of the
creek, about four mile below here?"

"Sure we know it," answered Mark. "We used to go in swimming not far
from there."

"Wa'al, the old house has been deserted now for quite a spell," went on
the trapper, "and there ain't nobody lived in it but tramps. But the
other night, when I was comin' past, with a lot of rats I'd jest taken
out of my traps, I see a light in the old house. Thinks I, to myself,
that there's more tramps snoozin' in there, and I didn't reckon it was
none of my business, so I kept on. But jest as I was walking past the
main gate, some one come out of the house and hurried away. I had a
good look at him, an'----"

"Who was it?" asked Mark impatiently, for the old trapper was a slow
talker.

"It was the same man you're lookin' for," declared Bascomb. "I'm sure
of it, an' he's hangin' out in the old Preakness house. If you want t'
see him, why don't you go there?"

"We will!" cried Jack. "Come on, Mark. I think we're on the trail at
last."




CHAPTER VII

MARK IS CAPTURED


Eagerly the boys hurried forward, intent on making the best time
possible to the old Preakness homestead, which was a landmark for miles
around, and which, in its day, had been a handsome house and estate.
Now it was fallen into ruins, for there was a dispute among the heirs,
and the property was in the Chancery Court.

"Do you think we'll find him there?" asked Mark, as they made their way
along the dusty highway. "Hard to tell. Yet, if he's hanging out in
this neighborhood, that would be as good a place as any, for him to
hide in."

"I wonder who he can be, anyhow? And how he knows me?"

"Give it up. Evidently he isn't a tramp, though he stays in a place
where there are plenty of the Knights of the Road."

The boys increased their pace, and were soon on the main road leading
to the Preakness house, and about a mile away from it. "We'll soon be
there now," remarked Jack. "Then we'll see if we can find that man."

As he spoke, the lad put his hand in his pocket, and, a moment later,
he uttered a startled cry.

"What's the matter?" asked Mark, in some alarm.

"Matter? Why, gee whiz! If I haven't forgotten to send that telegram
Professor Henderson gave me! It's to order some special tools to take
along on our trip to the moon. They didn't come, and the professor
wrote out a message urging the factory to hurry the shipment. He gave
it to me to send, just before the accident to the motor, but when that
happened it knocked it out of my mind, I guess. I stuck the telegram in
my pocket, and here it is yet," and Jack drew forth a crumpled paper.
"Wouldn't that make you tired?" he asked. "It's important, and ought to
go at once. The professor won't like it."

"I'll tell you what to do," suggested Mark, after a moment's thought.
"The telegraph office isn't so far away from here. You can cut across
lots, and be there in fifteen or twenty minutes. Tell 'em to rush the
message, and it may be in time yet. Anyhow, we're going to be delayed
because of the accident to the motor, so it won't make so much
difference. But come on, let's start, and we can hurry back."

"I guess that's the best plan," remarked Jack dubiously, for he did not
fancy a half-hour's tramp across the fields and back again. Then, as he
thought of something else, he called out:

"Say, Mark, there's no use of both of us going to the telegraph office.
I'll go alone, as it's my fault, and you can stay here, and watch to
see if that strange man appears on the scene. I'll not be long, and you
can wait for me here."

"How would it be if I went on a little nearer to the Preakness house?"
asked Mark. "I can meet you there just as well as here, and something
may develop."

"Good idea! You go on, and when I come back, I'll take the road that
leads through the old slate quarry, and save some time that way. I'll
meet you right near the old barn that stands on the Gilbert property,
just before you reach the Preakness grounds."

"All right; I'll be there, but don't run your legs off. We're out for
all day, and there isn't anything that needs to be done at home, or
around the projectile, so take your time."

"Oh, I'll not go to sleep," declared Jack. "I want to see if we can't
solve the mystery of the man who writes such queer notes."

Jack started off across the fields at a swift pace, while Mark strolled
on down the road, in the direction of the old Preakness house. He was
thinking of many things, chiefly of the wonderful journey that lay
before them, and he was wondering what the moon would look like when
they got to it.

That it would be a wild, desolate place, he had no doubt, for the
evidences of the telescopes of astronomers pointed that way, and, as is
well known, the most powerful instruments can now bring the moon to
within an apparent distance of one hundred miles of the earth. This is
true of the Lick telescope, which has a magnifying power of 2,500 and
an object lens a yard across.

But, with this powerful telescope, it has been impossible to
distinguish any such objects as forests, cities, or any evidences of
life on the moon--that is, on the side that has always been turned
toward us.

Almost unconsciously, Mark went on faster than he intended, and, before
he knew it, he had arrived at the barn where he had promised to wait
for his chum. Mark looked at his watch, and found that he would still
have some time to linger before he could expect Jack to return. He sat
down on a stone beside the fence, and looked about him. The day was
warm for fall, and the last of the crickets were chirping away, while,
in distant fields, men could be seen husking corn, or drawing in loads
of yellow pumpkins.

"I wonder if we'll have pumpkin pie on the moon," thought Mark.
"Though, of course, we won't. I guess all we'll have to eat will be
what Washington takes along in the projectile--that is, unless we find
people on the other side of the place."

He sat on the stone for some minutes longer, and then, tiring of the
inactivity, he arose and strolled about. Something seemed to draw him
in the direction of the old house, which he knew was just around the
bend in the road.

"I guess there wouldn't be any harm in my going along and taking a peep
at it," mused the lad. "It will be some time before Jack returns, and I
may be able to catch a glimpse of our man. I think I'll go up where I
can see the place, and I can come back in time to meet Jack. I'll do
it. Maybe the fellow might escape while I'm waiting."

Mark thus tried to justify himself for his action in not keeping to his
agreement with his chum. Of course it was not an important matter, Mark
thought, though the results of his simple action were destined to be
more far-reaching than he imagined. He thought he would be back in time
to meet Jack, and so he strolled on, going more cautiously now, for, in
a few minutes he would come in sight of the old, deserted house, and he
did not know what he might find there.

Mark's first sight of the Preakness homestead was of two old stone
posts, that had once formed a fine gateway. The posts were in ruins,
now, and half fallen down, being covered with Virginia creeper, the
leaves of which were now a vivid red, mingled with green.

"Nothing very alarming there," said Mark, half aloud. He could just
catch a glimpse of the roof of the house over the tops of the trees,
which had not yet shed all their leaves. "Guess I'll go on a little
farther. Maybe our friend, the enemy, is sitting on the front porch,
sunning himself."

Past the old gateway Mark continued, intending to proceed along the
highway until he got directly in front of the old mansion. There, he
knew, he would have a good view, unobstructed by trees or shrubbery.

When the lad got to this place in the road, he paused, and stooped
over, as if tying the lace of his shoe, for it was his intention to
pass himself off, if possible, as a casual passer-by, so that in case
the mysterious man should be in the house, his suspicions would not be
aroused by seeing the youth to whom he had written the note staring in
at him.

And, while he was apparently fussing with his shoe, Mark was narrowly
eying the old house.

"Not a very inviting place," thought Mark. "I don't see why any man who
could afford anything better, would stay there--unless he has some
strong motive for lingering in this section. And that's probably what
this fellow has, and I'd like to discover it. Well, I don't see any
signs of him, so I guess I might as well go back, and wait for Jack.
He'll be along soon."

He stood up, took a good look at the house, and was about to retrace
his steps down the highway, when he saw the sagging front door of the
old mansion slowly open. It creaked on the rusty hinges, and Mark
stared with all his might as he saw a man emerge, a man who did not
look like a tramp, for his clothes were of good material and cut, and
fit him well. Nor did he wear a stubbly growth of beard, but, on the
contrary, his face was clean shaven. The man was about Mark's size,
perhaps a little taller, and nearly as stout. He stood on the sagging
porch, and gazed off toward the road.

"Well, if that's the man Dick Johnson got the note from he's changed
mightily in appearance," thought Mark, as he looked at the fellow. "He
isn't very tall, and he hasn't any black mustache. But of course he may
have shaved that off, and I suppose in the dark, and when one is in a
hurry to earn a quarter, it's hard to say whether a man is tall or
short. I wonder if this can be the person we're looking for?"

Mark hardly knew what to do. He stood in the road, undecided, and
fairly stared at the man, who had left the porch, and was walking down
the weed-grown path. He was looking straight at Mark, but if the
stranger was the person who had written the note, and if he recognized
the lad, he gave no sign to that effect.

"Good afternoon," said the man, as he paused at the gap in the front
wall, where once a gate had been. "Pleasant day, isn't it."

"Ye--yes," stammered Mark, wondering what to say next.

"Live around here?" went on the man.

"Not very far off."

"Ah, then you know this old shack?"

"Well, I don't get over here, very often. Do you live here?" ventured
Mark boldly, determining to do some questioning on his own account.

"Me live here?" cried the man, as if indignant "Well, hardly! I was
just passing, and, happening to see the old place, and having a
fondness for antiques, I stepped in. But it is in bad shape. I should
say tramps make it their hangout."

"It has that name," said Mark.

There was a pause for a moment, and the lad was a trifle embarrassed.
The man was gazing boldly at him.

"I guess I've made a mistake," thought Mark. "This can't be the man we
want. He doesn't live here, and he doesn't look like him. I'd better be
getting back to meet Jack."

"Are you engaged at anything in particular?" questioned the man taking
a few steps nearer the youth.

"No, I'm not working, but I expect to take a trip, shortly, with some
friends of mine," answered Mark.

"Ah, is that so?" and there was polite inquiry in the man's voice. "Are
you going far?"

"Quite a distance." Mark wondered what the man would say if he told him
he was going to the moon.

"I wonder if you would do me a favor?" went on the man. "As I was
passing through this old house I saw, on one of the outer doors, an
old-fashioned knocker. I am a collector of antiques, and I would very
much like to have that. But I need help in getting it off. I do not
intend to steal it, but if it is left here some tramp may destroy it,
and that would be too bad. I intend to remove it, and then hunt up the
owners of this place, and purchase it from them."

"It will be hard to discover who are the owners," replied Mark, "as the
title is in dispute."

"So much the better for me. Will you help me remove the knocker? I will
pay you for your time."

Mark hesitated. He did not like the man's manner, and there was a
shifty, uneasy look about his eyes. Still he might be all right. But
Mark did not like the idea of going into the old house with him alone.
It might be safe, and, again, it might not. But the knocker was on an
outside door. There could be no harm in helping him, as long as it was
outside. The man saw the hesitation in the lad's manner.

"It will not take us long," the stranger said. "I want you to help me
pry off the knocker, as I have no screw-driver to remove it. I will pay
you well."

As he spoke he came nearer to Mark, and the lad noticed that the man's
right hand was held behind his back. This struck Mark as rather
suspicious. Suddenly he became aware of a peculiar odor in the air--a
sweet, sickish odor. He started back in alarm, all his former
suspicions aroused. The man seemed to leap toward him.

"Look out!" suddenly cried the fellow. "Look behind you!"

Involuntarily Mark turned. He saw nothing alarming. The next instant he
felt himself grasped in the strong arms of the man, and a cloth that
smelled strongly of the strange, sweetly sickish odor was pressed over
the lad's face.

"Here! Stop! Let me go! Help! Help!" cried Mark. Then his voice died
out. He felt weak and sick, and sank back, an inert mass in the man's
arms.

"I guess I've got you this time," whispered the fellow, as he gazed
down on Mark's white face. "I'll put you where you won't get away,
either," and, picking up the youth, he carried him a prisoner into the
deserted house.




CHAPTER VIII

JACK IS PUZZLED


Whistling merrily, with his mind as much on the big field of diamonds
he expected to discover on the moon, as it was on anything else, Jack
Darrow crossed over the meadows toward the telegraph office.

"By Jinks! It certainly will be great to fly through space once more,"
he mused. "Of course it isn't much of a trip, only a quarter of a
million miles at most, but it will be a little outing for us, and then
those diamonds!"

A trip of a quarter of a million miles only a little outing! But then
what can be expected of lads who had gone to Mars and back again?

Jack lost no time in reaching the telegraph office, where he left the
message to be sent, urging the operator to "rush" it, which that
official promised to do.

"'Twon't be no great hardship on me, neither," he said with a cheerful
grin, "seein' as how this is the only one I've had to send to-day. I'll
get it right off for you, Jack."

Jack meant to hurry back, but, just as he was turning out of the main
village street, to cut across lots, and join Mark at the place agreed
upon, Jack saw two dogs fighting. It was with the best intentions in
the world that he ran toward them, for he wanted to separate them.
However a man was ahead of him, and soon had the two beasts apart. But
Jack lingered several moments to see if there would be a renewal of the
hostilities. There wasn't, and he hurried on. In a short time he was
within sight of the barn, where his chum had agreed to meet him.

"Mark!" cried Jack, when he came within hailing distance.

There was no response.

"Maybe he's hiding to fool me," thought the lad, "I'll give him another
call."

Neither was there a reply to this shout, and Jack, with a vague feeling
of fear in his heart, hurried forward, climbed the fence that separated
the field from the highway, and fairly ran toward the barn.

A glance sufficed to show that Mark was not in sight, and, thinking
that his chum might be on the other side, Jack went around the
structure.

"Oh, you Mark!" he called. "I'm back! Let's get a move on and go to the
old house."

Silence was the only answer.

"That's queer," murmured Jack, when he had made a circuit of the place,
and had seen no sight of his friend. "I wonder if anything could have
happened to him? Perhaps he went inside, and has fallen down the hay
mow. I'll take a look."

He made a thorough inspection of the ramshackle old structure, but
there was no evidence that Mark had entered it, and Jack was soon quite
assured that no harm had befallen his friend in there. Then a sudden
thought came to him.

"Why, of course!" he exclaimed aloud. "I should have thought of that
before. Mark got tired of waiting, and went on to the Preakness house.
I might have known. I'll go on and catch up to him there."

Jack had reasoned correctly, but he could not know, what had taken
place with only the old, grim, deserted mansion for a witness. With a
lighter heart he set off down the road.

It did not take him long, at the pace he kept up, to come within sight
of the old gateway, with the creeper twining over the pillars. Then he
caught a glimpse of the house, and he at once slackened his footsteps.

"No use rushing into this thing," he reasoned in a whisper. "Mark may
be in hiding, taking an observation of the mysterious man, and I don't
want to spoil it, by butting in. Guess I'll lie low for a while, and
see what develops."

Crouching down beside some bushes that lined the roadway Jack looked
toward the silent, tumbled-down house and waited. All was still.
Occasionally a shutter flapped in the wind, the hinges creaking
dismally, or some of the loose window-panes rattled as the sash was
blown to and fro. It was not a pleasant aspect, and as the afternoon
was waning, and the sun was going down, while a cool wind sprang up,
Jack was anything but comfortable in his place of observation.

And the one objection to it was that there was nothing to observe. Not
a sign of life was to be seen about the place, and the broken windows,
like so many unblinking eyes, stared out on the fields and road.

"Oh pshaw!" exclaimed Jack at length, "I'm not going to sit here this
way! I'm going up and take a look. It can't bite me, and if that man's
in there I can give him some sort of a talk that will make it look all
right. I'm going closer. Maybe Mark's inside there, waiting for me,
though it's queer why he didn't keep his agreement and wait for me at
the barn. Well, here goes."

Though he spoke bravely, it was not without a little feeling of
apprehension that Jack started toward the old mansion. He kept a close
watch for the advent of any person or persons who might be in the
house, but, when he reached the front porch, and had seen no one, he
felt more at ease.

"Hello, Mark!" he cried boldly. "Are you inside?"

He paused for an answer. None came.

"This is getting rather strange," murmured Jack, who was now quite
puzzled as to what to make of the whole matter. "Mark must be here, yet
why doesn't he answer me? Oh, you Mark!" he shouted at the top of his
voice.

There was only silence, and, after waiting a few moments Jack made up
his mind that the best plan would be to enter the house and look
around.

He made a hasty search through the lower rooms, but saw no sign of
Mark. It was the same upstairs, and on the third floor there was no
evidence of his chum. Jack called again, but got no reply.

"The garret next, and then the cellar," he told himself, and these two
places, darker and more dismal than any other parts of the old mansion,
were soon explored.

"Well, if Mark came here he's not here now," thought Jack, "and there's
no use in my staying any longer. Maybe something happened that he had
to go back home. Perhaps he's trailing the man. We should have made up
some plan to be followed in case anything like that happened."

Deciding that the best thing he could do would be to go back home Jack
came out of the old house. As he did so he gave a final call:

"Mark! Oh, you Mark! Are you anywhere about?"

What was that? Was it an answer, or merely the echo of his own voice?
Jack started, and then, as he heard another sound, he said:

"Only the wind squeaking a shutter. Mark isn't here."

If Jack had only known!

Through the quickly-gathering darkness Jack turned his steps toward
home. On the way along the country road he kept a sharp lookout for any
sign of his chum, and, also, he looked to see if he could catch a
glimpse of any person who might answer the description of the man they
suspected of tampering with the Cardite motor.

But the road was deserted, save for an occasional farmer urging his
horses along, that be might the more quickly get home to supper.

"It's mighty strange," mused Jack, as he kept on. "I don't think Mark
did just right, and yet, perhaps, when it's all explained, he may have
good reasons for what he did. Maybe I'm wrong to worry about him, and,
just as likely as not, he's safe home, wondering what kept me. But he
might have known that I'd come back to the barn where I said I'd meet
him. Of course that dog-fight delayed me a little, but not much."

It was quite dark when Jack reached the house where he and his chum
lived with the two professors. There was a cheerful light glowing from
many windows, and Jack also noticed an illumination in the shed where
the projectile was housed.

"Guess they're working on it, to get it in shape for the trip, sooner
than they expected," he mused.

Jack was met at the door by Washington White.

"Hello, Wash!" greeted the lad.

"Good land a' massy! Where hab yo' been transmigatorying yo'se'f during
de period when the conglomeration of carbohydrates and protoids hab
been projected on to de interplanetary plane ob de rectangle?"

"Do you mean where have I been while supper was getting ready?" asked
Jack.

"Dat's 'zackly what I means, Massa Jack."

"Then why don't you say it?"

"I done did. Dat's what I done. Supper's cold. But where am Massa
Mark?"

"What! Isn't Mark home?" cried Jack, starting back in alarm.

"No, Massa Jack, we ain't seed him sence yo' two went off togedder.
Where yo' all been?"

"Mark not home!" gasped Mark. "Where is Professor Henderson, Wash? I
must speak to him at once."

"He am out in de shed wif Massa Roumann."

With fear in his heart Jack dashed out toward the big shed.

"Ain't yo' goin' t' hab some supper?" called Washington.

"I don't want any supper--yet," flung back Jack over his shoulder.




CHAPTER IX

A DARING PLOT


Mark Sampson lay an inert mass in the arms of the man who had attacked
him. Through the sagging door of the old, deserted house the captive
lad was carried, and up creaking stairs.

"I guess no one saw me," whispered the man. "I'm safe, so far, and I
can work my scheme to perfection. Everything turned out well for me. I
was just wondering how I could get this youth in my power, and he
fairly walked into my hands! Now to keep him safe until I can take his
place in the projectile, and have my revenge. I have waited a long time
for it, but it has come at last!"

Pausing at the head of the creaking stairs the man looked behind him,
to make sure that he was not being followed, but not a sound broke the
stillness of the old house, save the rattle and bang of the ruined
shutters.

"I'm safe! Safe!" exulted the man, with a cruel chuckle. "Now to bind
him, and hide him in the secret chamber."

He laid Mark down on a pile of bagging in a corner of a room at the
head of the stairs. Then, still glancing behind him, as if fearful of
being observed, the man walked over to a mantlepiece, fumbled about a
bit of carving that adorned the centre, and pressed on a certain spot.
A moment later the mantle seemed to swing out, and there was revealed a
secret room, the existence of which would never have been suspected by
the casual observer.

Taking some of the bags from the pile where the unconscious lad was,
the man made a rude bed in the secret room. Then he carried Mark in,
and placed him in a fairly comfortable position, first taking the
precaution, however, of binding his hands and feet.

"There," whispered the man, when he had finished, "I guess you'll not
get away in a hurry. Now I'll wait until dark, and then I'll give you
something to eat, for I don't want you to starve. But I must keep in
hiding, for, very likely, there'll be a search made for him. Guess I'd
better stay here, and see what happens," and the mysterious man pressed
the spring that sent the mantle back into place again, hiding all
traces of the secret room.

"It's a good thing I stumbled upon this hiding place," he said to
himself. "It couldn't be better for what I want. Now to see what
happens next."

He did not have long to wait, for in a short time Jack, as we have
seen, appeared on the scene, and began his search. At the sound of his
voice, calling for Mark, the man started in his hiding place, and
glanced uneasily at Mark.

"He may hear, and wake up," he whispered.

Jack came upstairs in the deserted house, and continued his search
there, calling from time to time. He gave one loud shout at the head of
the stairs, and the very thing that the man feared would happen came to
pass.

The effect of the drug having worn off, Mark stirred uneasily, and
started up. He heard Jack's cry, and uttered a half-articulate answer.
In an instant the man was at his side, and had quickly gagged him. This
had the further effect of awakening the unfortunate lad; and he
struggled to loosen his bonds, but they were too strongly tied. He
endeavored to answer Jack, but only a meaningless mumble resulted, for
the gag was effective.

"All you have to do is to keep quiet," urged the man, as he knelt
beside Mark in the darkness. "As soon as your chum goes, I'll take that
thing out of your mouth, and give you something to eat."

Jack's voice died away, and presently, as the ears of the man told him,
the boy left the old house. Waiting some time, to make sure that he
would not return, the man removed the knot of rags from Mark's mouth,
and slightly loosened his bonds, first warning him, however, that if he
attempted to escape he would be harshly dealt with.

"But what right have you to keep me here?" demanded the youth. "Who are
you, and what have I done to you, that you should treat me this way?
Are you crazy? Don't you know that you are liable to arrest for this?"

"No one can arrest me," boasted the fellow.

"But why have you made me a prisoner?" demanded Mark.

"For reasons of my own. You'll see very soon."

"But what have I done to you?" persisted the lad. "I never saw you
before, that I know of, unless you are the man who sent me the note,
and who ran when my chum and I came to the bridge to meet you."

"I'm the man," was the answer, with a chuckle.

"Then you must be the one who tried to wreck our projectile," went on
Mark.

"Yes, I did that, and now I am sorry for it, for I have thought of a
much better scheme for getting even, and having my revenge on you."

"But why do you want to be revenged on us?"

"Because of what you have done!" and the man's voice took on an ugly
tone.

"But what did we do?" begged Mark.

"You'll know soon enough," was the answer, with a cunning laugh, and
then Mark was sure he had to deal with a lunatic. He ceased his
struggles to loosen the bonds, and resolved to meet cunning with
cunning. He would bide his time.

"Will you promise to be quiet, and not kick up a fuss if I get you
something to eat?" asked the man.

"Yes; but I'd rather have a drink of water first. I feel sick."

"Very well, you shall have some water. I'll have to go out and get it,
but I must first blindfold you, so that you will not discover the
secret of this room."

Mark could not help himself, for he was bound, and when the man had
tied a handkerchief over his eyes, Mark heard his captor moving about.

Next there came a sound as of some heavy body, or object, being pushed
across the room. Mark felt a draught of wind on his face, but it ceased
instantly, and he knew that he was alone. He tried to work the bandage
from over his eyes, and he endeavored to loosen his bonds, for he did
not consider that this violated his promise. But it was of no effect.

Presently he heard the moving, shoving sound again, and once more felt
the wind on his face. Then he heard the voice of his captor speaking.

"Here is food and drink. I'm going to untie your hands so you can eat,
but mind, no fighting, for I'm a desperate man, and I won't stand any
nonsense!"

He fumbled about the bonds, and soon Mark was free to stand up and use
his hands. The bandage was taken from his eyes, and he was able to peer
about his prison by the light of a candle which his captor had brought.

Mark's first glance was at the man. He was the same one who had emerged
from the house to attack and drug him, but as for recognizing in him
the person who had been at the bridge, this was impossible. As far as
Mark could tell he had never seen the man before, nor did he answer the
description given by Dick Johnson.

There was little danger that Mark would attempt violence. He was too
weak, and his jailer seemed a powerful fellow. Then, too, the lad felt
ill from the effects of the drug.

"Drink some water, and eat a bit, and you'll feel better," urged the
man, which advice Mark followed, though, his appetite was not of the
best, and he was much worried as to what his friends would think about
his strange disappearance.

"What do you intend to do with me?" asked Mark, when he felt a little
better from the effects of the food and drink. The man had sat on an
old soap box, and watched his captive while he ate.

"Do with you? Why, I'm going to keep you here until your friends have
left in the projectile," was the answer.

"But why don't you want me to go with them?"

"Oh, I have my reasons. You'll find out soon enough. You can't go,
that's all."

"But why do you take such an interest in me? Why didn't you capture my
chum Jack, too, while you were about it?"

"Two reasons. One was that Jack wouldn't answer my purpose, and the
other was that I didn't have a chance to get him. You walked right into
my trap, just when I was doing my best to think of another plan to get
hold of you, since my first one failed."

"But what is your purpose?" insisted the lad. "What do you want with
me?" He thought perhaps if he questioned the man closely enough he
might discover something that would give him a clew, or might aid him
to escape.

"You'll learn soon enough," was the answer.

"Will you tell me your name?" asked Marie quietly.

"No--why should I?" was the quick reply. "If I told you who I was you
would at once know why I have made you a captive here. No; you shall
hear all in good time, but that will not be until I am ready.

"Now," went on his captor, after a period of silence, "I shall have to
bind and blindfold you again."

"Why?" asked Mark, in some alarm.

"Because I don't want you to see how I get in and out of this room, and
that's the only way I can guard my secret. Though if you promise not to
remove the bandage from your eyes within five minutes from the time I
leave you, I will not have to tie your hands and feet. After I am gone
you may take the handkerchief off, but when you hear me rap on the
wall, ready to come back again, you must once more blindfold yourself.
Otherwise I shall have to tie you up."

Mark considered a moment. It was not pleasant to be tied with the cruel
ropes, and he felt that in time he could penetrate the mystery of how
the room opened, even if he did not see his jailer enter and leave.

"I promise," he said finally.

"That's good. It simplifies matters. Now you can blindfold yourself,
and I trust to your honor. You may remove the bandage in five minutes,
but when you hear me knock, you must replace it until I am in the
apartment. Then you can take it off again."

There was little choice but to obey, and Mark tied the handkerchief
over his eyes. He listened intently, heard the man moving about the
room, felt the wind on his cheeks, and then came silence.

He waited until he thought five minutes had passed, and then took off
the bandage. The candle was burning where the man had set it, but the
fellow himself was gone. He had taken with him the broken dishes, and
remains of the food Mark had not eaten. The glass and a pitcher of
water stood on a broken table, and Mark took a big drink.

"Now to see if I can't get out of this place," he murmured to himself.

Mark had invented many pieces of apparatus, and he was considered a
good mechanician. Consequently he went about his task in a systematic
manner. He examined the walls carefully by the candle, which he carried
in his hand, but no opening was apparent.

"Of course, there must be some secret spring to press," said the lad.
"That's how he gets in and out. A section of the wall moves, but where
it is I can't see. It will take time. I must look at every inch."

He was in the midst of his investigations when there sounded on the
wall back of him three raps.

"Ha! At least, that tells me where the opening is," thought the lad.
"It's on that side, but now I have to put that blamed bandage on. Well,
I may be able to escape yet."

True to his promise, he blindfolded himself well, and presently he
heard a noise, felt a draught of air, and he knew his captor was in the
room.

"You can now take off the handkerchief," said the man. "I have brought
you some more bags for bed clothing. It isn't much, but it is all I
have. They will keep you warm tonight."

"Are you going to imprison me over night?" asked Mark.

"Yes, and I'll stay here with you. No one can find us here. The secret
room is well hidden. But first I have another matter that needs
attention. I am going to ask you a question."

"What?" asked the captive, wondering what strange request the mentally
unbalanced man would make now.

The man leaned forward and whispered something in Mark's ear, as if he
was afraid the very walls would hear.

"I'll not do it!" cried the youth. "I'll never aid you to deceive my
friends, for that is your object. I'll never do it!"

"Then I shall have to use force," was the determined response. "You may
take your choice!"

Poor Mark did not know what to do, yet there was little he could choose
between. The man had him in his power, yet the lad was terribly afraid
of the result of the daring scheme which he knew was in the mind of the
lunatic, for such he believed the man to be.

"Will you not give up this plan?" begged Mark. "I know Professor
Henderson will pay you any sum in reason to let me go. You can become a
rich man."

"I don't want riches--I want revenge!" exclaimed the man. And he glared
at Mark, while throughout the dismal, deserted house there sounded the
rattle and bang of the flapping shutters.




CHAPTER X

MARK'S STRANGE ACTIONS


Jack Darrow fairly burst into the big shed where the two scientists
were at work over the ruined motor. They looked up at his excitable
entrance, and Mr. Henderson called out:

"Why, Jack, what's the matter?"

"Quite a lot, I'm afraid," answered the lad, and there was that in his
voice which alarmed the professors.

"What do you mean?" inquired Mr. Roumann, laying aside some of the
damaged motor plates.

"Mark's gone!" gasped Jack.

"Gone! Where?" exclaimed Mr. Henderson.

"I don't know, but he went to the deserted house, where we thought the
mysterious man was hiding, and since then I can't find him."

Then the frightened lad proceeded to explain what he and Mark had
undertaken, and the outcome of it; how his chum had failed to meet him
at the rendezvous, and how Jack had searched through the old house
without result.

"There's but one thing to do," declared Professor Henderson, when he
had listened to the story. "We must go back there and make a more
thorough search."

"What--to-night?" exclaimed the German.

"Surely. Why not? We can't leave Mark there all alone. He may be hurt,
or in trouble."

"That's what I think," said Jack. "I'll tell Washington and Andy, and
we'll go back and hunt for him. Poor Mark! If he had only waited for
me, perhaps this would never have happened, and if I hadn't stopped at
the dog-fight maybe Mark would have waited for me. Well, it's too late
to worry about that now. The thing is to find him; and I guess we can."

Jack would not stop longer than to snatch a hasty bite of supper before
he joined the searching party. Washington and he carried lanterns,
while Andy Sudds had his trusty rifle, and the two professors brought
up in the rear, armed with stout clubs, for Jack's account of the
affair made them think that perhaps they might have to deal with a
violent man.

"Hadn't you better notify the police?" suggested Andy. "A couple of
constables would be some help."

"Not very much," declared Jack. "Besides, there are only two in
Bayside, and it's hard to locate either one when you want them. I guess
we can manage alone."

"Yes, I would rather not notify the police if it can be avoided," said
Professor Henderson.

The searching party hurried along the country highway, which was now
deserted, as it was quite dark. Their lanterns flashed from side to
side, but they had no hope of getting any trace of Mark until they came
to the old barn, at least, though Jack wished several times that he
might meet his chum running toward them along the road.

They reached the barn in due course, and while Washington, Jack and
Andy began a search of it, the two scientists went up to the house of
the man who owned it and enlisted his aid. They asked him if he had
seen Mark around that afternoon, but the farmer had not.

"But me an' my hired man'll come out and help you hunt through the
barn," he said. "I remember once, when I was a lad, that my brother
fell off the hay mow and lay unconscious in a manger for five hours
before we found him. Maybe that's what's happened to this young man,"
suggested Mr. Hampton, which was the farmer's name.

"I looked around pretty well this afternoon," explained Jack, when the
farmer and his man had reached the barn, "but, of course, I didn't know
all the nooks and corners."

A thorough search of the structure, however, failed to reveal the
presence of Mark, and then the farmer volunteered to accompany the
party on to the old Preakness house. His offer was received with
thanks, and, bringing two more lanterns with them, Mr. Hampton and his
man added considerable to the illumination.

They went through the old mansion from garret to cellar, and called
repeatedly, but there was no answer. And good reason, for in the secret
room, with his captive, the mysterious man heard the first approach of
the searching party; and he quickly bound Mark and gagged him, so that
he could not answer.

There was nothing to do but to leave, and it was with sad hearts that
Jack and his friends departed, their search having been unavailing.
They turned toward home, which they reached quite late, but found
nothing disturbed.

No one in Professor Henderson's house slept much that night, and in the
morning pale and wan faces looked at each other, all asking the same
question: "Where is Mark?"

But no one could answer.

They talked over the matter, and decided that Jack, with Andy and
Washington, should form a searching party to scour the surrounding
country. The two scientists were too old for such work, and, as the aid
of the police was not desired, it was felt that the three could do all
that was necessary.

Accordingly, while Professor Henderson and his German friend went to
work on the damaged motor, which did not need as much repairing as at
first was thought to put it in working shape again, Jack and the two
men started off to hunt for Mark.

They were gone all that day, returning very much discouraged at dusk,
saying that they could get no trace of him.

"I don't see where he can be!" exclaimed Jack desperately, for, though
the two lads were not related, they had been friends so long, and had
shared so many pleasures and dangers together, that they were like
brothers. "You won't start for the moon until you find him, will you,
Professor?" asked Jack.

"No, indeed; though we could start to-morrow if he was here," replied
the aged scientist. "The special tools came to-day, and the motor has
been repaired. We have tested it, and the Cardite power works even
better than did the Etherium apparatus."

"Then we can start as soon as Mark is found?" asked Andy Sudds.

"Yes, for everything has been put inside the projectile, and all that
remains is to haul it out of the shed, point it at the moon, and start
the motor."

"Then I guess I'll give my gun a final cleaning, and get ready. There
may be good hunting on the moon," said the old hunter.

Jack was tired from his long tramp that day, searching for his missing
chum, but before he went to bed he wanted to go out and take a look at
the big projectile, which was now ready to start for the moon.

As he turned around the corner of the immense shed to enter the door,
he was startled by seeing a figure coming toward him. Jack started,
rubbed his eyes, and peered again.

"Is it possible? Can I be mistaken?" he whispered.

The figure came nearer. Jack, who had come to a halt, broke into a run.

"Mark! Mark!" he cried joyously. "Oh, you've come back! Where have you
been?"

Jack was about to clasp his chum in his arms when he saw that Mark's
arm was in a sling, and that his face was all bandaged up, so that
scarcely any of his features showed. Had it not been for the clothes,
and a certain stoutness of which Mark never could seem to get rid, Jack
would scarcely have known his friend.

"Why, Mark, what happened?" cried Jack. "Have you met with an accident?
Where have you been? In a hospital? What became of you? Why didn't you
wait for me?"

"I can't answer all those questions at once," was the reply, and Jack
thought Mark's voice was curiously muffled and hoarse, entirely unlike
his usual tones. But he ascribed that to the bandages around the mouth.

"Well, answer one at a time then," said Jack, and there was an
undefinable, strange air about his chum which cooled Jack's first
impulse of gladness. "Whatever happened to you, Mark? Are you hurt?"

"I was--yes," came the reply, in short, jerky tones. "I had an
accident, and I've been in a hospital. That's why I couldn't send you
word. But I'm all right now. When does the projectile start?"

"To-morrow, now that you're here. But tell me more about it. Where were
you hurt?"

"On my head and arm."

"No; I mean where did the accident occur?"

"Oh, in the old house where I went to--to look for that man."

"Did you find him?" asked Jack eagerly.

"No. He's not there now."

"Well, never mind. We won't bother about him. Come on to the house. My,
but I'm glad to see you again! And so will the others be."

In his enthusiasm at seeing his chum again Jack wanted to hug him. He
approached Mark, but the latter cried out:

"Look out! Don't come too close!"

"Why not? Have you caught some disease?"

"No, but you might hurt my broken arm!"

"Oh, is it broken? That's tough luck. Did you fall?"

"Yes--in the old house. I fell down stairs."

"And your head is all bandaged up, too," went on Jack, trying to peer
into his friend's face through the roll of bandages.

"Look out! Don't come too near!" again warned the other. "You might
jostle against me, and knock off some of the bandages."

"Did you lose some of your teeth, the reason your voice sounds so
funny?" asked Jack.

"Yes, I did knock out a few when I tumbled. But don't bother about me.
I'll be all right soon. Let's go in the house. I want to go to bed."

"But they'll all want to see you, and hear about the accident, Mark,"
insisted Jack. "My, but we've been all worked up about you. How did you
happen to be taken to a hospital?"

"A farmer came along, and I hailed him. Then I lost consciousness, and
couldn't let you know where I was. But never mind the details. I'm
anxious to get started on the trip to the moon. Couldn't we start
to-night?"

"I don't believe so. You need rest. But come on in the house." Then
Jack hurried on ahead, calling: "Mark's found! Mark is back!"

His cries brought all of the others out on the porch, and at first they
could scarcely believe the good news, but soon Jack and the new arrival
came in sight. As Jack had been, the two professors and the others were
startled when they saw how Mark was bundled up in bandages.

"He fell down stairs," explained Jack.

"Come over here where it's light, so I can see you," suggested
Professor Henderson. "Perhaps some of the bandages have slipped off
since you came from the hospital. Why did you come alone? Why didn't
you send us word where you were as soon as you were conscious, and we
would have come for you."

"Oh, I didn't want to bother you," explained the bundled-up figure. "I
managed to walk it all right."

"But your injuries may need attention," insisted Mr. Henderson. "I know
something about doctoring. Come here where I can see."

"No--no--the--light hurts my eyes," was the hasty reply. "I guess I'll
go to bed, so as to be all ready to start in the morning. Why don't you
leave for the moon to-night, professor?"

"There are still a few little details to look after. But are you sure
you are well enough to go with us? We may meet with hardships up on the
moon."

"Oh, I'm all ready to go," was the answer. "I'd start to-night if I
could. But now I must get to bed."

"Don't you want supper?" asked Jack.

"No, I had some just before I left the hospital."

"What hospital was it?" inquired Andy Sudds. "I was in one once, and I
didn't like it. There wa'nt enough air for me."

"I forget the name of the place," came the reply. "I can't think
clearly. I need sleep."

The newcomer kept in the shadows of the room, as if the light hurt his
eyes, and appeared restless and ill at ease. With the hand that was not
in a sling he pulled the bandages closer about his face.

"Can't you tell us more about what happened?" asked Jack, for Mark was
not usually so reticent, and his chum noticed it.

"There isn't much to tell," was the response. "I went to the old house,
and I was looking around when I happened to tumble down stairs. I must
have been knocked unconscious, but when I came to I crawled outside. A
farmer was driving past, and I asked him to take me to a hospital."

"Why didn't you come home?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"Oh, I didn't want to make any trouble and delay work on the
projectile. I figured that I could be with you in a few hours, and you
wouldn't worry. But they insisted that I must stay in the hospital when
they got me there. Then I lost consciousness again, and couldn't manage
to let you know where I was. But I'm all right now."

"Why didn't you wait for me at the barn, when I went to send the
telegram, as you promised you would?" asked Jack, who felt a little
hurt at his chum's neglect.

"Did I promise to wait for you at some barn?"

"Yes; don't you remember?" and Jack gazed at the bandaged figure in
surprise.

"Oh, yes--I--I guess I do. But I want to go to bed now," and pulling
the cloths closer about his face the injured one started from the
apartment.

"Here. That's not the way up to your room. The stairs are over here,"
called Jack, for he saw the newcomer taking the wrong direction.

"Oh, yes. Guess my mind must be wandering," and with an uneasy laugh
the injured one turned about. They heard him going up stairs, and a
little later Jack followed. He found that Mark's room was not occupied.

"Hi, Mark! Where are you?" he called, in some alarm.

"Here," was the answer, and the voice came from Jack's own apartment.

"Well, you're in the wrong bunk."

"Am I? Well, I must have made another mistake. My head can't be right,"
and with that the other came out and hastily went into the adjoining
apartment.

For a moment Jack stood in the hall. He looked at the door that had
closed behind the bandaged figure.

"There's something wrong," said Jack in a low voice. "How strange Mark
acts! I wonder what can be the matter?"




CHAPTER XI

READY FOR THE MOON


There were busy times for the moon-voyagers the next day. They were up
early, for at the last moment many little details needed to be settled.
The Cardite motor had been thoroughly repaired, for the damage caused
by the unknown enemy had done no permanent harm.

When the injured one appeared the bandage on his head seemed larger
than ever, and his features were almost hidden. He still wore his arm
in a sling.

"Well, how do you feel?" asked Jack, looking narrowly at the figure. He
could not get rid of a suspicion that something was wrong with Mark.

"Oh, I'm feeling pretty fair," was the mumbled answer. "I didn't sleep
much, though."

"Well, take care of yourself," advised Jack. "We are about ready to
start. We'll get off about noon, Professor Henderson says. Don't try to
do anything and injure your broken arm. You certainly had a tough time
of it."

"Yes, I guess I did. I can't do much to help you."

"You don't need to. We're all but finished. Just hang around and watch
me work. There isn't much to do."

But though Jack gave an invitation to remain near him, the other seemed
to prefer being off by himself. He wandered in and out of the
projectile, now and then helping Andy or Washington to carry light
objects into the _Annihilator_. But all the while he was careful not to
disturb the bandage on his face, and several times he stopped to
readjust it. Nor did he talk much, which Jack ascribed to his statement
that his teeth hurt him. And when the bandaged figure did speak, it was
in mumbling tones, very different from Mark's usually cheerful ones.

"Well," remarked Professor Roumann, after a final inspection of the big
Cardite motor--the one that was to be depended on to carry them to the
moon--"I think we are about ready to leave this earth. How about it,
Professor Henderson?"

"Yes, I think so. Have you made any calculation as to speed?"

"Yes, we will not have to move nearly as fast as we did when we went to
Mars. We only have to cover a quarter of a million of miles at the
most, and probably less than that. The motor will send us along at the
rate of about a mile a second, which is three thousand six hundred
miles an hour, or eighty-six thousand four hundred miles a--day. At
that rate we would be at the moon in less than three days.

"But I don't want to travel as fast as that," the German went on. "I
want time to make some scientific observations on the way, and so I
have reduced the speed of the Cardite motor by half, though should we
need to hasten our trip we can do so."

"Then we'll be about a week on the way?" asked Jack.

"About that, yes," assented Mr. Roumann.

"And could we go farther than to the moon if we wanted to?" inquired
the bandaged figure mumblingly.

"Farther? What do you mean?" asked Professor Henderson quickly.

"I mean could we go to Mars if we wanted to?"

"You don't mean to say you want to go back there, and run the chance of
being attacked by the savage Martians, do you?" asked Jack.

"No, I was only asking," and the other seemed confused.

"Well, of course, we _could_ go there, as we have plenty of supplies
and enough of the Cardite," said Mr. Roumann. "But I think the moon
will be the limit of our trip this time."

The work went on, the last things to be put aboard the projectile being
a number of scientific instruments. The injured one wandered in and
out, now being in the house and again in the big shed. He seemed
restless and ill at ease, and frequently he walked to the front gate
and gazed down the road.

"You seem to be looking for some one," spoke Jack. "Are you expecting
your girl to come along and bid you good-by, Mark?"

"Who--me? No, I--I was just looking to see if--if it was going to
rain."

"Rain? Well, rain won't make much difference to us soon. We will be
outside of the earth's atmosphere in a jiffy after we have started, and
then rain won't worry us. Is your stateroom all fixed up?"

"No, I didn't think of that. Guess I'd better look after it."

The two started together for the projectile. The stout one entered
first, and made his way through the engine room and main cabin to the
compartment off which the staterooms opened. He entered one.

"Here, that's not yours," cried Jack. "That's where Professor Henderson
sleeps. Yours is next to mine."

"That's right; I forgot," mumbled the other. "I must be getting absent
minded since my accident. But I'll be all right soon. I'll get my room
to rights, and then probably we'll start."

"I guess so," answered Jack, but he shook his head as he gazed after
his chum. "Mark has certainly changed," he murmured. "I wish he'd take
those bandages off, so I could get a look at his face."

The last details were completed. The big _Annihilator_ had been run out
on trucks into the yard surrounding the shed, ready to be hurled
through the air. The shop, shed and house had been locked up and given
in charge of a caretaker, who would remain on guard until our friends
returned.

"Are we all ready?" asked Professor Henderson, as he stood ready to
close the main entrance door and seal it hermetically.

"All ready, I guess," answered Jack. The stout one had gone to his
stateroom, where he could be heard moving about.

"I'm ready," announced Professor Roumann. "Say the word and I'll start
the motor." He was in the engine room, looking over the machinery. At
that moment there came a loud yell from the galley where Washington
White was.

"Heah, heah! Come back!" cried the colored man. "My Shanghai rooster is
got loose!" he yelled, and, an instant later, the fowl came sailing out
of the projectile, with Washington in full chase after him.

"I'll help you catch him," volunteered Jack, springing to the cook's
aid, while Professor Henderson laughed, and a bandaged figure, looking
from a stateroom port, wondered at the delay in starting the
projectile.




CHAPTER XII

MARK'S ESCAPE


Mark Sampson was alone in the deserted house. Bound hand and foot,
stripped of his clothing, and attired in some old garments that the
tramps who made a hanging-out place of the old mansion had cast aside,
the unfortunate lad was stretched on a pile of bagging, his heart
beating partly with fear and partly with rage over a desire to escape
and punish the scoundrel responsible for his plight.

The man who had captured him, after taking away Mark's clothes, had
chuckled, as though at some joke.

"You may think this is funny," spoke the lad bitterly, "but you won't
be so pleased when my friends get after you."

"They'll never get after me," boasted the man. "This is a good joke. To
think that I can pass myself off as you; that I can join them in the
projectile, and they never will be the wiser!"

"They'll soon discover that you are disguised as me," declared Mark,
"and when they do they'll have you arrested."

"Yes, but they'll not discover it until we have left the earth, and are
on our way to the moon. Then it will be too late to turn back, and my
object will have been accomplished. I will be with them in the
_Annihilator_, and I'll have my revenge! The projectile is due to sail
to-morrow, and I'll be on hand. I'm going to leave you now. I have left
orders with a friend of mine that you are to be released to-morrow
night. In the meanwhile you will have to be as comfortable as you can.
I wish you no harm, but I must keep you here.

"I will feed you well before I go, and put some water where you can get
it. But I must leave you tied. I'll not gag you, for, no matter how you
yell, no one will hear you. I have posted a notice in front of this
place that it is under the watch of the police, so no tramps will
venture in, and your friends will not come back.

"Now, just make yourself comfortable here, and I'll go to the moon in
your place. I think I shall enjoy the trip. As I said, you will be
released to-morrow night, several hours after the projectile has left
the earth."

"How do you know it is to start to-morrow morning?" asked Mark.

"Oh, I have been spying around, and I overheard the professors talking.
I know a thing or two, and I'll be on hand, on time, in your place!
Now, I have to leave you. I've left ten dollars to pay for your suit,
which I need to disguise myself with."

Then the man was gone, and Mark was left with his bitter thoughts to
keep him company. The whole daring scheme of the man had been revealed.
He did look something like Mark, and, attired in the lad's clothes, and
by keeping his face concealed, he might pass himself off as Jack's
chum; at least, until after the projectile had started.

"And then, as he says, it will be too late to return to earth and get
me," thought Mark bitterly. "Oh, why did I ever try to learn this man's
secret? Who is he, anyhow? Why didn't I wait for Jack at the barn, as I
promised? It's all my fault. I wonder if I can't get loose?"

Mark struggled several hours desperately and at last he felt the ropes
giving slightly. He redoubled his efforts. Strand by strand the cords
parted. He put all his efforts into one last attempt, and to his great
joy he felt his hands separate. He was partly free!

But scarcely half his task was accomplished. He had yet to discover the
secret of the hidden room--a room, as he afterward learned, which had
been built during slavery days to conceal the poor black men who were
escaping from the South.

"But now I have my hands to work with!" exulted Mark.

Resting a bit after his strenuous labors, he took a long drink of water
and attacked the ropes on his feet. They were comparatively easy to
loosen, and soon he stood up unbound.

"Now for the secret panel!" he exclaimed, for he was convinced that it
was by some such means that his captor had entered and left. As has
already been explained, Mark knew on which side of his prison the
opening was likely to be--it would be where the warning knocks had
sounded. He began a minute inspection of that wall.

But if Mark hoped to speedily discover the secret he was doomed to
disappointment. He went over every inch of the surface, seemingly, and
pressed on every depression or projection that met his eye, as he
passed the candle flame along the wall.

Success did not reward him, and, as hour after hour passed, and the
candle burned lower and lower, Mark began to despair.

"I must escape before the projectile leaves," he murmured. "It will
never do to let them take that man with them under the impression that
they have me. I must escape! I will!"

Once more he began the tiresome task of seeking the secret spring. The
candle was spluttering in the socket now. It would burn hardly another
minute. Desperately Mark sought.

At last, just as the candle gave a dying gasp and flared brightly up
prior to going out, the lad saw a small screw head he had not noticed
before. It was sunk deep in a board.

"I'll press that and see what happens!" he exclaimed.

With a suddenness that was startling, he found himself in total
darkness. The candle had burned out, but he had his finger on the
screw. He pressed it with all his force.

There was a rumbling sound in the darkness, a movement as if some heavy
body had slid out of the way, and Mark felt a breath of air on his
cheeks. Then he saw a dim light.

"Oh, I'm out! I'm out!" he cried joyously, breathing a prayer of
thankfulness at his deliverance. "I'm free! I pushed on the right
spring, and the panel slid back!"

He fairly leaped forward. The morning light was streaming in through
the broken windows. He saw himself in the old hall of the mansion, at
the head of the stairs, in a sort of anteroom, the mantle of which
apartment had swung aside to give him egress from the secret chamber
through a hole in the wall. He was free!

"But am I in time?" he cried. "It is morning--and about ten o'clock, I
should judge. I've been working to get free all night. Will I be in
time?"

He gave one last look behind at his prison and sprang down the rickety
stairs. He had but one thought--to reach home in time to unmask the
villain who was impersonating him--to be in time to make the journey to
the moon.

"But it's several miles, and I can't walk very fast," murmured Mark.
"I'm too stiff and weak. How can I do it?"

He thought of making his way to the nearest farm house, and asking for
the loan of a horse and carriage, but he looked so much like a tramp
that no farmer would lend him a horse.

"And I need to make speed," he murmured.

At that moment he heard a noise down the road. It was a steady "chug-
chug," like some distant motor-boat, but there was no water near at
hand.

"A motorcycle!" exclaimed Mark. "Some one is coming on a motorcycle.
Oh, if I could only borrow it!"

He ran down into the road. He could see the rider now. To his joy it
was Dick Johnson--the lad who had brought him the mysterious note.

"Hi Dick! Dick! hold on!" cried Mark.

The lad on the motor gave one glance at the ragged figure that had
hailed him. Then he turned on more power to escape from what he thought
was a savage tramp.

"Wait! Stop! I want that motorcycle!" cried Mark.

"Well, you're not going to get it!" yelled back Dick. "I'll send the
police after you."

Mark couldn't understand. Then a glance down at his ragged garments
showed him what was the matter.

"Wait! Hold on, Dick!" he cried, running forward. "I'm Mark Sampson!
I've had a terrible time! I was captured by that mysterious man, and
he's got my clothes. I must get home quick!"

Dick heard, but scarcely understood. However, he comprehended that his
friend was in trouble, and he wanted to help him. He slowed up, and
Mark reached him.

"Lend me your motorcycle, Dick," begged Mark. "I must get home in a
hurry to unmask a scoundrel. I'll leave your machine for you at our
house. I won't hurt it. I'm in a hurry! Get off!"

Somewhat dazed, Dick dismounted, and Mark climbed into the saddle. He
began to pedal, and then threw in the gasolene and spark. The cycle
chugged off.

"I'll leave it for you at our house," Mark called back. "I'm going on a
trip to the moon, and I don't want to be late."

He was fast disappearing in a cloud of dust, while Dick, gazing after
him, remarked:

"Well, I always thought those fellows were crazy to go off in
projectiles and things like that, and now I'm sure of it. Going to the
moon! Well, I only hope he doesn't take my motorcycle there!"

Mark sped on, turning the handle levers to get the last notch of speed
out of the cycle. Would he be in time?




CHAPTER XIII

A DIREFUL THREAT


Perhaps Washington White's Shanghai rooster did not care to make the
trip to the moon, or perhaps the fowl had not yet seen enough of this
earth. At any rate, when he flew from the projectile, uttering loud
crows, and landed some distance away, he began to run back toward the
coop in the rear of the yard.

"Cotch him, cotch him!" yelled the colored man. "Dat's a valuable
bird!"

"We'll get him when he goes in the coop," said Jack, who found it
difficult to run and laugh at the same time.

"Shall I fire my rifle off and scare him?" asked Andy Sudds.

"No, you might kill him or scare him t' death," objected Washington.

"Come on, Mark, and help," cried Jack, looking toward the projectile,
where a figure was peering from the glass-covered port of the main
cabin.

But the figure, whose hand was done up in voluminous bandages, did not
come out, and Jack wondered the more at what he thought was a growing
strangeness on the part of his chum.

Jack, followed by Andy and Washington, raced off after the rooster,
while the two professors, somewhat amused, rather chaffed at the delay.
But afterward they were glad of it.

"Just my luck!" muttered the bandaged one. "This delay comes at the
wrong time. Why don't they go on without that confounded rooster? If we
stay here too long, that fellow Mark may get loose and spoil the whole
thing, or Jenkins may go and release him before the time set. It would
be just like Jenkins! I've a good notion to start the projectile
myself. I know how to operate the Cardite motor. Only I suppose those
two professors are on guard in the engine room. I'll have to wait until
they catch that rooster, I guess, but I'd like to wring his neck!"

The chase after the fowl was kept up.

"I've got him now!" cried Jack a little later, as the fowl, evidently
now much exhausted, ran into another fence corner, where Jack caught
him, and shut him up in the coop in the projectile.

"Yo' suttinly am de mos' contrary-minded specimen ob de chicken fambly
dat I eber seed," observed Washington, breathing heavily, for his run
had winded him.

"Well, are we all ready to start now?" asked Professor Henderson. "No
more live stock loose, is there, Jack?"

"I think not."

"Where's Mark? Wasn't he helping you catch the rooster?"

"No, he's inside. Shall I seal the door?"

"Yes, and I'll tell Professor Roumann that we're about to start. All
ready for the moon trip!"

Jack was pulling the steel portal toward him. An eager face, peering
from a port, waited anxiously for the tremor which would indicate that
the projectile had left the earth. In another moment they would be off.

But what was that sound coming from down the highway. A steady chug-
chug--a sort of roar, as of a battery of rapid-fire guns going off in
double relays! And, mingled with the explosions, there was a voice
shouting:

"Wait! Hold on! Don't go without me! I'm Mark Sampson! Don't start the
projectile!"

"Somebody must be in a mighty hurry on a motorcycle," thought Jack, as
he paused a moment before fastening the door. Then the shouts came to
his ears.

"Mark Sampson!" he cried.

Again came the cry: "Wait! Wait! Don't go without me! You've got that
mysterious man on board!"

"Mark Sampson!" murmured Jack again. "That's his voice sure enough! I
wonder--can it be possible--that man--with his head all bandaged up--
his queer actions--I--I----"

Words failed the youth. Throwing wide open the door, he sprang out of
the projectile. A moment later there dashed into the yard, where the
great projectile rested, a strange figure astride of a puffing
motorcycle. The figure was torn and, ragged, and the nondescript
garments were covered with dust, for Mark had had a fall. But there was
no mistaking the face that peered eagerly forward.

"Jack!" cried the youth on the machine.

"Mark!" ejaculated the lad who had sprung from the projectile. "What
has happened? Who is the fellow who has been masquerading as you?"

"A scoundrel and a villain! Let me get at him!" and, slamming on the
brakes, as he shut off the power, Mark leaped from the motorcycle,
stood it up against the projectile, and clasped his chum by the hand.

"What's the matter?" asked Professor Henderson, as he, too, ran out of
the _Annihilator_. "What does that tramp want, Jack? Give him some
money, and get back in here; we ought to have started long ago." He
looked at the ragged figure.

"This isn't a tramp," cried Jack. "It's Mark!"

"Mark! I thought----"

"There have been strange doings," gasped the lad in tramp's garments.
"I have just escaped from being kept a prisoner. Where is the
mysterious man? Oh, I'm glad I arrived in time! Were you about to
start?"

"That's what we were," replied Jack. "Oh, Mark, but I'm glad to see you
again! I didn't know what to think. You acted so strange--or, rather,
the fellow we thought was you had me guessing!"

"Good land a' massy!" exclaimed Washington White, as he stood in the
doorway, with Andy Sudds behind him. "Am dere two Marks? What's up,
anyhow?"

"Don't let that fellow get away--the fellow who passed himself off as
me!" shouted Mark. "Lock him up! There's some mystery about him that
must be explained. He's a dangerous man to be at large."

Professor Henderson turned back to enter the projectile. Jack advised
Andy to get his gun ready, with which to threaten the scoundrel in case
of necessity.

At that instant there sounded a crash of glass, and the whole front of
the big observation window in the side of the _Annihilator_ was smashed
to atoms. A figure leaped--a figure which no longer had its head
bandaged, and whose arm was no longer in a sling--the figure of a man--
the mysterious man who had held Mark a prisoner!

"There he goes!" shouted Jack. "Catch him, somebody! Andy, where's your
gun?"

"I'll have it in a jiffy!" cried the hunter, as he dashed back to get
it.

But the man did not linger. Scrambling to his feet after his fall,
caused by his leap from the broken window, which he had smashed with a
sledge hammer as soon as he understood that his game was up, he raced
out of the yard. He turned long enough to shake his fist at the group
assembled around the projectile, and then leaped away, calling out some
words which they could not hear.

"Let's take after him," proposed Mark.

"Come on," seconded Jack.

"No, let him go; he's a desperate man, and you came just in time to
unmask him," said Professor Henderson. "He might harm you if you took
after him. Let him go. He has not done much damage. We can easily
replace the broken window. But I can't understand what his object was
in disguising himself as Mark. He certainly looked like you, Mark,
especially when he kept his face concealed. Why did he do it?"

"He wanted to go to the moon in my place," answered the former prisoner
of the deserted house.

"But why?" insisted Jack.

"Because, I think, he's crazy, and he didn't really know what he did
want. But he certainly had me well concealed," spoke Mark. "I'm free
now, however, and as soon as I get some decent clothes on I'll go with
you to the moon. I wouldn't want the moon people to see me dressed this
way."

"How did it happen?" asked Jack. "Tell us all about it. My! but I
certainly have been puzzled since you--or rather since the person we
thought was you--came back last night all bunged up. Give us the
story."

"I will; give me a chance. I guess that villain is gone for good." Andy
Sudds came out with his gun, and insisted on taking a look down the
road and around the premises. The man was nowhere in sight.

"Now we're in for another delay," remarked Jack ruefully, as he gazed
at the smashed window. "It seems as if we'd never get started for the
moon."

"Oh, yes, we will," declared Professor Henderson. "We have some extra
heavy plate glass in the shop, and we can soon put in another
observation window."

"Let's get right to work then," proposed Jack. "That man may come back.
Did you learn who he was, Mark?"

"No, he wouldn't tell his name, and he said he was doing this to get
revenge on us for some fancied wrong. I can't imagine who he is. But
let's work and talk at the same time. I'll tell you all that happened
to me," which he did briefly.

Mark soon got rid of the tramp clothes, and donned an extra suit which
had been packed in his trunk in the projectile. Then he helped replace
the broken window, which, in spite of their haste, took nearly all the
rest of the day to put in place.

"Shall we wait and start to-morrow?" asked Jack, when four o'clock
came. "It will soon be dark."

"Darkness will make no difference to us," announced Professor Roumann.
"Our Cardite motor will soon take us out of the shadow of the earth,
and we will be in perpetual sunshine until we reach the moon. As we are
all ready, we might as well start now."

They all agreed with this, and, after a final inspection of the
projectile, the travellers entered it, and Jack was once more about to
seal the big door.

Before he could do so there came riding into the yard, on his
motorcycle, which he had claimed that afternoon, Dick Johnson.

"Wait a minute," he cried. "I've got a letter for you. It's from that
man!"

"What--another thing to delay us?" cried Jack, but he called to
Professor Roumann not to start the motor, and ran to take from Dick the
letter which the lad held out.

"That same man who gave me the one for Mark gave me this, and he paid
me a half a dollar to bring it here," said the boy.

"All right," answered Jack impatiently.

He looked at the note. It was addressed to the "Moon Travellers," and,
considering that he was one, the youth tore open the envelope. In the
dim light of the fading day he read the bold handwriting.

"I have fixed you," the letter began. "You will never get to the moon.
I shall have my revenge. You took my brother Fred Axtell to Mars and
left him there. I determined to get him back, and to that end I
disguised myself as one of the boys, and got aboard. When we were
safely away from the earth, I would have compelled you to go to Mars
and rescue my brother. But my plan has failed. I will have my revenge,
though. You will never reach the moon, even if you do get started.
Beware! George, the brother of Fred Axtell, will avenge his fate!"

"The brother of the crazy machinist!" gasped Jack. "Now I understand
his strange actions. He's crazy, too--he wanted to go to Mars--he says
we will never reach the moon! Say, look here!" cried Jack, raising his
voice. "Here's bad news! That scoundrel has put some game up on us!
Maybe he's tampered with the machinery! It won't be safe to start for
the moon until we've looked over everything carefully! He says he's
fixed us, and perhaps he has!"

From the projectile came hurrying the would-be moon travellers, a vague
fear in their hearts.




CHAPTER XIV

OFF AT LAST


In the gathering twilight Professor Henderson read slowly the note Dick
had brought. Then he passed it to Professor Roumann. The latter shook
his shaggy gray hair, and murmured something in German.

"Where did you meet the man?" asked Jack of the young motorcyclist.

"About two miles down the road. He was walking along, sort of talking
to himself, and I was afraid of him. He called to me, and offered me a
half a dollar to deliver this message. I didn't want to at first, but
he said if I didn't he'd hurt me, so I took it. Is it anything bad?"

"We don't know yet," replied Mark.

"No, that is the worst of it," added Professor Roumann. "He has made a
threat, but we can't tell whether or not he will accomplish it. We are
in the dark. He may have done some secret damage to our machinery, and
it will take a careful inspection to show it."

"And will the inspection have to be made now?" asked Jack.

"I think so," answered Professor Henderson gravely. "It would not be
safe to start for the moon and have a breakdown before we got there. We
must wait until morning to begin our trip."

"It will be the safest," spoke the German, and the boys, in spite of
the fact that they were anxious to get under way, were forced to the
same conclusion.

"Then if we're going to camp here for the night," proposed old Andy,
"what's the matter with me and the boys having a hunt for that man?
We've put up with enough from him, and it's time he was punished. If we
let him go on, he'll annoy us all the while, if not now, then after we
get back from the moon. I'm for giving him a chase and having him
arrested."

"He certainly deserves some punishment, if only for the way he treated
Mark," was Jack's opinion, his chum having related how he was drugged
and kept a prisoner in the secret room, and how he escaped in time to
unmask the villain.

"Well," said Professor Henderson, after some thought, "it might not be
a bad plan to see if you could get that scoundrel put in some safe
place, where he could make no more trouble for us. I guess the lunatic
asylum is where he belongs, though I can sympathize with him on account
of his brother. But it was not our fault that the crazy machinist went
with us to Mars. He was a stowaway, and went against our wishes, and
when he got there he tried to injure us."

"Then may Mark, Andy and I see if we can find this man?" asked Jack.

"Yes, but be careful not to get separated; and don't run any risks,"
cautioned the professor. "Mr. Roumann and I, with the help of
Washington, will go carefully over all the machinery, and every part of
the projectile, to see if any hidden damage has been done. But don't
stay out too late. You had better notify the police. They may be able
to give you some aid, and I don't mind letting them know about it now,
as we will soon be away from here, because, no matter if they do send
detectives or constables spying about now, they can learn none of our
secrets."

Waiting only to partake of a hasty meal, the two boys and the veteran
hunter set out, Andy with his gun over his shoulder and his sharp eyes
on the lookout for any sign of Axtell, though they hardly expected to
find him in the vicinity of the projectile.

Taking the road, on which Dick Johnson said he had encountered the man,
the two lads and Andy proceeded, making inquiries from time to time of
persons they met. But no one had seen Axtell, and the insane man, for
such he seemed to be, appeared to have dropped out of sight.

On into the village the searchers went, and there they reported matters
to the chief of police, telling him only so much as was necessary to
give him an understanding of the situation.

"I'll send a couple of my best constables right out on the case," said
the chief. "We've just appointed two new ones, and I guess they'll be
glad to arrest somebody."

"Let them look out that this fellow doesn't drug them and carry them
away," cautioned Mark.

"Oh, I guess my constables can look out for theirselves," spoke the
chief proudly.

Once more the trailers sallied forth to renew their search. They
thought perhaps they might find their man lingering in the town, but a
search through the principal streets did not disclose him, and Mark
proposed that they return to their home for the night, as he was tired
and weary from his experience in the deserted house.

As they were turning out of the town, their attention was attracted by
a disturbance on the street just ahead of them. A woman screamed, and
men's voices were heard. Then came cries of: "Police! Police!"

"Some one's in trouble!" exclaimed Jack. "Let's go see what it is."

They broke into a run, and, as they approached, they saw a crowd
quickly collect. It seemed to center about a man who was being held by
two others, though he struggled to get away.

"Here, what's the trouble?" the boys heard a constable ask as he
shouldered his way into the throng.

"This fellow tried to snatch this lady's purse and run away with it,"
explained one of the men who had grabbed the scoundrel. "Stand still,
you brute!" he shouted at him, "or I'll shake you to pieces! Such
fellows as you ought to go to the whipping-post!"

"I'll take charge of him," announced the officer. "Who is he? Does any
one know?"

"Stranger in town, I guess," volunteered the other man, who had helped
capture him. "Need any help, officer?"

"No, I guess I can manage him. Come along now, and behave yourself, or
I'll use my club. It hasn't been tried on any one yet."

"That's one of the new constables, I guess," said Mark, and Jack
nodded.

The crowd separated to allow the officer to take out his prisoner. As
the latter walked forward in the grip of the constable, he remarked in
a mild voice totally at variance with his bold act:

"Why, I only wanted a little change to pay my fare to the moon. I'm
going there to look for my brother."

"Crazy as a loon," said one of the men.

"Or pretending that he is," added the officer.

"Mark!" cried Jack, pointing at the prisoner, "look!"

"The man who held me captive!" gasped Mark. "And he's wearing my
clothes yet! But he's in custody now, and we needn't fear any more from
him."

"Unless he gets away," said Jack.

"We'll go tell the chief who he is, and he'll keep him safe," suggested
Mark, and they hurried to headquarters, reaching there just before the
prisoner was brought in. The boys were assured by the chief that the
man, who was evidently a dangerous lunatic, would be kept where he
could do no harm. He would be arraigned later on the serious charge of
attempted highway robbery, as well as of being a dangerous lunatic at
large. When the boys and Andy got back, they found the two professors
and Washington still going over the machinery in detail.

"Find anything wrong?" asked Jack, after they had told of the arrest of
Axtell.

"No, but we will have another look in the morning," said Mr. Henderson.
"Then, if we find nothing out of order, I think we will take a chance
and start."

A thorough inspection by all hands the next day did not disclose
anything wrong, and, a test of the motors and other machinery having
shown that it was in good working shape, it was decided to leave the
earth.

"At last, I think, we are really going to get under way to the moon,"
said Jack, as he closed the big main door. This time it was not
reopened. All the stores and supplies were in place. The two professors
were in the engine room. Washington White was in his galley, getting
ready to serve the first meal in the air. Jack and Mark were in the
pilot house, ready to do whatever was necessary and anxious to feel the
thrill that would tell them the projectile had left the earth.

"All ready?" asked Professor Henderson.

"All ready," replied his German assistant.

"Then here we go!" announced the aged scientist.

He pulled toward him the main starting lever of the Cardite motor,
while Professor Roumann opened the valve which admitted to the plates
and cylinders the mysterious force that was to send them on their way.

"Elevate the bow!" called Professor Henderson.

"Elevated it is," answered the German, as he turned a wheel which
directed the negative gravity force against the surface of the ground
and tilted up the nose of the _Annihilator_, as a skyrocket is slanted
in a trough before the fuse is ignited.

"Throw over the switch," directed Mr. Henderson, and the other
scientist, with a quick motion, snapped it into place, amid a shower of
vicious electric sparks that hissed as when hot iron is thrust into
water.

"Steer straight ahead!" called Professor Henderson to Mark and Jack,
who were in the pilot house. "We'll head for the moon later."

"Straight ahead it is," answered Jack.

There was a trembling to the great projectile. Up rose her sharp-
pointed bow. She swayed slightly in the air. The trembling increased.
The great Cardite motor hummed and throbbed. There was a crackling as
from a wireless apparatus.

Then, with a rush and a roar, the big steel car, resembling an enormous
cigar, soared away from the earth, like some gigantic piece of
fireworks, and shot toward the sky.

"We're off!" shouted Mark.

"For the moon!" added Jack.

And the _Annihilator_ soared upward and onward, while those in her
never dreamed of the fearful adventures that were to befall them ere
they would again be headed toward the earth.




CHAPTER XV

THE SHANGHAI MAKES TROUBLE


Remaining in the engine room long enough to see that all the motors and
apparatus were working smoothly, Professor Henderson made his way to
the pilot house forward, where Mark and Jack were in charge of the
steering gears. The projectile could be started and stopped from there,
as well as from the engine room, once the motor was set going.

"Well, boys, how does it feel to be in space once more?" asked the
scientist.

"Fine," answered Mark. "But while I was shut up in that old house I
feared I'd never have this chance again."

"It seems like old times again, to be flying through space," remarked
Jack. "My! but we aren't making half the speed of which the projectile
is capable. Why, we're only going about twenty miles a second," and he
spoke as if that was a mere nothing.

"Twenty miles is some speed," observed Mark.

"The earth goes around the sun at the rate of nineteen miles a second,
or about seventy-five times as fast as the swiftest cannon-ball, so you
see, Jack, you are 'going some,' as the boys say."

"Yes, but we went much faster when we went to Mars. Still, no matter
how fast we travel, you'd never realize it inside here."

This was true. So well balanced was the projectile, and so delicately
poised was the machinery, that the terrifically fast rate of travel,
rivalling that of the earth, was no more noticed than we, on this
globe, notice our pace of nineteen miles a second around the sun.

"Everything seems to be all right," observed Professor Henderson, as he
looked out of the plate-glass window of the pilot house into a sea of
rolling mist, which represented the ether, for they had soon passed
through the atmosphere of the earth, which scientists estimate to be
two hundred miles in thickness.

"Are we going to move any faster than this?" asked Jack, who seemed
possessed of a speed mania.

"Not right away," replied Mr. Henderson. "Professor Roumann wants to
thoroughly test the Cardite motor first. Then, when he finds that it
works all right, we may go faster. But we will be at the moon soon
enough as it is. It is time we headed more directly on our proper way,
though, so I think I will ask Mr. Roumann to step here and aid me in
getting the projectile on the right course. You boys had better remain
also and learn how it is done. You may need to know some time."

"I'll call the professor here, if he can leave the engine room," said
Mark, and he found the German bending over some complicated apparatus.
The scientist announced that the machines would run themselves
automatically for a while, so he accompanied the lad back to the pilot-
house.

There, consulting big charts of the heavens, and by making some
intricate calculations, which the boys partly understood, the German
and Mr. Henderson were able to locate the exact position of the moon,
though that body was not then in sight, being behind the earth.

"That ought to bring us there inside of a week," announced Mr.
Henderson, as he fastened the automatic steering apparatus in place.
"The projectile will now be held on a straight course, and I hope we
shall not have to change it."

"Could anything cause us to swerve to one side?" asked Jack.

"Sure," replied Mark. "Don't you remember how, in the trip to Mars, we
nearly collided with the comet? If we are in danger of hitting another
one of those things, or even a meteor, we'll steer out of the way,
won't we?"

"Of course. I forgot about that," admitted Jack.

"Yes," declared Professor Roumann, "we'll have to be on the lookout for
wandering meteors or other stray heavenly bodies. But our instruments
will give us timely warning of them. Now, I think we can leave the
projectile to herself while I make sure that all the machinery is
running smoothly. You boys may stay here if you like, though there
isn't much to see."

There wasn't. It was totally unlike taking a trip on earth, where the
ever-varying scenery makes a journey pleasant. There was no landscape
to greet the eye now. It was even unlike a trip in a balloon, for in
that sort of air-craft, at least for a time, a glimpse of the earth can
be had. Now there was nothing but a white blanket of mist to be seen,
which rolled this way and that. Occasionally it was dispelled, and the
full, golden sunlight bathed the projectile. The earth had long since
dropped out of sight, for it required only a few seconds to put the
_Annihilator_ high up in a position where even the most intrepid
balloonist had never ventured.

Mark and Jack sat for a few minutes in the pilot-house, looking out
into the ether. But they soon tired of seeing absolutely nothing.

"I wonder what we'll do when we get to the moon?" asked Jack of his
chum.

"Why, I suppose you'll make a dive for a hatful of diamonds, won't you?
That is, if you still believe that Martian newspaper account."

"I sure do."

The boys found the two professors busy adjusting some of the delicate
scientific instruments with which they expected to make observations on
the trip, and after they reached the moon.

"What is your opinion, Professor Roumann, of the temperature at the
moon's surface?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"I am in two minds about it," was the reply. "A few years ago, I see by
an astronomy, Lord Rosse inferred from his observations that the
temperature rose at its maximum (or about three days after full moon)
far above that of boiling water."

"Boiling water!" ejaculated Mark. "Wow! That won't be very nice. I
don't want to be boiled like a lobster!"

"Wait a moment," cautioned Mr. Roumann, with a smile. "Later, Lord
Rosse's own investigations, and those of Langley, threw some doubts on
this. There is said to be no air blanket about the moon, as there is
about the earth, so that the moon loses heat as fast as it receives it;
and it now seems more probable that the temperature never rises above
the freezing point of water, just as is the case on our highest
mountains."

"That's better," came from Jack. "We can stand a low temperature more
easily than we can to be boiled; eh, Jack?"

"Sure. But I don't want to be frozen or boiled either, if I can help
it. Guess I'll wear my fur suit that we brought back from the North
Pole with us."

"I agree with you, Professor Roumann, about the temperature," announced
Mr. Henderson, "so we must make up our minds to shiver, rather than
melt. But we are prepared for that."

"What about there being no air on the moon?" asked Jack.

"Oh, we can manufacture our own oxygen," said Mark. "We can walk around
with an air tank on our shoulders, as we did when we went beneath the
surface of the ocean. Now, I guess----"

"Dinner am served in de dining car!" interrupted Washington White, his
black face grinning cheerfully. He used to be a waiter in a Pullman,
and he was proud of it. "First call fo' dinner!" he went on. "Part ob
it am boiled, part am roasted, laik I done heah yo' talkin' 'bout jest
now, an' part am frozed--dat's de ice cream," he added hastily, lest
there be a mistake about it.

"Well, that sounds good," observed Mark. "Come on, everybody," and he
led the way to the dining cabin.

They had not been at the table more than a few minutes, and had begun
on the "boiled" part of the meal, which was the soup, when from the
engine room there came a curious, whining noise, as when an electric
motor slows up.

"What's that?" cried Professor Henderson, jumping up from his seat in
alarm.

"Something wrong in the engine room," cried Mr. Roumann.

The two scientists, followed by the boys, hurried to where the various
pieces of apparatus were sending the projectile forward through space.
Already there was an appreciable slackening of speed.

"The Cardite motor has stopped!" cried Mr. Roumann. "Something has
happened to it!"

"Can it be the result of the damage which that lunatic did?" asked Mr.
Henderson.

"Perhaps," spoke Jack. "If I had him here----"

"We are falling!" shouted Mark, looking at an indicator which marked
their speed and motion.

"Can't we start some other motor?" asked Jack.

At that instant from beneath the now silent Cardite machine there came
a prolonged crow.

"My Shanghai rooster!" shouted Washington. "He am in dar!"

A second later the rooster scrambled out, scratching vigorously. Grains
of corn were scattered about. The motor started up again, and the
projectile resumed its onward way.

"The rooster stopped it!" cried Jack. "He went under it to get some
corn, and he must have deranged one of the levers. Oh, you old
Shanghai, you nearly gave us all heart disease!"

And the rooster crowed louder than before, while his colored owner
"shooed" him out of the engine room. The trouble was over speedily, and
the _Annihilator_ was once more speeding toward the moon.




CHAPTER XVI

"WILL IT HIT US?"


"Well, for a trouble-maker, give me a rooster every time," spoke Jack,
as, after an examination of the machinery, it was found that nothing
was out of order. "How do you think it happened, Professor Henderson?"

"It never could have happened except in just that way," was the reply
of Mr. Roumann. "Underneath the motor, where they are supposed to be
out of all reach, are several self-adjusting levers. They control the
speed, and also, by being moved in a certain direction, they will shut
down the apparatus. The rooster crawled beneath the machine, an act
that I never figured on, for I knew it was too small for any of us to
reach with our hands or arms, even had we so desired. But the
Shanghai's feathers must have brushed against the levers, and that
stopped the action of the Cardite motor. However, I'm glad it was no
worse."

"Yes, let's finish dinner now, if everything is all right," proposed
Mark.

"How did the rooster get in here?" asked Jack.

"I 'spects dat's my fault," answered Washington. "I took him out ob his
coop fo' a little exercise dis mawnin', an' he run in heah."

"That explains it, I think," said Mr. Roumann. "Well, Washington, don't
let it happen again. We don't want to be dashed downward through space
all on account of a rooster."

"No, indeedy; I'll lock him up good an' tight arter dis," promised the
colored man.

They resumed the interrupted dinner, discussing the possibility of what
might have happened, and congratulating themselves that it did not take
place.

"It certainly seems like old times to be eating while travelling along
like a cannon-ball," remarked Jack. "I declare, it gives me an
appetite!"

"You didn't need any," retorted his chum. "But say! maybe things don't
taste good to me, after what I got while that fellow Axtell had me a
prisoner! Jack, I'll have a little more of that cocoanut pie, if you
don't mind."

Jack passed over the pastry, and Mark took a liberal piece. Then
Washington brought in the ice cream, which was frozen on board by means
of an ammonia gas apparatus, the invention of Professor Henderson. The
novelty of dining as comfortably as at home, yet being thousands of
miles above the earth, and, at the same time, speeding along like a
cannon-ball, did not impress our friends as much as it had during their
trip to Mars.

"Well, we're making a little better time now," observed Mark, as he and
the others rose from the table and went to the engine room. "The gauge
shows that we're making twenty-five miles a second."

"We will soon go much faster," announced Professor Roumann. "I have not
yet had a chance to test my Cardite motor to its fullest speed, and I
think I will do so. I wish to see if it will equal my Etherium machine.
I'll turn on the power gradually now, and we'll see what happens."

"How fast do you think it ought to send us along?" asked Jack.

"Oh, perhaps one hundred and twenty-five miles a second. You know we
went a hundred miles a second when we headed for Mars. I would not be
surprised if we made even one hundred and thirty miles a second with
the Cardite."

"Whew! If we ever hit anything going like that!" exclaimed old Andy
Sudds.

"We'd go right through it," finished Jack fervently. The professor was
soon ready for the test. Slowly he shoved over the controlling lever.
The Cardite motor hummed more loudly, like some great cat purring.
Louder snapped the electrical waves. The air vibrated with the enormous
speed of the valve wheels, and there was a prickling sensation as the
power flowed into the positive and negative plates, by which the
projectile was moved through space.

"Watch the hand of the speed indicator, boys," directed Professor
Roumann, "while Professor Henderson and I manipulate the motor. Call
out the figures to us, for we must keep our eyes on the valves." Slowly
the speed indicator hand, which was like that of an automobile
speedometer, swept over the dial.

"Fifty miles a second," read off Mark. The two professors shoved the
levers over still more.

"Seventy-five," called Jack.

"Give it a little more of the positive current," directed Mr. Roumann.

"Ninety miles a second," read Mark a few moments later.

"We are creeping up, but we have not yet equalled our former speed,"
spoke Mr. Henderson. The motor was fairly whining now, as if in
protest.

"One hundred and five miles," announced Jack.

"Ha! That's some better!" ejaculated the German. "I think we shall do
it." Once more he advanced the speed lever a notch.

"One hundred and thirty!" fairly shouted Mark. "We are beating all
records!"

"And we will go still farther beyond them!" cried Mr. Roumann. "Watch
the gauge, boys!"

To the last notch went the speed handle. There was a sharp crackling,
snapping sound, as if the metal of which the motor was composed was
strained to the utmost. Yet it held together.

The hand of the dial quivered. It hung on the one hundred and thirty
mark for a second, as if not wanting to leave it, and then the steel
pointer swept slowly on in a circle, past point after point.

"One hundred and thirty-five--one hundred and forty," whispered Jack,
as if afraid to speak aloud. The two professors did not look up from
the motor. They looked at the oil and lubricating cups. Already the
main shaft was smoking with the heat of friction.

"Look! look!" whispered Mark hoarsely.

"One hundred and fifty-three miles a second!" exclaimed Jack. "You've
done it, Professor Roumann!"

"Yes, I have," spoke the German, with a sigh of satisfaction. "That is
faster than mortal man ever travelled before, and I think no one will
ever equal our speed. We have broken all records--even our own. Now I
will slow down, but we must do it gradually, so as not to strain the
machinery."

He slipped back the speed lever, notch by notch. The hand of the dial
began receding, but it still marked one hundred and twenty miles a
second.

Suddenly, above the roar and hum of the motor, there sounded the voice
of Andy.

"Professor!" he shouted. "We're heading right toward a big, black
stone! Is that the moon?"

"The moon? No, we are not half way there," said Mr. Henderson. "Are you
sure, Andy?"

"Sure? Yes! I saw it from the window in the pilot-house. We are
shooting right toward it."

"Look to the motor, and I'll see what it is," directed Mr. Henderson to
his friend. Followed by the boys, he hurried to the steering tower. His
worst fears were confirmed.

Speeding along with a swiftness unrivalled even by some stars, the
projectile was lurching toward a great, black heavenly body. "It's a
meteor! An immense meteor!" cried Professor Henderson, "and it's coming
right toward us."

"Will it hit us?" gasped Mark and Jack together.

"I don't know. We must try to avoid it. Boys, notify Professor Roumann
at once. We are in grave danger!"




CHAPTER XVII

TURNING TURTLE


Together Mark and Jack leaped for the engine room. Their faces showed
the fear they felt. Even before they reached it, they realized that, at
the awful speed at which they were travelling, and the fearful velocity
of the meteor, there might be a crash in mid-air which would destroy
the projectile and end their lives.

"I wonder if we can steer clear of it?" gasped Jack.

"If it's possible the professor will do it," responded his chum.

The next instant they were in the engine room, where Mr. Roumann was
bending over the Cardite motor.

"Shut off the power!" yelled Jack.

"We are going to hit a meteor!" gasped Mark.

The German looked up with a startled glance.

"Slow down?" he repeated. "It is impossible to slow down at once! We
are going ninety miles a second!" He pointed to the speed gauge.

"Then there's going to be a fearful collision!" cried Jack, and he
blurted out the fact of the nearness of the heavenly wanderer.

"So!" exclaimed Professor Roumann. "Dot is bat! ferry bat!" and he
lapsed into the broken language that seldom marked his almost perfect
English. Then, murmuring something in his own tongue, he leaped away
from the motor, calling to the boys:

"Slow it down gradually! Keep pulling the speed lever toward you! I
will set in motion the repelling apparatus and go to help Professor
Henderson steer out of the way. It is our only chance!"

Mark and Jack took their places beside the Cardite motor, which was
still keeping up a fearful speed, though not so fast as at first. To
stop it suddenly would mean that the cessation of strain could not all
be diffused at once, and serious damage might result.

The only way was to come gradually down to the former speed, and, while
Mark kept his eyes on the indicator, Jack pulled the lever toward him,
notch by notch.

"She's down to seventy-five miles a second," whispered Mark. They were
as anxious now to reduce speed as they had been before to increase it.

Meanwhile Professor Roumann had set in motion a curious bit of
apparatus, designed to repel stray meteors or detached bits of comets.
As is well known, bodies floating in space, away from the attraction of
gravitation, attract or repel each other as does a magnet or an
electrically charged object.

Acting on this law of nature, Professor Roumann had, with the aid of
Mr. Henderson, constructed a machine which, when a negative current of
electricity was sent into it, would force away any object that was
approaching the _Annihilator_. In a few moments the boys at the
Cardite motor heard the hum, the throb and crackling that told them
that the repelling apparatus was at work.

But would it act in time? Or would the meteor prove too powerful for
it? And, if it did, would the two scientists be able to steer the
swiftly moving projectile out of the way of the big, black stone, as
the old hunter called it?

These were questions that showed on the faces of the two lads as they
bent over the motor.

"We're only going fifty miles a second now," whispered Jack.

Mark nodded his head. "Can't you pull the lever over faster?" he asked.

"I don't dare," replied his chum. There was nothing to do but to wait
and gradually slow up the projectile as much as possible. The boys
could hear the professors in the pilothouse shifting gears, valves and
levers to change the course of the projectile. Andy Sudds and
Washington White, with fear on their faces, looked into the engine
room, waiting anxiously for the outcome.

"Hab--hab we hit it yet?" asked Washington, moving his hands nervously.

"I reckon not, or we'd know it," said the hunter.

"No, not yet," answered Jack, in a low voice. "How much are we making
now, Mark?"

"Only thirty a second."

"Good! She's coming down."

Hardly had he spoken than there sounded a noise like thunder, or the
rushing of some mighty wind. The projectile, which was trembling
throughout her length from the force of the motor, shivered as though
she had plunged into the unknown depths of some mighty sea. The roaring
increased. Mark and Jack looked at each other. Washington White fell
upon his knees and began praying in a loud voice. Old Andy grasped his
gun, as though to say that, even though on the brink of eternity, he
was ready.

Then, with a scream as of some gigantic shell from a thousand-inch
rifle, something passed over the _Annihilator_; something that shook
the great projectile like a leaf in the wind. And then the scream died
away, and there was silence. For a moment no one spoke, and then Jack
whispered hoarsely:

"We've passed it."

"Yes," added Mark, "we're safe now."

"By golly! I knowed we would!" fairly yelled Washington, leaping to his
feet. "I knowed dat no old meteor could kerflumox us! Perfesser
Henderson he done jumped our boat ober it laik a hunter jumps his boss
ober a fence. Golly! I'se feelin' better now!"

"How did you avoid it?" asked Mark of the professor.

"With the help of the repelling machine and by changing our course. But
we did it only just in time. It was an immense meteor, much larger than
at first appeared, and it was blazing hot. Had it struck us, there
would have been nothing left of us or the projectile either but star
dust. But we managed to pass beneath it, and now we are safe."

They congratulated each other on their lucky escape, and then busied
themselves about various duties aboard the air-craft. The rest of the
day was spent in making minor adjustments to some of the machines,
oiling others, and in planning what they would do when they reached the
moon.

In this way three days and nights passed, mainly without incident. They
slept well on board the _Annihilator_, which was speeding so swiftly
through space--slept as comfortably as they had on earth. Each hour
brought them nearer the moon, and they figured on landing on the
surface of that wonderful and weird body in about three days more.

It was on the morning of the fourth day when, as Mark and Jack were
taking their shift in the engine room, that Jack happened to glance
from the side observation window, which was near the Cardite motor.
What he saw caused him to cry out in surprise.

"I say, Mark, look here! There's the moon over there. We're not heading
for it at all!"

"By Jove! You're right!" agreed his chum. "We're off our course!"

"We must tell Professor Henderson!" cried Jack. "I'll do it. You stay
here and watch things."

A few seconds later a very much alarmed youth was rapidly talking to
the two scientists, who were in the pilot-house.

"Some unknown force must have pulled us off our course," Jack was
saying. "The moon is away off to one side of us."

To his surprise, instead of being alarmed, Mr. Roumann only smiled.

"It's true," insisted Jack.

"Of course, it is," agreed Mr. Henderson. "We can see it from here,
Jack," and he pointed to the observation window, from which could be
noticed the moon floating in the sky at the same time the sun was
shining, a phenomenon which is often visible on the earth early in the
morning at certain of the moon's phases.

"Will we ever get there?" asked Jack.

"Of course," replied Mr. Roumann. "You must remember, Jack, that the
moon is moving at the same time we are. Had I headed the projectile for
Luna, and kept it on that course, she would, by the time we reached
her, been in another part of the firmament, and we would have overshot
our mark. So, instead, I aimed the _Annihilator_ at a spot in the
heavens where I calculated the moon would be when we arrived there.
And, if I am not mistaken, we will reach there at the same time, and
drop gently down on Luna."

"Oh, is that it?" asked the lad, much relieved.

"That's it," replied Mr. Henderson. "And that's why we seem to be
headed away from the moon. Her motion will bring her into the right
position for us to land on when the time comes."

"Then I'd better go tell Mark," said the lad. "He's quite worried." He
soon explained matters to his chum, and together they discussed the
many things necessary to keep in mind when one navigates the heavens.

That day saw several thousand more miles reeled off on the journey to
the moon, and that evening (or rather what corresponded to evening, for
it was perpetual daylight) they began to make their preparations for
landing. Their wonderful journey through space was nearing an end.

"I guess that crazy Axtell fellow was only joking when he said we'd
never reach the moon," ventured Jack. "Nothing has happened yet."

"Only the meteor," said Mark, "and he couldn't know about that. I guess
he didn't get a chance to damage any of the machinery."

"No, we seem to be making good time," went on his chum. "I think I'll
go and----"

Jack did not finish his sentence. Instead he stared at one of the
instruments hanging from the walls of the engine room. It was a sort of
barometer to tell their distance from the earth, and it swung to and
fro like a pendulum. Now the instrument was swinging out away from the
wall to which it was attached. Further and further over it inclined.
Jack felt a curious sensation. Mark put his hand to his head.

"I feel--feel dizzy!" he exclaimed. "What is the matter?"

"Something has happened," cried Jack.

The instrument swung over still more. Some tools fell from a work
bench, and landed on the steel floor with a crash. The boys were
staggering about the engine room, unable to maintain their balance.

There came cries of fear from the galley, where Washington White was
rattling away amid his pots and pans. Andy Sudds was calling to some
one, and from the pilot-house came the excited exclamations of
Professors Henderson and Roumann.

"We're turning turtle!" suddenly yelled Jack. "The projectile is
turning over in the air! Something has gone wrong! Perhaps this is the
revenge of that crazy man!" and, as he spoke, he fell over backward,
Mark following him, while the _Annihilator_ was turned completely over
and seemed to be falling down into unfathomable depths.




CHAPTER XVIII

AT THE MOON


Confusion reigned aboard the _Annihilator_. It had turned completely
over, and was now moving through space apparently bottom side up. Of
course, being cigar shaped, this did not make any difference as far as
the exterior was concerned, but it did make a great difference to those
within.

The occupants of the great shell had fallen and slid down the rounded
sides of the projectile, and were now standing on what had been the
ceiling. Objects that were not fast had also followed them, scattering
all about, some narrowly missing hitting our friends. Of course, the
machinery was now in the air, over the heads of the travellers.

This was one of the most serious phases of the accident, for the great
Cardite motor was built to run while in the other position, and when it
was turned upside down it immediately stopped, and the projectile,
deprived of its motive power, at once began falling through space.

"What has happened? What caused it?" cried Mark, as he crawled over to
where Jack sat on the ceiling, with a dazed look on his face.

"I don't know. Something went wrong. Here comes Professor Henderson and
Mr. Roumann. We'll ask them."

The two scientists were observed approaching from the pilot-house. They
walked along what had been the ceiling, and when they came to the
engine room they had to climb over the top part of the door frame.

"What's wrong?" asked Jack.

"Our center of gravity has become displaced," answered Mr. Henderson.
"The gravity machine has either broken, or some one has been tampering
with it. Did either of you boys touch it?"

"No, indeed!" cried Mark, and his chum echoed his words.

"I wonder if Washington could have meddled with it?" went on the
scientist.

At that moment the colored cook came along, making his way cautiously
into the engine room. He was an odd sight. Bits of carrots, turnips and
potatoes were in his hair, while from one ear dangled a bunch of
macaroni, and his clothes were dripping wet.

"My kitchen done turned upside down on me!" wailed Washington, "an' a
whole kettle ob soup emptied on my head! Oh, golly! What happened?"

The aged scientist looked toward the German. The latter was gazing up
at the motionless Cardite motor over his head.

"There is but one way," he answered. "We must restore our centre of
gravity to where it was before. Then the projectile will right
herself."

"Can it be done?" asked Mark.

"It will be quite an undertaking, but we must attempt it. Bring some
tables and chairs, so I can stand up and reach the equilibrium
machine."

From where they had fallen to the ceiling, which was now the floor,
Jack and Mark brought tables and chairs, and made a sort of stepladder.
On this Professor Roumann mounted, and at once began the readjusting of
the centre of gravity.

It was hard work, for he had to labor with his arms stretched up in the
air, and any one who has even put up pictures knows what that means.
The muscles are unaccustomed to the strain. The German scientist,
though a strong man, had to rest at frequent intervals.

"We're falling rapidly," announced Jack, in a low voice, as he looked
at the height gauge.

"I am doing all I can," answered Mr. Roumann. "I think I will soon be
able to right the craft."

He labored desperately, but he was at a disadvantage, for the
_Annihilator_ was not now moving smoothly through space. With the
stopping of the motor she was falling like some wobbly balloon, swaying
hither and thither in the ether currents.

But Professor Roumann was not one to give up easily. He kept at his
task, aided occasionally by Professor Henderson and by the boys
whenever they could do anything.

Finally the German cried out:

"Ah, I have discovered the trouble. It is that scoundrel Axtell! See!"
And reaching into the interior of the machine he pulled out a small
magnet. To it was attached a card, on which was written:

"I told you I would have my revenge!" It was signed with Axtell's name.

"This was the dastardly plot he evolved," said Professor Roumann. "He
slipped this magnet into the equilibrium machine, knowing that in time
it would cause a deflection of the delicate needles, and so shift the
centre of gravity. He must have done this as a last resort, and to
provide for his revenge in case we discovered him on board after we
started. It was a cruel revenge, for had I not discovered it we would
soon all be killed."

"Is the machine all right now?" asked Jack.

"It will be in a few minutes. Here, take this magnet and put it as far
away from the engine room as possible."

It was the work of but a few minutes, now that the disturbing element
was removed, to readjust the gravity machine, and Mr. Roumann called:

"Look out, now, everybody! We're going to turn right side up again!"

As he spoke he turned a small valve wheel. There was a clanging of
heavy ballast weights, which slid down their rods to the proper places.
Then, like some great fish turning over in the water, the _Annihilator_
turned over in the ether, and was once more on her proper keel, if such
a shaped craft can be said to have a keel.

Of course, the occupants of the space ship went slipping and sliding
back, even as they had fallen ceilingward before, but they were
prepared for it, and no one was hurt. From the galley came a chorus of
cries, as pots and pans once more scattered about Washington, but there
was no more soup to spill.

As soon as the _Annihilator_ was righted, the Cardite motor began to
work automatically, and once more the projectile, with the seekers of
the moon, was shooting through space at their former speed. They had
lost considerable distance, but it was easy to make it up.

"Well, that _was_ an experience," remarked Jack, as he and his chum
began picking up the tools and other objects that were scattered all
about by the change in equilibrium.

"I should say yes," agreed Mark. "I'm glad it didn't happen at dinner
time. That fellow Axtell is a fiend to think of such a thing."

"Indeed, he is! But we're all right now, though it did feel funny to be
turned upside down."

An inspection of the projectile was made, but they could discover no
particular damage done. She seemed to be moving along the same as
before, and, except for the upsetting of things in the store-room, it
would hardly have been known, an hour later, that a dreadful accident
was narrowly averted.

Washington made more soup, and soon had a fine meal ready, over which
the travellers discussed their recent experience.

"And when do you think we will arrive?" asked Jack of Mr. Henderson.

"We ought to be at the moon inside of two days now. We have not made
quite the speed we calculated on, but that does not matter. I think we
will go even more slowly on the remainder of the trip, as I wish to
take some scientific observations."

"Yes, and so do I," added Mr. Roumann. "I think if we make fifteen
miles a second from now on we will be moving fast enough."

Accordingly the Cardite motor was slowed down, and the projectile shot
through space at slightly reduced speed, while the two scientists made
several observations, and did some intricate calculating about ether
pressure, the distance of heavenly bodies and other matters of interest
only to themselves.

It was on the afternoon of the third day following the turning turtle
of the _Annihilator_ that Mark, who was looking through a telescope in
the pilot-house, called out: "I say, Jack, look here!"

"What's the matter?" asked his chum.

"Why, we're rushing right at the moon! I can see the mountains and
craters on it as plain as though we were but five miles away!"

"Then we must be nearly there," observed Jack. "Let's tell the others,
Mark."

They hurried to inform the two professors, who at once left their
tables of figures and entered the steering chamber. Then, after gazing
through the glass, Mr. Henderson announced: "Friends, we will land on
the moon in half an hour. Get ready."

"Are we really going to be walking around the moon inside of thirty
minutes?" asked Mark.

"I don't know about walking around on it," answered the German. "We
first have to see if there is an atmosphere there for us to breathe,
and whether the temperature is such as we can stand. But the
Annihilator will soon be there."

The speed of the Cardite motor was increased, and so rapidly did the
projectile approach Luna that glasses were no longer needed to
distinguish the surface of the moon.

There she floated in space, a great, silent ball, but not like the
earth, pleasantly green, with lakes and rivers scattered about in
verdant forests. No, for the moon presented a desolate surface to the
gaze of the travellers. Great, rugged mountain peaks arose all about
immense caverns that seemed hundreds of miles deep. The surface was
cracked and seamed, as if by a moonquake. Silence and terrible
loneliness seemed to confront them.

"Maybe it's better on some other part of the surface," said Jack, in a
low voice.

"Perhaps," agreed Mark. "It's certainly not inviting there."

Nearer and nearer they came to the moon. It no longer looked like a
great sphere, for they were so close that their vision could only take
in part of the surface, and it began to flatten out, as the earth does
to a balloonist.

And the nearer they came to it the more rugged, the more terrible, the
more desolate did it appear. Would they be able to find a place to
land, or would they go hurtling down into some awful crater, or be
dashed upon the sharp peak of some mountain of the moon?

It was a momentous question, and anxious were the faces of the two
professors.

"Mr. Henderson, if you will undertake to steer to some level place, I
will take charge of the motor," suggested Mr. Roumann. "I will
gradually reduce the speed, and get the repelling machine in readiness,
so as to render our landing gentle."

"Very well," responded the aged scientist, as he grasped the steering
wheel.

The progress of the _Annihilator_ was gradually checked. More and more
slowly it approached the moon. The mountains seemed even higher now,
and the craters deeper.

"What a terrible place," murmured Jack. "I shouldn't want to live
there."

"Me either," said Mark.

"Can you see a place to land?" called Professor Roumann through the
speaking-tube from the engine room to the steering tower.

"Yes, we seem to be approaching a fairly level plateau," was Mr.
Henderson's reply.

"Very well, then, I'll start the repelling machine."

The Cardite motor was stopped. The projectile was now being drawn
toward the moon by the gravity force of the dead ball that once had
been a world like ours. Slowly and more slowly moved the great
projectile.

There was a moment of suspense. Mr. Henderson threw over the steering
wheel. The _Annihilator_ moved more slowly. Then came a gentle shock.
The dishes in the galley rattled, and there was the clank of machinery.
The Shanghai rooster crowed.

"We're on the moon at last!" cried jack, peering from an observation
window at the rugged surface outside.

"Yes; and now to see what it's like," added Mark. "We'll go outside,
and----"

"Wait," cautioned Professor Roumann. "First we must see if we can
breathe on the moon, and whether the temperature will support life. I
must make some tests before we venture out of the projectile."




CHAPTER XIX

TORCHES OF LIFE


The natural inclination of the boys to rush out on the surface of the
moon to see what it was like was checked by the words of caution from
Professor Roumann.

"Do you think it would be dangerous to venture outside the projectile?"
asked Jack, as he looked from the window and noted the rugged, uneven
surface of the moon.

"Very much so," was the answer. "According to most astronomers, there
is absolutely no air on the moon, also no moisture, and the temperature
is either very high or around the freezing point. We must find out what
it is."

"How can we?" inquired Mark.

"I'll soon show you," went on the German. "Professor Henderson, will
you kindly assist me."

When it had been decided to come to the moon in quest for the field of
diamonds, certain changes had been made in the _Annihilator_ to fit it
for new conditions that might be met. One of these consisted of an
aperture in the two sides of the projectile permitting certain delicate
instruments to be thrust out, so that the conditions they indicated
could be read on dials or graduated scales from within.

"We will first make a test of the temperature," said Mr. Roumann, "as
that will be the easiest." Accordingly a thermometer was put outside,
and those in the air-craft anxiously watched the red column of spirits.
The temperature was marked as seventy-five inside the _Annihilator_,
but the thermometer had not been outside more than a second before
it began falling.

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson, as he noted it. "The temperature is
going down. I'd rather have it too cold than too hot. We can stand a
minus fifty of cold better than two hundred and twelve of heat. We have
fur garments with us."

"It is still going down," remarked Jack, as he saw the red column drop
down past the thirty mark.

"Below freezing," added Mark.

The spirits fell in the tube until they touched twenty-eight degrees,
and there they remained.

"Twenty-eight degrees," remarked Professor Henderson. "That isn't so
bad. At least, we can stand that if we are warmly clad."

"Yes, but it will be colder to-night," said Jack. For they had landed
on the moon in bright sunlight.

"To-night?" questioned the German scientist, with a smile.

"Yes, it's always colder when the sun goes down," went on the lad.

"You have forgotten one thing," said Mr. Henderson, with a smile at his
young protege. "You must remember, Jack, that the nights and days here
are each fourteen days long--that is, fourteen of our days."

"How's that?" asked Jack.

"Why," broke in Mark, who was a trifle better student than was his
chum, "don't you remember that the moon rotates on its axis once a
month, or in about twenty-eight days, to be exact, and so half of that
time is day and half night, just as on our earth, when it revolves on
its axis in twenty-four hours, half the time is day and half the time
is night."

"Sure, I ought to have remembered," declared Jack.

"Mark is right," added Mr. Henderson. "And, as we have most fortunately
arrived on the moon at the beginning of the long day, we will have
fourteen days of sunshine, during which we may expect the temperature
to remain at about twenty-eight degrees. But now about the atmosphere."
"We will test that directly," went on the German. "It will take some
time longer, though."

Various instruments were brought forth and thrust out of the opening in
the side of the projectile, which opening was so arranged that it was
closed hermetically while the instruments were put forth. Then the
readings of the dials or scales were taken, and computations made. In
fact, some of what corresponded to the moon's atmosphere was secured in
a hollow steel cup and brought inside the _Annihilator_ for analysis.

"Well," remarked Professor Roumann, as he bent over a test tube, the
contents of which he had put through several processes, "I am afraid we
cannot breathe on the moon."

"Can't breathe on it?" gasped Jack. "Then we can't go out and walk
around it."

"I didn't say that," resumed the German, with a smile. "I said we
couldn't breathe the moon's atmosphere. In fact there is nothing there
that we would call atmosphere. There is absolutely no oxygen, and there
are a number of poisonous gases that would instantly cause death if
inhaled."

"Then how are we to get out and hunt for those diamonds, Professor?"
went on Jack. "Gee whiz! if I'd known that, I wouldn't have come. This
is tough luck!"

"Maybe the professor can suggest a way out of the difficulty, boys,"
spoke Mr. Henderson. "It certainly would be too bad if, after our
perilous trip, we couldn't get out of our cage and walk around the
moon."

"I think perhaps I can discover a way so that it will be safe to
venture forth," said Mr. Roumann. "But I must first conduct some
further experiments. In the meanwhile suppose you boys get out some
fur-lined garments, for, though it is only twenty-eight degrees, we
will need to be well clad after the time spent inside this warm
projectile."

"It does look as if he expected to get us out," remarked Jack, as he
and his chum went to where Andy Sudds was.

"Yes, you'll get a chance to pick up diamonds after all, Jack. That is,
if there are any here."

"Of course there are diamonds. You wait and see," and then, with the
help of the old hunter, they took from the store-room their fur
garments.

It was half an hour before the warm clothes were sorted out, and then
the boys went back to where the two professors were.

"Well," asked Jack cautiously, "can we go outside?"

"I think so," answered the German cheerfully. "But you must always be
careful to carry one of these with you," and he handed to each of the
boys a steel rod about two feet long, at the end of which was a small
iron box, with perforations in the sides and top.

"What is this?" asked Jack. "It looks like a magician's wand."

"And that is exactly what it is," said Mr. Henderson. "As there is no
atmosphere fit to breathe on the moon, we have been forced to make our
own, boys. You each hold what may be called torches of life. To venture
out without them would mean instant death by suffocation or poison."

"And will these save our lives?" asked Mark.

"Yes," said Mr. Roumann. "In the iron boxes on those rods are certain
chemicals, rich in oxygen and other elements, which, when brought in
contact with the gases on the moon, will dispel a cloud of air about
whoever carries them--air such as we find on our earth. So, boys, be
careful never to venture out without the torches of life. I had them
prepared in anticipation of some such emergency as this, and all that
was necessary was to put in the chemicals. This I have done, and now,
if you wish, you may go out and stroll about the moon."




CHAPTER XX

ON THE EDGE OF A CRATER


There was a little hesitation after Professor Roumann had spoken. Even
though he assured them all that it would be safe to venture out on the
surface of the moon, with its chilling temperature and its poisonous
"atmosphere" (if such it can be termed), there was an uncanny feeling
about stepping forth into the midst of the desolation that was on every
side.

For it was desolate--terribly so! Not a sound broke the stillness.
There was no life--no motion--as far as could be seen. Not a tree or
shrub relieved the rugged monotony of the landscape. It was like a dead
world.

"And to think that people may have once lived here," observed Jack, in
a low voice.

"Yes, and to think that there may be people on the other side of the
moon even now," added Mark. "We must take a look if it's possible."

"Well," remarked Mr. Henderson, after a while, "are we going out and
see what it's like or not."

"Of course, we are," said Jack. "Come on, Mark, I'm not afraid."

"Me either. Do we have to do anything to the torches to make them
operate, Professor Roumann?"

"Merely press this lever," and the scientist showed them where there
was one in the handle of the steel rod. "As soon as that is pressed, it
admits a liquid to the chemicals and the oxygen gas is formed, rising
all around you, like a protecting vapor. After that it is automatic."

"How long will the supply of chemical last?" inquired Jack.

"Each one is calculated to give out gas for nearly two weeks," was the
reply; "possibly for a little longer. But come, I want to see how they
work. Here is your life-torch, Professor Henderson, and there is one
for you, too, Andy, and Washington."

"'Scuse me!" exclaimed the colored man hastily, as he started back
toward the kitchen.

"Why, what's the matter?" asked Jack. "Don't you want to go out, and
walk around the moon, and pick up diamonds?"

"Diamonds am all right," answered Washington, "but I jest done fo'got
dat I ain't fed my Shanghai rooster to-day, an' I 'spects he's mighty
hungry. You folks go on out an' pick up a few obde sparklers, an' when
I gits de Shanghai fed I'll prognosticate myse'f inter conjunction wif
yo' all."

"You mean you'll join us?" asked Mark.

"Dat's what I means, suah."

"Why, I do believe Washington's afraid!" cried Jack jokingly.

"Askeered! Who's afraid?" retorted the colored man boldly. "Didn't I
done tole yo' dat I got t' feed my rooster? Heah him crowin' now? Yo'
all go 'long, an' I'll meet yo' later," and with that Washington
disappeared quickly.

"Well, he'll soon pluck up courage and come out," declared Professor
Henderson. "Let him go now, and we'll go out and see what it is like on
the moon."

"I hope we find those diamonds," murmured Jack, and Mark smiled.

In order not to admit the poisonous gases into the projectile, it was
decided to leave the Annihilator and return to it by means of a double
door, forming a sort of air lock. It was similar to the water lock used
on the submarine. That is, the adventurers entered a chamber built in
between the two steel walls of their craft. The interior door was then
sealed shut automatically. Next the outer door was opened, and they
could step directly to the surface of the moon and into the deadly
atmosphere.

"Well, are we all ready?" asked Mr. Roumann, as he picked up one of the
chemical torches.

"I guess so," responded Andy Sudds, who had his gun with him. "I hope I
see some game. I haven't had a shot in a long while."

"You're not likely to up here," spoke Mr. Henderson. "Game is scarce on
the moon, unless it's some of that green cheese Washington talked
about."

They entered the air lock and fastened the door behind them. Then
Professor Roumann pressed on the lever that swung open the outer
portal.

"Hold your torches close to your head," he called. "The moon atmosphere
may be too strong for us at first until we create a mist of oxygen
about us."

Out upon the surface of the moon they stepped, probably the first earth
beings so to do, though they had evidence that the inhabitants of Mars
had preceded them.

For a moment they all gasped for breath, but only for a moment. Then
the gas began to flow from the life-torches, and they could breathe as
well as they had done while in the projectile, or while on the earth.

"Well, if this isn't great!" cried Jack, gazing about him.

"It certainly beats anything I ever saw," came from Mark.

"Wonderful, wonderful," murmured Professor Henderson. "We will be able
to gain much valuable scientific knowledge here, Professor Roumann. We
must at once begin our observations."

"I agree with you," spoke the German.

Andy Sudds said nothing. He was looking around for a sight of game,
with his rifle in readiness. But not a sign of life met his eager eyes.

Once they were outside the projectile it was even more desolate than it
had seemed when they looked from the observation windows. It was
absolutely still. Not a breath of wind fanned their cheeks, for where
there is no air to be heated and cooled there could be no wind which is
caused by the differences of temperature of the air, the cold rushing
in to fill the vacuum caused by the rising of the hot vapors. Clad in
their fur-lined garments, which effectually defied the cold, the
adventurers stepped out.

Over the rugged ground they went, gazing curiously about them. It was
like being in the wildest part of the Canadian Rocky Mountains of our
earth, and, in fact, the surface of the moon was not unlike the
mountainous and hilly sections of the earth. There were no long ranges
of rugged peaks, though, but rather scattered pinnacles and deep
hollows, great craters adjoining immense, towering steeples of rocks,
with comparatively level ground in between.

The life-torches worked to perfection. As our friends carried them,
there arose about their bodies a cloud of invisible vapor, which,
however, was as great a protection from the poisonous gases as a coat
of mail would have been.

"This is great!" exclaimed Jack. "It's much better than to have to put
on a diving-suit and carry a cylinder of oxygen or compressed air about
on our shoulders."

They strolled away from the projectile and gazed back at it. Nothing
moved--not a sound broke the stillness. There was only the blazing
sunlight, which, however, did not seem to warm the atmosphere much, for
it was very chilly. On every side were great rocks, rugged and broken,
with here and there immense fissures in the surface of the moon,
fissures that seemed miles and miles long.

"Well, here's where I look for diamonds," called Jack, as he stepped
boldly out, followed by Mark. "Let's see who'll find the first
sparkler."

"All right," agreed his chum, and they strolled away together, slightly
in advance of the two professors and Andy, who remained together, the
scientist discussing the phenomena on every side and the hunter looking
in vain for something to shoot. But he had come to a dead world.

Almost before they knew it Jack and Mark had gone on quite some
distance. Though they were not aware of it at that moment, it was much
easier to walk on the moon than it was on the earth, for they weighed
only one sixth as much, and the attraction of gravitation was so much
less.

But suddenly Jack remembered that curious fact, and, stooping, he
picked up a stone. He cast it from him, at the same time uttering a
yell.

"What's the matter?" called Mark.

"Look how far I fired that rock!" shouted Jack. "Talk about it being
easy! why, I believe I could throw a mile if I tried hard!"

"It goes six times as far as it would on the earth," spoke his chum,
"and we can also jump six times as far."

"Then let's try that!" proposed Jack. "There's a nice level place over
there. Come on, I'll wager that I can beat you."

"Done!" agreed Mark, and they hurried to the spot, their very walking
being much faster than usual.

"I'll go first," proposed Jack, "and you see if you can come up to me."
He poised himself on a little hummock of rock, balanced himself for a
moment, and then hurled himself through space.

Prepared as he was, in a measure, for something strange, he never
bargained for what happened. It was as if he had been fired from some
catapult of the ancient Romans. Through the air he hurtled, like some
great flying animal, covering fifty feet from a standing jump.

"Say, that's great!" yelled Mark. "Here I come, and I'll beat----"

He did not finish, for a cry of horror came from Jack.

"I'm going to fall into a crater--a bottomless pit! I'm on the edge of
it!" yelled the lad who had jumped.

And, with horror-stricken eyes, Mark saw his chum disappear from sight
beyond a pile of rugged rocks, toward which he had leaped. The last
glimpse Mark had was of the life-torch, which Jack held up in the air,
close to his head.

"Jack--in a crater!" gasped Mark, as he ran forward, holding his own
life-torch close to his mouth and nose.




CHAPTER XXI

WASHINGTON SEES A GHOST


Advancing by leaps and bounds, and getting over the ground in a manner
most surprising, Mark soon found himself on the edge of the great,
yawning crater, into which his chum Jack had started to slide. I say
started, for, fortunately, the lad had been saved from death but by a
narrow margin.

As Mark gazed down into the depths, which seemed fathomless, and which
were as black as night, he saw his friend clinging to a rocky
projection on the side of the extinct volcano. Jack had managed to
grasp a part of the rough surface as he slid down it after his reckless
jump. He looked up and saw Mark.

"Oh, Mark, can't you save me?" he gasped. "Call Professor Henderson!"

"I'll get you up, don't worry!" called Mark, as confidently as he
could. "Hold tight, Jack. What has become of your life-torch?"

"I have it here by me. I didn't drop it, and it's on a piece of the
rock near my head. Otherwise I couldn't breathe. Oh, this place is
fearfully deep. I guess it hasn't any bottom."

"Now, keep still, and don't think about that. Save your strength, hold
fast, and I'll get you up."

But, having said that much, Mark was not so sure how next to proceed.
It was going to be no easy task to haul up Jack, and that without ropes
or other apparatus. Another matter that added to the danger was the
necessity of keeping the life-torch close to one's face in order to
prevent death by the poisonous gases.

Mark's first impulse was to hasten back and call the two professors,
but he looked over the desolate landscape, and could not see them, and
he feared that if he went away Jack might slip and fall into the
unknown depths of the crater.

"I've got to get him out alone," decided Mark. "But how can I do it?"

He crawled cautiously nearer to the edge of the extinct volcano and
looked down. A few loose stones, dislodged by his weight, rattled down
the sides.

"Look out!" cried Jack quickly, "or you'll fall, too!"

"I'll be careful," answered Mark, and then he drew away out of danger,
with a queer feeling about his heart, which was beating furiously. Mark
had hoped to be able to make his way down the side of the crater to
where his chum was and help him up. But a look at the steep sides and
the uncertain footing afforded by the loose rocks of lava-like
formation showed that this could not be done.

"I've got to think of a different scheme," decided Mark, and, spurred
on by the necessity of acting quickly if he was to save Jack, he fairly
forced his brain to work. For he saw by the strained look on his chum's
face that Jack could not hold out much longer.

"I have it!" cried Mark at length. "My fur coat! I can cut it into
strips of hide and make a rope. Then I can lower it down to Jack and
haul him up."

He did not think, for the moment, of the cold he would feel when he
stripped off the fur garment, and when it did come to him in a flash he
never hesitated.

"After all, I've often been out without an overcoat on cold days," he
said to himself. "I guess I can stand it for a while, and when Jack is
up I can run back to the projectile and keep warm that way."

To think was to act, and Mark laid down his life-torch to take off the
big fur coat. The next instant he had toppled over, almost in a faint,
and, had he not fallen so that his head was near the small perforated
box on the end of the steel rod, whence came the life-giving gas, the
lad might have died.

He had forgotten, for the instant, the necessity of always keeping the
torch close to his face to prevent the poisonous gases of the moon from
overpowering him. Mark soon revived while lying on the ground, and,
rising, with his torch in his hand, he looked about him.

"I've got to have my two hands to work with," he mused, "and yet I've
got to hold this torch close to my face. Say, a fellow ought to have
three hands if he's going to visit the moon. What can I do?"

In an instant a plan came to him. He thrust the pointed end of the
steel rod in the crevice of some rocks, and it stood upright, so that
the perforated box of chemicals was on a level with his face.

"There," said Mark aloud, "I guess that will work. I can use both my
hands now." The plan was a good one. Next, taking off his coat, the lad
proceeded to cut it into strips, working rapidly. He called to Jack
occasionally, bidding him keep up his courage. "I'll soon have you
out," he said cheeringly.

In a few minutes Mark had a long, stout strip of hide, and, taking his
life-torch with him, he advanced once more to the edge of the crater.
He stuck the torch in between some rocks, as before, and looked down at
Jack.

"I--I can't hold on much longer," gasped the unfortunate lad. "Hurry,
Mark!"

"All right. I'm going to haul you up now. Can you hold on with one hand
long enough to slip the loop of this rope over your shoulders?"

"I guess so. But where did you get a rope?"

"I made it--cut up my fur coat."

"But you'll freeze!"

"Oh, I guess not. Here it comes, Jack. Get ready!"

Mark lowered the hide rope to his chum. The latter, who managed to get
one toe on a small, projecting rock, while he held on with his right
hand, used his left to adjust the loop over his shoulders and under his
arms.

"Are you all ready?" asked Mark.

"Yes, but can you pull me up?"

"Sure. I'm six times as strong as when on the earth. Hold steady now,
and keep the torch close to your face."

Mark had placed some pieces of his fur coat under the rope where it
passed over the edge of the mouth of the crater to prevent the jagged
rocks from cutting the strips of hide.

"Here you come!" he cried to Jack, and he began to haul, taking care to
keep his own head near his torch, which was stuck upright. Mark had
spoken truly when he said he possessed much more than his usual
strength. Any one who has tried to haul up a person with a rope from a
hole, and with no pulleys to adjust the strain of the cable, knows what
a task it is. But to Mark, on the moon, it was comparatively easy.

Hand over hand he pulled on the hide rope until, with a final heave, he
had Jack out of his perilous position. He had pulled him up from the
mouth of the crater, and the thick fur coat Jack wore had prevented the
sharp rocks from injuring him. In another moment he stood beside Mark,
a trifle weak and shaky from his experience, but otherwise unhurt.

"How did you happen to go down there?" asked Mark.

"Not from choice, I assure you," answered Jack. "I couldn't see the
crater when I jumped, as it was hidden by some rocks, and I was into it
before I knew it. But don't stand talking here. Put on my coat. I don't
need it. I'm warm."

"I will not. I'm not a bit cold. But we may as well get back to the
projectile, for they'll be worrying about us." Thereupon Mark broke
into a run, for, now that the exertion of hauling up Jack was over, he
began to feel cool, and the chilling atmosphere of the moon struck
through to his bones.

In a short time the two lads were back at the _Annihilator_, where
they found Professors Roumann and Henderson getting a bit anxious about
them. Their adventure was quickly related, and the boys were cautioned
to be more careful in the future.

"This moon is a curious, desolate place," said Mr. Henderson, "and you
can't behave on it as you would on the earth. We have discovered some
curious facts regarding it, and when we get back I am going to write a
book on them. But I think we have seen enough for the present, so we'll
stay in the rest of the day and plan for farther trips."

"Aren't we going to look for those diamonds?" asked Jack, who had
almost fully recovered from his recent experience.

"Oh, yes, we will look around for them," assented Mr. Roumann. "I
think, after a day or so, we will move our projectile to another part
of the moon. We want to see as much of it as possible."

They sat discussing various matters, and, while doing so, Washington
White peered into the living cabin.

"Has yo' got one ob dem torch-light processions t' spare?" he asked.

"Torch-light processions?" queried Mark. "What do you think this is, an
election, Wash?"

"I guess he means a life-torch," suggested Jack. "Are you going out,
Wash?"

"Yais, sah, I did think I'd take a stroll around. Maybe I kin find a
diamond fo' my tie."

Laughing, Jack provided the colored man with one of the torches,
instructing him how to use it, and presently Washington was seen
outside, walking gingerly around, as though he expected to go through
the crust of the moon any moment. Pretty soon, however, he got more
courage and tramped boldly along, peering about on the ground for all
the world, as Mark said, as if he was looking for chestnuts.

They paid no attention to the cook for some little time until, when the
boys and the two professors were in the midst of a discussion as to
where would be the best place to move the projectile next, they heard
him running along the corridor toward the cabin.

"Wash is in a hurry," observed Jack.

The next instant they sprang to their feet at the sight of the
frightened face of the colored man peering in on them. He was as near
white as a negro can ever be, which is a sort of chalk color, and his
eyes were wide open with fear.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack.

"A ghost! I done seen de ghost ob a dead man!" gasped the colored man.

"A ghost?" repeated Mark.

"Yais, sah, right out yeah! He's lyin' down in a hole--a dead man.
Golly! but I'se a scared coon, I is!" and Washington looked over his
shoulder as though he feared the "ghost" had followed him.




CHAPTER XXII

A BREAKDOWN


At first they were inclined to regard the announcement of Washington
lightly, but the too evident fright of the colored man showed that
there was some basis for his fear.

"Tell us just what you saw, and where it was," said Mr. Henderson. "Was
the man alive, Washington?"

"No, sah. How could a ghost be alive? Dey is all dead ones, ghosts am!"

"There are no such things as ghosts," said Mr. Henderson sternly.

"Den how could I see one?" demanded the cook triumphantly, as if there
was no further argument.

"Well, tell us about it," suggested Jack.

"It were jest dis way," began Washington earnestly, and with occasional
glances over his shoulder, "I were walkin' along, sort ob lookin' fer
dem sparklin' diamonds, an' I didn't see none, when all on a suddint I
looked down in a hole, and dere I seen HIM!" and he brought out the
word with a jerk.

"Saw what--who?" asked Mr. Roumann.

"De ghost--de dead man. He were lyin' all curled up, laik he were
asleep, an' when I seed him, I didn't stop t' call him t' dinner, yo'
can make up yo' minds t' dat all."

"Can you show us the place?" inquired Jack.

"Yais, sah, massa Jack, dat's what I kin. I'll point it out from dish
yeah winder, but I ain't g'wine dar ag'in; no, sah, 'scuse me!"

"Well, show us then," suggested Mark. "I wonder what it can be?" he
went on.

"Maybe one of the people who came from Mars after the diamonds, who was
forgotten and left here, and who died," said Jack.

"It's possible," murmured Mr. Henderson. "However, we'll go take a
look. Get on your fur coats, boys, and take the life-torches. Will you
come, Andy?"

"Sure. It's got to be more than a ghost to scare me," said the hunter.

They emerged from the projectile and walked in the direction Washington
had pointed, holding their gas torches near their heads and talking of
what they might see.

"This will be evidence in favor of my diamond theory," declared Jack.
"It shows that the Martians were here."

"Wait and see what it is," suggested his chum.

They walked along a short distance farther, and then Mark spoke.

"That ought to be the place over there," he said, pointing to a
depression between two tall pinnacles of black rock.

Jack sprang forward, and a moment later uttered a cry of astonishment.

"Here it is!" he called. "A dead man!"

"A dead man?" echoed Professor Henderson.

"A petrified man," added Jack, in awe-struck tones. "He's turned to
stone."

A few seconds later they were all grouped around the strange object--it
was a man no longer, but had once been one. It was a petrified human
being, a full-grown man, to judge by the size, and it was a solid image
in stone, even the garments with which he had been clothed being turned
to rock.

For a moment no one spoke, and they gazed in silence at what was an
evidence of former life on the moon. The man was huddled up, with the
knees drawn toward the stomach and the arms bent around the body, as if
the man had died in agony. The features were scarcely distinguishable.

"That man was never an inhabitant of Mars," spoke Professor Henderson,
in a low voice. "He is much too large, and he has none of the
characteristics of the Martians."

"I agree with you," came from Mr. Roumann.

"Then who is he?" asked Jack.

"I think," said the aged scientist, "that we are now gazing on all that
was once mortal of one of the inhabitants of the moon."

"An inhabitant of the moon?" gasped Mark.

"Yes; why not?" went on Mr. Henderson. "I believe the moon was once a
planet like our earth--perhaps even a part of it, and I think that it
was inhabited. In time it cooled so that life could no longer be
supported, or, at least, this side of the moon presents that
indication. The people were killed--frozen to death, and by reason of
the chemical action of the gases, or perhaps from the moon being
covered with water in which was a large percentage of lime, they were
turned to stone. That is what happened to this poor man."

"Such a thing is possible," admitted Professor Roumann gravely.

And, indeed, it is, as the writer can testify, for in the Metropolitan
Museum in New York there are the remains of an ancient South American
miner, whose body has been turned into solid copper. The corpse, of
which the features are partly distinguishable, was found four hundred
feet down in an old copper mine, where the dripping from hidden
springs, the waters of which were rich in copper sulphate, had
converted the man's body into a block of metal, retaining its natural
shape. The body is drawn up in agony, and there is every indication
that the man was killed by a cave-in of the mine. Some of his tools
were found near him.

They remained gazing at the weird sight of the petrified man for some
time.

"Then the moon was once inhabited?" asked Jack at length.

"I believe so--yes," answered Professor Henderson.

"Then where are the other people?" asked Mark. "There must be more than
one left. Why was this man off here alone?"

"We don't know," responded the German scientist. "Perhaps he was off
alone in the mountains when death overtook him, or perhaps all his
companions were buried under an upheaval of rock. We can only
theorize."

"It will be something else to put in the book I am to write," said Mr.
Henderson. "But, now that we have evidence of former life on the moon,
we must investigate further. We will make an attempt to go to the other
side of the country, and to that end I suggest that we set our
projectile in motion and travel a bit. There is little more to see
here."

This plan met with general approval, and, after some photographs had
been taken of the petrified man, and the professors had made notes, and
set down data regarding him, and had tried to guess how long he had
been dead, they went back to the _Annihilator_.

"Well, did yo' all see him?" asked Washington.

"We sure did," answered Jack. "You weren't mistaken that time."

They got ready to move the projectile, but decided to remain over night
where they were. "Over night" being the way they spoke of it, though,
as I have said, there was perpetual daylight for fourteen days at a
time on the moon.

Professors Roumann and Henderson made a few more observations for
scientific purposes. They found traces of some vegetation, but it was
of little value for food, even to the lower forms of animal life, they
decided. There was also a little moisture; noticed at certain hours of
the day. But, in the main, the place where they had landed was most
desolate.

"I hope we get to a better place soon," said Jack, just before they
sealed themselves up in the projectile to travel to a new spot.

As distance was comparatively small on the moon, for her diameter is
only a little over two thousand miles and the circumference only about
six thousand six hundred miles, the _Annihilator_ could not be speeded
up. If it went too fast, it would soon be off the moon and into space
again.

Accordingly the Cardite motor was geared to send the big craft along at
about forty miles an hour, and at times they went even slower than
that, when they were passing over some part of the surface which the
professors wished to photograph or observe closely.

They did not rise high into the air, but flew along at an elevation of
about two hundred feet, steering in and out to avoid the towering peaks
scattered here and there. Occasionally they found themselves over
immense craters that seemed to have no bottom.

For two days they moved here and there, finding no further signs of
life, neither petrified nor natural, though they saw many strange
sights, and some valuable pictures and scientific data was obtained.

It was on the third day, when they were approaching the side of the
moon which from time immemorial has been hidden from view of the
inhabitants of the earth, that Jack, who was with Mark in the engine
room, while the two professors were in the pilot-house, remarked to his
chum: "Mark, doesn't it strike you that the water pump and the air
apparatus aren't working just right?"

"They don't seem to be operating very smoothly," admitted Mark, after
an examination.

"That's what I thought. Let's call Mr. Henderson. The machinery may
need adjusting."

Jack started from the engine room to do this, and as he paused on the
threshold there was a sudden crash. Part of the air pump seemed to fly
off at a tangent, and a second later had smashed down on the Cardite
motor. This stopped in an instant, and the projectile began falling.
Fortunately it was but a short distance above the moon's surface, and
came down with a jar, which did not injure the travellers.

But there was sufficient damage done to the machinery, for with the
breaking of the air pump the water apparatus also went out of
commission, and together with the breakdown of the Cardite motor had
fairly stalled the _Annihilator_.

"What's the matter?" cried Professor Henderson, running in from the
pilot-house, for an automatic signal there had apprised him that
something was wrong.

"There's a bad break," said Jack ruefully.

"A bad break! I should say there was," remarked the scientist. "I think
we'll have to lay up for repairs." And he called Mr. Roumann.




CHAPTER XXIII

LOST ON THE MOON


Notwithstanding that they were somewhat accustomed to having accidents
happen, it was not with the most pleasant feelings in the world that
the moon travellers contemplated this one. It meant a delay, and a
delay was the one thing they did not want just now.

They desired to get to the other side of the moon while the long period
of sunshine gave them an opportunity for observation. True there was
some time yet ere the long night of fourteen days would settle down,
but they felt that they would need every hour of sunshine.

"Well, it's tough luck, but it can't be helped," said Mark.

"No, let's get right to work," suggested Jack.

They got out their tools and started to repair the two pumps. It was
found that the Cardite motor was not badly damaged, one of the negative
electrical plates merely having been smashed by a piece of the broken
connecting rod of the air pump. It was only a short time before the
motor was ready to run again.

But it could not be successfully operated without the air and water
pumps, and it was necessary to fix them next. New gaskets were needed,
while an extra valve and some sliding gears had to be replaced.

"It's an all day's job," remarked Professor Henderson.

But many hands made light work, and even Washington and Andy were
called upon to do their share. By dinner time the work was more than
half done, and Professor Roumann, announced that he and Mr. Henderson
would finish it if Jack and Mark would take a look at the exterior of
the projectile, to see if any repairs were needed to that.

The boys found that some of the exterior piping had become loosed at
the joints, because of the jar of the sudden descent, and, taking the
necessary tools outside, while they stuck their life-torches upright
near them, they labored away.

At four o'clock the two lads had their task completed, and at the same
time Professor Henderson announced that the air and water pumps were
now in good shape again.

"Then let's get under way at once," suggested Mr. Roumann. "We have
lost enough time as it is. Hurry inside, boys, and we'll start."

The two chums were glad enough to do so, and in a few minutes they were
again moving through the air toward the unknown portion of the moon.

Below the travellers, as they could see by looking down through a
plate-glass window in the floor of the projectile, were the same rugged
peaks, the same large and small craters that had marked the surface of
the moon from the time they had first had a glimpse of it. There was an
uninteresting monotony about it, unrelieved by any save the very
sparest vegetation.

"I am beginning to think more and more that we will find people on the
other side of this globe," remarked Mr. Roumann, as he made an
observation through a telescope.

"What strengthens your belief?" inquired Mr. Henderson.

"The fact that the vegetation is growing thicker. There are many more
plants below us now than there were before. This part of the moon is
better able to support life than the portion we have just come from."

This seemed to be so, but they were still some distance from the
opposite side of the moon.

"I don't see anything of those diamonds you talked so much about,
Jack," said Mark, with a smile, a little later. "I guess all the
Reonaris you get you can put in a hollow tooth."

"You wait," was all Jack replied.

The projectile was slowed up to permit the two professors to make some
notes regarding a particularly large and deep crater, and a few minutes
later when Mark, who was in the engine room, attempted to speed up the
Cordite motor it would not respond.

"Humph! I wonder what's wrong?" he asked of Jack.

"Better call Mr. Roumann, and not try to fix it yourself," suggested
his chum, when, in response to various movements of the lever, the
machine seemed to go slower and slower.

The German came in answer to the summons.

"Ha!" he exclaimed, "that motor is broken again. We shall have to stop
once more for repairs. I shall need to take it all apart, I fear. Get
me the negative plate remover, will you, Mark?"

The lad went to the tool chest for it. He opened the lid and fumbled
about inside.

"It doesn't seem to be here," he announced.

"What! the negative plate remover not there?" cried the professor.
"Why, it must be. It is one of the new tools we got, and it has not
been used for anything; has it?".

"Oh, by Jinks!" cried Jack suddenly.

"What's the matter?" asked his chum.

"That plate remover! Don't you remember you and I had it when we were
fixing the pipes outside the projectile, when we had the other
breakdown? We must have left it back there on the ground."

Jack and his chum gazed blankly at each other.

"I guess we did," admitted Mark dubiously.

"And it is the only one we have," said Mr. Roumann. "We need it very
much, too, for the projectile can't very well be moved without it."

"How can we get it?" asked Jack. "I'm sorry. It was my fault."

"It was as much mine as yours," asserted Mark. "I guess it's up to us
to go back after it. It isn't far. We can easily walk it."

There seemed to be nothing else to do, and, after some discussion, it
was decided to have the two boys walk back after the missing tool,
which was a very valuable one.

"Take fresh life-torches with you," advised Mr. Henderson, "and you had
better carry some food with you. It may be farther back than you think,
and you may get hungry."

"I guess it will be a good thing to take some lunch along," admitted
Jack. "And some water, too. We can't get a drink here unless we come to
a spring, and we haven't seen any since we arrived."

"I'll go with you, if you don't mind," said Andy. "I may see something
to shoot."

The three of them, each one carrying a freshly charged vapor-torch, a
basket of food and a bottle of water, started off, well wrapped in
their fur coats. Andy had a compass to enable them to make their way
back to where the tool was left, for, amid the towering peaks and the
valley-like depressions, very little of the level surface of the moon
could be seen at a time.

They walked on for several hours, every now and then hoping that they
had reached the place where the projectile had been halted, and where
they expected to find the tool. But so many places looked alike that
they were deceived a number of times.

At length, however, they reached the spot and found the instrument
where Jack had carelessly dropped it. They picked it up and turned to
go back, when Andy Sudds saw a large crater off to one side.

"Boys, I'm going to have a look down that," he said. "It may contain a
bear or wildcat, and I can get a shot."

"Guess there isn't much danger of a bear being on the moon," said Mark,
but the old hunter leaned as far over the edge of the crater as he
dared.

"No, there's nothing here," he announced, with almost a sigh, and he
straightened up. As he did so there came a tinkling sound, as if some
one had dropped a piece of money.

"What's that?" asked Jack.

"By heck! It's the compass!" cried Andy. "It slipped from my pocket
when I stooped over. Now it's gone!"

There was no question of that. They could hear the instrument tinkling
far down in the unfathomable depths, striking from side to side of the
crater as it went down and down.

"We'll never see that again," spoke Mark dubiously. "Can we get back to
the projectile without it?" asked Jack.

"Oh, I fancy I can pick my trail back," answered the hunter. "It isn't
going to be easy, for there are no landmarks to guide me, but I'll do
my best. I ought to have known better than to put a compass in that
pocket."

It was not with very light hearts that they started back, and for a
time they went cautiously. Then, as they seemed to get on familiar
ground, they increased their pace and covered several miles.

"Say," remarked. Jack, as he sat down on a big stone. "I don't know how
the rest of you feel, but I'm tired. We've come quite a distance since
we picked up that tool."

"Yes, farther than it took us to find it after we left the projectile,"
added Mark. "I wonder if we're going right?"

The two boys looked at Andy. He scratched his head in perplexity.

"I can't be sure, but it seems to me that we came past here," he said.
"I seem to remember that big rock."

"There are lots like it," observed Jack.

"Suppose we try over to the left," spoke Mark, after they had rested
for ten minutes.

They swerved in that direction, and, after keeping on that trail for
some time, and becoming more and more convinced that it was the wrong
one, they turned to the right. That did not bring them to familiar
ground, and there was no sight of the projectile.

"Let's go straight ahead," suggested Andy, after a puzzled pause. "I
think that will be best."

"Well, which way is straight ahead?" asked Mark.

"That's so, it is hard to tell," admitted the hunter. "I wish I hadn't
lost that compass."

They wandered about for an hour longer. They could seem to make no
progress, though they covered much ground. Suddenly Jack called out:

"Say, we've been going around in a circle!"

"In a circle?" asked Mark.

"Yes," went on his chum. "Here's the very rock I sat down on a while
ago. I remember it, for I scratched my initials on it."

Jack pointed out the letters. There was no disputing it. They had made
a complete circle. For a moment they maintained silence in the face of
this alarming fact. Then Mark exclaimed:

"I guess we're lost!"

"Lost on the moon!" added Jack, in an awestruck voice, and he gazed on
the chill and desolate scene all about them; the great pinnacles of
rocks, in fantastic form; the immense black caverns of craters on
either hand; the sickly green vegetation.

"Lost on the moon!" whispered Mark, and there was not even an echo of
his voice to keep them company. Only a chill, desolate silence!




CHAPTER XXIV

DESOLATE WANDERINGS


For a moment the three stood helplessly there and stared at each other.
They could scarcely comprehend their situation at first. Then, with a
glance at the cold and quiet scene all about them, a look up at the
sun, which was the only cheerful object in the whole landscape, Jack
observed: "Oh, I say, come on now, don't let's give up this way! We
have only taken a wrong turn, and I'll wager that the projectile will
be just around the corner. Come on," and he started off.

"Yes," said Mark, "that's the trouble. There are so many corners, and
we have taken so many wrong turns, that we're all confused. I think the
best thing to do will be to stay here a while and pull ourselves
together."

"That's right," spoke old Andy. "Many a time in the woods I've got all
confused-like, and then I'd sit down and think, and I'd get on the
right path in a few minutes after."

"The trouble here is," said Jack, "that there are no woods. If there
were we might know how to get out of them. But think of it! Lost on
the moon, in the midst of a whole lot of queer mountain peaks, and big
holes that would hold half a dozen cities of the United States at the
same time, and never know it! This is a fearful place to be lost in!"

"I'm not going to admit that we're lost," declared Mark stoutly.

"Hu! You're like the Indian," spoke Jack. "The Indian who got lost in
the woods. He insisted that it wasn't he who was lost, that it was his
wigwam that couldn't be found. He knew where he himself was all the
while. That's our case, I suppose. We're here, but the projectile is
lost."

"Ha! ha!" laughed Andy Sudds. "That's a pretty good joke!"

"But not being able to find the projectile is no joke," went on Mark,
who always took matters more seriously than did his chum. "What are we
going to do?" he added. "We can't stay here like this."

"Maybe we'll have to," declared Jack. "We certainly can't get off the
moon--at least, not until we reach the projectile, and I'd like to
discover those diamonds before we go back."

"Hu! Those diamonds!" exploded Mark. "I think this whole thing is a
wild-goose chase, anyhow! If it hadn't been for those diamonds we
wouldn't have come to the moon. I don't believe there are any diamonds
here, anyhow."

"Well, I can't prove it to you now, but I will before we get back,"
asserted Jack. "We'll be wearing diamonds, as the song says."

"Diamonds aren't going to keep us warm when we're freezing," went on
Mark, who seemed bound to look on the dark side, "and we can't eat 'em
when we're hungry. A lot of good they'll do us if we do find them!"

"Oh, cheer up!" suggested Jack cheerfully. "And, speaking of eating,
what's the matter with having some lunch? What did we bring it along
for if we're not going to eat? Let's begin."

His good spirits were contagious, not that Andy needed any special
cheering up, but Mark did. In a few minutes they were seated on some
rugged rocks, and, with their life-torches stuck in cracks, so that the
perforated metal boxes of chemicals would be on a level with their
faces, they opened the baskets they had been fore-sighted enough to
bring with them.

"Why, I feel better already," asserted Jack, as he munched some
sandwiches which Washington White had made. "As soon as we've finished
we'll have another hunt for the projectile, and I'll wager that we'll
find it."

"I wouldn't finish if I were you," suggested Andy, who was eating
sparingly.

"Finish what?" asked Jack.

"All your lunch. You see," the old hunter went on, "we may find the
projectile, and, again, we may not. I'm inclined to think we're not so
very far from it, but we may be some time locating it in among all
these peaks and craters. So it will be the best plan to save some of
our lunch and drinking water until--well, until we're hungry again,"
and he carefully put back into his basket the remains of the food.

"You don't mean to say you think we'll be all day finding the
Annihilator, do you?"

Jack paused, with a sandwich half way to his mouth as he asked this
question.

"Well, it's best to be on the safe side," spoke Andy guardedly. "We may
find it, and, again, we may not. Save your powder against the time of
need, I say--by powder meaning victuals and drink. We can't drop in a
restaurant up here, and I don't see much game to shoot, and I should
hate to eat such fodder as this," and he poked with his foot some
sickly green vines, growing on the ground.

The boys' faces, which had become more cheerful, assumed a serious
look. Jack stopped eating at once and placed back in the basket his
remaining sandwiches. He also corked up the bottle of water, which was
kept from freezing by means of a fur pouch in which it was carried.

"If there's a possibility of being lost some time," spoke Mark, "we'd
better figure out just how long our food will last," and he examined
the contents of his basket.

Fortunately Washington White, with a knowledge of the appetites of the
chums, had filled the baskets with lavish hands. There was, they found,
food enough to last them three days, if they ate sparingly, and there
was enough water for half that time, providing they only took small
sips when thirsty. But they had noticed, in one or two places, little
pools of liquid, which they had not tasted, but which might prove to be
drinking water. Certainly they would need more if they were destined to
remain away from the projectile for very long.

"Well, then," observed Mark, when the food calculation was over, "it
appears that we can remain lost for about three days, at the most."

"Oh, but we'll be back home--I mean in the projectile--long before
that," declared Jack.

"I wish I was sure of that," murmured Andy with a dubious shake of his
head.

"Well, let's move on again," suggested Jack. "We feel better now, and
maybe we'll have better luck."

They started off, tramping over the rugged surface of the moon, while
the sun shone with tepid heat down on them. They had to go this way and
that to avoid the immense fissures in the ground or the yawning
craters, which loomed deep, and in awful silence, in their path.
Sometimes they climbed small mountains or crawled in and out of small
craters, slipping and stumbling.

They were not cold, for their fur garments kept them comfortably warm,
and there was no wind to make the freezing temperature search through
the crevices of their clothing. But it was the desolate silence, the
utter absence of any form of life save the pale green vegetation that
got on their nerves. It was like being in a dead world--on a planet
that seemed about to dissolve into space.

They began their further search for the projectile with hope in their
hearts, but this gradually gave way to despair as they wandered on over
the desolate surface, and saw nothing but the same rugged peaks, the
same yawning caverns and the innumerable craters, large and small.

On they wandered, looking on all sides for the missing projectile, but
they had no glimpse of it. Even climbing to one of the high peaks,
whence they had a view of the surrounding country, afforded them no
trace of the _Annihilator_, They were utterly lost.

Old Andy, who, by reason of his experience as a trapper and hunter, had
taken the lead, came to a halt. He looked around helplessly. He did not
know what to do.

"Well, boys," he remarked at length, "I don't like to say it, but I
can't seem to get anywhere. I give up."

"Give up?" murmured Jack, in blank dismay.

"Yes, for the time being," said the old man. "I'm all played out. I
guess we all are. We must have a rest. Here's a sort of cave. Let's
crawl in and have a sleep. Then maybe we can do something to-morrow--
no, not to-morrow, for they don't have that on the moon, where the day
is fourteen days long--but after we sleep we may be able to find our
way back. Anyhow, I've got to get some sleep," and without another word
the old hunter went into the cave, and, fixing his life-torch near his
head, where the fumes from it would dissipate the poisonous gases of
the moon, he closed his eyes, and was soon in slumber.

"I--I guess we'd better do the same," said Jack, and Mark nodded. They
were both sick at heart.




CHAPTER XXV

THE PETRIFIED CITY


For a time, after they had entered the cave, which was in the side of a
rugged mountain, the boys talked in low tones of their perilous
situation. For that it was perilous they both knew. Had they been on
the earth, lost in some desolate part of it, away from civilization,
their plight, would have been bad enough with what little food they
possessed.

But on the far-off moon--the dead moon, which contained no living
creatures save themselves, as far as they could tell--with no form of
animal life that might serve to keep them from starving, with only the
scantiest of vegetation, their situation was most deplorable.

"And then there's another thing," said Mark, as if he was cataloguing a
list of their troubles.

"What is it?" asked Jack. "I guess we have all the troubles that belong
to us, and more, too."

"Well, what are we going to do when the life-torches give out, and we
can't breathe any more?" asked Mark dubiously.

"Well, I guess it'll be all up with us then, if we don't starve to
death in the meanwhile," answered Jack. "But I'm afraid we will get out
of food before the torches are exhausted. They were freshly filled
before we started out after that tool, and they'll last for two weeks.
So we don't have to worry about that.

"By Jinks! this is all my fault, anyhow, it seems. If I hadn't seen
that item in the Martian paper about the diamonds, we never would have
come here, and if I hadn't left that tool on the ground outside of the
projectile we wouldn't have had to come back after it, and we wouldn't
have become lost. So I guess it's up to me, as the boys say."

"Oh, nonsense!" exclaimed Mark, who, as soon as he heard his chum
blaming his own actions, was ready to shoulder part of the
responsibility himself. "We all wanted to come to the moon," he went
on, "and, as for leaving the tool and forgetting it, I'm as much at
fault as you are. Let's go to sleep, and maybe we'll feel better when
we wake up."

It was a new role for Mark--to be cheerful in the face of difficulties
--and Jack appreciated it. They stretched out on the hard, rocky floor
of the cavern, taking care to fix their life-torches so that the fumes
would dispel the poisonous gases. Then the two lads joined Andy in
slumberland.

Meanwhile, as may be imagined, those aboard the projectile were very
anxious about the fate of the two boys and the hunter. They could not
understand what delayed them, and, though they guessed the real cause,
after several hours had passed, there was nothing the two scientists
could do.

They could not move the projectile until it had been repaired, and this
could not be done, without the tool--at least, they did not believe so
then. Nor did Mr. Henderson and the German think it would be safe to
start out in search of the wanderers.

"For," said Mr. Henderson, "if we went we would easily get lost amid
these peaks ourselves, and they are so much alike and in such numbers
that there is no distinguishing feature about them. We had better stay
here in charge of the _Annihilator_ until the boys and Andy come back.
They can't be away much longer now."

So worn out and exhausted were the boys and the hunter that they slept
for several hours in the cave, and the rest did them good. They awoke
in better spirits, and, after a frugal meal and a sip of the fast-
dwindling water, they started off once more to locate the projectile.

"I'm a regular amateur hunter to go and lose my compass," complained
old Andy. "I ought to have it fastened to me, like a baby does the
rattle-box. I ought to kick myself," and he accepted all the blame for
their misadventure. But the boys would not suffer him to thus accuse
himself, and they insisted that they would shortly be with the two
professors and Washington in the _Annihilator_ once more.

"Well, it can't come any too soon," said Jack, "for I am beginning to
feel the need of a square meal and a big drink of water."

"So am I," said Mark, "but let's not think of it."

All that day they wandered on, crossing the rugged mountains, climbing
towering peaks, and descending into deep valleys. At times they skirted
the lips of craters, to look shudderingly into the depths of which made
them dizzy, for the bottoms were lost to sight in the black gloom that
enshrouded the yawning holes.

Their food was getting less and less, and what there was of it was most
unpalatable, for the bread was stale and dry, though the meat kept
perfectly in that freezing temperature. How they longed for a hot cup
of coffee, such as Washington used to make! and how they would have
even exchanged their chance of filling their pockets with the moon
diamonds for a good meal, such as was so often served in the
projectile!

On and on they went. Once, as they were crossing the lip of a great
crater, Mark became dizzy, and would have fallen had not Jack caught
him. Mark had forgotten, for the moment, and had lowered his life-
torch, so that his mouth and nose were not enclosed in the film of
vapor that emanated from the perforated box.

"You must be careful," Andy warned them.

"What's the use?" asked Mark despondently. "I don't believe we'll ever
find the projectile."

"Of course we will!" exclaimed Jack. "I know we can't be far from it,
only we can't see it because of the mountains. If we only had some way
of letting them know where we are, they could signal to us."

"By gum!" suddenly exclaimed Andy.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack, for the old hunter was capering about
like a boy.

"Matter? Why, the matter is that I'm a double-barrelled dunce," was the
answer. "Look here; do you see that?" and he held up his rifle.

"Sure," replied Jack, wondering if their sufferings and worry had made
the old hunter simple-minded.

"What is it?" asked Andy, shaking it in the air.

"Your rifle," answered Mark, looking at Jack in surprise.

"Of course," answered the hunter, "and a rifle is made to be fired off,
and here I've been carrying mine for nearly three days now, and I
haven't shot it once. You wanted a signal to make the folks in the
projectile hear us. Well, here it is I I guess they can hear this, and
when they do they can come and get us, for we don't seem able to reach
them. I'll just fire some signal shots."

"That's the stuff!" cried Jack, and Andy proceeded to discharge his
rifle.

The report the gun made in that quiet place was tremendous, and the
effect was curious, for, there being no air in the ordinary acceptance
of the word, there was no echo. It was as if one had hit two shingles
together. Merely a loud, sharp sound, and then an utter silence, the
vibrations being swallowed up instantly.

"Do you think they can hear that?" asked Andy.

"It sounds loud enough," answered Jack. "Shoot some more," which the
old hunter did. They wandered on still farther, firing at intervals all
that day, but there came no answering report or calls to direct them to
the projectile. They climbed once more to the tops of towering peaks,
but there they found their range of vision limited by peaks still
higher, while there were great valleys, in one of which, whether near
or far they could not tell, they knew, the _Annihilator_ was hidden.

They had almost lost track of time now, and they did not know how far
they had wandered. They had sought out lonely caves to sleep in when
they were so weary they could go no farther, and they had sat about on
bleak rocks shivering, and had eaten their scanty meals--shivering
because in spite of their fur garments they were cold, as they did not
eat enough to keep their blood properly circulating. They could not
when they did not have the food to eat!

Andy used up all but a few of his cartridges in firing signals, but to
no purpose. Their water was all but gone, and of their food only enough
remained for a day longer, though their life-torches still gave forth
plenty of vapor.

"Well, what's to be done?" asked Jack, as they sat about, looking
helplessly at one another.

"Might as well give up," suggested Mark bitterly.

"Give up? Not a bit of it!" cried Andy, as cheerfully as he could.
"Let's keep on. We'll find the projectile sooner or later."

So they kept on. It was while making their way between two great
mountain peaks that towered above their heads on either side, thousands
of feet up, making a sort of natural gateway, that Jack, who was in the
lead, cried out in astonishment at the sight that met his gaze when he
had passed the pinnacles.

"Look!" he shouted, pointing forward.

What he indicated was a great crater--larger and deeper than any they
had yet met with. It seemed a mile across, and, if gloom and darkness
were any indications, it was a hundred miles deep.

But it was not the size of the great hole in the ground, not its
fearful gloom, that attracted their attention. What did was a great
natural or artificial bridge of stone that was thrown across the middle
of it from edge to edge. A bridge of stone that spanned the abyss; a
roadway, fifty feet wide, which reached into some unknown land,
connecting it with the desolate country in which our friends had been
wandering.

"A bridge of stone across the cavern," said Jack, "but see. Here is a
house of stone. This was the guard-house, I'll wager--the guardhouse at
the entrance to some city, and that bridge is the means by which the
inhabitants entered and left. Maybe we are at the edge of the inhabited
part of the moon!"

His words thrilled them. They pressed forward to the beginning of the
bridge across the crater. They looked into the stone hut. Clearly it
had been made by hands, for it was composed of blocks of stone, neatly
fitted together. Jack's theory seemed confirmed.

Mark peered into the house, and uttered a cry of alarm.

"There's a petrified man in there!" he gasped.

Jack and Andy looked in at the open window. They saw, sitting at a
table, which was also of rock, a man, evidently a soldier, or rather he
had been, for he was nothing but stone now, like the hut in which he
dwelt.

The wanderers looked at each other with fear on their faces. What
dreadful mystery were they about to penetrate? "Let's cross the
bridge," suggested Jack, in a low voice. "Maybe this marks the end of
desolation. Perhaps we may find life and food across the crater."

"But--but the petrified man!" gasped Mark.

"What of it? He won't hurt us. Maybe there are live men, who will take
care of us, beyond there," and Jack pointed across the bridge of stone.

There was nothing to keep them where they were--in the land of
desolation. They could not live much longer there, with no food and
water. To pass on over the crater seemed the only thing to do.

"Come ahead," called Jack boldly. They followed him. They kept in the
middle of the road, for to approach the edge, where there was a sheer
descent of so many feet that it made them dizzy to think of it, filled
them with terror. On they hurried until, in a short time, they had
crossed the great chasm.

The road over the crater came to an end between two peaks, similar to
those at the beginning. Jack was the first to pass them, and as he
emerged he once more uttered a cry--a cry of fear and wonder.

And well he might, for in a valley below the wanderers there was a
city. A great city, with wonderful buildings, with wide streets well
laid out--a city in which figures of many men and women could be seen--
little children too! A fair city, teeming with life, it seemed!

But then, as they looked again, struck by the curious quiet that
prevailed, they knew that they were gazing down on a city of the dead--
a city where the inhabitants had been turned to stone, even as had the
soldier on guard in his lonely hut.

They had come upon a petrified city of the moon!




CHAPTER XXVI

SEEKING FOOD


"Well, if this isn't the limit!" burst out Jack, when he had stood and
contemplated the silent city for several moments, which also his
companions did. "After all our wanderings and troubles, when we do find
a place, it isn't any good to us. I don't suppose there is a square
meal in the whole town! Isn't it wonderful, though--every person turned
to stone!"

"Wonderful!" gasped old Andy. "I never saw anything like it in all my
life! What do you reckon did it, boys?"

"The same thing that turned the man in the hut, and the one Washington
thought was a ghost, into stone," answered Mark. "There was a rain of
some lime-water, or a liquid charged with similar chemicals, and the
people were turned to rocks."

It was uncanny, and for a moment they hesitated on the edge of the
city, which lay in a sort of cup-like valley, surrounded on all sides
by towering peaks of the moon mountains. The bridge over which they had
come afforded the only entrance to the city, and in times of war
(provided the inhabitants of the moon ever fought) the passage must
have been well guarded.

It was evidently a time of peace when the calamity that turned the
inhabitants to stone came upon them, for only one soldier was in the
guard hut--doubtless being there merely to give an alarm, or possibly
to keep out undesirable strangers.

"Well, are we going to stand here all day?" asked Jack of his
companions, when they had contemplated the silent city for five minutes
longer.

"I say, let's go down there and see what we can find. I'm getting
hungry."

"There'll be nothing there to eat," declared Mark. "If there ever was
anything, it's now stone. Think of a loaf of bread like a brick, and a
chunk of meat like some great rock!"

"Let's go down, anyhow," added Andy, and they advanced.

As they got down into the streets, the weird effect came over them more
strongly. It was as if they had suddenly entered some large town, and
at their advent every living person had been turned into an image.

"Wonderful, wonderful!" murmured Jack.

"I've read of the uncovering of the ancient buried cities, and how they
found women in the kitchen baking bread, and men at their work, but
this goes ahead of that, for here the people are not dust--they are
statues!"

"It certainly is wonderful," agreed Mark. "I only wish the two
professors could see this. They could write several books about it.
This proves that the moon was once inhabited, though it is dead now.
The projectile should have come to this part of the moon."

"Maybe they'll bring it here, when we get back and tell them what we've
seen," suggested Jack.

"Yes, if we ever do get back," went on his chum, with a return of his
gloomy thoughts.

The strangeness of the scenes all about them can scarcely be imagined.
Think of looking at a city street teeming with life, men and women
hurrying here and there, dogs running about, children at their play,
and then suddenly seeing that same street become as dead as some
mountain, with the people represented as stones on that same mountain,
and you can get some idea of what our friends looked upon.

Here was a woman, looking in a store window, probably at some bargains,
though even the very window and store itself was now stone, and the
woman was like a block of marble. Near her was a little child, also
turned to stone, and there were a number of men, standing together on a
street corner as if they had been talking politics when the calamity
overtook them.

There were shops where the workers had been turned to stone at their
benches, there were houses at the windows of which stone faces peered
out, and there were parks on the benches of which sat men, women and
children, stiff and solid--creatures of stone! Truly it was a city of
the dead!

The wanderers walked about, seeing new wonders on every side. They
spoke in whispers at times, as though at the sound of a loud voice the
silent ones would awaken and resume the occupations or pleasures they
had left off centuries ago.

Another strange part of it was that the people were not so very
different from those of the earth. They were exactly the same in size
and feature, but their clothing, as nearly as could be told from the
stone garments, seemed of a bygone fashion, such as was in vogue
hundreds of years ago. There were no horses observed, though there were
stone dogs and cats, and the shops given over to the sale of food
contained in the windows what seemed to be chunks of meat, loaves of
bread, and pies and cakes, though now they were only pieces of rock.

"It's just as if one of our cities and the people in it should be
suddenly petrified," said Mark. "It's almost like the earth up here;
only they don't seem to have gotten to trolley cars yet."

"Maybe they would if the moon hadn't cooled off when it did, and killed
them all," suggested Jack. "But, I say, let's get down to something
more practical than theorizing."

"What, for instance?" asked Mark.

"Looking for something to eat," went on Jack. "I'm nearly starved, and
I have only half a sandwich left. I want to eat it, yet, if I do, I
don't know where I'm going to get more. And as for water, I'd give a
handful of diamonds, if I had them, for half a glass of even warm
water."

"Yes, we do need food and water badly," said Andy.

"Then let's look for it," suggested Jack. "If we can find food in any
of these houses or shops, I don't believe the people will care if we
take it."

"Find food here?" cried Mark. "Why, you must be crazy! All the food is
turned to stone, and what isn't would be spoiled! Why, no one has been
alive here for thousands and thousands of years!"

"That's nothing," asserted Jack. "Don't you remember reading how, in
the arctic regions, they have found the bodies of prehistoric elephants
and mastodons encased in blocks of ice, where they have been for
centuries. The meat is perfectly preserved because of the cold. And
what of the grains of wheat they find in the coffins of Egyptian
mummies? Some of that is three thousand years old, yet it grows when
they plant it, and they can make bread of it.

"Now, maybe we can find some wheat or something to eat in some of these
houses. If there's meat, it will be perfectly preserved, for the
temperature is below freezing."

"That may be," admitted Mark, convinced, in spite of himself, "but it's
turned to stone, I tell you."

"The outside part may be," said Jack, "but if we can crack off the
outside layer of stone we may find some good meat inside. I'm going to
look, anyhow."

"That's not a bad idea!" cried Andy with enthusiasm. "Think of having a
loaf of bread and some beefsteak thousands of years old. I suppose they
had beefsteak here," he added cautiously.

"Some kind of meat, anyhow," agreed Jack. "Well, let's look for a place
that was once a restaurant or hotel, and we'll see what luck we have.
Come on."

They walked along the silent streets, with their silent occupants, and
finally Jack found what he was seeking. It was an eating place, to
judge by the appearance, and at tables inside were seated stone men and
women.

"Back to the kitchen!" cried Jack with enthusiasm. "There's where we'll
find food, if there is any!"

"It'll be all stone," declared Mark, but he and Andy followed Jack.

They came to the place where was what appeared to be a stove. It was
more like a brick oven, however, than a modern range, though in dishes
that were now stone something was being cooked when the catastrophe
occurred.

"There's meat, I'll wager!" cried Jack, pointing to several objects on
a table. They looked like chunks of beef, but when Mark struck them
with the end of his life-torch they gave forth a sound as if a rock had
been tapped.

"What did I tell you?" Mark asked, "Nothing but rocks. And the bread is
also a stone," he added bitterly.

"You're right," admitted Jack, with a sigh. "And I'm getting hungrier
than ever." They all were. For days they had been without sufficient
food, and now, when it was almost within their reach, they were denied
it by this curious trick of nature. With pale and wan faces they gazed
at each other, wetting their parched lips, for they had some time since
taken the last of their scant supply of water, and they were very
thirsty.

"I guess it's all up with us," murmured Mark. "We'll soon be like these
poor people here--blocks of stone."

"If we only could change this meat back into it's original shape,"
spoke Jack musingly, smiting his fist against a block of beef.

Suddenly Andy uttered a cry.

"I have it!" he fairly shouted.

"What?" asked Jack.

"I have a plan to get meat out of this hunk of stone!"

The two boys gazed at the old hunter as though they thought he had lost
his reason, but, chuckling gleefully, Andy took from his pouch several
cartridges, and proceeded to remove the wads, and pour the powder from
the paper shells out on the stone table.

"I'll have some meat for us," he muttered. "We shan't starve now!"




CHAPTER XXVII

THE BLACK POOL


"What are you going to do, Andy?" asked Jack, as he watched the old
hunter.

"What am I going to do? Why, I'm going to blast out some of this meat,
that's what I'm going to do! I heard you boys talking about elephants
and other things being preserved for centuries in a cake of ice, and,
if that's true, why won't the meat in this petrified city be preserved
just as well? It's always below freezing here, and that's cold enough."

"But the meat has turned to stone," objected Mark.

"Only the outside part of it, to my thinking," answered Andy. "I
believe that inside these lumps of rock we'll find good, fresh meat!"

"But how are you going to get it?" asked Jack.

"Just as I told you--blast it out with some of the powder from my
cartridges. I used to be a miner before I turned hunter, and when we
wanted gold we used to fire a charge in some rocks. Now we want meat,
and I'm going to do the same thing. I'll put some powder underneath
this block of stone that looks as if it was a chunk of roast beef, and
we'll see what happens. It's lucky I saved some of my cartridges."

While he was talking the old hunter had taken some of the powder and
put it back in one of the paper shells. Then, making a fuse by twisting
some powder grains in a piece of paper he happened to have in his
pocket, he inserted it in the improvised bomb, using some dirt and
small stones with which to tamp down the charge. He discovered a crack
in the big stone, which they hoped would prove to be a chunk of roast
beef, and Andy put the cartridge in that.

"Look out now, boys," he called, "I'm going to light the fuse. I didn't
make a heavy charge, but it might do some damage, so we'll go outside."

They hurried from the place, with its silent guests and waiters, and
reached the street. A moment later there sounded a dull explosion.

"Now, let's see what we've got!" called Jack.

Back to the kitchen they ran, the two boys in the lead.

"Why--why--the stone has disappeared!" cried Jack, in disappointment,
as he glanced all around.

"Yes, but look here," added Mark. "Here are bits of meat," and he
picked up from the stone table some scraps of meat.

"Is it really roast beef?" cried Jack. "Good to eat?"

Mark smelled of it. Then he put the morsel cautiously to his lips. The
next instant it had disappeared. It was proof enough.

"Good! I should say it was good!" exclaimed Mark. "I wish there was
more of it! What happened to the rock of meat, Andy?"

"I used too heavy a charge, and it blew all to pieces. I'll know better
next time. There are lots more chunks of meat, and we'll soon have a
feast. I'll make another bombshell."

He worked rapidly while Jack sampled some of the shreds of meat that
had been scattered about by the explosion. The beef was perfectly
cooked, and in spite of its great age it was as fresh and palatable as
frozen meat ever is. Besides the heat generated by the explosion had
partly thawed it, so that there was no trouble in chewing it.

Once more came the explosion, a slight one this time, and when the
adventurers re-entered the kitchen they found that what had been a lump
of stone had been broken open, and the middle part, like the kernel of
a nut, was sweet and good. It was cooked, so they did not have to eat
it raw.

"Say, maybe this isn't good!" exclaimed Jack, chewing away. "It's the
best ever!"

"And there's enough in this city to keep us alive for months, if we
can't find the projectile in that time," declared Andy.

"Don't you think we will?" asked Mark.

"Of course, but I was only just mentioning it. Now, eat all you want,
boys, I have quite a few cartridges left. I didn't fire away as many as
I thought I did, and we can blast out a dinner any time we want it. So
eat hearty!"

They needed no second invitation, and for the first time in several
days they had enough to eat. It was comfortable in the petrified
restaurant, too, for they could move about without carrying their life-
torches constantly in their hand. The gases from the perforated boxes
filled the rooms, and were not quickly dispelled by the poisonous
vapors as they were outside, so they could walk around in comparative
freedom.

"Now, if we could only blast out a loaf of bread, we'd be all right,"
said Jack. They found some petrified loaves, but on breaking one open
it was found to be stone all the way through.

Spurred on by an overwhelming thirst, they wandered about the dead
city, but found no moisture. They tried to chew some of the pale green
vegetation that grew more plentiful on this side of the moon, but it
was exceedingly bitter, and they could not stand it, though there was
some juice in it.

They crossed the city, and wandered out into the country beyond. It
appeared to have been a fertile land before the stone death settled
down on it. They saw farmers in the fields, turned into images, beside
the oxen with which they had been plowing. But nowhere was there a sign
of water. Had it not been for a frozen rice pudding, they would have
perished that first day in the stone city.

As it was, they dragged out a miserable existence, eating from time to
time of the blasted meat. But even this palled on them after a while,
for their lips were parched and cracked, and their tongues were swollen
in their mouths.

"I can't stand this any longer!" cried Jack.

"What are you going to do?" asked Mark.

"Go out and look for water. There must be some in the country outside
if there isn't any in this city. I'm going to have a look. Besides, if
I'm going to die, I might as well die while I'm busy. I'm not going to
sit here in this dreadful place and give up."

His words urged them to follow him, and, with lagging steps, for they
were weak and faint, they went from the restaurant, which they had made
their home since coming to the petrified city.

Out into the open fields they went, but their search seemed likely to
be in vain. Between times of looking for the water they scanned the sky
for a sight of the projectile, which, hoping against hope, they thought
they might see hovering over them. But there was no sight of it.

They came to a vast, level plain, girt with mountains, a lonesome
place, where there was no sign of life. Listlessly they walked over it.

Suddenly Andy, who was in the lead, uttered a cry and sprang forward.
The boys ran to him, and found the old hunter gazing into the depths of
a great black pool, which filled a depression in the surface of the
moon. It was a small crater, and was filled, nearly to the top, with
some black liquid, which gloomily reflected back the light of the sun.

"I'm going to have a drink!" cried Andy, and before the boys could stop
him he threw himself face downward at the edge of the black pool.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE SIGNAL FAILS


"Stop! Don't drink that! It may be poison!" yelled Jack.

"Pull him back!" shouted Mark, and together they advanced on the old
hunter. They tried to drag him away from the black pool, but Andy shook
them off.

"Let--me--alone!" he gasped, as he bent over the uninviting liquid and
drank deeply. "It's water, I tell you--good water--and I'm almost--
dead--from--thirst!"

"Water? Is that water?" cried Jack.

"Well, it's the nearest thing to it that I've tasted since I've been
lost on the moon," spoke Andy, as he slowly arose. "My, but that was
good!" he added fervently.

"But--water?" gasped Mark. "How can there be water here?"

"Taste and see," invited the old hunter.

They hesitated a moment, and then followed his example. The liquid--
water it evidently had once been--had a peculiar taste, but it was not
bad. By some curious chemical action, which they never understood, the
liquid had been prevented from evaporating, nor was it frozen or
petrified as was everything else on the moon.

What gave the liquid its peculiar black color they could not learn.
Sufficient for them that it was capable of quenching their thirst, and
they all drank deeply and refilled their bottles.

"Now, I feel like eating again," spoke Andy, "We can take some of this
back with us, and have a good meal on blasted meat. Whenever we get
thirsty we'll have to make a trip back here for water."

The boys agreed with him. They examined the black pool. It appeared to
be filled by hidden springs, though there was no bubbling, and the
surface was as unruffled as a mirror. The liquid was not very inviting,
being as black as ink, but the color appeared to be a sort of
reflection, for when the water, if such it was, had been put into
bottles it at once became clear, nor did it stain their faces or hands.

"Well, it's another queer thing in this queer moon," said Jack. "I wish
the two professors could see this place. They'd have lots to write
about."

"I wonder if we'll ever see them again?" asked Mark.

"Sure," replied Jack hopefully. "We'll fill our lunch baskets, take a
lot of water along, and have another hunt for the projectile soon."

They did, but with no success. For several days more they lived in the
petrified city, the meat encased in its block of stone, which Andy
blasted from time to time, and the black water keeping them alive. From
time to time they went out in the surrounding country, looking for the
projectile. But they could not find the place where they had left it,
nor could they find even the place where they had picked up the lost
tool that had cost them so much suffering. They were more completely
lost than ever. They crossed back and forth on the bridge over the
crater chasm, and penetrated for many miles in a radius from that,
marking their way by chipping off pieces of the rocky pinnacles, as
they did not want to leave the petrified city behind.

From some peaks they caught glimpses of other towns that had fallen
under the strange spell of the petrification. Some were larger and some
smaller than the one they called "home."

Jack proposed visiting some of them, thinking they might find better
food, but Mark and Andy decided it was best to stay where they were, as
they were nearer the supposed location of the projectile.

"I think they'll manage to fix it up somehow, so it will move," said
Andy, "and then they'll come to look for us. I hope it will be soon,
though."

"Why?" asked Jack, struck by something in the tone of the old hunter.

"Because," replied Andy, "I am afraid our life-torches won't last much
longer. Mine seems to be weakening. I have to hold it very close to my
face now to breathe in comfort, while at first the oxygen from it was
so strong that I could hold it two feet off and never notice the
poisonous moon vapors."

This was a new danger, and, thinking of it, the faces of the boys
became graver than ever. Death seemed bound to get them somehow.

Two more days went by. They had now been lost on the moon over a week.
Each one now noticed that his life-torch was weakening. How much longer
would they last? They dared not answer that question. They could only
hope.

The sun, too, was moving away from them. Soon the long night would set
in. By Mark's computation there was only three more days of daylight
left. What would happen in the desolate darkness?

As they were returning from the black pool, with their water bottles
filled, and put inside the fur bags to prevent the frost from reaching
them, Mark happened to gaze over across a line of towering peaks. What
he saw caused him to gasp in astonishment.

"Jack! Andy! See!" he whispered hoarsely, pointing a trembling finger
at the sky.

There, outlined against the cloudless heavens, was a long, black shape,
floating through the air about two miles distant.

"The projectile! The _Annihilator!_" yelled Jack. "Shout! Call to them!
Wave your hands! Andy, fire your gun! They have started off, and they
can't see us. We must make them hear!"

Together they raised their voices in a mighty shout. The old hunter
fired his gun several times. They waved their hands frantically.

But the projectile never swerved from its course. On it moved slowly,
those in it paying no heed to the wanderers, for they did not hear
them. Andy fired his gun again, but the signal failed, and a few
minutes later the _Annihilator_ was lost to sight behind a great peak.




CHAPTER XXIX

THE FIELD OF DIAMONDS


Dumbly the wanderers gazed at each other. They could not comprehend it
at first. That the projectile, on which their very lives depended in
this dead world of the moon, should float away and leave them seemed
incredible. Yet they had witnessed it.

"Do--do you really think we saw it--saw the _Annihilator_, Mark?" asked
Jack in a low voice, after several minutes had passed.

"Saw it? Of course, we saw it. We've seen the last of it, I'm afraid.
But what do you mean?"

"I--I thought maybe I was out of my head, and I only saw a vision,"
answered Jack. "You know--a sort of mirage. It was real, then?"

"Altogether too real," spoke Andy Sudds grimly. "They didn't see us nor
hear us. We're left behind!"

"But can't we do something?" demanded Mark. "Let's start off and try to
catch them. They were going slow."

"The wonder to me is how they moved at all," said Jack. "I thought the
machinery wouldn't work until we got back with the lost tool."

"Probably the two professors found some way of patching up the motor,"
was Mark's opinion, and later they found that this was so.

For some time they remained staring in the direction in which the
projectile had vanished, as if they might see it reappear, but the
great steel shell did not poke its sharp nose in among the towering
peaks which hid it from view. Probably it was many miles away now.

"Well," remarked old Andy at length, "we've got to make the best of it.
We won't have many more days of light, and we must gather what food we
can, put it where we can find it in the dark, and also bring in some
water from the black pool. We can store that in some of the stone
tables. By turning them upside down they will make good troughs, and it
won't freeze. We must work while we have light, for soon the long night
will come."

The sight of the projectile going away seemed to take the heart out of
all of them, and they did not know what to do. For some time they
remained there idly, until Andy roused the boys to a sense of their
responsibility by urging upon them the necessity of getting together a
store of meat and water.

As they had about exhausted the limited food supply in the ancient
restaurant, they sought and found another and larger one. There they
had the good fortune to come upon some whole sides of beef and lamb,
which were petrified on the outside, but which, when they had blasted
off the outer shell of stone, gave them good food.

They made several trips to the black pool, and brought in all the
liquid they could, for they did not want to have to go outside the
petrified city into the wild and desolate country beyond, after the
dismal night had settled down. They feared they would become lost
again.

Their lonely situation seemed to grow upon them. The appalling silence
all about terrified them. The weird sight of the petrified men and
women in the petrified city got on their nerves.

They had done all they could. A store of meat had been blasted out and
put away. It would keep outside of the stone shell now, for the weather
was getting colder with the advent of the long night.

This fact worried them. With the temperature at twenty-eight when the
sun was shining, what might it not fall to in the darkness? The
terrible cold of the arctic regions might be nothing compared to the
frostiness of the dead moon in the shadow. Their fur garments, thick as
they were, might be no more protection than so much paper. And they had
no means of making a fire, nor anything to burn on one had they been
capable of kindling it, for Andy had used the last of his cartridges to
blast with, and where everything was petrified there was no wood.

Then, too, their life-torches were giving out. The emanations of oxygen
were weaker, and they had to hold them almost under their noses to
breathe the vital vapor.

One day, or rather what corresponded to a day, for they had lost all
track of time, Andy Sudds arose from the stone bench on which their
meager meal had been served. He started from the restaurant where they
had taken up their abode.

"Where are you going?" asked Jack.

"I'm going to make one last attempt to find the projectile before it
gets too dark," answered the hunter. "We can go out, look around for
several hours, and get back before darkness sets in. We might as well
do it as sit here doing nothing. Then, too, we can bring in some more
water. We'll need all we can store away."

"I'll go with you," volunteered Jack, and Mark, not wanting to be left
alone in the dead city, followed. Carrying their life-torches and
wrapping their fur garments closely about them, for it had grown much
colder, they sallied forth.

They found a thin film of ice on the black pool, showing that it would
probably freeze when it got cold enough, though the ordinary
temperature of thirty-two degrees had not affected it. They filled
their water bottles, and then Andy proposed that they take a new path--
one they had not tried before.

They hardly knew where they were going, but ever as they tramped on
they cast anxious looks upward to see if they might descry the
projectile hovering over them. But they did not see it.

Jack had taken the lead, and was walking along, glancing idly about. He
came to a place where two peaks were so close together that it was all
he could do to squeeze through. But the moment he had passed the defile
and looked out on a broad, level field, he came to a sudden stop. His
companions, who pressed after him, saw him rub his eyes and shake his
head, as if disbelieving the evidence of what lay before him. Then Jack
murmured: "It can't be true! It can't be true!"

"What?" called Mark.

"There! Those," answered his chum. "See, the field is covered with
diamonds! We have found the diamonds of the moon--the field of Reonaris
that the men of Mars discovered! There are the diamonds--millions of
them!"

"Diamonds!" exclaimed Mark. He squeezed through the defile, and stood
beside Jack. Before him in the fading light of the sun was a broad
field, girt around with towering cliffs, and the surface of the field
was covered with white stones.

Jack sprang forward and gathered up a double handful. He let them run
through his fingers in a sparkling stream. Old Andy came up to the
boys.

"They're only glass or crystals," he said.

"They are _not_ glass or crystals!" declared Mark, who had made a study
of gems. "I should say they were diamonds, probably meteoric diamonds,
very rare and valuable. Why, there is the ransom of a thousand kings
spread out before us!"

He fell upon his knees and began to scoop up the gems. His chum was
making a little heap of the stones.

"The ransom of a thousand kings!" murmured Jack. "More diamonds than in
all the world--and I'd give my share for a good ham sandwich!"




CHAPTER XXX

BACK TO EARTH--CONCLUSION


At any other time the discovery of such a vast store of wealth would
have set the wanderers half wild with joy. Now they only accepted the
fact dully, for the perils of their situation overburdened them. As
Jack had said, they needed food more than the gems, for at best the
supply they had blasted out could not last long, and when that was gone
where were they to get more, for there were no more cartridges, and the
rending force of powder was needed to open the rocky meat.

"I knew we'd find the diamonds," murmured Jack, as he began to fill the
pockets of his fur coat. "I'm right, after all, Mark, you see."

"Yes, but what good will it do us? What's the good of even carrying any
away. We can never use them."

"That's so," agreed Jack, in a low voice. "I might as well leave them
here."

But somehow the desire to pick up gems which, when they were cut and
polished, would rival many of the famous diamonds of history was too
strong to be resisted. Though he was afraid he would never get back to
earth to enjoy them, Jack could not help putting in his pockets a
goodly supply of the largest of the precious stones. Andy did the same,
and Mark, in spite of his gloomy feelings, stuffed his pockets. They
worked with their torches held close to their faces, and in the search
for the better stones they literally walked over millions of dollars'
worth of the gems.

For there, stretched out before them, was an actual field of diamonds.
As Mark had said, they were of meteoric origin, that is, a meteor had
burst over that particular portion of the moon, and the chemical action
had created the diamonds, which had fallen in a shower in the field.

"If you boys have all you want, then let's get back to the city,"
suggested Andy. "No telling when it will be night now."

They followed his advice, and soon were going back by way of the black
pool. It seemed more lonesome than ever, after the excitement of
discovering the field of diamonds, and even Jack, glad as he was to
have his theory vindicated, got tired of referring to it. His triumph
meant little to him now.

They were at the entrance to the petrified city. As they were about to
go in, ready to hide themselves in the deepest part of the restaurant,
away from the terrible cold and appalling darkness they felt would soon
be upon them, Mark came to a sudden halt. He glanced quickly up into
the air and cried out: "Hark!"

"What's the matter?" asked Jack, as they stood in a listening attitude.

"I heard a noise," whispered Mark. "It sounded--I'm sure it sounded--
like the crackling of the wireless motor waves of the projectile.
Listen!"

Faintly through the silence came a sound as if there was a discharge of
an electric current. It increased in volume, and there was a faint
roaring in the atmosphere.

"It's her--it's the _Annihilator!_" shouted Jack, leaping about.

"Wait," counselled Andy, who dreaded the terrible disappointment should
the boys be mistaken. The sound came nearer. The crackling could
plainly be made out now. The sun was out of sight, but there was still
the glow which follows sunset.

The boys were eagerly scanning the heavens, Their hearts beat high with
hope. Suddenly, in the olive-tinted sky just above a range of rugged
peaks, a black shape loomed. A black shape, as of a great cigar,
pointed at both ends. It shot into full view.

"The projectile!" yelled Jack.

"The _Annihilator!_" gasped Mark.

"Thank Heaven, they have found us in time!" exclaimed Andy fervently,
and the three stretched out their arms toward the craft from which they
had been parted so long. It was as if they tried to pull it down to
them.

"Do they see us?"

"Will they pass us by?"

"Make a noise so they'll hear us!"

"Wave to them!"

"Oh, if they leave us now!"

Questions, ejaculations and entreaties came rapidly from the lips of
the wanderers. They raised their voices in a shout. They leaped up and
down. They wildly waved their hands and life-torches.

Then, to their inexpressible joy, they saw the course of the projectile
change. It was headed toward them, and a few minutes later it settled
slowly to the ground about half a mile away.

"Come on!" cried Jack! "We must hurry to them, or soon it will be too
dark to see them, or for them to find us. It's our last chance; don't
let's lose it!"

He sprang forward, the others after him, and together they ran toward
the projectile. They could see the two professors and Washington White
emerging from the steel car, waving their hands.

On rushed the lost wanderers, over the rough stones, skirting the great
cliffs, falling into small craters, crawling out again, just missing
several times being precipitated into yawning caverns, and stumbling
over petrified bodies that strewed the ground.

Ever did they hasten onward though, increasing their speed. They came
to a great crater that lay between them and the projectile, but
fortunately there was across the middle of it a natural bridge of
stone. But it was narrow--scarcely wide enough for one at a time.

"We can never cross on that!" cried Mark, halting.

"We've got to!" shouted Jack, and he sprang fearlessly forward, fairly
running over the narrow path, which had a sheer descent of thousands of
feet on either side.

Mark, though fearful that he would become dizzy and fall, followed
Andy. They were soon across the narrow bridge, and speeding on toward
the _Annihilator_. Five minutes later they had reached it, and were
being wildly welcomed by the two professors and Washington White, who
had advanced to meet them.

"I 'clar t' goodness-gladness!" exclaimed the colored man, "I am
suttinly constrained t' espress my approbation ob de deleterous manner
in which yo' all has come back t' dis continuous territory."

"Do you mean you're glad to see us, Wash?" asked Jack.

"Dat's what I done said," was the answer, with a cheerful grin, "an' I
might also remark dat dinner am serbed in de dinin' car."

"Hurrah!" cried Jack. "That's the best news I've heard in a week. No
more blasted beef for mine! Give me ham and eggs!"

"But what happened to you? Where have you been? We have searched all
over for you, and were just giving you up for dead, and going back to
the earth," said Professor Henderson. "We caught sight of you at the
last minute."

"Oh, you mustn't go back until you go to the field of diamonds!" cried
Jack, and then by turns he and Mark and Andy told of their terrible
adventures while they were lost on the moon.

On their part Professors Roumann and Henderson stated how they had
waited in vain for the return of the wanderers, and had then, by
strenuous work, managed to make the necessary repairs without the
missing tool. Then they set out to discover the lost ones, but
succeeded only just in time, for it was now quite dusk.

"An' did yo' all really discober dem sparklers?" asked Washington, as
he served what the boys thought was the finest dinner they had ever
tasted.

"We sure did," replied Jack. "Here are a couple for that red necktie of
yours," and he passed over two big diamonds.

It did not take long to move the projectile to the field of the
sparkling gems, and by means of a powerful search-light enough were
soon gathered up to satisfy even Washington White, who declared that he
would be the best decorated colored man in Bayside when they got back.
The two professors made what observations they could in the petrified
city in the fast-gathering darkness, and then, having taken a petrified
man into the projectile with them to deposit in a scientific museum in
which Professor Roumann was interested, the _Annihilator_ was sealed
shut.

And it was only just in time, for with the suddenness of an eclipse
intense darkness settled down, and the temperature, as indicated by a
thermometer thrust outside, showed a drop of a hundred degrees.

"We never could have lived out there," said Jack.

"Well, we'll soon be back on earth," observed Mark, and a little later
the Cardite motor was out in operation, and the journey back to this
world begun.

Little of moment happened on the return trip. The boys went more into
detail about their wanderings, and told how they had managed to live
during the time they were lost. The two professors and Washington spoke
of their worry and anxiety, and their vain search for the wanderers.

As they were anxious to get back home, the motor was speeded to the
limit, and in much less time than they had made the trip to the moon
they had arrived in sight of the earth again. As they did not want to
create too much excitement, they hovered about in the air over Bayside
until dark, when they gently descended almost in the very spot from
which they had started.

"Well," remarked Jack, as he stepped out on the earth once more, "it
was quite an experience to go to the moon, and I suppose being lost
there wasn't the worst thing that could happen to us, but all the same
I'm glad to be back."

"So am I," declared Mark. "It was worth while going," and he felt of
his pocketful of diamonds.

"We certainly made some very valuable scientific observations,"
asserted Mr. Henderson, "and we will be able to prove that the moon was
once inhabited."

Washington White was carefully lifting out his Shanghai rooster, which
was uttering loud crows. As soon as he had set the fowl on the ground,
the colored man started off.

"Where are you going?" asked Mark.

"I'm going t' a jewelery shop t' hab my diamonds made inter a stick-pin
fo' my red necktie," was the answer.

"Oh, you'd better wait until morning," suggested Professor Henderson.

They gathered about the table in the cozy dining room of their home,
while Washington got a meal ready. Every one was talking about what a
wonderful trip they had had.

"The only trouble is," said Jack, "that we've been to about all the
interesting places in this universe now. I wonder where we can go
next?"

"I'm going to bed right after supper," announced Mark. "Maybe I'll
discover a new land in my dreams."

The moon voyagers had a great store of gems, and, as they did not wish
to bring down values by disposing of them, they only sold a few, which,
because of their great size and brilliancy, brought a large price.
Several jewelers wanted to know where the diamonds came from, but the
secret was well kept. Most of the gems were used for scientific
purposes, but Mark and Jack gave some to certain of their friends.

The petrified man proved a great curiosity, and a history of it, in two
large volumes, can be seen in the museum where the body is exhibited.
Professor Henderson wrote the account, and also published quite an
extensive history of the trip to the moon, which was considered by
scientists and laymen to be a most remarkable journey.

But, though our friends had been to many strange places, it was
reserved for them to have yet still more wonderful adventures, though
for a time after returning from the moon they remained at home, the two
professors busy over their scientific work, and the boys engaged with
their studies, while Andy occasionally went hunting, and Washington got
the meals and, between times, fed his rooster and admired the diamonds
in his red necktie. And now we will bid our friends good-by.

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lost on the Moon, by Roy Rockwood





Produced by Anne Folland, Tiffany Vergon,Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




LIGHT O' THE MORNING

_The Story of an Irish Girl_

BY

L. T. MEADE



CONTENTS.


CHAPTER

I. NORA

II. "SOME MORE OF THE LAND MUST GO"

III. THE WILD MURPHYS

IV. THE INVITATION

V. "I AM ASHAMED OF YOU"

VI. THE CAVE OF THE BANSHEE

VII. THE MURPHYS

VIII. THE SQUIRE'S TROUBLE

IX. EDUCATION AND OTHER THINGS

X. THE INVITATION

XI. THE DIAMOND CROSS

XII. A FEATHER-BED HOUSE

XIII. "THERE'S MOLLY"

XIV. BITS OF SLANG

XV. TWO LETTERS

XVI. A CHEEKY IRISH GIRL

XVII. TWO DESCRIPTIONS

XVIII. A COMPACT

XIX. "SHE WILL SOON TAME DOWN"

XX. STEPHANOTIE

XXI. THE ROSE-COLORED DRESS

XXII. LETTERS

XXIII. THE BOX OF BON-BONS

XXIV. THE TELEGRAM

XXV. THE BLOW

XXVI. TEN POUNDS

XXVII. ADVENTURES--AND HOME AGAIN

XXVIII. THE WILD IRISH

XXIX. ALTERATIONS

XXX. THE LION IN His CAGE

XXXI. RELEASE OF THE CAPTIVE

XXXII. ANDY

XXXIII. THE CABIN ON THE MOUNTAIN

XXXIV. A DARING DEED

XXXV. THE COT WHERE HE WAS BORN

XXXVI. "I'M A HAPPY MAN"




CHAPTER I.


NORA.

"Why, then, Miss Nora--"

"Yes, Hannah?"

"You didn't see the masther going this way, miss?"

"What do you mean, Hannah? Father is never at home at this hour."

"I thought maybe--" said Hannah. She spoke in a dubious voice,
backing a little away.

Hannah was a small, squat woman, of a truly Irish type. Her nose was
celestial, her mouth wide, her eyes dark, and sparkling with fun.
She was dressed in a short, coarse serge petticoat, with what is
called a bedgown over it; the bedgown was made of striped calico,
yellow and red, and was tied in at the waist with a broad band of
the same. Hannah's hair was strongly inclined to gray, and her
humorous face was covered with a perfect network of wrinkles. She
showed a gleam of snowy teeth now, as she looked full at the young
girl whom she was addressing.

"Ah, then, Miss Nora," she said, "it's I that am sorry for yez."

Before Nora O'Shanaghgan could utter a word Hannah had turned on her
heel.

"Come back, Hannah," said Nora in an imperious voice.

"Presently, darlint; it's the childer I hear calling me. Coming,
Mike asthore, coming."

The squat little figure flew down a side walk which led to a paddock:
beyond the paddock was a turnstile, and at the farther end of an
adjacent field a cabin made of mud, with one tiny window and a
thatched roof. Hannah was making for the cabin with rapid, waddling
strides. Nora stood in the middle of the broad sweep which led up to
the front door of the old house.

Castle O'Shanaghgan was a typical Irish home of the ancient regime.
The house, a great square pile, was roomy and spacious; it had
innumerable staircases, and long passages through which the wind
shrieked on stormy nights, and a great castellated tower at its
north end. This tower was in ruins, and had been given up a long
time ago to the exclusive tenancy of the bats, the owls, and rats so
large and fierce that the very dogs were afraid of them. In the
tower at night the neighbors affirmed that they heard shrieks and
ghostly noises; and Nora, whose bedroom was nearest to it, rejoiced
much in the distinction of having twice heard the O'Shanaghgan
Banshee keening outside her window. Nora was a slender, tall, and
very graceful girl of about seventeen, and her face was as typical
of the true, somewhat wild, Irish beauty as Hannah Croneen's was the
reverse.

In the southwest of Ireland there are traces of Spanish as well as
Celtic blood in many of its women; and Nora's quantities of thick,
soft, intensely black hair must have come to her from a Spanish
ancestor. So also did the delicately marked black brows and the
black lashes to her dark and very lovely blue eyes; but the clear
complexion, the cheeks with the tenderest bloom on them, the softly
dimpled lips red as coral, and the little teeth white as pearls were
true Irish characteristics.

Nora waited for a moment after Hannah had left her, then, shading
her eyes from the westerly sun by one hand, she turned slowly and
went into the house.

"Where is mother, Pegeen?" she said to a rough-looking, somewhat
slatternly servant who was crossing the hall.

"In the north parlor, Miss Nora."

"Come along, then, Creena; come along, Cushla," said the girl,
addressing two handsome black Pomeranians who rushed to meet her.
The dogs leaped up at her with expressions of rapture, and girl and
dogs careered with a wild dance across the great, broad hall in the
direction of the north parlor. Nora opened the door with a somewhat
noisy bang, the dogs precipitated themselves into the room, and she
followed.

"Ah, then, mother dear! and have I disturbed you?" she said.

A pale-faced lady, who was lying full-length on a very old and hard
sofa, rose with a querulous expression on her face when Nora entered.

"I wish someone would teach you thoughtfulness," she said; "you are
the most tiresome girl in the world. I have been two hours trying to
get a wink of sleep, and just when I succeed you come in and wake
me."

"It's sorry I am to my heart's core," said Nora. She went up to her
mother, dropped on one knee, and looked with her rosy face into the
worn and faded one of the elder woman. "Here I am, mammy," she said
again, "your own little Nora; let me sit with you a bit--may I?"

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan smiled faintly. She looked all over the girl's
slim figure, and finally her eyes rested on the laughing, lovely
face. Then a cloud crossed her forehead, and her eyes became dim
with tears.

"Have you heard the last thing, Nora?"

"There are so many last things, mother," said Nora.

"But the very last. Your father has to pay back the money which
Squire Murphy of Cronane lent him. It is the queerest thing; but the
mortgagee means to foreclose, as he calls it, within three months if
that money is not paid in full. I know well what it means."

Nora smiled. She took her mother's hand in hers, and began to stroke
it gently.

"I suppose," she said, "it means this. It means that we must part
with a little more of the beloved land, every sod of which I love.
We certainly do seem to be getting poorer and poorer; but never
mind--nothing will ever alter the fact that--"

"That what, child?"

"That we O'Shanaghgans are the proudest and oldest family in the
county, and that there is scarcely an Englishman across the water
who would not give all he possesses to change places with us."

"You talk like a silly child," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan; "and please
remember that I am English."

"Oh, mummy, I am so sorry!" said the girl. She laid her soft head
down on the sofa, pressing it against her mother's shoulder.

"I cannot think of you as English," she said. "You have lived here
all, all my life. You belong to father, and you belong to Terence
and me--what have you to do with the cold English?"

"I remember a time," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, "when I thought Ireland
the most desolate and God-forsaken place on the earth. It is true I
have become accustomed to it now. But, Nora, if you only could
realize what my old home was really like."

"I don't want to realize any home different from this," said the girl,
a cloud shading her bright eyes for the moment.

"You are silly and prejudiced," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan. "It is a
great trial to me to have a daughter so unsympathetic."

"Oh, mummy! I don't mean to be unsympathetic. There now, we are
quite cozy together. Tell me one of the old stories; I do so love to
listen."

The frown cleared from Mrs. O'Shanaghgan's forehead, and the peevish
lines went out of her face. She began to talk with animation and
excitement. Nora knew exactly what she was going to say. She had
heard the story so often; but, although she had heard it hundreds
and thousands of times, she was never tired of listening to the
history of a trim life of which she knew absolutely nothing. The
orderly, well-dressed servants, the punctual meals, the good and
abundant food, the nice dresses, the parties, the solid education,
the discipline so foreign to her own existence, all--all held their
proper fascination. But although she listened with delight to these
stories of a bygone time, she never envied her mother those periods
of prosperity. Such a life would have been a prison to her; so she
thought, although she never spoke her thought aloud.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan began the old tale to-night, telling it with a
little more _verve_ even than usual. She ended at last with a
sigh.

"Oh, the beautiful old times!" she said.

"But you didn't know father then," answered Nora, a frown coming to
her brows, and an angry feeling for a moment visiting her warm
heart. "You didn't have father, nor Nora, nor Terry."

"Of course not, darling, and you make up for much; but, Nora dear,
although I love my husband and my children, I hate this country. I
hate it!"

"Don't, mother," said Nora, with a look of pain. She started to her
feet. At that moment loud, strong steps were heard in the hall; a
hearty voice exclaimed:

"Where's Light o' the Morning? Where have you hidden yourself,
witch?"

"It's father," said Nora. She said the words with a sort of gasp of
rejoicing, and the next moment had dashed out of the room.




CHAPTER II.


"SOME MORE OF THE LAND MUST GO."

Squire O'Shanaghgan was a tall, powerfully built man, with deep-set
eyes and rugged, overhanging brows; his hair was of a grizzled gray,
very thick and abundant; he had a shaggy beard, too, and a long
overhanging mustache. He entered the north parlor still more noisily
than Nora had done. The dogs yelped with delight, and flung
themselves upon him.

"Down, Creena! down, Cushla!" he said. "Ah, then, Nora, they are as
bewitching as yourself, little woman. What beauties they are
growing, to be sure!"

"I reared them," said Nora. "I am proud of them both. At one time I
thought Creena could not live; but look at her now--her coat as
black as jet, and so silky."

"Shut the door, won't you, Patrick?" said his wife.

"Bless me! I forgot," said the Squire. He crossed the room, and,
with an effort after quietness, closed the door with one foot; then
he seated himself by his wife's side.

"Better, Eileen?" he said, looking at her anxiously.

"I wish you would not call me Eileen," she said. "I hate to have my
name Irishized."

The Squire's eyes filled with suppressed fun.

"Ah, but you are half-Irish, whether you like it or not," he said.
"Is not she, colleen? Bless me, what a day it has turned out! We are
getting summer weather at last. What do you say to going for a drive,
Eileen--Ellen, I mean? Black Bess is eating her head off in the
stables. I want to go as far as Murphy's place, and you might as well
come with me."

"And I too?" said Nora.

"To be sure, child. Why not? You run round to the stables, Norrie,
and give the order."

Nora instantly left the room, the dogs following her.

"What ails her?" said the Squire, looking at his wife.

"Ails her, Pat? Nothing that I know of."

"Then you know very little," was his answer. "I never see that sort
of anxious frown between the colleen's brows without knowing there's
mischief in the wind. Somebody has been worrying her, and I won't
have it." He put down his great hand with a thump on the nearest
table.

"Don't, Pat. You quite shatter my nerves."

"Bless you and your nerves, Ellen. I want to give them all possible
consideration; but I won't have Light o' the Morning worried."

"You'll spoil that girl; you'll rue it yet."

"Bless her heart! I couldn't spoil her; she's unspoilable. Did you
ever see a sweeter bit of a thing, sound to the core, through and
through?"

"Sweet or not," said the mother, "she has got to learn her lesson of
life; and it is no good to be too tender with her; she wants a
little bracing."

"You have been trying that on--eh?"

"Well, not exactly, Pat; but you cannot expect me to keep all our
troubles to ourselves. There's that mortgage, you know."

"Bother the mortgage!" said the Squire. "Why do you harp on things
the way you do? I'll manage it right enough. I am going round to see
Dan Murphy now; he won't be hard on an old friend."

"Yes; but have you not to pay up?"

"Some day, I suppose."

"Now listen, Patrick. Do be reasonable. Whenever I speak of money
you fight shy of the subject."

"I don't--I don't," said the Squire restlessly; "but I am dead tired.
I have had a ride of thirty miles; I want my tea. Where is Nora? Do
you mind my calling her? She'll order Pegeen to bring the tea here."

"No; I won't have it. We'll have tea in the dining room presently. I
thought you objected to afternoon tea."

"So I do, as a rule; but I am mighty dhry--thirsty, I mean, Ellen.
Well, all the better; I'll get more to drink in the dining room.
Order the tea as soon as you please."

"Ring the bell, Patrick."

The Squire strode to the mantelpiece, pulled a bell-cord which hung
from the ceiling, a distant bell was heard ringing in noisy fashion,
and a moment afterward Pegeen put in her head.

"Come right in, Margaret," said her mistress.

"Aw! then, I'm sorry, ma'am, I forgot," said the girl. She came in,
hiding both her hands under her apron.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan uttered an impatient sigh.

"It is impossible to train these creatures," she said under her
breath. Aloud, she gave her order in quiet, impassive tones:

"Tea as soon as possible in the west parlor, and sound the gong when
it is ready."

"Why, then, wasn't I getting it?" said Pegeen. She left the room,
leaving the door wide open.

"Just like them," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan. "When you want the door
open they invariably shut it, and when you want it shut they leave
it open."

"They do that in England too, as far as I can tell," said the
Squire, with a slightly nettled tone in his voice.

"Well, now, Patrick, while we have a few moments to ourselves, I want
to know what you mean to do about that ten thousand pounds?"

"I am sure, Ellen, it is more than I can tell you."

"You will have to pay it, you know."

"I suppose so, some day. I'll speak to Dan to-night. He is the last
man to be hard on a chap."

"Some more of the land must go," said the wife in a fretful tone.
"Our rent-roll will be still smaller. There will be still less money
to educate Terence. I had set my heart on his going to Cambridge or
Oxford. You quite forget that he is eighteen now."

"Cambridge or Oxford!" said the Squire. "Not a bit of it. My son
shall either go to Old Trinity or he does without a university
education. Cambridge or Oxford indeed! You forget, Ellen, that the
lad is my son as well as yours."

"I don't; but he is half an Englishman, three parts an Englishman,
whatever his fatherhood," said the Squire's wife in a tone of triumph.

"Well, well! he is Terence O'Shanaghgan, for all that, and he will
inherit this old place some day."

"Much there will be for him to inherit."

Eager steps were heard on the gravel, and the next instant Nora
entered by the open window.

"I have given the order," she said; "Angus will have the trap round
in a quarter of an hour."

"That's right, my girl; you didn't let time drag," said her father.

"Angus wants you and mother to be quite ready, for he says Black
Bess is nearly off her head with spirit. Now, then, mother, shall I
go upstairs and bring down your things?"

"I don't mind if you do, Nora; my back aches a good bit."

"We'll put the air-cushion in the trap," said the Squire, who,
notwithstanding her fine-lady airs, had a great respect and
admiration for his wife. "We'll make you right cozy, Ellen, and a
rattle through the air will do you a sight of good."

"May I drive, father?" said Nora.

"You, little one? Suppose you bring Black Bess down on her knees?
That horse is worth three hundred pounds, if she's worth a penny."

"Do you think I would?" said the girl reproachfully. "Now, dad, that
is about the cruelest word you have said to your Nora for many a day."

"Come and give me a hug, colleen," said the Squire.

Nora ran to him, clasped her arms round his neck, and kissed him
once or twice. He had moved away to the other end of the room, and
now he looked her full in the face.

"You are fretting about something?"

"Not I--not I," said the girl; but she flushed.

"Listen to me, colleen," said the Squire; "if it is that bit of a
mortgage, you get it right out of your head. It's not going to worry
_me_. I am going this very evening to have a talk with Dan."

"Oh, if it is Dan Murphy you owe it to," said the girl.

"Ah, he's all right; he's the right sort; a chip of the old block--eh?
He wouldn't be hard on a brother in adversity?"

"He wouldn't if he could help it," said Nora; but the cloud had not
left her sensitive face. Then, seeing that father looked at her with
intense anxiety, she made a valiant effort.

"Of course, I believe in you," she said; "and, indeed, what does the
loss of money matter while we are together?"

"Right you are! right you are!" said the Squire, with a laugh. He
clapped her on the shoulder. "Trust Light o' the Morning to look at
things in the right direction," he said.




CHAPTER III.


THE WILD MURPHYS.

Terence made his appearance at the tea table. In every respect he was
a contrast to Nora. He was very good-looking--strikingly handsome, in
fact; tall, with a graceful elegance of deportment which was in
striking contrast to the burly figure of the old Squire. His face was
of a nut-brown hue; his eyes dark and piercing; his features straight.
Young as he was, there were the first indications of a black silky
mustache on his short upper lip, and his clustering black curls grew
in a high ridge off a lofty brow. Terence had the somewhat languid air
which more or less characterized all his mother's movements. He was
devoted to her, and took his seat now by her side. She laid her very
thin and slender hand on his arm. He did not respond by look or movement
to the gesture of affection; but had a very close observer been present
he would have noticed that he drew his chair about the tenth of an inch
nearer to hers.

Nora and her father at the other end of the table were chattering
volubly. Nora's face was all smiles; every vestige of that little
cloud which had sat between her dark brows a few moments before had
vanished. Her blue eyes were sparkling with fun.

The Squire made brilliant sally after sally, to which she responded
with all an Irish girl's aptitude for repartee.

Terence and his mother conversed in low tones.

"Yes, mother," he was saying, "I had a letter from Uncle George this
morning; he wants me to go next week. Do you think you can manage?"

"How long will you be away, Terence?"

"I don't know; a couple of months, perhaps."

"How much money will it cost?"

"I shall want an evening suit, and a new dress-suit, and something
for everyday. These things are disgraceful," said the lad, just
glancing at the frayed coat-sleeve, beneath which showed a linen
cuff of immaculate whiteness.

Terence was always the personification of fastidiousness in his
dress, and for this trait in his character alone Mrs. O'Shanaghgan
adored him.

"You shall have it," she said--"somehow."

"Well, I must reply tonight," he continued. "Shall I ask the
governor, or will you?"

"We won't worry him, Terry; I can manage."

He looked at her a little anxiously.

"You are not going to sell any more of them?" he said.

"There is a gold chain and that diamond ring; I never wear either. I
would fifty times rather think that you were enjoying yourself with
my relations in England. You are fitted to grace any society. Do not
say another word, my boy."

"You are the very best and noblest mother in the world," said the
lad with enthusiasm.

Meanwhile, Nora and her father continued their gay conversation.

"We will take a basket with us," said Nora, "and Bridget shall give
me a couple of dozen more of those little brown eggs. Mrs. Perch
shall have a brood of chicks if I can manage it."

"Trust the girleen for that," said the Squire, and then they rose
from table.

"Ellen," he continued, addressing his wife, "have you and Terence
done colloguing together? for I hear Black Bess coming to the front
door."

"Oh, hasten, mother; hasten!" said Nora. "The mare won't stand
waiting; she is so fresh she is just ready to fly."

The next few moments witnessed a scene of considerable bustle. Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan, with all her English nerves, had plenty of pluck, and
would scorn to show even a vestige of fear before the hangers-on, as
she called the numerous ragged urchins who appeared from every quarter
on each imaginable occasion. Although she was shaking from head to
foot with absolute terror at the thought of a drive behind Black Bess,
she stepped into her seat in the tall dog-cart without a remark. The
mare fidgeted and half reared.

"Whoa! whoa! Black Bess, my beauty!" said the Squire. The groom, a
bright-faced lad, with a wisp of yellow hair falling over his forehead,
held firmly to the reins. Nora jumped up beside her mother.

"Are you going to drive?" asked that lady.

"Yes, mummy; you know I can. Whoa, Black Bess! it's me," said the
girl. She took the reins in her capable little hands; the Squire
sprang up behind, and Black Bess flew down the avenue as if on the
wings of the wind.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan gave one hurried pant of suppressed anguish, and
then sat perfectly still, her lips set, her hands tightly locked
together. She endured these drives almost daily, but had never yet
got accustomed to them. Nora, on the contrary, as they spun through
the air, felt her spirits rising; the hot young blood coursed through
her veins, and her eyes blazed with fun and happiness. She looked
back at her father, who nodded to her briefly.

"That's it, Nora; keep her well in. Now that we are going uphill you
can give her her head a bit. Whoa, Black Bess! Whoa!"

The mare, after her first wild canter, settled into a more jog-trot
gait, and the dog-cart did not sway so violently from side to side.
They were soon careering along a wide, well-made road, which ran for
many miles along the top of some high cliffs. Below them, at their
feet, the wild Atlantic waves curled and burst in innumerable
fountains of spray; the roar of the waves came up to their ears, and
the breath of the salt breeze, the freshest and most invigorating in
the world, fanned their cheeks. Even Mrs. O'Shanaghgan felt her
heart beating less wildly, and ventured to put a question or two to
Nora with regard to the clucking hen, Mrs. Perch.

"I have not forgotten the basket, mammy," said the girl; "and Hannah
will put the eggs under the hen tonight."

"I am quite certain that Hannah mismanaged the last brood," said
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan; "but everything goes wrong at the Castle just
now."

"Oh, mother, hush! he will hear," said Nora.

"It is just like you, Nora; you wish to keep----"

"Oh, come, now," said the Squire; "I hear the grumbles beginning. No
grumbles when we are having our ride--eh, Ellen? I want you to come
back with a hearty appetite for dinner, and a hearty inclination to
sleep tonight."

They drove faster and faster. Occasionally Nora touched the mare the
faintest little flick with the end of her long whip. The creature
responded to her touch as though girl and horse were one.

At last they drew up outside a dilapidated gate, one hinge of which
was off. The Squire jumped down from his seat, came round, and held
the horse's head.

"Whoa! whoa!" he said. "Hullo, you, Mike! Why aren't you in your
place? Come and open the gate this minute, lad."

A small boy, with bare feet and ragged trousers, came hurrying, head
over heels, down the road. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan shuddered and shut her
eyes. The gate was swung open. Nora led the mare skillfully round a
somewhat sharp corner, and the next instant they were dashing with
headlong speed up a steep avenue. It was neglected; weeds grew all
over it, and the adjacent meadows were scarcely distinguishable from
the avenue itself.

The Squire ran after the dog-cart, and leaped up while the mare was
going at full speed.

"Well done, father!" called back Nora.

"Heaven preserve us!" thought Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, who still sat
speechless, and as if made of iron.

At last they reached a long, rambling old house, with many small
windows, interspersed with a few of enormous dimensions. These were
called parliament windows, and had been put into many houses of that
period in order to avoid the window-tax. Most of the windows were
open, and out of some of them ragged towels were drying in the
evening breeze. About half a dozen dogs, most of which were of
mongrel breed, rushed forward at the sound of the wheels, barking
vociferously. Nora, with a dexterous touch of her hand, drew the
mare up just in front of the mansion, and then sprang lightly to her
feet.'

"Now, mother, shall I help you down?"

"You had better find out first if Mrs. Murphy is in," said the
Squire's wife.

A ragged urchin, such as seemed to abound like mushrooms in the
place, came and held the reins close to the horse's mouth. The
creature stood trembling from the violence of her exertions, and
pouring down moisture at every pore. "She wants to be well rubbed
down," said the Squire. "She doesn't get half exercise enough; this
will never do. What if I have to make money on her, and she is
spoiled?"

The low words which came to his lips were not heard by anyone; there
was a frown, very like Nora's own, between his brows. The next
moment a small man, with reddish hair, in a very shabby suit of
half-worn tweed, appeared on the steps of the front door.

"Hullo, O'Shanaghgan, is that yourself?" he called out. "How are you,
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan? Right glad to see you. You'll step inside--won't
you? I believe the wife is somewhere round. Neil, my man, go and look
for the missus. Tell her that Madam O'Shanaghgan is here, and the
Squire. Well, Nora, I suppose you are wanting a chat with Bridget?
You won't find her indoors this fine evening."

"Where is she, Mr. Murphy?" asked the girl. "I do want to have a
talk with her."

"Ah! what's the basket for?"

"I want her to give me some of the pretty brown eggs."

"Well, go right down there by the sea-path, and you'll find her, as
likely as not."

"Very well," answered Nora. Slinging her basket on her arm, she
started for her walk. As soon as she was out of sight she began to
run. Presently she stopped and began whistling "The Wearing of the
Green," which was responded to in a moment by another voice, sweet
as that of a blackbird. She looked to right and left, and presently
saw a pair of laughing black eyes looking down at her from beneath
the shelter of a huge oak tree.

"Here I am. Will you climb up?" said the voice of Bridget Murphy.

"Give me a hand, and I'll be up with you in a moment," said Nora.
She tossed her basket on the ground; a very firm, little brown hand
was extended; and the next moment the girls were seated side by side
on a stout branch of the tree.

"Well, and what has brought you along here?" said Bridget.

"I came with father and mother in the dog-cart," replied Nora.
"Father let me drive Black Bess. I had a jolly time; but she did
pull a bit--my wrists are quite stiff."

"I am glad you have come," said the other girl. "I was having a
concert all by myself. I can imitate the thrush, the blackbird, and
most of the birds round here. Shall I do the thrush for you?"

Before Nora could speak she began imitating the full liquid notes of
the bird to perfection.

"I declare you have a genius for it," said Nora. "But how are you
yourself, Biddy?"

"What should ail me?" replied Biddy. "I never had a care nor a worry
nor a trouble yet; the day is long, and my heart is light. I am at
peace, and I never had an ache in my body yet. But what is up with
you, Nora alannah?"

"It's that mortgage, you know," said Nora, dropping her voice. "What
is your father going to do?"

"Oh, the mortgage," said Bridget. "Mr. Morgan came down from Dublin
yesterday; he and father had a long talk. I don't know. I believe
there's worry in the air, and when there is I always steer clear of
it."

"Your father, you mean?"

"I can't tell you; don't question me. I am glad you have come. Can't
you stay for the night?"

"No, I can't. I must go back with father and mother. The fact is
this, Bridget, I believe your father would do anything in the world
for you."

"I suppose he would. What do you want to coax out of me now? Oh,
Nora alannah! don't let us talk of worries. Come down to the sea
with me--won't you? I have found the most lovely cave. I mean to
explore it with lanterns. You go into the cave, and you can walk in
nearly half a mile; and then it takes a sudden turn to the right,
and they say there's an entrance into another cave, and just beyond
that there's a ghost supposed to be. Some people say it is the home
of the O'Shanaghgans' Banshee; but whatever it is, I mean to see all
about it."

"Do you mean the Sea-Nymphs' Cave?" said Nora. "But you can only get
to that by crossing the bay."

"Yes. Well, I am going tomorrow night; the moon is at the full. You
will come over and go with me--won't you?"

"Oh! I wish I could."

"But why can't you? Don't let us worry about fathers and mothers.
We're a pair of girls, and must have our own larks. There's Neil and
there's Mike; they will get the boat all ready, and we can start off
for the cave just when the tide is high; we can only get in then.
We'll run the boat in as far as it will go, and we'll see what we'll
see. You will come--won't you, Nora?"

"I should like it of all things in the world," said Nora.

"Well, why not? You can come over tomorrow afternoon, and stay the
night here. Just say that I have asked you."

"But mother does not much like my sleeping out."

"You mean that she does not like you to sleep at the house of the
wild Murphys--that's what you mean, Nora. Then, get away; I don't
want to force my company on you. I am as good as any other girl in
Ireland; I have the blood of the old Irish kings in my veins; but if
you are too proud to come, why----"

"I am not, and you know it," said Nora; "but mother is an Englishwoman,
and she thinks we are all a little rough, you and I into the bargain.
All the same, I'll come to-morrow. I do want to explore that cave. Yes,
I'll come if you give me a proper invitation before mother."

"Oh, mercy me!" said the girl, "must I go back to the house? I am so
precious shabby, and your lady-mother has got such piercing eyes.
But there, we can smuggle in the back way. I'll go up to my room and
put on my bits of finery. Bedad! but I look as handsome as the best
when I am dressed up. Come along, Nora; we'll get in the back way,
and I'll give the invitation in proper style."




CHAPTER IV.


THE INVITATION.

Bridget and Nora began to climb up a very steep and narrow winding
path. It was nothing more than a grass path in the midst of a lot of
rock and underwood, but the girls were like young chamois, and
leaped over such obstacles with the lightness of fawns. Presently
they arrived at the back entrance of Cronane, the Murphys' decidedly
dilapidated residence. They had to cross a courtyard covered with
rough cobbles and in a sad state of neglect and mess. Some pigs were
wallowing in the mire in one corner, and a rough pony was tethered
to a post not far off; he was endeavoring, with painful insistence,
to reach a clump of hay which was sticking out of a hayrick a foot
or two away. Nora, seeing his wistful eyes, sprang forward, pulled a
great handful of the hay, and held it to his mouth. The little
creature almost whinnied with delight.

"There you are," said Bridget. "What right have you to give our hay
to that pony?"

"Oh, nonsense," said Nora; "the heart in him was starving." She
flung her arms round the pony's neck, pressed a kiss on his
forehead, and continued to cross the yard with Biddy. Two or three
ragged urchins soon impeded their path; one of them was the
redoubtable Neil, the other Mike.

"Is it to-morrow night you want the boat, Miss Biddy?" said Neil.

Bridget dropped her voice to a whisper.

"Look here, Neil," she said, "mum's the word; you are not to let it
out to a soul. You and Mike shall come with us, and Miss Nora is
coming too."

Neil cast a bashful and admiring glance at handsome Nora, as she
stood very erect by Biddy's side.

"All right, miss," he said.

"At ten o'clock," said Bridget; "have the boat in the cove then, and
we'll be down there and ready."

"But they say, miss, that the Banshee is out on the nights when the
moon is at the full."

"The O'Shanaghgans' Banshee," said Biddy, glancing at Nora, whose face
did not change a muscle, although the brightness and wistfulness in
her eyes were abundantly visible. She was saying to herself:

"I would give all the world to speak to the Banshee alone--to ask
her to get father out of his difficulty."

She was half-ashamed of these thoughts, although she knew and almost
gloried in the fact that she was superstitious to her heart's core.

She and Biddy soon entered the house by the back entrance, and ran up
some carpetless stairs to Biddy's own room. This was a huge bedroom,
carpetless and nearly bare. A little camp-bed stood in one corner,
covered by a colored counterpane; there was a strip of carpet beside
the bed, and another tiny strip by a wooden washhand-stand. The two
great parliament windows were destitute of any curtain or even blind;
they stared blankly out across the lovely summer landscape as hideous
as windows could be.

It was a perfect summer's evening; but even now the old frames
rattled and shook, and gave some idea of how they would behave were
a storm abroad.

Biddy, who was quite accustomed to her room and never dreamed that
any maiden could sleep in a more luxurious chamber, crossed it to
where a huge wooden wardrobe stood. She unlocked the door, and took
from its depths a pale-blue skirt trimmed with quantities of dirty
pink flounces.

"Oh, you are not going to put _that_ on," said Nora, whose own
training had made her sensitive to incongruity in dress.

"Yes, I am," said Biddy. "How can I see your lady-mother in this
style of thing?"

She went and stood in front of Nora with her arms akimbo.

"Look," she said, "my frock has a rent from here to here, and this
petticoat is none of the best, and my stockings--well, I know it is
my own fault, but I _won't_ darn them, and there is a great
hole just above the heel. Now, this skirt will hide all blemishes."

"But what will your mother say?"

"Bless her!" said Biddy, "she won't even notice. Here, let's whip on
the dress."

She hastily divested herself of her ragged cotton skirt, and put on
the pale blue with the dirty silk flounces.

"What are you looking so grave for?" she said, glancing up at Nora.
"I declare you're too stately for anything, Nora O'Shanaghgan! You
stand there, and I know you criticise me."

"No; I love you too much," replied Nora. "You are Biddy Murphy, one
of my greatest friends."

"Ah, it's sweet to hear her," said Biddy.

"But, all the same," continued Nora, "I don't like that dress, and
it's terribly unsuitable. You don't look ladylike in it."

"Ladylike, and I with the blood of----"

"Oh, don't begin that," said Nora; "every time I see you you mention
that fact. I have not the slightest doubt that the old kings were
ruffians, and dressed abominably."

"If you dare," said Biddy. She rushed up to the bed, dragged out her
pillow, and held it in a warlike attitude. "Another word about my
ancestors, and this will be at your devoted head!" she cried.

Nora burst into a merry laugh.

"There, now, that's better," said Biddy. She dropped the pillow and
proceeded with her toilet. The dirty skirt with its tawdry flounces
was surmounted by a bodice of the same material, equally unsuitable.

Biddy brushed out her mop of jet-black hair, which grew in thick curls
all over her head and stood out like a mop round her shoulders. She was
a plain girl, with small, very black eyes, a turned-up nose, and a wide
mouth; but there was an irresistible expression of drollery in her face,
and when she laughed, showing her milk-white teeth, there were people
who even thought her attractive. Nora really loved her, although the
two, standing side by side, were, as far as appearances were concerned,
as the poles asunder.

"Now, come along," said Biddy. "I know I look perfectly charming. Oh,
what a sweet, sweet blue it is, and these ducky little flounces! It
was Aunt Mary O'Flannagan sent me this dress at Christmas. She wore
it at a fancy ball, and said it might suit me. It does, down to the
ground. Let me drop a courtesy to you, Nora O'Shanaghgan. Oh, how
proper we look! But I don't care! Now I'm not afraid to face anyone--why,
the old kings would have been proud of me. Come along--do."

She caught Nora's hand; they dashed down the wide, carpetless stairs,
crossed a huge hall, and entered a room which was known as the
drawing room at Cronane. It was an enormous apartment, but bore the
same traces of neglect and dirt which the whole of the rest of the
house testified to. The paper on the walls was moldy in patches, and
in one or two places it had detached itself from the wall and fell
in great sheets to the ground. One loose piece of paper was tacked
up with two or three huge tacks, and bulged out, swaying with the
slightest breeze. The carpet, which covered the entire floor, was
worn threadbare; but, to make up for these defects, there were
cabinets of the rarest and most exquisite old china, some of the
pieces being worth fabulous sums. Vases of the same china adorned
the tall marble mantelpiece, and stood on brackets here and there
about the room. There were also some exquisite and wonderfully
carved oak, a Queen Anne sofa, and several spindle-legged chairs. An
old spinet stood in a distant window, and the drab moreen curtains
had once been handsome.

Standing on the hearth, with his elbow resting on the marble
mantelpiece close to a unique vase of antique design, stood Squire
O'Shanaghgan. He was talking in pleasant and genial tones to Mrs.
Murphy, a podgy little woman, with a great likeness to Biddy.

Mrs. Murphy wore a black alpaca dress and a little three-cornered
knitted shawl across her shoulders. She had gray hair, which curled
tightly like her daughter's; on top of it was a cap formed of rusty
black velvet and equally rusty black lace. She looked much excited
at the advent of the Squire, and her cheeks testified to the fact by
the brightness of their color.

Mr. Murphy was doing penance opposite to Mrs. O'Shanaghgan. He was
dreadfully afraid of that stately lady, and was glancing nervously
round at his wife and the Squire from moment to moment.

"Yes, madam," he was saying, "it's turnips we are going to plant in
that field just yonder. We have had a very good crop of hay too. It
is a fine season, and the potatoes promise to be a sight for sore
eyes."

"I hate the very name of that root," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan in her
most drawling tones.

"Why, then, ma'am, you don't say so," answered Murphy; "it seems
hard on the poor things that keep us all going. The potheen and the
potatoes--what would Ireland be without 'em? Glory be to goodness,
it's quite awful to hear you abusing the potato, ma'am."

"I am English, you know," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan.

On this scene Nora and Biddy entered. Mr. Murphy glanced with intense
relief at his daughter. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan slightly raised her brows.
It was the faintest of movements, but the superciliousness of the
action smote upon Nora, who colored painfully.

Biddy, taking her courage in her hand, went straight up to the
august lady.

"How do you do?" she said.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan extended her hand with a limp action.

"Oh, dear!" panted Biddy.

"What is up, my dear Bridget?" said her mother, turning round and
looking at her daughter. "Oh, to goodness, what have you put that on
for? It's your very best Sunday-go-to-meeting dress, and you won't
have another, I can tell you, for six months."

"There now, mother, hush, do," said Biddy. "I have put it on for a
purpose. Why, then, it's sweet I want to make myself, and I believe
it's sweet I look. Oh, there's the mirror; let me gaze at myself."

She crossed the room, and stood in front of a long glass, examining
her unsuitable dress from the front and side; and then, being
thoroughly satisfied with the elegance of appearance, she went back
and stood in front of Mrs. O'Shanaghgan.

"It's a request I want to make of you, ma'am," she said.

"Well, Biddy, I will listen to it if you will ask me properly," said
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan.

"Yes, to be sure," said Biddy. "How shall I say it?"

"Speak quietly, my dear."

"Yes, Biddy, I do wish you would take pattern by Nora, and by Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan," said Mrs. Murphy, who in her heart of hearts envied
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan's icy manners, and thought them the most perfect
in all the world. She was in mortal fear of this good lady, even
more terrified of her than her husband was.

"Well, Biddy," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan.

"May Nora come and spend tomorrow night here?"

"No," was on Mrs. O'Shanaghgan's lips; but just then the Squire came
forward.

"To be sure she may; it will do her a sight of good. The child
hardly ever goes from home."

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan raised displeased eyes to her husband's face.

"Girls of Nora's age ought to stay at home," she said.

"Yes, to be sure, to be sure," said the Squire; "and we would miss
her awfully if she was away from us; but a day or two off duty--eh,
madam?" He glanced at his wife.

"You have your answer, Biddy," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan; "her father
wishes Nora to accept your invitation. She may stay away for one
night--no longer."

Biddy winked broadly round at Nora.

"Now, then," she said, "come along." She seized her friend by the arm,
and whisked her out of the room.

"It was the dress that did it," she said; "it is the loveliest
garment in all the world. Come along now, and let's take it off. I
want to gather those eggs for you."

She ran upstairs again, followed by Nora. The dress was disposed of in
the large wooden wardrobe, the old torn frock readjusted on Biddy's
stout form, and the girls went out into the lovely summer air. The
eggs which Nora required were put into the little basket, and in
half an hour the O'Shanaghgans' party were returning at full speed
to Castle O'Shanaghgan. Nora glanced once into her father's face, and
her heart gave a great leap. Her high spirits left her as if by magic;
she felt a lump in her throat, and during the rest of the drive hardly
spoke.

The Squire, on the contrary, talked incessantly. He talked more than
ever after Nora had looked at him. He slapped his wife on the
shoulder, and complimented her on her bravery. Nora's driving was
the very best in all the world; she was a born whip; she had no fear
in her; she was his own colleen, the Light o' the Morning, the dearest,
sweetest soul on earth.

Mrs. O'Shanaghan replied very briefly and coldly to her husband's
excited words. She treated them with what she imagined the contempt
they deserved; but Nora was neither elated just then by her father's
praise nor chilled by her mother's demeanor. Every thought of her
heart, every nerve in her highly strung frame, was concentrated on
one fact alone--she had surprised a look, a look on the Squire's
face, which told her that his heart was broken.




CHAPTER V.


"I AM ASHAMED OF YOU."

It was late that same evening, and the household at the Castle had
all retired to rest. Nora was in her own room. This room was not
furnished according to an English girl's fancy. It was plain and
bare, but, compared to Biddy Murphy's chamber, it was a room of
comfort and even luxury. A neat carpet covered the floor, there were
white dimity curtains to the windows, and the little bed in its
distant recess looked neat and comfortable. It is true that the
washhand-stand was wooden, and the basin and jug of the plainest
type; but Mrs. O'Shanaghgan herself saw that Nora had at least what
she considered the necessaries of life. She had a neat hanging-press
for her dresses, and a pretty chest of drawers, which her mother
herself had saved up her pin-money to buy for her.

Nora now stood by one of the open windows, her thick and very long
black hair hanging in a rippling mass over her neck and shoulders.
Suddenly, as she bent out of the window, the faint, very faint
perfume of a cigar came up on the night air. She sniffed excitedly
for a moment, and then, bending a little more forward, said in a low
tone:

"Is that you, Terry?"

"Yes--why don't you go to bed?" was the somewhat ungracious
response.

"I am not sleepy. May I come down and join you?"

"No."

"Will you come up and join me?"

The answer was about to be "No"; there was a moment's hesitation,
then Nora's voice said pleadingly, "Ah, do now, Terry; I want to say
something so badly."

"But if anybody hears?"

"They can't hear. Father and mother's room is at the other end of
the house."

"All right; don't say any more; you'll wake people with that chatter
of yours. I'm coming."

In a couple of minutes there was a knock at Nora's door. She flew to
open it, and Terence came in.

"What do you want?" he said.

"To talk to you; I have got something to say. Come over and sit by
the window."

Terence obeyed.

"The first thing to do is to put out that light," said Nora. She ran
to the dressing table, and before her brother could prevent her had
extinguished the candle.

"Now, then, there is the dear old lady moon to look down upon us,
and nothing else can see us."

"Why don't you go to bed, Nora? Hannah would say that you are losing
your beauty-sleep sitting up at this, hour."

"As if anything about me mattered just now," said Nora.

"Why, what's up?"

"The old thing, Terry; you must know what's up."

"What old thing? I am sure I can't guess."

"Well, then, if you can't you ought. Father is in a peck of trouble--a
peck of trouble."

Nora's voice broke and trembled. Terence, who disliked a scene beyond
anything, fidgeted restlessly. He leaned out of the window, and dropped
his cigar ash on the ground beneath.

"And you are his only son and the heir to Castle O'Shanaghgan."

"The heir to a pack of ruins," said the boy impatiently.

"Terry, you don't deserve to be father's son. How dare you speak
like that of the--the beloved old place?"

"Come, come, Nora, if you are going into heroics I think I'll be off
to bed," said Terence, yawning.

"No, you won't; you must listen. I have got something most important
to say."

"Well, then, I will give you five minutes; not another moment. I
know you, Nora; you always exaggerate things. You are an Irishwoman
to your backbone."

"I am, and I glory in the fact."

"You ought to be ashamed to glory in it. Don't you want to have
anything to do with mother and her relations?"

"I love my mother, but I am glad I don't take after her," said Nora;
"yes, I am glad."

The moon shone on the two young faces, and Nora looked up at her
brother; he put on a supercilious smile, and folded his arms across
his broad chest.

"Yes," she replied; "and I should like to shake you for looking like
that. I am glad I am Irish through and through and _through_.
Would I give my warm heart and my enthusiasm for your coldness and
deliberation?"

"Good gracious, Nora, what a little ignorant thing you are! Do you
suppose no Englishman has enthusiasm?"

"We'll drop the subject," said Nora. "It is one I won't talk of; it
puts me into such a boiling rage to see you sitting like that."

Terence did not speak at all for a moment; then he said quietly:

"What is this thing that you have got to tell me? The five minutes
are nearly up, you know."

"Oh, bother your five minutes! I cannot tell you in five minutes.
When my heart is scalded with unshed tears, how can I measure time
by _minutes_? It has to do with father; it is worse than
anything that has ever gone before."

"What is it, Norrie?" Her brother's tone had suddenly become gentle.
He laid his hand for a moment on her arm; the gentleness of the tone,
the unexpected sweetness of the touch overcame Nora; she flung her
arms passionately round his neck.

"Oh, and you are the only brother I have got!" she sobbed; "and I
could love you--I could love you like anything. Can't you be
sympathetic? Can't you be sweet? Can't you be dear?"

"Oh, come, come!" said Terence, struggling to release himself from
Nora's entwining arms; "I am not made like you, you know; but I am
not a bad chap at heart. Now, what is it?"

"I will try and tell you."

"And for goodness' sake don't look so sorrowfully at me, Nora; we
can talk, and we can act and do good deeds, without giving ourselves
away. I hate girls who wear their hearts on their sleeves."

"Oh! you will _never_ understand," said Nora, starting back
again; all her burst of feeling turned in upon herself. "I can't
imagine how you are father's son," she began. But then she stopped,
waited for a moment, and then said quietly, "There is a fresh
mortgage, and it is for a very big sum."

"Oh, is that all?" said Terence. "I have heard of mortgages all my
life; it seems to be the fashion at O'Shanaghgan to mortgage to any
extent. There is nothing in that; father will give up a little more
of the land."

"How much land do you think is left?"

"I am sure I can't say; not much, I presume."

"It is my impression," said Nora--"I am not sure; but it is my
impression--that there is _nothing_ left to meet this big thing
but the--the--the land on which"--her voice broke--"Terry, the land
on which the house stands."

"Really, Nora, you are so melodramatic. I don't know how you can
know anything of this."

"I only guess. Mother is very unhappy."

"Mother? Is she?"

"Ah, I have touched you there! But anyhow, father is in worse
trouble than he has been yet; I never, _never_ saw him look as
he did tonight."

"As if looks mattered."

"The look I saw tonight does matter," said Nora. "We were coming
home from Cronane, and I was driving."

"It is madness to let you drive Black Bess," interrupted Terence. "I
wonder my father risks spoiling one of his most valuable horses."

"Oh, nonsense, Terry; I can drive as well as you, and better, thanks,"
replied Nora, much nettled, for her excellent driving was one of the
few things she was proud of. "Well, I turned round, and I saw father's
face, and, oh! it was just as if someone had stabbed me through the
heart. You know, or perhaps you don't, that the last big loan came
from Squire Murphy."

"Old Dan Murphy; then we are as safe as we can be," said Terence,
rising and whistling. "You really did make me feel uncomfortable,
you have such a queer way; but if it is Dan Murphy, he will give
father any amount of time. Why, they are the best of friends."

"Well, father went to see him on the subject--I happen to know that--and
I don't think he has given him time. There is something wrong, anyhow--I
don't know what; but there _is_ something very wrong, and I mean
to find out tomorrow."

"Nora, if I were you I wouldn't interfere. You are only a young girl,
and these kind of things are quite out of your province. Father has
pulled along ever since you and I were born. Most Irish gentlemen
are poor in these days. How can they help it? The whole country is
going to ruin; there is no proper trade; there is no proper system
anywhere. The tenants are allowed to pay their rent just as they
please----"

"As if we could harry them," said inconsistent Nora. "The poor
dears, with their tiny cots and their hard, hard times. I'd rather
eat dry bread all my days than press one of them."

"If these are your silly views, you must expect our father to be badly
off, and the property to go to the dogs, and everything to come to an
end," said the brother in a discontented tone. "But there, I say once
more that you have exaggerated in this matter; there is nothing more
wrong than there has been since I can remember. I am glad I am going
to England; I am glad I am going to be out of it all for a bit."

"You going to England--you, Terry?"

"Yes. Don't you know? Our Uncle George Hartrick has asked me to stay
with him, and I am going."

"And you can go? You can leave us just now?"

"Why, of course; there will be fewer mouths to feed. It's a good
thing every way."

"But Uncle George is a rich man?"

"What of that?"

"I mean he lives in a big place, and has heaps and heaps of money,"
said Nora.

"So much the better."

"You cannot go to him _shabby_. What are you going to do for
dress?"

"Mother will manage that."

"Mother!" Nora leaped up from the window-ledge and stood facing her
brother. "You have spoken to mother?"

"Of course I have. Dear me, Nora, you are getting to be quite an
unpleasant sort of girl."

"You have spoken to mother," repeated Nora, "and she has promised to
help you? How will she do it?"

Terence moved restlessly.

"I suppose she knows herself how she will do it."

"And you will let her?" said Nora--"you, a man, will let her? You
know she has no money; you know she has nothing but her little
trinkets, and you allow her to sell those to give you pleasure? Oh,
I am ashamed of you! I am sorry you are my brother. How can you do
it?"

"Look here, Nora, I won't be scolded by you. After all, I am your
elder, and you are bound, at any rate, to show me decent outward
respect. If you only mean to talk humbug of this sort I am off to
bed."

Terence rose from his place on the window-ledge, and, without
glancing at Nora, left the room. When he did so she clasped her
hands high above her head, and sat for a moment looking out into the
night. Her face was quivering, but no tears rose to her wide-open
eyes. After a moment she turned, and began very slowly to undress.

"I will see the Banshee tomorrow, if it is possible," she whispered
under her breath. "If ruin can be averted, it shall be. I don't mind
leaving the place; I don't mind starving. I don't mind _anything_
but that look on father's face. But father's heart shall not be broken;
not while Nora O'Shanaghgan is in the world."




CHAPTER VI.


THE CAVE OF THE BANSHEE.

At ten o'clock on the following evening two eager excited girls
might have been seen stealing down a narrow path which led to
Murphy's Cove. Murphy's Cove was a charming little semicircular bay
which ran rather deeply into the land. The sand here was of that
silvery sheen which, at low tide, shone like burnished silver. The
cove was noted for its wonderful shells, producing many cowries and
long shells called pointers.

In the days of her early youth Nora had explored the treasures of
this cove, and had secured a valuable collection of shells, as well
as very rare seaweeds, which she had carefully dried. Her mother had
shown her how to make seaweeds and shells into baskets, and many of
these amateur productions adorned the walls of Nora's bedroom.

All the charm of these things had passed away, however; the time had
come when she no longer cared to gather shells or collect seaweeds.
She felt that she was turning very fast into a woman. She had all an
Irish girl's high spirits; but she had, added to these, a peculiarly
warm and sensitive heart. When those she loved were happy, no one in
all the world was happier than Nora O'Shanaghgan; but when any gloom
fell on the home-circle, then Nora suffered far more than anyone
gave her credit for.

She had passed an anxious day at home, watching her father intently,
afraid to question him, and only darting glances at him when she
thought he was not looking. The Squire, however, seemed cheerful
enough, plodding over his land, or arranging about the horses, or
doing the thousand-and-one small things which occupied his life.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan seemed to have forgotten all about the mortgage,
and was eagerly discussing ways and means with Terence. Terence
avoided Nora's eyes, and rode off early in the evening to see the
nearest tailor. It was not likely that this individual could make a
fitting suit for the young heir to O'Shanaghgan; but the boy must
have something to travel in, and Mrs. O'Shanaghgan gave implicit
directions as to the London tailor whom he was to visit as soon as
he reached the Metropolis.

"For you are to look your best, and never to forget that you are my
son," was her rejoinder; and Terence forgot all about Nora's words
on the previous evening. He was to start in two days' time. Even
Nora became excited over his trip and in her mother's account of her
Uncle Hartrick.

"I wish you were going, Nora," said the mother. "I should be proud
of you. Of course you are a little rough colt; but you could be
trained;" and then she looked with sudden admiration at her handsome
daughter.

"She has a face in a thousand," she thought, "and she is absolutely
unconscious of her beauty."

At five o'clock Nora had started off in the pony-trap to visit her
friend Biddy. The trap had been brought back by one of the numerous
gossoons who abounded all over O'Shanaghgan, and Biddy and Nora had a
few hours before the great secret expedition was to take place. And
now the time had come. The girls had put on thick serge petticoats,
short jackets, and little tight-fitting caps on their heads. There
was always a breeze blowing round that extreme corner of the Atlantic.
Never did the finest summer day find the waves calm there. Nora and
Biddy had been accustomed to these waves since their earliest girlhood,
and were not the least afraid. They stood now waiting in the little
cove, and looking round wonderingly for the appearance of Mike and
Neil upon the scene. They were to bring the boat with them. The girls
were to wade through the surf to get into it, and Biddy was stooping
down to take off her shoes and stockings for the purpose.

"Dear, dear!" she cried. "Do you see that ugly bank of clouds just
behind the moon? I hope my lady moon is not going to hide herself;
we can do nothing in the cave if we have not light."

"But the cave is dark, surely?"

"Yes. But don't you know there is a break in the cliffs above, just
in the center? And it is down there the moon sends its shafts when
it is at the full; it is there the Banshee will meet us, if we are
to see her at all. The shafts from the moon will only enter the cave
at midnight. I have counted the times, and I know everything."

"I want to see the Banshee so badly," said Nora.

"You won't be frightened, then, Nora?"

"Frightened? No. Not of our own Banshee."

"They say," began Biddy, "that if you see a spirit, and come face to
face with it, you are good for--"

"What?" said Nora.

"If you hold out during the year you have seen the spirit, you are
good to live for another ten; but during that first year you are in
extreme danger of dying. If you escape that fate, however, and are
whole and sound, you will be quite safe to live for ten more years.
They say nothing can send you out of the world; not sickness, nor
accidents, nor fire, nor water; but the second year you are liable to
an accident, and the year after to a misfortune; then in the fourth
year your luck turns--in the fourth year you find gold, in the fifth
year health, in the sixth year beauty. Oh, I would give anything to
be beautiful!"

"You are very well as you are, Biddy."

"Very well as I am? What nonsense! Look at my turned-up nose." Here
Biddy pressed her finger on the feature in question.

"It looks very racy," answered Nora.

"Bedad, then, it does that," replied Biddy. "I believe I got it
sound and safe from one of the old----"

"You needn't go on," cried Nora. "I know what you are going to say."

"And why shouldn't I say it? You would be proud enough to be
descended from----"

"Oh, I have a very fine descent of my own," answered Nora, with spirit.

"Now, if I was like you," began Biddy, "wouldn't I be proud, just?
But dear, dear! there never were two Irish girls farther asunder as
far as appearance goes. See here, let me describe myself, feature by
feature. Oh, here's a clear pool. I can get a glimpse of myself in
it. You come and look in too, Nora. Now, then, we can see ourselves.
Oh, holy poker! it's cruel the difference between us. Here's my
forehead low and bumpy, and my little nose, scarcely any of it, and
what there is turned right up to the sky; and my wide mouth, and my
little eyes, and my hair just standing straight up as rakish as you
please. And look at you, with your elegant features and your--oh,
but it's genteel you are!--and I love you, Nora alannah; I love you,
and am not a bit jealous of you."

Here the impulsive girl threw her arms round her friend's neck and
kissed her.

"All the same," she added, "I wish those clouds were not coming up.
It has been so precious hot all day that I should not be the least
surprised if we had a thunderstorm."

"A thunderstorm while we are in the cave would be magnificent," said
Nora.

"Does anything ever frighten you, Nora?"

"I don't think anything in nature could frighten me; but there are
some things I am frightened at."

"What? Do tell me. I should like to know."

"You'll keep it a secret--won't you, Biddy?"

"To be sure I will. When did I ever blaze out anything you told me?
If I am plain, I am faithful."

"Well, I am afraid of _pain_," said Nora.

"Pain! You? But I have seen you scratch yourself ever so deep and
not so much as wink; and I mind that time when you twisted your
ankle and you didn't even pretend you were hurt."

"Oh, it is not that sort of pain. I am terrified of pain when it
affects those I love. But there! don't ask me any more. Here are the
boys; we'll jump into the boat and be off. Why, it is half-past ten,
and it will take half-an-hour's good rowing to cross the bay, and
then we have to enter the cave and----"

"I don't like those clouds," said Biddy. "I wonder if it is safe to
go."

"Safe?" said Nora. "We must go. Mother won't allow me to spend another
night here, and I shall lose my chance. I am determined to speak to the
Banshee or die in the attempt."

The splash of oars was now distinctly audible, and the next moment a
four-oared gig swiftly turned the little promontory and shot with a
rapid movement into the bay.

"Why," said Biddy, running forward, "who's in the boat?"

A lad and a man now stood upright and motioned to the girls.

"Where's Neil?" said Biddy.

"Neil could not come, Miss Biddy, so I'm taking his place," said the
deep voice of a powerful-looking man. He had a black beard down to
his waist, flashing black eyes, a turned-up nose, and a low forehead.
A more bull-dog and ferocious-looking individual it would be hard to
find. Biddy, however, knew him; he was Neil's father--Andy Neil, as
he was called. He was known to be a lawless and ferocious man, and
was very much dreaded by most of the neighbors around. Neither Nora
nor Biddy, however, felt any reason to fear him and Nora said almost
cheerfully:

"As we are to have such a stiff row, it is just as well to have a
man in the boat."

"Faix, now, young ladies, come along, and don't keep me waiting,"
said Andy, rising and brandishing one of his oars in a threatening
way. "There's a storm coming on, and I want to be out of this afore
it overtakes us. Oh, glory be to goodness, there's a flash of
lightning!"

There came a flash on the edge of the horizon, lighting up the thick
bank of rapidly approaching clouds.

"Nora, had we better go tonight?" said Biddy. She had as little fear
as her friend, but even she did not contemplate with pleasure a wild
storm in the midst of the Atlantic.

The man Neil looked gravely round.

"Och! good luck to ye now, young ladies; don't be kaping me waiting
after the botheration of coming to fetch yez. Come along, and be
quick about it."

"To be sure," said Nora. She splashed bravely into the surf, for the
boat could not quite reach the shore. The waves reached high above
her pretty, rosy ankles as she stepped into the boat.

Biddy followed in her wake; and then Nora, producing a rough towel,
began to dry her feet. Both girls put on their shoes and stockings
again in absolute silence.

Neil had now faced the boat seaward, and with great sweeps with a pair
of sculls was taking it out to sea. The tide was in their favor, and
they went at a rapid rate. The man did not speak at all, and his face
was in complete shadow. Nora breathed hard in suppressed excitement
and delight. Biddy crouched at the bottom of the boat and watched the
clouds as they came up.

"I wish I hadn't come," she muttered once or twice.

The boy Mike sat at the stern. The two girls had nothing whatever to
do.

"Shall I take an oar, Andy?" said Nora at last.

"You, miss?"

"I can take a pair of oars and help you," said the girl.

"If it plazes you, miss." The man hastily stepped to the back of the
boat. Nora took her place, and soon they were going at greater speed
than ever. She was a splendid oarswoman, and feathered her oars in
the most approved fashion.

In less than the prescribed half-hour they reached the entrance to
the great cave.

They were safe. A hollow, booming noise greeted them as they came
close. Andy bent forward and gave Nora a brief direction.

"Ship your oars now, miss. Aisy now; aisy now. Now, then, I'll take
one pull; pull your left oar again. Now, here we are."

He spoke with animation. Nora obeyed him implicitly. They entered the
shadow of the cave, and the next instant found themselves in complete
darkness. The boat bobbed up and down on the restless water, and just
at that instant a flash of vivid lightning illuminated all the outside
water, followed by a crashing roar of thunder.

"The storm is on us; but, thank the Almighty, we're safe," said
Mike, with a little sob. "I wish to goodness we hadn't come, all the
same."

"And so do I," said Biddy; "it is perfectly awful being in a cave
like this. What shall we do?"

"Do!" said Neil. "Hould your tongues and stay aisy. Faix, it's the
Almighty is having a bit of a talk; you stay quiet and listen."

The four oars were shipped now, and the boat swayed restlessly up
and down.

"Aren't we going any farther?" said Nora.

"Not while this storm lasts. Oh, for goodness' sake, Nora, do stay
quiet," said Biddy.

Andy now produced out of his pocket a box of matches and a candle.
He struck a match, applied it to the candle, and the next moment a
feeble flame shot up. It was comparatively calm within the cave.

"There! that will light us a bit," said Andy. "The storm won't last
long. It's well we got into shelter. Now, then, we'll do fine."

"You don't think," said Biddy, in a terrified tone, "that the cave
will be be crashed in?"

"Glory be to Heaven, no, miss--we have cheated the storm coming here."
The man smiled as he spoke, showing bits of broken teeth. His words
were gentle enough, but his whole appearance was more like that of a
wild beast than a man. Nora looked full at him. The candle lit up her
pale face; her dark-blue eyes were full of courage; a lock of her
black hair had got loose in the exertion of rowing, and had fallen
partly over her shoulder and neck. "Faix, then, you might be the Banshee
herself," said Andy, bending forward and looking at her attentively.

"If the moon comes out again we may see the Banshee," whispered
Nora. "Can we not go farther into the cave? Time is flying." She
took her watch from her pocket and looked at the hour. It was
already past eleven o'clock.

"The storm will be over in good time," said the man. "Do you want to
get the gleam of moonlight in the crack of the inner cave? Is that
what you're afther, missy?"

"Yes," said Nora.

"Well, you stay quiet; you'll reach it right enough."

"Nora wants to see the Banshee, Andy," called out Biddy. "Oh, what a
flash! It nearly blinded me."

"The rain will soon be on us, and then the worst of the storm will
be past," said the man.

Mike uttered a scream; the lightning was now forked and intensely
blue. It flashed into every cranny in the cave, showing the barnacles
on the roof, the little bits of fern, the strange stalactites. After
the flash had passed, the darkness which followed was so intense that
the light of the dim candle could scarcely be seen. Presently the
rain thundered down upon the bare rock above with a tremendous sound;
there were great hailstones; the thunder became less frequent, the
lightning less vivid. In a little more than half an hour the fierce
storm had swept on to other quarters.

"Now, then, we can go forward," said Andy. He took up his oars. "You
had best stay quiet, missies; just sit there in the bottom of the
boat, and let me push ahead."

"Then I will hold the candle," said Nora.

"Right you are, miss."

She took it into her cold fingers. Her heart was beating high with
suppressed excitement; she had never felt a keener pleasure in her
life. If only she might see the Banshee, and implore the spirit's
intercession for the fortunes of her house!

The man rowed on carefully, winding round corners and avoiding many
dangers. At last they came bump upon some rocks.

"Now, then," he said, "we can't go a step farther."

"But we must," said Nora. "We have not reached the chasm in the
rock. We must."

"We dare not, miss; the boat hasn't water enough to float her."

"Well, then, I shall wade there. How far on is the chasm?"

"Oh, Nora! Nora! you won't be so mad as to go alone?" called out
Biddy.

"I shan't be a scrap afraid," said Nora.

"But there's water up to your knees; you dare not do it," said
Biddy.

"Yes, I dare; and the tide is going down--is it not?"

"It will be down a good bit in half an hour," said the man, "and
we'll be stranded here as like as not. These are bad rocks when the
tide is low; we must turn and get out of this, miss, in a quarter of
an hour at the farthest."

"Oh, I could just do it in a quarter of an hour," said Nora.

She jumped up, and the next moment had sprung out of the boat into
the water, which nearly reached up to her knees.

"Oh, Nora! Nora! you'll be lost; you'll slip and fall in that awful
darkness, and we'll never see you again," said Biddy, with a cry of
terror.

"No, no; let her go," said Andy. "There ain't no fear, miss; you
have but to go straight on, holding your candle and avoiding the
rocks to your left, and you'll come to the opening. Be as quick as
you can, Miss Nora; be as quick as you can."

His voice had a queer note in it. Nora gave him a look of gratitude,
and proceeded on her dangerous journey. Her one fear was that the
candle might go out; the flame flickered as the air got less good; the
hot grease scalded her fingers; but suddenly a breeze of fresher air
reached her, and warned her that she was approaching the aperture.
There came a little puff of wind, and the next moment the brave girl
found herself in total darkness. The candle had gone out. Just at that
instant she heard, or fancied she heard, a splash behind her in the
water. There was nothing for it now but to go forward. She resolved
not to be terrified. Perhaps it was a water-rat; perhaps it was the
Banshee. Her heart beat high; still she had no fear. She was going to
plead for her father. What girl would be terrified with such a cause
in view? She walked slowly and carefully on, and at last the fresher
air was followed by a welcome gleam of light; she was approaching the
opening. The next moment she had found it. She stood nearly up to her
knees in the water; the shaft of moonlight was piercing down into the
cave. Nora went and stood in the moonlight. The hole at the top was
little more than a foot in width; there was a chasm, a jagged chasm,
through which the light came. She could see a bit of cloudless sky,
and the cold moonlight fell all over her.

"Oh, Banshee!--Lady Spirit who belongs to our house, come and speak
to me," cried the girl. "Come from your home in the rock and give me
a word of comfort. A dark time is near, and we implore your help.
Come, come, Banshee--it is the O'Shanaghgans who want you. It is
Nora O'Shanaghgan who calls you now."

The sound of a laugh came from the darkness behind her, and the next
instant the startled girl saw the big form of Andy Neil approaching.

"Don't you be frightened, Miss Nora," he said. "I aint the Banshee,
but I am as good. Faix, now, I want to say something to you. I have
come here for the purpose. There! don't be frightened. I won't hurt
ye--not I; but I want yez to promise me something."

"What is that?" said Nora.

"I have come here for the purpose. _She_ aint no good." He
indicated with a motion of his thumb the distant form of Biddy
within the dark recess of the cave.

"Does Miss Murphy know you have followed me?" said Nora.

"No, she don't know it; she's in the dark. There's the little lad
Mike will look after her. She won't do nothing until we go back."

"Oh, I did want to see the Banshee!"

"The Banshee may come or not," said the man; "but I have my message
to yez, and it is this: If you don't get Squire O'Shanaghgan to let
me keep my little bit of land, and to see that I aint evicted, why,
I'll--you're a bonny lass, you're as purty a young lady as I ever
set eyes on, but I'll drownd yez, deep down here in this hole. No
one will ever know; they'll think you has fallen and got drowned
without no help from me. Yes, I'll do it--yes, I will--unless you
promises that Squire O'Shanaghgan shan't evict me. If I go out, why,
you goes out first. Now, you'll do it; you'll swear that you'll do
it? You'll leave no stone unturned. You'll get 'em to leave me my
cabin where I was born, and the childer was born, and where the wife
died, or I'll drownd yez deep down here in the Banshee's hole.
Look!" said the man as the moon nickered on a deep pool of water;
"they say there is no bottom to it. Just one shlip, and over you
goes, and nobody will ever see Nora O'Shanaghgan again."

"I'm not going to be frightened; you wouldn't do it, Andy," said the
girl.

"Wouldn't I just? You think that I'd be afraid?"

"I don't think so. I am sure you are afraid of nothing."

"Then why shouldn't I do it?"

"Because you wouldn't be so bad, not to an innocent girl who never
harmed you."

"Oh! wouldn't I just? Ain't I a-stharving, and aint the childer
stharving, and why should they turn us out of our bit of a cabin?
Swear you'll do it; swear you won't have me evicted; you has got to
promise."

"_I_ wouldn't evict you--never, never!" said Nora. "Oh, never!"
she added, tears, not of fright, but of pity, filling her eyes. "But
how can I control my father?"

"That's for you to see to, missy; I must go back now, or we'll none
of us leave this cave alive. But you'll just shlip into that water,
and you'll never be heard of again unless you promises. I'll go
back; they none of 'em will know I followed yez. You'll be drowned
here in the deep pool, and I'll go back to the boat, or you promises
and we both goes back."

"But, Andy, what am I to promise?"

"That you won't have me evicted. You say solemn here: 'Andrew Neil,
I would rather die myself or have my tongue cut out, and may the
Holy Mother cast me from her presence forever, and may the evil
spirits take me, if I don't save you, Andy.' You has to say that."

"No, I won't," said Nora with sudden spirit. "I am not afraid. I'll
do my very, very best for you; but I won't say words like those."

The man looked at her attentively.

"I was a little frightened at first," continued Nora; "but I am not
now. I would rather you pushed me into that pool, I would rather
sink and die, than take an awful vow like that. I won't take it.
I'll do my very best to save you, but I won't make a vow."

"Faix, then, miss, it's you that has the courage; but now if I let
yez off this time, will ye do yer best?"

"Yes, I'll do my best."

"If yer don't, bonny as you are, and the light of somebody's eyes,
you'll go out of the world. But, come, I trust yez, and we must be
turning back."

The man took the matches from his pocket, struck one, and lit the
candle. Then, Andy going in front of Nora, they both turned in the
direction where the boat was waiting for them.




CHAPTER VII.


THE MURPHYS.

It was between two and three in the morning when the girls found
themselves back again in the desolate mansion of Cronane. Biddy had
left a window open; they had easily got in by it and gone up to
Biddy's big room on the first floor. They were to sleep together in
Biddy's small bed. Personally, discomforts did not affect them; they
had never been accustomed to luxury, and rather liked the sense of
hardship than otherwise.

"I brought up a bit of supper beforehand," said Biddy. "I am real
hungry. What do you say to cold bacon and taters--eh? I went down to
the larder and got a good few early this morning. I put them in the
cupboard in a brown bowl with a plate over it. You're hungry--aren't
you, Norrie?"

"No, not very," answered Nora.

"What's come to you, you're so quiet? You have lost all your spirit.
I thought we would have a real rollicking time over our supper,
laughing and talking, and telling our adventures. Oh! it was awful
in that cave; and when you were away talking to the lady Banshee I
did have a time of it. I thought that awful Andy was going to murder
me. I had a sort of feeling that he was getting closer and closer,
and I clutched hold of little Mike. I think he was a bit surprised;
I'll give him a penny to-morrow, poor gossoon. But aren't you
hungry, and won't you laugh, and shan't we have a jolly spree?"

"Oh, I shall be very glad to eat something," said Nora; "and I am a
little cold, too. I took a chill standing so long in that icy
water."

"Oh, dear, oh, dear! it's the rheumatics you'll be getting, and then
you'll lose your beautiful straight figure. I must rub your legs.
There, sit on the bed and I'll begin."

Nora submitted to Biddy's ministrations. The room was lit by a small
dip candle, which was placed in an old tin candlestick on the
mantelpiece.

"Dear, dear! the light will be coming in no time, and we can quench
the glim then," said Biddy. "I've got to be careful about candles.
We're precious short of everything at Cronane just now. We're as
poor as church mice; it's horrid to be so desperately poor as that.
But, hurrah for the cold taters and bacon! We'll have a right good
meal. That will warm you up; and I have a little potheen in a black
bottle, too. I'll put some water to it and you shall have a drink."

"I never touch it," said Nora, shuddering.

"But you must tonight, or you'll catch your death of cold. There,
the best thing you can do is to get right into bed. Why, you're
shivering, and your teeth are chattering. It's a fine state Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan will be in tomorrow when you go back to her."

"I must not get ill, Biddy; that would never do," said Nora, pulling
herself together with an effort. "Yes, I'll get into bed; and I'll
take a little of your potheen--very, very weak, if you'll mix it for
me--and I'll have some of the bacon and potatoes. Oh! I would eat
anything rather than be ill. I never was really ill in my life; but
now, of all times, it would never do."

"Well, then, here you go. Tumble into bed. I'll pile the blankets on
you. Now, isn't that better?"

Biddy bustled, intent on hospitality. She propped Nora up with
pillows, pulled a great rug over her shoulders, and heaped on more
and more blankets, which she pulled expeditiously from under the
bed. "They always stay here in the summer," said Biddy. "That's to
keep them aired; and now they're coming in very handy. You have got
four doubled on you now; that makes eight. I should think you'd soon
be warm enough."

"I expect I shall soon be too hot," said Nora; "but this is very
nice."

She sipped the potheen, ate a little bacon and cold potatoes, and
presently declared herself well again.

"Oh, I am perfectly all right!" she said; "it was coming home in the
boat in my wet things. I wish I had taken a pair of sculls again;
then I wouldn't even have been cold."

"Now you'll tell me," said Biddy, who sat on the edge of the bed
munching great chunks of bacon and eating her cold potatoes with
extreme relish. "Oh! it's hungry I am; but I want to hear all about
the lady Banshee. Did she come? Did you see her, Nora?"

"No, she didn't come," said Nora very shortly.

"Didn't come? But they say she never fails when the moon is at the
full. She rises up out of that pool--the bottomless pool it is
called--and she floats over the water and waves her hand. It's awful
to see her if you don't belong to her; but to those who belong to
her she is tender and sweet, like a mother, they say; and her breath
is like honey, and her kiss the sweetest you ever got in all your
life. You mean to say you didn't see her? Why, Nora, what has come
to you? You're trembling again."

"I cannot tell you, Biddy; don't ask me any more. I didn't see the
Banshee. It was very, very cold standing up to my knees in the
water. I suppose I did wrong to go; but that's done and over now.
Oh, I am so tired and sleepy! Do get into bed, Biddy, and let us
have what little rest we can."

Early the next morning Nora returned to O'Shanaghgan. All trace of
ill effects had vanished under Biddy's prompt treatment. She had
lain under her eight blankets until she found them intolerable, had
then tossed most of them off, and fallen into deep slumber. In the
morning she looked much as usual; but no entreaties on the part of
Biddy, joined in very heartily by Squire Murphy and also by Mrs.
Murphy, could induce her to prolong her visit.

"It's a message I'll take over myself to your father if you'll but
stay, Nora," said the Squire.

"No, no; I must really go home," answered Nora.

"It's too fine you are for us, Nora, and that's the truth; and don't
go for to be denying it," said Mrs. Murphy.

"No; I hope I may never be too fine for my real friends," said Nora
a little sadly. "I must go back. I believe I am wanted at home."

"You're a very conceited colleen; there's no girl that can't be
spared from home sometimes," said Mrs. Murphy. "I thought you would
help Biddy and me to pick black currants. There are quarts and
quarts of 'em in the garden, and the maids can't do it by
themselves, poor things. Well, Biddy, you have got to help me
today."

"Oh, mammy, I just can't," answered Biddy. "I'm due down at the
shore, and I want to go a bit of the way back with Nora. You can't
expect me to help you today, mammy."

"There she is, Nora--there she is!" exclaimed the good lady, her
face growing red and her eyes flashing fire; "not a bit of good, not
worth her keep, I tell her. Why shouldn't she stay at home and help
her mother? Do you hear me, Squire Murphy? Give your orders to the
girl; tell her to stay at home and help her mother."

"Ah, don't be bothering me," said Squire Murphy. "It's out I'm going
now. I have enough on my own shoulders without attending to the
tittle-tattle of women."

He rose from the table, and the next moment had left the room.

"Dear, dear! there are bad times ahead for poor Old Ireland," said
Mrs. Murphy. "Children don't obey their parents; husbands don't
respect their wives; it's a queer state of the country. When I was
young, and lived at my own home in Tipperary, we had full and
plenty. There was a bite and a sup for every stranger who came to
the door, and no one talked of money, nor thought of it neither. The
land yielded a good crop, and the potatoes--oh, dear! oh, dear! that
was before the famine. The famine brought us a lot of bad luck, that
it did."

"But the potatoes have been much better the last few years, and this
year they say we're going to have a splendid crop," said Nora. "But
I must go now, Mrs. Murphy. Thank you so much for asking me."

"You're looking a bit pale; but you're a beautiful girl," said the
good woman admiringly. "I'd give a lot if Biddy could change places
with you--that is, in appearance, I mean. She's not a credit to
anybody, with her bumpy forehead and her cocked nose, and her rude
ways to her mother."

"Mammy, I really cannot help the way I am made," said Biddy; "and as
to staying in this lovely day picking black currants and making jam,
and staining my fingers, it's not to be thought of. Come along out,
Nora. If you must be off back to O'Shanaghgan, I mean to claim the
last few moments of your stay here."

The girls spent the morning together, and early in the afternoon
Nora returned to O'Shanaghgan. Terence met her as she was driving
down the avenue.

"How late you are!" he said; "and you have got great black shadows
under your eyes. You know, of course, that I have to catch the early
train in the morning?"

"To be sure I do, Terry; and it is for that very reason I have come
back so punctually. I want to pack your things my own self."

"Ah, that's a good girl. You'll find most of them laid out on the bed.
Be sure you see that all my handkerchiefs are there--two dozen--and
all marked with my initials."

"I never knew you had so many."

"Yes; mother gave me a dozen at Christmas, and I have not used them
yet. I shall want every bit of decent clothing I possess for my
visit to my rich Uncle Hartrick."

"How is mother, Terence?"

"Mother? Quite well, I suppose; she is fretting a bit at my going;
you'll have to comfort her. The place is very rough for her just
now."

"I don't see that it is any rougher than it has ever been," said
Nora a little fiercely. "You're always running down the place,
Terry."

"Well, I can't help it. I hate to see things going to the dogs," said
the young man. He turned on his heel, called a small fox-terrier, who
went by the name of Snap, to follow him, and went away in the direction
of the shore.

Nora whipped up her pony and drove on to the house. Here she was
greeted by her father. He was standing on the steps; and, coming
down, he lifted her bodily out of the dog-cart, strained her to his
heart, and looked full into her eyes.

"Ah, Light o' the Morning, I have missed you," he said, and gave a
great sigh.

The girl nestled up close to him. She was trembling with excess of
feeling.

"And I have missed you," she answered. "How is the mother?"

"I suppose she is all right, Nora; but there, upon my word, she does
vex me sometimes. Take the horse to the stables, and don't stand
staring there, Peter Jones." The Squire said these latter words on
account of the fixed stare of a pair of bright black eyes like sloes
in the head of the little chap who had brought the trap for Nora. He
whipped up the pony, turned briskly round, and drove away.

"Come out for a bit with me round the grounds, Nora. It's vexed I
am, sometimes; I feel I cannot stand things. I wish my lady would
not have all those fine airs. But there, I have no right to talk
against your mother to you, child; and of course she is your mother,
and I am desperately proud of her. There never was her like for
beauty and stateliness; but sometimes she tries me."

"Oh! I know, father; I know. But let's go round and look at the new
calf and the colt. We can spare an hour--can we not?"

"Yes; come along quick, Nora," answered the Squire, all smiles and
jokes once more. "The mother doesn't know you have come back, and we
can have a pleasant hour to ourselves."




CHAPTER VIII.


THE SQUIRE'S TROUBLE.

Nora and her father went slowly down a shady walk, which led in the
direction of the shore. Soon they found themselves in a hay-field. The
crop here was not particularly good. The hay had been spoiled by rains,
which had soaked down on the lands a fortnight ago. It was stunted in
height, and in some parts had that impoverished appearance which is so
painful to the heart of the good farmer.

Squire O'Shanaghgan, notwithstanding his somewhat careless ways, was
really a capital farmer. He had the best interests of the land at
heart, and did his utmost to get profit out of his many acres. He
now shook his head over the hay-crop.

"It's just like all the rest, Norrie--everything going to ruin--the
whole place going to the dogs; and yet--and yet, colleen, it's about
the sweetest bit of earth in all God's world. I wouldn't give
O'Shanaghgan for the grandest place in the whole of England; and I
told your lady-mother so this morning."

"Why did you say it, father? Had mother been--"

"Oh, nothing, child--nothing; the old grumbles. But it's her way,
poor dear; she can't help herself; she was born so. It's not to be
expected that she who was brought up in that prim land over yonder,
where everything is cut and dry, and no one ever thinks of managing
anything but by the rule of three, would take to our wild ways. But
there, Norrie, it's the freedom of the life that suits me; when I am
up and away on Black Bess or on Monarch, I don't think there is a
happier fellow in the world. But there, when I come face to face
with money, why, I'm bothered--I'm bothered entirely, child."

"Father," said Nora, "won't you tell me what is worrying you?"

"How do you know I am worried about anything, colleen?"

"How do I know, father?" answered Nora a little playfully. She turned
and faced him. "I know," she said; "that is enough; you are worried.
What is it?"

The Squire looked at her attentively. He was much the taller of the
two, and his furrowed face seemed to the girl, as she looked up at
him, like a great rock rising above her. She was wont to sun herself
in his smile, and to look to him always as a sure refuge in any
perplexity. She did not love anyone in the whole world as she loved
her father. His manliness appealed to her; his generous ways suited
her; but, above all these things, he was her father; he was Irish to
his backbone, and so was she.

"You must tell me," she said. "Something is troubling you, and Nora
has to know."

"Ah, my Light o' the Morning! what would I do without you?" answered
the Squire.

"Prove that you trust me," said Nora, "and tell me what worries
you."

"Well, Nora, you cannot understand; and yet if you could it would be a
relief to unburden my mind. But you know nothing about mortgages--do
you, little woman?"

"More than you think," said Nora. "I am not a child--I am nearly
seventeen; and I have not lived at O'Shanaghgan all my life for
nothing. Of course we are poor! I don't know that I want to be
rich."

"I'll tell you what I want," said the Squire; "I want to forget that
there is such a thing as money. If it were not for money I would say
to myself, 'There's not a better lot than mine.' What air we have
here!" He opened his mouth and took in a great breath of the pure
Atlantic breezes. "What a place it is! Look at the beauty of it!
Look round, Norrie, and see for yourself; the mountains over there;
and the water rolling up almost to our doors; and the grand roar of
the waves in our ears; and those trees yonder; and this field with
the sun on it; and the house, though it is a bit of a barrack, yet
it is where my forebears were born. Oh, it's the best place on
earth; it's O'Shanaghgan, and it's mine! There, Nora, there; I can't
stand it!"

The Squire dashed his hand to his brow. Nora looked up at him; she
was feeling the exposure and excitement of last night. Her pallor
suddenly attracted his attention.

"Why, what's the matter with you, colleen?" he said. "Are you well--are
you sure you're well?"

"Absolutely, perfectly well, father. Go on--tell me all."

"Well, you know, child, when I came in for the estate it was not to
say free."

"What does that mean, father?"

"It was my father before me--your grandfather--the best hunter in
the county. He could take his bottle of port and never turn a hair;
and he rode to hounds! God bless you, Nora! I wish you could have
seen your grandfather riding to hounds. It was a sight to remember.
Well, he died--God bless him!--and there were difficulties. Before
he died those difficulties began, and he mortgaged some of the outer
fields and Knock Robin Farm--the best farm on the whole estate; but
I didn't think anything of that. I thought I could redeem it; but
somehow, child, somehow rents have been going down; the poor folk
can't pay, and I'm the last to press them; and things have got worse
and worse. I had a tight time of it five years ago; I was all but
done for. It was partly the fact of the famine; we none of us ever
got over that--none of us in this part of Ireland, and many of the
people went away. Half the cabins were deserted. There's half a mile
of 'em down yonder; every single one had a dead man or woman in it
at the time of the famine, and now they're empty. Well of course,
you know all about that?"

"Oh, yes, father; Hannah has told me of the famine many, many
times."

"To be sure--to be sure; but it is a dark subject, and not fit for a
pretty young thing like you. But there, let me go on. It was five
years ago I mortgaged some of the place, a good bit, to my old
friend Dan Murphy. He lent me ten thousand pounds--not a penny more,
I assure you. It just tided me over, and I thought, of course, I'd
pay him back, interest and all, by easy stages. It seemed so easy to
mortgage the place to Murphy, and there was nothing else to be
done."

The Squire had been walking slowly; now he stopped, dropped Nora's
hand from his arm, and faced her.

"It seemed so easy to mortgage the land to Dan Murphy," he said,
dropping his voice, "so very easy, and that money was so handy, and
I thought--"

"Yes, father?" said Nora in a voice of fear. "You said these words
before. Go on--it was so easy. Well?"

"Well, a month ago, child, I got a letter from Murphy's lawyer in
Dublin, to say that the money must be paid up, or they would
foreclose."

"Foreclose, father. What is that?"

"Take possession, child--take possession."

"A month ago you got that letter? They would take possession--possession
of the land you have mortgaged. Does that mean that it would belong
to Squire Murphy, father?"

"So I thought, my dear colleen, and I didn't fret much. The fact is,
I put the letter in the fire and forgot it. It was only three days
ago that I got another letter to know what I meant to do. I was
given three months to pay in, and if I didn't pay up the whole ten
thousand, with the five years' interest, they'd foreclose. I hadn't
paid that, Nora; I hadn't paid a penny of it; and what with interest
and compound interest, it mounted to a good round sum. Dan charged
me six per cent, on the money; but there, you don't understand
figures, child, and your pretty head shan't be worried. Anyhow, I
was to pay it all up within the three months--I, who haven't even
fifty pounds in the bank. It was a bit of a staggerer."

"I understand," said Nora; "and that was why you went the day before
yesterday to see Squire Murphy. Of course, he'll give you time;
though, now I come to think of it, he is very poor himself."

"He is that," said the Squire. "I don't blame him--not a bit."

"But what will you do, father?"

"I must think. It is a bit of a blow, my child, and I don't quite
see my way. But I am sure to, before the time comes; and I have got
three months."

"But won't he let you off, father? Must you really pay it in three
months?"

"God help me, Norrie! I can't, not just now; but I will before the
time comes."

"But what did he say, father? I don't understand."

"It's this, Nora. Ah, you have a wise little head on your shoulders,
even though you are an Irish colleen. He said that he had sold my
mortgage to another man, and had got money on it; and the other man--he
is an Englishman, curse him!--and he wants the place, Nora, and he'll
take it in lieu of the mortgage if I don't pay up in three months."

"The place," said Nora; "O'Shanaghgan--he wants O'Shanaghgan?"

"Yes, yes; that's it; he wants the land, and the old house."

"But he can't," said Nora. "You have not--oh! you have not mortgaged
the house?"

"Bless you, Nora! it is I that have done it; the house that you were
born in, and that my father, and father before him, and father before
him again, were born in, and that I was born in--it goes, and the
land goes, the lake yonder, all these fields, and the bit of the shore;
all the bonny place goes in three months if we cannot pay the mortgage.
It goes for an old song, and it breaks my heart, Nora."

"I understand," said Nora very gravely. She did not cry out; the
tears pressed close to the back of her eyes, and scalded her with
cruel pain; but she would not allow one of them to flow. She held
her head very erect, and the color returned to her pale cheeks, and
a new light shone in her dark-blue eyes.

"We'll manage somehow; we must," she said.

"I was thinking of that," said the Squire. "Of course we'll manage."
He gave a great sigh, as if a load were lifted from his heart. "Of
course we'll manage," he repeated; "and don't you tell your mother,
for the life of you, child."

"Of course I will tell nothing until you give me leave. But how do
you mean to manage?"

"I am thinking of going up to Dublin next week to see one or two old
friends of mine; they are sure to help me at a pinch like this. They
would never see Patrick O'Shanaghgan deprived of his acres. They
know me too well; they know it would break my heart. I was thinking
of going up next week."

"But why next week, father? You have only three months. Why do you
put it off to next week?"

"Why, then, you're right, colleen; but it's a job I don't fancy."

"But you have got to do it, and you ought to do it at once."

"To be sure--to be sure."

"Take me with you, father; let us go tomorrow."

"But I have not got money for us both. I must go alone; and then
your mother must not be left. There's Terence gallivanting off to
England to visit his fine relations, and that will take a good bit.
I had to give him ten pounds this morning, and there are only forty
now left in the bank. Oh, plenty to tide us for a bit. We shan't
want to eat much; and there's a good supply of fruit and vegetables
on the land; and the poor folk will wait for their wages. Of course
there will be more rents coming in, and we'll scrape along somehow.
Don't you fret, colleen. I declare it's light as a feather my heart
is since I told you the truth. You are a comfort to me, Norrie."

"Father," said Nora suddenly, "there's one thing I want to say."

"What is that, pet?"

"You know Andy Neil?"

"What! Andrew Neil--that scoundrel?" The Squire's brow grew very
black. "Yes, yes. What about him? You have not seen him, have you?"

"Yes, father, I have."

"Over at Murphy's? He knew he dare not show his face here. Well,
what about him, Nora?"

"This," said Nora, trembling very much; "he--he does not want you to
evict him."

"He'll pay his rent, or he'll go," thundered the Squire. "No more of
this at present. I can't be worried."

"But, oh, father! he--he can't pay it any more than you can pay the
mortgage. Don't be cruel to him if you want to be dealt with mercifully
yourself; it would be such bad luck."

"Good gracious, Nora, are you demented? The man pays his rent, or he
goes. Not another word."

"Father, dear father!"

"Not another word. Go in and see your mother, or she'll be wondering
what has happened to you. Yes, I'll go off to Dublin to-morrow. If
Neil doesn't pay up his rent in a week, off he goes; it's men like
Andrew Neil who are the scum of the earth. He has put my back up;
and pay his rent he will, or out he goes."




CHAPTER IX.


EDUCATION AND OTHER THINGS.

The next day the Squire and Terence went off together. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan
was very angry with her husband for going, as she expressed it, to amuse
himself in Dublin. Dirty Dublin she was fond of calling the capital of
Ireland.

"What do you want to go to Dirty Dublin for?" she said. "You'll spend a
lot of money, and God knows we have little enough at the present moment."

"Oh, no, I won't, Ellen," he replied. "I'll be as careful as careful
can be; the colleen can witness to that. There's a little inn on the
banks of the Liffey where I'll put up; it is called the 'Green Dragon,'
and it's a cozy, snug little place, where you can have your potheen
and nobody be any the wiser."

"I declare, Patrick," said his lady, facing him, "you are becoming
downright vulgar. I wish you wouldn't talk in that way. If you have
no respect for yourself and your ancient family, you ought to
remember your daughter."

"I'm sure I'm not doing the colleen any harm," said the Squire.

"That you never could, father," replied Nora, with a burst of
enthusiasm.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan surveyed her coldly.

"Go upstairs and help Terence to pack his things," she said; and
Nora left the room.

The next day the travelers departed. As soon as they were gone Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan sent for Nora to come and sit in the room with her.

"I have been thinking during the night how terribly neglected you
are," she said; "you are not getting the education which a girl in
your position ought to receive. You learn nothing now."

"Oh, mother, my education is supposed to be finished," answered
Nora.

"Finished indeed!" said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan.

"Since Miss Freeman left I have had no governess; but I read a good
bit alone. I am very fond of reading," answered Nora.

"Distasteful as it all is to me," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, "I must
take you in hand myself. But I do wish your Uncle George would
invite you over to stay with them at The Laurels. It will do Terence
a wonderful lot of good; but you want it more, you are so unkempt
and undignified. You would be a fairly nice-looking girl if any
justice was done to you; but really the other day, when I saw you
with that terrible young person Bridget Murphy, it gave my heart
quite a pang. You scarcely looked a lady, you were laughing in such
a vulgar way, and quite forgetting your deportment. Now, what I have
been thinking is that we might spend some hours together daily, and
I would mark out a course of instruction for you."

"Oh, mammy," answered Nora, "I should be very glad indeed to learn;
you know I always hated having my education stopped, but father
said--"

"I don't want to hear what your father said," interrupted Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan.

"Oh, but, mother dear, I really must think of father, and I must
respect what he says. He told me that my grandmother stopped her
schooling at fourteen, and he said she was the grandest lady, and the
finest and bonniest, in the country, and that no one could ever put
her to shame; for, although she had not much learning to boast of,
she had a smart answer for every single thing that was said to her.
He said you never could catch her tripping in her words, never--never;
and he thinks, mother," continued Nora, sparkling and blushing, "that
I am a little like my grandmother. There is her miniature upstairs.
I should like to be like her. Father did love her so very, very much."

"Of course, Nora, if those are your tastes, I have nothing further
to say," answered Mrs. O'Shanaghgan; "but while you are under my
roof and under my tuition, I shall insist on your doing a couple of
hours' good reading daily."

"Very well, mother; I am quite agreeable."

"I suppose you have quite forgotten your music?"

"No, I remember it, and I should like to play very much indeed; but
the old piano--you must know yourself, mother dear, that it is
impossible to get any music out of it."

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan uttered a groan.

"We seem to be beset with difficulties at every step," she said. "It
is such a mistake your father going to Dublin now, and throwing away
his little capital. Has he said anything to you about the mortgage,
by the way, Nora?"

Nora colored.

"A little," she answered in a low voice.

"Ah, I see--told it as a secret; so like the Irish, making mysteries
about everything, and then blabbing them out the next minute. I
don't want, my dear, to encroach upon your father's secrets, so
don't be at all afraid. Now, bring down your Markham's History of
England and Alison's History of Europe, and I will set you a task to
prepare for me for to-morrow."

Nora went slowly out of the room. She hated Markham's History of
England. She had read it five or six times, and knew it by heart.
She detested George and Richard and Mary, and their conversations
with their mother were simply loathsome to her. Alison's History,
however, was tougher metal, and she thought she would enjoy a good
stiff reading of it. She was a very intelligent girl, and with
advantages would have done well.

She returned with the books. Her mother carelessly marked about
twenty pages in each, told her to read them in the course of the
day, and to come to her the next morning to be questioned.

"You can go now," she said. "I was very busy yesterday, and have a
headache. I shall lie down and go to sleep."

"Shall I draw down the blind, mother?"

"Yes, please; and you can put that rug over me. Now, don't run
shouting all over the house; try to remember you are a young lady.
Really and truly, no one would suppose that you and Terence were
brother and sister. He will do great credit to my brother George; he
will be proud of such a handsome young fellow as his nephew."

Nora said nothing; having attended to her mother's comforts, she left
the room. She went out into the sunshine. In her hand she carried the
two books. Her first intention was to take them down to one end of the
dilapidated garden and read them steadily. She was rather pleased than
otherwise at her mother's sudden and unlooked-for solicitude with
regard to her education. She thought it would be pleasant to learn
even under her mother's rather peculiar method of tutelage; but, as
she stood on the terrace looking across the exquisite summer scene,
two of the dogs, Creena and Cushla, came into view. They rushed up to
Nora with cries and barks of welcome. Down went the books on the
gravel, and off ran the Irish girl, followed by the two barking dogs.
A few moments later she was down on the shore. She had run out without
her hat or parasol. What did that matter? The winds and sea-breezes
had long ago taken their own sweet will on Nora's Irish complexion;
they could not tan skin like hers, and had given up trying; they could
only bring brighter roses into her cheeks and more sweetness into her
dark-blue eyes. She forgot her troubles, as most Irish girls will when
anything calls off their attention, and ran races with the dogs up and
down the shore. Nora was laughing, and the dogs were barking and
gamboling round her, when the stunted form of Hannah Croneen was seen
approaching. Hannah wore her bedgown and her short blue serge
petticoat; her legs and feet were bare; the breezes had caught up
her short gray locks, and were tossing them wildly about. She looked
very elfin and queer as she approached the girl.

"Why, then, Miss Nora, it's a word I want with you, a-colleen."

"Yes--what is it, Hannah?" answered Nora. She dropped her hands to
her sides and turned her laughing, radiant face upon the little
woman.

"Ah, then, it's a sight for sore eyes you are, Miss Nora. Why, it is
a beauty you are, Miss Nora honey, and hondsomer and hondsomer you
gets every time I see yez. It's the truth I'm a-telling yez, Miss
Nora; it's the honest truth."

"I hope it is, Hannah, for it is very pleasant hearing," answered
Nora. "Do I really get handsomer and handsomer? I must be a beauty
like my grandmother."

"Ah, she was a lady to worship," replied Hannah, dropping a courtesy
to the memory; such ways as she had, and her eyes as blue and dark
as the blessed night when the moon's at the full, just for all the
world like your very own. Why, you're the mortal image of her; not a
doubt of it, miss, not a doubt of it. But there, I want to say a
word to yez, and we need not spend time talking about nothing but
mere looks. Looks is passing, miss; they goes by and leaves yez
withered up, and there are other things to think of this blessed
morning."

"To be sure," answered Nora.

"And it's I that forgot to wish yez the top of the morning,"
continued the little woman. "I hear the masther and Masther Terry
has gone to foreign parts--is it true, miss?"

"It is not true of my father," replied Nora; "he has only gone to
Dublin."

"Ah, bless him! he's one in a thousand, is the Squire," said Hannah.
"But what about the young masther, him with the handsome face and
the ways?--aye, but he aint got your nice, bonny Irish ways, Miss
Nora--no, that he aint."

"He has gone to England for a time to visit some of my mother's
relations," replied Nora. "I am, sure it will do him a great deal of
good, and dear mother is so pleased. Now, then, Hannah, what is it?"

Hannah went close to the girl and touched her on her arm.

"What about your promise to Andy Neil?" she asked.

"My promise to Andy Neil," said Nora, starting and turning pale.
"How do you know about it?"

"A little bird told me," replied Hannah. "This is what it said:
'Find out if Miss Nora, the bonniest and handsomest young lady in
the place, has kept her word to Andy.' Have you done it, Miss Nora?
for it's word I have got to take the crayther, and this very night,
too."

"Where?" said Nora. "Where are you going to meet him?"

"In the haunted glen, just by the Druid's Stone," replied the woman.

"At what hour?"

"Tin o'clock, deary. Aw, glory be to God! it's just when the clock
strikes tin that he'll be waiting for me there."

"I have no message," said Nora.

"Are you sure, Miss Nora?"

"Quite sure."

"When will you have?"

"Never."

"Miss Nora, you don't mane it?"

"Yes, I do, Hannah. I have nothing to do with Andy Neil. I did what
I could for him, but that little failed. You can tell him that if
you like."

"But is it in earnest you are, Miss Nora? Do you mane to say that
you'll let the poor crayther have the roof taken off his cabin? Do
you mane it miss?"

"I wouldn't have the roof taken off his cabin," said Nora; "but
father is away, and he is Andy's landlord, and Andy has done
something to displease him. He had better come and talk to father
himself. I kept my word, and spoke; but I couldn't do anything. Andy
had better talk to father himself; I can do no more."

"You don't guess as it's black rage is in the crayther's heart, and
that there's no crime he wouldn't stoop to," whispered Hannah in a
low, awestruck voice.

"I can't help it, Hannah; I am not going to be frightened. Andy
would not really injure me, not in cold blood."

"Oh, wouldn't he just? The man's heart is hot within him; it's the
thought of the roof being taken off his cabin. I have come as his
messenger. You had best send some sort of message to keep him on the
quiet for a bit. Don't you send a hard message of that sort, heart
asthore; you'll do a sight of mischief if you do."

"I can only send him a true message," replied the girl.

"Whisht now, Miss Nora! You wouldn't come and see him yourself
tonight by the Druid's Stone?"

Nora stood for a moment considering. She was not frightened; she had
never known that quality. Even in the cave, when her danger was
extreme, she had not succumbed to fear; it was impossible for her to
feel it now, with the sunlight filling her eyes and the softest of
summer breezes blowing against her cheeks. She looked full at Hannah.

"I won't go," she said shortly.

"Miss Nora, I wouldn't ask yez if I could help myself. It's bothered I
am entirely, and frightened too. You'll come with me, Miss Nora--won't
yez?"

"I will not come," answered Nora. "My mother is alone, and I cannot
leave her; but I tell you what I will do. Just to show Andy that I
am not afraid of him, when father returns I will come. Father will
be back in a couple of days; when he returns I will speak to him
once more about Andy, and I will bring Andy the message; and that is
all I can promise. If that is all you want to say to me, Hannah, I
will go home now, for mother is all alone."

Hannah stood with her little, squat figure silhouetted against the
sky; she had placed both her arms akimbo, and was gazing at Nora
with a half-comical, half-frightened glance.

"You're a beauty," she said, "and you has the courage of ten women.
I'll tell Andy what you say; but, oh, glory! there's mischief in
that man's eyes, or I'm much mistook."

"You can't frighten me," said Nora, with a laugh. "How are the
children?"

"Oh, bless yez, they're as well and bonny as can be. Little Mike, he
said he'd stand and wait till you passed by the gate, he's that took
up with you, Miss Nora. You'd be concaited if you heard all he says
about you."

Nora thrust her hand into her pocket.

"Here," she said, "is a bright halfpenny; give it to Mike, and tell
him that Nora loves him very much. And now I am going home. Hannah,
you'll remember my message to Andy, and please let him understand
that he is not going to frighten me into doing anything I don't
think right."




CHAPTER X.


THE INVITATION.

Squire O'Shanaghgan came home in a couple of days. He entered the
house in noisy fashion, and appeared to be quite cheerful. He had a
great deal to say about Dublin, and talked much of his old friends
during the evening that followed. Nora, however, try as she would,
could never meet his eye, and she guessed, even before he told her,
that his mission had been a failure. It was early the next morning
that he gave her this information.

"I tried them, one and all, colleen," he said, "and never were fellows
more taken aback. 'Is it you to lose your property, O'Shanaghgan?' they
said. They wouldn't believe me at first."

"Well, father, and will they help?" said Nora.

"Bless you, they would if they could. There's not a better-natured
man in the length and breadth of Ireland than Fin O'Hara; and as to
John Fitzgerald, I believe he would take us all into his barrack of
a house; but they can't help with money, Nora, because, bedad, they
haven't got it. A man can't turn stones into money, even for his
best and dearest friends."

"Then what is to be done, father?"

"Oh, I'll manage somehow," said Squire O'Shanaghgan; "and we have
three months all but a week to turn round in. We'll manage by hook
or by crook. Don't you fret your pretty little head. I wouldn't have
a frown on the brow of my colleen for fifty O'Shanaghgans, and
that's plain enough. I couldn't say more, could I?"

"No, father dear," answered Nora a little sadly.

"And tell me what you were doing while I was away," said the Squire.
"Faith! I thought I could never get back fast enough, I seemed to
pine so for you, colleen; you fit me down to the ground."

Nora began to relate the small occurrences which had taken place.
The Squire laughed at Mrs. O'Shanaghgan's sudden desire that Nora
should be an educated lady.

"I don't hold with these new fashions about women," he said; "and
you are educated enough for me."

"But, father, I like to read, I like to learn," said the girl. "I am
very, very anxious to improve myself. I may be good enough for you,
dear father, for you love me with all my faults; but some day I may
pine for the knowledge which I have not got."

"Eh! is it that way with you?" said the Squire, looking at her
anxiously. "They say it's a sort of a craze now amongst women, the
desire to beat us men on our own ground; it's very queer, and I
don't understand it, and I am sorry if the craze has seized my
girleen."

"Oh! never mind, father dear; I wouldn't fret you for all the
learning in Christendom."

"And I wouldn't fret you for fifty estates like O'Shanaghgan," said
the Squire, "so it strikes me we are both pretty equal in our
sentiments." He patted her cheek, she linked her hand in his, and
they walked together down one of the sunny meadows.

Nora thought of Neil, but determined not to trouble her father about
him just then. Notwithstanding her cheerfulness, her own heart was
very heavy. She possessed, with all her Irish ways, some of the
common sense of her English ancestors, and knew from past experience
that now there was no hope at all of saving the old acres and the
old house unless something very unexpected turned up. She understood
her father's character too well; he would be happy and contented
until a week before the three months were up, and then he would
break down utterly--go under, perhaps, forever. As to turning his
back on the home of his ancestors and the acres which had come to
him through a long line, Nora could not face such a possibility.

"It cannot be; something must happen to prevent it," she thought.

She thought and thought, and suddenly a daring idea came into her
mind. All her life long her mother's relations had been brought up
to her as the pink of propriety, the souls of wealth. Her uncle,
George Hartrick, was, according to her mother, a wealthy man. Her
mother had often described him. She had said that he had been very
angry with her for marrying the Squire, but had confessed that at
times he had been heard to say that the O'Shanaghgans were the
proudest and oldest family in County Kerry, and that some day he
would visit them on their own estate.

"I have prevented his ever coming, Nora," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan;
"it would be such a shock to him. He thinks we live in a castle such
as English people live in, with suites of magnificent rooms, and
crowds and crowds of respectably dressed servants, and that we have
carriages and horses. I have kept up this delusion; he must never
come over to see the nakedness of the land."

But now the fact that her Uncle George had never seen the nakedness
of the land, and that he was attached to her mother, and proud of
the fact that she had married an Irish gentleman of old descent,
kept visiting Nora again and again. If she could only see him! If
she could only beg of him to lend her father a little money just to
avert the crowning disgrace of all--the O'Shanaghgans leaving their
home because they could not afford to stop there, Nora thought, and
the wild idea which had crept into her head gathered strength.

"There is nothing for it; something desperate must be done," she
thought. "Father won't save himself, because he does not know how.
He will just drift on until a week of the fatal day, and then he
will have an illness. I cannot let father die; I cannot let his
heart be broken. I, Nora, will do something."

So one day she locked herself in her room. She stayed there for a
couple of hours, and when she came out again a letter was thrust
into her pocket. Nora was not a good letter-writer, and this one had
taken nearly two hours to produce. Tears had blotted its pages, and
the paper on which it was written was of the poorest, but it was
done at last. She put a stamp on it and ran downstairs. She went to
Hannah's cabin. Standing in front of the cabin was her small admirer
Mike. He was standing on his head with the full blaze of the
sunlight all over him, his ragged trousers had slipped down almost
to his knees, and his little brown bare legs and feet were twinkling
in the sun. His bright sloe-black eyes were fixed on Nora as she
approached.

"Come here, Mike," said the girl. Mike instantly obeyed, and gave a
violent tug to one of his front locks by way of salutation. He then
stood with his legs slightly apart, watching Nora.

"Mike, I want you to go a message for me."

"To be sure, miss," answered Mike.

"Take this letter to the post-office; put it yourself into the
little slit in the wall. I will give you a penny when you have done
it."

"Yes, miss," answered Mike.

"Here is the letter; thrust it into your pocket. Don't let anyone
see it; it's a secret."

"A saycret, to be sure, miss," answered Mike.

"And you shall have your penny if you come up to the Castle tonight.
Now good-by; run off at once and you will catch the mail."

"Yes, to be sure," said Mike. He winked at Nora, rolled his tongue
in his cheek, and disappeared like a flash down the dusty road.

The next few days seemed to drag themselves somehow. Nora felt limp,
and not in her usual spirits. The Squire was absent a good deal, too.
He was riding all over the country trying to get a loan from his
different friends. He was visiting one house after another. Some of
the houses were neat and well-to-do, but most of them sadly required
funds to put them in order. At every house Squire O'Shanaghgan
received a hearty welcome, an invitation to dinner, and a bed for
the night; but when he made his request the honest face that looked
into his became sorrowful, the hands stole to the empty pockets, and
refusals, accompanied by copious apologies, were the invariable result.

"There's no one in all the world I would help sooner, Pat, if I
could," said Squire O'Grady; "but I have not got it, my man. I am as
hard pressed as I can be myself. We don't get in the rents these
times. Times are bad--very bad. God help us all! But if you are
turned out, what an awful thing it will be! And your family the
oldest in the place. You're welcome, every one of you, to come here.
As long as I have a bite and sup, you and yours shall share it with
me." And Squire Malone said the same thing, and so did the other
squires. There was no lack of hospitality, no lack of good will, no
lack of sorrow for poor Squire O'Shanaghgan's calamities; but funds
to avert the blow were not forthcoming.

The Squire more and more avoided Nora's eyes; and Nora, who now had
a secret of her own, and a hope which she would scarcely dare to
confess even to herself, avoided looking at him.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan was a little more fretful than usual. She forgot
all about the lessons she had set her daughter in her laments over
her absent son, over the tattered and disgraceful state of the
Castle, and the ruin which seemed to engulf the family more and
more.

Nora, meanwhile, was counting the days. She had made herself quite
_au fait_ with postal regulations during these hours of waiting.
She knew exactly the very time when the letter would reach Mr. Hartrick
in his luxurious home. She thought she would give him, perhaps, twelve
hours, perhaps twenty-four, before he replied. She knew, then, how
long the answer would take on its way. The night before she expected
her letter she scarcely slept at all. She came down to breakfast with
black shadows under her eyes and her face quite wan.

The Squire, busy with his own load of trouble, scarcely noticed her.
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan took her place languidly at the head of the board.
She poured out a cup of tea for her daughter and another for her
husband.

"I must send to Dublin for some better tea," she said, looking at
the Squire. "Can you let me have a pound after breakfast, Pat? I may
as well order a small chest while I am about it."

The Squire looked at her with lack-luster eyes. Where had he got one
pound for tea? But he said nothing.

Just then the gossoon Mike was seen passing the window with the
post-bag hung over his shoulder. Mike was the postman in general for
the O'Shanaghgan household for the large sum of twopence a week. He
went daily to fetch the letters, and received his money proudly each
Saturday night. Nora now jumped up from the table.

"The letters!" she gasped.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan surveyed her daughter critically.

"Sit down again, Nora," she said. "What is the matter with you? You
know I don't allow these manners at table."

"But it is the post, mammy," said the girl.

"Well, my dear, if you will be patient, Margaret will bring the post
in."

Nora sat down again, trembling. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan gave her a cold
stare, and helped herself languidly to a small snippet of leathery
toast.

"Our cook gets worse and worse," she said as she broke it. "Dear,
dear! I think I must make a change. I have heard of an excellent
cook just about to leave some people of the name of Wilson in the
town. They are English people, which accounts for their having a
good servant."

At that moment the redoubtable Pegeen did thrust in her head,
holding the post-bag at arm's length away from her.

"Here's the post, Miss Nora," she said; "maybe you'll fetch it,
miss. I'm a bit dirty."

Nora could not restrain herself another moment. She rushed across the
room, seized the bag, and laid it by her father's side. As a rule,
the post-bag was quickly opened, and its small contents dispersed.
These consisted of the local paper for the Squire, which was always
put up with the letters, a circular or two, and, at long intervals, a
letter for Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, and perhaps one from an absent friend
for the Squire. No one was excited, as a rule, about the post at the
Castle, and Nora's ill-suppressed anxiety was sufficiently marked now
to make even her father look at her in some surprise. To the girl's
relief, her mother unexpectedly came to the rescue.

"She thinks, perhaps, Terence will write," she said; "but I told him
not to worry himself writing too often. Stamps cost money, and the
boy will need every penny to keep up a decent appearance at my
brother's."

"All the same, perhaps he will be an Irish boy enough to write a
letter to his own sister," said the Squire. "So here goes; we'll
look and see if there is anything inside here for you, my little
Norrie."

The Squire unlocked the bag and emptied the contents on the table.
They were very meager contents; nothing but the newspaper and one
letter. The Squire took it up and looked at it.

"Here we are," he said; "it is for you, my dear."

"For me," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, holding out her hand. "Pass it
across, Nora."

"No, it is not for you, my lady, as it happens. It is for Nora.
Here, Norrie, take it."

Nora took it up. She was shivering now, and her hand could scarcely
hold it. It was addressed to her, beyond doubt: "Miss O'Shanaghgan,
Castle O'Shanaghgan," etc.

"Read it at once, Nora," said her mother. "I have not yet had any
letter to speak of from Terry myself. If you read it aloud it will
entertain us. It seems to be a thick letter."

"I don't think--I don't think it--it is from Terence," answered
Nora.

"Nonsense, my dear."

"Open it, Norrie, and tell us," said the Squire. "It will be
refreshing to hear a bit of outside news."

Nora now opened the envelope, and took a very thick sheet of paper
out. The contents of the letter ran as follows:

"My Dear Nora--Your brother Terence came here a week ago, and has
told us a great deal about you. We are enjoying having him
extremely; but he has made us all anxious to know you also. I write
now to ask if you will come and pay us a visit at once, while your
brother is here. Ask your mother to spare you. You can return with
Terence whenever you are tired of us and our ways. I have business
at Holyhead next Tuesday, and could meet you there, if you could
make it convenient to cross that day. I inclose a paper with the
hours that the boats leave, and when they arrive at Holyhead. I
could then take you up with me to London, and we could reach here
that same evening. Ask my sister to spare you. You will be heartily
welcome, my little Irish niece.--Your affectionate uncle,

George Hartrick."

Nora could scarcely read the words aloud. When she had finished she
let the sheet of paper flutter to the floor, and looked at her
mother with glowing cheeks and sparkling eyes.

"I may go? I must go," she said.

"My dear Nora," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, "why that must?"

"Oh, mammy! oh, daddy! don't disappoint me," cried the girl. "Do--do
let me go, please, please."

"Nora," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan again, "I never saw you so unreasonable
in your life; you are quite carried away. Your uncle, after long years,
has condescended to send you an invitation, and you speak in this
impulsive, unrestrained fashion. Of course, it would be extremely nice
for you to go; but I doubt for a single moment if it can be afforded."

"Oh, daddy, daddy! please take my part!" cried Nora. "Please let me
go, daddy--oh, daddy!" She rushed up to her father, flung her arms
round his neck, and burst into tears.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan rose from the table in cold displeasure. "Give me
your uncle's letter," she said.

Nora did not glance at her; she was past speaking. So much hung on
this; all the future of the O'Shanaghgans; the Castle, the old
Castle, the home of her ancestors, the place in which she was born,
the land she loved, the father she adored--all, all their future
hung upon Nora's accepting the invitation which she had asked her
uncle to give her. Oh! if they ever found out, what would her father
and mother say? Would they ever speak to her again? But they must
not find out, and she must go; yes, she must go.

"What is it, Nora? Do leave her alone for a moment, wife," said the
Squire. "There is something behind all this. I never saw Light o'
the Morning give way to pure selfishness before."

"It isn't--it isn't," sobbed Nora, her head buried on the Squire's
shoulder.

"My darling, light of my eyes, colleen asthore, acushla machree!"
said the Squire. He lavished fond epithets upon the girl, and
finally took her into his arms, and clasped her tight to his breast.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, after staring at the two in speechless
indignation for a moment, left the room. When she reached the door
she turned round.

"I cannot stand Irish heroics," she said. "This is a disgraceful
scene. Nora, I am thoroughly ashamed of you."

She carried her brother's letter away with her, however, and retired
into the drawing room. There she read it carefully.

How nice it would be if Nora could go! And Nora was a beauty, too--an
Irish beauty; the sort of girl who always goes down in England. She
would want respectable dress; and then--with her taking ways and those
roguish, dark-blue eyes of hers, with that bewitching smile which
showed a gleam of the whitest and most pearly teeth in the world, with
the light, lissome figure, and the blue-black hair--what could not
Irish Nora achieve? Conquests innumerable; she might make a match
worthy of her race and name; she might--oh, she might do anything. She
was only a child, it is true; but all the same she was a budding woman.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan sat and pondered.

"It seems a great pity to refuse," she said to herself. "And Nora
does need discipline badly; the discipline of England and my
brother's well-ordered home will work wonders with her. Poor child,
her father will miss her. I really sometimes think the Squire is
getting into his dotage. He makes a perfect fool of that girl; to
see her there speaking in that selfish way, and he petting her, and
calling her ridiculous names, with no meaning in them, and folding
her in his arms as if she were a baby, and all for pure, downright
selfishness, is enough to make any sensible person sick. Nora, too,
who has always been spoken of as the unselfish member of the family,
who would not spend a penny to save her life if she thought the
Squire was going to suffer. Now she wants him to put his hand into
his pocket for a considerable amount; for the child cannot go to my
brother without suitable clothes--that is a foregone conclusion.
But, dear me! all women are selfish when it comes to mere pleasure,
and Nora is no better than the rest. For my part, I admire dear
Terence's downright method of asking for so-and-so, and getting it.
Nora is deceitful. I am much disappointed in her."




CHAPTER XI.


THE DIAMOND CROSS.

But although Mrs. O'Shanaghgan spoke of her daughter to herself as
deceitful, she did not at all give up the idea of her accepting her
uncle's invitation. George Hartrick had always had an immense
influence over his sister Ellen. He and she had been great friends
long ago, when the handsome, bright girl had been glad to take the
advice of her elder brother. They had almost quarreled at that brief
period of madness in Ellen Hartrick's life, when she had fallen in
love with handsome Squire O'Shanaghgan; but that quarrel had long been
made up. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan had married the owner of O'Shanaghgan Castle,
and had rued her brief madness ever since. But her pride had prevented
her complaining to her brother George. George still imagined that she
kept her passionate love intact for the wild Irishman. Only one thing
she had managed ever since their parting, many years ago, and that
was, that her English brother should not come to see her in her Irish
home. One excuse after the other she had offered, and at last she had
told him frankly that the ways of the Irish were not his ways; and
that, when he really wanted to see his sister, he must invite her to
come to England to visit him.

Hartrick was hurt at Ellen's behavior, and as he himself had married
about the same time, and his own young family were growing up around
him, and the making of money and the toil of riches were claiming
him more and more, he did not often think of the sister who was away
in the wilds of Ireland. She had married one of the proud old Irish
chiefs. She had a very good position in her way; and when her son
and daughter required a little peep into the world, Hartrick
resolved that they should have it. He had invited Terence over; and
now Nora's letter, with its perplexity, its anguish, its bold
request, and its final tenderness, had come upon him with a shock of
surprise.

George Hartrick was a much stronger character than his sister. He was
a very fine man, indeed, with splendid principles and downright ways;
and there was something about this outspoken and queer letter which
touched him in spite of himself. He was not easily touched; but he
respected the writer of that letter. He felt that if he knew her he
could get on with her. He resolved to treat her confidence with the
respect it seemed to him it deserved; and, without hesitation, he
wrote her the sort of letter she had asked him to write. She should
pay him a visit, and he would find out for himself the true state of
things at Castle O'Shanaghgan. Whether he would help the Squire or
not, whether there was any need to help him, he could not say, for
Nora had not really revealed much of the truth in her passionate
letter. She had hinted at it, but she had not spoken; she would wait
for that moment of outpouring of her heart until she arrived at The
Laurels.

Now, Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, standing alone in her big, empty drawing
room, and looking out at the summer landscape, thought of how Nora
might enter her brother's house. Fond as Mrs. O'Shanaghgan was of
Terence--he was in truth a son after her own heart--she had a queer
kind of pride about her with regard to Nora. Wild and untutored as
Nora looked, her mother knew that few girls in England could hold a
candle to her, if justice were done her. There was something about
the expression in Nora's eyes which even Mrs. O'Shanaghgan could
scarcely resist at times, and there were tones and inflections of
entreaty in Nora's voice which had a strange power of melting the
hearts of those who listened to her.

After about an hour Mrs. O'Shanaghgan went very slowly upstairs. Her
bedroom was over the drawing room. It was just as large as the
drawing room--a great bare apartment. The carpet which covered the
floor was so threadbare that the boards showed through in places;
the old, faded chintz curtains which hung at the windows were also
in tatters; but they were perfectly clean, for Mrs. O'Shanaghgan did
her best to retain that English cleanliness and order which she felt
were so needed in the land of desolation, as she was pleased to call
Ireland.

A huge four-post bedstead occupied a prominent place against one of
the walls; there was an enormous mahogany wardrobe against another;
but the whole center of the room was bare. The dressing-table,
however, which stood right in the center of the huge bay, was full
of pretty things--silver appointments of different kinds, brushes
and combs heavily mounted in silver, glass bottles with silver
stoppers, perfume bottles, pretty knick-knacks of all sorts. When
Nora was a little child she used to stand fascinated, gazing at her
mother's dressing-table. It was the one spot where any of the
richness of the Englishwoman's early life could still be found. Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan went up now and looked at her dressing-table, sweeping
her eyes rapidly over its contents. The brushes and combs, the
bottles of scent, the button-hooks, the shoe-horns, the thousand-
and-one little nothings, polished and bright, stood upon the
dressing-table; and besides these there was a large, silver-mounted
jewel-case.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan was not at all afraid to leave this jewel-case
out, exposed to view day after day, for no one all round the place
would have touched so much as a pin which belonged to the Squire's
lady. The people were poor, and would think nothing of stealing half
a bag of potatoes, or helping themselves to a good sack of fruit out
of the orchard; but to take the things from the lady's bedroom or
anything at all out of the house they would have scorned. They had
their own honesty, and they loved the Squire too much to attempt
anything of the sort.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan now put a key into the lock of the jewel-case
and opened it. When first she was married it was full of pretty
things--long strings of pearls, a necklet of very valuable diamonds,
a tiara of the same, rings innumerable, bracelets, head ornaments
of different kinds, buckles for shoes, clasps for belts, pins,
brooches. Mrs. O'Shanaghan, when Nora was a tiny child, used on
every one of the little girl's birthdays to allow her to overhaul
the jewel case; but of late years Nora had never looked inside it,
and Mrs. O'Shanaghgan had religiously kept it locked. She opened it
now with a sigh. The upper tray was quite empty; the diamonds had
long ago been disposed of. They had gone to pay for Terence's
schooling, for Terence's clothes, for one thing and another that
required money. They had gone, oh! so quickly; had melted away so
certainly. That first visit of her son's to England had cost Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan her long string of pearls, which had come to her as an
heirloom from her mother before her. They were very valuable pearls,
and she had sold them for a tenth, a twentieth part of their value.
The jeweler in Dublin, who was quite accustomed to receiving the
poor lady's trinkets, had sent her a check for fifty pounds for the
pearls, knowing well that he could sell them himself for at least
three hundred pounds.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan now once more rifled the jewel case. There were
some things still left--two or three rings and a diamond cross. She
had never wanted to part with that cross. She had pictured over and
over how it would shine on Nora's white neck; how lovely Nora would
look when dressed for her first ball, having that white Irish cross,
with its diamonds and its single emerald in the center, shining on
her breast. But would it not be better to give Nora the chance of
spending three or four months in England, the chance of educating
herself, and let the cross go by? It was so valuable that the good
lady quite thought that she ought to get seventy pounds for it. With
seventy pounds she could fit Nora up for her English visit, and have
a little over to keep in her own pocket. Only Nora must not go next
Tuesday; that was quite impossible.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan quickly determined to make the sacrifice. She
could still supply Nora with a little, very simple pearl necklet, to
wear with her white dress during her visit; and the cross would have
to go. There would be a few rings still left; after that the jewel
case would be empty.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan packed the precious cross into a little box, and
took it out herself to register it, and to send it off to the
jeweler who always bought the trinkets she sent him. She told him
that she expected him to give her, without the smallest demur,
seventy pounds for the cross, and hoped to have the money by the
next day's post.

Having done this and dispatched her letter, she walked briskly back
to the Castle. She saw Nora wandering about in the avenue. Nora,
hatless and gloveless, was playing with the dogs. She seemed to have
forgotten all about her keen disappointment of the morning. When she
saw her mother coming up the avenue she ran to meet her.

"Why, mammy," she said, "how early you are out! Where have you
been?"

"I dislike extremely that habit you have, Nora, of calling me mammy;
mother is the word you should address your parent with. Please
remember in future that I wish to be called mother."

"Oh, yes, mother!" answered Nora. The girl had the sweetest temper
in the world, and no amount of reproof ever caused her to answer
angrily. "But where have you been?" she said, her curiosity getting
the better of her prudence.

"Again, Nora, I am sorry to say I must reprove you. I have been to
the village on business of my own. It is scarcely your affair where
I choose to walk in the morning."

"Oh, of course not, mam--I mean mother."

"But come with me down this walk. I have something to say to you."

Nora eagerly complied. There was something in the look of her
mother's eyes which made her guess that the usual subject of
conversation--her own want of deportment, her ignorance of
etiquette--was not to be the theme. She felt her heart, which had
sunk like lead within her, rise again to the surface. Her eyes
sparkled and smiles played round her rosy lips.

"Yes, mother," she said; "yes."

"All impulse," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan--she laid her hand on Nora's
arm--"all impulse, all Irish enthusiasm."

"I cannot help it, you know," said Nora. "I was born that way. I am
Irish, you know, mammy."

"You are also English, my dear," replied her mother. "Pray remember
that fact when you see your cousins."

"My cousins! My English cousins! But am I to see them? Mother,
mother, do you mean it?"

"I do mean it, Nora. I intend you to accept your uncle's invitation.
No heroics, please," as the girl was about to fling her arms round
her mother's neck; "keep those for your father, Nora; I do not wish
for them. I intend you to go and behave properly; pray remember that
when you give way to pure Irishism, as I may express your most
peculiar manners, you disgrace me, your mother. I mean you to go in
order to have you tamed a little. You are absolutely untamed now,
unbroken in."

"I never want to be broken in," whispered Nora, tears of mingled
excitement and pain at her mother's words brimming to her eyes. "Oh,
mother!" she said, with a sudden wail, "will you never, never
understand Nora?"

"I understand her quite well," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, her voice
assuming an unwonted note of softness; "and because I do understand
Nora so well," she added--and now she patted the girl's slender arm--"I
want her to have this great advantage, for there is much that is good
in you, Nora. But you are undisciplined, my dear; wild, unkempt.
Little did I think in the old days that a daughter of mine should have
to have such things said to her. Our more stately, more sober ways
will be a revelation to you, Nora. To your brother Terence they will
come as second nature; but you, my dear, will have to be warned
beforehand. I warn you now that your Uncle George will not understand
the wild excitement which you seem to consider the height of good
breeding at O'Shanaghgan."

"Mother, mother," said Nora, "don't say anything against
O'Shanaghgan."

"Am I doing so?" said the poor lady. She stood for a moment and
looked around her. Nora stopped also and when she saw her mother's
eyes travel to the rambling old house, to the neglected lawn, the
avenue overgrown with weeds, it seemed to her that a stab of the
cruelest pain was penetrating her heart.

"Mother sees all the ugliness; she is determined to," thought Nora;
"but I see all the beauty. Oh! the dear, dear old place, it shan't
go if Nora can save it." Then, with a great effort, she controlled
herself.

"How am I to go?" she said. "Where is the money to come from?"

"You need not question me on that point," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan. "I
will provide the means."

"Oh, mother!" said Nora; "no, I would rather stay." But then she
remembered all that this involved; she knew quite well that her
mother had rifled the jewel-case; but as she had done so over and
over again just for Terence's mere pleasure, might she not do so
once more to save the old place?

"Very well," she said demurely; "I won't ask any questions."

"You had better not, for I have not the slightest idea of replying
to them," answered Mrs. O'Shanaghgan. "I shall write to your uncle
to-day. You cannot go next week, however."

"Oh! why not? He said Tuesday; he would meet me at Holyhead on
Tuesday."

"I will try and provide a fit escort for you to England; But you
cannot go next Tuesday; your wardrobe forbids it," answered Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan.

"My wardrobe! Oh, mother, I really need not bother about clothes!"

"You may not bother about them, Nora; but I intend to," replied Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan. "I must buy you some suitable dress."

"But how will you do it?"

"I have not been away from Castle O'Shanaghgan for a long time,"
said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, "and it will be a nice change for me. I
shall take you to Dublin, and get you what things are necessary. I
will then see you off on board the steamer."

"But would not father be best?"

"Your father can come with us or not, just as he pleases; but I am
the person who will see to your wardrobe for your English visit,"
replied her mother.

Nora, excited, bewildered, charmed, had little or nothing to oppose
to this plan. After all, her mother was coming out in a new light.
How indifferent she had been about Nora's dress in the past! For
Terence were the fashionable coats and the immaculate neckties and
the nice gloves and the patent-leather boots. For Nora! Now and then
an old dress of her mother's was cut down to fit the girl; but as a
rule she wore anything she could lay hands on, made anyhow. It is
true she was never grotesque like Biddy Murphy; but up to the
present dress had scarcely entered at all as a factor into her life.

The next few days passed in a whirl of bewildered excitement. Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan received, as she expected, by return of post, seventy
pounds from the Dublin jeweler for her lovely diamond cross. This
man was rapidly making his fortune out of poor Mrs. O'Shanaghgan,
and he knew that he had secured a splendid bargain for himself when
he bought the cross.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, therefore, with a full purse, could give
directions to her household during her brief absence, and altogether
was much brightened and excited at the thought of Nora's visit. She
had written herself to her brother, saying that she would be very
glad to spare her daughter, and giving him one or two hints with
regard to Nora's manners and bringing up.

"The Irish have quite different ideas, my dear brother," she wrote,
"with regard to etiquette to those which were instilled into us; but
you will bear patiently with my little wild Irish girl, for she has
a very true heart, and is also, I think you will admit, nice-looking."

Mr. Hartrick, who read between the lines of his sister's letter,
wrote to say that business would bring him to Holyhead on the
following Tuesday week also, and, therefore, it would be quite
convenient for him to meet Nora on that day.

The evening before she was to depart arrived at last. The Squire had
spent a busy day. From the moment when Nora had told him that her
mother had provided funds, and that she was to go to England, he had
scarcely reverted to the matter. In truth, with that curious Irish
phase in his character which is more or less the inheritance of
every member of his country, he contrived to put away the
disagreeable subject even from his thoughts. He was busy, very busy,
attending to his farm and riding round his establishment. He was
still hoping against hope that some money would come in his way long
before the three months were up, when the mortgagee would foreclose
on his property. He was not at all unhappy, and used to enter his
house singing lustily or whistling loudly. Nora sometimes wondered
if he also forgot how soon she was going to leave him. His first
call when he entered the house had always been "Light o' the
Morning, where are you? Come here, asthore; the old dad has
returned," or some such expression. It came to the excited girl's
heart with a pang how he would miss her when she was no longer
there; how he would call for her in vain, and feel bewildered for a
moment, and then remember that she was far away.

"But I shan't be long away," she thought; "and when I come back and
save him and the old place, oh, how glad he will be! He will indeed
then think me his Light o' the Morning, for I shall have saved him
and the old home."

But the last evening came, and Nora considered whether she ought to
recall the fact that she was going away, perhaps for a couple of
months, to her father. He came in as usual, sat down heavily on the
nearest settee, and stretched out his long legs.

"I wonder if I am getting old?" he said. "I declare I feel a bit
tired. Come along here, Nora, and cheer me up. What news have you
this evening, little woman?"

"Oh, father! don't you know?"

"Well, your eyes look bright enough. What is it, girleen?"

"I am going away to Dublin to-morrow."

"You? Bless you! so you are," said the Squire, with a hearty laugh.
"Upon my soul I forgot all about it. Well, and you are going to have
a good time, and you'll forget the old dad--eh?--you'll forget all
about the old dad?"

"Father, father, you know better," said Nora--she flung her arms
round his neck and laid her soft cheek against his--"as if I could
ever forget you for a single moment," she said.

"I know it, a-colleen; I know it, heart's asthore. Of course you
won't. I am right glad you are going; it will be a nice change for
you. And what about the bits of duds--eh?--and the pretty trinkets?
Why, you'll be going into grand society; you'll be holding your
little head like a queen. Don't you forget, my pet, that you're
Irish through and through, and that you come of a long line of brave
ancestors. The women of your house never stooped to a shabby action,
Nora; and never one of them sacrificed her honor for gold or
anything else; and the men were brave, girleen, very brave, and had
never fear in one of them. You remember that, and keep yourself
upright and brave and proud, and come back to the old dad with as
pure and loving a heart as you have now."

"Oh, father, of course, of course. But you will miss me? you will
miss me?"

"Bedad! I expect I shall," said the Squire; "but I am not going to
fret, so don't you imagine it."

"Have you," said Nora in a low whisper--"have you done anything
about-about the mortgage?"

"Oh, you be aisy," said the Squire, giving her a playful poke; "and
if you can't be aisy, be as aisy as you can," he continued,
referring to the old well-known saying. "Things will come right
enough. Why, the matter is weeks off yet. It was only yesterday I
heard from an old friend, Larry M'Dermott, who has been in
Australia, and has made a fine pile. He is back again, and I am
thinking of seeing him and settling up matters with him. Don't you
have an uneasy thought in your head, my child. I'll write to you
when the thing is fixed up, as fixed it will be by all that's likely
in a week or fortnight from now. But look here, Norrie, you'll want
something to keep in your pocket when you are away. I had best give
you a five-pound note."

"No, no," said Nora. "I wouldn't touch it; I don't want it."

"Why not? Is it too proud you are?"

"No; mother is helping me to this visit. I don't know how she has
got money. I suppose in the old way."

"Poor soul!" said the Squire. "To tell you the truth, Norrie, I
can't bear to look at that jewel-case of hers. I believe, upon my
word, that it is nearly empty. She is very generous, is your mother.
She's a very fine woman, and I am desperate proud of her. When
M'Dermott helps me to tide over this pinch I'll have all those
jewels back again by hook or by crook. Your mother shan't suffer in
the long run, and I'll do a lot to the old place--the old house
wants papering and painting. We'll dance a merry jig at O'Shanaghgan
at your wedding, my little girl; and now don't keep me, for I have
got to go out to meet Murphy. He said he would look around about
this hour."

Nora left her father, and wandered out into the soft summer
gloaming. She went down the avenue, and leaned for a time over the
gate. The white gate was sadly in need of paint, but it was not
hanging off its hinges as the gate was which led to the estate of
Cronane. Nora put her feet on the last rung, leaned her arms on the
top one, and swayed softly, as she thought of all that was about to
happen, and the glorious adventures which would in all probability
be hers during the next few weeks. As she thought, and forgot
herself in dreams of the future, a low voice calling her name caused
her to start. A man with shaggy hair and wild, bright eyes had come
up to the other side of the gate.

"Why, then, Miss Nora, how are ye this evening?" he said. He pulled
his forelock as he spoke.

Nora felt a sudden coldness come over all her rosy dreams; but she
was too Irish and too like her ancestors to feel any fear, although
she could not help remembering that she was nearly half a mile away
from the house, and that there was not a soul anywhere within call.

"Good-evening, Andy," she said. "I must be going home now."

"No, you won't just yet," he answered. He came up and laid his dirty
hand on her white sleeve.

"No, don't touch me," said Nora proudly. She sprang off the gate,
and stood a foot or two away. "Don't come in," she continued; "stay
where you are. If you have anything to say, say it there."

"Bedad! it's a fine young lady that it is," said the man. "It aint
afeared, is it?"

"Afraid!" said Nora. "What do you take me for?"

"Sure, then, I take yez for what you are," said the man--"as fine
and purty a slip of a girleen as ever dwelt in the old Castle; but
be yez twice as purty, and be yez twice as fine, Andy Neil is not
the man to forget his word, his sworn word, his oath taken to the
powers above and the powers below, that if his bit of a roof is
taken off his head, why, them as does it shall suffer. It's for you
to know that, Miss Nora. I would have drowned yez in the deep pool
and nobody would ever be the wiser, but I thought better of that;
and I could here--yes, even now--I could choke yez round your pretty
soft neck and nobody would be any the wiser, and I'd think no more
of it than I'd think of crushing a fly. I won't do it; no I won't,
Miss Nora; but there's _thim_ as will have to suffer if Andy
Neil is turned out of his hut. You spake for me, Miss Nora; you
spake up for me, girleen. Why, the Squire, you're the light of his
eyes; you spake up, and say, 'Lave poor Andy in his little hut; lave
poor Andy with a roof over him. Don't mind the bit of a rint.' Why,
then, Miss Nora, how can I pay the rint? Look at my arrum, dear." As
the man spoke he thrust out his arm, pushing up his ragged shirt
sleeve. The arm was almost like that of a skeleton's; the skin was
starting over the bones.

"Oh, it is dreadful!" said Nora, all the pity in her heart welling
up into her eyes. "I am truly, truly sorry for you, Andy, I would do
anything in my power. It is just this: you know father?"

"Squire? Yes, I guess I know Squire," said the man.

"You know," continued Nora, "that when he takes what you might call
the bit between his teeth nothing will move him. He is set against
you, Andy. Oh, Andy! I don't believe he will listen."

"He had betther," said the man, his voice dropping to a low growl;
"he had betther, and I say so plain. There's that in me would stick
at nothing, and you had best know it, Miss Nora."

"Can you not go away, Andy?"

"I--and what for?"

"But can you?"

"I could, but I won't."

"I don't believe father will yield. I will send you some money from
England if you will promise to go away."

"Aye; but I don't want it. I want to stay on. Where would my old
bones lie when I died if I am not in my own counthry? I'm not going
to leave my counthry for nobody. The cot where I was born shall see
me die; and if the roof is took off, why, I'll put it back again.
I'll defy him and his new-fangled ways and his English wife to the
death. You'll see mischief if you don't put things right, Miss Nora.
It all rests with yez, alannah."

"I am awfully sorry for you, Andy; but I don't believe you would
seriously injure father, for you know what the consequences would
be."

"Aye; but when a man like me is sore put to it he don't think of
consequences. It's just the burning wish to avenge his wrongs;
that's what he feels, and that's what I feel, Miss Nora, and so you
had best take warning."

"Well, I am going away to-morrow," said the girl. "My father is in
great trouble, and wants money very badly himself, and I am going to
England."

"To be out of the way when the ruin comes. I know," said the man,
with a loud laugh.

"No; you are utterly mistaken. Andy, don't you remember when I was a
little girl how you used to let me ride on your shoulder, and once
you asked me for a tiny bit of my hair, that time when it was all in
curls, and I gave you just the end of one of my curls, and you said
you would keep it to your dying day? Would you be cruel to Nora now,
and just when her heart is heavy?"

"Your heart heavy? You, one of the quality--'taint likely," said the
man.

"It is true; my heart is very heavy. I am so anxious about father; you
won't make me more anxious--will you? You won't do anything--anything
wrong--while I am away? Will you make me a promise that you will let
me go with an easy mind?"

"You ask your father to give me three months' longer grace, and then
we'll see."

"I will speak to him," said Nora very slowly. "I am sorry, because
he is worried about other things, and he does not take it kindly
when I interfere in what he considers his own province; but I'll do
my best. I cannot stay another moment now, Andy. Good-by."

She waved her hand to him, and ran down the avenue, looking like a
white wraith as she disappeared into the darkness.




CHAPTER XII.


A FEATHER-BED HOUSE.

Before she went to sleep that night Nora wrote a tiny note to her
father:

"DEAREST DAD:

"For the sake of your Light o' the Morning, leave poor Andy Neil in
his little cottage until I come back again from England. Do, dear
dad; this is the last wish of Nora before she goes away.

"YOUR COLLEEN."

She thought and thought, and felt that she could not have expressed
herself better. Fear would never influence the Squire; but he would
do a good deal for Nora. She laid the letter just where she knew he
would see it when he entered his ramshackle study on the following
day; and the next morning, with her arms clasped round his neck and
her kisses on his cheeks, she gave him one hearty hug, one fervent
"God bless you, dad," and rushed after her mother.

The outside car was ready at the door. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan was already
mounted. Nora sprang up, and they were rattling off into the world,
"to seek my fortune," thought the girl, "or rather the fortune of
him I love best."

The Squire, with his grizzled locks and his deep-set eyes, stood in
the porch to watch Nora and her mother as they drove away.

"I'll be back in a twinkling, father; never you fret," called out
his daughter, and then a turn in the road hid him from view.

"Why, Nora, what are you crying for?" said her mother, who turned
round at that moment, and encountered the full gaze of the large
dark-blue eyes swimming in tears.

"Oh, nothing. I'll be all right in a moment," was the answer, and
then the sunshine broke all over the girl's charming face; and
before they reached the railway station Nora was chatting to her
mother as if she had not a care in the world.

Her first visit to Dublin and the excitement of getting really
pretty dresses made the next two or three days pass like a flash.
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan with money in her pocket was a very different
woman from Mrs. O'Shanaghgan without a penny. She enjoyed making
Nora presentable, and had excellent taste and a keen eye for a
bargain. She fitted up her daughter with a modest but successful
wardrobe, bought her a proper trunk to hold her belongings, and saw
her on board the steamer for Holyhead.

The crossing was a rough one, but the Irish girl did not suffer from
seasickness. She stood leaning over the taffrail chatting to the captain,
who thought her one of the most charming passengers he ever had to
cross in the _Munster_; and when they arrived at the opposite
side, Mr. Hartrick was waiting for his niece. He often said since
that he would never forget his first sight of Nora O'Shanaghgan.
She was wearing a gray tweed traveling dress, with a little gray cap
to match; the slender young figure, the rippling black hair, and the
brilliant face flashed for an instant on the tired vision of the man
of business; then there came the eager outstretching of two hands, and
Nora had kissed him because she could not help herself.

"Oh, I am so glad to see you, Uncle George!" The words, the action,
the whole look were totally different from what his daughters would
have said or done under similar circumstances. He felt quite sure
that his sister's description of Nora was right in the main; but he
thought her charming. Drawing her hand through his arm, he took her
to the railway station, where the train was already waiting to
receive its passengers. Soon they were flying in _The Wild Irish
Girl_ to Euston. Nora was provided with innumerable illustrated
papers. Mr. Hartrick took out a little basket which contained
sandwiches, wine, and different cakes, and fed her with the best he
could procure. He did not ask her many questions, not even about the
Castle or her own life. He was determined to wait for all these
things. He read something of her story in her clear blue eyes; but
he would not press her for her confidence. He was anxious to know
her a little better.

"She is Irish, though, and they all exaggerate things so
dreadfully," was his thought. "But I'll be very good to the child.
What a contrast she is to Terence! Not that Terence is scarcely
Irish; but anyone can see that this child has more of her father
than her mother in her composition."

They arrived at Euston; then there were fresh changes; a cab took
them to Waterloo, where they once again entered the train.

"Tired, my dear niece?" said her uncle as he settled her for the
final time in another first-class compartment.

"Not at all. I am too excited to be tired," was her eager answer.
And then he smiled at her, arranged the window and blind to her
liking, and they started once more on their way.

Mr. Hartrick lived in a large place near Weybridge, and Nora had her
first glimpse of the lovely Surrey scenery. A carriage was waiting
for the travelers when they reached their destination--a carriage
drawn by a pair of spirited grays. Nora thought of Black Bess, and
secretly compared the grays to the disadvantage of the latter. But
she was determined to be as sweet and polite and English as her
mother would desire. For the first time in her whole existence she
was feeling a little shy. She would have been thoroughly at home on
a dog cart, or on her favorite outside car, or on the back of Black
Bess, who would have carried her swift as the wind; but in the
landau, with her uncle seated by her side, she was altogether at a
loss.

"I don't like riches," was her inward murmur. "I feel all in silken
chains, and it is not a bit pleasant; but how dear mammy--oh, I must
think of her as mother--how mother would enjoy it all!"

The horses were going slowly uphill, and now they paused at some
handsome iron gates. These were opened by a neatly dressed woman,
who courtesied to Mr. Hartrick, and glanced with curiosity at Nora.
The carriage bowled rapidly down a long avenue, and drew up before a
front door. A large mastiff rose slowly, wagged his tail, and
sniffed at Nora's dress as she descended.

"Come in, my dear; come in," said her uncle. "We are too late for
dinner, but I have ordered supper. You will want a good meal and
then bed. Where are all the others? Where are you, Molly? Where are
you, Linda? Your Irish cousin Nora has come."

A door to the left was quickly opened, and a graceful-looking lady,
in a beautiful dress of black silk and quantities of coffee lace,
stood on the threshold.

"Is this Nora?" she said. "Welcome, my dear little girl." She went
up to Nora, laid one hand on her shoulder, and kissed her gravely on
the forehead. There was a staid, sober sort of solemnity about this
kiss which influenced Nora and made a lump come into her throat.

This gracious English lady was very charming, and she felt at once
that she would love her.

"The child is tired, Grace," said her husband to Mrs. Hartrick.
"Where are the girls? Why are they not present?"

"Molly has been very troublesome, and I was obliged to send her to
her room," was her reply; "but here is Terence. Terence, your sister
has come."

"Oh, Terry!" cried Nora.

The next moment Terence, in full evening dress, and looking
extremely manly and handsome, appeared upon the scene. Nora forgot
everything else when she saw the familiar face; she ran up to her
brother, flung her arms round his neck, and kissed him over and
over.

"Oh, it is a sight for sore eyes to see you!" she cried. "Oh, Terry,
how glad, how glad I am that you are here!"

"Hush! hush! Nonsense, Nora. Try to remember this is an English
house," whispered Terence; but he kissed her affectionately. He was
glad to see her, and he looked at her dress with marked approval.
"She will soon tame down, and she looks very pretty," was his
thought.

Just then Linda was seen coming downstairs.

"Has Nora come?" called out her sweet, high-bred voice. "How do you
do, Nora? I am so glad to see you. If you are half as nice as
Terence, you will be a delightful addition to our party."

"Oh, but I am not the least bit like Terence," said Nora. She felt
rather hurt; she did not know why.

Linda was a very fair girl. She could not have been more than
fifteen years of age, and was not so tall as Nora; but she had
almost the manners of a woman of the world, and Nora felt
unaccountably shy of her.

"Now take your cousin up to her room. Supper will be ready in a
quarter of an hour," said Mrs. Hartrick. "Come, George; I have
something to say to you."

Mr. and Mrs. Hartrick disappeared into the drawing-room. Linda took
Nora's hand. Nora glanced at Terence, who turned on his heel and
went away.

"See you presently, sis," he called out in what he considered a very
manly tone; and Nora felt her heart, as she expressed it, sink down
into her boots as she followed Linda up the richly carpeted stairs.
Her feet sank into the velvety pile, and she hated the sensation.

"It is all a sort of feather-bed house," she said to herself, "and I
hate a feather-bed house. Oh, I can understand my dad better than
ever to-night; but how mother would enjoy this!"




CHAPTER XIII.


"THERE'S MOLLY."

As they were going upstairs Linda suddenly turned and looked full at
her cousin.

"How very grave you are! And why have you that little frown between
your brows? Are you vexed about anything?"

"Only I thought Terry would be more glad to see me," replied Nora.

"More glad!" cried Linda. "I saw you hugging him as I ran
downstairs. He let you. I don't know how any one could show gladness
more. But come along; this is your room. It is next to Molly's and
mine. Isn't it pretty? Molly and I chose it for you this morning,
and we arranged those flowers. You will have such a lovely view, and
that little peep of the Thames is so charming. I hope you will like
your room."

Nora entered one of the prettiest and most lovely bedrooms she had
ever seen in her life. Never in her wildest dreams had she imagined
anything so cozy. The perfectly chosen furniture, the elegant
appointments of every sort and description, the view from the partly
opened windows, the view of winding river and noble trees--all
looked rich and cultivated and lovely; and the Irish girl, as she
gazed around, found suddenly a great, fierce hatred rising up in her
heart against what she called the mere prettiness. She turned and
faced Linda, who was watching her with curiosity in her somewhat
small blue eyes Linda was essentially English, very reserved and
quiet, very self-possessed, quite a young lady of the world. She
looked at Nora as if she meant to read her through.

"Well, don't you think the view perfect?" she said.

"Have you ever been in Ireland?" was Nora's answer.

"Never. Oh, dear me! have you anything as pretty as this in
Ireland?"

"No," said Nora fiercely--"no." She left the window, turned back,
and began to unpin her hat.

"You look as if you did not care for your room."

"It is a very, very pretty room," said Nora, "and the view is very,
very pretty, but I am tired to-night. I did not know it; but I am. I
should like to go to bed soon."

"So you shall, of course, after you have had supper. Oh, how awfully
thoughtless of me not to know that you must be very tried and
hungry! Molly and I are glad you have come."

"But where is Molly? I should like to see her."

Linda went up to Nora and spoke in a low whisper.

"She is in disgrace."

"In disgrace? Has she done anything naughty?"

"Yes, fearfully naughty. She is in hot water as usual."

"I am sorry," said Nora. She instantly began to feel a strong
sensation of sympathy for Molly. She was sure, in advance, that she
would like her.

"But is she in such dreadful disgrace that I may not see her?" she
asked after a pause.

"Oh, I don't know. I don't suppose so."

Just then there was heard at the room door a gay laugh and a kind of
scamper. A knock followed, but before Nora could answer the door was
burst open, and a large, heavily made, untidy-looking girl, with a
dark face and great big black eyes, bounded into the apartment.

"I have burst the bonds, and here I am," she said. "How do you do,
Nora? I'm Molly. I am always and always in hot water. I like being
in hot water. Now, tell-tale-tit, you can go downstairs and acquaint
mother with the fact that I have burst the bonds, for kiss little
Irish Nora I will."

"Oh, I am glad to see you," said Nora. Her depression vanished on
the spot. She felt that, naughty as doubtless Molly was, she could
get on with her.

"Come, let's take a squint at you," said the eldest Miss Hartrick;
"come over here to the light."

Molly took Nora by both hands over to the window.

"Now then, let's have a category of your charms. Terence has been
telling us that you are very pretty. You are. Come, Linda; come and
look at her. Did you ever see such black hair? And it's as soft as
silk."

Molly put up a rather large hand and patted Nora somewhat violently
on the head.

"Oh, don't!" said Nora, starting back.

"My dear little cousin, I am a very rough specimen, and you must put
up with me if you mean to get on at The Laurels. We are all stiff
and staid here; we are English of the English. Everything is done by
rule of thumb--breakfast to the minute, lunch to the minute,
afternoon tea to the minute, dinner to the minute, even tennis to
the minute. Oh! it's detestable; and I--I am expected to be good,
and you know there's not a bit of goodness in me. I am all fidgets,
and you can never be sure of me for two seconds at a time. I am a
worry to mother and a worry to father; and as to Terence--oh, my
dear creature, I am so truly thankful you are not like Terence! Here
I drop a courtesy to his memory. What an awfully precise man he will
make by and by! I did not know you turned out that kind of article
in Ireland."

Nora's face, over which many emotions had been flitting, now looked
grave.

"You know that Terence is my brother?" she said slowly.

Molly gazed at her; then she burst into a fit of hearty laughter.

"You and I will get on," she said. "I like you for sticking up for
your brother. But now, my dear, I must go back. I am supposed to
stay in my bedroom until to-morrow morning. Linda, if you tell--
well, you'll have to answer to me when we are going to bed, that's
all. By-by, Nora. I'll see you in the morning. Do get her some hot
water, Linda. She's worth waiting on; she's a very nice sort of
child, and very, very pretty. If that is the Irish sort of face, I
for one shall adore it. Good-by, Nora, for the present."

Molly banged herself away--her mode of exit could scarcely be called
by any other name. As soon as the door had closed behind her Linda
laughed.

"I ought to tell, you know," she said in her precise voice; "it is
very, very wrong of Molly to leave her bedroom when mother is
punishing her."

"But what has she done wrong?" asked Nora.

"Oh, went against discipline. She is at school, you know, and she
would write letters during lessons. It is really very wrong of her,
and Miss Scott had to complain; so mother said she should stay in
her room, instead of being downstairs to welcome you. She is a good
soul enough; but we none of us can discipline her. She is very
funny; you'll see a lot of her queer cranks while you are here."

"How old is she?" asked Nora.

"Between sixteen and seventeen; too old to be such a romp."

"Only a little older than I am," said Nora. "And how old are you,
Linda?"

"Fifteen; they all tell me I look more."

"You do; you look eighteen. You are very old for your age."

"Oh, thank you for the compliment. Now, then, do brush your hair and
wash your hands; there's the supper-gong. Mother will be annoyed if
we are not down in a jiffy. Now, do be quick."

Nora washed her hands, brushed her hair, and ran downstairs with her
cousin. As she ate during the somewhat stiff meal that followed she
thought many times of Molly. She felt that, naughty as Molly
doubtless was, she would make the English house tolerable. Terence
sat near her at supper, by way of extending to her brotherly
attentions; but all the time he was talking on subjects of local
interest to his aunt and uncle.

Mr. Hartrick evidently thought Terence a very clever fellow, and
listened to his remarks with a deference which Nora thought by no
means good for him.

"He wants one of the dear old dad's downright snubs," was her inward
comment. "I must have a talk with him to-morrow. If he progresses at
this rate toward English refinement he will be unbearable at
O'Shanaghgan when he returns; quite, quite unbearable. Oh, for a
sniff of the sea! oh, for the wild, wild wind on my cheeks! and oh,
for my dear, darling, bare bedroom! I shall be smothered in that
heavily furnished room upstairs. Oh, it is all lovely, I know--very
lovely; but I'm not made to enjoy it. I belong to the free, and I
don't feel free here. The silken chains and the feather-bed life
won't suit me; of that I am quite sure. Thank goodness, however,
there's Molly; she is in a state of rebellion, too. I must not
sympathize with her; but I am truly glad she is here."




CHAPTER XIV.


BITS OF SLANG.

Early the next morning Nora was awakened from a somewhat heavy sleep
by someone pulling her violently by the arm.

"Wake up! wake up!" said a voice; and then Nora, who had been dreaming
of her father, and also of Andy Neil, started up, crying as she did
so, "Oh, don't, Andy! I know father will let you stay a little longer
in the cot. Don't, don't, Andy!"

"Who, in the name of fortune, is Andy?" called the clear voice of
Molly Hartrick. "Do wake up, Nora, and don't look so dazed. You
really are a most exciting person to have staying in the house. Who
is Andy, and what cot are you going to turn him out of? Is he a
baby?"

Nora now began to laugh.

"I quite forgot that I was in England," she said. "Am I really in
England? Are you--are you----Oh, now I remember everything. You are
Molly Hartrick. What is the hour? Is it late? Have I missed
breakfast?"

"Bless you, child! lie down and keep quiet; it's not more than six
o'clock. I wanted to see some more of you all by myself. I am out of
punishment now; it ended at midnight, and I am as free as anybody
else; but as it is extremely likely I shall be back in punishment by
the evening, I thought we would have a little chat while I was able
to have it. Just make way for me in your bed; I'll nestle up close
to you, and we'll be ever so jolly."

"Oh, do," said Nora, in a hearty tone.

Molly scrambled in, taking the lion's share of the bed, Nora lay on
the edge.

"I am glad you are facing the light, for I can examine your features
well," said Molly. "You certainly are very nice-looking. How
prettily your eyebrows are arched, and what white teeth you have!
And, although you have that wonderful black hair, you have a fair
skin, and your cheeks have just enough color; not too much. I hate
florid people; but you are just perfect."

"I wish you would not flatter me, Molly," said Nora; "nobody
flatters me in Ireland."

"They don't? But I thought they were a perfect nation of flatterers.
I am sure it is always said of them."

"Oh, if you mean the poor people," said Nora; "they make pretty
speeches, but nobody thinks anything about that. Everybody makes
pretty speeches to everybody else, except when we are having a
violent scold by way of a change."

"How delicious!" said Molly. "And what sort of house have you? Like
this?"

"No, not the least like this," answered Nora.

"With what emphasis you speak. Do you know that father told me you
lived in a beautiful place, a castle hanging over the sea, and that
your mountains and your sea and your old castle were things to be
proud of?"

"Did he? Did your father really say that?" asked Nora. She sat up on
her elbow; her eyes were shining; they assumed a look which Nora's
eyes often wore when she was, as she expressed it, "seeing things
out of her head." Far-off castles in the clouds would Nora look at
then; rainbow-tinted were they, and their summits reached heaven.
Molly gazed at her with deepening interest.

"Yes, Nora," she said; "he did say it. He told me so before Terence
came; but I--do forgive me--I don't care for Terence."

"You must not talk against him to me," said Nora, "because he
happens to be my brother; but I'll just whisper one thing back to
you, Molly--if he was not my brother he would not suit me."

"How nice of you to say that! We shall get on splendidly. Of course,
you must stick up for him, being your brother; he stuck up for you
before you came. It is very nice and loyal of you, and I quite
understand. But, dear me! I am not likely to see much of you while
you are here."

"Why not? Are you not going to stay here?"

"Oh, my dear, yes; I'll stay. School has just begun over again, you
know, and I am always in hot water. I cannot help it; it is a sort
of way of mine. This is the kind of way I live. Breakfast every
morning; then a lecture from mother or from father. Off I go in low
spirits, with a great, sore heart inside me; then comes the hateful
discipline of school; and every day I get into disgrace. I have a
lot of lessons returned, and am low down in my class, instead of
high up, and am treated from first to last as a naughty child. By
the middle of the day I am a very naughty child indeed."

"But you are not a child at all, Molly; you are a woman. Why, you
are older than I."

"Oh, what have years to do with it?" interrupted Molly. "I shall be a
child all my days, I tell you. I shall never be really old. I like
mischief and insubordination, and--and--let me whisper it to you,
little Nora--vulgarity. Yes, I do love to be vulgar. I like shocking
mother; I like shocking father. Since Terence came I have had rare fun
shocking him. I have learned a lot of slang, and whenever I see Terence
I shout it at him. He has got quite nervous lately, and avoids me. He
likes Linda awfully, but he avoids me. But, to go on with my day. I
am back from school to early dinner, generally in disgrace. I am not
allowed to speak at dinner. Back again I go to school, and I am home,
or supposed to be home, at half-past four; but not a bit of it, my
dear; I don't get home till about six, because I am kept in to learn
my lessons. It is disgraceful, of course; but it is a fact. Then back
I come, and mother has a talk with me. However busy mother may be,
and she is a very busy woman, Nora--you will soon find that out--she
always has time to find out if I have done anything naughty; and, as
fibs are not any of my accomplishments, I always tell her the truth;
and then what do you think happens? An evening quite to myself in my
bedroom; my dinner sent up to me there, and I eating it in solitary
state. They are all accustomed to it. They open their eyes and almost
glare at me when by a mere chance I do come down to dinner. They are
quite uncomfortable, because, you see, I am waiting my opportunity to
fire slang at one of them. I always do, and always will. I never could
fit into the dull life of the English."

"You must be Irish, really," said Nora.

"You don't say so! But I am afraid I am not. I would give all the
world to be, but am quite certain I am not. There, now, of course
I'd be awfully scolded if it was found out that I had awakened you
at this hour, and had confided my little history to you. I am over
sixteen. I shall be seventeen in ten months' time. And that is my
history, insubordination from first to last. I don't suppose anybody
really likes me, unless it is poor Annie Jefferson at school."

"Who is Annie Jefferson, Molly?"

"A very shabby sort of girl, who is always in hot water too. I have
taken to her, and she just adores me. There is no one else who loves
me; and she, poor child, would not be admitted inside these walls;
she is not aristocratic enough. Dear me, Nora! it is wrong of me to
give you all this information so soon; and don't look anxious about
me, little goose, for I have taken an enormous fancy to you."

"I will tell you one thing," said Nora after a pause, "if you will
never tell again."

"Oh, a secret!" said Molly. "Tell it out, Nora. I love secrets. I'll
never betray; I have no friends to betray them to. You may tell me
with all the heart in the world."

"Well, it is this," said Nora; "we are not at all rich at home. We
are poor, and have no luxuries and the dear old house is very bare;
and, oh! but, Molly, there is no place like it--no place like it. It's
worth all the world to me; and when I came here last night, and saw
your great, rich, beautiful house, I--I quite hated it, and I almost
hated Linda too; and even my uncle, who has been so kind, I could not
get up one charitable thought for him, nor for your mother, who is
such a beautiful, gracious lady; and even Terence--oh! Terry seemed
quite English. Oh, I was miserable! But when I saw you, Molly, I said
to myself, 'There is one person who will fit me'; and--oh, don't
Molly! What is it?"

"Only, if you say another word I shall squeeze you to death in the
hug I am giving you," said Molly. Her arms were flung tightly round
Nora's neck. She kissed her passionately three or four times.

"We'll be friends. I'll stick up for you through thick and thin,"
said Molly. "And now I'm off; for if Linda caught me woe betide me."

"One word before you go, Molly," called out Nora.

"Yes," said Molly, standing at the door.

"Try to keep straight to-day, for my sake, for I shall want to say a
great deal to you to-night."

"Oh, yes, so I will," answered Molly. "Now then, off I go."

The door was banged behind her. It awoke Mrs. Hartrick, who turned
slowly on her pillow, and said to herself, "I am quite certain that
wicked girl Molly has been disturbing our poor little traveler." But
she fell asleep, and Nora lay thinking of Molly. How queer she was!
And yet--and yet she was the only person in the English home who had
yet managed to touch Nora's warm Irish heart.

The rest of the day passed somewhat soberly. Molly and Linda both
started for school immediately after an early breakfast. Terence
went to town with his uncle, and Nora and her aunt were left alone.
She had earnestly hoped that she might have had one of her first
important talks with Mr. Hartrick before he left that morning; but
he evidently had no idea of giving her an opportunity. He spoke to
her kindly, but seemed to regard her already as quite one of the
family, and certainly was not disposed to alter his plans or put out
his business arrangements on her account. She resolved, with a
slightly impatient sigh, to abide her time, and followed her aunt
into the morning-room, where the good lady produced some fancywork,
and asked Nora if she would like to help her to arrange little
squares for a large patchwork quilt which was to be raffled for at a
bazar shortly to be held in the place.

Nora gravely took the little bits of colored silk, and, under her
aunt's supervision, began to arrange them in patterns. She was not a
neat worker, and the task was by no means to her taste.

"What time ought I to write in order to catch the post?" she said,
breaking the stillness, and raising her lovely eyes to Mrs.
Hartrick's face.

"The post goes out many times in the day, Nora; but if you want to
catch the Irish mail, you must have your letter in the box in the
hall by half-past three. There is plenty of time, my dear, and you
will find notepaper and everything you require in the escritoire in
the study. You can always go there if you wish to write your
letters."

"Thank you," answered Nora.

"When you are tired of work, you can go out and walk about the
grounds. I will take you for a drive this afternoon. I am sorry that
you have arrived just when the girls have gone back to school; but
you and Linda can have a good deal of fun in the evenings, you
know."

"But why not Molly too?" asked Nora. She felt rather alarmed at
mentioning her elder cousin's name.

Mrs. Hartrick did not speak at all for a moment; then she gave a
sigh.

"I am sorry to have to tell you, Nora, that Molly is by no means a
good girl. She is extremely rebellious and troublesome; and if this
state of things goes on much longer her father and I will be obliged
to send her to a very strict school as a boarder. We do not wish to
do that, as my husband does not approve of boarding-schools for
girls. At present she is spending a good deal of her time in
punishment."

"I hope she won't be in punishment to-night," said Nora. "I like her
so much."

"Do you, my dear? I hope she won't influence you to become
insubordinate."

Nora felt restless, and some of the bits of colored silk fluttered
to the floor.

"Be careful, my dear Nora," said her aunt in a somewhat sharp voice;
"don't let those bits of silk get about on the carpet. I am most
particular that everything in the house should be kept neat and in
order. I will get you a little work-basket to keep your things in
when next I go upstairs."

"Thank you, Aunt Grace," answered Nora.

"And now, as we are alone," continued the good lady, "you might tell
me something of your life. Your uncle is very anxious that your
mother should come and pay us a visit. He is very much attached to
his sister, and it seems to me strange that they should not have met
for so many years. You have a beautiful place at home, Nora--have
you not?"

"Yes," said Nora; "the place is"--she paused, and her voice took an
added emphasis--"beautiful."

"How emphatically you say it, dear! You have a pretty mode of
speech, although very, very Irish."

"I am Irish, you see, Aunt Grace," answered Nora.

"Yes, dear, you need scarcely tell me that; your brogue betrays
you."

"But mother was always particular that I should speak correctly,"
continued the girl. "Does my accent offend you, Aunt Grace?"

"No, dear; your uncle and I both think it quite charming. But tell me
some more. Of course you are very busy just now with your studies,
Nora. A girl of your age--how old did you say you were--sixteen?--a
girl of your age has not a moment to lose in acquiring those things
which are essential to the education of an accomplished woman of
the present day."

"I am afraid I shall shock you very much indeed, Aunt Grace, when I
tell you that my education is supposed to be finished."

"Finished!" said Mrs. Hartrick. She paused for a moment and stared
full at Nora. "I was astonished," she continued, "when your uncle
suggested that you should pay us a visit now. I said, as September
had begun, you would be going back to school; but you accepted the
invitation, or rather your mother did for you, without any allusion
to your school. You must have got on very well, Nora, to be finished
by now. How many languages do you know?"

"I can chatter in Irish after a fashion," said Nora; "and I am
supposed, after a fashion also, to know my own tongue."

"Irish!" said Mrs. Hartrick in a tone of quivering scorn. "I don't
mean anything of that sort. I allude to your acquaintance with
French, German, and Italian."

"I do know a very little French," said Nora; "that is, I can read
one or two books in French. Mother taught me what I know; but I do
not know any German or any Italian. I don't see that it matters,"
she continued, a flush coming into her cheeks. "I should never talk
German or Italian in Ireland. I wouldn't be understood if I did."

"That has nothing to do with it, Nora; and your tone, my dear, without
meaning it, of course, was just a shade pert just now. It is essential
in the present day that all well-educated women should be able to
speak at least in three languages."

"Then I am sorry, Aunt Grace, for I am afraid you will despise me. I
shall never be well educated in that sense of the word."

Mrs. Hartrick was silent.

"I will speak to your uncle," she said after a pause. "While you are
here you can have lessons. It would be possible to arrange that you
went to school with Linda and Molly, and had French and German
lessons while there."

"But I don't expect to be very long in England," said Nora, a note
of alarm in her voice.

"Oh, my dear child, now that we have got you, we shall not allow you
to go in a hurry. It is such a nice change for you, too; this is
your first visit to England, is it not?"

"Yes, Aunt Grace."

"We won't let you go for some time, little Nora. Your brother is a
dear fellow; your uncle and I admire him immensely, and he is quite
well educated and so adaptable; and I am sure you would be the same,
my dear, when you have had the many chances which will be offered to
you here. You must look upon me as your real aunt, dear, and tell me
anything that you wish. Don't be shy of me, my love; I can quite
understand that a young girl, when she first leaves her mother, is
rather shy."

"I never felt shy at home," answered Nora; "but then, you know, I
was more with father than with mother."

"More with your father! Does he stay at home all day, then?"

"He is always about the place; he has nothing else to do."

"Of course he has large estates."

"They are not so very large, Aunt Grace."

"Well, dear, that is a relative term, of course; but from your
uncle's description, and to judge from your mother's letters, it
must be a very large place. By the way, how does she manage her
servants? She must have a large staff at Castle O'Shanaghgan."

"I don't think we manage our servants particularly well," said
Nora. "It is true they all stay with us; but then we don't keep
many."

"How many, dear?"

"There's Pegeen--she is the parlor-maid--and there's the cook--we do
change our cook sometimes, for mother is rather particular; then
there is the woman who attends to the fowls, and the woman who does
the washing, and--I think that is about all. Oh, there's the post-boy;
perhaps you would consider him a servant, but I scarcely think he
ought to be called one. We give him twopence a week for fetching the
letters. He is a very good little boy. He stands on his head whenever
he sees me; he is very fond of me, and that is the way he shows his
affection. It would make you laugh, Aunt Grace, if you saw Michael
standing on his head."

"It would make me shudder, you mean," said Mrs. Hartrick. "Really,
Nora, your account of your mother's home is rather disparaging; two
or three very rough servants, and no more. But I understood you
lived in castle."

"Oh, a castle may mean anything; but it is not fair for you and
Uncle George to think we are rich, for we are very poor. And,"
continued Nora, "for my part, I love to be poor." She stood up
abruptly. In her excitement all her bits of silk tumbled to the
floor. "May I go out and have a run, Aunt Grace?" she said. "I feel
quite stiff. I am not accustomed to being indoors for so long at a
time."

"You can go out, Nora, if you like," said her aunt in a displeased
tone; "but, first, have the goodness to pick up all those bits you
have dropped."

Nora, with flushed cheeks, stooped and picked up the bits of silk.
She wrapped them in a piece of paper and put them on the table.

"You can stay out for an hour, my dear; but you are surely not going
without a hat."

"I never wear a hat at home," said Nora.

"You must run upstairs and fetch your hat," said Mrs. Hartrick.

Poor Nora never felt more tried in the whole course of her life.

"I shall get as bad as Molly if this goes on," she thought to
herself.




CHAPTER XV.


TWO LETTERS.

"DEAR MOTHER [wrote Nora O'Shanaghgan later on that same morning]: I
arrived safely yesterday. Uncle George met me at Holyhead, and was
very kind indeed. I had a comfortable journey up to town, and Uncle
George saw that I wanted for nothing. When we got to London we drove
across the town to another station, called Waterloo, and took a
train on here. A carriage met us at the station with a pair of
beautiful gray horses. They were not as handsome as Black Bess, but
they were very beautiful; and we arrived here between eight and nine
o'clock. This is just the sort of place you would like, mother; such
thick carpets on the stairs, and such large, spacious, splendidly
furnished rooms; and Aunt Grace has meals to the minute; and they
have lots and lots of servants; and my bedroom--oh, mother! I think
you would revel in my bedroom. It has such a terribly thick carpet
on the floor--I mean it has a thick carpet on the floor; and there
is a view from the window, the sort you have so often described to
me--great big trees, and a lawn like velvet, and four or five
tennis-courts, and a shrubbery with all the trees cut so exact and
round and proper, and a peep of the River Thames just beyond. My
cousins keep a boat on the river, and they often go out in the
summer evenings. They are going to take me for a row on Saturday,
when the girls have a holiday.

"I saw Terence almost immediately after I arrived. He looked just as
you would like to see him, so handsome in his evening dress. He was
a little stiff--at least, I mean he was very correct in his manner.
We had supper when we arrived. I was awfully hungry, but I did not
like to eat too much, for Terence seemed so correct--nice in his
manner, I mean--and everything was just as you have described things
when you were young. There are two girls, my cousins--Linda, a very
pretty girl, fair, and so very neatly dressed; and Molly, who is not
the least like the others. You would not like Molly; she is rather
rough; but of course I must not complain of her. I have been sitting
with Aunt Grace all the morning, until I could bear it no longer--I
mean, until I got a little stiff in my legs, and then I had a run in
the garden. Now I am writing this letter in Aunt Grace's morning-room,
and if I look round I shall see her back.

"Good-by, dear mother. I will write again in a day or two.--Your
affectionate daughter,

"NORA O'SHANAGHGAN."

"There," said Nora, under her breath, "that's done. Now for daddy."

She took out another sheet of paper, and began to scribble rapidly.

"Darling, darling, love of my heart! Daddy, daddy, oh! but it's I
that miss you. I am writing to you here in this could, could
country. Oh, daddy, if I could run to you now, wouldn't I? What are
you doing without your Light o' the Morning? I am pent up, daddy,
and I don't think I can stand it much longer. It's but a tiny visit
I'll pay, and then I'll come back again to the mountains and the
sea, and the old, old house, and the dear, darling dad. Keep up your
heart, daddy; you'll soon have Light o' the Morning home. Oh! it's
so proper, and I'm wrapped up in silk chains; they are surrounding
me everywhere, and I can't quite bear it. Aunt Grace is sitting
here; I am writing in her morning-room. Oh! if I could, wouldn't I
scream, or shout, or do something awfully wicked; but I must not,
for it is the English way. They have got the wild bird Nora into the
English cage; and, darling dad asthore, it's her heart that will be
broke if she stays here long. There's one comfort I have--or, bedad!
I don't think I could bear it--and that's Molly. She's a bit of a
romp and a bit of a scamp, and she has a daring spirit of her own,
and she hates the conventionalities, and she would like to be Irish
too. She can't, poor colleen; but she is nice and worth knowing, and
she'll just keep my heart from being broke entirely.

"How are they all at home? Give them lashins and lavins of love from
Nora. Tell them it's soon I'll be back with them. You go round and
give a message to each and all; and don't forget Hannah Croneen, and
little Mike, and Bridget Murphy, and Squire Murphy, and the rest--all
and every one who remembers Nora O'Shanaghgan. Tell them it's her
heart is imprisoned till she gets back to them; and she would rather
have one bit of her own native soil than all the gold in the whole
of England. I declare it's rough and wild I am getting, and my heart
is bleeding. I have written a correct letter to mother, and given
her the news; but I am telling you a bit of my true, true heart. Send
for me if you miss me too much, and I'll fly back to you. Oh! it's
chains wouldn't keep me, for go I must if this state of things
continues much longer.--Your

"LIGHT O' THE MORNING."

The two letters were written, the last one relieving Nora's feelings
not a little. She put them into separate envelopes and stamped them.

Mrs. Hartrick rose, went over to her desk, and saw Nora's letters.

"Oh, you have written to your parents," she said. "Quite right, my
dear. But why put them into separate envelopes? They could go nicely
in one. That, really, is willful waste, Nora, which we in England
never permit."

"Oh, please, don't change them, Aunt Grace," said Nora, as Mrs.
Hartrick took the two letters up and paused before opening one of
the envelopes. "Please, please, let them go as they are. It's my own
stamp," she continued, losing all sense of grammar in her
excitement.

"Well, my dear, just as you please. There, don't excite yourself,
Nora. I only suggested that, when one stamp would do, it was rather
wasteful to spend two."

"Oh, daddy does like to get his own letters to his own self," said
Nora.

"Your father, you mean. You don't, surely, call him by the vulgar
word daddy?"

"Bedad! but I do," answered Nora.

Mrs. Hartrick turned and gave her niece a frozen glance. Presently
she laid her hand on the girl's shoulder.

"I don't want to complain or to lecture you," she said; "but that
expression must not pass your lips again while you are here."

"It shan't. I am ever so sorry," said the girl.

"I think you are, dear; and how flushed your cheeks are! You seem
quite tired. Now, go upstairs and wash your hands; the luncheon-gong
will ring in five minutes, and we must be punctual at meals."

Nora slowly left the room.

"Oh! but it's like lead my heart is," she said to herself.

The day passed very dismally for the wild Irish girl. After lunch
she and her aunt had a long and proper drive. They drove through
lovely country; but Nora was feeling even a little bit cross, and
could not see the beauties of the perfectly tilled landscape, of the
orderly fields, of the lovely hedgerows.

"It is too tidy," she said once in a choking sort of voice.

"Tidy!" answered Mrs. Hartrick. She looked at Nora, tittered a sigh,
and did not speak of the beauties of the country again.

When they got back from their drive things were a little better, for
Linda and Molly had returned from school; and, for a wonder, Molly
was not in disgrace. She looked quite excited, and darting out of
the house, took Nora's hand and pulled it inside her arm.

"Come and have a talk," she said. "I am hungering for a chat with
you."

"Tea will be ready in fifteen minutes, Molly," called out Mrs.
Hartrick, then entered the house accompanied by Linda.

Meanwhile Molly and Nora went round to the shrubbery at the back of
the house.

"What is the matter with you?" said Molly. She turned and faced her
companion.

Nora's eyes filled with sudden tears.

"It is only that I am keeping in so much," she said; "and--and, oh!
I do wish you were not all quite so tidy. I am just mad for somebody
to be wild and unkempt. I feel that I could take down my hair, or
tear a rent in my dress--anything rather than the neatness. Oh! I
hate your landscapes, and your trim hedges, and your trim house, and
your--"

"Go on," said Molly; "let it out; let it out. I'll never repeat it.
You must come in, in about a quarter of an hour, to a stiff meal.
You will have to sit upright, let me tell you, and not lounge; and
you will have to eat your bread and butter very nicely, and sip your
tea, and not eat overmuch. Mother does not approve of it. Then when
tea is over you will have to leave the room and go upstairs and get
things out for dinner."

"My things out for dinner?" gasped Nora. "What do you mean?"

"Your evening-dress. Do you suppose you will be allowed to dine in
your morning-dress?"

"Oh, to be sure," said Nora, brightening; "now I understand. Mother
did get me a white frock, and she had it cut square in the neck, and
the sleeves are a little short."

"You will look sweet in that," said Molly, gazing at her critically;
"and I will bring you in a bunch of sweet-peas to put in your belt,
and you can have a little bunch in your hair, too, if you like. You
know you are awfully pretty. I am sure Linda is just mad with
jealousy about it; I can see it, although she does not say anything.
She is rather disparaging about you, is Linda; that is one of her
dear little ways. She runs people down with faint praise. She was
talking a lot about you as we were going to school this morning. She
began: 'You know, I do think Nora is a pretty girl; but it is such a
pity that--'"

"Oh, don't," said Nora, suddenly putting out her hand and closing
Molly's lips.

"What in the world are you doing that for?" said Molly.

"Because I don't want to hear; she did not mean me to know that she
said these things."

"What a curiosity you are!" said Molly. "So wild, so defiant, and yet-
-oh, of course, I like you awfully. Do you know that the vision of
your face kept me good all day? Isn't that something to be proud of? I
didn't answer one of my teachers back, and I did have a scolding, let
me tell you. Oh, my music; you don't know what I suffer over it. I
have not a single particle of taste. I have not the faintest ghost of
an ear; but mother insists on my learning. I could draw; I could
sketch; I can do anything with my pencil; but that does not suit
mother. It must be music. I must play; I must play well at sight; I
must play all sorts of difficult accompaniments for songs, because
gentlemen like to have their songs accompanied for them; and I must be
able to do this the very moment the music is put before me. And I must
not play too loud; I must play just right, in perfect time; and I must
be ready, when there is nothing else being done, to play long pieces,
those smart kind of things people do play in the present day; and I
must never play a wrong note. Oh, dear! oh, dear! and I simply cannot
do these things. I don't know wrong notes from right. I really don't."

"Oh, Molly!" cried Nora.

"There you are; I can see that you are musical."

"I think I am, very. I mean I think I should always know a wrong
note from a right one; but I have not had many opportunities of
learning."

"Oh, good gracious me! what next?" exclaimed Molly.

"I don't understand what you mean," said Nora.

"My dear, I am relieving my feelings, just as you relieved yours a
short time ago. Oh, dear! my music. I know I played atrociously; but
that dreadful Mrs. Elford was so cross; she did thump so herself on
the piano, and told me that my fingers were like sticks. And what
could I do? I longed to let out some of my expressions at her. You
must know that I am feared on account of my expressions--my slang, I
call them. They do shock people so, and it is simply irresistible to see
them shudder, and close their eyes, and draw themselves together, and
then majestically walk out of the room. The headmistress is summoned
then, and I--I am doomed. I get my pieces to do out of school; and when
I come home mother lectures me, and sends me to my bedroom. But I am
free to-night. I have been good all day; and it is on account of you,
Nora; just because you are a little Irish witch; and I sympathize with
you to the bottom of my soul."

"Molly! Molly!" here called out Linda's voice; "mother says it's
time for you and Nora to come in to wash your hands for tea."

"Oh, go to Jericho!" called out Molly.

Linda turned immediately and went into the house.

"She is a tell-tale-tit," said Molly. "She will be sure to repeat that
to mother; and do you think I shall be allowed any cake? There is a
very nice kind of rice-cake which cook makes, and I am particularly
fond of it. You'll see I am not to have any, just because I said 'Go
to Jericho!' I am sure I wish Linda would go."

"But those kind of things are rather vulgar, aren't they?" said
Nora. "Father wouldn't like them. We say all kinds of funny things
at home, but not things like that. I wish you would not."

"You wish I would not what?"

"Use words like 'Go to Jericho!' Father would not like to hear you."

"You are a very audacious kind of girl, let me tell you, Nora," said
Molly. She colored, and looked annoyed for a moment, then burst into
a laugh. "But I like you all the better for not being afraid of me,"
she continued. "Come, let's go into the house; we can relieve our
feelings somehow to-night; we'll have a lark somehow; you mark my
words. In the meantime mum's the word."




CHAPTER XVI.


A CHEEKY IRISH GIRL.

At tea the girls were very stiff. Molly and Nora were put as far as
possible asunder. They did not have tea in the drawing room, but in
the dining room, and Mrs. Hartrick presided. There was jam on the
table, and two or three kinds of cake, and, of course, plenty of
bread and butter.

As Molly had predicted, however, the news of her expression "Go to
Jericho!" had already reached Mrs. Hartrick's ears, and the fiat had
gone forth that she was only to eat bread and butter. It was handed
to her, in a marked way, by her mother, and Linda's light-blue eyes
flashed with pleasure. Nora felt at that moment that she almost
hated Linda. She herself ate resignedly, and without much appetite.
Her spirits were down to zero. It seemed far less likely than it did
before she left O'Shanaghgan that she could help her father out of
his scrape. It was almost impossible to break through these chains
of propriety, of neatness, of order. Would anybody in this trim
household care in the very least whether the old Irishman broke his
heart or not? whether he and the Irish girl had to go forth from the
home of their ancestors? whether the wild, beautiful, rack-rent sort
of place was kept in the family or not?

"They none of them care," thought Nora. "I don't believe Uncle
George will do anything; but all the same I have got to ask him. He
was nice about my letter, I will own that; but will he really,
really help?"

"A penny for your thoughts, Nora, my dear," said Mrs. Hartrick at
this moment.

Nora glanced up with a guilty flush.

"Oh, I was only thinking," she began.

"Yes, dear, what about?"

"About father." Nora colored as she spoke, and Linda fixed her eyes
on her face.

"Very pretty indeed of you, my dear, to think so much of your
father," said Mrs. Hartrick; "but I cannot help giving you a hint.
It is not considered good manners for a girl to be absent-minded
while she is in public. You are more or less in public now; I am
here, and your cousins, and it is our bounden duty each to try and
make the others pleasant, to add to the enjoyment of the meal by a
little graceful conversation. Absent-mindedness is very dull for
others, my dear Nora; so in future try not to look quite so
abstracted."

Nora colored again. Molly, at the other end of the table, bit her lip
furiously, and stretched out her hand to help herself to another thick
piece of bread and butter. In doing so she upset a small milk-jug; a
stream of milk flowed down the tablecloth, and Mrs. Hartrick rose in
indignation.

"This is the fourth evening running you have spilt something on the
tablecloth, Molly. Go to your room immediately."

Molly rose, dropped a mocking courtesy to her mother, and left the
room.

"Linda dear, run after your sister, and tell her that, for her
impertinence to me, she is to remain in her room until dinner-time."

"Oh! please forgive her this time; she didn't mean it really," burst
from Nora's lips.

"Nora!" said Mrs. Hartrick.

"Oh! I am sorry for her; please forgive her."

"Nora!" repeated her aunt again.

"It is because you do not understand her that she goes on like that;
she is such a fine girl, twice--twice as fine as Linda. Oh, I do
wish you would forgive her!"

"Thank you," said Linda in a mocking voice. She had got as far as
the door, and had overheard Nora's words. She now glanced at her
mother, as much as to say, "I told you so," and left the room.

Nora had jumped to her feet. She had forgotten prudence; she had
forgotten politeness; her eyes were bright with suppressed fire, and
her glib Irish tongue was eager to enter into the fray.

"I must speak out," she said. "Molly is more like me than anybody
else in this house, and I must take her part. She would be a very,
very good girl if she were understood."

"What are your ideas with regard to understanding Molly?" said Mrs.
Hartrick in that very calm and icy voice which irritated poor Nora
almost past endurance. She was speechless for a moment, struggling
with fresh emotion.

"Oh! I wish----" she began.

"And I wish, my dear Nora, that you would remember the politeness
due to your hostess. I also wish that you would consider how very
silly you are when you speak as you are now doing. I do not know
what your Irish habits are; but if it is considered in Ireland
rather a virtue than otherwise to spill a milk jug, and allow the
contents to deface the tablecloth, I am sorry for you, that is all."

"You cannot understand. I--I am sorry I came," said Nora.

She burst into sudden tears, and ran out of the room. In a few
moments Linda came back.

"Molly is storming," she said; "she is in an awful rage."

"Sit down, Linda, and don't tell tales of your sister," answered
Mrs. Hartrick in an annoyed voice.

"Dear me, mother!" said Linda; "and where is Nora?"

"Nora is a very impertinent little girl. She is wild, however, and
unbroken. We must all have patience with her. Poor child! it is
terrible to think that she is your father's niece. What a contrast
to dear Terence! He is a very nice, polite boy. I am sorry for Nora.
Of course, as to Molly, she is quite different. She has always had
the advantage of my bringing-up; whereas poor Nora--well, I must say
I am surprised at my sister-in-law. I did not think your father's
sister would have been so remiss."

"There is one thing I ought to say," said Linda.

"What is that, dear? Linda, do sit up straight, and don't poke your
head."

Linda drew herself up, and looked prettily toward her mother.

"What do you wish to say?"

"It is this. I think Nora will be a very bad companion for Molly.
Molly will be worse than ever that Nora is in the house."

"Well, my dear Linda, it is your duty to be a good deal with your
cousin. You are too fond of poking holes in others; you are a little
hard upon your sister Molly. I do not wish to excuse Molly; but it
is not your place as her younger sister to, as it were, rejoice in
her many faults."

"Oh, I don't, mother," said Linda, coloring.

"Linda dear, I am afraid you do. You must try and break yourself of
that very unchristian habit. But, on the whole, my dear, I am
pleased with you. You are careful to do what I wish; you learn your
lessons correctly; I have good reports of you from your
schoolmistresses; and if you are careful, my dear, you will correct
those little habits which mar the perfect whole."

"Thank you, dear mother," said Linda. "I will try to do what you
wish."

"What I particularly want you to do just now is to be gentle and
patient with your cousin; you must remember that she has never had
your advantages. Be with her a good deal; talk to her as nicely as
you can; hint to her what I wish. Of course, if she becomes quite
incorrigible, it will be impossible for me to have her long with you
and Molly; but the child is much to be pitied; she is a very pretty
creature, and with a little care could be made most presentable. I
by no means give her up."

"Dear mother, how sweetly Christian-like and forgiving you are!"
said Linda.

"Oh, hush, my dear; hush! I only do my duty; I hope I shall never
fail in that."

Mrs. Hartrick rose from the tea-table, and Linda soon afterward
followed her. Mr. Hartrick was seen coming down the avenue. He
generally walked from the station. He came in now.

"What a hot day it is!" he said. "Pour me out a cup of tea, Linda. I
am very thirsty."

He flung himself into an easy chair, and Linda waited on him.

"Well," he said, "where are the others? Where is the little Irish
witch, and where is Molly?"

"I am sorry to say that Molly is in disgrace, as usual," said Mrs.
Hartrick.

"Oh, dear, dear!" said Mr. Hartrick; "we ought to send her to
school, poor child! I am sorry for her."

"And I intended to give her quite a pleasant evening," said Mrs.
Hartrick, "in honor of her cousin's arrival. She was in disgrace
yesterday when Nora arrived; and I had thought of giving the girls a
delightful evening. I had it all planned, and was going to ask the
Challoners over; but really Molly is so incorrigible. She was very
pert to me, although she did bring a better report from school; she
used some of her objectionable language to Linda, and was more
awkward even than usual."

"Look at the tablecloth, father," said Linda.

"I think, Linda, you had better run out of the room," said Mr.
Hartrick. He spoke in an annoyed voice.

"Certainly, father, I will go; but don't you want another cup of tea
first?"

"Your mother shall pour it out for me. Go, my dear--go."

"Only, mother, is it necessary that we should not ask the Challoners
because Molly is naughty? The rest of us would like to have them."

"I will let you know presently, Linda," said her mother; and Linda
was obliged, to her disgust, to leave the room.

"Now, then, my dear," said Mr. Hartrick, "I don't at all like to
call you over the coals; but I think it is a pity to speak against
Molly so much as you do in her sister's presence. Linda is getting
eaten up with conceit; she will be an intolerable woman by and by,
so self-opinionated, and so pleased with herself. After all, poor
Molly may have the best of it in the future; she is a fine child,
notwithstanding her naughtiness."

"I thought it likely you would take her part, George; and I am
sorry," answered Mrs. Hartrick in a melancholy tone; "but I am
grieved to tell you that there is something else to follow. That
little Irish girl is quite as cheeky, even more cheeky than Molly. I
fear I must ask you to say a word to her; I shall require her to be
respectful to me while she is here. She spoke very rudely to me just
now, simply because I found it my duty to correct Molly."

"Oh, that won't do at all," said Mr. Hartrick. "I must speak to
Nora."

"I wish you would do so."

"I will. By the way, Grace, what a pretty creature she is!"

"She is a beautiful little wildflower," said Mrs. Hartrick. "I have
taken a great fancy to her, notwithstanding her rudeness. She has
never had the smallest care; she has simply been allowed to grow up
wild."

"Well, Nature has taken care of her," said Mr. Hartrick.

"Yes, dear, of course; but you yourself know the advantage of
bringing up a girl nicely."

"And no one is more capable of doing that than you are," said Mr.
Hartrick, giving his wife an admiring glance.

"Thank you, dear, for the compliment; but I should be glad if you
would speak to Nora. Now that she is here, I have no doubt that we
shall soon discipline her; and I should like her to pay quite a long
visit--that is, of course, if she becomes conformable to my ways."

"She will be sure to do that, Grace," replied the husband. "I am
glad you mean to be good to her, and to take her in hand, poor
little lass!"

"I thought she might have some good masters and get some valuable
lessons while she is here," said Mrs. Hartrick. "Would you believe
it, George?--that little girl of sixteen calmly informed me that her
education was finished. At the same time, she said she knew no
language but her own, and just a smattering of that dead tongue,
Irish. She cannot play; in short, she has no accomplishments
whatever, and yet her education is finished. I must say I do not
understand your sister. I should have thought that she was a little
more like you."

"There never was a more particular girl than Ellen used to be," said
Mr. Hartrick; "but I must have a long talk with Nora. I'll see her
this evening. I know she has a good deal she wants to talk to me
about."

"A good deal she wants to talk to you about, George?"

"Oh, yes, my dear; but I will explain presently. She is a proud
little witch, and must not be coerced; we must remember that her
spirit has never been broken. But I'll talk to her, I'll talk to
her; leave the matter in my hands, Grace."

"Certainly, dear; she is your niece, remember."




CHAPTER XVII.


TWO DESCRIPTIONS.

Some of Nora's words must have sunk into Mrs. Hartrick's heart, for,
rather to Molly's own astonishment, she was allowed to dress nicely
for dinner, and to come down. Her somewhat heavy, dark face did not
look to the best advantage. She wore a dress which did not suit her;
her hair was awkwardly arranged; there was a scowl on her brow. She
felt so sore and cross, after what she considered her brave efforts
to be good during the morning, that she would almost rather have
stayed up in her room. But Nora would not hear of that. Nora had
rushed into Molly's room, and had begged her, for her sake, to come
downstairs. Nora was looking quite charming in that pretty white
frock which Mrs. O'Shanaghgan had purchased for her in Dublin. Her
softly rounded figure, her dazzlingly fair complexion, were seen now
for the first time to the best advantage. Her thick black hair was
coiled up becomingly on her graceful little head, and, with a bunch
of sweet peas at her belt, there could scarcely have been seen a
prettier maiden. When she appeared in the drawing room, even Terence
was forced to admit that he had seldom seen a more lovely girl than
his sister. He went up to her and began to take notice of her.

"I am sorry I was obliged to be out all day. I am studying the
different museums very exhaustively," said Terence in that measured
tone of his which drove poor Nora nearly wild. She replied to him
somewhat pertly, and he retired once more into his shell.

"Pretty as my sister is," he soliloquized, "she really is such an
ignorant girl that few fellows would care to speak to her. It is a
sad pity."

Terence, the last hope of the house of O'Shanaghgan, was heard to
sigh profoundly. His aunt, Mrs. Hartrick, and his cousin Linda
would, doubtless, sympathize with him.

"Dinner was announced, and the meal went off very well. Molly was
absolutely silent; Nora, taking her cue from her, hardly spoke; and
Linda, Terence, and Mrs. Hartrick had it all their own way. But just
as dessert was placed on the table, Mr. Hartrick looked at Nora and
motioned to her to change seats and to come to one close to him.

"Come now," he said, "we should like to hear your account of Castle
O'Shanaghgan. Terence has told us all about it; but we should like
to hear your version."

"And a most lovely place it must be," said Mrs. Hartrick from the
other end of the table. "Your description, Terence, makes me quite
long to see it; and if it were not that I am honestly very much
afraid of the Irish peasantry, I should be glad to go there during
the summer. But those terrible creatures, with their shillalahs, and
their natural aptitude for firing on you from behind a hedge, are
quite too fearful to contemplate. I could not run the risk of
assassination from any of them. They seem to have a natural hatred
for the English and--why, what is the matter, Nora?"

"Only it's not true," said Nora, her eyes flashing. "They are not a
bit like that; they are the most warmhearted people in the whole
world. Terence, have you been telling lies about your country? If
you have, I am downright ashamed of you."

"But I have not. I don't know what you mean," answered Terence.

"Oh, come, come, Nora!" said her uncle, patting her arm gently; but
Nora's eyes blazed with fire.

"It's not a bit true," she continued. "How can Aunt Grace think of that?
The poor things have been driven to desperation, because--because their
hearts have been trampled on."

"For instance," said Terence in a mocking voice, which fell like ice
upon poor Nora's hot, indignant nature--"for instance, Andy Neil--he's
a nice specimen, is he not?"

"Oh," said Nora, "he--he is the exception. Don't talk of him,
please."

"That's just it," said Terence, laughing. "Nora wants to give us all
the sweets, and to conceal all the bitters. Now, I am honest,
whatever I am."

"Oh, are you?" said Nora, in indignation. "I should like to know,"
she continued, "what kind of place you have represented Castle
O'Shanaghgan to be."

"I don't know why I should be obliged to answer to you for what I
say, Nora," cried her brother.

"You describe it now, Nora. We will hear your description," said her
uncle.

Nora sat quite still for a moment; then she raised her very dark-blue
eyes.

"Do you really want me to tell you about O'Shanaghgan?" she said
slowly.

"Certainly, my dear."

"Certainly, Nora. I am sure you can describe things very well," said
her aunt, in an encouraging voice, from the other end of the table.

"Then I will tell you," said Nora. She paused for a moment, then, to
the astonishment and disgust of Mrs. Hartrick, rose to her feet.

"I cannot talk about it sitting down," she said. "There's the sea, you
know--the wild, wild Atlantic. In the winter the breakers are--oh! I
have sometimes seen them forty feet high."

"Come, come, Nora!" said Terence,

"It is true, Terry; the times when you don't like to go out."

Terence retired into his shell.

"I have seen the waves like that; but, oh! in the summer they can be
so sweet and conoodling."

"What in the world is that?" said Mrs. Hartrick.

"Oh, it is one of our Irish words; there's no other way to express
it. And then there are the cliffs, and the great caves, and the
yellow, yellow sands, and the shells, and the seaweeds, and the
fish, and the boating, and--and--"

"Go on, Nora; you describe the sea just like any other sea."

"Oh, but it is like no other sea," said Nora. "And then there are
the mountains, their feet washed by the waves."

"Quite poetical," said Mrs. Hartrick.

"It is; it is all poetry," said Nora. "You are not laughing at me,
are you, Aunt Grace? I wish you could see those mountains and that
sea, and then the home--O'Shanaghgan itself."

"Yes, Nora; tell us," said her uncle, who did not laugh, and was
much interested in the girl's description.

"The home," cried Nora; "the great big, darling, empty house."

"Empty! What a very peculiar description!" said Mrs. Hartrick.

"Oh, it is so nice," said Nora. "You don't knock over furniture when
you walk about; and the dining-room table is so big that, even if
you did spill a jug of milk, father would not be angry."

Mrs. Hartrick uttered a sigh.

"Oh, we are wild over there," continued Nora; "we have no
conventionalities. We share and share alike; we don't mind whether
we are rich or poor. We are poor--oh! frightfully poor; and we keep
very few servants; and--and the place is bare; because it can be
nothing but bare; but there's no place like O'Shanaghgan."

"But what do you mean by bare?" said Mrs. Hartrick.

"Bare?" said Nora. "I mean bare; very few carpets and very little
furniture, and--and----But, oh! it's the hearts that are warm, and
that is the only thing that matters."

"It must be a right-down jolly place; and, by Jehoshaphat! I wish I
was there," interrupted Molly.

"Molly!" said her mother.

"Oh, leave her alone for the present," said Mr. Hartrick. "But do you
mean," he continued, looking at Nora in a distressed way, "that--that
my sister lives in a house of that sort?"

"Mother?" said Nora. "Of course; she is father's wife, and my
mother; she is the lady of O'Shanaghgan. It is a very proud
position. We don't want grand furniture nor carpets to make it a
proud position. She is father's wife, and he is O'Shanaghgan of
Castle O'Shanaghgan. He is a sort of king, and he is descended from
kings."

"Well, Terence, I must say this does not at all coincide with your
description," said his uncle, turning and looking his nephew full in
the face.

"I didn't wish to make things too bad, sir. Of course, we are not
very rich over there; but still, Nora does exaggerate."

"Look here, Nora," said her uncle, suddenly turning and pulling her
down to sit beside him, "you and I must have a little chat. We will
just go and have it right away. You shall tell me your version of
the story quite by ourselves." He then rose and drew her out of the
room.

"Where shall we go?" he said when they stood for a moment in the
conservatory, into which the big dining room opened.

"Do you really mean it?" said Nora.

"Mean what, dear?"

"To talk to me about--about my letter? Do you mean it?"

"Certainly I do, and there is no time like the present. Come--where
shall we go?"

"Where we can be alone; where none of the prim English can
interrupt."

"Nora, you must not be so prejudiced. We are not so bad as all
that."

"Oh, I know it. I wish you were bad; it's because you are so awfully
good that I hate--I mean, that I cannot get on with any of you."

"Poor child! you are a little wild creature. Come into my study; we
shall be quite safe from interruption there."




CHAPTER XVIII.


A COMPACT.

Mr. Hartrick, still holding Nora's hand, took her down a corridor,
and the next moment they found themselves in a large room, with oak
bookcases and lined with oak throughout; but it was a stately sort
of apartment, and it oppressed the girl as much as the rest of the
house had done.

"I had thought," she murmured inwardly, "that his study would be a
little bare. I cannot think how he can stand such closeness, so much
furniture." She sighed as the thought came to her.

"More and more sighs, my little Irish girl," said Mr. Hartrick.
"Why, what is the matter with you?"

"I cannot breathe; but I'll soon get accustomed to it," said Nora.

"Cannot breathe? Are you subject to asthma, my dear?"

"Oh, no, no; but there is so much furniture, and I am accustomed to
so little."

"All right, Nora; but now you must pull yourself together, and try
to be broad-minded enough to take us English folk as we are. We are
not wild; we are civilized. Our houses are not bare; but I presume
you must consider them comfortable."

"Oh, yes," said Nora; "yes."

"Do you dislike comfortable houses?"

"Hate them!" said Nora.

"My dear, dear child!"

"You would if you were me--wouldn't you, Uncle George?"

"I suppose if I were you I should feel as you do, Nora. I must
honestly say I am very thankful I am not you."

Nora did not reply at all to that.

"Ah, at home now," she said, "the moon is getting up, and it is
making a path of silver on the waves, and it is touching the head of
Slieve Nagorna. The dear old Slieve generally keeps his snow
nightcap on, and I dare say he has it by now. In very hot weather,
sometimes, it melts and disappears; but probably he has got his
first coat of snow by now, just on his very top, you know. Then,
when the moon shines on it and then on the water--why, don't you
think, Uncle George, you would rather look at Slieve Nagorna, with
the snow on him and the moon touching his forehead, and the path of
silver on the water, than--than be just comfortable?"

"I don't see why I should not have both," said Mr. Hartrick after a
pause; "the silver path on the water and the grand look of Slieve
Nagorna (I can quite fancy what he is like from your description,
Nora), and also have a house nicely furnished, and good things to
eat, and----. But I see we are at daggers drawn, my dear niece. Now,
please tell me what your letter means."

"Do you really want me to tell you now?"

"Yes."

"Do you know why I have really come here?"

"You said something in your letter; but you did not explain yourself
very clearly."

"I came here," said Nora, "for a short visit. I want to go back
again soon. Time is flying. Already a month of the three months is
over. In two months' time the blow will fall unless--unless you,
Uncle George, avert it."

"The blow, dear? What blow?"

"They are going," said Nora--she held out both her hands--"the
place, the sea, the mountains, the home of our ancestors, they are
going unless--unless you help us, Uncle George."

"My dear Nora, you are very melodramatic; you must try and talk
plain English. Do you mean to say that Castle O'Shanaghgan--"

"Yes, that's it," said Nora; "it is mortgaged. I don't quite know
what mortgaged means, but it is something very bad; and unless
father can get a great deal of money--I don't know how much, but a
good deal--before two months are up, the man to whom Castle
O'Shanaghgan is mortgaged will take possession of it. He is a horrid
Englishman; but he will go there, and he will turn father out, and
mother out, and me--oh, Terence doesn't matter. Terence never was an
Irishman--never, never; but he will turn us out. We will go away.
Oh, it does not greatly matter for me, because I am young; and it
does not greatly matter for mother, because she is an English woman.
Oh, yes, Uncle George, she is just like you--she likes comfort; she
likes richly furnished rooms; but she is my mother, and of course I
love her; she will stand it, for she will think perhaps we will come
here to this country. But it is father I am thinking of, the old
lion, the old king, the dear, grand old father. He won't understand,
he'll be so puzzled. No other place will suit him; he won't say a
word; it's not the way of the O'Shanaghgans to grumble. He won't
utter a word; he will go away, and he will--die. His heart will be
broken; he will die."

"Nora, my dear child!"

"It is true," said Nora. Her face was ghastly white; her words came
out in broken sobs. "I see him, Uncle George; every night I see him,
with his bowed head, and his broken heart, and his steps getting
slower and slower. He'll be so puzzled, for he is such a true
Irishman, Uncle George. You don't know what we are--happy one day,
miserable the next. He thinks somehow, somehow, that the money will
be paid. But, oh, Uncle George!--I suppose I have got a little bit
of the English in me after all--I know it will not be paid, that no
one will lend it to him, not any of his old friends and cronies; and
he will have to go, and it will break his heart, unless, unless you
help him. I thought of you; I guessed you must be rich. I see now
that you are very rich. Oh, how rich!--rich enough for carriages,
and thick carpets, and easy-chairs, and tables, and grand dresses,
and--and all those sort of things; and you will help--won't you?
Please, do! please, do! You'll be so glad some day that you helped
the old king, and saved him from dying of a broken heart. Please,
help him, Uncle George."

"My dear little girl!" said Mr. Hartrick. He was really affected by
Nora's speech; it was wild; it was unconventional; there was a great
deal of false sentiment about it; but the child herself was true,
and her eyes were beautiful, and she looked graceful, and young, and
full of passion, almost primeval passion, as she stood there before
him. Then she believed in him. If she did not believe in anyone else
in the house, she believed in him. She thought that if she asked him
he would help.

"Now, tell me," he said after a pause, "does your mother know what
you have come here for?"

"Mother? Certainly not; I told you in my letter that you must not
breathe a word of it to mother; and father does not know. No one
knows but I--Nora, I myself."

"This has been completely your own idea?"

"Completely."

"You are a brave girl."

"Oh, I don't know about being brave. I had to do something. If you
belonged to Patrick O'Shanaghgan you would do something for him too.
Have you ever seen him, Uncle George?"

"Yes, at the time of my sister's wedding, but not since."

"And then?"

"He was as handsome a fellow as I ever laid eyes on, and Irish
through and through."

"Of course. What else would he be?"

"I have not seen him since. My sister, poor Ellen, she was a
beautiful girl when she was young, Nora."

"She is stately, like a queen," said Nora. "We all admire her very,
very much."

"And love her, my dear?"

"Oh yes, of course I love mother."

"But not as well as your father?"

"You could not, Uncle George, if you knew father."

"Well, I shall not ask any more. You really do want me to help?"

"If you can; if it will not cost you too much money."

"And you mean that your father is absolutely, downright poor?"

"Oh, I suppose so. I don't think that matters a bit. We wouldn't
like to be rich, neither father nor I; but we do want to keep
O'Shanaghgan."

"Even without carpets and chairs and tables?" said Mr. Hartrick.

"We don't care about carpets and chairs and tables," said Nora. "We
want to keep O'Shanaghgan, the place where father was born and I was
born."

"Well, look here, Nora. I can make you no promises just now; but I
respect you, my dear, and I will certainly do something--what I
cannot possibly tell you, for I must look into this matter for
myself. But I will do this: I will go to O'Shanaghgan this week and
see my sister, and find out from the Squire what really is wrong."

"You will?" said Nora. She thought quickly. Her father would hate
it; but, after all, it was the only chance. Even she had sufficient
common sense to know that Mr. Hartrick could not help unless he went
to the old place.

"Oh, you will do it when you see it," she said, with sudden rapture.
"And you'll take me home with you?"

"Well, I think not, Nora. Now that you are here you must stay. I am
fond of you, my little girl, although I know very little about you;
but I do think that you have very mistaken ideas. I want you to love
your English cousins for your mother's sake, and to love their home
for your mother's sake also; and I should like you to have a few
lessons, and to take some hints from your Aunt Grace, for you are
wild, and need training. If I go to O'Shanaghgan for you, will you
stay at The Laurels for me?"

"I will do anything, anything for you, if you save father," said
Nora. She fell on her knees before her uncle could prevent her, took
his hand, and kissed it.

"Then it is a compact," said Mr. Hartrick; "but remember I only
promise to go. I cannot make any promises to help your father until
I have seen him."




CHAPTER XIX.


SHE WILL SOON TAME DOWN.

"I am going to Ireland to-morrow, Grace," said Mr. Hartrick to his
wife that evening.

"To Ireland!" she cried. "What for?"

"I want to see my sister Ellen. I feel that I have neglected her too
long. I shall run over to O'Shanaghgan, and stay there for two or
three nights."

"Why are you doing this, George?" said Mrs. Hartrick very slowly.

Mr. Hartrick was silent for a moment; then he said gravely:

"I have heard bad news from that child."

"From Nora?"

"Yes, from Nora."

"But Terence has never given us bad news."

"Terence is not a patch upon Nora, my dear Grace."

"There I cannot agree with you. I infinitely prefer Terence to
Nora," was Mrs. Hartrick's calm reply.

"But I thought you admired the child."

"Oh, I admire what the child may become," was the cautious answer. "I
cannot admire a perfectly wild girl, who has no idea of self-discipline
or self-restraint. And remember one thing, George: whatever she says
to you, you must take, to use a vulgarism, with a grain of salt. An
Irish girl cannot help exaggerating. She has doubtless exaggerated the
condition of things."

"I only pray God she has," was Mr. Hartrick's reply.


"If things are even half as bad as she represents them, it is high
time that I should pay my sister a visit."

"Why? What does she say?"

"She has given me a picture of the state of affairs at that house
which wrings my heart, Grace. To think that my beautiful sister
Ellen should be subjected to such discomforts, to such miseries, is
intolerable. I intend to go to O'Shanaghgan to-morrow, and will see
how matters are for myself."

Mrs. Hartrick was again silent for a moment or two; then she said
gravely:

"Doubtless you are right to do this; but I hope, while you are away,
you will do nothing rash."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that, from the little I have seen of Nora, she is a very
impetuous creature, and has tried perhaps to wring a promise from
you."

"I will tell you quite simply what she has said, Grace, and then you
will understand. She says her father has mortgaged the Castle
evidently up to the hilt. The mortgagees will foreclose in a couple
of months, unless money can be found to buy them off. Now, it has
just occurred to me that I might buy Castle O'Shanaghgan for
ourselves as a sort of summer residence, put it in order, and allow
Patrick O'Shanaghgan to live there, and my sister. By and by the
place can go to Terence, as we have no son of our own. I have plenty
of money. What do you think of this suggestion, Grace?"

"It might not be a bad one," said Mrs. Hartrick; "but I could not
possibly go to a place of that sort unless it were put into proper
repair."

"It is, I believe, in reality a fine old place, and the grounds are
beautiful," said Mr. Hartrick. "A few thousand pounds would put it
into order, and we could furnish it from Dublin. You could have a
great many guests there, and--"

"But what about the O'Shanaghgans themselves?"

"Well, perhaps they would go somewhere else for the couple of months
we should need to occupy the house during the summer. Anyhow, I feel
that I must do something for Ellen's sake; but I will let you know
more after I have been there."

Mrs. Hartrick asked a few more questions. After a time she said:

"Is Nora to remain here?"

"Yes. I was going to speak to you about that. It is a sad pity that
so pretty a girl should grow up wild. We had better keep her with us
for the next two or three years. She will soon tame down and learn
our English habits; then, with her undeniable Irish charm and great
beauty, she will be able to do something with her life."

"I shall be quite pleased to have her," said Mrs. Hartrick in a
cordial tone. "I like training young girls, and Nora is the sort who
would do me credit if she really were willing to take pains."

"I am sure she will be; she is an honest little soul."

"Oh, I see you are bewitched by her."

"No, not bewitched; but I admire honesty and candor, and the child
has got both."

"Well, well!" said Mrs. Hartrick, "if it is arranged that Nora is to
stay here, I will go and see Miss Flowers at Linda's and Molly's
school to-morrow, and ask if Nora can be admitted as a pupil. There
is no use in losing time, and she may as well start her lessons next
week. By all means, George, go and do your best for the poor things.
Of course your sister ought not to be allowed to be in money
difficulties."

"I should think not," said Mr. Hartrick.

The next day Mr, Hartrick bade Nora and his own family good-by, and
started on his expedition to Ireland. Nora was quivering with
impatience. When she had seen the last of him she turned back into
the house, and was there met by her brother Terence.

"Come here, Nora. I want to speak to you," he said.

She followed him into the nearest room. He closed the door behind
them.

"May I ask what you have been saying to Uncle George?"

"You may ask, of course, Terry; but I don't mean to tell you,"
answered Nora.

"It is because of you he is going to Ireland?"

"It is because of something I have said."

"How do you think our mother will like it? You know how proud she
is; how all these years she has determined to put a good face on
things, and not to allow her relations in England to know the truth.
I have followed her cue, and have been careful to make the very best
of things at Castle O'Shanaghgan."

"Oh, it is easy to tell lies," said Nora, with scorn.

"Nora, you talk in a very silly way, and I often have no patience
with you," answered her brother. "If I have regard to my mother's
feelings, why should you despise me? You are supposed to consider
our father's feelings."

"That is very different; the whole thing is different," said Nora.
She flushed, bit her lip, and then turned away.

"You must hear me," said Terence, looking at her with some
impatience; "you must, you shall. You are quite intolerable with
your conceit and your silly, silly Irish ways."

"Well, go on. What have you to say to me?"

"That I think you were guilty of dishonor in talking as you did at
dinner last night. You spoke of the place and the poverty in a way
which quite put me to the blush. I hope in future, while you are
here, you will cease to run the O'Shanaghgans down. It is not worthy
of you, Nora, and I am ashamed of you."

"Run them down--I?" said poor Nora in astonishment.

"Yes, you."

She was silent for a moment; she was making a great effort to
recover her equanimity. Was Terence right? Had she done wrong to
speak before her aunt and cousins as she had done? Of course her
uncle was different; it was absolutely necessary that he at least
should know the truth. A distressful sense of dismay at her own
impetuosity came over her. Terence watched her narrowly. He was fond
of Nora in his heart of hearts, and also proud of her; and now that
he saw she was really sorry he went up to her, put his arm round her
neck, and kissed her.

"Never mind, little girl," he said, "you are young. Try to be guided
by me in future, and do not give yourself away. We Irish wear our
hearts on our sleeves, and that sort of thing does not go down in
England."

"Oh, how I hate this cold England!" said the Irish girl, with
passion.

"There you are again, all your feelings expressed too broadly. You
will never endure life if you go on as you have begun, Nora."

"Terence," said Nora, looking up at him, "when are you going home?"

"When am I going home? Thank you, I am very comfortable here."

"Don't you think that just at present, when father is in trouble,
his only son, the heir of O'Shanaghgan, ought to be with him?"

"Poor old O'Shanaghgan," said the lad, with impatience; "you think
that it comprises the whole of the world. I tell you what it is,
Nora, I am made differently, and I infinitely prefer England. My
uncle has been kind enough to offer me a small post in his business.
Did I not tell you?"

"No, no; I never knew what my uncle's business was."

"He is a merchant prince, Nora; an enormously rich man. He owns
warehouses upon warehouses. He has offered me a post in one--a very
good post, and a certain income."

"And you mean to accept?" said Nora, her eyes flashing fire.

"Well, I am writing to mother on the subject. I think it would be
well to do so."

"You, an O'Shanaghgan, will descend to trade?" replied the girl.

"Oh, folly! folly! Nora, your ideas are really too antiquated."

Nora did not speak at all for a moment; then she walked toward the
door.

"I cannot understand you," she said. "I am awfully sorry. I was born
different; I was made different. I cannot understand why you should
bring dishonor to the old place."

"By earning a little money to keep us all from beggary," retorted
the lad in a bitter tone; but Nora did not hear him; she had left
the room. Her eyes were smarting with unshed tears. She went out
into the shrubbery in search of Molly.

"But for Molly I should break my heart," she thought.




CHAPTER XX.


STEPHANOTIE.

Mrs. Hartrick made all necessary arrangements, and on the following
Monday Nora accompanied her cousin to school. Molly was much
delighted.

"Now I shall be able to work," she said, "and I won't be guilty of
slang when you are by. Don't whisper it to Linda. She would be in
the seventh heaven of bliss, and I detest pleasing her; but I would
do anything in the world for you, Nora creena."

Nora gave her cousin's arm an affectionate squeeze.

"I have never been to school," said Nora; "you must instruct me what
I am to do."

"Oh, dear, dear!" said Molly, "you won't need instruction; you are
as sharp and smart as any girl could be. You'll be a little puzzled
at first about the different classes, and I'll give you hints about
how to take notes and all that sort of thing. But you will quickly
get into the way of it, and then you'll learn like a house on fire."

"I wish you two wouldn't whisper together so much," said Linda in an
annoyed voice. "I am going over my French parsing to myself, and you
do interrupt me so."

"Then walk a little farther away from us," said Molly rudely.

She turned once more to her cousin.

"I will introduce you to the very nicest girls in my form," she
said. "I do hope you'll be put into my form, for then in the
evenings you and I can do our work together. I expect you know about
as much as I do."

"But that's just it--I don't," said Nora. "I have not learned a bit
in the school way. I had a governess for a time, but she did not
know a great deal. Of course mother taught me too; but I have not
had advantages. I should not be surprised if I were put into the
lowest form."

They now arrived at the school, and a few minutes later Nora found
herself in a huge classroom in which about sixty other girls were
assembled. Miss Flowers presently sent a pupil-teacher to ask Miss
O'Shanaghgan to have an interview with her in her private room.

Miss Flowers was about fifty years of age. She had white hair, calm,
large, well-opened blue eyes, a steadfast mouth, and a gracious and
at the same time dignified manner. She was not exactly beautiful;
but she had the sort of face which most girls respected and which
many loved. Nora looked earnestly at her, and in her wild, impulsive
Irish fashion, gave her heart on the spot.

"What is your name, my dear?" said the head-mistress kindly.

Nora told it.

"You are Irish, Mrs. Hartrick tells me."

"Yes, Miss Flowers, I have lived all my life in Ireland."

"I must find out what sort of instruction you have had. Have you
ever been at school before?"

"Never."

"How old are you?"

"Sixteen, Miss Flowers."

"What things have you been taught?"

"English subjects of different sorts," replied Nora. "A little
music--oh, I love music, I do love music!--and a little French; and
I can speak Irish," she added, raising her beautiful, dark-blue
eyes, and fixing them on the face of the head-mistress. That winsome
face touched Miss Flowers' heart.

"I will do what I can for you," she said. "For the present you had
better study alone. At the end of a week or so I shall be able to
determine what form to put you in. Now, go back to the schoolroom
and ask Miss Goring to come to me."

Miss Goring was the English mistress. Miss Flowers saw her alone for
a minute or two.

"Do what you can for the Irish girl," she said. "She is a very
pretty creature; she is evidently ignorant; but I think she has
plenty of talent."

Miss Goring went back, and during the rest of the morning devoted
herself to Nora. Nora had varied and strange acquirements at her
finger's ends. She was up in all sorts of folk lore; she could
clothe her speech in picturesque and striking language. She could
repeat poetry from Sir Walter Scott, from Shakspere, from the old
Irish bards themselves; but her grammar was defective, although her
reading aloud was very pretty and sweet. Her knowledge of history
was vague, and might be best described by the expression, up and
down. She knew all about the Waldenses; she had a vivid picture in
her mind's eye of St. Bartholomew's Eve. The French Revolution
appalled and, at the same time, attracted her. The death of Charles
I. drew tears from her eyes; but she knew nothing whatever of the
chronological arrangements of history; and the youngest girl in the
school could have put her to shame with regard to the Magna Charta.
It was just the same with every branch of knowledge which Nora had
even a smattering of.

At last the great test of all came--could she play or could she not?
She had spoken often of her passionate love for music. Miss Goring
took her into the drawing room, away from the other girls.

"I am not supposed to be musical," she said, "but I think I know
music when I hear it. If you have talent, you shall have plenty of
advantages here. Now, sit down and play something for me."

"What! At that piano?" said Nora, her eyes sparkling. Miss Goring
had opened a magnificent Broadwood grand.

"Yes," she said. "It is rather daring of me to bring you here; but I
want you to have fair play."

"I never played on a really good piano in my life," said Nora. "May
I venture?"

"Yes. I do not believe you will injure it."

"May I play as loud as I like, and as soft as I like?"

"Certainly. You may play exactly as you please; only play with all
your heart. You will be taught scientific music doubtless; but I
want to know what you can do without education, at present."

Nora sat down. At first she felt a little shy, and all her
surroundings were so strange, the piano was so big; she touched it
with her small, taper fingers, and it seemed to her that the deep,
soft notes were going to overpower her. Then she looked at Miss
Goring and felt uncomfortable; but she touched the notes again, and
she began to forget the room, and Miss Goring, and the grand piano;
and the soul of music stood in her eyes and touched the tips of her
fingers. The music was quite unclassical, quite unconventional; but
it was music--a wild kind of wailing chant--the notes of the Banshee
itself. Nora played on, and the tears filled her eyes and streamed
down her cheeks.

"Oh, it hurts so!" she said at last, and she looked full up at Miss
Goring. Behold, the cold, gray eyes of the English teacher were also
full of tears.

"You terrify me," she said. "Where did you hear anything like that?"

"That is the wail of the Banshee. Shall I play any more?"

"Nothing more so eerie."

"Then may I sing for you?"

"Can you sing?"

"I was never taught; but I think I can sing." Nora struck a few
chords again. She sang the pathetic words, "She is Far from the
Land," and Miss Goring felt the tears filling her eyes once more.

"Upon my word!" she said, as she led her pupil back to the
schoolroom, "you can play and you can sing; you have music in you.
It would be worth while to give you good lessons."

Nora's musical education was now taken up with vigor. Miss Goring
spoke to Miss Flowers about it, and Miss Flowers communicated with
Mrs. Hartrick; and Mrs. Hartrick was extremely pleased to find that
she had a musical genius in her midst, and determined to give that
same musical genius every chance. Accordingly, the very best master
in the school arranged to give Nora lessons, and a mistress of
striking ability took her also in hand. Nora's wild music, the music
that came from her heart, and the song that bubbled from her lips,
were absolutely silenced. She must not sing at will; she must on no
account play at will. The dullest of exercises were given to her for
the purpose of molding her fingers, and the dullest of voice
exercises were also given to her for the purpose of molding her
voice. She struggled against the discipline, and hated it. She was
essentially a child of nature, and this first putting on of the
chains of education was the reverse of pleasant.

"Oh, Molly," she said, "what is the good of singing those hateful,
screaming exercises, and those scales? They are too detestable, and
those little twists and turns. My fingers absolutely feel quite
nervous. What is the use? What is the use?"

Molly also sighed and said, "What is the use?" But then the musical
mistress and the great master looked at Nora all over when she made
similar remarks, and would not even vouchsafe to answer.

"Father would never be soothed with that sort of music," she said.
"I think he would be very glad we had not a good piano. Oh, Molly,
what does it all mean?"

"I don't know," said Molly. "It's like all other education, nothing
but grind, grind; but I suppose something will come of it in the
long run."

"What are you talking about, girls?" said Mrs. Hartrick, who just
then appeared upon the scene. "Nora, I am pleased; to get very good
reports of your music."

"Oh!" said Nora, "I am glad you have come, Aunt Grace; and I shall
be able to speak to you. Must I learn what takes all the music out
of me?"

"Silly child. There is only one road to a sound musical education,
and that is the road of toil. At present you play by ear, and sing
by ear. You have talent; but it must be cultivated. Just believe
that your elders know what they are about."

Nora did not say anything. Mrs. Hartrick, after looking at her
gravely for a moment, continued her gentle walk round the shrubbery.
Molly uttered a sigh.

"There's no good, Nora," she said. "You'll have to go through with
it. I suppose it is the only way; but it's hard to believe it."

"Well, at any rate, I enjoy other things in my school life," said
Nora. "Miss Goring is so nice, and I quite love Miss Flowers; and,
after all, I am in your form, Molly, and we do like doing our
lessons together."

"To be sure we do; life is quite a different thing for me since you
have come here," was Molly's retort.

"And you have been very good indeed about your naughty words, you
know," said Nora, nestling up to her cousin.

"Have I? Well, it's owing to you. You see, now, I have someone to
help me--someone to understand me."

"Ah!" said Nora; "but I won't be here very long."

"Not here very long! Why, you must. What is the use of beginning
school and then stopping it?"

"School or no school, my place is by father's side. It is a long,
long time since we heard from Uncle George. As soon as ever he comes
back I go."

"Father has been a whole month in Ireland now," said Molly. "I
cannot imagine what he is doing. I think mother fidgets rather. She
has very long letters from him, and----"

"And, do you know," said Nora, "that father has not written to me
once--no, not once since Uncle George went over? I am absolutely in
the dark."

"I wonder you stand it," said Molly. "You are so impetuous. I cannot
imagine why you don't fly back."

"I could not," said Nora.

"Could not? What is there to hinder you?"

"I have given my word."

"Your word? To whom?"

"To your father. He went to Ireland to please me."

"Oh, did he? That's exciting," said Molly. "Father went to Ireland
to please a little chit like you. Now, what does this mean?"

"It means exactly what I have said. He went because I begged him to;
because I explained things to him, and he said he would go. But he
made a condition, and I am bound to stick to my part of it."

"And that was----How your eyes shine, Nora!"

"That was, that I am to stay patiently here, and get as English as
ever I can. Oh! I must stick to my part of the bargain."

"Well, I cannot say you look very happy," said Molly, "although you
are such a favorite at the school. If I was not very fond of you
myself I should be jealous. If I had a friend whom I really
worshiped, before you appeared on the scene, it was Stephanotie
Miller, the American girl."

"Oh, isn't she charming?" said Nora. "She makes me laugh. I am sure
she has Irish blood in her."

"Not a bit of it; she's a Yankee of the Yankees."

"Well, she has been sent to school to get tame, just as I have
been," said Nora; "but I don't want you to lose her friendship.
After all, I care very little for anyone in the school but you,
Molly; only Stephanotie makes me laugh."

"We'll have her to tea tomorrow. I'll run in now and ask mother. I
shan't mind a bit if you are not going quite to take her from me.
After all, she can be friends with both of us. I'll run into the
house this moment, and ask mother if we may have Stephanotie to
tea."

Molly rushed into the house. Her mother was seated in the morning
room, busily writing.

"Well, my dear, well?" she said. "I hear you--you need not bang the
door. What is it, Molly?"

"Oh, mother! do look up and listen."

Mrs. Hartrick raised her head slowly.

"Yes, dear?" she said.

"I have behaved a great deal better lately--have I not, mother?"

"You certainly have, Molly; and I am pleased with you. If you would
restrain some of your impetuosity, I should be glad to tell you how
pleased I am."

"It is all owing to Nora."

"To Nora, my dear! Nora is as wild as you are."

"All the same, it is owing to Nora; and she is not as wild as I am.
I mean that I have been downright vulgar; but if you think there is
one trace of that in little Nora, it is because you do not know her
a bit."

"What is your special request, Molly? I am very busy just now, and
cannot discuss your cousin's character. You have improved, and I am
pleased with you."

"Then, if you are pleased with me, mother, will you do me a favor?"

"What is that?"

"Stephanotie Miller has never been at our house."

"Stephanotie Miller. What an outlandish name! Who is she?"

"She is a dear, jolly, sweet, handsome American girl. She came to
school last term, and she is in the same form with Nora and me; and
we both adore her, yes we do. Whatever she does, and whatever she
says, we think simply perfection; and we want to ask her here. She
is staying with a rather tiresome aunt, in a little house in the
village, and she has come over to be Englishized. May she have tea
with us tomorrow?"

"I will inquire about her from Miss Flowers; and if she seems to be
a nice girl I shall have no objection."

"But we want her to come tomorrow," said Molly. "It is Saturday, you
know, and a whole holiday. We thought she might come to lunch, or,
if you objected to that, immediately after lunch."

"And what about Linda? Does Linda like her?"

"Holy Moses, no!" said Molly.

"Molly!"

"Oh, mother! do forgive me, and don't say she mustn't come because I
said 'Holy Moses.' It's all Linda; she excites the vulgar in me
always. But may Stephie come, mother? You are always having Linda's
friends here."

"I will not be reproved by you, Molly."

"But, please, dear mother, let her come. Nora and I want her so
badly."

"Well, dear, I will try and see Miss Flowers tomorrow morning."

"Won't you judge of her for yourself, mother? There never was a
better judge than you are."

This judicious flattery had its effect on Mrs. Hartrick, She sat
quite still for a moment, pondering. After all, to be a pupil at
Mrs. Flowers' school was in itself a certificate of respectability,
and Molly had been very good lately--that is, for her; and if she
and Nora wanted a special friend to spend the afternoon with them,
it would be possible for Mrs. Hartrick quickly to decide whether the
invitation was to be repeated.

"Very well," she said, looking at her daughter, "for this once you
may have her; and as you have wisely expressed it, Molly, I can
judge for myself."

"Oh, thank you, thank you, mother!"

Molly rushed out of the room. She was flying headlong down the
passage, when she came plump up against Linda.

"Now, what is up?" said that young person. "Really, Molly!"

"Oh, hurrah! I have won my way for once," said Molly. "Stephanotie
is coming tomorrow to spend the whole afternoon."

"Stephanotie--that horrid Yankee?" said Linda.

"Horrid Yankee yourself!" was Molly's vulgar retort.

"But she cannot come. I have asked Mabel and Rose Armitage, and you
know they cannot stand Stephanotie."

"Well, you, and your Mabel and Rose, can keep away from
Stephanotie--that's all," said Molly. "Anyhow, she is coming.
Don't keep me. I must tell Nora."

Linda made way for her sister to fly past her, as she afterward
expressed it, like a whirlwind. She stood still for a moment in deep
consideration. Stephanotie was a daring, bright, go-ahead young
person, and had she ever taken, in the very least, to Linda, Linda
would have worshiped her. Stephanotie was extremely rich, and the
bouquets she brought to school, and the bon-bons she kept in her
pocket, and the pretty trinkets she wore, and the dresses she
exhibited had fascinated Linda more than once. For, rich as the
Hartricks were, Mrs. Hartrick had far too good taste to allow her
daughters more pocket-money, or more trinkets, or more bon-bons than
their companions. Linda, in her heart of hearts, had greatly
rebelled against her mother's rule in this particular, and had
envied Stephanotie what she called her free life. But Stephanotie
had never taken to Linda, and she had taken to Molly, and still more
had she taken to Nora; and, in consequence, Linda pretended to hate
her, and whenever she had an opportunity used to run her down.

Linda and her friends, Rose and Mabel Armitage, with several other
girls, formed quite a clique in the school against Stephanotie and
what she termed her "set"; and now to think that this very
objectionable American girl was to spend the next day at The Laurels
because Molly, forsooth! wished it, was quite intolerable.

Linda thought for a moment, then went into the room where her mother
was busy writing. Mrs. Hartrick had just finished her letter. She
looked up when Linda approached.

"Well, darling?" she said. Mrs. Hartrick was very fond of Linda, and
petted her a great deal more than Molly.

"Oh, mother! I am vexed," said Linda. "Is it quite settled?"

"Is what settled, my dear?"

"Is it quite settled that Stephanotie is to come to-morrow?"

"By the way, I was going to ask you about her, Linda. What sort of
girl is she?"

"I do not wish to say anything against my schoolfellows, mother; but
if you could only see her--"

Mrs. Hartrick raised her eyebrows in alarm.

"Molly has taken so violently to her," she answered, "and so has
Nora; and I thought that just for once--"

"So you have given leave, mother?"

"Yes; I have."

"And my friends are coming--those two charming girls, the
Armitages."

"Yes, dear; I greatly admire both the Armitage girls. I am glad they
are coming; but why should not Miss Miller come also?"

"Only, she is not in their 'set,' mother--that is all. I wish--I do
wish you would ask her to postpone her visit. If she must come, let
her come another Saturday."


"I will think about it," said Mrs. Hartrick. "I have certainly
promised and----But I will think about it."

Linda saw that she could not press her mother any further. She went
away in great disquietude.

"What is to be done?" she thought. "If only mother would speak to
Molly at once; but Molly is so impetuous; and once Stephanotie is
asked, there will be no getting out of it. She is just the sort of
girl to tell that unpleasant story about me, too. If mother knew
that, why, I should at last be in her black books. Well, whatever
happens, Stephanotie must not be asked to spend the afternoon here
to-morrow. I must somehow contrive to put some obstacle in the way."




CHAPTER XXI.


THE ROSE-COLORED DRESS.

Meanwhile Molly rushed off to Nora. "Linda means mischief, and I
must put my foot down immediately," she said.

"Why, Molly, what is up?"

"Put on your hat, darling, and come with me as fast as ever you
can."

"Where to?"

"Mother has given in about Stephanotie. Linda will put her finger in
the pie if she possibly can. I mean Stephanotie to get her
invitation within the next five minutes. Now, then, come along,
Nora. Do be quick."

Mrs. Hartrick never allowed the girls to go out except very neatly
dressed; but on this occasion they were seen tearing down the road
with their garden hats on and minus their gloves. Had anyone from
The Laurels observed them, good-by to Molly's liberty for many a
long day. No one did, however. Linda during the critical moment was
closeted with her mother. When she reappeared the girls were halfway
to the village. They reached it in good time, and arrived at the
house of Miss Truefitt, Stephanotie's aunt.

Miss Truefitt was an old-fashioned and precise little lady. She had
gone through a great deal of trouble since the arrival of her niece,
and often, as she expressed it, did not know whether she stood on
her head or her heels; but she was fond of Stephanotie, who,
notwithstanding her wild ways, was very affectionate and very
taking. And now, when she saw Molly and Nora appearing, she herself
entered the hall and opened the door for them.

"Well, my dears," she said, "Stephie is in her bedroom; she has a
headache, and wanted to lie down for a little."

"Oh, just let me run up to her. I won't keep her a minute," said
Molly.

"Come in here with me," said Miss Truefitt to Nora. She opened the
door of her neat little parlor. Nora entered. The room was full of
gay pictures and gay books, and scattered here and there were very
large boxes of bon-bons.

"How she can eat them all is what puzzles me," said Miss Truefitt;
"she seems to live on them. The quantity she demolishes would wreck
the health of any English girl. Ah, here comes Molly."

But Molly did not come downstairs alone; the American girl was with
her. Stephanotie rushed into the room.

"I am going to The Laurels to-morrow, auntie. I am going quite
early; this dear old Molly has asked me. You guess I'll have a good
time. There will be a box of bon-bons for Nora, sweet little Irish
Nora; and a box for dear little Molly, a true native of England, and
a fine specimen to boot. Oh, we shall have a nice time; and I am so
glad I am asked!"

"It is very kind of Mrs. Hartrick to send you an invitation,
Stephie," said her aunt.

"Oh, bother that, Aunt Violet! You know perfectly well she would not
ask me if Molly and Nora had not got it out of her."

"Well, we did try our best and most conoodling ways," said Nora in a
soft voice.

"Ah, didn't you, you little Irish witch; and I guess you won, too.
Well, I'm going; we'll have a jolly lark with Linda. If for no other
reason, I should be glad to go to upset her apple cart."

"Dear me, Stephie! you are very coarse and vulgar," said Miss
Truefitt.

"Not a bit of it, auntie. Have a bon-bon, do." Stephanotie rushed
across the room, opened a big box of bon-bons, and presented one, as
if it were a pistol, full in Miss Truefitt's face.

"Oh, no, thank you, my dear!" said that lady, backing; "the
indigestion I have already got owing to the way you have forced your
bon-bons upon me has almost wrecked my health. I have lost all
appetite. Dear me, Stephie! I wish you would not be so dreadfully
American."

"The process of Englishizing me is a slow one," said Stephanotie.
She turned, walked up to the glass, and surveyed herself. She was
dressed in rich brown velveteen, made to fit her lissome figure. Her
hair was of an almost fiery red, and surrounded her face like a
halo; her eyes were very bright china-blue, and she had a dazzlingly
fair complexion. There were people who thought Stephanotie pretty;
there were others who did not admire her at all. She had a go-ahead,
very independent manner, and was the sort of girl who would be
idolized by the weaker members of the school. Molly, however, was by
no means a weak member of the school, nor, for that matter, was
Nora, and they both took great pleasure out of Stephanotie.

"My bark is worse than my bite," said that young person. "I am
something like you, Molly. I am a bit of a scorcher; but there, when
I am trained in properly I'll be one of the best of good creatures."

"Well, you are booked for to-morrow now," said Molly; "and
Jehoshaphat! if you don't come in time--"

"Oh, Molly!" whispered Nora.

"There, I won't say it again."

Poor Miss Truefitt looked much shocked. Molly and Nora bade her
good-by, and nodded to Stephanotie, who stood upon the doorstep and
watched them down the street; then she returned to her aunt.

"I did think," said Miss Truefitt slowly, "that the girls belonging
to your school were ladylike; but to come here without gloves, and
that eldest girl, Miss Hartrick, to use such a shocking expression."

"Oh, bless you, Aunt Vi! it's nothing to the expressions she uses at
school. She's a perfect horror of a girl, and I like her for that
very reason. It is that horrid little Linda would please you; and I
must say I am sorry for your taste."

Stephanotie went upstairs to arrange her wardrobe for the next day.
She had long wished to visit Molly's home. The Laurels was one of
the prettiest places in the neighborhood, and Molly and Linda were
considered as among the smartest girls at the school. Stephanotie
wished to be hand-and-glove with Molly, not because she was supposed
to be rich, or respectable, or anything else, but simply because her
nature fitted to that of the wild, enthusiastic American girl. But,
all the same, now that she had got the _entree_, as she expressed
it, of the Hartricks' home, she intended to make a sensation.

 "When I do the thing I may as well do it properly," she said to
herself. "I will make them open their eyes. I have watched Mrs.
Hartrick in church; and, oh dear me! have not I longed to give her a
poke in the back. And as to Linda, she thinks a great deal of her
dress. She does not know what mine will be when I take out my very
best and most fascinating gown."

Accordingly Stephanotie rifled her trunk, and from its depths she
produced a robe which would, as she said, make the members of The
Laurels sit up. It was made of rose-colored silk, and trimmed with
quantities of cream lace. The skirt had many little flounces on it,
and each was edged with lace. The bodice was cut rather low in the
neck, and the sleeves did not come down anything like as far as the
wrists. The rose-colored silk with its cream lace trimmings was
altogether the sort of dress which might be worn in the evening; but
daring Stephanotie intended to appear in it in the morning. She
would encircle her waist with a cream-colored sash, very broad, and
with much lace upon it; and would wear many-colored beads round her
neck, and many bracelets on her arms.

"The whole will have a stylish effect, and will at any rate
distinguish me from everyone else," was her inward comment. She
shook out the dress, and then rang the bell. One of the servants
appeared.

"I want to have this robe ironed and made as presentable as
possible," said Stephanotie; "see you have it all done and put in my
wardrobe ready for wear tonight. I guess it will fetch 'em," she
added, and then she rushed like a whirlwind into the presence of
Miss Truefitt.

"Auntie," she said, "would you like to see me done up in style?"

"I don't know, I am sure, my dear," said Miss Truefitt, looking at
her with nervous eyes.

"Oh, dear, Aunt Vi! if you were to see mother now you wouldn't know
her; she is wonderfully addicted to the pleasures of the toilet.
There is nothing so fascinating as the pleasures of the toilet when
once you yield to its charms. She rigged me up pretty smart before I
left New York, and I am going to wear my rose-colored silk with the
cream lace to-morrow."

"But you are not going to an evening party, my dear."

"No; but I shall stay all the evening, and I know I'll look killing.
The dress suits me down to the ground. It is one of my fads always
to be in something red; it seems to harmonize with my hair."

Miss Truefitt uttered a deep sigh.

"What are you sighing for, Aunt Vi?"

"Nothing, dear; only please don't offer me a bon-bon. The mere sight
of those boxes gives me a feeling of nausea."

"But you have not tried the crystallized figs," cried Stephanotie;
"they are wonderfully good; and if you feel nausea a peppermint-drop
will set you right. I have a kind of peppermint chocolate in this
box which is extremely stimulating to the digestive organs."

"No, no, Stephie. I beg--I really do beg that you will take all the
obnoxious boxes out of the room."

"Very well, auntie; but you'll come up to-morrow to see me in my
dress?"

The next day was Saturday, a holiday of course. Stephanotie had put
her hair into Hinde's curlers the night before, and, in consequence,
it was a perfect mass of frizzle and fluff the next morning. Miss
Truefitt, who wore her own neat gray locks plainly banded round her
head, gave a shudder when she first caught sight of Stephanotie.

"I was thinking, dear, during the night," she said, "of your pink
silk dress, and I should very much prefer you to wear the gray
cashmere trimmed with the neat velvet at the cuffs and collar. It
would tone down your--"

"Oh, don't say it," said Stephanotie; "my hair is a perfect glory
this morning. Come yourself and look at it--here; stand just here;
the sun is shining full on me. Everyone will have to look twice at
me with a head like this."

"Indeed, that is true," said Miss Truefitt; "and perhaps three
times; and not approve of you then."

"Oh, come, auntie, you don't know how bewitching I look when I am
got up in all my finery."

"She is hopelessly vulgar," thought poor Miss Truefitt to herself;
"and I always supposed Agnes would have such a nice, proper girl,
such as she was herself in the old days; but that last photograph of
Agnes shows a decided falling off. How truly glad I am that I was
never induced to marry an American! I would rather have my neat,
precise little house and a small income than go about like a figure
of fun. That poor child will never be made English; it is a hopeless
task. The sooner she goes back to America the better."

Meanwhile Stephanotie wandered about the house, thinking over and
over of the happy moment when she would appear at The Laurels. She
thought it best to put on her rose-colored dress in time for early
dinner. It fitted her well, but was scarcely the best accompaniment
to her fiery-red hair.

"Oh, lor', miss!" said Maria, the servant, when she first caught
sight of Stephanotie.

"You may well say, 'Oh, lor'!' Maria," replied Stephanotie,
"although it is not a very pretty expression. But have a bon-bon; I
don't mean to be cross."

She whirled across the room, snatched hold of one of her boxes of
bon-bons, and presented it to Maria. Maria was not averse to a
chocolate peppermint, and popped one into her mouth. The next
instant Miss Truefitt appeared. "Now, Stephanotie," she said, "do
you think for a single moment--Oh, my dear child, you really are too
awful! You don't mean to say you are going to The Laurels like
that?"

"Have a bon-bon?" was Stephanotie's response.

"You are downright rude. I will not allow you to offer me bon-bons
again."

"But a fresh box of them has just arrived. I got them by the eleven
o'clock post to-day," was Stephanotie's reckless answer; "and, oh,
such beauties! And I had a letter from mother to say that I might
order as many as ever I liked from Fuller's. I mean to write to them
to ask them to send me ten shillings' worth. I'll ask for the newest
varieties. There surely must be bon-bons which would not give you
indigestion, Aunt Vi."

"I must ask you to take off that dress, Stephanotie. I forbid you to
go to The Laurels in such unsuitable attire."

"Oh, lor'! and it's lovely!" said Maria, _sotto voce_, as she
was leaving the room.

"What an unpleasant smell of peppermint!" said Miss Truefitt,
sniffing at that moment. "You know, Stephanotie, how I have begged
of you not to eat those unpleasant sweets in the dining room."

"I didn't," said Stephanotie; "it was only Maria."

Maria backed out of the room with another violent "Oh, lor'!" and
ran down to the kitchen.

"I'll have to give notice," she said. "It's Miss Stephanotie; she's
the most dazzlingly brilliant young lady I ever set eyes on; but
mistress will never forgive me for eating that peppermint in her
presence."

"Rinse the mouth out, and take no notice," was the cook's somewhat
heartless rejoinder. "How do you say she was dressed, Maria?"

"Pink, the color of a rose, and that ravishing with lace. I never
see'd such a dress," said Maria. "She's the most beautiful young
lady and the queerest I ever set eyes on."

Stephanotie and her aunt were having a battle upstairs, and in the
end the elder lady won. Stephanotie was obliged to take off the
unsuitable dress and put on the gray cashmere. As subsequent events
proved, it was lucky for her that she did do so.




CHAPTER XXII.


LETTERS.

By the post on the following morning there came two letters for
Nora. She hailed them with a cry of delight.

"At last!" she said.

Mrs. Hartrick was not in the room; she had a headache, and did not
get up to breakfast. Terence had already started for town. He had
secured the post he desired in his uncle's office, and thought
himself a very great man of business. Linda did not count for
anything.

Nora flung herself into an easy-chair, and opened the first of her
letters. It was from her mother. She was soon lost in its contents.

"MY DEAR NORA [wrote Mrs. O'Shanaghgan]: Be prepared for very great,
startling, and at the same time gratifying, news. Your dear Uncle
George, who has been spending the last three weeks with us, has made
an arrangement which lifts us, my dear daughter, out of all
pecuniary embarrassments. I will tell you as briefly as possible
what has taken place. He had a consultation with your father, and
induced him, at my suggestion, to unburden his mind to him. You know
the Squire's ways. He pooh-poohed the subject and fought shy of it;
but at last I myself brought him to task, and the whole terrible and
disgraceful state of things was revealed. My dear Nora, my dear
little girl, we were, it appears, on the brink of bankruptcy. In a
couple of months O'Shanaghgan would no longer have been ours.

I cannot say that I should ever have regretted leaving this
ramshackle and much-dilapidated place, but of course I should have
shrunk from the disgrace, the exposure, the feeling that I was the
cynosure of all eyes. That, indeed, would have cut me to the quick.
Had your father consented to sell O'Shanaghgan and live in England,
it would have been a moment of great rejoicing for me; but the place
to be sold up over his head was quite a different matter. This, my
dear Nora, seems to have been the position of affairs when your dear
uncle, like a good providence or a guardian angel, appeared on the
scene. Your uncle, my dearest Nora, is a very rich man. My dear
brother has been careful with regard to money matters all his life,
and is now in possession of a very large supply of this world's
goods. Your dear uncle was good enough to come to the rescue, and
has bought O'Shanaghgan from the man to whom your father owed the
mortgage. O'Shanaghgan now belongs to your Uncle George."

"Never!" cried Nora, springing to her feet.

"What is the matter, Nora?" said Linda.

"Don't talk to me for the present, or I'll say something you won't
like to hear," replied Nora.

"Really, I must say you are copying Molly in your manner."

"Don't speak to me," said Nora. Her face was crimson; she had never
felt such a wild, surging sense of passion in the whole of her
existence. Linda's calm gray eyes were upon her, however. She
managed to suppress any more emotion, saw that her cousin was
burning with curiosity, and continued the letter.

"Although, my dearest Nora, Castle O'Shanaghgan now belongs to your
Uncle George, don't suppose for a single moment that he is going to
be unkind to us. Far from it. To all appearance the place is still
ours; but with, oh! such a difference. Your father is still, in the
eyes of the tenants and of the country round, the owner of Castle
O'Shanaghgan; but, after consulting with me, your Uncle George felt
that he must not have the reins. His Irish nature, my dear--But I
need not discuss that. You know as well as I do how reckless and
improvident he is."

"Oh, mother!" gasped Nora. She clenched her little white teeth, and
had great difficulty in proceeding with her letter. Linda's
curiosity, however, acted as a restorative, and she went on with her
mother's lengthy epistle.

"All things are now changed, and I may as well say that a glorious
era has begun. Castle O'Shanaghgan is now your uncle's property, and
it will soon be a place to be proud of. He is having it refurnished
from attic to cellar; carpets, curtains, mirrors, furniture of all
sorts have already begun to arrive from one of the most fashionable
shops in Dublin. Gardeners have been got to put the gardens to
rights, the weeds have been removed from the avenue, the grass has
been cut, the lawns have been mown; the whole place looks already as
if it had undergone a resurrection. My bedroom, dear Nora, is now a
place suitable for your mother to sleep in; the bare boards are
covered with a thick Brussels carpet. The Axminster stair carpets
arrived yesterday. In the dining room is one of the most magnificent
Turkey carpets I have ever seen; and your uncle has insisted on
having the edge of the floor laid with parquetry. Will you believe
me, Nora?--your father has objected to the sound of the hammering
which the workmen make in putting in the different pieces of wood.
You can scarcely believe it possible; but I state a fact. The
stables are being filled with suitable horses; and with regard to
that I am glad to say your father does take some interest. A
victoria has arrived for me, and a pony-trap for you, dear; for it
seems your Uncle George has taken a great fancy to you, my little
Nora. Well, dear, all this resurrection, this wonderful restoration
of Castle O'Shanaghgan has occurred during your absence. You will
come back to a sort of fairyland; but it is one of your uncle's
stipulations that you do not come back at present; and, of course,
for such a fairy godfather, such a magician, no promise is too great
to give. So I have told him, dear Nora, that you will live with your
kind and noble Aunt Grace, and with your charming cousin Linda, and
your cousin Molly--about whom I do not hear so much--as long as he
wishes you to do so. You will receive the best of educations, and
come back at Christmas to a suitable home. You must have patience
until then. It is your uncle's proposal that at Christmas-time you
and your cousins also come to O'Shanaghgan, and that we shall have a
right good old-fashioned Christmas in this place, which at last is
beautiful and worthy of your ancient house. You must submit
patiently, therefore, dear Nora, to remaining in England. You will
probably spend the greater portion of your time there for the next
few years, until you are really accomplished. But the holidays you,
with your dear cousins and your uncle and aunt, will always spend at
O'Shanaghgan. You must understand, dear, that the house really
belongs to your uncle; the place is his, and we are simply his
tenants, from whom he nobly asks no rent. How proud I am of my dear
brother, and how I rejoice in this glorious change!--Your
affectionate mother,

"ELLEN O'SHANAGHGAN.".

The letter dropped from Nora's fingers.

"And was it I who effected all this?" she said to herself. "And I
thought I was doing good."

The other letter lay unopened on her lap. She took it up with
trembling hands, and broke the seal. It was a short letter compared
to her mother's, but it was in the handwriting she loved best on
earth.

"LIGHT O' THE MORNING [it began]: Why, then, my darling, it's done--it
is all over. The place is mine no longer; it belongs to the English.
To think I, O'Shanaghgan of Castle O'Shanaghgan, should live to write
the words. Your mother put it to me, and I could not refuse her; but,
oh, Nora asthore, heart of my life, I can scarcely bear to live here
now. What with the carpets and the curtains, and the fuss and the
misery, and the whole place being turned into a sort of furniture-shop,
it is past bearing. I keep out most of my time in the woods, and I
won't deny to you, my dearest child, that I have shed some bitter
tears over the change in O'Shanaghgan; for the place isn't what it
was, and it's heart-breaking to behold it. But your mother is pleased,
and that's one comfort. I always did all I could for her; and when
she smiles at me and looks like the sun--she is a remarkably handsome
woman, Nora--I try to take a bit of comfort. But I stumble over the
carpets and the mats, and your mother is always saying, 'Patrick,
take care where you are going, and don't let the dogs come in to
spoil the new carpets.' And the English servants that we have now
taken are past bearing; and it's just as if I were in chains, and I
would almost as lief the place had been sold right away from me as
see it in its changed condition. I can add no more now, my child,
except to say that, as I am under great and bitter obligations to
your Uncle George,

I must agree to his request that you stay in England for the
present; but Christmas is coming, and then I'll clasp you in my
arms, and I'll have a grain of comfort again.--Your sorrowful old
father,

"PATRICK O'SHANAGHGAN."

Nora's cheeks flushed brighter than ever as she read these two
letters. The first had cut her to the heart; the second had caused
that desire for weeping which unless it is yielded to amounts to
torture.

Oh! if Linda would not stay in the room. Oh! if she might crouch away
where she, too, could shed tears over the changed Castle O'Shanaghgan.
For what did she and her father want with a furniture-shop? Must she,
for all the rest of her days, live in a sort of feather-bed house?
Must the bareness, the space, the sense of expansion, be hers no more?
She was half a savage, and her silken fetters were tortures to her.

"It will kill him," she murmured. She said the words aloud.

"What will kill him? What is wrong? Do, please, tell me," said
Linda.

Nora looked at her with flashing eyes.

"How bright your cheeks are, Nora, and how your eyes shine! But you
look very, very angry. What can be the matter?"

"Matter? There is plenty the matter. I cannot tell you now," said
Nora.

"Then I'll go up and ask mother; perhaps she will tell me. It has
something to do with that old place of yours, I have not the
slightest doubt. Mother has got a very long letter from Ireland; she
will tell me perhaps."

"Yes, go; and don't come back again," said Nora, almost rudely.

"She gets worse and worse," thought Linda as she slowly mounted the
stairs. "Nora is anything but a pleasure in the house. At first when
she came she was not quite so bad; she had a pretty face, and her
manners had not been coarsened from contamination with Molly. Now
she is much changed. Yes, I'll go to mother and talk to her. What an
awful afternoon we are likely to have with that American girl here
and Nora changing for the worse hour by hour."

Linda knocked at her mother's door. Mrs. Hartrick was not well, and
was sitting up in bed reading her letters.

"My head is better, Linda," she said. "I shall get up presently.
What is it, darling?"

"It is only the usual thing," said Linda, with a deep sigh. "I am
always being rubbed the wrong way, and I don't like it."

"So it seems, my pet. But how nicely you have done your hair this
morning! How very neat and ladylike you are becoming, Linda! You are
a great comfort to me, dear."

"Thank you, mother; I try to please you," said Linda. She seated
herself on her mother's bed, suppressed a sigh, then said eagerly:

"Nora is awfully put out. Is there bad news from that wild place,
Castle O'Shanaghgan?"

"Bad news?" cried Mrs. Hartrick. "Has the child had letters?"

"Yes, two; she had been reading them instead of eating her
breakfast, and the sighs and the groans, and the flashing eyes and
the clenched teeth, and the jumping to her feet and the flopping
herself down again have been past bearing. She won't let out
anything except that she is downright miserable, and that it is a
burning shame."

What can she mean, mother? Is the old place sold? I always expected
they were terribly poor."

"The best, most splendid news," said Mrs. Hartrick. "My dear Linda,
you must be mistaken. Your father says that he has given your aunt
and uncle leave to tell Nora everything. I thought the child would
be in the seventh heaven of bliss; in fact, I was almost dreading
her arrival on the scene, she is so impetuous."

"Well, mother, she is not in any seventh heaven of bliss," replied
Linda; "so perhaps they have not told her. But what is it, mother
dear? Do tell me."

"It is this, darling--your father has bought Castle O'Shanaghgan."

"Oh! and given it to the O'Shanaghgans. Why did he do that?"

"He has bought it, but he has not given it to the O'Shanaghgans.
Some day, if Terence turns out worthy, the old place will doubtless
be his, as we have no son of our own; but at present it is your
father's property; he has bought it."

"Then no wonder poor Nora is sad," said Linda. "I can understand
her; she is fond of the old place."

"But why should she be sad? They are not going; they are to stay
there, practically owners of all they possess; for, although the
property is really your father's, he will only exercise sufficient
control to prevent that poor, wild, eccentric uncle of yours from
throwing good money after bad. To all intents and purposes the
O'Shanaghgans still hold possession; only now, my dear Linda, they
will have a beautiful house, magnificently furnished. The grounds
are carefully attended to, good gardeners provided, English servants
sent for, and the whole place made suitable for your father's
sister."

"But does Nora know of this?"

"I suppose so. I know your father said she was to be told."

"She is very miserable about something. I cannot understand her,"
said Linda. "I tell you what, I'll just go down and tell her.
Perhaps those two letters were nothing but grumbles; and the
O'Shanaghgans did not know then the happiness that was in store for
them."

"You can tell her if you like, dear."

"I will, I will," said Linda. She jumped off her mother's bed and
ran downstairs.

Nora was standing in the conservatory. She was gazing straight
before her, not at the great, tall, flowering cactus nor the
orchids, nor the mass of geraniums and pelargoniums of every shade
and hue--she was seeing a picture of a wild, wild lonely place, of a
bare old house, of a seashore that was like no other seashore in the
world. She was looking at this picture with all the heart of which
she was capable shining in her eyes; and she knew that she was
looking at it in imagination only, and that she would never see the
real picture again, for the wild old place was wild no longer, and
in Nora's opinion the glory had departed. She turned when Linda's
somewhat mincing voice fell upon her ears.

"How you startled me!" she said. "What is it?"

"Oh, good news," said Linda. "I am not quite so bad as you think me,
Nora, and I am delighted. Mother has told me everything. Castle
O'Shanaghgan is yours to live in as long as ever you care to do so.
Of course it belongs to us; but that does not matter, and it is
furnished from attic to cellar most splendidly, and there are
English servants, and there are--"

"Everything abominable and odious and horrible!" burst from Nora's
lips. "Oh, don't keep me; don't keep me! I am smothered at the
thought--O'Shanaghgan is ruined--ruined!"

She ran away from her cousin out into the air. At headlong speed did
she go, until at last she found herself in the most remote and least
cultivated part of the plantation.

Oh, to be alone! Now she could cry, and cry she did right bitterly.




CHAPTER XXIII.


THE BOX OF BON-BONS.

It occurred to Stephanotie that, as she could not wear the
rose-colored dress, as she must go perforce to the Hartricks' in
her dove-colored cashmere, with its very neat velvet collar and
cuffs, she would at least make her entrance a little striking.

"Why not take a box of bon-bons to Mrs. Hartrick?" she said to
herself. "There's that great big new box which I have not opened yet
It contains dozens of every kind of sweetmeat. I'll present it to
her; she'll be pleased with the attention."

The box was a very large one; on its lid was painted a picture of
two or three cupids hovering in the air, some of them touching the
shoulders of a pretty girl who was supposed to be opening a box of
chocolates. There was a good deal of color and embossed writing also
on the cover, and altogether it was as showy and, in Stephanotie's
opinion, as handsome a thing as anybody could desire.

She walked through the village, holding the box, tied with great
bunches of red ribbon, in her hand. She scorned to put a brown-paper
cover over it; she would take it in all its naked glory into the
midst of the Hartrick household.

On her way she met the other two girls who were also going to spend
an afternoon at The Laurels. Rose and Mabel Armitage were the
daughters of a neighbouring squire. They were nice girls, but
conventional.

There was nothing original about either of them; but they were very
much respected in the school, not only on account of their father's
position--he represented the county in the House--but also because they
were good, industrious, and so-called clever. The Armitages took prizes
at every examination. Their French was considered very nearly Parisian
in accent; their drawings were all in absolutely perfect proportions.
It is true the trees in Rose's landscapes looked a little stiff; but
how carefully she laid on her water-colors; how honestly she endeavored
to copy her master's smallest requirements! Then Mabel played with
great correctness, never for a single moment allowing a wrong note to
appear; and they both sang, very prettily, simple little ballads; and
they were dressed with exquisite neatness and propriety in very quiet
colors--dark blues, very dark reds, pretty, neat blouses, suitable
skirts. Their hair was shiny, and sat in little tight tendrils and
pretty curls round their heads. They were as like as two peas--each
girl had a prim little mouth with rosy lips; each girl possessed an
immaculate set of white teeth; each girl had a little, straight nose
and pretty, clear gray-blue eyes; their foreheads were low, their
eyebrows penciled and delicately marked. They had neat little figures;
they were neat in every way, neat in soul too; admirable little people,
but commonplace. And, just because they were commonplace, they did
not like fiery-red-haired Stephanotie; they thought Molly the
essence of vulgarity; they secretly admired beautiful Nora, but
thought her manners and style of conversation deplorable; and they
adored Linda as a kindred spirit.

Seeing them walking on in advance, like a little pair of doves,
Stephanotie quickened her steps until she came up to them.

"Hallo!" she said; "you guess where I'm off to?"

"I am sure I cannot say," answered Rose, turning gently round.

Mabel was always Rose's echo.

"I cannot say," she repeated.

"Well, I can guess where you're going. You're going to have a right
down good time at The Laurels--guess I'm right?"

"We are going to spend an afternoon at The Laurels," said Rose.

"An afternoon at The Laurels," echoed Mabel.

"And so am I--that's the best of the fun," said Stephanotie; "and I
mean to give her something to remember me by."

"Whom do you mean?" said Rose.

"Why, my good, respected hostess, Mrs. Hartrick."

"What do you mean to give her?" asked Rose.

"This. How do you like it? It's full of bon-bons."

Rose, notwithstanding her virtuous and commonplace mind, had a
secret leaning toward bon-bons. She did not dare to confess it even
to Mabel; for Mabel also had a secret leaning, and did not dare to
confess it to Rose. It was not _comme il faut_ in their family
for the girls of the house to indulge in bon-bons; but still, they
would have liked some of those delicious sweets, and had often
envied Stephanotie when she was showing them to her companions.

Of course, not for worlds would they have been friendly with the
terrible American girl; but they did envy her her boxes of sweets.

"How gay!" said Rose, looking at the startling cover, with its
cupids and its greedy-looking maiden.

"How jolly," said the American girl--"how luscious when you're
eating them! Would you like to see them inside?"

"Oh, I think not," said Rose.

"Better not," said Mabel.

"But why better not?" continued Stephanotie. "It's natural that
girls like us should like sweetmeats, bon-bons, or anything of that
sort. Here, there's a nice little bit of shelter under this tree,
and there's no one looking. I'll untie the ribbons; just hold the
box, Rose."

Rose held it. Stephanotie hastily pulled off the red ribbons and
lifted the cover. Oh, how delicious the inside did look!--rows upon
rows of every imaginable sweet--cream-colored sweets, rose-colored,
green, white; plums, apples, pears, figs, chocolates; every sort
that the heart of girl could desire lay before them in rows on rows.

"They are, every one of them, for Mrs. Hartrick," said Stephanotie,
"and you mustn't touch them. But I have got two boxes in my pocket;
they make it bulge out; I should be glad to get rid of them. We'll
tie this up, but you'll each have one of my boxes."

In a jiffy the big box was tied up again with its huge crimson bows,
and each of the Armitage girls possessed one of the American girl's
boxes of bon-bons.

"Aren't they pretty? Do have some; you don't know how long you may
be kept waiting for your tea," said Stephanotie as she danced beside
her companions up the avenue.

In this fashion, therefore, did the three enter the house, for both
of the Armitages had yielded to temptation, and each girl was just
finishing a large bon-bon when they appeared on the scene.

Mrs. Hartrick was standing in the great square central hall, waiting
for her guests.

Stephanotie ran up to her.

"It's very good of you indeed to ask me," she said; "and please
accept this--won't you? It's from an American girl, a trophy to
remember her by."

"Indeed?" said Mrs. Hartrick, flushing very brightly. She stepped
back a little; the huge box of bon-bons was forced into her hands.

"Jehoshaphat!" exclaimed Molly.

"Molly!" said her mother.

Linda uttered a little sigh. Rose and Mabel immediately became as
discreet and commonplace and proper as they could be; but
Stephanotie knew that the boxes of bon-bons were reposing in each of
their pockets and her spirits rose higher than ever.

"Where is Irish Nora?" she said. "It's she that is fond of a good
sweet such as they make for us in the States. But have the box--won't
you, Mrs. Hartrick? I have brought it to you as a token of my regard."

"Indeed? Thank you very much, Miss Miller," said Mrs. Hartrick in a
chilly voice. She laid the box on a side-table.




CHAPTER XXIV.


THE TELEGRAM,

The girls went out into the grounds. The afternoon happened to be a
perfect one; the air was balmy, with a touch of the Indian summer
about it. The last roses were blooming on their respective bushes;
the geraniums were making a good show in the carefully laid out
beds. There were clumps of asters and dahlias to be seen in every
direction; some late poppies and some sweet-peas and mignonette made
the borders still look very attractive, and the chrysanthemums were
beginning to appear.

"In a week's time they will be splendid," said Linda, piloting her
two friends through the largest of the greenhouses.

"Do come away," said Molly; "when Linda speaks in that prim voice
she's intolerable. Come, Nora; come, Stephie--we'll just have a run
by ourselves."

Nora was still looking rather pale. The shock of the morning had
caused the color to fade from her cheeks; she could not get the
utterly changed O'Shanaghgan out of her head. She longed to write to
her father, and yet she did not dare.

Stephanotie looked at her with the curious, keen glance which an
American girl possesses.

"What is it? Do say," she said, linking her hand inside Nora's. "Is
it anything that a bon-bon will soothe, or is it past that?"

"It is quite past that; but don't ask me now, Stephie. I cannot tell
you, really."

"Don't bother her," said Molly; "she has partly confided in me, but
not wholly. We'll have a good time by ourselves. What game do you
think we had best play, Stephie?"

"I'm not one for games at all," answered Stephanotie. "Girls of my
age don't play games. They are thinking seriously of the business of
life--the flirtations and the jolly time they are going to have
before they settle down to their staid married life. You English are
so very childish."

"And we Irish are childish too," said Nora. "It's lovely to be
childish," she added. "I hate to put away childish things."

"Oh, dear! so that is the Irish and English way," said Stephanotie.
"But there, don't let us talk nationalities; let's be cozy and
cheerful. I can tell you I did feel annoyed at coming here such a
dowd; it was not my fault. I meant to make an impression; I did,
really and truly. It was very good of you, Molly, to ask me; and I
know that proud lady, your mother, didn't want to have me a bit. I
am nothing but Stephanotie Miller, and she doesn't know the style we
live in at home. If she did, maybe she would open her eyes a little;
but she doesn't, and that's flat; and I am vulgar, or supposed to
be, just because I am frank and open, and I have no concealment
about me. I call a spade a spade."

"Oh, hurrah! so do I," said Molly, the irrepressible.

"Well, my dear, I don't use your words; they wouldn't suit me at all,"
said the American girl. "I never call out Jehoshaphat the way you do,
whoever Jehoshaphat _is_; but I have my little eccentricities,
and they run to pretty and gay dresses--dresses with bright colors
and quantities of lace on them--and bon-bons at all hours, in season
and out of season. It's easy to content me, and I don't see why my
little innocent wishes should not be gratified."

"But you are very nicely dressed now," said Nora, looking with
approval at the gray cashmere.

"Me nicely dressed!" screamed Stephanotie. "Do you call this dress
nice? Why, I do declare it's a perfect shame that I should be made
such a spectacle. It don't suit my hair. When I am ordering a dress
I choose shades of red; they tone me down. I am fiery to-day--am I
not, Molly?"

"Well, you certainly are," said Molly. "But what--what did you do to
it?"

"To my locks, do you mean?"

"Yes. They do stick out so funnily. I know mother was shocked; she
likes our heads to be perfectly smooth.'

"Like the Armitages', for instance," said Stephanotie.

"Well, yes; something like theirs. They are pretty girls, are they
not?"

"Yes," said Stephanotie; "but don't they give you the quivers? Don't
you feel as if you were rubbed the wrong way the moment you speak to
them?"

"I don't take to them," said Molly; "but I think they're pretty."

"They're just like what O'Shanaghgan is now," thought Nora, who did
not speak. "They are all prim and proper; there's not a single
wildness allowed to come out anywhere."

"But they're for all the world like anybody else," said Stephanotie.
"Don't they love sweeties just! If you' had seen them--the greedy
way they took the bon-bons out of the little boxes I gave them. Oh,
they're just like anybody else, only they are playing parts; they
are little actors; they're always acting. I'd like to catch them
when they were not. I'd like to have them for one wild week, with
you, Molly, and you, Nora. I tell you there would be a fine change
in them both."

"There's a telegraph-boy coming down the avenue," cried Molly
suddenly. "I'll run and see what is the matter?"

Nora did not know why her heart beat. Telegrams arrived every day at
The Laurels. Nevertheless she felt sure that this was no ordinary
message; she stood now and stared at that boy as though her eyes
would start from their sockets.

"What is the matter?" said Stephanotie.

"Nothing--nothing."

"You're vexed about something. Why should you be so distant with
me?"

"I am not, Stephie. I am a little anxious; it is difficult always to
be just the same," said Nora.

"Oh, don't I know it, my darling; and if you had as much to do with
Aunt Vi Truefitt as I have, you would realize how often _my_
spirits turn topsy-turvy. I often hope that I'll be Englishized
quickly, so that I may get back to my dear parents. But there, Molly
is coming back."

"The telegram was for mother," she said. "Do let us play."

Nora looked at Molly. Her face was red; it was usually pale. Nora
wondered what had brought that high color into her cheeks. Molly
seemed excited, and did not want to meet her cousin's eyes.

"Come, let us have a race," she said. "I don't want to put away
childish things. I want to have a good game while I am in the humor.
Let us see who will get first to the top of that hill. I like
running uphill. I'm off; catch me who may!"

Molly started. Her figure was stout, and she ran in a somewhat
awkward way. Nora flew after her. She soon reached her side.

"There, stop running," she said. "What is up?"

"What is up?" echoed Molly.

"Yes; what was in that telegram?"

"The telegram was for mother."

"But you know what was in it. I know you do."

"Nothing--nothing, Nora. Come, our race isn't over yet. I'm off
again; you cannot catch me this time."

Molly ran, panting as she did so.

"I cannot tell her; I won't," she said to herself. "I wish her eyes
were not so sharp. She is sure to find out; but I have begged and
prayed of mother not to tell her, at least until after Stephanotie
and the others have gone. Then, I suppose, she must know."

Molly reached the top of the hill. She was so blown that she had to
fling herself on the grass. Nora again reached her side.

"Tell me, Molly," she said; "there is something the matter?"

"There is a telegram for mother, and I cannot tell you anything
whatever about it," said Molly in a cross voice. "There, I'm off
once more. I promised Linda that I would help her to look after the
Armitage girls. Prim and proper as they are, they are sometimes a
little bit too much for my dainty sister Linda. You take care of
Stephie; she's right good fun. Let me go, Nora; let me go."

Molly pulled her hand almost roughly out of her cousin's grip, and
the next moment was rushing downhill as fast as she could in the
direction of the summer-house. There she knew she would find Linda
and her two friends.




CHAPTER XXV.


THE BLOW.

Notwithstanding all the efforts of at least five merry girls, there
was a cloud over the remainder of that afternoon. Nora's face was
anxious; her gay laugh was wanting; her eyes wore an abstracted,
far-away look. The depression which the letters of the morning had
caused was now increased tenfold. If she joined in the games it was
without spirit; when she spoke there was no animation in her words.
Gone was the Irish wit, the pleasant Irish humor; the sparkle in the
eyes was missing; the gay laughter never rose upon the breeze. At
tea things were just as bad. Even at supper matters had not mended.

Molly now persistently avoided her cousin. Stephanotie and she were
having a wild time. Molly, to cover Nora's gloom, was going on in a
more extravagant way than usual. She constantly asked Jehoshaphat to
come to her aid; she talked of Holy Moses more than once; in short,
she exceeded herself in her wildness. Linda was so shocked that she
took the Armitage girls to a distant corner, and there discoursed
with them in low whispers. Now and then she cast a horrified glance
round at where her sister and the Yankee, as she termed Stephanotie,
were going on together. To her relief, toward the end of the evening,
Mrs. Hartrick came into the room. But even her presence could not
suppress Molly now. She was beside herself; the look of Nora sitting
gloomily apart from the rest, pretending to be interested in one of
Sir Walter Scott's novels, was too much for her. She knew that a bad
time was coming for Nora, and her misery made her reckless. Mrs.
Hartrick, hearing some of her naughtiest words, said in an icy tone
that Miss Truefitt had sent a maid for Stephanotie; and a few moments
afterward the little party broke up.

As soon as the strange girls had departed, Mrs. Hartrick turned
immediately to Molly.

"I am shocked at your conduct," she said. "In order to give you
pleasure I allowed Miss Miller to come here; but I should have been
a wiser and happier woman if I had taken dear Linda's advice. She is
not the sort of girl I wish either you or Nora ever to associate
with again. Now, go straight to your room, and don't leave it until
I send for you."

Molly stalked off with a defiant tread and eyes flashing fire; she
would not even glance at Nora. Linda began to talk in her prim
voice. Before she could utter a single word Nora had sprung forward,
caught both her aunt's hands, and looked her in the face.

"Now," she said, "I must know. What did that telegram say?"

"What telegram, Nora? My dear child, you forget yourself."

"I do not forget myself, Aunt Grace. If I am not to go quite off my
head, I must know the truth."

"Sit down, Nora."

"I cannot sit; please put me out of suspense. Please tell me the
worst at once."

"I am sorry for you, dear; I really am."

"Oh, please, please speak! Is anything--anything wrong with father?"

"I hope nothing serious."

"Ah! I knew it," said Nora; "there is something wrong."

"He has had an accident."

"An accident? An accident? Oh, what? Oh! it's Andy; it must be Andy.
Oh, Aunt Grace, I shall go mad; I shall go mad!"

Mrs. Hartrick did not speak. Then she looked at Linda. She motioned
to Linda to leave the room. Linda, however, had no idea of stirring.
She was too much interested; she looked at Nora as if she thought
her really mad.

"Tell me--tell me; is father killed?"

"No, no, my poor child; no, no. Do calm yourself, Nora. I will let
you see the telegram; then you will know all that I know."

"Oh, please, please!"

Mrs. Hartrick took it out of her pocket. Nora clutched it very hard,
but her trembling fingers could scarcely take the little flimsy pink
sheet out of its envelope. At last she had managed it. She spread it
before her; then she found that her dazed eyes could not see the
words. What was the misery of the morning to the agony of this
moment?

"Read it for me," she said in a piteous voice. "I--I cannot see."

"Sit down, my dear; you will faint if you don't."

"Oh! everything is going round. Is he--is he dead?"

"No, dear; nothing very wrong."

"Read--read!" said Nora.

Mrs. Hartrick did read. The following words fell upon the Irish
girl's ears:

"O'Shanaghgan was shot at from behind a hedge this, morning.
Seriously injured. Break it to Nora."

"I must go to him," said Nora, jumping up. "When is the next train?
Why didn't you tell me before? I must go--I must go at once."

Now that the worst of the news was broken, she had recovered her
courage and some calmness.

"I must go to him," she repeated.

"I have telegraphed. I have been mindful of you. I knew the moment
you heard this news you would wish to be off to Ireland, so I have
telegraphed to know if there is danger. If there is danger you shall
go, my dear child; indeed, I myself will take you."

"Oh! I must go in any case," repeated Nora. "Danger or no danger, he
is hurt, and he will want me. I must go; you cannot keep me here."

Just then there came a loud ring at the hall-door.

"Doubtless that is the telegram," said Mrs. Hartrick. "Run, Linda,
and bring it."

Linda raced into the hall. In a few moments she came back with a
telegram.

"The messenger is waiting, mother," she said.

Mrs. Hartrick tore it open, read the contents, uttered a sigh of
relief, and then handed the paper on to Nora to read.

"There," she said; "you can read for yourself."

Nora read:

"Better. Doctor anticipates no danger. Tell Nora I do not wish her
to come. Writing.

"HARTRICK."

"There, my dear, this is a great relief," said Mrs. Hartrick.

"Oh! I am going all the same," said Nora.

"No; that I cannot possibly allow."

"But he wants me, even if he is not in danger. It was bad enough to
be away from him when he was well; but now that he is ill----You
don't understand, Aunt Grace--there is no one can do anything for
father as I can. I am his Light o' the Morning."

"His what?" said Mrs. Hartrick.

"Oh, that is what he calls me; but I have no time to explain now. I
must go; I don't care."

"You are an ungrateful girl, Nora. If you had lived through the
misery I have lived through the last few hours this telegram would
fill you with thankfulness. It is your duty to stay here. You are
under a promise to your kind uncle. He has rescued your father and
mother from a most terrible position, and your promise to him saying
that you would stay quietly here you cannot in all honor break. If
your father were in danger it would be a different matter. As it is,
it is your duty to stay quietly here, and show by your patience how
truly you love him."

Nora sat silent. Mrs. Hartrick's words were absolute. The good lady
felt that she was strictly following the path of duty.

"I can understand the shock you have had," she continued, looking at
the girl, who now sat with her head slightly drooping, her hands
clasped tightly together, her attitude one of absolute despair.

"Linda," she said, turning to her daughter, "fetch Nora a glass of
wine. I noticed, my dear, that you ate scarcely any supper."

Nora did not speak.

Linda returned with a glass of claret.

"Now drink this off, Nora," said her aunt; "I insist."

Nora was about to refuse, but she suddenly changed her mind.

"I shall go whether she gives me leave or not," was her inward
thought. "I shall want strength." She drank off the wine, and
returned the empty glass to her cousin.

"There now, that is better," said Mrs. Hartrick; "and as you are
unaccustomed to wine you will doubtless sleep soundly after it. Go
up to your bedroom, dear. I will telegraph the first thing in the
morning to O'Shanaghgan, and if there is the slightest cause for
alarm will promise to take you there immediately. Be content with my
promise; be patient, be brave, I beg of you, Nora. But, believe me,
your uncle knows best when he says you are not to go."

"Thank you, Aunt Grace," said Nora in a low voice. She did not
glance at Linda. She turned and left the room.




CHAPTER XXVI.


TEN POUNDS.

Molly was standing by the open window of her room when Nora came in. She
entered quite quietly. Every vestige of color had left her face; her eyes,
dark and intensely blue, were shining; some of her jet-black hair had got
loosened and fell about her neck and shoulders. Molly sprang toward her.

"Oh, Nora!" she said.

"Hush!" said Nora. "I have heard; father is hurt--very badly hurt,
and I am going to him."

"Are you indeed? Is mother going to take you?" said Molly.

"No; she has refused. A telegram has come from my uncle; he says I
am not to go--as if a thousand telegrams would keep me. Molly, I am
going."

"But you cannot go alone."

"I am going."

"When?" said Molly.

"Now--this very minute."

"What nonsense! There are no trains."

"I shall leave the house and stay at the station. I shall take the
very next train to town. I am going."

"But, Nora, have you money?"

"Money?" said Nora. "I never thought of that."

"Mother won't give you money if she does not wish you to go."

"I'll go to my room and see." Nora rushed away. She came back in a
few moments with her purse; she flung the contents on Molly's bed.
Molly took up the silver coins as they rattled out of Nora's purse.
Alack and alas! all she possessed was eight shillings and a few
coppers.

"You cannot go with that," said Molly; "and I have nothing to lend
you, or I would; indeed, I would give you all I possess, but mother
only gives me sixpence a week. Nothing would induce her to give me
an allowance. I have sixpence a week just as if I were a baby, and
you can quite understand I don't save out of that. What is to be
done?"

Nora looked nonplused. For the first time the vigorous intention,
the fierce resolve which was bearing her onward, was checked, and
checked by so mighty a reason that she could not quite see her way
out of the present difficulty. To ask her Aunt Grace for money would
be worse than useless. Nora was a sufficient reader of character to
be quite certain that Mrs. Hartrick when she said a thing meant it.
She would be kind to Nora up to a certain point. Were her father in
what they called danger she herself would be the first to help Nora
to go to him.

"How little they know how badly he wants me!" thought the girl; "how
all this time he is pining for me--he who never knew illness in his
life--pining, pining for me! Nothing shall keep me from him. I would
steal to go to him; there is nothing I would not do."

"Nora, how queer you look!" said Molly.

"I am thinking," said Nora. "I wonder how I am to get that money?
Oh, I have it. I'll ask Stephanotie to lend it to me. Do you think
she would?"

"I don't know. I think it very likely. She is generous, and she has
heaps of money."

"Then I'll go to her," said Nora.

"Stay, Nora; if you really want to run away----"

"Run away?" said Nora. "If you like to call it so, you may; but I'm
going. My own father is ill; my uncle and aunt don't hold the same
position to me that my father holds. I will go to him--I will."

"Then I tell you what it is," said Molly, "you must do this thing
carefully or you'll be locked up in your bedroom. Mother would think
nothing of locking the door of your bedroom and keeping you there.
You don't know mother when once her back is up. She can be immensely
kind up to a certain point, and then--oh! I know it--immensely
cruel."

"What is to be done?" said Nora. "I hate doing a thing in this kind
of way--in the dark, as it were."

"You must listen to me," said Molly; "you must be very careful. I
have had some little scampers in my time, and I know how to manage
matters. There is only one way for you to go."

"What is that?"

"You and I must go off and see Stephanotie; but we cannot do so
until everyone is in bed."

"How can we go then?"

"We can easily climb down from this window. You see this pear-tree;
it almost touches the window. I have climbed down by it more than
once; we can get in again the same way."

"Oh, yes. If we must sneak out of the house like thieves," said
Nora, "it's as good as any other way."

"I tell you it's the only way," said Molly. "We must be off on our
way to London before mother gets up tomorrow morning. You don't know
anything whatever about trains."

"But I can look them out," said Nora.

"Well, go back to your room. Mother will not be going to bed for
quite an hour. We cannot help it; we can do nothing until she is
safe in bed. Go away at once, Nora; for if she finds you here
talking to me she will suspect something. I cannot tell you what
mother is when once her suspicions are aroused; and she has had good
cause to suspect me before now."

"But do you really mean to say you'll come with me?"

"I certainly mean to say I won't let you go alone. Now then, go
away; just pack a few things, and slip back to me when I knock on
the wall. I know when mother has gone to bed; it is necessary that
she should be asleep, and that Linda should be asleep also; that is
all we require. Leave the rest to me."

"And you are certain Stephanotie can lend us the money?"

"We can but ask her. If she refuses we must only come back again and
make the best of things."

"I will never come back," said Nora. "I will go to the first
pawnbroker's and pawn everything of value I possess; but go to my
father I will."

"I admire your courage," said Molly. "Now then, go back to your room
and wait for my signal."

Nora returned to her room. She began to open and shut her drawers.
She did not care about being quiet. It seemed to her that no one
could keep her from her father against her will. She did not
recognize the all-potent fact that she had no money herself for the
journey. Still, the money must be obtained. Of course Stephanotie
had it, and of course Stephanotie would lend it; it would only be a
loan for a few days. When once Nora got to Ireland she would return
the money immediately.

She opened her drawers and filled a little black bag which she had
brought with her from home. She put in the trifles she might need on
her journey; the rest of her things could stay; she could not be
bothered with them one way or the other. Then she sat quite still on
the edge of her bed. How earnestly she wished that her aunt would
retire for the night, that Linda would be quiet! Linda's room
adjoined Nora's--it opened into Nora's--and Linda, when occasions
roused her suspicions, could be intensely watchful. She did not seem
to be going to bed; she kept moving about in her room. Poor Nora
could scarcely restrain herself from calling out, "Oh, do be quick,
Linda! What are you staying up for?" but she refrained from saying
the fatal words. Presently she heard the creak of Linda's bed as she
got into it. This was followed by silence.

Nora breathed a sigh of relief, but still the dangers were not past.
Her little black bag lay quite ready on the chair, and she herself
sat on the edge of her bed. Mrs. Hartrick's steps were heard coming
up the stairs, and the next moment the door of Nora's room was
opened and the good lady looked in.

"Not in bed, Nora," she said; "but this is very wrong."

"Oh, I could not sleep," said Nora.

Mrs. Hartrick went up to her.

"Now, my dear child," she said, "I cannot rest until I see you safe
in bed. Come, I must undress you myself. What a wan little face! My
dear girl, you must trust in God. Your uncle's telegram assures us
that there is no danger; and if there is the smallest occasion I
will take you myself to your father tomorrow."

"Oh! if you would only promise to take me," said poor Nora, suddenly
rising to her feet, twining her arms round her aunt's neck, and
looking full into her face. "Oh! don't say you will take me to my
father if there is danger; say you'll take me in any case. It would
break my heart to stay away. I cannot--cannot stay away from him."

"Now, you are talking in an unreasonable way, Nora--in a way I
cannot for a moment listen to. Your uncle wishes you to stay where
you are. He would not wish that if there was the least occasion for
you to go to Ireland."

"Then you will not take me tomorrow?"

"Not unless your father is worse. Come, I must help you to get your
things off."

Nora felt herself powerless in Mrs. Hartrick's hands. The good lady
quickly began to divest her of her clothes, soon her night-dress was
popped on, and she was lying down in bed.

"What is that black bag doing here?" said Mrs. Hartrick, glancing at
the bag as she spoke.

"I was packing my things together to go to father."

"Well, dear, we must only trust there will be no necessity. Now,
goodnight. Sleep well, my little girl. Believe me, I am not so
unsympathetic as I look."

Nora made no reply. She covered her face with the bedclothes; a sob
came from her throat. Mrs. Hartrick hesitated for a moment whether
she would say anything further; but then, hoping that the tired-out
girl would sleep, she went gently from the room. In the passage she
thought for a moment.

"Why did Nora pack that little bag?" she said to herself. "Can it be
possible--but no, the child would not do it. Besides, she has no
money."

Mrs. Hartrick entered her own room at the other end of the corridor
and shut the door. Then stillness reigned over the house--stillness
absolute and complete.

No light had been burning under Molly's door when Mrs. Hartrick had
passed. Molly, indeed, wiser than Nora, had got into bed and lay
there, dressed, it is true, but absolutely in the dark. Nora also
lay in her bed; every nerve was beating frantically; her body seemed
to be all one great pulse. At last, in desperation, she sprang out
of bed--there came the welcome signal from Molly's room. Nora struck
a light and began to dress feverishly. In ten minutes she was once
more in her clothes. She now put on the dark-gray traveling dress
she had worn when coming to The Laurels. Her hat and jacket were
quickly put on, and, carrying the little black bag, she entered
Molly's room.

"What hour is it?" said Nora. "It must be long past midnight."

"Oh, no; nothing of the kind. It is not more than eleven o'clock."

"Oh! I thought it was one or two. Do you know that your mother came
to see me and insisted on my getting into bed?"

"You were a great goose, Nora. You should have lain down as I did,
in your clothes; that would have saved a little time. But come,
mother has been quite quiet for half an hour and more; she must be
sound asleep. We had better go."

"Yes, we had better go," said Nora. "I packed a few things in this bag;
it is quite light, and I can carry it. My money is in it, too--eight
shillings and fivepence. I do trust Stephanotie will be able to lend
us the rest."

Molly had not been idle while Nora was in her room. She had taken
care to oil the hasp of the window; and now, with extreme caution,
she lifted it up, taking care that it did not make the slightest
sound as she did so. The next moment both girls were seated on the
window-ledge. Molly sprang on to the pear-tree, which creaked and
crackled under her weight; but Mrs. Hartrick was already in the land
of dreams. Molly dropped on to the ground beneath, and then it was
Nora's turn.

"Shall I shut the window before I get on to the pear-tree?"
whispered Nora.

"No, no; leave it open. Come just as you are."

Nora reached out her arms, grasped the pear tree, and slipped down
to the ground.

"Now then, we must be off," said Molly. "I hope Pilot won't bark."
She was alluding to the big watchdog. "But there, I'll speak to him;
he is very fond of me."

The girls stole across the grass. The dew lay heavy on it; their
footsteps made no sound. Presently they reached the front of the
house, and Pilot, with a deep bay, flew to meet them.

"Pilot! Pilot! quiet; good dog!" said Molly. She went on her knees,
flung her arms round the dog, and began to whisper in his ear.

"He understands," she said, looking up at Nora. The great creature
seemed to do so; he wagged his feathery tail from side to side and
accompanied the girls as far as the gate.

"Now, go home, go home," said Molly. She then took Nora's hand, and
they ran down the road in the direction of the village.

"If it were not that you are so miserable I should enjoy this
awfully," said Molly.

"But how do you mean to wake Stephie?" asked Nora at last.

"Well, luckily for us, her aunt, Miss Truefitt, is rather deaf. Miss
Truefitt has a bedroom at the back of the house, and Stephanotie
sleeps in front. I shall fling gravel at the window. There is not a
soul, as you see, in the streets. It's well that it is such a quiet
place; it will serve our purpose all the better."

They now found themselves outside Miss Truefitt's house. Molly took
up a handful of gravel and flung it in a great shower at
Stephanotie's window. Both girls then waited eagerly for a response.
At first there was none; once again Molly threw the gravel.

"I do hope she will wake soon," she said, turning to Nora; "that
gravel makes a great noise, and some of the neighbors may pop out
their heads to see what is the matter. There! I saw a flicker of
light in the room. She is thinking it is thieves; she won't for a
single moment imagine that we are here. I do hope Miss Truefitt
won't awaken; it will be all up with us if she does."

"No, no, it won't," said Nora; "there's not a person in this place I
could not get to help me in a cause like this. The one who is
absolutely invulnerable, who cannot be moved, because she imagines
herself to be right, is your mother."

"There's Stephie at the window now," said Molly. A little figure in
a night-dress was seen peeping out.

"It's us, Stephie. Let us in; it's most awfully important,"
whispered Molly's voice in deep sepulchral tones from below.

"But say, what's the matter?" called Stephanotie, opening her window
and popping out her curly head.

"I can't talk to you in the street. Slip down and open the hall-door
and let us in," said Molly. "It's most vital."

"It's life or death," whispered Nora. There was something in Nora's
tremulous tones which touched Stephanotie, and at the same time
stimulated her curiosity to such an extent that she flew into her
clothes, dashing about perfectly reckless of the fact that she was
making a loud noise; but, luckily for her, Miss Truefitt was deaf
and the servants slept in a remote part of the old house. Soon
Stephanotie was tumbling downstairs, the chain was taken off the
door, and the two girls were admitted.

"Where shall I take you?" said Stephanotie. "It's all as dark as
pitch. You know Aunt Vi won't hear of gas in the house. But stay, we
can go into the dining room. I suppose you can tell me by the light
of a solitary glim." As she spoke she pointed to the candle which
she was holding high above her head.

"Yes, yes, or with no light at all," said Nora.

Stephanotie now opened the door of the dining room, and the three
girls entered. Stephanotie placed the candle on the table and turned
and faced them.

"Well," she said, "what's up? What do you want me to do?"

"I want you to lend me all the money you have," said Nora.

"All the money I have--good gracious!"

"Oh, Jehoshaphat! be quick about it," said Molly. "We cannot stand
here talking; we want to catch the very next train to town."

"But why should I lend you all the money I have?"

"Oh, I'll tell her, Nora; don't you speak," said Molly. "Nora's
father has been awfully hurt; he was shot at from behind a hedge by
some scoundrel in Ireland. A telegram came to-day about him to
mother, and mother won't take Nora to Ireland unless her father is
in danger, and Nora is determined to go."

"I guess I'd about do the same," said Stephanotie, nodding her head.
"If poppa was shot at from behind a hedge, I guess there's nothing
would keep me away from him. But is it for that you want the money?"

"Yes," said Nora, plunging her hands into the depths of her black
bag; "there's only eight shillings and five-pence here, and I can't
get to Ireland with that."

"Haul out the spoil," said Molly; "make no bones about it. I'm going
with Nora, because the child isn't fit to travel alone."

"You coming with me?" said Nora. "I didn't know that."

"I don't mean to leave you, my dear, until I see you safe in the
midst of your family; besides, I have a bit of curiosity with regard
to that wonderful old place of yours."

"Oh, it's lost, the place is quite lost," said Nora, remembering for
the first time since the blow had fallen the feather-bed condition
of Castle O'Shanaghgan.

"Well, lost or found, I'd like to have a peep at it," said Molly;
"so fork out the spoil, Stephie, and be quick."

"I will, of course," said Stephanotie. "But how much do you want?"

"All you possess, my dear; you cannot give us more than all you
possess."

"And when am I likely to have it back?"

"Oh, as if that mattered," said Molly; "the thing is to get Nora
home. You won't be any the worse for this, if that is what you
mean."

"Oh, I am not really thinking of that; but my school fees have to be
paid, and the money only came from America two days ago for the
purpose. You know Aunt Vi is very poor."

"Poor or rich, don't keep us waiting now," said Molly. "Look at
Nora. Do you think for a single moment that your school bills matter
when her heart is breaking?"

"And you shall have the money back, Stephie, every farthing, if I
die to get it for you," said Nora with sudden passion.

"I don't doubt you, darling," said the generous-hearted American
girl. "Well, I'll go up to my room and see what I can do." She left
the room, ran upstairs, and quickly returned with a fat purse. It
contained gold and notes; and very soon Molly found, to her infinite
delight, that it would be by no means necessary for her and Nora to
take all Stephie's wealth.

"Ten pounds will be sufficient," said Molly. "I have not the
slightest idea what the fares to Ireland are, but I have no doubt we
shall do nicely with this sum. May we have these two five-pounds
notes, Stephie?"

"You may and welcome," said Stephanotie. "I have nearly thirty pounds
here; but it's on account of the school bills. As a rule, poppa is not
quite so generous. He says it is better for young girls like me not to
have too much money. I guess I'd eat too many bon-bons if I had a lot
of money at my disposal. But had you not better take it in gold? It is
much easier to change."

"To be sure," said Molly. "Holy Moses! it's you that have got the
sense, Stephie."

"Thank you for the compliment," replied Stephanotie. "Well, then,
here you are--ten sovereigns. Good luck to you both. What do you
mean to do?"

"Go to the station and find out about the trains, and start the very
first moment possible," said Molly.

"I do wish I was going with you. It would be no end of a lark."

"Why don't you come?" asked Molly.

"I wish I might; but there, I suppose I had better not. I must look
perfectly innocent to-morrow, or I may get into an awful scrape for
this. You must both go now, or Aunt Vi when she turns in her sleep
may wake. She turns in her sleep about three times during the night;
and whenever she turns she wakes, so she tells me. I guess it's
about time for her first turn now, so the sooner you are off the
better."

"Oh, thank you, Stephie! I shall never, never forget your kindness,"
said Nora. She flung her arms impulsively round Stephanotie's neck,
and the next moment the girls left the house.




CHAPTER XXVII.


ADVENTURES--AND HOME AGAIN.

The girls now went straight to the railway station; the hour was a
quarter to twelve. They entered and asked at once if there was a train
up to town. Yes; the last train would be due in ten minutes. Molly
now took the management of affairs; she purchased a third-class
ticket for herself and another for Nora.

"If we go third-class we shall not be specially remarked," she said.
"People always notice girls who travel first-class."

The tickets being bought, the girls stood side by side on the
platform. Molly had put on her shabbiest hat and oldest jacket; her
gloves had some holes in them; her umbrella was rolled up in such a
thick, ungainly fashion that it looked like a gamp. Nora, however,
exquisitely neat and trim, stood by her companion's side, betraying
as she did so traces of her good birth and breeding.

"You must untidy yourself a bit when we get into the train," said
Molly. "I'll manage it."

"Oh, never mind about my looks; the thing is to get off," said Nora.
"I'm not a scrap afraid," she added; "if Aunt Grace came to me now
she could not induce me to turn back; nothing but force would make
me. I have got the money, and to Ireland I will go."

"I admire you for your determination," said Molly. "I never knew
that an Irish girl could have so much spunk in her."

"And why not? Aren't we about the finest race on God's earth?"

"Oh, come, come," said Molly; "you mustn't overdo it. Even you
sometimes carry things a trifle too far."

Just then the train came in. There was the usual bustle of
passengers alighting and others getting in; the next moment the
girls had taken their seats in a crowded compartment and were off to
town. They arrived in London between twelve and one o'clock, and
found themselves landed at Waterloo. Now, Waterloo is not the nicest
station in the world for two very young girls to arrive at midnight,
particularly when they have not the faintest idea where to go.

"Let us go straight to the waiting room and ask the woman there what
we had best do," said Molly, who still immensely enjoyed taking the
lead.

Nora followed her companion quite willingly. Her worst fears about
her father were held in abeyance, now that she was really on her way
to him. The girls entered the waiting room. A tired-looking woman
was busy putting out the gas, and reducing the room to darkness for
the night. She turned round as the girls came in.

"I'm shutting up, ladies," she said.

"Oh, but please advise us," said Molly.

"How so, miss? What am I to do?"

"You'll be paid well," said Molly, "so you need not look so angry.
Can you take us home to your place until the morning?"

"What does this mean?" said the woman.

"Oh, I'll explain," said Molly. "We're two runaways. I don't mind
telling you that we are, because it's a fact. It is important that
we should leave home. We don't want to be traced. Will you give us
lodging?--any sort. We don't mind how small the room is. We want to
be at Euston at an early hour in the morning; we are going to
Holyhead."

"Dear, dear!" said the woman; "and does this really mean money?"

"It means five shillings," said Molly.

"Ten" was on Nora's lips; but Molly silenced her with a look.

"There's no use in overpaying her; she won't be half as civil,"
whispered Molly to Nora.

"It's five shillings you'll get," she repeated in a firm voice.
"Here, I have got the change; you can look in my purse."

"Molly opened her purse as she spoke. The woman, a Mrs. Terry by name,
did look in. She saw the shine of gold and several half-crowns.

"Well, to be sure!" she said. "But you'll promise not to get me into
a scrape?"

"We won't even ask you your name. You can let us out of the house in
time for us to catch the first train from Euston. We shall be off
and away before we are discovered."

"And we'll remember you all our lives if you'll help us," said Nora.
Then she added, tears filling her pretty eyes, "It's my father,
please, kind woman; he has been shot at and is very ill."

"And who wants to keep you from your father, you poor thing?" said
the woman. "Oh, if it's that, and there's no lovers in the question,
I don't mind helping you both. It don't do for young girls to be
wandering about the streets alone at night. You come with me,
honeys. I can't take you for nothing, but I'll give you supper and
breakfast, and the best bed I can, for five shillings."

Accordingly, in Mrs. Terry's company, the two girls left Waterloo
Station. She walked down a somewhat narrow side-street, crossed another,
and they presently found themselves in a little, old-fashioned square.
The square was very old indeed, belonging to quite a dead-and-gone
period of the world. The woman stopped at a house which once had been
large and stately; doubtless in days gone by it had sheltered goodly
personages and had listened to the laughter of the rich and well-to-do;
but in its old age the house was let out in tenements, and Mrs. Terry
owned a couple of rooms at the very top.

She took the girls up the dirty stairs, opened the door of a not
uncomfortable sitting room, and ushered them in.

"There now, honeys," she said; "the best I can do for you both is
the sofa for one and my bed for the other."

"No, no," said Nora, "we would not dream of taking your bed; and,
for that matter, I could not sleep," she added. "If you will let me
have a couple of chairs I shall lie down on them and wait as best I
can until the morning. Oh, I have often done it at home and thought
it great fun."

"Well, you must each have a bit of supper first; it don't do for
young girls to go to bed hungry, more particularly when they have a
journey before them. I'll get you some bread and cheese and a glass
of milk each--unless, indeed, you would prefer beer?"

"Oh, no, we would much rather have milk," said Molly.

The woman bustled about, and soon came in with a jug of milk, a
couple of glasses, some bread, and some indifferent butter.

"You can have the cheese if you really want it," she said.

"No; this will do beautifully," answered Nora.

"Well then, my dears, I'll leave you now for the night. The lamp
will burn all night. It will be lonely for young girls to be in the
dark; and I'll promise to call you at five o'clock. There's a train
leaves Euston between six and seven that you had better catch,
unless you want them as is hindering you from flight to stop you. I
am interested in this poor young lady who wants to see her father."

"Oh, thank you; you are a perfect darling!" said Nora. "I'll come
and see you some day when I am happy again, and tell you all about
it."

"Bless your kind heart, honey! I'm glad to be able to do something
for those who are in trouble. Now then, lie down and have a bit of
sleep. I'll wake you sure and certain, and you shan't stir, the two
of you, until you have had a hot cup of tea each."

Mrs. Terry was as good as her word. She called the girls in good
time, and gave them quite a comfortable breakfast before they
started. The tea was hot; the bread was good--what else did they
want?

Nora awoke from a very short and broken slumber.

"Soon I shall be back again," she thought. "No matter how changed
and ruined the place is, I shall be with him once more. Oh, my
darling, my heart's darling, I shall kiss you again! Oh! I am happy
at the thought."

Mrs. Terry herself accompanied them to Euston. It was too early to
get a cab; she asked them if they were good walkers. They said they
were. She took them by the shortest routes; and, somewhat tired, but
still full of a strange exultation, they found themselves at the
great station. Mrs. Terry saw them into their train, and with many
loudly uttered blessings started them on their journey. She would
not touch anything more than the five shillings, and tears were in
her eyes as she looked her last at them.

"God bless them, and particularly that little Irish girl. Haven't
she just got the cunningest, sweetest way in all the world?" thought
the good woman. "I do hope her father will be better when she gets
to him. Don't she love him just!"

Yes, it had been the most daring scheme, the wildest sort of
adventure, for two girls to undertake, and yet it was crowned with
success. They were too far on their journey for Mrs. Hartrick,
however much she might wish it, to rescue them. She might be as
angry as she pleased; but nothing now could get them back. She
accordingly did the very best thing she could do--telegraphed to Mr.
Hartrick to say that they had absolutely run away, but begged of him
to meet them in Dublin. This the good man did. He met them both on
the pier, received them quietly, without much demonstration; but
then, looking into Nora's anxious face, his own softened.

"You have come, Nora, and against my will," he said. "Are you
sorry?"

"Not a bit, Uncle George," she answered. "I would have come against
the wills of a thousand uncles if father were ill."

"Then I have nothing to say," he answered, with a smile, "at least
to you; but, Molly, I shall have something to talk to you about
presently."

"It was very good of you to meet us, father. Was mother terribly
angry?"

"What could you expect her to be? You have behaved very badly."

"I don't think so. I did the only possible thing to save Nora's
heart from breaking."

"It seems to me," said Mr. Hartrick slowly, "that you all think of
nothing but the heart of Nora. I am almost sorry now that I ever
asked her to come to us in England."

"Oh, it's home again; it's home again!" cried the Irish girl as she
paced up and down the platform. "Molly, do listen to the brogue.
Isn't it just delicious? Come along, and let's talk to this poor old
Irish beggar."

"Oh, but he doesn't look at all pleasant," said Molly, backing a
little.

"Bless the crayther, but he is pleasant," said Nora. "I must go and
have a chat with him." She caught hold of Molly's hand, and dragged
her to the edge of the pavement, where an old man, with almost blind
eyes, was seated in front of a large basket of rosy apples.

"And how are you this morning, father?" said Nora.

"Oh, then, it's the top of the morning to yez, honey," was the
instant reply. "And how is yourself?"

"Very well indeed," said Nora.

"Then it's I that am delighted to see yez, though see yez I can't.
Oh, then, I hope that it's a long life and plenty you'll have before
you, my sweet, dear, illigant young lady--a good bed to lie on, and
plenty to eat and drink. If you has them, what else could ail yez?
Good-by to yez; good-by to yez."

Nora slipped a couple of pence into his hand.

"The blessings of the Vargin and all the Saints be on your head,
miss. Oh! it's I that am glad to see yez. God's blessing on yez a
thousand times."

Nora took the old man's hand and wrung it. He raised the white
little hand to his lips and kissed it.

"There now," he said, "I have kissed yez; and these lips shan't see
wather again for many a long day--that they shan't. I wouldn't wash
off the taste of your hand, honey, for a bag of yellow gold."

"What an extraordinary man!" said Molly. "Have you known him all
your life?"

"Known him all my life!" said Nora. "Never laid eyes on him before;
that's the way we always talk to one another. Oh, I can tell you we
love each other here in Ireland."

"It seems so," answered Molly, in some astonishment. "Dear me! if
you address a total stranger so, how will you speak to those you
really love?"

"You wait and see," answered Nora, her dark-blue eyes shining, and a
mist of tears dimming their brightness; "you wait and see. Ah, it's
past words we are sometimes; but you wait and you'll soon see."

Mr. O'Shanaghgan was pronounced better, although Mr. Hartrick had to
admit that he was weak and fretful; and, now that Nora had come, it
was extremely likely that her presence would do her father a sight
of good.

"I knew it, Uncle George," she answered as they seated themselves in
the railway carriage preparatory to going back to O'Shanaghgan--"I
knew it, and that was why I came. You, uncle, are very wise," she
added; "and yours is a beautiful, neat, orderly country; and you are
very kind, and very clever; and you have been awfully good to the
Irish girl--awfully good; and she is very ignorant; and you know a
great deal; but one thing she does know best, and that is, the love
and the longing in the heart of her own dear father. Oh, hurrah! I'm
home again; I'm home again! Erin go bragh! Erin go bragh!"




CHAPTER XXVIII.


THE WILD IRISH.

The somewhat slow Irish train jogged along its way; it never put
itself out, did that special train, starting when it pleased, and
arriving when it chose at its destination. Its guard, Jerry by name,
was of a like mind with itself; there was no hurry about Jerry; he
took the world "aisy," as he expressed it.

"What's the good of fretting?" he used to say. "What can't be cured
must be endured. I hurry no man's cattle; and my train, she goes
when she likes, and I aint going to hurry her, not I."

On one occasion Jerry was known to remark to a somewhat belated
traveler:

"Why, then, miss, is it hurrying ye are to meet the train? Why,
then, you can take your time."

"Oh, Jerry!" said this anxious person, fixing her eyes on his face
in great excitement, "I forgot a most important parcel at a shop
half a mile away."

"Run and fetch it, then, honey," replied Jerry, "and I'll keep her a
bit longer."

This the lady accordingly did. When she returned, the heads of all
the other angry passengers were out of the windows expostulating
with Jerry as to the cause of the delay.

"Hurry up, miss," he said then. He popped her into a compartment,
and she, as he called the train, moved slowly out of the station.

At times, too, without the smallest provocation, Jerry would stop
this special train because a little "pigeen" had got off one of the
trucks and was running along the line. He and the porter shouted and
raced after the animal, caught it, and brought it back to the train.
On another occasion he calmly informed a rather important passenger,
"Ye had best get out here, for she's bust." "She" happened to be the
engine.

Into this train now got English Molly and Irish Nora. Mr. Hartrick
pronounced it quite the vilest service he had ever traveled by. He
began to grumble the moment he got into the train.

"It crawls," he said; "and it absolutely has the cheek to call
itself an express."

But Nora, with her head out of the window, was shouting to Jerry,
who came toward her full of blessings, anxious to shake her purty
white hand, and telling her that he was as glad as a shower of gould
to have her back again in the old country.

At last, however, the slow, very slow journey came to an end; and
just after sunset the party found themselves at the little wayside
station. Here a sight met Nora's eyes which displeased her
exceedingly. Instead of the old outside car which her father used to
drive, with the shabby old retainer, whose livery had long ago seen
its best days, there arrived a smart groom, in the newest of livery,
with a cockade in his hat. He touched his hat respectfully to Mr.
Hartrick, and gave a quick glance round at Nora and Molly.

"Is the brougham outside, Dennis?" was Mr. Hartrick's response.

"Yes, sir; it has been waiting for half an hour; the train is a bit
late, as usual, sir."

"You need not tell me that this train is ever in time," said Mr.
Hartrick. "Well, girls, come along; I told Dennis to meet us, and
here we are."

Molly thought nothing at all of the neat brougham, with its pair of
spirited grays; she was accustomed to driving in the better-class of
carriage all her life; but Nora turned first pale and then crimson.
She got into the carriage, and sat back in a corner; tears were
brimming to her eyes.

"This is the first. How am I to bear all the rest?" she said to
herself.

Mr. Hartrick, who had hoped that Nora would be pleased with the
brougham, with Dennis himself, with the whole very stylish get-up,
was mortified at her silence, and, taking her hand, tried to draw
her out.

"Well, little girl," he said, "I hope you will like the improvements
I have made in the Castle. I have done it all at your instigation,
remember."

"At my instigation?" cried Nora. "Oh, no, Uncle George, that you
have not."

He looked at her in some amazement, then closed his lips, and said
nothing more. Molly longed to get her father alone, in order to
explain Nora's peculiar conduct.

"It is difficult for an Englishman to understand her," thought
Molly. "I do, and I think her altogether charming; but father, who
has gone to this enormous expense and trouble, will be put out if
she does not show a little gratitude. I will tell her that she must;
I will take the very first opportunity."

And now they were turning in at the well-known gates. These gates
were painted white, whereas they had been almost reduced to their
native wood. The avenue was quite tidy, no weeds anywhere; but Nora
almost refused to look out. One by one the familiar trees seemed to
pass by her as she was bowled rapidly along in the new brougham, as
if they were so many ghosts saying good-by. But then there was the
roar--the real, real, grand roar--of the Atlantic in her ears. No
amount of tidiness, nothing could ever alter that sound.

"Oh, hurrah for the sea!" she said. She flung down the window and
popped out her head.

Mr. Hartrick nodded to Molly. "She will see a great deal more to
delight her than just the old ocean," he said.

Molly was silent. They arrived at the house; the butler was standing
on the steps, a nice, stylish-looking Englishman, in neat livery. He
came down, opened the carriage door, let down the steps, and offered
his arm to Nora to alight; but she pushed past him, bounded up the
steps, and the next moment found herself in her mother's arms.

"How do you do, my dear Nora?" said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan. "I am glad to
see you, dear, but also surprised. You acted in your usual
headstrong fashion."

"Oh, another time, mother. Mummy, how are you? I am glad to see you
again; but don't scold me now; just wait. I'll bear it all patiently
another time. How is the dad, mummy?--how is the dad?"

"Your father is doing nicely, Nora; there was not the slightest
occasion for you to hurry off and give such trouble and annoyance."

"I don't suppose I have given annoyance to father," said Nora.
"Where is he--in his old room?"

"No; we moved him upstairs to the best bedroom. We thought it the
wisest thing to do; he was in considerable pain."

"The best bedroom? Which is the best bedroom?" said Nora. "Your
room, mummy?"

"The room next to mine, darling. And just come and have a look at
the drawing room, Nora."

"I will go to father first," said Nora. "Don't keep me; I can't
stay."

She forgot Molly; she forgot her uncle; she even forgot her mother.
In a moment she was bounding upstairs over those thick Axminster
carpets--those awful carpets, into which her feet sank--down a
corridor, also heavily lined with Axminster, past great velvet
curtains, which seemed to stifle her as she pushed them aside, and
the next instant she had burst open a door.

In the old days this room had been absolutely destitute of
furniture. In the older days again it had been the spare room of
Castle O'Shanaghgan. Here hospitality had reigned; here guests of
every degree had found a hearty welcome, an invitation to stay as
long as they pleased, and the best that the Castle could afford for
their accommodation. When Nora had left O'Shanaghgan, the only thing
that had remained in the old room was a huge four-poster. Even the
mattress from this old bed had been removed; the curtains had been
taken from the windows; the three great windows were bare of both
blinds and curtains. Now a soft carpet covered the entire floor; a
neat modern Albert bed stood in a recess; there were heavy curtains
to the windows, and Venetian blinds, which were so arranged as to
temper the light. But the light of the sunset had already faded, and
it was twilight when Nora popped her wild, excited little face round
the door.

In the bed lay a gaunt figure, unshaven, with a beard of a week's
growth. Two great eyes looked out of caverns, then two arms were
stretched out, and Nora was clasped to her father's breast.

"Ah, then, I have you again; may God be praised for all His mercies,"
said the Squire in a great, deep hoarse voice.

Nora lay absolutely motionless for nearly half a minute in his arms,
then she raised herself.

"Ah," she said, "that was good. I hungered for it."

"And I also hungered for it, my darling," said the Squire. "Let me
look at you, Light o' the Morning; get a light somehow, and let me
see your bonny, bonny, sweet, sweet face."

"Ah, there's a fire in the grate," said Nora. "Are there any
matches?"

"Matches, bedad!" said the Squire; "there's everything that's
wanted. It's perfectly horrible. They are in a silver box, too,
bedad! What do we want with it? Twist up a bit of paper, do, Nora,
like a good girl, and light the glim the old way."

Nora caught at her father's humor at once. She had already flung off
her hat and jacket.

"To be sure I will," she said, "and with all the heart in the
world." She tore a long strip from the local paper, which was lying
on a chair near by, twisted it, lit it in the fire, and then applied
it to a candle.

"Only light one candle, for the love of heaven, child," said the
Squire. "I don't want to see too many of the fal-lals. Now then,
that's better; bring the light up to the bed. Oh, what I have
suffered with curtains, and carpets, and---"

"It's too awful, father," said Nora.

"That's it, child. That's the first cheery word I have heard for the
last six weeks--too awful I should think it is. They are smothering
me between them, Nora. I shall never get up and breathe the free air
again; but when you came in you brought a breath of air with you."

"Let's open the window. There's a gale coming up, We'll have some
air," said Nora.

"Why, then, Light o' the Morning, they say I'll get bronchitis if
the window is opened."

"They! Who are they?" said Nora, with scorn.

"Why, you wouldn't believe it, but they had a doctor down from
Dublin to see me. I don't believe he had a scrap of real Irish blood
in him, for he said I was to be nursed and messed over, and gruels
and all kinds of things brought to my bedside--I who would have
liked a fine potato with a pinch of salt better than anything under
the sun."

"You'll have your potato and your pinch of salt now that I am back,"
said Nora. "I mean to be mistress of this room."

The Squire gave a laugh.

"Isn't it lovely to hear her?" he said. "Don't it do me a sight of
good? There, open the window wide, Nora, before your mother comes
in. Oh, your mother is as pleased as Punch, and for her sake I'd
bear a good deal; but I am a changed man. The old times are gone,
never to return. Call this place Castle O'Shanaghgan. It may be
suitable for an English nobleman to live in, but it's not my style;
it's not fit for an Irish squire. We are free over here, and we
don't go in for luxuries and smotherations."

"Ah, father, I had to go through a great deal of that in England,"
said Nora. "It's awful to think that sort of life has come here; but
there--there's the window wide open. Do you feel a bit of a breeze,
dad?"

"To be sure I do; let me breathe it in. Prop me up in bed, Nora.
They said I was to lie flat on my back, but, bedad! I won't now that
you have come back."

Nora pushed some pillows under her father, and sat behind him to
support him, and at last she got him to sit up in bed with his face
turned to the wide-open window.

The blinds were rattling, the curtains were being blown into the
room, and the soft, wild sound of the sea fell on his ears.

"Ah, I'm better now," he said; "my lungs are cleared at bit. You had
best shut the window before your lady-mother comes in. And put the
candle so that I can't see the fal-lals too much," he continued;
"but place it so that I can gaze at your bonny face."

"You must tell me how you were hurt, father, and where."

"Bedad! then, I won't--not to-night. I want to have everything as
cheerful as possible to-night. My little girl has come back--the joy
of my heart, the light of my eyes, the top of the morning, and I'm
not going to fret about anything else."

"You needn't--you needn't," said Nora. "Oh! it is good to see you
again. There never was anybody like you in all the world. And you
were longing for Nora?"

"Now, don't you be fishing."

"But you were--wern't you?"

"To be sure--to be sure. Here, then, let me grip hold of your little
hand. I never saw such a tiny little paw. And so they haven't made a
fine English lady of you?"

"No, not they," said Nora.

"And you ran away to see your old dad? Why, then, you have the
spirit of the old O'Shanaghgans in you."

"Horses would not have kept me from you," said Nora.

"I might have known as much. How I laughed when your mother brought
in the telegram from your Aunt Grace this morning! And weren't they
in a fuss, and wasn't your Uncle George as cross as he could be, and
your mother rampaging up and down the room until I said, 'If you
want to bring on the fever, you'll go on like that, Ellen; and then
she went out, and I heard her talking to your uncle in the passage.
Clap, clap went their tongues. I never knew anything like English
people; they never talk a grain of anything amusing; that's the
worst of it. Why, it's the truth I'm telling you, darling; I haven't
had a hearty laugh since you left home. I'll do fine now. When they
were out of the room didn't I give way! I gave two loud guffaws,
that I did, when I thought of the trick you had played them. Ah,
you're a true daughter of the old race!"

Nora nestled up to her father, squeezing his hand now and then, and
looking into his face.

"We'll have a fine time to-morrow, and the next day, and the next
day, and the next," she said. "Oh! I am determined to be near you.
But isn't there one little place in the house left bare, father,
where we can go and have a happy moment?"

"Never a square inch," said the Squire, looking at her solemnly.
"It's too awful; even the attics have been cleared out and put in
order, for the servants, forsooth! says your Uncle George."

"What do we want so many retainers for? I am sure, now, if they
would take a good houseful of some of the poor villagers and plant
them up in those attics, there would be some sense in it."

"Oh, Nora, couldn't we get a bit of a place just like the old place,
all to ourselves?"

"I'll think it over," said Nora; "we'll manage somehow. We can't
stand feather-beds for ever and ever, father."

"Hark to her," said the Squire; "you're a girl after my own heart,
Light o' the Morning, and it's glad I am to see you, and to have you
back again."




CHAPTER XXIX.


ALTERATIONS.

While Nora and her father were talking together there came a sound
of a ponderous gong through the house.

"What's that?" said Nora, starting.

"You may well ask 'What's that?'" replied the Squire. "It's the
dinner-gong. There's dinner now in the evening, bedad! and up to
seven courses, by the same token. I sat out one or two of them; but,
bless my soul! I couldn't stand too much of that sort of thing. You
had best go and put on something fine. Your mother dresses in velvet
and silk and jewels for dinner. She looks wonderful; she is a very
fine woman indeed, is your mother. I am as proud as Punch of her;
but, all the same, it is too much to endure every day. She is
dressed for all the world as though she were going to a ball at the
Lord-Lieutenant's in Dublin. It's past standing; but you had best go
down and join 'em, Norrie."

"Not I. I am going to stay here," said Nora.

"No, no, darling pet; you had best go down, enjoy your dinner, and
come back and tell me about it. It will be fun to hear your
description. You mimic 'em as much as you like, Norrie; take 'em
off. Now, none of your coaxing and canoodling ways; off you go. You
shall come back later on, and tell me all about it. Oh, they are
stiff and stately, and they'll never know you and I are laughing at
'em up our sleeves. Now, be off with you."

So, unwillingly, Nora went. In the corridor outside she met her
cousin Molly.

"Why, you haven't begun to dress yet," said Molly; "and I'm going
down to dinner."

"Bother dress!" said Nora. "I am home again. Mother can't expect me
to dress." She rushed past her cousin. She was too excited to have
any sympathy then with English Molly. She ran up to her own room,
and stood with a sense of dismay on the threshold. It had always
been a beautiful room, with its noble proportions and its splendid
view; and it was now furnished exquisitely as well.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan had great taste. She had taken immense pains
with Nora's room; had thought it all out, and got it papered and
painted after a scheme of color of her own. The furniture was of
light wood--the room was fit to be the bower of a gracious and
lovely maiden; there were new books in the little bookcase hanging
up by the bedside. Everything was new and everything was beautiful.
There was no sense of bad taste about the room; it was furnished
harmoniously.

Nora stood and gazed at it, and her heart sank.

"Oh! it is kind of mother; it is beautiful," she said to herself;
"but am I never, never, never to lie down in the little old bed
again? Am I never to pour water out of the cracked old jug? Am I
never to look at myself in the distorted glass? Oh, dear! oh, dear!
how I did love looking at myself in the old glass, which made one
cheek much more swollen than the other, and one eyebrow went up a
quarter of an inch above the other, and my mouth was a little
crooked! It is perfectly horrid to know one's self all one's life
long with a swollen cheek and a crooked mouth, and then see
classical features without a scrap of fun in them. Oh, dear! But I
suppose I had best get ready."

So Nora washed her face and hands, and ran downstairs. The dining
room looked heavy and massive, and the footman and the butler
attended noiselessly; and Mr. Hartrick at the foot of the table and
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan at the head looked as stately a pair as could be
found in the length and breadth of the land.

Molly, nicely dressed in her dinner-frock, was quite in keeping with
the elder pair; but wild Nora, still wearing her gray traveling-dress,
felt herself out of place. Her cheeks were flushed with the excitement
of seeing her father; her hair was wild and disarranged. Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan looked at her all over with marked disapproval.

"Why, she looks scarcely pretty," thought the mother to herself.
"How tired and fagged she appears! Dear, dear! if after all the
trouble I have gone to, Nora disappoints me in this way, life will
really not be worth living."

But Mrs. O'Shanaghgan could scarcely suppress the joy which was now
filling her life. She was the mistress of a noble home; she was at
the head of quite the finest establishment in the county. Already
all the best county folk had called upon her several times.

It is sad to state that these great and rich people had rather
neglected the lady of the Castle during the last few years; but now
that she drove about behind a pair of horses, that her house was
refurnished, that wealth seemed to have filled all her coffers, she
was certainly worth attending to.

"Now that you have come back, Nora," said her mother in the course
of the meal, "I wish to say that I have several invitations for you,
and that Molly can accept too." She looked with kindness at Molly,
who, if only Nora had been happy, would have thoroughly enjoyed
herself.

"I must show you the drawing room after dinner, my dear," said her
mother. "It is really a magnificent room. And I must also show you
my morning room, and the library, and your father's smoking room."

"This is a splendid house, you know, Ellen," said Mr. Hartrick to
his sister, "and pays for doing up. Why, a house like this in any
habitable part of England would fetch a colossal fortune."

Nora sighed and shrugged her shoulders. Molly glanced at her, and
the word "Jehoshaphat!" was almost trembling on her lips. She kept
it back, however; she was wonderfully on her good behavior to-night.
At last the long and dreary meal came to an end. Nora could scarcely
suppress her yawns of utter weariness. She began to think of nothing
but lying down, shutting her eyes, and going into a long and
dreamless slumber.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan rose from the table and sailed out of the room. A
footman flung open the door for her, and Nora and Molly followed in
her wake.

"I'll be with you presently in the drawing room, Ellen," said Mr.
Hartrick to his sister; "but first of all I'll just go up and have a
smoke with O'Shanaghgan. You found your father much better to-night,
did you not, Nora?"

"I thought father looked very bad indeed," said Nora. She could not
add another word; she went out into the hall.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan took her hand, squeezing it up in a tight
pressure.

"You ought not to speak in that tone to your uncle," she said; "you
can never, never know all that he has done for us. He is the
noblest, the most generous, the best man in the world."

"Oh, I know all that, mother; I know all that," said Nora. She did
not add, "But for me he would never have done it. It was I who
inserted the thin edge of the wedge." Her tone was gentle; her
mother looked at her with a softening of her own face.

"Well, dear," she said, "your Uncle George has taken a great fancy
to you. Notwithstanding your eccentricities, Nora--and they are
considerable--he says you have the making of a fine girl. But come,
we must not neglect your cousin. Come here, dear Molly; you and Nora
will be interested in seeing what a beautiful place Castle
O'Shanaghgan is now."

Molly took hold of Nora's other hand, and they entered the drawing
room. It was lit with soft candles in many sconces; the blinds were
down; across the windows were drawn curtains of Liberty silk of the
palest, softest shade of rose. On the floor was a carpet of many
soft colors cunningly mingled. The walls were painted a pale
artistic green, large mirrors were introduced here and there, and
old family portraits, all newly framed, of dead and gone
O'Shanaghgans, hung on the painted walls. There were new tables,
knick-knacks--all the various things which constitute the drawing
room of an English lady.

Nora felt for one brief, passionate, angry moment that she was back
again at The Laurels; but then, seeing the light in her mother's
eyes, the pink flush of happiness on her cheeks, she restrained
herself.

"It makes you happy, mummy," she said, "and----"

"But what do you think of it, my darling?"

"It is a very beautiful room."

"Ah! that is right. I thought my little wildflower would appreciate
all these things when she came back again. Ah, Nora! you have been a
naughty, wild imp; but your father was delighted when he heard what
you had done. Of course I am terribly angry."

"No, you are not, mummy; you are pleased to see me again."

"I am glad to have you back, Nora; but as to being pleased, how
could I be? However, you can stay here for a fortnight or so now
that you have come; and then, when your dear uncle leaves us, you
and Molly can go back with him."

Nora did not say anything; but a stubborn look came into her face
which her mother knew of old.

From the drawing room they went to the library, which had also
undergone complete rejuvenation. The walls were laden with standard
works of different kinds; but some of the shelves were still empty.

"The old books, your uncle says, were of great value," said Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan, "and he sent them all to Dublin to be rebound. They
have not come back yet. They are to be bound in old calf, and will
suit the rest of the room. Is it not a magnificent apartment?"

Nora said "Yes" in a somewhat dreamy voice.

They then went to her mother's morning-room, and then on to the
Squire's smoking-room.

"They might at least have left this alone," thought the girl. "They
might at least have left this one room, where he could retire when
he felt quite choked by all the furniture in the rest of the place."

But even the Squire's smoking-room was changed into the smoking-room
of an English gentleman. There were deep easy-chairs covered with
leather; there were racks for pipes, and great brass dogs before the
fireplace; on the floor was a thick carpet. Nora felt as if she
longed to give it a savage kick.

At last the terrible ordeal of going through the--to her, utterly
ruined--house was over, and she and Molly found themselves alone.

"I will go up to your father for a few minutes," said Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan, nodding to Nora. "You and your cousin will like to
have a chat; and then, my dears, I should recommend you both to go
to bed as ear