dentity here of the
description with the coast near Laguna de Moron seems very clear. The cape
east of Laguna de Moron coincides with Cape Palmas, the Laguna de Moron
with the shoal river described by Columbus; and in the western point of
entrance, with the island of Cabrion opposite it, we recognize the two
projecting capes he speaks of, with what appeared to be a bay between
them. This all is a remarkable combination, difficult to be found any
where but in the same spot which Columbus visited and described. Further,
the coast from the port of San Salvador had run west to Rio de Mares, a
distance of seventeen leagues, and from Rio de Mares it had extended N. W.
fifteen leagues to Cabo de Palmos; all of which agrees fully with what has
been here supposed. The wind having shifted to north, which was contrary
to the course they had been steering, the vessels bore up and returned to
Rio de Mares.

On the 12th of November the ships sailed out of Rio de Mares to go in
quest of Babeque, an island believed to abound in gold, and to lie E. by
S. from that port. Having sailed eight leagues with a fair wind, they came
to a river, in which may be recognized the one which lies just west of
Punta Gorda. Four leagues farther they saw another, which they called Rio
del Sol. It appeared very large, but they did not stop to examine it, as
the wind was fair to advance. This we take to be the river now known as
Sabana. Columbus was now retracing his steps, and had made twelve leagues
from Riode Mares, but in going west from Port San Salvador to Rio de
Mares, he had run seventeen leagues. San Salvador, therefore, remains five
leagues east of Rio del Sol; and, accordingly, on reference to the chart,
we find Caravelas Grandes situated a corresponding distance from Sabana.

Having run six leagues from Rio del Sol, which makes in all eighteen
leagues from Rio de Mares, Columbus came to a cape which he called Cabo de
Cuba, probably from supposing it to be the extremity of that island. This
corresponds precisely in distance from Punta Curiana with the lesser
island of Guajava, situated near Cuba, and between which and the greater
Guajava Columbus must have passed in running in for Port San Salvador.
Either he did not notice it, from his attention being engrossed by the
magnificent island before him, or, as is also possible, his vessels may
have been drifted through the passage, which is two leagues wide, while
lying to the night previous to their arrival at Port San Salvador.

On the 13th of November, having hove to all night, in the morning the
ships passed a point two leagues in extent, and then entered into a gulf
that made into the S.S.W., and which Columbus thought separated Cuba from
Bohio. At the bottom of the gulf was a large basin between two mountains.
He could not determine whether or not this was an arm of the sea; for not
finding shelter from the north wind, he put to sea again. Hence it would
appear that Columbus must have partly sailed round the smaller Guajava,
which he took to be the extremity of Cuba, without being aware that a few
hours' sail would have taken him, by this channel, to Port San Salvador,
his first discovery in Cuba, and so back to the same Rio del Sol which he
had passed the day previous. Of the two mountains seen on both sides of
this entrance, the principal one corresponds with the peak called Alto de
Juan Daune which lies seven leagues west of Punta de Maternillos. The wind
continuing north, he stood east fourteen leagues from Cape Cuba, which we
have supposed the lesser island of Guajava. It is here rendered sure that
the point of little Guajava was believed by him to be the extremity of
Cuba; for he speaks of the land mentioned as lying to leeward of the
above-mentioned gulf as being the island of Bohio, and says that he
discovered twenty leagues of it running E.S.E. and W.N.W.

On the 14th November, having lain to all night with a N.E. wind, he
determined to seek a port, and, if he found none, to return to those which
he had left in the island of Cuba; for it will be remembered that all east
of little Guajava he supposed to be Bohio. He steered E. by S. therefore
six leagues, and then stood in for the land. Here he saw many ports and
islands; but as it blew fresh, with a heavy sea, he dared not enter, but
ran the coast down N.W. by W. for a distance of eighteen leagues, where he
saw a clear entrance and a port, in which he stood S.S.W. and afterwards
S.E., the navigation being all clear and open. Here Columbus beheld so
many islands that it was impossible to count them. They were very lofty,
and covered with trees. Columbus called the neighboring sea Mar de Nuestra
Senora, and to the harbor near the entrance to these islands he gave the
name of Puerto del Principe. This harbor he says he did not enter until
the Sunday following, which was four days after. This part of the text of
Columbus's journal is confused, and there are also anticipations, as if it
had been written subsequently, or mixed together in copying. It appears
evident, that while lying to the night previous, with the wind at N.E.,
the ships had drifted to the N.W., and been carried by the powerful
current of the Bahama channel far in the same direction. When they bore
up, therefore, to return to the ports which they had left in the island of
Cuba, they fell in to leeward of them, and now first discovered the
numerous group of islands of which Cayo Romano is the principal. The
current of this channel is of itself sufficient to have carried the
vessels to the westward a distance of 20 leagues, which is what they had
run easterly since leaving Cape Cuba, or Guajava, for it had acted upon
them during a period of thirty hours. There can be no doubt as to the
identity of these keys with those about Cayo Romano; for they are the only
ones in the neighborhood of Cuba that are not of a low and swampy nature,
but large and lofty. They inclose a free, open navigation, and abundance
of fine harbors, in late years the resort of pirates, who found security
and concealment for themselves and their prizes in the recesses of these
lofty keys. From the description of Columbus, the vessels must have
entered between the islands of Baril and Pacedon, and, sailing along Cayo
Romano on a S.E. course, have reached in another day their old cruising
ground in the neighborhood of lesser Guajava. Not only Columbus does not
tell us here of his having changed his anchorage amongst these keys, but
his journal does not even mention his having anchored at all, until the
return from the ineffectual search after Babeque. It is clear, from what
has been said, that it was not in Port Principe that the vessels anchored
on this occasion; but it could not have been very distant, since Columbus
went from the ships in his boats on the 18th November, to place a cross at
its entrance. He had probably seen the entrance from without, when sailing
east from Guajava on the 13th of November. The identity of this port with
the one now known as Neuvitas el Principe seems certain, from the
description of its entrance, Columbus, it appears, did not visit its
interior.

On the 19th November the ships sailed again, in quest of Babeque. At
sunset Port Principe bore S. S. W. distant seven leagues, and, having
sailed all night at N.E. by N. and until ten o'clock of the next day
(20th November), they had run a distance of fifteen leagues on that
course. The wind blowing from E.S.E., which was the direction in which
Babeqne was supposed to lie, and the weather being foul, Columbus
determined to return to Port Principe, which was then distant twenty-five
leagues. He did not wish to go to Isabella, distant only twelve leagues,
lest the Indians whom he had brought from San Salvador, which lay eight
leagues from Isabella, should make their escape. Thus, in sailing N.E. by
N. from near Port Principe, Columbus had approached within a short
distance of Isabella. That island was then, according to his calculations,
thirty-seven leagues from Port Principe; and San Salvador was forty-five
leagues from the same point. The first differs but eight leagues from the
truth, the latter nine; or from the actual distance of Neuvitas el
Principe from Isla Larga and San Salvador. Again, let us now call to mind
the course made by Columbus in going from Isabella to Cuba; it was first
W. S. W., then west, and afterwards S. S. W. Having consideration for the
different distances run on each, these yield a medium course not
materially different from S. W. Sailing then S. W. from Isabella, Columbus
had reached Port San Salvador, on the coast of Cuba. Making afterwards a
course of N.E. by N. from off Port Principe, he was going in the
direction of Isabella. Hence we deduce that Port San Salvador, on the
coast of Cuba, lay west of Port Principe, and the whole combination is
thus bound together and established. The two islands seen by Columbus at
ten o'clock of the same 20th November, must have been some of the keys
which lie west of the Jumentos. Running back towards Port Principe,
Columbus made it at dark, but found that he had been carried to the
westward by the currents. This furnishes a sufficient proof of the
strength of the current in the Bahama channel; for it will be remembered
that he ran over to Cuba with a fair wind. After contending for four days,
until the 24th November, with light winds against the force of these
currents, he arrived at length opposite the level island whence he had set
out the week before when going to Babeque.

We are thus accidentally informed that the point from which Columbus
started in search of Babeque was the same bland of Guajava the lesser,
which lies west of Neuvitas el Principe. Farther: at first he dared not
enter into the opening between the two mountains, for it seemed as though
the sea broke upon them; but having sent the boat ahead, the vessels
followed in at S. W. and then W. into a fine harbor. The level island lay
north of it, and with another island formed a secure basin capable of
sheltering all the navy of Spain. This level island resolves itself then
into our late Cape Cuba, which we have supposed to be little Guajava, and
the entrance east of it becom'es identical with the gulf above mentioned
which lay between two mountains, one of which we have supposed the Alto de
Juan Daune, and which gulf appeared to divide Cuba from Bohio. Our course
now becomes a plain one. On the 26th of November, Columbus sailed from
Santa Catalina (the name given by him to the port last described) at
sunrise, and stood for the cape at the S.E. which he called Cabo de Pico.
In this it is easy to recognize the high peak already spoken of as the
Alto de Juan Daune. Arrived off this, he saw another cape, distant fifteen
leagues, and still farther another five leagues beyond it, which he called
Cabo de Campana. The first must be that now known as Point Padre, the
second Point Mulas: their distances from Alto de Juan Daune are
underrated; but it requires no little experience to estimate correctly the
distances of the bold headlands of Cuba, as seen through the pure
atmosphere that surrounds the island.

Having passed Point Mulas in the night, on the 27th Columbus looked into
the deep bay that lies S.E. of it, and seeing the bold projecting
headland that makes out between Port Hipe and Port Banes, with those deep
bays on each side of it, he supposed it to be an arm of the sea dividing
one land from another with an island between them.

Having landed at Taco for a short time, Columbus arrived in the evening of
the 27th at Baracoa, to which he gave the name of Puerto Santo. From Cabo
del Pico to Puerto Santo, a distance of sixty leagues, he had passed no
fewer than nine good ports and five rivers to Cape Campana, and thence to
Puerto Santo eight more rivers, each with a good port; all of which may be
found on the chart between Alto de Juan Daune and Baracoa. By keeping near
the coast he had been assisted to the S.E. by the eddy current of the
Bahama channel. Sailing from Puerto Santo or Baracoa on the 4th of
December, he reached the extremity of Cuba the following day, and striking
off upon a wind to the S.E. in search of Babeque, which lay to the N.E.,
he came in sight of Bohio, to which he gave the name of Hispaniola.

On taking leave of Cuba, Columbus tells us that he had coasted it a
distance of 120 leagues. Allowing twenty leagues of this distance for his
having followed the undulations of the coast, the remaining 100 measured
from Point Maysi fall exactly upon Cabrion Key, which we have supposed the
western boundary of his discoveries.

The astronomical observations of Columbus form no objection to what has
been here advanced; for he tells us that the instrument which he made use
of to measure the meridian altitudes of the heavenly bodies was out of
order and not to be depended upon. He places his first discovery,
Guanahani, in the latitude of Ferro, which is about 27 deg. 30' north. San
Salvador we find in 24 deg. 30', and Turk's Island in 21 deg. 30': both are very
wide of the truth, but it is certainly easier to conceive an error of
three than one of six degrees.

Laying aside geographical demonstration, let us now examine how historical
records agree with the opinion here supported, that the island of San
Salvador was the first point where Columbus came in contact with the New
World. Herrera, who is considered the most faithful and authentic of
Spanish historians, wrote his History of the Indies towards the year 1600.
In describing the voyage of Juan Ponce de Leon, made to Florida in 1512,
he makes the following remarks: [333] "Leaving Agnada in Porto Rico, they
steered to the N. W. by N., and in five days arrived at an island called
El Viejo, in latitude 22 deg. 30' north. The next day they arrived at a small
island of the Lucayos, called Caycos. On the eighth day they anchored at
another island called Yaguna in 24 deg., on the eighth day out from Porto
Kico. Thence they passed to the island of Mannega, in 24 deg. 30', and on the
eleventh day they reached Guanahani, which is in 25 deg. 40' north. This
island of Guanahani was the first discovered by Columbus on his first
voyage, and which he called San Salvador." This is the substance of the
remarks of Herrera, and is entirely conclusive as to the location of San
Salvador. The latitudes, it is true, are all placed higher than we now
know them to be; that of San Salvador being such as to correspond with
no other land than that now known as the Berry Islands, which are seventy
leagues distant from the nearest coast of Cuba: whereas Columbus tells us
that San Salvador was only forty-five leagues from Port Principe. But in
those infant days of navigation, the instruments for measuring the
altitudes of the heavenly bodies, and the tables of declinations for
deducing the latitude, must have been so imperfect as to place the most
scientific navigator of the time below the most mechanical one of the
present.

The second island arrived at by Ponce de Leon, in his northwestern course,
was one of the Caycos; the first one, then, called El Viejo, must have
been Turk's Island, which lies S.E. of the Caycos. The third island they
came to was probably Mariguana; the fourth, Crooked Island; and the fifth,
Isla Larga. Lastly they came to Guanahani, the San Salvador of Columbus.
If this be supposed identical with Turk's Island, where do we find the
succession of islands touched at by Ponce de Leon on his way from Porto
Rico to San Salvador? [334] No stress has been laid, in these
remarks, on the identity of name which has been preserved to San Salvador,
Concepcion, and Port Principe, with those given by Columbus, though
traditional usage is of vast weight in such matters. Geographical proof,
of a conclusive kind it is thought, has been advanced, to enable the world
to remain in its old hereditary belief that the present island of San
Salvador is the spot where Columbus first set foot upon the New World.
Established opinions of the kind should not be lightly molested. It is a
good old rule, that ought to be kept in mind in curious research as well
as territorial dealings, "Do not disturb the ancient landmarks."

_Note to the Revised Edition of 1848_.--The Paron de Humboldt, in his
"Examen critique de l'histoire de la geographie du nouveau continent,"
published in 1837, speaks repeatedly in high terms of the ability
displayed in the above examination of the route of Columbus, and argues at
great length and quite conclusively in support of the opinion contained in
it. Above all, he produces a document hitherto unknown, and the great
importance of which had been discovered by M. Valeknaer and himself in
1832. This is a map made in 1500 by that able mariner Juan de la Cosa, who
accompanied Columbus in his second voyage and sailed with other of the
discoverers. In this map, of which the Baron de Humboldt gives an
engraving, the islands as laid down agree completely with the bearings and
distances given in the journal of Columbus, and establishes the identity
of San Salvador, or Cat Island, and Guanahani.

"I feel happy," says M. de Humboldt, "to be enabled to destroy the
incertitudes (which rested on this subject) by a document as ancient as it
is unknown; a document which confirms irrevocably the arguments which Mr.
Washington Irving has given in his work against the hypotheses of the
Turk's Island." In the present revised edition the author feels at liberty
to give the merit of the very masterly paper on the route of Columbus,
where it is justly due. It was furnished him at Madrid by the late
commander Alexander Slidell Mackenzie, of the United States navy, whose
modesty shrunk from affixing his name to an article so calculated to do
him credit, and which has since challenged the high eulogiums of men of
nautical science.




No. XVIII.

Principles upon which the Sums Mentioned in This Work Have Been Reduced
into Modern Currency.



In the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella the mark of silver, which was
equal to 8 ounces or to 50 castellanos, was divided into 65 reals, and
each real into 34 maravedis; so that there were 2210 maravedis in the mark
of silver. Among other silver coins there was the real of 8, which
consisting of 8 reals, was, within a small fraction, the eighth part of a
mark of silver, or one ounce. Of the gold coins then in circulation the
castellano or _dobla de la vanda_ was worth 490 maravedis, and the
ducado 383 maravedis.

If the value of the maravedi had remained unchanged in Spain down to the
present day, it would be easy to reduce a sum of the time of Ferdinand and
Isabella into a correspondent sum of current money; but by the successive
depreciations of the coin of Vellon, or mixed metals, issued since that
period, the _real_ and maravedi of Vellon, which had replaced the
ancient currency, were reduced, towards the year 1700, to about a third of
the old _real_ and maravedi, now known as the _real_ and maravedi
of silver. As, however, the ancient piece of 8 reals was equal
approximately to the ounce of silver, and the duro, or dollar of the
present day, is likewise equal to an ounce, they may be considered
identical. Indeed, in Spanish America, the dollar, instead of being
divided into 20 reals, as in Spain, is divided into only 8 parts called
reals, which evidently represent the real of the time of Ferdinand and
Isabella, as the dollar does the real of 8. But the ounce of silver was
anciently worth 276-1/4 maravedis; the dollar, therefore, is likewise
equal to 276 1/4 maravedis. By converting then the sums mentioned in this
work into maravedis, they have been afterwards reduced into dollars by
dividing by 276 1/4.

There is still, however, another calculation to be made, before we can
arrive at the actual value of any sum of gold and silver mentioned in
former times. It is necessary to notice the variation which has taken
place in the value of the metals themselves. In Europe, previous to the
discovery of the New World, an ounce of gold commanded an amount of food
or labor which would cost three ounces at the present day; hence an ounce
of gold was then estimated at three times its present value. At the same
time an ounce of silver commanded an amount which at present costs 4
ounces of silver. It appears from this, that the value of gold and silver
varied with respect to each other, as well as with respect to all other
commodities. This is owing to there having been much more silver brought
from the New World, with respect to the quantity previously in
circulation, than there has been of gold. In the 15th century one ounce of
gold was equal to about 12 of silver; and now, in the year 1827, it is
exchanged against 16.

Hence giving an idea of the relative value of the sums mentioned in this
work, it has been found necessary to multiply them by three when in gold,
and by four when expressed in silver. [335]

It is expedient to add that the dollar is reckoned in this work at 100
cents of the United States of North America, and four shillings and
sixpence of England.




No. XIX.

Prester John:



Said to be derived from the Persian _Prestegani_ or
_Perestigani_, which signifies apostolique; or _Preschtak-Geham_,
angel of the world. It is the name of a potent Christian monarch of
shadowy renown, whose dominions were placed by writers of the middle ages
sometimes in the remote parts of Asia and sometimes in Africa, and of
whom such contradictory accounts were given by the travelers of those days
that the very existence either of him or his kingdom carne to he
considered doubtful. It now appears to be admitted, that there really
was such a potentate in a remote part of Asia. He was of the Nestorian
Christians, a sect spread throughout Asia, and taking its name and origin
from Nestorius, a Christian patriarch of Constantinople.

The first vague reports of a Christian potentate in the interior of Asia,
or, as it was then called, India, were brought to Europe by the Crusaders,
who it is supposed gathered them from the Syrian merchants who traded to
the very confines of China.

In subsequent ages, when the Portuguese in their travels and voyages
discovered a Christian king among the Abyssinians, called Baleel-Gian,
they confounded him with the potentate already spoken of. Nor was the
blunder extraordinary, since the original Prester John was said to reign
over a remote part of India; and the ancients included in that name
Ethiopia and all the regions of Africa and Asia bordering on the Red Sea
and on the commercial route from Egypt to India.

Of the Prester John of India we have reports furnished by William
Ruysbrook, commonly called Rubruquis, a Franciscan friar sent by Louis IX,
about the middle of the thirteenth century, to convert the Grand Khan.
According to him, Prester John was originally a Nestorian priest, who on
the death of the sovereign made himself king of the Naymans, all Nestorian
Christians. Carpini, a Franciscan friar, sent by pope Innocent in 1245 to
convert the Mongols of Persia, says, that Ocoday, one of the sons of
Ghengis Khan of Tartary, marched with an army against the Christians of
Grand India. The king of that country, who was called Prester John, came
to their succor. Having had figures of men made of bronze, he had them
fastened on the saddles of horses, and put fire within, with a man behind
with a bellows. When they came to battle these horses were put in the
advance, and the men who were seated behind the figures threw something
into the fire, and blowing with their bellows, made such a smoke that the
Tartars were quite covered with it. They then fell on them, dispatched
many with their arrows, and put the rest to flight.

Marco Polo (1271) places Prester John near the great wall of China, to the
north of Chan-si, in Teudich, a populous region full of cities and
castles.

Mandeville (1332) makes Prester sovereign of upper India (Asia), with four
thousand islands tributary to him.

When John II, of Portugal, was pushing his discoveries along the African
coast, he was informed that 350 leagues to the east of the kingdom of
Benin, in the profound depths of Africa, there was a puissant monarch,
called Ogave, who had spiritual and temporal jurisdiction over all the
surrounding kings.

An African prince assured him, also, that to the east of Timbuctoo there
was a sovereign who professed a religion similar to that of the
Christians, and was king of a Mosaic people.

King John now supposed he had found traces of the real Prester John, with
whom he was eager to form an alliance religious as well as commercial. In
1487 he sent envoys by land in quest of him. One was a gentleman of his
household, Pedro de Covilham; the other, Alphonso de Paiva. They went by
Naples to Rhodes, thence to Cairo, thence to Aden on the Arabian Gulf
above the mouth of the Red Sea.

Here they separated with an agreement to rendezvous at Cairo. Alphonso de
Paiva sailed direct for Ethiopia; Pedro de Covilham for the Indies. The
latter passed to Calicut and Goa, where he embarked for Sofala on the
eastern coast of Africa, thence returned to Aden, and made his way back to
Cairo. Here he learned that his coadjutor, Alphonso de Paiva, had died in
that city. He found two Portuguese Jews waiting for him with fresh orders
from king John not to give up his researches after Prester John until he
found him. One of the Jews he sent back with a journal and verbal accounts
of his travels. With the other he set off again for Aden; thence to Ormuz,
at the entrance of the Gulf of Persia, where all the rich merchandise of
the East was brought to be transported thence by Syria and Egypt into
Europe.

Having taken note of every thing here, he embarked on the Red Sea, and
arrived at the court of an Abyssinian prince named Escander, (the Arabic
version of Alexander,) whom he considered the real Prester John. The
prince received him graciously, and manifested a disposition to favor the
object of his embassy, but died suddenly, and his successor Naut refused
to let Covilham depart, but kept him for many years about his person, as
his prime councilor, lavishing on him wealth and honors. After all, this
was not the real Prester John; who, as has been observed, was an Asiatic
potentate.




No. XX.

Marco Polo.

[336]



The travels of Marco Polo, or Paolo, furnish a key to many parts of the
voyages and speculations of Columbus, which without it would hardly be
comprehensible.

Marco Polo was a native of Venice, who, in the thirteenth century, made a
journey into the remote, and, at that time, unknown regions of the East,
and filled all Christendom with curiosity by his account of the countries
he had visited. He was preceded in his travels by his father Nicholas and
his uncle Maffeo Polo. These two brothers were of an illustrious family in
Venice, and embarked, about the year 1255, on a commercial voyage to the
East. Having traversed the Mediterranean and through the Bosphorus, they
stopped for a short time at Constantinople, which city had recently been
wrested from the Greeks by the joint arms of France and Venice. Here they
disposed of their Italian merchandise, and, having purchased a stock of
jewelry, departed on an adventurous expedition to trade with the western
Tartars, who, having overrun many parts of Asia and Europe, were settling
and forming cities in the vicinity of the Wolga. After traversing the
Euxine to Soldaia, (at present Sudak,) a port in the Crimea, they
continued on, by land and water, until they reached the military court, or
rather camp, of a Tartar prince, named Barkah, a descendant of Ghengis
Khan, into whose hands they confided all their merchandise. The barbaric
chieftain, while he was dazzled by their precious commodities, was
flattered by the entire confidence in his justice manifested by these
strangers. He repaid them with princely munificence, and loaded them with
favors during a year that they remained at his court. A war breaking out
between their patron and his cousin Hulagu, chief of the eastern Tartars,
and Barkah being defeated, the Polos were embarrassed how to extricate
themselves from the country and return home in safety. The road to
Constantinople being cut off by the enemy, they took a circuitous route,
round the head of the Caspian Sea, and through the deserts of Transoxiana,
until they arrived in the city of Bokhara, where they resided for three
years.

While here there arrived a Tartar nobleman who was on an embassy from the
victorious Hulagu to his brother the Grand Khan. The ambassador became
aquainted with the Venetians, and finding them to be versed in the Tartar
tongue and possessed of curious and valuable knowledge, he prevailed upon
them to accompany him to the court of the emperor, situated, as they
supposed, at the very extremity of the East.

After a march of several months, being delayed by snow-storms and
inundations, they arrived at the court of Cublai, otherwise called the
Great Khan, which signifies King of Kings, being the sovereign potentate
of the Tartars. This magnificent prince received them with great
distinction; he made inquiries about the countries and princes of the
West, their civil and military government, and the manners and customs of
the Latin nation. Above all, he was curious on the subject of the
Christian religion. He was so much struck by their replies, that after
holding a council with the chief persons of his kingdom, he entreated the
two brothers to go on his part as ambassadors to the pope, to entreat him
to send a hundred learned men well instructed in the Christian faith, to
impart a knowledge of it to the sages of his empire. He also entreated
them to bring him a little oil from the lamp of our Saviour, in Jerusalem,
which he concluded must have marvelous virtues. It has been supposed, and
with great reason, that under this covert of religion, the shrewd Tartar
sovereign veiled motives of a political nature. The influence of the pope
in promoting the crusades had caused his power to be known and respected
throughout the East; it was of some moment, therefore, to conciliate his
good-will. Cublai Khan had no bigotry nor devotion to any particular
faith, and probably hoped, by adopting Christianity, to make it a common
cause between himself and the warlike princes of Christendom, against his
and their inveterate enemies, the soldan of Egypt and the Saracens.

Having written letters to the pope in the Tartar language, he delivered
them to the Polos, and appointed one of the principal noblemen of his
court to accompany them in their mission. On their taking leave he
furnished them with a tablet of gold on which was engraved the royal arms;
this was to serve as a passport, at sight of which the governors of the
various provinces were to entertain them, to furnish them with escorts
through dangerous places, and render them all other necessary services at
the expense of the Great Khan.

They had scarce proceeded twenty miles, when the nobleman who accompanied
them fell ill, and they were obliged to leave him, and continue on their
route. Their golden passport procured them every attention and facility
throughout the dominions of the Great Khan. They arrived safely at Acre,
in April, 1269. Here they received news of the recent death of Pope
Clement IV, at which they were, much grieved, fearing it would cause delay
in their mission. There was at that time in Acre a legate of the holy
chair, Tebaldo di Vesconti, of Placentia, to whom they gave an account of
their embassy. He heard them with great attention and interest, and
advised them to await the election of a new pope, which must soon take
place, before they proceeded to Rome on their mission. They determined in
the interim to make a visit to their families, and accordingly departed
for Negropont, and thence to Venice, where great changes had taken place
in their domestic concerns, during their long absence. The wife of
Nicholas, whom he had left pregnant, had died, in giving birth to a son,
who had been named Marco.

As the contested election for the new pontiff remained pending for two
years, they were uneasy, lest the emperor of Tartary should grow impatient
at so long a postponement of the conversion of himself and his people;
they determined, therefore, not to wait the election of a pope, but to
proceed to Acre, and get such dispatches and such ghostly ministry for the
Grand Khan, as the legate could furnish. On the second journey, Nicholas
Polo took with him his son Marco, who afterwards wrote an account of these
travels.

They were again received with great favor by the legate Tebaldo, who,
anxious for the success of their mission, furnished them with letters to
the Grand Khan, in which the doctrines of the Christian faith were fully
expounded. With these, and with a supply of the holy oil from the
sepulchre, they once more set out in September, 1271, for the remote parts
of Tartary. They had not long departed, when missives arrived from Rome,
informing the legate of his own election to the holy chair. He took the
name of Gregory X, and decreed that in future, on the death of a pope, the
cardinals should be shut up in conclave until they elected a successor; a
wise regulation, which has since continued, enforcing a prompt decision,
and preventing intrigue.

Immediately on receiving intelligence of his election, he dispatched a
courier to the king of Armenia, requesting that the two Venetians might be
sent back to him, if they had not departed. They joyfully returned, and
were furnished with new letters to the Khan. Two eloquent friars, also,
Nicholas Vincenti and Gilbert de Tripoli, were sent with them, with powers
to ordain priests and bishops and to grant absolution. They had presents
of crystal vases, and other costly articles, to deliver to the Grand Khan;
and thus well provided, they once more set forth on their journey.
[337]

Arriving in Armenia, they ran great risk of their lives from the war which
was raging, the soldan of Babylon having invaded the country. They took
refuge for some time with the superior of a monastery. Here the two
reverend fathers, losing all courage to prosecute so perilous an
enterprise, determined to remain, and the Venetians continued their
journey. They were a long time on the way, and exposed to great hardships
and sufferings from floods and snow-storms, it being the winter season. At
length they reached a town in the dominions of the Khan. That potentate
sent officers to meet them at forty days' distance from the court, and to
provide quarters for them during their journey. [338] He received them
with great kindness, was highly gratified with the result of their
mission and with the letters of the pope, and having received from them
some oil from the lamp of the holy sepulchre, he had it locked up, and
guarded it as a precious treasure.

The three Venetians, father, brother and son, were treated with such
distinction by the Khan, that the courtiers were filled with jealousy.
Marco soon, however, made himself popular, and was particularly esteemed
by the emperor. He acquired the four principal languages of the country,
and was of such remarkable capacity, that, notwithstanding his youth, the
Khan employed him in missions and services of importance, in various parts
of his dominions, some to the distance of even six months' journey. On
these expeditions he was industrious in gathering all kinds of information
respecting that vast empire; and from notes and minutes made for the
satisfaction of the Grand Khan, he afterwards composed the history of his
travels.

After about seventeen years' residence in the Tartar court the Venetians
felt a longing to return to their native country. Their patron was
advanced in age and could not survive much longer, and after his death,
their return might be difficult, if not impossible. They applied to the
Grand Khan for permission to depart, but for a time met with a refusal,
accompanied by friendly upbraidings. At length a singular train of events
operated in their favor; an embassy arrived from a Mogul Tartar prince,
who ruled in Persia, and who was grand-nephew to the emperor. The object
was to entreat, as a spouse, a princess of the imperial lineage. A
granddaughter of Cublai Klian, seventeen years of age, and of great beauty
and accomplishments, was granted to the prayer of the prince, and departed
for Persia with the ambassadors, and with a splendid retinue, but after
traveling for some months, was obliged to return on account of the
distracted state of the country.

The ambassadors despaired of conveying the beautiful bride to the arms of
her expecting bridegroom, when Marco Polo returned from a voyage to
certain of the Indian islands. His representations of the safety of a
voyage in those seas, and his private instigations, induced the
ambassadors to urge the Grand Khan for permission to convey the princess
by sea to the gulf of Persia, and that the Christians might accompany
them, as being best experienced in maritime affairs. Cublai Khan consented
with great reluctance, and a splendid fleet was fitted out and victualed
for two years, consisting of fourteen ships of four masts, some of which
had crews of two hundred and fifty men.

On parting with the Venetians the munificent Khan gave them rich presents
of jewels, and made them promise to return to him after they had visited
their families. He authorized them to act as his ambassadors to the
principal courts of Europe, and, as on a former occasion, furnished them
with tablets of gold, to serve, not merely as passports, but as orders
upon all commanders in his territories for accommodations and supplies.

They set sail therefore in the fleet with the oriental princess and her
attendants and the Persian ambassadors. The ships swept along the coast of
Cochin China, stopped for three months at a port of the island of Sumatra
near ihe western entrance of the straits of Malacca, waiting for the
change of the monsoon to pass the bay of Bengal. Traversing this vast
expanse, they touched at the island of Ceylon and then crossed the strait
to the southern part of the great peninsula of India. Thence sailing up
the Pirate coast, as it is called, the fleet entered the Persian gulf and
arrived at the famous port of Olmuz, where it is presumed the voyage
terminated, after eighteen months spent in traversing the Indian seas.

Unfortunately for the royal bride who was the object of this splendid
naval expedition, the bridegroom, the Mogul king, had died some time
before her arrival, leaving a son named Ghazan, during whose minority the
government was administered by his uncle Kai-Khatu. According to the
directions of the regent, the princess was delivered to the youthful
prince, son of her intended spouse. He was at that time at the head of an
army on the borders of Persia. He was of a diminutive stature, but of a
great soul, and, on afterwards ascending the throne, acquired renown for
his talents and virtues. What became of the Eastern bride, who had
traveled so far in quest of a husband, is not known; but every thing
favorable is to be inferred from the character of Ghazan.

The Polos remained some time in the court of the regent, and then
departed, with fresh tablets of gold given by that prince, to carry them
in safety and honor through his dominions. As they had to traverse many
countries where the traveler is exposed to extreme peril, they appeared on
their journeys as Tartars of low condition, having converted all their
wealth into precious stones and sewn them up in the folds and linings of
their coarse garments. They had a long, difficult, and perilous journey to
Trebizond, whence they proceeded to Constantinople, thence to Negropont,
and, finally, to Venice, where they arrived in 1295, in good health, and
literally laden with riches. Having heard during their journey of the
death of their old benefactor Cublai Khan, they considered their
diplomatic functions at an end, and also that they were absolved from
their promise to return to his dominions.

Ramusio, in his preface to the narrative of Marco Polo, gives a variety of
particulars concerning their arrival, which he compares to that of
Ulysses. When they arrived at Venice, they were known by nobody. So many
years had elapsed since their departure, without any tidings of them, that
they were either forgotten or considered dead. Besides, their foreign
garb, the influence of southern suns, and the similitude which men acquire
to those among whom they reside for any length of time, had given them the
look of Tartars rather than Italians.

They repaired to their own house, which was a noble palace, situated in
the street of St. Giovanni Chrisostomo, and was afterwards known by the
name of la Corte de la Milione. They found several of their relatives
still inhabiting it; but they were slow in recollecting the travelers, not
knowing of their wealth, and probably considering them, from their coarse
and foreign attire, poor adventurers returned to be a charge upon their
families. The Polos, however, took an effectual mode of quickening the
memories of their friends, and insuring themselves a loving reception.
They invited them all to a grand banquet. When their guests arrived, they
received them richly dressed in garments of crimson satin of oriental
fashion. When water had been served for the washing of hands, and the
company were summoned to table, the travelers, who had retired, appeared
again in still richer robes of crimson damask. The first dresses were cut
up and distributed among the servants, being of such length that they
swept the ground, which, says Ramusio, was the mode in those days, with
dresses worn within doors. After the first course, they again retired and
came in dressed in crimson velvet; the damask dresses being likewise given
to the domestics, and the same was done at the end of the feast with their
velvet robes, when they appeared in the Venetian dress of the day. The
guests were lost in astonishment, and could not comprehend the meaning of
this masquerade. Having dismissed all the attendants, Marco Polo brought
forth the coarse Tartar dresses in which they had arrived. Slashing them
in several places with a knife, and ripping open the seams and lining,
there tumbled forth rubies, sapphires, emeralds, diamonds, and other
precious stones, until the whole table glittered with inestimable wealth,
acquired from the munificence of the Grand Khan, and conveyed in this
portable form through the perils of their long journey.

The company, observes Ramusio, were out of their wits with amazement, and
now clearly perceived what they had at first doubted, that these in very
truth were those honored and valiant gentlemen the Polos, and,
accordingly, paid them great respect and reverence.

The account of this curious feast is given by Ramusio, on traditional
authority, having heard it many times related by the illustrious Gasparo
Malipiero, a very ancient gentleman, and a senator, of unquestionable
veracity, who had it from his father, who had it from his grandfather, and
so on up to the fountain-head.

When the fame of this banquet and of the wealth of the travelers came to
be divulged throughout Venice, all the city, noble and simple, crowded to
do honor to the extraordinary merit of the Polos. Maffeo, who was the
eldest, was admitted to the dignity of the magistracy. The youth of the
city came every day to visit and converse with Marco Polo, who was
extremely amiable and communicative. They were insatiable in their
inquiries about Cathay and the Grand Khan, which he answered with great
courtesy, giving details with which they were vastly delighted, and, as he
always spoke of the wealth of the Grand Khan in round numbers, they gave
him the name of Messer Marco Milioni.

Some months after their return, Lampa Doria, commander of the Genoese
navy, appeared in the vicinity of the island of Curzola with seventy
galleys. Andrea Dandolo, the Venetian admiral, was sent against him. Marco
Polo commanded a galley of the fleet. His usual good fortune deserted him.
Advancing the first in the line with his galley, and not being properly
seconded, he was taken prisoner, thrown in irons, and carried to Genoa.
Here he was detained for a long time in prison, and all offers of ransom
rejected. His imprisonment gave great uneasiness to his father and uncle,
fearing that he might never return. Seeing themselves in this unhappy
state, with so much treasure and no heirs, they consulted together. They
were both very old men; but Nicolo, observes Ramusio, was of a galliard
complexion; it was determined he should take a wife. He did so; and, to
the wonder of his friends, in four years had three children.

In the meanwhile, the fame of Marco Polo's travels had circulated in
Genoa. His prison was daily crowded with nobility, and he was supplied
with every thing that could cheer him in his confinement. A Genoese
gentleman, who visited him every day, at length prevailed upon him to
write an account of what he had seen. He had his papers and journals sent
to him from Venice, and, with the assistance of his friend, or, as some
will have it, his fellow-prisoner, produced the work which afterwards made
such noise throughout the world.

The merit of Marco Polo at length procured him his liberty. He returned to
Venice, where he found his father with a house full of children. He took
it in good part, followed the old man's example, married, and had two
daughters, Moretta and Fantina. The date of the death of Marco Polo is
unknown; he is supposed to have been, at the time, about seventy years of
age. On his death-bed he is said to have been exhorted by his friends to
retract what he had published, or, at least, to disavow those parts
commonly regarded as fictions. He replied indignantly that so far from
having exaggerated, he had not told one half of the extraordinary things
of which he had been an eye-witness.

Marco Polo died without male issue. Of the three sons of his father by the
second marriage, one only had children, viz. five sons and one daughter.
The sons died without leaving issue; the daughter inherited all her
father's wealth, and married into the noble and distinguished house of
Trevesino. Thus the male line of the Polos ceased in 1417, and the family
name was extinguished.

Such are the principal particulars known of Marco Polo; a man whose
travels for a long time made a great noise in Europe, and will be found to
have had a great effect on modern discovery. His splendid account of the
extent, wealth, and population of the Tartar territories filled every one
with admiration. The possibility of bringing all those regions under the
dominion of the church, and rendering the Grand Khan an obedient vassal to
the holy chair, was for a long time a favorite topic among the
enthusiastic missionaries of Christendom, and there were many
saints-errant who undertook to effect the conversion of this magnificent
infidel.

Even at the distance of two centuries, when the enterprises for the
discovery of the new route to India had set all the warm heads of Europe
madding about these remote regions of the East, the conversion of the
Grand Khan became again a popular theme; and it was too speculative and
romantic an enterprise not to catch the vivid imagination of Columbus. In
all his voyages, he will be found continually to be seeking after the
territories of the Grand Khan, and even after his last expedition, when
nearly worn out by age, hardships, and infirmities, he offered, in a
letter to the Spanish monarchs, written from a bed of sickness, to conduct
any missionary to the territories of the Tartar emperor, who would
undertake his conversion.




No. XXI.

The Work of Marco Polo.



The work of Marco Polo is stated by some to have been originally written
in Latin, [339] though the most probable opinion is that it was written in
the Venetian dialect of the Italian. Copies of it in manuscript were
multiplied and rapidly circulated; translations were made into various
languages, until the invention of printing enabled it to be widely
diffused throughout Europe. In the course of these translations and
successive editions, the original text, according to Purchas, has been
much vitiated, and it is probable many extravagances in numbers and
measurements with which Marco Polo is charged may be the errors of
translators and printers.

When the work first appeared, it was considered by some as made up of
fictions and extravagances, and Vossius assures us that even after the
death of Marco Polo he continued to be a subject of ridicule among the
light and unthinking, insomuch that he was frequently personated at
masquerades by some wit or droll, who, in his feigned character, related
all kinds of extravagant fables and adventures. His work, however, excited
great attention among thinking men, containing evidently a fund of
information concerning vast and splendid countries, before unknown to the
European world. Vossius assures us that it was at one time highly esteemed
by the learned. Francis Pepin, author of the Brandenburgh version, styles
Polo a man commendable for his piety, prudence, and fidelity. Athanasius
Kircher, in his account of China, says that none of the ancients have
described the kingdoms of the remote East with more exactness. Various
other learned men of past times have borne testimony to his character, and
most of the substantial parts of his work have been authenticated by
subsequent travelers. The most able and ample vindication of Marco Polo,
however, is to be found in the English translation of his work, with
copious notes and commentaries, by William Marsden, F. R. S. He has
diligently discriminated between what Marco Polo relates from his own
observation, and what he relates as gathered from others; he points out
the errors that have arisen from misinterpretations, omissions, or
interpretations of translators, and he claims all proper allowance for the
superstitious coloring of parts of the narrative from the belief,
prevalent among the most wise and learned of his day, in miracles and
magic. After perusing the work of Mr. Marsden, the character of Marco Polo
rises in the estimation of the reader. It is evident that his narration,
as far as related from his own observations, is correct, and that he had
really traversed a great part of Tartary and China, and navigated in the
Indian seas. Some of the countries and many of the islands, however, are
evidently described from accounts given by others, and in these accounts
are generally found the fables which have excited incredulity and
ridicule. As he composed his work after his return home, partly from
memory and partly from memorandums, he was liable to confuse what he had
heard with what he had seen, and thus to give undue weight to many fables
and exaggerations which he had received from others.

Much had been said of a map brought from Cathay by Marco Polo, which was
conserved in the convent of San Michale de Murano in the vicinity of
Venice, and in which the Cape of Good Hope and the island of Madagascar
were indicated; countries which the Portuguese claim the merit of having
discovered two centuries afterwards. It has been suggested also that
Columbus had visited the convent and examined this map, whence he derived
some of his ideas concerning the coast of India. According to Ramusio,
however, who had been at the convent, and was well acquainted with the
prior, the map preserved there was one copied by a friar from the original
one of Marco Polo, and many alterations and additions had since been made
by other hands, so that for a long time it lost all credit with judicious
people, until on comparing it with the work of Marco Polo it was found in
the main to agree with his descriptions. [340] The Cape of Good Hope was
doubtless among the additions made subsequent to the discoveries of the
Portuguese. [341] Columbus makes no mention of this map, which he most
probably would have done had he seen it. He seems to have been entirely
guided by the one furnished by Paulo Toscanelli, and which was apparently
projected after the original map, or after the descriptions of Marco
Polo, and the maps of Ptolemy.

When the attention of the world was turned towards the remote parts of
Asia in the 15th century, and the Portuguese were making their attempts to
circumnavigate Africa, the narration of Marco Polo again rose to notice.
This, with the travels of Nicolo le Comte, the Venetian, and of Hieronimo
da San Stefano, a Genoese, are said to have been the principal lights by
which the Portuguese guided themselves in their voyages. [342]

Above all, the influence which the work of Marco Polo had over the mind of
Columbus, gives it particular interest and importance. It was evidently an
oracular work with him. He frequently quotes it, and on his voyages,
supposing himself to be on the Asiatic coast, he is continually
endeavoring to discover the islands and main-lands described in it, and to
find the famous Cipango.

It is proper, therefore, to specify some of those places, and the manner
in which they are described by a Venetian traveler, that the reader may
more fully understand the anticipations which were haunting the mind of
Columbus in his voyages among the West Indian islands, and along the coast
of Terra Firma.

The winter residence of the Great Khan, according to Marco Polo, was in
the city of Cambalu, or Kanbalu, (since ascertained to be Pekin,) in the
province of Cathay. This city, he says, was twenty-four miles square, and
admirably built. It was impossible, according to Marco Polo, to describe
the vast amount and variety of merchandise and manufactures brought there;
it would seem they were enough to furnish the universe. "Here are to be
seen in wonderful abundance the precious stones, the pearls, the silks,
and the diverse perfumes of the East; scarce a day passes that there does
not arrive nearly a thousand cars laden with silk, of which they make
admirable stuffs in this city."

The palace of the Great Khan is magnificently built, and four miles in
circuit. It is rather a group of palaces. In the interior it is
resplendent with gold and silver; and in it are guarded the precious vases
and jewels of the sovereign. All the appointments of the Khan for war, for
the chase, for various festivities, are described in gorgeous terms. But
though Marco Polo is magnificent in his description of the provinces of
Cathay, and its imperial city of Cambalu, he outdoes himself when he comes
to describe the province of Mangi. This province is supposed to be the
southern part of China. It contains, he says, twelve hundred cities. The
capital, Quinsai  (supposed to be the city of Hang-cheu), was twenty-five
miles from the sea, but communicated by a river with a port situated on
the seacoast, and had great trade with India.

The name Quinsai, according to Marco Polo, signifies the city of heaven;
he says he has been in it and examined it diligently, and affirms it to be
the largest in the world; and so undoubtedly it is if the measurement of
the traveler is to be taken literally, for he declares that it is one
hundred miles in circuit. This seeming exaggeration has been explained by
supposing him to mean Chinese miles or _li,_ which are to the Italian
miles in the proportion of three to eight; and Mr. Marsden observes that
the walls even of the modern city, the limits of which have been
considerably contracted, are estimated by travelers at sixty _li_.
The ancient city has evidently been of immense extent, and as Marco Polo
could not be supposed to have measured the walls himself, he has probably
taken the loose and incorrect estimates of the inhabitants. He describes
it also as built upon little islands like Venice, and has twelve thousand
stone bridges, [343] the arches of which are so high that the largest
vessels can pass under them without lowering their masts. It has, he
affirms, three thousand baths, and six hundred thousand families,
including domestics. It abounds with magnificent houses, and has a lake
thirty miles in circuit within its walls, on the banks of which are
superb palaces of people of rank. [344] The inhabitants of Qninsai are
very voluptuous, and indulge in all kinds of luxuries and delights,
particularly the women, who are extremely beautiful. There are many
merchants and artisans, but the masters do not work, they employ servants
to do all their labor. The province of Mangi was conquered by the Great
Khan, who divided it into nine kingdoms, appointing to each a tributary
king. He drew from it an immense revenue, for the country abounded in
gold, silver, silks, sugar, spices, and perfumes.


Zipangu, Zifangri, or Cipango.

Fifteen hundred miles from the shores of Mangi, according to Marco Polo,
lay the great island of Zipangu, by some written Zipangri, and by Columbus
Cipango. [345] Marco Polo describes it as abounding in gold,
which, however, the king seldom permits to be transported out of the
island.--The king has a magnificent palace covered with plates of gold, as
in other countries the palaces are covered with sheets of lead or copper.
The halls and chambers are likewise covered with gold, the windows adorned
with it, sometimes in plates of the thickness of two fingers. The island
also produces vast quantities of the largest and finest pearls, together
with a variety of precious stones; so that, in fact, it abounds in riches.
The Great Khan made several attempts to conquer this island, but in vain;
which is not to be wondered at, if it be true what Marco Polo relates,
that the inhabitants had certain stones of a charmed virtue inserted
between the skin and the flesh of their right arms, which, through the
power of diabolical enchantments, rendered them invulnerable. This island
was an object of diligent search to Columbus.

About the island of Zipangu or Cipango, and between it and the coast of
Mangi, the sea, according to Marco Polo, is studded with small islands to
the number of seven thousand four hundred and forty, of which the greater
part are inhabited. There is not one which does not produce odoriferous
trees and perfumes in abundance Columbus thought himself at one time in
the midst of these islands.

These are the principal places described by Marco Polo, which occur in the
letters and journals of Columbus. The island of Cipango was the first land
he expected to make, and he intended to visit afterwards the province of
Mangi, and to seek the Great Khan in his city of Cambalu, in the province
of Cathay. Unless the reader can bear in mind these sumptuous descriptions
of Marco Polo, of countries teeming with wealth, and cities where the very
domes and palaces flamed with gold, he will have but a faint idea of the
splendid anticipations which filled the imagination of Columbus when he
discovered, as he supposed, the extremity of Asia. It was his confident
expectation of soon arriving at these countries, and realizing the
accounts of the Venetian, that induced him to hold forth those promises of
immediate wealth to the sovereigns, which caused so much disappointment,
and brought upon him the frequent reproach of exciting false hopes and
indulging in willful exaggeration.




No. XXII.

Sir John Mandeville.



Next to Marco Polo, the travels of Sir John Mandeville, and his account
of the territories of the Great Khan along the coast of Asia, seem to have
been treasured up in the mind of Columbus.

Mandeville was born in the city of St. Albans. He was devoted to study
from his earliest childhood, and, after finishing his general education,
applied himself to medicine. Having a great desire to see the remotest
parts of the earth, then known, that is to say, Asia and Africa, and above
all, to visit the Holy Land, he left England in 1332, and passing through
France embarked at Marseilles. According to his own account, he visited
Turkey, Armenia, Egypt, Upper and Lower Lybia, Syria, Persia, Chaldea,
Ethiopia, Tartary, Amazonia,  and the Indies, residing in their principal
cities. But most he says he delighted in the Holy Land, where he remained
for a long time, examining it with the greatest minuteness, and
endeavoring to follow all the traces of our Saviour. After an absence of
thirty-four years he returned to England, but found himself forgotten and
unknown by the greater part of his countrymen, and a stranger in his
native place. He wrote a history of his travels in three languages,
English, French, and Latin, for he was master of many tongues. He
addressed his work to Edward III. His wanderings do not seem to have made
him either pleased with the world at large, or contented with his home. He
railed at the age, saying that there was no more virtue extant; that the
church was ruined; error prevalent among the clergy; simony upon the
throne; and, in a word, that the devil reigned triumphant. He soon
returned to the continent, and died at Liege in 1372. He was buried in the
abbey of the Gulielmites, in the suburbs of that city, where Ortelius, in
his Itinerarium Belgiae, says that he saw his monument, on which was the
effigy, in stone, of a man with a forked beard and his hands raised
towards his head (probably folded as in prayer, according to the manner of
old tombs) and a lion at his feet. There was an inscription stating his
name, quality, and calling, (viz. professor of medicine,) that he was very
pious, very learned, and very charitable to the poor, and that after
having traveled over the whole world he had died at Liege. The people of
the convent showed also his spurs, and the housings of the horses which he
had ridden in his travels.

The descriptions given by Mandeville of the Grand Khan, of the province of
Cathay, and the city of Cambalu, are no less splendid than those of Marco
Polo. The royal palace was more than two leagues in circumference. The
grand hall had twenty-four columns of copper and gold. There were more
than three hundred thousand men occupied and living in and about the
palace, of which more than one hundred thousand were employed in taking
care of ten thousand elephants and of a vast variety of other animals,
birds of prey, falcons, parrots, and paroquets. On days of festivals there
were even twice the number of men employed. The title of this potentate in
his letters was "Khan, the son of God, exalted possessor of all the earth,
master of those who are masters of others." On his seal was engraved, "God
reigns in heaven, Khan upon earth."

Mandeville has become proverbial for indulging in a traveler's
exaggerations; yet his accounts of the countries which he visited have
been found far more veracious than had been imagined. His descriptions of
Cathay, and the wealthy province of Mangi, agreeing with those of Marco
Polo, had great authority with Columbus.




No. XXIII.

The Zones.



The zones were imaginary bands or circles in the heavens producing an
effect of climate on corresponding belts on the globe of the earth. The
polar circles and the tropics mark these divisions.

The central region, lying beneath the track of the sun, was termed the
torrid zone; the two regions between the tropics and the polar circles
were termed the temperate zones, and the remaining parts, between the
porlar circles and the poles, the frigid zones.

The frozen regions near the poles were considered uninhabitable and
unnavigable on account of the extreme cold. The burning zone, or rather
the central part of it, immediately about the equator, was considered
uninhabitable, unproductive, and impassable in consequence of the
excessive heat. The temperate zones, lying between them, were supposed to
be fertile and salubrious, and suited to the purposes of life.

The globe was divided into two hemispheres by the equator, an imaginary
line encircling it at equal distance from the poles. The whole of the
world known to the ancients was contained in the temperate zone of the
northern hemisphere.

It was imagined that if there should be inhabitants in the temperate zone
of the southern hemisphere, there could still be no communication with
them on account of the burning zone which intervened.

Parmenides, according to Strabo, was the inventor of this theory of the
five zones, but he made the torrid zone extend on each side of the equator
beyond the tropics. Aristotle supported this doctrine of the zones. In his
time nothing was known of the extreme northern parts of Europe and Asia,
nor of interior Ethiopia and the southern part of Africa, extending beyond
the tropic of Capricorn to the Cape of Good Hope. Aristotle believed that
there was habitable earth in the southern hemisphere, but that it was for
ever divided from the part of the world already known, by the impassable
zone of scorching heat at the equator. [346]

Pliny supported the opinion of Aristotle concerning the burning zones.
"The temperature of the central region of the earth," he observes, "where
the sun runs his course, is burnt up as with fire. The temperate zones
which lie on either side can have no communication with each other in
consequence of the fervent heat of this region." [347]

Strabo, (lib. xi.,) in mentioning this theory, gives it likewise his
support; and others of the ancient philosophers, as well as the poets,
might be cited to show the general prevalence of the belief.

It must be observed that, at the time when Columbus defended his
proposition before the learned board at Salamanca, the ancient theory of
the burning zone had not yet been totally disproved by modern discovery.
The Portuguese, it is true, had penetrated within the tropics; but, though
the whole of the space between the tropic of Cancer and that of Capricorn,
in common parlance, was termed the torrid zone, the uninhabitable and
impassable part, strictly speaking, according to the doctrine of the
ancients, only extended a limited number of degrees on each side of the
equator; forming about a third, or, at most, the half of the zone. The
proofs which Columbus endeavored to draw therefore from the voyages made
to St. George la Mina, were not conclusive with those who were bigoted to
the ancient theory, and who placed this scorching region still farther
southward, and immediately about the equator.




No. XXIV.

Of the Atlantis of Plato.



The island Atalantis is mentioned by Plato in his dialogue of Timaeus.
Solon, the Athenian lawgiver, is supposed to have traveled into Egypt. He
is in an ancient city on the Delta, the fertile island formed by the Nile,
and is holding converse with certain learned priests on the antiquities of
remote ages, when one of them gives him a description of the island of
Atalantis, and of its destruction, which he describes as having taken
place before the conflagration of the world by Phaeton.

This island, he was told, had been situated on the Western Ocean, opposite
to the Straits of Gibraltar. There was an easy passage from it to other
islands, which lay adjacent to a large continent, exceeding in size all
Europe and Asia. Neptune settled in this island, from whose son Atlas its
name was derived, and he divided it among his ten sons. His descendants
reigned here in regular succession for many ages. They made irruptions
into Europe and Africa, subduing all Libya as far as Egypt, and Europe to
Asia Minor. They were resisted, however, by the Athenians, and driven back
to their Atlantic territories. Shortly after this there was a tremendous
earthquake, and an overflowing of the sea, which continued for a day and a
night. In the course of this the vast island of Atalantis, and all its
splendid cities and warlike nations, were swallowed up, and sunk to the
bottom of the sea, which, spreading its waters over the chasm, formed the
Atlantic Ocean. For a long time, however, the sea was not navigable, on
account of rocks and shelves, of mud and slime, and of the ruins of that
drowned country.

Many, in modern times, have considered this a mere fable; others suppose
that Plato, while in Egypt, had received some vague accounts of the Canary
Islands, and, on his return to Greece, finding those islands so entirely
unknown to his countrymen, had made them the seat of his political and
moral speculations. Some, however, have been disposed to give greater
weight to this story of Plato. They imagine that such an island may really
have existed filling up a great part of the Atlantic, and that the
continent beyond it was America, which, in such case, was not unknown to
the ancients. Kircher supposes it to have been an island extending from
the Canaries to the Azores; that it was really ingulfed in one of the
convulsions of the globe, and that those small islands are mere shattered
fragments of it.

As a farther proof that the New World was not unknown to the ancients,
many have cited the singular passage in the Medea of Seneca, which is
wonderfully apposite, and shows, at least, how nearly the warm imagination
of a poet may approach to prophecy. The predictions of the ancient oracles
were rarely so unequivocal.

                   Venient annis
  Saecula seris, quilms Oceanus
  Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens
  Patent tellus, Typhisque novos
  Detegat orbes, nee sit terris
  Ultima Thule.

Gosselin in his able research into the voyages of the ancients, supposes
the Atalantis of Plato to have been nothing more nor less than one of the
nearest of the Canaries, viz. Fortaventura or Lancerote.




No. XXV.

The Imaginary Island of St. Brandan.



One of the most singular geographical illusions on record is that which
for a long while haunted the imaginations of the inhabitants of the
Canaries. They fancied they beheld a mountainous island about ninety
leagues in length, lying far to the westward. It was only seen at
intervals, but in perfectly clear and serene weather. To some it seemed
one hundred leagues distant, to others forty, to others only fifteen or
eighteen. [348]On attempting to reach it, however, it somehow or other
eluded the search, and was nowhere to be found. Still there were so many
eye-witnesses of credibility who concurred in testifying to their having
seen it, and the testimony of the inhabitants of different islands agreed
so well as to its form and position, that its existence was generally
believed, and geographers inserted it in their maps. It is laid down on
the globe of Martin Behem, projected in 1492, as delineated by M. De Murr,
and it will be found in most of the maps of the time of Columbus, placed
commonly about two hundred leagues west of the Canaries. During the time
that Columbus was making his proposition to the court of Portugal, an
inhabitant of the Canaries applied to king John II for a vessel to go in
search of this island. In the archives of the Torre do Tombo [349] also,
there is a record of a contract made by the crown of Portugal with
Fernando de Ulmo, cavalier of the royal household, and captain of the
island of Tercera, wherein he undertakes to go at his own expense, in
quest of an island or islands, or Terra Firma, supposed to be the island
of the Seven Cities, on condition of having jurisdiction over the same
for himself and his heirs, allowing one tenth of the revenues to the king.
This Ulmo, finding the expedition above his capacity, associated one Juan
Alfonso del Estreito in the enterprise. They were bound to be ready to
sail with two caravels in the month of March, 1487. [350]  The fate of
their enterprise is unknown.

The name of St. Brandan, or Borondon, given to this imaginary island from
time immemorial, is said to be derived from a Scotch abbot, who flourished
in the sixth century, and who is called sometimes by the foregoing
appellations, sometimes St. Blandano, or St. Blandanus. In the Martyrology
of the order of St. Augustine, he is said to have been the patriarch of
three thousand monks. About the middle of the sixth century, he
accompanied his disciple, St. Maclovio, or St. Malo, in search of certain
islands possessing the delights of paradise, which they were told existed
in the midst of the ocean, and were inhabited by infidels. These most
adventurous saints-errant wandered for a long time upon the ocean, and at
length landed upon an island called Ima. Here St. Malo found the body of a
giant lying in a sepulchre. He resuscitated him, and had much interesting
conversation with him, the giant informing him that the inhabitants of
that island had some notions of the Trinity, and, moreover, giving him a
gratifying account of the torments which Jews and Pagans suffered in the
infernal regions. Finding the giant so docile and reasonable, St. Malo
expounded to him the doctrines of the Christian religion, converted him,
and baptized him by the name of Mildum. The giant, however, either through
weariness of life, or eagerness to enjoy the benefits of his conversion,
begged permission, at the end of fifteen days, to die again, which was
granted him.

According to another account, the giant told them he knew of an island in
the ocean, defended by walls of burnished gold, so resplendent that they
shone like crystal, but to which there was no entrance. At their request,
he undertook to guide them to it, and taking the cable of their ship,
threw himself into the sea. He had not proceeded far, however, when a
tempest rose, and obliged them all to return, and shortly after the giant
died. [351]  A third legend makes the saint pray to heaven on Easter day,
that they may be permitted to find land where they may celebrate the
offices of religion with becoming state. An island immediately appears,
on which they land, perform a solemn mass, and the sacrament of the
Eucharist; after which re-embarking and making sail, they behold to their
astonishment the supposed island suddenly plunge to the bottom of the sea,
being nothing else than a monstrous whale. [352] When the rumor circulated
of an island seen from the Canaries, which always eluded the search, the
legends of St. Brandan were revived, and applied to this unapproachable
land. We are told, also, that there was an ancient Latin manuscript in the
archives of the cathedral church of the Grand Canary, in which the
adventures of these saints were recorded. Through carelessness, however,
this manuscript has disappeared. [353] Some have maintained that this
island was known to the ancients, and was the same mentioned by Ptolemy
among the Fortunate or Canary islands, by the names of Aprositus, [354] or
the Inaccessible; and which, according to friar Diego Philipo, in his book
on the Incarnation of Christ, shows that it possessed the same quality in
ancient times of deluding the eye and being unattainable to the feet of
mortals. [355] But whatever belief the ancients may have had on this
subject, it is certain that it took a strong hold on the faith of the
moderns during the prevalent rage for discovery; nor did it lack abundant
testimonials. Don Joseph de Viera y Clavijo says, there never was a more
difficult paradox nor problem in the science of geography; since, to
affirm the existence of this island, is to trample upon sound criticism,
judgment, and reason; and to deny it, one must abandon tradition and
experience, and suppose that many persons of credit had not the proper
use of their senses. [356]

The belief in this island has continued long since the time of Columbus.
It was repeatedly seen, and by various persons at a time, always in the
same place and of the same form. In 1526 an expedition set off for the
Canaries in quest of it, commanded by Fernando de Troya and Fernando
Alvarez. They cruised in the wonted direction, but in vain, and their
failure ought to have undeceived the public. "The phantasm of the island,
however," says Viera, "had such a secret enchantment for all who beheld
it, that the public preferred doubting the good conduct of the explorers,
than their own senses." In 1570 the appearances were so repeated and
clear, that there was a universal fever of curiosity awakened among the
people of the Canaries, and it was determined to send forth another
expedition.

That they might not appear to act upon light grounds, an exact
investigation was previously made of all the persons of talent and
credibility who had seen these apparitions of land, or who had other
proofs of its existence.

Alonzo de Espinosa, governor of the island of Ferro, accordingly made a
report, in which more than one hundred witnesses, several of them persons
of the highest respectability, deposed that they had beheld the unknown
island about forty leagues to the northwest of Ferro; that they had
contemplated it with calmness and certainty, and had seen the sun set
behind one of its points.

Testimonials of still greater force came from the islands of Palma and
Teneriffe. There were certain Portuguese who affirmed, that, being driven
about by a tempest, they had come upon the island of St. Borondon. Pedro
Vello, who was the pilot of the vessel, affirmed, that having anchored in
a bay, he landed with several of the crew. They drank fresh water in a
brook, and beheld in the sand the print of footsteps, double the size of
those of an ordinary man, and the distance between them was in proportion.
They found a cross nailed to a neighboring tree; near to which were three
stones placed in form of a triangle, with signs of fire having been made
among them, probably to cook shell-fish. Having seen much cattle and sheep
grazing in the neighborhood, two of their party armed with lances went
into the woods in pursuit of them. The night was approaching, the heavens
began to lower, and a harsh wind arose. The people on board the ship cried
out that she was dragging her anchor, whereupon Vello entered the boat and
hurried on board. In an instant they lost sight of land; being as it were
swept away in the hurricane. When the storm had passed away, and the sea
and sky were again serene, they searched in vain for the island; not a
trace of it was to be seen, and they had to pursue their voyage, lamenting
the loss of their two companions who had been abandoned in the wood.
[357]

A learned licentiate, Pedro Ortiz de Funez, inquisitor of the Grand
Canary, while on a visit at Teneriffe, summoned several persons before
him, who testified having seen the island. Among them was one Marcos
Verde, a man well known in those parts. He stated that in returning from
Barbary and arriving in the neighborhood of the Canaries, he beheld land,
which, according to his maps and calculations, could not be any of the
known islands. He concluded it to be the far-famed St. Borondon. Overjoyed
at having discovered this land of mystery, he coasted along its spell-bound
shores, until he anchored in a beautiful harbor formed by the mouth of a
mountain ravine. Here he landed with several of his crew. It was now,
he said, the hour of the Ave Maria, or of vespers. The sun being set, the
shadows began to spread over the land. The voyagers having separated,
wandered about in different directions, until out of hearing of each
other's shouts. Those on board, seeing the night approaching, made signal
to summon back the wanderers to the ship. They re-embarked, intending to
resume their investigations on the following day. Scarcely were they on
board, however, when a whirlwind came rushing down the ravine, with such
violence as to drag the vessel from her anchor, and hurry her out to sea;
and they never saw any thing more of this hidden and inhospitable island.

Another testimony remains on record in manuscript of one Abreu Galindo;
but whether taken at this time does not appear. It was that of a French
adventurer, who, many years before, making a voyage among the Canaries,
was overtaken by a violent storm which carried away his masts. At length
the furious winds drove him to the shores of an unknown island covered
with stately trees. Here he landed with part of his crew, and choosing a
tree proper for a mast, cut it down, and began to shape it for his
purpose. The guardian power of the island, however, resented as usual this
invasion of his forbidden shores. The heavens assumed a dark and
threatening aspect; the night was approaching, and the mariners, fearing
some impending evil, abandoned their labor and returned on board. They
were borne away as usual from the coast, and the next day arrived at the
island of Palma. [358]

The mass of testimony collected by official authority in 1750 seemed so
satisfactory, that another expedition was fitted out in the same year in
the island of Palma. It was commanded by Fernando de Villabolos, regidor
of the island; but was equally fruitless with the preceding. St. Borondon
seemed disposed only to tantalize the world with distant and serene
glimpses of his ideal paradise; or to reveal it amidst storms to
tempest-tossed mariners, but to hide it completely from the view of all
who diligently sought it. Still the people of Palma adhered to their
favorite chimera. Thirty-four years afterwards, in 1605, they sent another
ship on the quest, commanded by Gaspar Perez de Acosta, an accomplished
pilot, accompanied by the padre Lorenzo Pinedo, a holy Franciscan friar,
skilled in natural science. St. Borondon, however, refused to reveal his
island to either monk or mariner. After cruising about in every direction,
sounding, observing the skies, the clouds, the winds, every thing that
could furnish indications, they returned without having seen any thing to
authorize a hope.

Upwards of a century now elapsed without any new attempt to seek this
fairy island. Every now and then, it is true, the public mind was agitated
by fresh reports of its having been seen. Lemons and other fruits, and the
green branches of trees which floated to the shores of Gomera and Ferro,
were pronounced to be from the enchanted groves of St. Borondon. At
length, in 1721, the public infatuation again rose to such a height that a
fourth expedition was sent, commanded by Don Caspar Dominguez, a man of
probity and talent. As this was an expedition of solemn and mysterious
import, he had two holy friars as apostolical chaplains. They made sail
from the island of Teneriffe towards the end of October, leaving the
populace in an indescribable state of anxious curiosity mingled with
superstition. The ship, however, returned from its cruise as unsuccessful
as all its predecessors.

We have no account of any expedition being since undertaken, though the
island still continued to be a subject of speculation, and occasionally to
reveal its shadowy mountains to the eyes of favored individuals. In a
letter written from the island of Gomera, 1759, by a Franciscan monk, to
one of his friends, he relates having seen it from the village of Alaxero
at six in the morning of the third of May. It appeared to consist of two
lofty mountains, with a deep valley between; and on contemplating it with
a telescope, the valley or ravine appeared to be filled with trees. He
summoned the curate Antonio Joseph Manrique, and upwards of forty other
persons, all of whom beheld it plainly. [359]

Nor is this island delineated merely in ancient maps of the time of
Columbus. It is laid down as one of the Canary islands in a French map
published in 1704; and Mons. Gautier, in a geographical chart, annexed to
his Observations on Natural History, published in 1755, places it five
degrees to the west of the island of Ferro, in the 29th deg. of N.
latitude. [360]

Such are the principal facts existing relative to the island of St.
Brandan: Its reality was for a long time a matter of firm belief. It was
in vain that repeated voyages and investigations proved its nonexistence;
the public, after trying all kinds of sophistry, took refuge in the
supernatural, to defend their favorite chimera. They maintained that it
was rendered inaccessible to mortals by Divine Providence, or by
diabolical magic. Most inclined to the former. All kinds of extravagant
fancies were indulged concerning it; [361] some confounded it with the
fabled island of the Seven Cities situated somewhere in the bosom of the
ocean, where in old times seven bishops and their followers had taken
refuge from the Moors. Some of the Portuguese imagined it to be the abode
of their lost king Sebastian. The Spaniards pretended that Roderick, the
last of their Gothic kings, had fled thither from the Moors after the
disastrous battle of the Guadalete. Others suggested that it might be the
seat of the terrestrial paradise, the place where Enoch and Elijah
remained in a state of blessedness until the final day; and that it was
made at times apparent to the eyes, but invisible to the search of
mortals. Poetry, it is said, has owed to this popular belief one of its
beautiful fictions, and the garden of Armida, where Rinaldo was detained
enchanted, and which Tasso places in one of the Canary islands, has been
identified with the imaginary St. Borondon. [362]

The learned father Feyjoo [363] has given a philosophical solution to
this geographical problem. He attributes all these appearances, which
have been so numerous and so well authenticated as not to admit of doubt,
to certain atmospherical deceptions, like that of the Fata Morgana, seen
at times, in the straits of Messina, where the city of Reggio and its
surrounding country is reflected in the air above the neighboring sea: a
phenomenon which has likewise been witnessed in front of the city of
Marseilles. As to the tales of the mariners who had landed on these
forbidden shores, and been hurried thence in whirlwinds and tempests, he
considers them as mere fabrications.

As the populace, however, reluctantly give up any thing that partakes of
the marvelous and mysterious, and as the same atmospherical phenomena,
which first gave birth to the illusion, may still continue, it is not
improbable that a belief in the island of St. Brandan may still exist
among the ignorant and credulous of the Canaries, and that they at times
behold its fairy mountains rising above the distant horizon of the
Atlantic.




No. XXVI.

The Island of the Seven Cities.



One of the popular traditions concerning the ocean, which were current
during the time of Columbus, was that of the Island of the Seven Cities.
It was recorded in an ancient legend, that at the time of the conquest of
Spain and Portugal by the Moors, when the inhabitants fled in every
direction to escape from slavery, seven bishops, followed by a great
number of their people, took shipping and abandoned themselves to their
fate, on the high seas. After tossing about for some time, they landed on
an unknown island in the midst of the ocean. Here the bishops burnt the
ships, to prevent the desertion of their followers, and founded seven
cities. Various pilots of Portugal, it was said, had reached that island
at different times, but had never returned to give any information
concerning it, having been detained, according to subsequent accounts, by
the successors of the bishops to prevent pursuit. At length, according to
common report, at the time that prince Henry of Portugal was prosecuting
his discoveries, several seafaring men presented themselves one day before
him, and stated that they had just returned from a voyage, in the course
of which they had landed upon this island. The inhabitants, they said,
spoke their language, and carried them immediately to church, to ascertain
whether they were Catholics, and were rejoiced at finding them of the true
faith. They then made earnest inquiries, to know whether the Moors still
retained possession of Spain and Portugal. While part of the crew were at
church, the rest gathered sand on the shore for the use of the kitchen,
and found to their surprise that one-third of it was gold. The islanders
were anxious that the crew should remain with them a few days, until the
return of their governor, who was absent; but the mariners, afraid of
being detained, embarked and made sail. Such was the story they told to
prince Henry, hoping to receive reward for their intelligence. The prince
expressed displeasure at their hasty departure from the island, and
ordered them to return and procure further information; but the men,
apprehensive, no doubt, of having the falsehood of their tale discovered,
made their escape, and nothing more was heard of them. [364]

This story had much currency. The Island of the Seven Cities was
identified with the island mentioned by Aristotle as having been
discovered by the Carthaginians, and was put down in the early maps about
the time of Columbus, under the name of Antilla.

At the time of the discovery of New Spain, reports were brought to
Hispaniola of the civilization of the country; that the people wore
clothing; that their houses and temples were solid, spacious, and often
magnificent; and that crosses were occasionally found among them. Juan de
Grivalja, being dispatched to explore the coast of Yucatan, reported that
in sailing along it he beheld, with great wonder, stately and beautiful
edifices of lime and stone, and many high towers that shone at a distance.
[365] For a time the old tradition of the Seven Cities was revived, and
many thought that they were to be found in the same part of New Spain.




No. XXVII.

Discovery of the Island of Madeira.



The discovery of Madeira by Macham rests principally upon the authority of
Francisco Alcaforado, an esquire of prince Henry of Portugal, who composed
an account of it for that prince. It does not appear to have obtained much
faith among Portuguese historians. No mention is made of it in Barros; he
attributes the first discovery of the island to Juan Gonzalez and Tristram
Vaz, who he said descried it from Porto Santo, resembling a cloud on the
horizon. [366]

The abbe Provost, however, in his general history of voyages, vol. 6,
seems inclined to give credit to the account of Alcaforado. "It was
composed," he observes, "at a time when the attention of the public would
have exposed the least falsities; and no one was more capable than
Alcaforado of giving an exact detail of this event, since he was of the
number of those who assisted at the second discovery." The narrative, as
originally written, was overcharged with ornaments and digressions. It was
translated into French and published in Paris, in 1671. The French
translator had retrenched the ornaments, but scrupulously retained the
facts. The story, however, is cherished in the island of Madeira, where a
painting in illustration of it is still to be seen. The following is the
purport of the French translation: I have not been able to procure the
original of Alcaforado.

During the reign of Edward the Third of England, a young man of great
courage and talent, named Robert Macham, fell in love with a young lady of
rare beauty, of the name of Anne Dorset. She was his superior in birth,
and of a proud and aristocratic family; but the merit of Macham gained him
the preference over all his rivals. The family of the young lady, to
prevent her making an inferior alliance, obtained an order from the king
to have Macham arrested and confined, until by arbitrary means they
married his mistress to a man of quality. As soon as the nuptials were
celebrated, the nobleman conducted his beautiful and afflicted bride to
his seat near Bristol. Macham was now restored to liberty. Indignant at
the wrongs he had suffered, and certain of the affections of his mistress,
he prevailed upon several friends to assist him in a project for the
gratification of his love and his revenge. They followed hard on the
traces of the new-married couple to Bristol. One of the friends obtained
an introduction into the family of the nobleman in quality of a groom. He
found the young bride full of tender recollections of her lover, and of
dislike to the husband thus forced upon her. Through the means of this
friend, Macham had several communications with her, and concerted means
for their escape to France, where they might enjoy their mutual love
unmolested.

When all things were prepared, the young lady rode out one day accompanied
only by the fictitious groom, under pretence of taking the air. No sooner
were they out of sight of the house, than they galloped to an appointed
place on the shore of the channel, where a boat awaited them. They were
conveyed on board a vessel which lay with anchor a-trip, and sails
unfurled, ready to put to sea. Here the lovers were once more united.
Fearful of pursuit, the ship immediately weighed anchor; they made their
way rapidly along the coast of Cornwall, and Macham anticipated the
triumph of soon landing with his beautiful prize on the shores of gay and
gallant France. Unfortunately an adverse and stormy wind arose in the
night; at daybreak they found themselves out of sight of land. The
mariners were ignorant and inexperienced; they knew nothing of the
compass, and it was a time when men were unaccustomed to traverse the high
seas. For thirteen days the lovers were driven about on a tempestuous
ocean, at the mercy of wind and wave. The fugitive bride was filled with
terror and remorse, and looked upon this uproar of the elements as the
anger of heaven directed against her. All the efforts of her lover could
not remove from her mind a dismal presage of some approaching catastrophe.

At length the tempest subsided. On the fourteenth day, at dawn, the
mariners perceived what appeared to be a tuft of wood rising out of the
sea. They joyfully steered for it, supposing it to be an island. They were
not mistaken. As they drew near, the rising sun shone upon noble forests,
the trees of which were of a kind unknown to them. Flights of birds also
came hovering about the ship, and perched upon the yards and rigging
without any signs of fear. The boat was sent on shore to reconnoitre, and
soon returned with such accounts of the beauty of the country, that Macham
determined to take his drooping companion to the land, in hopes her health
and spirits might be restored by refreshment and repose. They were
accompanied on shore by the faithful friends who had assisted in their
flight. The mariners remained on board to guard, the ship.

The country was indeed delightful. The forests were stately and
magnificent; there were trees laden with excellent fruits, others with
aromatic flowers; the waters were cool and limpid, the sky was serene, and
there was a balmy sweetness in the air. The animals they met with showed
no signs of alarm or ferocity, from which they concluded that the island
was uninhabited. On penetrating a little distance they found a sheltered
meadow, the green bosom of which was bordered by laurels and refreshed by
a mountain brook which ran sparkling over pebbles. In the centre was a
majestic tree, the wide branches of which afforded shade from the rays of
the sun. Here Macham had bowers constructed and determined to pass a few
days, hoping that the sweetness of the country, and the serene
tranquillity of this delightful solitude, would recruit the drooping
health and spirits of his companion. Three days, however, had scarcely
passed, when a violent storm arose from the northeast, and raged all night
over the island. On the succeeding morning Macham repaired to the sea-side,
but nothing of his ship was to be seen, and he concluded that it had
foundered in the tempest.

Consternation fell upon the little band, thus left in an uninhabited
island in the midst of the ocean. The blow fell most severely on the timid
and repentant bride. She reproached herself with being the cause of all
their misfortunes, and, from the first, had been haunted by dismal
forebodings. She now considered them about to be accomplished, and her
horror was so great as to deprive her of speech; she expired in three days
without uttering a word.

Machnm was struck with despair at beholding the tragical end of this
tender and beautiful being. He upbraided himself, in the transports of his
grief, with tearing her from home, her country, and her friends, to perish
upon a savage coast. All the efforts of his companions to console him were
in vain. He died within five days, broken-hearted; begging, as a last
request, that his body might be interred beside that of his mistress, at
the foot of a rustic altar which they had erected under the great tree.
They set up a large wooden cross on the spot, on which was placed an
inscription written by Macham himself, relating in a few words his piteous
adventure, and praying any Christians who might arrive there, to build a
chapel in the place dedicated to Jesus the Saviour.

After the death of their commander, his followers consulted about means to
escape from the island. The ship's boat remained on the shore. They
repaired it and put it in a state to bear a voyage, and then made sail,
intending to return to England. Ignorant of their situation, and carried
about by the winds, they were cast upon the coast of Morocco, where, their
boat being shattered upon the rocks, they were captured by the Moors and
thrown into prison. Here they understood that their ship had shared the
same fate, having been driven from her anchorage in the tempest, and
carried to the same inhospitable coast, where all her crew were made
prisoners.

The prisons of Morocco were in those days filled with captives of all
nations, taken by their cruisers. Here the English prisoners met with an
experienced pilot, a Spaniard of Seville, named Juan de Morales. He
listened to their story with great interest; inquired into the situation
and description of the island they had discovered; and, subsequently, on
his redemption from prison, communicated the circumstances, it is said, to
prince Henry of Portugal.

There is a difficulty in the above narrative of Alcaforado in reconciling
dates. The voyage is said to have taken place during the reign of Edward
III, which commenced in 1327 and ended in 1378. Morales, to whom the
English communicated their voyage, is said to have been in the service of
the Portuguese, in the second discovery of Madeira, in 1418 and 1420. Even
if the voyage and imprisonment had taken place in the last year of king
Edward's reign, this leaves a space of forty years.

Hacluyt gives an account of the same voyage, taken from Antonio Galvano.
He varies in certain particulars. It happened, he says, in the year 1344,
in the time of Peter IV of Aragon. Macham cast anchor in a bay since
called, after him, Machio.

The lady being ill, he took her on shore, accompanied by some of his
friends, and the ships sailed without them. After the death of the lady,
Macham made a canoe out of a tree, and ventured to sea in it with his
companions. They were cast upon the coast of Africa, where the Moors,
considering it a kind of miracle, carried him to the king of their
country, who sent him to the king of Castile. In consequence of the
traditional accounts remaining of this voyage, Henry II of Castile sent
people, in 1395, to re-discover the island.




No. XXVIII.

Las Casas.



Bartholomew Las Casas, bishop of Chiapa, so often cited in all histories
of the New World, was born at Seville, in 1474, and was of French
extraction. The family name was Casaus. The first of the name who appeared
in Spain, served under the standard of Ferdinand III, surnamed the saint,
in his wars with the Moors of Andalusia. He was at the taking of Seville
from the Moors, when he was rewarded by the king, and received permission
to establish himself there. His descendants enjoyed the prerogatives of
nobility, and suppressed the letter u in their name, to accommodate it to
the Spanish tongue.

Antonio, the father of Bartholomew, went to Hispaniola with Columbus in
1493, and returned rich to Seville in 1498. [367] It has been stated by
one of the biographers of Bartholomew Las Casas, that he accompanied
Columbus in his third voyage in 1498, and returned with him in 1500. [368]
This, however, is incorrect. He was, during that time, completing his
education at Salamanca, where he was instructed in Latin, dialectics,
logic, metaphysics, ethics, and physics, after the supposed method and
system of Aristotle. While at the university, he had, as a servant, an
Indian slave, given him by his father, who had received him from Columbus.
When Isabella, in her transport of virtuous indignation, ordered the
Indian slaves to be sent back to their country, this one was taken from
Las Casas. The young man was aroused by the circumstance, and, on
considering the nature of the case, became inflamed with a zeal in favor
of the unhappy Indians, which never cooled throughout a long and active
life. It was excited to tenfold fervor, when, at about the age of
twenty-eight years, he accompanied the commander Ovando to Hispaniola in
1502, and was an eye-witness to many of the cruel scenes which took place
under his administration. The whole of his future life, a space exceeding
sixty years, was devoted to vindicating the cause, and endeavoring to
meliorate the sufferings of the natives. As a missionary, he traversed the
wilderness of the New World in various directions, seeking to convert and
civilize them; as a protector and champion, he made several voyages to
Spain, vindicated their wrongs before courts and monarchs, wrote volumes
in their behalf, and exhibited a zeal, and constancy, and intrepidity
worthy of an apostle. He died at the advanced age of ninety-two years, and
was buried at Madrid, in the church of the Dominican convent of Atocha, of
which fraternity he was a member.

Attempts have been made to decry the consistency and question the real
philanthropy of Las Casas, in consequence of one of the expedients to
which he resorted to relieve the Indians from the cruel bondage imposed
upon them. This occurred in 1517, when he arrived in Spain, on one of his
missions, to obtain measures in their favor from the government. On his
arrival in Spain, he found cardinal Ximenes, who had been left regent on
the death of King Ferdinand, too ill to attend to his affairs. He
repaired, therefore, to Valladolid, where he awaited the coming of the new
monarch Charles, archduke of Austria, afterwards the emperor Charles V. He
had strong opponents to encounter in various persons high in authority,
who, holding estates and repartimientos in the colonies, were interested
in the slavery of the Indians. Among these, and not the least animated,
was the bishop Fonseca, president of the council of the Indies.

At length the youthful sovereign arrived, accompanied by various Flemings
of his court, particularly his grand chancellor, doctor Juan de Selvagio,
a learned and upright man, whom he consulted on all affairs of
administration and justice. Las Casas soon became intimate with the
chancellor, and stood high in his esteem; but so much opposition arose on
every side that he found his various propositions for the relief of the
natives but little attended to. In his doubt and anxiety he had now
recourse to an expedient which he considered as justified by the
circumstances of the case. [369] The chancellor Selvagio and other
Flemings who had accompanied the youthful sovereign had obtained from him,
before quitting Flanders, licenses to import slaves from Africa to the
colonies; a measure which had recently in 1516 been prohibited by a decree
of cardinal Ximenes while acting as regent. The chancellor, who was a
humane man, reconciled it to his conscience by a popular opinion that one
negro could perform, without detriment to his health, the labor of several
Indians, and that therefore it was a great saving of human suffering. So
easy is it for interest to wrap itself up in plausible argument! He might,
moreover, have thought the welfare of the Africans but little affected by
the change. They were accustomed to slavery in their own country, and they
were said to thrive in the New World. "The Africans," observes Herrera,
"prospered so much in the island of Hispaniola, that it was the opinion
unless a negro should happen to be hanged, he would never die; for as yet
none had been known to perish from infirmity. Like oranges, they found
their proper soil in Hispaniola, and it seemed ever more natural to them
than their native Guinea." [370]

Las Casas, finding all other means ineffectual, endeavored to turn these
interested views of the grand chancellor to the benefit of the Indians. He
proposed that the Spaniards, resident in the colonies, might be permitted
to procure negroes for the labor of the farms and the mines, and other
severe toils, which were above the strength and destructive of the lives
of the natives. [371] He evidently considered the poor Africans as little
better than mere animals; and he acted like others, on an arithmetical
calculation of diminishing human misery, by substituting one strong man
for three or four of feebler nature. He, moreover, esteemed the Indians
as a nobler and more intellectual race of beings, and their preservation
and welfare of higher importance to the general interests of humanity.

It is this expedient of Las Casas which has drawn down severe censure upon
his memory. He has been charged with gross inconsistency, and even with
having originated this inhuman traffic in the New World. This last is a
grievous charge; but historical facts and dates remove the original sin
from his door, and prove that the practice existed in the colonies, and
was authorized by royal decree, long before he took a part in the
question.

Las Casas did not go to the New World until 1502. By a royal ordinance
passed in 1501, negro slaves were permitted to be taken there, provided
they had been born among Christians. [372] By a letter written by Ovando,
dated 1503, it appears that there were numbers in the island of
Hispaniola at that time, and he entreats that none more might be
permitted to be brought.

In 1506 the Spanish government forbade the introduction of negro slaves
from the Levant, or those brought up with the Moors; and stipulated that
none should be taken to the colonies but those from Seville, who had been
instructed in the Christian faith, that they might contribute to the
conversion of the Indians. [373] In 1510, king Ferdinand, being informed
of the physical weakness of the Indians, ordered fifty Africans to be
sent from Seville to labor in the mines. [374] In 1511, he ordered that
a great number should be procured from Guinea, and transported to
Hispaniola, understanding that one negro could perform the work of four
Indians. [375] In 1512 and '13 he signed further orders relative to the
same subject. In 1516, Charles V granted licenses to the Flemings to
import negroes to the colonies. It was not until the year 1517, that Las
Casas gave his sanction of the traffic. It already existed, and he
countenanced it solely with a view to having the hardy Africans
substituted for the feeble Indians. It was advocated at the same time,
and for the same reasons, by the Jeronimite friars, who were missionaries
in the colonies. The motives of Las Casas were purely benevolent, though
founded on erroneous notions of justice. He thought to permit evil that
good might spring out of it; to choose between two existing abuses, and
to eradicate the greater by resorting to the lesser. His reasoning,
however fallacious it may be, was considered satisfactory and humane by
some of the most learned and benevolent men of the age, among whom was
the cardinal Adrian, afterwards elevated to the papal chair, and
characterized by gentleness and humanity. The traffic was permitted;
inquiries were made as to the number of slaves required, which was
limited to four thousand, and the Flemings obtained a monopoly of the
trade, which they afterwards farmed out to the Genoese.

Dr. Eobertson, in noticing this affair, draws a contrast between the
conduct of the cardinal Ximenes and that of Las Casas, strongly to the
disadvantage of the latter. "The cardinal," he observes, "when solicited
to encourage this commerce, peremptorily rejected the proposition, because
he perceived the iniquity of reducing one race of men to slavery, when he
was consulting about the means of restoring liberty to another; but Las
Casas, from the inconsistency natural to men who hurry with headlong
impetuosity towards a favorite point, was incapable of making this
distinction. In the warmth of his zeal to save the Americans from the
yoke, he pronounced it to be lawful and expedient to impose one still
heavier on the Africans." [376] This distribution of praise and censure is
not perfectly correct. Las Casas had no idea that he was imposing a
heavier, nor so heavy, a yoke upon the Africans. The latter were
considered more capable of labor, and less impatient of slavery. While the
Indians sunk under their tasks, and perished by thousands in Hispaniola,
the negroes, on the contrary, thrived there. Herrera, to whom Dr.
Robertson refers as his authority, assigns a different motive, and one of
mere finance, for the measures of cardinal Ximenes. He says that he
ordered that no one should take negroes to the Indies, because, as the
natives were decreasing, and it was known that one negro did more work
than four of them, there would probably be a great demand for African
slaves, and a tribute might be imposed upon the trade, from which would
result profit to the royal treasury. [377] This measure was presently
after carried into effect, though subsequent to the death of the
cardinal, and licenses were granted by the sovereign for pecuniary
considerations. Flechier, in his life of Ximenes, assigns another but a
mere political motive for this prohibition. The cardinal, he says,
objected to the importation of negroes into the colonies, as he feared
they would corrupt the natives, and by confederacies with them render
them formidable to government. De Marsolier, another biographer of Ximenes,
gives equally politic reasons for this prohibition. He cites a letter
written by the cardinal on the subject, in which he observed that he knew
the nature of the negroes; they were a people capable, it was true, of
great fatigue, but extremely prolific and enterprising; and that if they
had time to multiply in America, they would infallibly revolt, and impose
on the Spaniards the same chains which they had compelled them to wear.
[378] These facts, while they take from the measure of the cardinal that
credit for exclusive philanthropy which has been bestowed upon it,
manifest the clear foresight of that able politician; whose predictions
with respect to negro revolt have been so strikingly fulfilled in the
island of Hispaniola.

Cardinal Ximenes, in fact, though a wise and upright statesman, was not
troubled with scruples of conscience on these questions of natural right;
nor did he possess more toleration than his contemporaries towards savage
and infidel nations. He was grand inquisitor of Spain, and was very
efficient during the latter years of Ferdinand in making slaves of the
refractory Moors of Granada. He authorized, by express instructions,
expeditions to seize and enslave the Indians of the Caribbee islands, whom
he termed only suited to labor, enemies of the Christians, and cannibals.
Nor will it be considered a proof of gentle or tolerant policy, that he
introduced the tribunal of the inquisition into the New World. These
circumstances are cited not to cast reproach upon the character of
cardinal Ximenes, but to show how incorrectly he has been extolled at the
expense of Las Casas. Both of them must be judged in connection with the
customs and opinions of the age in which they lived.

Las Casas was the author of many works, but few of which have been
printed. The most important is a general history of the Indies, from the
discovery to the year 1520, in three volumes. It exists only in
manuscript, but is the fountain from which Herrera, and most of the other
historians of the New World, have drawn large supplies. The work, though
prolix, is valuable, as the author was an eye-witness of many of the
facts, had others from persons who were concerned in the transactions
recorded, and possessed copious documents. It displays great erudition,
though somewhat crudely and diffusely introduced. His history was
commenced in 1527, at fifty-three years of age, and was finished in 1559,
when eighty-five. As many things are set down from memory, there is
occasional inaccuracy, but the whole bears the stamp of sincerity and
truth. The author of the present work, having had access to this valuable
manuscript, has made great use of it, drawing forth many curious facts
hitherto neglected; but he has endeavored to consult it with caution and
discrimination, collating it with other authorities, and omitting whatever
appeared to be dictated by prejudice or over-heated zeal.

Las Casas has been accused of high coloring and extravagant declamation in
those passages which relate to the barbarities practised on the natives;
nor is the charge entirely without foundation. The same zeal in the cause
of the Indians is expressed in his writings that shone forth in his
actions, always pure, often vehement, and occasionally unseasonable.
Still, however, where he errs it is on a generous and righteous side. If
one-tenth part of what he says he "witnessed with his own eyes" be true,
and his veracity is above all doubt, he would have been wanting in the
natural feelings of humanity had he not expressed himself in terms of
indignation and abhorrence.

In the course of his work, when Las Casas mentions the original papers
lying before him, from which he drew many of his facts, it makes one
lament that they should be lost to the world. Besides the journals and
letters of Columbus, he says he had numbers of the letters of the
Adelantado, Don Bartholomew, who wrote better than his brother, and whose
writings must have been full of energy. Above all, he had the map formed
from study and conjecture, by which Columbus sailed on his first voyage.
What a precious document would this be for the world! These writings may
still exist, neglected and forgotten among the rubbish of some convent in
Spain. Little hope can be entertained of discovering them in the present
state of degeneracy of the cloister. The monks of Atocha, in a recent
conversation with one of the royal princes, betrayed an ignorance that
this illustrious man was buried in their convent, nor can any of the
fraternity point out his place of sepulture to the stranger. [379]

The publication of this work of Las Casas has not been permitted in Spain,
where every book must have the sanction of a censor before it is committed
to the press. The horrible picture it exhibits of the cruelties inflicted
on the Indians, would, it was imagined, excite an odium against their
conquerors. Las Casas himself seems to have doubted the expediency of
publishing it; for in 1560 he made a note with his own hand, which is
preserved in the two first volumes of the original, mentioning that he
left them in confidence to the college of the order of Predicators of St.
Gregorio, in Valladolid, begging of its prelates that no secular person,
nor even the collegians, should be permitted to read his history for the
space of forty years; and that after that term it might be printed if
consistent with the good of the Indies and of Spain. [380]

For the foregoing reason the work has been cautiously used by Spanish
historians, passing over in silence, or with brief notice, many passages
of disgraceful import. This feeling is natural, if not commendable; for
the world is not prompt to discriminate between individuals and the nation
of whom they are but a part. The laws and regulations for the government
of the newly-discovered countries, and the decisions of the council of the
Indies on all contested points, though tinctured in some degree with the
bigotry of the age, were distinguished for wisdom, justice, and humanity,
and do honor to the Spanish nation. It was only in the abuse of them by
individuals to whom the execution of the laws was intrusted, that these
atrocities were committed. It should be remembered, also, that the same
nation which gave birth to the sanguinary and rapacious adventurers who
perpetrated these cruelties, gave birth likewise to the early
missionaries, like Las Casas, who followed the sanguinary course of
discovery, binding up the wounds inflicted by their countrymen; men who in
a truly evangelical spirit braved all kinds of perils and hardships, and
even death itself, not through a prospect of temporal gain or glory, but
through a desire to meliorate the condition and save the souls of
barbarous and suffering nations. The dauntless enterprises and fearful
peregrinations of many of these virtuous men, if properly appreciated,
would be found to vie in romantic daring with the heroic achievements of
chivalry, with motives of a purer and far more exalted nature.




No. XXIX.

Peter Martyr.



Peter Martir, or Martyr, of whose writings much use has been made in this
history, was born at Anghierra, in the territory of Milan, in Italy, on
the second of February, 1455. He is commonly termed Peter Martyr of
_Angleria_, from the Latin name of his native place. He is one of the
earliest historians that treat of Columbus, and was his contemporary and
intimate acquaintance. Being at Rome in 1487, and having acquired a
distinguished reputation for learning, he was invited by the Spanish
ambassador, the count de Tendilla, to accompany him to Spain. He willingly
accepted the invitation, and was presented to the sovereigns at Saragossa.
Isabella, amidst the cares of the war with Granada, was anxious for the
intellectual advancement of her kingdom, and wished to employ Martyr to
instruct the young nobility of the royal household. With her peculiar
delicacy, however, she first made her confessor, Hernando de Talavera,
inquire of Martyr in what capacity he desired to serve her. Contrary to
her expectation, Martyr replied, "in the profession of arms." The queen
complied, and he followed her in her campaigns, as one of her household
and military suite, but without distinguishing himself, and perhaps
without having any particular employ in a capacity so foreign to his
talents. After the surrender of Granada, when the war was ended, the
queen, through the medium of the grand cardinal of Spain, prevailed upon
him to undertake the instruction of the young nobles of her court.

Martyr was acquainted with Columbus while making his application to the
sovereigns, and was present at his triumphant reception by Ferdinand and
Isabella in Barcelona, on his return from his first voyage. He was
continually in the royal camp during the war with the Moors, of which his
letters contain many interesting particulars. He was sent ambassador
extraordinary by Ferdinand and Isabella, in 1501, to Venice, and thence to
the grand soldan of Egypt. The soldan, in 1490 or 1491, had sent an
embassy to the Spanish sovereigns, threatening that, unless they desisted
from the war against Granada, he would put all the Christians in Egypt and
Syria to death, overturn all their temples, and destroy the holy sepulchre
at Jerusalem. Ferdinand and Isabella pressed the war with tenfold energy,
and brought it to a triumphant conclusion in the next campaign, while the
soldan was still carrying on a similar negotiation with the pope. They
afterwards sent Peter Martyr ambassador to the soldan to explain and
justify their measure. Martyr discharged the duties of his embassy with
great ability; obtained permission from the soldan to repair the holy
places at Jerusalem, and an abolition of various extortions to which
Christian pilgrims had been subjected. While on this embassy, he wrote his
work Do Legatione Babylonica, which includes a history of Egypt in those
times.

On his return to Spain, he was rewarded with places and pensions, and in
1524 was appointed a minister of the council of the Indies. His principal
work is an account of the discoveries of the New World, in eight decades,
each containing ten chapters. They are styled Decades of the New World, or
Decades of the Ocean, and, like all his other works, were originally
written in Latin, though since translated into various languages. He had
familiar access to letters, papers, journals, and narratives of the early
discoverers, and was personally acquainted with many of them, gathering
particulars from their conversation. In writiug his Decades, he took great
pains to obtain information from Columbus himself, and from others, his
companions.

In one of his epistles, (No. 153, January, 1494, to Pomponius Laetus,) he
mentions having just received a letter from Columbus, by which it appears
he was in correspondence with him. Las Casas says that great credit is to
be given to him in regard to those voyages of Columbus, although his
Decades contain some inaccuracies relative to subsequent events in the
Indies. Munoz allows him great credit, as an author contemporary with his
subject, grave, well cultivated, instructed in the facts of which he
treats, and of entire probity. He observes, however, that his writings
being composed on the spur or excitement of the moment, often related
circumstances which subsequently proved to be erroneous; that they were
written without method or care, often confusing dates and events, so that
they must be read with some caution.

Martyr was in the daily habit of writing letters to distinguished persons,
relating the passing occurrences of the busy court and age in which he
lived. In several of these Columbus is mentioned, and also some of the
chief events of his voyages, as promulgated at the very moment of his
return. These letters not being generally known or circulated, or
frequently cited, it may be satisfactory to the reader to have a few of
the main passages which relate to Columbus. They have a striking effect in
carrying us back to the very time of the discoveries.

In one of his epistles, dated Barcelona, Mny 1st, 1493, and addressed to
C. Borromeo, he says: "Within these few days a certain Christopher
Columbus has arrived from the western antipodes; a man of Liguria, whom my
sovereigns reluctantly intrusted with three ships, to seek that region,
for they thought that what he said was fabulous. He has returned and
brought specimens of many precious things, but particularly gold, which
those countries naturally produce." [381]

In another letter, dated likewise from Barcelona, in September following,
he gives a more particular account. It is addressed to count Tendilla,
governor of Granada, and also to Hernando Talavera, archbishop of that
diocese, and the same to whom the propositions of Columbus had been
referred by the Spanish sovereigns. "Arouse your attention, ancient
sages," says Peter Martyr in his epistle; "listen to a new discovery. You
remember Columbus the Ligurian, appointed in the camp by our sovereigns to
search for a new hemisphere of land at the western antipodes. You ought to
recollect, for you had some agency in the transaction; nor would the
enterprise, as I think, have been undertaken, without your counsel. He has
returned in safety, and relates the wonders he has discovered. He exhibits
gold as proofs of the mines in those regions; Gossampine cotton, also, and
aromatics, and pepper more pnngent than that from Caucasus. All these
things, together with scarlet dye-woods, the earth produces spontaneously.
Pursuing the western sun from Gades five thousand miles, of each a
thousand paces, as he relates, he fell in with sundry islands, and took
possession of one of them, of greater circuit, he asserts, than the whole
of Spain. Here he found a race of men living contented, in a state of
nature, subsisting on fruits and vegetables, and bread formed from
roots.... These people have kings, some greater than others, and they war
occasionally among themselves, with bows and arrows, or lances sharpened
and hardened in the fire. The desire of command prevails among them,
though they are naked. They have wives also. What they worship except the
divinity of heaven, is not ascertained."  [382]

In another letter, dated likewise in September, 1403, and addressed to the
cardinal and vice-chancellor Ascanius Sforza, he says:

"So great is my desire to give you satisfaction, illustrious prince, that
I consider it a gratifying occurrence in the great fluctuations of events,
when any thing takes place among us, in which you may take an interest.
The wonders of this terrestrial globe, round which the sun makes a circuit
in the space of four and twenty hours, have, until our time, as you are
well aware, been known only in regard to one hemisphere, merely from the
Golden Chersonesus to our Spanish Gades. The rest has been given up as
unknown by cosmographers, and if any mention of it has been made, it has
been slight and dubious. But now, O blessed enterprise! under the auspices
of our sovereigns, what has hitherto lain hidden since the first origin of
things, has at length begun to be developed. The thing has thus occurred--
attend, illustrious prince! A certain Christopher Columbus, a Ligurian,
dispatched to those regions with three vessels by my sovereigns, pursuing
the western sun above five thousand miles from Gades, achieved his way to
the antipodes. Three and thirty successive days they navigated with naught
but sky and water. At length from the mast-head of the largest vessel, in
which Columbus himself sailed, those on the look-out proclaimed the sight
of land. He coasted along six islands, one of them, as all his followers
declare, beguiled perchance by the novelty of the scene, is larger than
Spain."

Martyr proceeds to give the usual account of the productions of the
islands, and the manners and customs of the natives, particularly the wars
which occurred among them; "as if _meum_ and _tuum_ had been
introduced among them as among us, and expensive luxuries, and the desire
of accumulating wealth; for what, you will think, can be the wants of
naked men?" "What farther may succeed," he adds, "I will hereafter
signify. Farewell." [383]

In another letter, dated Valladolid, February 1, 1494, to Hernando de
Talavera, archbishop of Granada, he observes, "The king and queen, on the
return of Columbus to Barcelona, from his honorable enterprise, appointed
him admiral of the ocean sea, and caused him, on account of his
illustrious deeds, to be seated in their presence, an honor and a favor,
as you know, the highest with our sovereigns. They have dispatched him
again to those regions, furnished with a fleet of eighteen ships. There is
prospect of great discoveries at the western antarctic antipodes."
[384]

In a subsequent letter to Pomponius Laetus, dated from Alcala de Henares,
December 9th, 1494, he gives the first news of the success of this
expedition.

"Spain," says he, "is spreading her wings, augmenting her empire, and
extending her name and glory to the antipodes.... Of eighteen vessels
dispatched by my sovereigns with the admiral Columbus, in his second
voyage to the western hemisphere, twelve have returned and have brought
Gossampine cotton, huge trees of dye-wood, and many other articles held
with us as precious, the natural productions of that hitherto hidden
world; and besides all other things, no small quantity of gold. O
wonderful, Pomponius! Upon the surface of that earth are found rude masses
of native gold, of a weight that one is afraid to mention. Some weigh two
hundred and fifty ounces, and they hope to discover others of a much
larger size, from what the naked natives intimate, when they extol their
gold to our people. Nor are the Lestrigonians nor Polyphemi, who feed on
human flesh, any longer doubtful. Attend--but beware! lest they rise in
horror before thee! When he proceeded from the Fortunate islands, now
termed the Canaries, to Hispaniola, the island on which he first set foot,
turning his prow a little toward the south, he arrived at innumerable
islands of savage men, whom they call cannibals, or Caribbees; and these,
though naked, are courageous warriors. They fight skillfully with bows and
clubs, and have boats hollowed from a single tree, yet very capacious, in
which they make fierce descents on neighboring islands, inhabited by
milder people. They attack their villages, from which they carry off the
men and devour them," &c. [385]

Another letter to Pomponius Laetus, on the same subject, has been cited at
large in the body of this work. It is true these extracts give nothing
that has not been stated more at large in the Decades of the same author,
but they are curious, as the very first announcements of the discoveries
of Columbus, and as showing the first stamp of these extraordinary events
upon the mind of one of the most learned and liberal men of the age.

A collection of the letters of Peter Martyr was published in 1530, under
the title of Opus Epistolarum, Petri Martyris Anglerii; it is divided into
thirty-eight books, each containing the letters of one year. The same
objections have been made to his letters as to his Decades, but they bear
the same stamp of candor, probity, and great information. They possess
peculiar value from being written at the moment, before the facts they
record were distorted or discolored by prejudice or misrepresentation. His
works abound in interesting particulars not to be found in any
contemporary historian. They are rich in thought, but still richer in
fact, and are full of urbanity, and of the liberal feeling of a scholar
who has mingled with the world. He is a fountain from which others draw,
and from which, with a little precaution, they may draw securely. He died
in Valladolid, in 1526.




No. XXX.

Oviedo.



Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo y Valdes, commonly known as Oviedo, was born
in Madrid in 1478, and died in Valladolid in 1557, aged seventy-nine
years. He was of a noble Austrian family, and in his boyhood (in 1490) was
appointed one of the pages to prince Juan, heir-apparent of Spain, the
only son of Ferdinand and Isabella. He was in this situation at the time
of the seige and surrender of Granada, was consequently at court at the
time that Columbus made his agreement with the Catholic sovereigns, and
was in the same capacity at Barcelona, and witnessed the triumphant
entrance of the discoverer, attended by a number of the natives of the
newly-found countries.

In 1513, he was sent out to the New World by Ferdinand, to superintend the
gold foundries. For many years he served there in various offices of trust
and dignity, both under Ferdinand and his grandson and successor, Charles
V. In 1535, he was made alcayde of the fortress of St. Domingo in
Hispaniola, and afterwards was appointed histomgrapher of the Indies. At
the time of his death, he had served the crown upwards of forty years,
thirty-four of which were passed in the colonies, and he had crossed the
ocean eight times, as he mentions in various parts of his writings. He
wrote several works; the most important is a chronicle of the Indies in
fifty books, divided into three parts. The first part, containing nineteen
books, was printed at Seville in 1535, and reprinted in 1547 at Salamanca,
augmented by a twentieth book containing shipwrecks. The remainder of the
work exists in manuscript. The printing of it was commenced at Valladolid
in 1557, but was discontinued in consequence of his death. It is one of
the unpublished treasures of Spanish colonial history.

He was an indefatigable writer, laborious in collecting and recording
facts, and composed a multitude of volumes which are scattered through the
Spanish libraries. His writings are full of events which happened under
his own eye, or were communicated to him by eyewitnesses; but he was
deficient in judgment and discrimination. He took his facts without
caution, and often from sources unworthy of credit. In his account of the
first voyage of Columbus, he falls into several egregious errors, in
consequence of taking the verbal information of a pilot named Hernan Perez
Matteo, who was in the interest of the Pinzons, and adverse to the
admiral. His work is not much to be depended upon in matters relative to
Columbus. When he treats of a more advanced period of the New World, from
his own actual observation, he is much more satisfactory, though he is
accused of listening too readily to popular fables and misrepresentations.
His account of the natural productions of the New World, and of the
customs of its inhabitants, is full of curious particulars; and the best
narratives of some of the minor voyages which succeeded those of Columbus
are to be found in the unpublished part of his work.




No. XXXI.

Cura de Los Palacios.



Andres Bernaldes, or Bernal, generally known by the title of the curate of
_Los Palacios_, from having been curate of the town of Los Palacios
from about 1488 to 1513, was born in the town of Fuentes, and was for some
time chaplain to Diego Dora, archbishop of Seville, one of the greatest
friends to the application of Columbus Bernaldes was well acquainted with
the admiral, who was occasionally his guest, and in 1496, left many of his
manuscripts and journals with him, which the curate made use of in a
history of the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, in which he introduced an
account of the voyages of Columbus. In his narrative of the admiral's
coasting along the southern side of Cuba, the curate is more minute and
accurate than any other historian. His work exists only in manuscript, but
is well known to historians, who have made frequent use of it. Nothing can
be more simple and artless than the account which the honest curate gives
of his being first moved to undertake his chronicle. "I who wrote these
chapters of memoirs," he says, "being for twelve years in the habit of
reading a register of my deceased grandfather, who was notary public of
the town of Fuentes, where I was born, I found therein several chapters
recording certain events and achievements which had taken place in his
time; and my grandmother his widow, who was very old, hearing me read
them, said to me, 'And thou, my son, since thou art not slothful in
writing, why dost thou not write, in this manner, the good things which
are happening at present in thy own day, that those who come hereafter may
know them, and marvelling at what they read, may render thanks to God?'

"From that time," continues he, "I proposed to do so, and as I considered
the matter, I said often to myself,' if God gives me life and health, I
will continue to write until I behold the kingdom of Granada gained by the
Christians;' and I always entertained a hope of seeing it, and did see it:
great thanks and praises be given to our Saviour Jesus Christ! And because
it was impossible to write a complete and connected account of all things
that happened in Spain, during the matrimonial union of the king Don
Ferdinand, and the queen Dona Isabella, I wrote only about certain of the
most striking and remarkable events, of which I had correct information,
and of those which I saw or which were public and notorious to all men."
[386]

The work of the worthy curate, as may be inferred from the foregoing
statement, is deficient in regularity of plan; the style is artless and
often inelegant, but it abounds in facts not to be met with elsewhere,
often given in a very graphical manner, and strongly characteristic of the
times. As he was contemporary with the events and familiar with many of
the persons of his history, and as he was a man of probity and void of all
pretension, his manuscript is a document of high authenticity. He was much
respected in the limited sphere in which he moved, "yet," says one of his
admirers, who wrote a short preface to his chronicle, "he had no other
reward than that of the curacy of Los Palacios, and the place of chaplain
to the archbishop Don Diego Deza."

In the possession of O. Rich, Esq., of Madrid, is a very curious
manuscript chronicle of the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, already
quoted in this work, made up from this history of the curate of Los
Palacios, and from various other historians of the times, by some
contemporary writer. In his account of the voyage of Columbus, he differs
in some trivial particulars from the regular copy of the manuscript of the
curate. These variations have been carefully examined by the author of
this work, and wherever they appear to be for the better, have been
adopted.




No. XXXII.

"Navigatione del Re de Castiglia delle Isole e Paese Nuovamente
Ritrovate."

"Naviagatio Chrisophori Colombi."



The above are the titles, in Italian and in Latin, of the earliest
narratives of the first and second voyages of Columbus that appeared in
print. It was anonymous; and there are some curious particulars in regard
to it. It was originally written in Italian by Montalbodo Fracanzo, or
Fracanzano, or by Francapano de Montabaldo, (for writers differ in regard
to the name,) and was published in Vicenza, in 1507, in a collection of
voyages, entitled "Mondo Novo, e Paese Nuovamente Ritrovate." The
collection was republished at Milan, in 1508, both in Italian, and in a
Latin translation made by Archangelo Madrignano, under the title of
"Itinerarium Portugallensium;" this title being given, because the work
related chiefly to the voyages of Luigi Cadamosto, a Venetian in the
service of Portugal.

The collection was afterwards augmented by Simon Grinaens with other
travels, and printed in Latin at Basle, in 1533, [387] by Hervagio,
entitled "Novus Orbis Regionum," &c. The edition of Basle, 1555, and the
Italian edition of Milan, in 1508, have been consulted in the course of
this work.

Peter Martyr (Decad. 2, Cap. 7,) alludes to this publication, under the
first Latin title of the book, "Itinerarium Portugallensium," and accuses
the author, whom by mistake he terms Cadamosto, of having stolen the
materials of his book from the three first chapters of his first Decade of
the Ocean, of which, he says, he granted copies in manuscript to several
persons, and in particular to certain Venetian ambassadors. Martyr's
Decades were not published until 1516, excepting the first three, which
were published in 1511, at Seville.

This narrative of the voyages of Columbus is referred to by Gio. Batista
Spotorno, in his historical memoir of Columbus, as having been written by
a companion of Columbus.

It is manifest, from a perusal of the narrative, that though the author
may have helped himself freely from the manuscript of Martyr, he must have
had other sources of information. His description of the person of
Columbus as a man tall of stature and large of frame, of a ruddy
complexion and oblong visage, is not copied from Martyr, nor from any
other writer. No historian had, indeed, preceded him, except Sabellicus,
in 1504; and the portrait agrees with that subsequently given of Columbus
in the biography written by his son.

It is probable that this narrative, which appeared only a year after the
death of Columbus, was a piece of literary job-work, written, for the
collection of voyages published at Vicenza; and that the materials were
taken from oral communication, from the account given by Sabellicus, and
particularly from the manuscript copy of Martyr's first decade.




No. XXXIII.

Antonio de Herrera.



Antonio Herrera de Tordesillas, one of the authors most frequently cited
in this work, was born in 1565, of Roderick Tordesillas, and Agnes de
Herrera, his wife. He received an excellent education, and entered into
the employ of Vespasian Gonzago, brother to the duke of Mantua, who was
viceroy of Naples for Philip the Second of Spain. He was for some time
secretary to this statesman, and intrusted with all his secrets. He was
afterwards grand historiographer of the Indies to Philip II, who added to
that title a large pension. He wrote various books, but the most
celebrated is a General History of the Indies, or American Colonies, in
four volumes, containing eight decades. When he undertook this work, all
the public archives were thrown open to him, and he had access to
documents of all kinds. He has been charged with great precipitation in
the production of his two first volumes, and with negligence in not making
sufficient use of the indisputable sources of information thus placed
within his reach. The fact was, that he met with historical tracts lying
in manuscript, which embraced a great part of the first discoveries, and
he contented himself with stating events as he found them therein
recorded. It is certain that a great part of his work is little more than
a transcript of the manuscript history of the Indies by Las Casas,
sometimes reducing and improving the language when tumid; omitting the
impassioned sallies of the zealous father, when the wrongs of the Indians
were in question; and suppressing various circumstances degrading to the
character of the Spanish discoverers. The author of the present work has,
therefore, frequently put aside the history of Herrera, and consulted the
source of his information, the manuscript history of Las Casas.

Munoz observes, that "in general Herrera did little more than join
together morsels and extracts, taken from various parts, in the way that a
writer arranges chronologically the materials from which he intends to
compose a history;" he adds, that "had not Herrera been a learned and
judicious man, the precipitation with which he put together these
materials would have led to innumerable errors." The remark is just; yet
it is to be considered, that to select and arrange such materials
judiciously, and treat them learnedly, was no trifling merit in the
historian.

Herrera has been accused also of flattering his nation; exalting the deeds
of his countrymen, and softening and concealing their excesses. There is
nothing very serious in this accusation. To illustrate the glory of his
nation is one of the noblest offices of the historian; and it is difficult
to speak too highly of the extraordinary enterprises and splendid actions
of the Spaniards in those days. In softening their excesses he fell into
an amiable and pardonable error, if it were indeed an error for a Spanish
writer to endeavor to sink them in oblivion.

Vossius passes a high eulogium on Herrera. "No one," he says, "has
described with greater industry and fidelity the magnitude and boundaries
of provinces, the tracts of sea, positions of capes and islands, of ports
and harbors, the windings of rivers and dimensions of lakes; the situation
and peculiarities of regions, with the appearance of the heavens, and the
designation of places suitable for the establishment of cities." He has
been called among the Spaniards the prince of the historians of America,
and it is added that none have risen since his time capable of disputing
with him that title. Much of this praise will appear exaggerated by such
as examine the manuscript histories from which he transferred chapters
and entire books, with very little alteration, to his volumes; and a great
part of the eulogiums passed on him for his work on the Indies, will be
found really due to Las Casas, who has too long been eclipsed by his
copyist. Still Herrera has left voluminous proofs of industrious research,
extensive information, and great literary talent. His works bear the mark
of candor, integrity, and a sincere desire to record the truth.

He died in 1625, at sixty years of age, after having obtained from Philip
IV the promise of the first charge of secretary of state that should
become vacant.




No. XXXIV.

Bishop Fonseca.



The singular malevolence displayed by bishop Juan Rodriguez de Fonseca
towards Columbus and his family, and which was one of the secret and
principal causes of their misfortunes, has been frequently noticed in the
course of this work. It originated, as has been shown, in some dispute
between the admiral and Fonseca at Seville in 1493, on account of the
delay in fitting out the armament for the second voyage, and in regard to
the number of domestics to form the household of the admiral. Fonseca
received a letter from the sovereigns, tacitly reproving him, and ordering
him to show all possible attention to the wishes of Columbus, and to see
that he was treated with honor and deference. Fonseca never forgot this
affront, and, what with him was the same thing, never forgave it. His
spirit appears to have been of that unhealthy kind which has none of the
balm of forgiveness; and in which a wound, once made, for ever rankles.
The hostility thus produced continued with increasing virulence throughout
the life of Columbus, and at his death was transferred to his son and
successor. This persevering animosity has been illustrated in the course
of this work by facts and observations, cited from authors, some of them
contemporary with Fonseca, but who were apparently restrained by motives
of prudence from giving full vent to the indignation which they evidently
felt. Even at the present day, a Spanish historian would be cautious of
expressing his feelings freely on the subject, lest they should prejudice
his work in the eyes of the ecclesiastical censors of the press. In this
way, bishop Fonseca has in a great measure escaped the general odium his
conduct merited.

This prelate had the chief superintendence of Spanish colonial affairs,
both under Ferdinand and Isabella and the emperor Charles V. He was an
active and intrepid, but selfish, overbearing, and perfidious man. His
administration bears no marks of enlarged and liberal policy; but is full
of traits of arrogance and meanness. He opposed the benevolent attempts of
Las Casas to ameliorate the condition of the Indians, and to obtain the
abolition of repartimientos; treating him with personal haughtiness and
asperity. [388] The reason assigned is that Fonseca was enriching himself
by those very abuses, retaining large numbers of the miserable Indians in
slavery, to work on his possessions in the colonies.

To show that his character has not been judged with undue severity, it is
expedient to point out his invidious and persecuting conduct towards
Hernando Cortez. The bishop, while ready to foster rambling adventurers
who came forward under his patronage, had never the head or the heart to
appreciate the merits of illustrious commanders like Columbus and Cortez.

At a time when disputes arose between Cortez and Diego Velazquez, governor
of Cuba, and the latter sought to arrest the conqueror of Mexico in the
midst of his brilliant career, Fonseca, with entire disregard of the
merits of the case, took a decided part in favor of Velazquez. Personal
interest was at the bottom of this favor; for a marriage was negotiating
between Velazquez and a sister of the bishop. [389] Complaints and
misrepresentations had been sent to Spain by Velazquez of the conduct of
Cortez, who was represented as a lawless and unprincipled adventurer,
attempting to usurp absolute authority in New Spain. The true services of
Cortez had already excited admiration at court, but such was the influence
of Fonseca, that, as in the case of Columbus, he succeeded in prejudicing
the mind of the sovereign against one of the most meritorious of his
subjects. One Christoval de Tapia, a man destitute of talent or character,
but whose greatest recommendation was his having been in the employ of
the bishop, [390] was invested with powers similar to those once given to
Bobadilla to the prejudice of Columbus. He was to inquire into the conduct
of Cortez, and in case he thought fit, to seize him, sequestrate his
property, and supersede him in command. Not content with the regular
official letters furnished to Tapia, the bishop, shortly after his
departure, sent out Juan Bono de Quexo with blank letters signed by his
own hand, and with others directed to various persons, charging them to
admit Tapia for governor, and assuring them that the king considered the
conduct of Cortez as disloyal. Nothing but the sagacity and firmness of
Cortez prevented this measure from completely interrupting, if not
defeating, his enterprises; and he afterwards declared, that he had
experienced more trouble and difficulty from the menaces and affronts of
the ministers of the king than it cost him to conquer Mexico. [391]

When the dispute between Cortez and Velazquez came to be decided upon in
Spain, in 1522, the father of Cortez, and those who had come from New
Spain as his procurators, obtained permission from cardinal Adrian, at
that time governor of the realm, to prosecute a public accusation of the
bishop. A regular investigation took place before the council of the
Indies of their allegations against its president. They charged him with
having publicly declared Cortez a traitor and a rebel: with having
intercepted and suppressed his letters addressed to the king, keeping his
majesty in ignorance of their contents and of the important services he
had performed, while he diligently forwarded all letters calculated to
promote the interest of Velazquez: with having prevented the
representations of Cortez from being heard in the council of the Indies,
declaring that they should never be heard there while he lived: with
having interdicted the forwarding of arms, merchandise, and reinforcements
to New Spain: and with having issued orders to the office of the India
House at Seville to arrest the procurators of Cortez and all persons
arriving from him, and to seize and detain all gold that they should
bring. These and various other charges of similar nature were
dispassionately investigated. Enough were substantiated to convict Fonseca
of the most partial, oppressive, and perfidious conduct, and the cardinal
consequently forbade him to interfere in the cause between Cortez and
Velazquez, and revoked all the orders which the bishop had issued, in the
matter, to the India House of Seville. Indeed, Salazar, a Spanish
historian, says that Fonseca was totally divested of his authority as
president of the council, and of all control of the affiairs of New Spain,
and adds that he was so mortified at the blow, that it brought on a fit of
illness, which well nigh cost him his life. [392]

The suit between Cortez and Velazquez was referred to a special tribunal,
composed of the grand chancellor and other persons of note, and was
decided in 1522. The influence and intrigues of Fonseca being no longer of
avail, a triumphant verdict was given in favor of Cortez, which was
afterwards confirmed by the emperor Charles V, and additional honors
awarded him. This was another blow to the malignant Fonseca, who retained
his enmity against Cortez until his last moment, rendered still more
rancorous by mortification and disappointment.

A charge against Fonseca, of a still darker nature than any of the
preceding, may be found lurking in the pages of Herrera, though so obscure
as to have escaped the notice of succeeding historians. He points to the
bishop as the instigator of a desperate and perfidious man, who conspired
against the life of Hernando Cortez. This was one Antonio de Villafana,
who fomented a conspiracy to assassinate Cortez, and elect Francisco
Verdujo, brother-in-law of Velazquez, in his place. While the conspirators
were waiting for an opportunity to poniard Cortez, one of them relenting,
apprised him of his danger. Villafana was arrested. He attempted to
swallow a paper containing a list of the conspirators, but being seized by
the throat, a part of it was forced from his mouth containing fourteen
names of persons of importance, Villafafia confessed his guilt, but
tortures could not make him inculpate the persons whose names were on the
list, who he declared were ignorant of the plot. He was hanged by order of
Cortez. [393]

In the investigation of the disputes between Cortez and Velazquez, this
execution of Villafana was magnified into a cruel and wanton act of power;
and in their eagerness to criminate Cortez the witnesses on the part of
Alvarez declared that Villafana had been instigated to what he had done by
letters from bishop Fonseca! (Que se movio a lo que hizo con cartas del
obispo de Burgos. [394]) It is not probable that Fonseca had recommended
assassination, but it shows the character of his agents, and what must
have been the malignant nature of his instructions, when these men thought
that such an act would accomplish his wishes.

Fonseca died at Burgos, on the 4th of November, 1524, and was interred at
Coca.




No. XXXV.

Of the Situation of the Terrestrial Paradise.



The speculations of Columbus on the situation of the terrestrial
paradise, extravagant as they may appear, were such as have occupied many
grave and learned men. A slight notice of their opinions on this curious
subject may be acceptable to the general reader, and may take from the
apparent wildness of the ideas expressed by Columbus.

The abode of our first parents was anciently the subject of anxious
inquiry; and indeed mankind have always been prone to picture some place
of perfect felicity, where the imagination, disappointed in the coarse
realities of life, might revel in an Elysium of its own creation. It is an
idea not confined to our religion, but is found in the rude creeds of the
most savage nations, and it prevailed generally among the ancients. The
speculations concerning the situation of the garden of Eden resemble those
of the Greeks concerning the garden of the Hesperides; that region of
delight, which they for ever placed at the most remote verge of the known
world; which their poets embellished with all the charms of fiction; after
which they were continually longing, and which they could never find. At
one time it was in the Grand Oasis of Arabia. The exhausted travelers,
after traversing the parched and sultry desert, hailed this verdant spot
with rapture; they refreshed themselves under its shady bowers, and beside
its cooling streams, as the crew of a tempest-tost vessel repose on the
shores of some green island in the deep; and from its being thus isolated
in the midst of an ocean of sand, they gave it the name of the Island of
the Blessed. As geographical knowledge increased, the situation of the
Hesperian gardens was continually removed to a greater distance. It was
transferred to the borders of the great Syrtis, in the neighborhood of
Mount Atlas. Here, after traversing the frightful deserts of Barca, the
traveler found himself in a fair and fertile country, watered by rivulets
and gushing fountains. The oranges and citrons transported hence to
Greece, where they were as yet unknown, delighted the Athenians by their
golden beauty and delicious flavor, and they thought that none but the
garden of the Hesperides could produce such glorious fruits. In this way
the happy region of the ancients was transported from place to place,
still in the remote and obscure extremity of the world, until it was
fabled to exist in the Canaries, thence called the Fortunate or the
Hesperian islands. Here it remained, because discovery advanced no
farther, and because these islands were so distant, and so little known,
as to allow full latitude to the fictions of the poet. [395]

In like manner the situation of the terrestrial paradise, or garden of
Eden, was long a subject of earnest inquiry and curious disputation, and
occupied the laborious attention of the most learned theologians. Some
placed it in Palestine or the Holy Land; others in Mesopotamia, in that
rich and beautiful tract of country embraced by the wanderings of the
Tigris and the Euphrates; others in Armenia, in a valley surrounded by
precipitous and inaccessible mountains, and imagined that Enoch and Elijah
were transported thither, out of the sight of mortals, to live in a state
of terrestrial bliss until the second coming of our Saviour. There were
others who gave it situations widely remote, such as in the Trapoban of
the ancients, at present known as the island of Ceylon; or in the island
of Sumatra; or in the Fortunate or Canary islands; or in one of the
islands of Sunda; or in some favored spot under the equinoctial line.

Great difficulty was encountered by these speculators to reconcile the
allotted place with the description given in Genesis of the garden of
Eden; particularly of the great fountain which watered it, and which
afterwards divided itself into four rivers, the Pison or Phison, the
Gihon, the Euphrates, and the Hiddekel. Those who were in favor of the
Holy Land supposed that the Jordan was the great river which afterwards
divided itself into the Phison, Gihon, Tigris, and Euphrates, but that the
sands have choked up the ancient beds by which these streams were
supplied; that originally the Phison traversed Arabia Deserta and Arabia
Felix, whence it pursued its course to the gulf of Persia; that the Gihon
bathed northern or stony Arabia and fell into the Arabian Gulf or the Red
Sea; that the Euphrates and the Tigris passed by Eden to Assyria and
Chaldea, whence they discharged themselves into the Persian Gulf.

By most of the early commentators the river Gihon is supposed to be the
Nile. The source of this river was unknown, but was evidently far distant
from the spots whence the Tigris and the Euphrates arose. This difficulty,
however, was ingeniously overcome by giving it a subterranean course of
some hundreds of leagues from the common fountain, until it issued forth
to daylight in Abyssinia. [396] In like manner, subterranean courses were
given to the Tigris and the Euphrates, passing under the Bed Sea, until
they sprang forth in Armenia, as if just issuing from one common source.
So also those who placed the terrestrial paradise in islands, supposed
that the rivers which issued from it, and formed those heretofore named,
either traversed the surface of the sea, as fresh water, by its greater
lightness, may float above the salt; or that they flowed through deep
veins and channels of the earth, as the fountain of Arethusa was said to
sink into the ground in Greece, and rise in the island of Sicily, while
the river Alpheus pursuing it, but with less perseverance, rose somewhat
short of it in the sea.

Some contended that the deluge had destroyed the garden of Eden, and
altered the whole face of the earth; so that the rivers had changed their
beds, and had taken different directions from those mentioned in Genesis;
others, however, amongst whom was St. Augustine, in his commentary upon
the book of Genesis, maintained that the terrestrial paradise still
existed, with its original beauty and delights, but that it was
inaccessible to mortals, being on the summit of a mountain of stupendous
height, reaching into the third region of the air, and approaching the
moon; being thus protected by its elevation from the ravages of the
deluge.

By some this mountain was placed under the equinoctial line; or under that
band of the heavens metaphorically called by the ancients "the table of
the sun," [397] comprising the space between the tropics of Cancer and
Capricorn, beyond which the sun never passed in his annual course. Here
would reign a uniformity of nights and days and seasons, and the elevation
of the mountain would raise it above the heats and storms of the lower
regions. Others transported the garden beyond the equinoctial line and
placed it in the southern hemisphere; supposing that the torrid zone might
be the flaming sword appointed to defend its entrance against mortals.
They had a fanciful train of argument to support their theory. They
observed that the terrestrial paradise must be in the noblest and happiest
part of the globe; that part must be under the noblest part of the
heavens; as the merits of a place do not so much depend upon the virtues
of the earth, as upon the happy influences of the stars and the favorable
and benign aspect of the heavens. Now, according to philosophers, the
world was divided into two hemispheres. The southern they considered the
head, and the northern the feet, or under part; the right hand the east,
whence commenced the movement of the primum mobile, and the left the west,
towards which it moved. This supposed, they observed that as it was
manifest that the head of all things, natural and artificial, is always
the best and noblest part, governing the other parts of the body, so the
south, being the head of the earth, ought to be superior and nobler than
either east, or west, or north; and in accordance with this, they cited
the opinion of various philosophers among the ancients, and more
especially that of Ptolemy, that the stars of the southern hemisphere were
larger, more resplendent, more perfect, and of course of greater virtue
and efficacy, than those of the northern: an error universally prevalent
until disproved by modern discovery. Hence they concluded that in this
southern hemisphere, in this head of the earth, under this purer and
brighter sky, and these more potent and benignant stars, was placed the
terrestrial paradise.

Various ideas were entertained as to the magnitude of this blissful
region. As Adam and all his progeny were to have lived there, had he not
sinned, and as there would have been no such thing as death to thin the
number of mankind, it was inferred that the terrestrial paradise must be
of great extent to contain them. Some gave it a size equal to Europe or
Africa; others gave it the whole southern hemisphere. St. Augustine
supposed that as mankind multiplied, numbers would be translated without
death to heaven; the parents, perhaps, when their children had arrived at
mature age; or portions of the human race at the end of certain periods,
and when the population of the terrestrial paradise had attained a certain
amount. [398] Others supposed that mankind, remaining in a state of
primitive innocence, would not have required so much space as at present.
Having no need of rearing animals for subsistence, no land would have
been required for pasturage; and the earth not being cursed with
sterility, there would have been no need of extensive tracts of country
to permit of fallow land and the alternation of crops required in
husbandry. The spontaneous and never-failing fruits of the garden would
have been abundant for the simple wants of man. Still, that the human
race might not be crowded, but might have ample space for recreation and
enjoyment, and the charms of variety and change, some allowed at least a
hundred leagues of circumference to the garden.

St. Basilius, in his eloquent discourse on paradise, [399] expatiates with
rapture on the joys of this sacred abode, elevated to the third region of
the air, and under the happiest skies. There a pure and never-failing
pleasure is furnished to every sense. The eye delights in the admirable
clearness of the atmosphere, in the verdure and beauty of the trees, and
the never-withering bloom of the flowers. The ear is regaled with the
singing of the birds, the smell with the aromatic odors of the land. In
like manner the other senses have each their peculiar enjoyments. There
the vicissitudes of the seasons are unknown and the climate unites the
fruitfulness of summer, the joyful abundance of autumn, and the sweet
freshness and quietude of spring. There the earth is always green, the
flowers are ever blooming, the waters limpid and delicate, not rushing in
rude and turbid torrents, but swelling up in crystal fountains, and
winding in peaceful and silver streams. There no harsh and boisterous
winds are permitted to shake and disturb the air, and ravage the beauty of
the groves; there prevails no melancholy, nor darksome weather, no
drowning rain, nor pelting hail; no forked lightning, nor rending and
resounding thunder; no wintry pinching cold, nor withering and panting
summer heat; nor any thing else that can give pain or sorrow or annoyance;
but all is bland and gentle and serene; a perpetual youth and joy reigns
throughout all nature, and nothing decays and dies.

The same idea is given by St. Ambrosius, in his book on Paradise, [400] an
author likewise consulted and cited by Columbus. He wrote in the fourth
century, and his touching eloquence, and graceful yet vigorous style,
insured great popularity to his writings. Many of these opinions are cited
by Glanville. usually called Bartholomeus Anglicus, in his work De
Proprietatibus Rerum; a work with which Columbus was evidently acquainted.
It was a species of encyclopedia of the general knowledge current at the
time, and was likely to recommend itself to a curious and inquiring
voyager. This author cites an assertion as made by St. Basilius and St.
Ambrosius, that the water of the fountain which proceeds from the garden
of Eden falls into a great lake with such a tremendous noise that the
inhabitants of the neighborhood are born deaf; and that from this lake
proceed the four chief rivers mentioned in Genesis. [401]

This passage, however, is not to be found in the Hexameron of either
Basilius or Ambrositis, from which it is quoted; neither is it in the
oration on Paradise by the former, nor in the letter on the same subject
written by Ambrosius to Ainbrosins Sabinus. It must be a misquotation by
Glanville. Columbus, however, appears to have been struck with it, and Las
Casas is of opinion that he derived thence his idea that the vast body of
fresh water which filled the gulf of La Ballena or Paria, flowed from the
fountain of Paradise, though from a remote distance; and that in this
gulf, which he supposed in the extreme part of Asia, originated the Nile,
the Tigris, the Euphrates, and the Ganges, which might be conducted under
the land and sea by subterranean channels, to the places where they spring
forth on the earth and assume their proper names.

I forbear to enter into various other of the voluminous speculations which
have been formed relative to the terrestrial paradise, and perhaps it may
be thought that I have already said too much on so fanciful a subject; but
to illustrate clearly the character of Columbus, it is necessary to
elucidate those veins of thought passing through his mind while
considering the singular phenomena of the unknown regions he was
exploring, and which are often but slightly and vaguely developed in his
journals and letters. These speculations, likewise, like those concerning
fancied islands in the ocean, carry us back to the time, and make us feel
the mystery and conjectural charm which reigned over the greatest part of
the world, and have since been completely dispelled by modern discovery.
Enough has been cited to show, that, in his observations concerning the
terrestrial paradise, Columbus was not indulging in any fanciful and
presumptuous chimeras, the offspring of a heated and disordered brain.
However visionary his conjectures may seem, they were all grounded on
written opinions held little less than oracular in his day; and they will
be found on examination to be far exceeded by the speculations and
theories of sages held illustrious for their wisdom and erudition in the
school and cloister.




No. XXXVI.

Will of Columbus.



In the name of the Most Holy Trinity, who inspired me with the idea, and
afterwards made it perfectly clear to me, that I could navigate and go to
the Indies from Spain, by traversing the ocean westwardly; which I
communicated to the king, Don Ferdinand, and to the queen Dona Isabella,
our sovereigns; and they were pleased to furnish me the necessary
equipment of men and ships, and to make me their admiral over the said
ocean, in all parts lying to the west of an imaginary line, drawn from
pole to pole, a hundred leagues west of the Cape de Verd and Azore
islands; also appointing me their viceroy and governor over all continents
and islands that I might discover beyond the said line westwardly; with
the right of being succeeded in the said offices by my eldest son and his
heirs for ever; and a grant of the tenth part of all things found in the
said jurisdiction; and of all rents and revenues arising from it; and the
eighth of all the lands and every thing else, together with the salary
corresponding to my rank of admiral, viceroy, and governor, and all other
emoluments accruing thereto, as is more fully expressed in the title and
agreement sanctioned by their highnesses.

And it pleased the Lord Almighty, that in the year one thousand four
hundred and ninety-two, I should discover the continent of the Indies and
many islands, among them Hispaniola, which the Indians called Ayte, and
the Monicongos, Cipango. I then returned to Castile to their highnesses,
who approved of my undertaking a second enterprise for farther discoveries
and settlements; and the Lord gave me victory over the island of
Hispaniola, which extends six hundred leagues, and I conquered it and made
it tributary; and I discovered many islands inhabited by cannibals, and
seven hundred to the west of Hispaniola, among which is Jamaica, which we
call Santiago; and three hundred and thirty-three leagues of continent
from south to west, besides a hundred and seven to the north, which I
discovered in my first voyage, together with many islands, as may more
clearly be seen by my letters, memorials, and maritime charts. And as we
hope in God that before long a good and great revenue will be derived from
the above islands and continent, of which, for the reasons aforesaid,
belong to me the tenth and the eighth, with the salaries and emoluments
specified above; and considering that we are mortal, and that it is proper
for every one to settle his affairs, and to leave declared to his heirs
and successors the property he possesses or may have a right to: Wherefore
I have concluded to create an entailed estate (mayorazgo) out of the said
eighth of the lands, places, and revenues, in the manner which I now
proceed to state.

In the first place, I am to be succeeded by Don Diego, my son, who in case
of death without children is to be succeeded by my other son Ferdinand;
and should God dispose of him also without leaving children, and without
my having any other son, then my brother Don Bartholomew is to succeed;
and after him his eldest son; and if God should dispose of him without
heirs, he shall be succeeded by his sons from one to another for ever; or,
in the failure of a son, to be succeeded by Don Ferdinand, after the same
manner, from son to son successively; or in their place by my brothers
Bartholomew and Diego. And should it please the Lord that the estate,
after having continued for some time in the line of any of the above
successors, should stand in need of an immediate and lawful male heir, the
succession shall then devolve to the nearest relation, being a man of
legitimate birth, and bearing the name of Columbus derived from his father
and his ancestors. This entailed estate shall in nowise be inherited by a
woman, except in case that no male is to be found, either in this or any
other quarter of the world, of my real lineage, whose name, as well as
that of his ancestors, shall have always been Columbus. In such an event
(which may God forefend), then the female of legitimate birth, most nearly
related to the preceding possessor of the estate, shall succeed to it; and
this is to be under the conditions herein stipulated at foot, which must
be understood to extend as well to Don Diego, my son, as to the aforesaid
and their heirs, every one of them, to be fulfilled by them; and failing
to do so, they are to be deprived of the succession, for not having
complied with what shall herein be expressed; and the estate to pass to
the person most nearly related to the one who held the right: and the
person thus succeeding shall in like manner forfeit the estate, should he
also fail to comply with said conditions; and another person, the nearest
of my lineage, shall succeed, provided he abide by them, so that they may
be observed for ever in the form prescribed. This forfeiture is not to be
incurred for trifling matters, originating in lawsuits, but in important
cases, when the glory of God, or my own, or that of my family, may be
concerned, which supposes a perfect fulfillment of all the things hereby
ordained; all which I recommend to the courts of justice. And I supplicate
his Holiness, who now is, and those that may succeed in the holy church,
that if it should happen that this my will and testament has need of his
holy order and command for its fulfillment, that such order be issued in
virtue of obedience, and under penalty of excommunication, and that it
shall not be in any wise disfigured. And I also pray the king and queen,
our sovereigns, and their eldest-born, Prince Don Juan, our lord, and
their successors, for the sake of the services I have done them, and
because it is just, that it may please them not to permit this my will and
constitution of my entailed estate to be any way altered, but to leave it
in the form and manner which I have ordained, for ever, for the greater
glory of the Almighty, and that it may be the root and basis of my
lineage, and a memento of the services I have rendered their highnesses;
that, being born in Genoa, I came over to serve them in Castile, and
discovered to the west of Terra Firma, the Indies and islands before
mentioned. I accordingly pray their highnesses to order that this my
privilege and testament be held valid, avid be executed summarily and
without any opposition or demur, according to the letter. I also pray the
grandees of the realm and the lords of the council, and all others having
administration of justice, to be pleased not to suffer this my will and
testament to be of no avail, but to cause it to be fulfilled as by me
ordained; it being just that a noble, who has served the king and queen,
and the kingdom, should be respected in the disposition of his estate by
will, testament, institution of entail, or inheritance, and that the same
be not infringed either in whole or in part.

In the first place, my son Don Diego, and all my successors and
descendants, as well as ihy brothers Bartholomew and Diego, shall bear my
arms, such as I shall leave them after my days, without inserting any
thing else in them; and they shall he their seal to seal withal. Don Diego
my son, or any other who may inherit this estate, on coming into
possession of the inheritance, shall sign with the signature which I now
make vise of, which is an X with an S over it, and an M with a Roman A
over it, and over that an S, and then a Greek Y, with an S over it, with
its lines and points as is my custom, as may be seen by my signatures, of
which there are many, and it will be seen by the present one.

He shall only write "the Admiral," whatever other titles the king may have
conferred on him. This is to be understood as respects his signature, but
not the enumeration of his titles, which he can make at full length if
agreeable, only the signature is to be "the Admiral."

The said Don Diego, or any other inheritor of this estate, shall possess
my offices of admiral of the ocean, which is to the west of an imaginary
line, which his highness ordered to be drawn, running from pole to pole a
hundred leagues beyond the Azores, and as many more beyond the Cape de
Verd islands, over all which I was made, by their order, their admiral of
the sea, with all the preeminences held by Don Henrique in the admiralty
of Castile, and they made me their governor and viceroy perpetually and
for ever, over all the islands and main-land discovered, or to be
discovered, for myself and heirs, as is more fully shown by my treaty and
privilege as above mentioned.

Item: The said Don Diego, or any other inheritor of this estate, shall
distribute the revenue which it may please our Lord to grant him, in the
following manner, under the above penalty:

First--Of the whole income of this estate, now and at all times, and of
whatever may be had or collected from it, he shall give the fourth part
annually to my brother Don Bartholomew Columbus, Adelantado of the Indies;
and this is to continue till he shall have acquired an income of a million
of maravadises, for his support, and for the services he has rendered and
will continue to render to this entailed estate; which million he is to
receive, as stated, every year, if the said fourth amount to so much, and
that he have nothing elae; but if he possess a part or the whole of that
amount in rents, that thenceforth he shall not enjoy the said million, nor
any part of it, except that he shall have in the said fourth part unto the
said quantity of a million, if it should amount to so much; and as much as
he shall have of revenue beside this fourth part, whatever sum of
maravadises of known rent from property, or perpetual offices, the said
quantity of rent or revenue from property or offices shall be discounted;
and from the said million shall be reserved whatever marriage portion he
may receive with any female he may espouse; so that whatever he may
receive in marriage with his wife, no deduction shall be made on that
account from said million, but only for whatever he may acquire, or may
have, over and above his wife's dowry, and when it shall please God that
he or his heirs and descendants shall derive from their property and
offices a revenue of a million arising from rents, neither he nor his
heirs shall enjoy any longer any thing from the said fourth part of the
entailed estate, which shall remain with Don Diego, or whoever may inherit
it. Item: From the revenues of the said estate, or from any other fourth
part of it, (should its amount be adequate to it,) shall be paid every
year to my son Ferdinand two millions, till such time as his revenue shall
amount to two millions, in the same form and manner as in the case of
Bartholomew, who, as well as his heirs, are to have the million or the
part that may be wanting.

Item: The said Don Diego or Don Bartholomew shall make, out of the said
estate, for my brother Diego, such provision as may enable him to live
decently, as he is my brother, to whom I assign no particular sum, as he
has attached himself to the church, and that will he given him which is
right: and this to be given him in a mass, and before any thing shall
have' been received by Ferdinand my son, or Bartholomew my brother, or
their heirs, and also according to the amount of the income of the estate.
And in case of discord, the case is to be referred to two of our
relations, or other men of honor; and should they disagree among
themselves, they will choose a third person as arbitrator, being virtuous
and not distrusted by either party.

Item: All this revenue which I bequeath to Bartholomew, to Ferdinand, and
to Diego, shall be delivered to and received by them as prescribed under
the obligation of being faithful and loyal to Diego my son, or his heirs,
they as well as their children: and should it appear that they, or any of
them, had proceeded against him in any thing touching his honor, or the
prosperity of the family, or of the estate, either in word or deed,
whereby might come a scandal and debasement to my family, and a detriment
to my estate; in that ease, nothing farther shall be given to them or him,
from that time forward, inasmuch as they are always to be faithful to
Diego and to his successors.

Item: As it was my intention, when I first instituted this entailed
estate, to dispose, or that my son Diego should dispose for me, of the
tenth part of the income in favor of necessitous persona, as a tithe, and
in commemoration of the Almighty and Eternal God; and persisting still in
this opinion, and hoping that his High Majesty will assist me and those
who may inherit it, in this or the New World, I have resolved that the
said tithe shall be paid in the manner following:

First--It is to be understood that the fourth part of the revenue of the
estate which I have ordained and directed to be given to Don Bartholomew,
till he have an income of one million, includes the tenth of the whole
revenue of the estate; and that as in proportion as the income of my
brother Don Bartholomew shall increase, as it has to be discounted from
the revenue of the fourth part of the entailed estate, that the said
revenue shall be calculated, to know how much the tenth part amounts to;
and the part which exceeds what is necessary to make up the million for
Don Bartholomew shall be received by such of my family as may most stand
in need of it, discounting it from said tenth, if their income do not
amount to fifty thousand maravadises; and should any of these come to have
an income to this amount, such a part shall be awarded them as two
persons, chosen for the purpose, may determine along with Don Diego, or
his heirs. Thus, it is to be understood that the million which I leave to
Don Bartholomew comprehends the tenth of the whole revenue of the estate;
which revenue is to be distributed among my nearest and most needy
relations in the manner I have directed; and when Don Bartholomew have an
income of one million, and that nothing more shall be due to him on
account of said fourth part, then Don Diego my sou, or the person who may
be in possession of the estate, along with the two other persons which I
shall herein point out, shall inspect the accounts, and so direct, that
the tenth of the revenue shall still continue to be paid to the most
necessitous members of my family that may be found in this or any other
quarter of the world, who shall be diligently sought out; and they are to
be paid out of the fourth part from which Don Bartholomew is to derive his
million; which sums are to be taken into account, and deducted from the
said tenth, which, should it amount to more, the overplus, as it arises
from the fourth part, shall be given to the most necessitous persons as
aforesaid; and should it not be sufficient, that Don Bartholomew shall
have it until his own estate goes on increasing, leaving the said million
in part or in the whole.

Item: The said Don Diego my son, or whoever may be the inheritor, shall
appoint two persons of conscience and authority, and most nearly related
to the family, who are to examine the revenue and its amount carefully,
and to cause the said tenth to be paid out of the fourth from which Don
Bartholomew is to receive his million, to the most necessitated members of
my family that may be found here or elsewhere, whom they shall look for
diligently upon their consciences; and as it might happen that said Don
Diego, or others after him, for reasons which may concern their own
welfare, or the credit and support of the estate, may be unwilling to make
known the full amount of the income; nevertheless, I charge him, on his
conscience, to pay the sum aforesaid; and I charge them, on their souls
and consciences, not to denounce or make it known, except with the consent
of Don Diego, or the person that may succeed him; but let the above tithe
be paid in the manner I have directed.

Item: In order to avoid all disputes in the choice of the two nearest
relations who are to act with Don Diego or his heirs, I hereby elect Don
Bartholomew my brother for one, and Don Fernando my son for the other; and
when these two shall enter upon the business, they shall choose two other
persons among the most trusty, and most nearly related, and these again
shall elect two others when it shall be question of commencing the
examination; and thus it shall be managed with diligence from one to the
other, as well in this as in the other of government, for the service and
glory of God, and the benefit of the said entailed estate.

Item: I also enjoin Diego, or any one that may inherit the estate, to have
and maintain in the city of Genoa one person of our lineage, to reside
there with his wife, and appoint him a sufficient revenue to enable him to
live decently, as a person closely connected with the family, of which he
is to be the root and basis in that city; from winch great good may accrue
to him, inasmuch as i was born there, and came from thence.

Item: The said Don Diego, or whoever shall inherit the estate, must remit
in bills, or in any other way, all such sums as he may be able to save out
of the revenue of the estate, and direct purchases to be made in his name,
or that of his heirs, in a stock in the Bank of St. George, which gives an
interest of six per cent, and in secure money; and this shall be devoted
to the purpose I am about to explain.

Item: As it becomes every man of property to serve God, either personally
or by means of his wealth, and as all moneys deposited with St. George are
quite safe, and Genoa is a noble cily, and powerful by sea, and as at the
time that I undertook to set out upon the discovery of the Indies, it was
with the intention of supplicating the king and queen, our lords, that
whatever moneys should be derived from the said Indies, should be invested
in the conquest of Jerusalem; and as I did so supplicate them; if they do
this, it will be well; if not, at all events, the said Diego, or such
person as may succeed him in this trust, to collect together all the money
he can, and accompany the king our lord, should he go to the conquest of
Jerusalem, or else go there himself with all the force he can command; and
in pursuing this intention, it will please the Lord to assist towards the
accomplishment of the plan; and should he not be able to effect the
conquest of the whole, no doubt he will achieve it in part. Let him
therefore collect and make a fund of all his wealth in St. George of
Genoa, and let it multiply there till such time as it may appear to him
that something of consequence may be effected as respects the project on
Jerusalem; for I believe that when their highnesses shall see that this is
contemplated, they will wish to realize it themselves, or will afford him,
as their servant and vassal, the means of doing it for them.

Item: I charge my son Diego and my descendants, especially whoever may
inherit this estate, which consists, as aforesaid, of the tenth of
whatsoever may be had or found in the Indies, and the eighth part of the
lands and rents, all which, together with my rights and emoluments as
admiral, viceroy, and governor, amount to more than twenty-five per cent.;
I say, that I require of him to employ all this revenue, as well as his
person and all the means in his power, in well and faithfully serving and
supporting their highnesses, or their successors, even to the loss of life
and property; since it was their highnesses, next to God, who first gave
me the means of getting and achieving this property, although, it is true,
I came over to these realms to invite them to the enterprise, and that a
long time elapsed before any provision was made for carrying it into
execution; which, however, is not surprising, as this was an undertaking
of which all the world was ignorant, and no one had any faith in it;
wherefore I am by so much the more indebted to them, as well as because
they have since also much favored and promoted me.

Item: I also require of Diego, or whomsoever may be in possession of the
estate, that in the case of any schism taking place in the church of God,
or that any person of whatever class or condition should attempt to
despoil it of its property and honors, they hasten to offer at the feet of
his holiness, that is, if they are not heretics (which God forbid!), their
persons, power, and wealth, for the purpose of suppressing such schism,
and preventing any spoliation of the honor and property of the church.

Item: I command the said Diego, or whoever may possess the said estate, to
labor and strive for the honor, welfare, and aggrandizement of the city of
Genoa, and to make use of all his power and means in defending and
enhancing the good and credit of that republic, in all things not contrary
to the service of the church of God, or the high dignity of our king and
queen, our lords, and their successors.

Item: The said Diego, or whoever may possess or succeed to the estate, out
of the fourth part of the whole revenue, from which, as aforesaid, is to
be taken the tenth, when Don Bartholomew or his heirs shall have saved the
two millions, or part of them, and when the time shall come of making a
distribution among our relations, shall apply and invest the said tenth in
providing marriages for such daughters of our lineage as may require it,
and in doing all the good in their power.

Item: When a suitable time shall arrive, he shall order a church to be
built in the island of Hispaniola, and in the most convenient spot, to be
called Santa Maria de la Concepcion; to which is to be annexed an
hospital, upon the best possible plan, like those of Italy and Castile,
and a chapel erected to say mass in for the good of my soul, and those of
my ancestors and successors, with great devotion, since no doubt it will
please the Lord to give us a sufficient revenue for this and the
aforementioned purposes.

Item: I also order Diego my son, or whomsoever may inherit after him, to
spare no pains in having and maintaining in the island of Hispaniola, four
good professors of theology, to the end and aim of their studying and
laboring to convert to our holy faith the inhabitants of the Indies; and
in proportion as, by God's will, the revenue of the estate shall increase,
in the same degree shall the number of teachers and devout increase, who
are to strive to make Christians of the natives; in attaining which no
expense should be thought too great. And in commemoration of all that I
hereby ordain, and of the foregoing, a monument of marble shall be erected
in the said church of la Concepcion, in the most conspicuous place, to
serve as a record of what I here enjoin on the said Diego, as well as to
other persons who may look upon it; which marble shall contain an
inscription to the same effect.

Item: I also require of Diego my son, and whomsover may succeed him in the
estate, that every time, and as often as he confesses, he first show this
obligation, or a copy of it, to the confessor, praying him to read it
through, that he may be enabled to inquire respecting its fulfillment;
from which will redound great good and happiness to his soul.

       S.
    S. A. S.
    X. M. Y.
  EL ALMIRANTE.




No. XXXVII.

Signature of Columbus.



As every thing respecting Columbus is full of interest, his signature has
been a matter of some discussion. It partook of the pedantic and bigoted
character of the age, and perhaps of the peculiar character of the man,
who, considering himself mysteriously elected and set apart from among men
for certain great purposes, adopted a correspondent formality and
solemnity in all his concerns. His signature was as follows:

       S.
    S. A. S.
    X. M. Y.
  EL ALMIRANTE.

The first half of the signature, XPO, (for CHRISTO,) is in Greek letters;
the second, FERENS, is in Latin. Such was the usage of those days; and
even at present both Greek and Roman letters are used in signatures and
inscriptions in Spain.

The ciphers or initials above the signature are supposed to represent a
pious ejaculation. To read them one must begin with the lower letters, and
connect them with those above. Signor Gio. Batista Spotorno conjectures
them to mean either Xristus (Christus) Sancta Maria Yosephus, or, Salve
me, Xristus, Maria, Yosephus. The Korth American Review, for April, 1827,
suggests the substitution of Jesus for Josephus, but the suggestion of
Spotorno is most probably correct, as a common Spanish ejaculation is
"Jesus Maria y Jose."

It was an ancient usage in Spain, and it has not entirely gone by, to
accompany the signature with some words of religious purport. One object
of this practice was to show the writer to be a Christian. This was of
some importance in a country in which Jews and Mahometans were proscribed
and persecuted.

Don Fernando, son to Columbus, says that his father, when he took his pen
in hand, usually commenced by writing "Jesus cum Maria sit nobis in via;"
and the book which the admiral prepared and sent to the sovereigns,
containing the prophecies which he considered as referring to his
discoveries, and to the rescue of the holy sepulchre, begins with the same
words. This practice is akin to that of placing the initials of pious
words above his signature, and gives great probability to the mode in
which they have been deciphered.




No. XXXVIII.

A Visit to Palos.



[The following narrative was actually commenced, by the author of this
work, as a letter to a friend, but unexpectedly swelled to its present
size. He has been induced to insert it here from the idea, that many will
feel the same curiosity to know something of the present state of Falos
and its inhabitants that led him to make the journey.]

Seville, 1828.

Since I last wrote to you, I have made what I may term an American
pilgrimage, to visit the little port of Palos in Andalusia, where Columbus
fitted out his ships, and whence he sailed for the discovery of the New
World. Need I tell you how deeply interesting and gratifying it has been
to me? I had long meditated this excursion, as a kind of pious, and, if I
may so say, filial duty of an American, and my intention was quickened
when I learnt that many of the edifices, mentioned in the History of
Columbus, still remained in nearly the same state in which they existed at
the time of his sojourn at Palos, and that the descendants of the intrepid
Pinzons, who aided him with ships and money, and sailed with him in the
great voyage of discovery, still flourished in the neighborhood.

The very evening before my departure from Seville on the excursion, I
heard that there was a young gentleman of the Pinzon family studying law
in the city. I got introduced to him, and found him of most prepossessing
appearance and manners. He gave me a letter of introduction to his father,
Don Juan Fernandez Pinzon, resident of Moguer, and the present head of the
family.

As it was in the middle of August, and the weather intensely hot, I hired
a calesa for the journey. This is a two-wheeled carriage, resembling a
cabriolet, but of the most primitive and rude construction; the harness is
profusely ornamented with brass, and the horse's hend decorated with tufts
and tassels and dangling bobs of scarlet and yellow worsted. I had for
calasero, a tall, long-legged Andalusian, in short jacket, little
round-crowned hat, breeches decorated with buttons from the hip to the
knees, and a pair of russet leather bottinas or spatterdashes. He was an
active fellow, though uncommonly taciturn for an Andalusian, and strode
along beside his horse, rousing him occasionally to greater speed by a
loud malediction or a hearty thwack of his cudgel.

In this style, I set off late in the day to avoid the noontide heat, and,
after ascending the lofty range of hills which borders the great valley of
the Guadalquiver, and having a rough ride among their heights, I descended
about twilight into one of those vast, silent, melancholy plains, frequent
in Spain, where I beheld no other signs of life than a roaming flock of
bustards, and a distant herd of cattle, guarded by a solitary herdsman,
who, with a long pike planted in the earth, stood motionless in the midst
of the dreary landscape, resembling an Arab of the desert. The night had
somewhat advanced when we stopped to repose for a few hours at a solitary
venta or inn, if it might so be called, being nothing more than a vast
low-roofed stable, divided into several compartments for the reception of
the troops of mules and arrieros (or carriers) who carry on the internal
trade of Spain. Accommodation for the traveler there was none--not even
for a traveler so easily accommodated as myself. The landlord had no food
to give me, and as to a bed, he had none but a horse-cloth, on which his
only child, a boy of eight years old, lay naked on the earthen floor.
Indeed the heat of the weather and the fumes from the stables made the
interior of the hovel insupportable; so I was fain to bivouac, on my
cloak, on the pavement, at the door of the venta, where, on waking, after
two or three hours of sound sleep, I found a contrabandista (or smuggler)
snoring beside me, with his blunderbuss on his arm.

I resumed my journey before break of day, and had made several leagues by
ten o'clock, when we stopped to breakfast, and to pass the sultry hours of
mid-day in a large village; whence we departed about four o'clock, and
after passing through the same kind of solitary country, arrived just
after sunset at Moguer. This little city (for at present it is a city) is
situated about a league from Palos, of which place it has gradually
absorbed all the respectable inhabitants, and, among the number, the whole
family of the Pinzons.

So remote is this little place from the stir and bustle of travel, and so
destitute of the show and vainglory of this world, that my calesa, as it
rattled and jingled along the narrow and ill-paved streets, caused a great
sensation; the children shouted and scampered along by its side, admiring
its splendid trappings of brass and worsted, and gazing with reverence at
the important stranger who came in so gorgeous an equipage.

I drove up to the principal posada, the landlord of which was at the door.
He was one of the very civilest men in the world, and disposed to do every
thing in his power to make me comfortable; there was only one difficulty,
he had neither bed nor bed-room in his house. In fact it was a mere venta
for muleteers, who are accustomed to sleep on the ground, with their
mule-cloths for beds and pack-saddles for pillows. It was a hard case, but
there was no better posada in the place. Few people travel for pleasure or
curiosity in these out-of-the-way parts of Spain, and those of any note
are generally received into private houses. I had traveled sufficiently in
Spain to find out that a bed, after all, is not an article of
indispensable necessity, and was about to bespeak some quiet corner where
I might spread my cloak, when fortunately the landlord's wife came forth.
She could not have a more obliging disposition than her husband, but then
--God bless the women!--they always know how to carry their good wishes
into effect. In a little while a small room, about ten feet square, which
had formed a thoroughfare between the stables and a kind of shop or
bar-room, was cleared of a variety of lumber, and I was assured that a
bed should be put up there for me. From the consultations I saw my
hostess holding with some of her neighbor gossips, I fancied the bed was
to be a kind of piecemeal contribution among them for the credit of the
house.

As soon as I could change my dress, I commenced the historical researches
which were the object of my journey, and inquired for the abode of Don
Juan Fernandez Pinzon. My obliging landlord himself volunteered to conduct
me thither, and I set off full of animation at the thoughts of meeting
with the lineal representative of one of the coadjutors of Columbus.

A short walk brought us to the house, which was most respectable in its
appearance, indicating easy, if not affluent, circumstances. The door, as
is customary in Spanish villages during summer, stood wide open. We
entered with the usual salutation or rather summons, "Ave Maria!" A trim
Andalusian handmaid answered to the call, and, on our inquiring for the
master of the house, led the way across a little patio or court, in the
centre of the edifice, cooled by a fountain surrounded by shrubs and
flowers, to a back court or terrace, likewise set out with flowers, where
Don Juan Fernandez was seated with his family, enjoying the serene evening
in the open air. I was much pleased with his appearance. He was a
venerable old gentleman, tall, and somewhat thin, with fair complexion and
gray hair. He received me with great urbanity, and on reading the letter
from his son, appeared struck with surprise to find I had come quite to
Moguer, merely to visit the scene of the embarkation of Columbus; and
still more so on my telling him, that one of my leading objects of
curiosity was his own family connection; for it would seem that the worthy
cavalier had troubled his head but little about the enterprises of his
ancestors.

I now took my seat in the domestic circle, and soon felt myself quite at
home, for there is generally a frankness in the hospitality of Spaniards,
that soon puts a stranger at his ease beneath their roof. The wife of Don
Juan Fernandez was extremely amiable and affable, possessing much of that
natural aptness for which the Spanish women are remarkable. In the course
of conversation with them I learnt, that Don Juan Fernandez, who is
seventy-two years of age, is the eldest of five brothers, all of whom are
married, have numerous offspring, and live in Moguer and its vicinity, in
nearly the same condition and rank of life as at the time of the
discovery. This agreed with what I had previously heard, respecting the
families of the discoverers. Of Columbus no lineal and direct descendant
exists; his was an exotic stock which never took deep and lasting root in
the country; but the race of the Pinzons continues to thrive and multiply
in its native soil.

While I was yet conversing, a gentleman entered, who was introduced to me
as Don Luis Fernandez Pinzon, the youngest of the brothers. He appeared
between fifty and sixty years of age, somewhat robust, with fair
complexion, gray hair, and a frank and manly deportment. He is the only
one of the present generation that has followed the ancient profession of
the family; having served with great applause as an officer of the royal
navy, from which he retired, on his marriage, about twenty-two years
since. He is the one, also, who takes the greatest interest and pride in
the historical honors of his house, carefully preserving all the legends
and documents of the achievements and distinctions of his family, a
manuscript volume of which he lent to me for my inspection.

Don Juan now expressed a wish that, during my residence in Moguer, I would
make his house my home. I endeavored to excuse myself, alleging, that the
good people at the posada had been at such extraordinary trouble in
preparing quarters for me, that I did not like to disappoint them. The
worthy old gentleman undertook to arrange all this, and, while supper was
preparing, we walked together to the posada. I found that my obliging host
and hostess had indeed exerted themselves to an uncommon degree. An old
rickety table had been spread out in a corner of the little room as a
bedstead, on top of which was propped up a grand _cama de luxo_, or
state bed, which appeared to be the admiration of the house. I could not,
for the soul of me, appear to undervalue what the poor people had prepared
with such hearty good-will, and considered such a triumph of art and
luxury; so I again entreated Don Juan to dispense with my sleeping at his
house, promising most faithfully to make my meals there whilst I should
stay at Moguer, and as the old gentleman understood my motives for
declining his invitation, and felt a good-humored sympathy in them, we
readily arranged the matter. I returned therefore with Don Juan to his
house and supped with his family. During the repast a plan was agreed upon
for my visit to Palos, and to the convent La Kabida, in which Don Juan
volunteered to accompany me and be my guide, and the following day was
allotted to the expedition. We were to breakfast at a hacienda, or
country-seat, which he possessed in the vicinity of Palos, in the midst of
his vineyards, and were to dine there on our return from the convent.
These arrangements being made, we parted for the night; I returned to the
posada highly gratified with my visit, and slept soundly in the
extraordinary bed which, I may almost say, had been invented for my
accommodation.

On the following morning, bright and early, Don Juan Fernandez and myself
set off in the caleea for Palos. I felt apprehensive at first that the
kind-hearted old gentleman, in his anxiety to oblige, had left his bed at
too early an hour, and was exposing himself to fatigues unsuited to his
age. He laughed at the idea, and assured me that he was an early riser,
and accustomed to all kinds of exercise on horse and foot, being a keen
sportsman, and frequently passing days together among the mountains on
shooting expeditions, taking with him servants, horses, and provisions,
and living in a tent. He appeared, in fact, to be of an active habit, and
to possess a youthful vivacity of spirit. His cheerful disposition
rendered our morning drive extremely agreeable; his urbanity was shown to
every one whom we met on the road; even the common peasant was saluted by
him with the appellation of _caballero_, a mark of respect ever
gratifying to the poor but proud Spaniard, when yielded by a superior.

As the tide was out, we drove along the flat grounds bordering the Tinto.
The river was on our right, while on our left was a range of hills,
jutting out into promontories, one beyond the other, and covered with
vineyards and fig trees. The weather was serene, the air soft and balmy,
and the landscape of that gentle kind calculated to put one in a quiet and
happy humor. We passed close by the skirts of Palos, and drove to the
hacienda, which is situated some little distance from the village, between
it and the river. The house is a low stone building well whitewashed, and
of great length; one end being fitted up as a summer residence, with
saloons, bed-rooms, and a domestic chapel; and the other as a bodega or
magazine for the reception of the wine produced on the estate.

The house stands on a hill, amidst vineyards, which are supposed to cover
a part of the site of the ancient town of Palos, now shrunk to a miserable
village. Beyond these vineyards, on the crest of a distant hill, are seen
the white walls of the convent of La Babida rising above a dark wood of
pine trees.

Below the hacienda flows the river Tinto, on which Columbus embarked. It
is divided by a low tongue of land, or rather the sand-bar of Saltes, from
the river Odiel, with which it soon mingles its waters, and flows on to
the ocean. Beside this sand-bar, where the channel of the river runs deep,
the squadron of Columbus was anchored, and thence he made sail on the
morning of his departure.

The soft breeze that was blowing scarcely ruffled the surface of this
beautiful river; two or three picturesque barks, called mystics, with long
latine sails, were gliding down it. A little aid of the imagination might
suffice to picture them as the light caravels of Columbus, sallying forth
on their eventful expedition, while the distant bells of the town of
Hnelva, which were ringing melodiously, might be supposed as cheering the
voyagers with a farewell peal.

I cannot express to you what were my feelings on treading the shore which
had once been animated with the bustle of departure, and whose sands had
been printed by the last footstep of Columbus. The solemn and sublime
nature of the event that had followed, together with the fate and fortunes
of those concerned in it, filled the mind with vague yet melancholy ideas.
It was like viewing the silent and empty stage of some great drama when
all the actors had departed. The very aspect of the landscape, so
tranquilly beautiful, had an effect upon me; and as I paced the deserted
shores by the side of a descendant of one of the discoverers, I felt my
heart swelling witfi emotions and my eyes filling with tears.

What surprised me was, to find no semblance of a sea-port; there was
neither wharf nor landing-place--nothing but a naked river bank, with the
hulk of a ferry-boat, which I was told carried passengers to Huelva, lying
high and dry on the sands, deserted by the tide. Palos, though it has
doubtless dwindled away from its former size, can never have been
important as to extent and population. If it possessed warehouses on the
beach, they have disappeared. It is at present a mere village of the
poorest kind, and lies nearly a quarter of a mile from the river, in a
hollow among hills. It contains a few hundred inhabitants, who subsist
principally by laboring in the fields and vineyards. Its race of merchants
and mariners is extinct. There are no vessels belonging to the place, nor
any show of traffic, excepting at the season of fruit and wine, when a few
mystics and other light barks anchor in the river to collect the produce
of the neighborhood. The people are totally ignorant, and it is probable
that the greater part of them scarce know even the name of America. Such
is the place whence sallied forth the enterprise for the discovery of the
western world!

We were now summoned to breakfast in a little saloon of the hacienda. The
table was covered with natural luxuries produced upon the spot--fine
purple and muscatel grapes from the adjacent vineyard, delicious melons
from the garden, and generous wines made on the estate. The repast was
heightened by the genial manners of my hospitable host, who appeared to
possess the most enviable cheerfulness of spirit and simplicity of heart.

After breakfast we set off in the calesa to visit the convent of La
Rabida, about half a league distant The road, for a part of the way, lay
through the vineyards, and was deep and sandy. The calasero had been at
his wit's end to conceive what motive a stranger like myself, apparently
traveling for mere amusement, could have in coming so far to see so
miserable a place as Palos, which he set down as one of the very poorest
places in the whole world; but this additional toil and struggle through
deep sand to visit the old convent of La Rabida completed his confusion--
"Hombre!" exclaimed he, "es una ruina! no hay mas que dos frailes!"--
"Zounds! why it's a ruin! there are only two friars there!" Don Juan
laughed, and told him that I had come all the way from Seville precisely
to see that old ruin and those two friars. The calasero made the
Spaniard's last reply when he is perplexed--he shrugged his shoulders and
crossed himself. After ascending a hill and passing through the skirts of
a straggling pine wood, we arrived in front of the convent. It stands in a
bleak and solitary situation, on the brow of a rocky height or promontory,
overlooking to the west a wide range of sea and land, bounded by the
frontier mountains of Portugal, about eight leagues distant. The convent
is shut out from a view of the vineyard of Palos by the gloomy forest of
pines already mentioned, which cover the promontory to the east, and
darken the whole landscape in that direction.

There is nothing remarkable in the architecture of the convent; part of it
is Gothic, but the edifice, having been frequently repaired, and being
whitewashed, according to a universal custom in Andalusia, inherited from
the Moors, has not that venerable aspect which might be expected from its
antiquity.

We alighted at the gate where Columbus, when a poor pedestrian, a stranger
in the land, asked bread and water for his child! As long as the convent
stands, this must be a spot calculated to awaken the most thrilling
interest. The gate remains apparently in nearly the same state as at the
time of his visit, but there is no longer a porter at hand to administer
to the wants of the wayfarer. The door stood wide open, and admitted us
into a small court-yard. Thence we passed through a Gothic portal into the
chapel, without seeing a human being. We then traversed two interior
cloisters, equally vacant and silent, and bearing a look of neglect and
dilapidation. From an open window we had a peep at what had once been a
garden, but that had also gone to ruin; the walls were broken and thrown
down; a few shrubs, and a scattered fig tree or two, were all the traces
of cultivation that remained. We passed through the long dormitories, but
the cells were shut up and abandoned; we saw no living thing except a
solitary cat stealing across a distant corridor, which fled in a panic at
the unusual sight of strangers. At length, after patrolling nearly the
whole of the empty building to the echo of our own footsteps, we came to
where the door of a cell, being partly open, gave us the sight of a monk
within, seated at a table writing. He rose, and received us with much
civility, and conducted us to the superior, who was reading in an adjacent
cell. They were both rather young men, and, together with a novitiate and
a lay-brother, who officiated as cook, formed the whole community of the
convent.

Don Juan Fernandez communicated to them the object of my visit, and my
desire also to inspect the archives of the convent, to find if there was
any record of the sojourn of Columbus. They informed us that the archives
had been entirely destroyed by the French. The younger monk, however, who
had perused them, had a vague recollection of various particulars
concerning the transactions of Columbus at Palos, his visit to the
convent, and the sailing of his expedition. From all that he cited,
however, it appeared to me that all the information on the subject
contained in the archives had been extracted from Herrera and other
well-known authors. The monk was talkative and eloquent, and soon diverged
from the subject of Columbus, to one which he considered of infinitely
greater importance--the miraculous image of the Virgin possessed by their
convent, and known by the name of "Our Lady of La Rabida." He gave us a
history of the wonderful way in which the image had been found buried in
the earth, where it had lain hidden for ages, since the time of the
conquest of Spain by the Moors; the disputes between the convent and
different places in the neighborhood for the possession of it; the
marvelous protection it extended to the adjacent country, especially in
preventing all madness, either in man or dog, for this malady was
anciently so prevalent in this place as to gain it the appellation of La
Rabia, by which it was originally called; a name which, thanks to the
beneficent influence of the Virgin, it no longer merited nor retained.
Such are the legends and relics with which every convent in Spain is
enriched, which are zealously cried up by the monks, and devoutly
credited by the populace.

Twice a year, on the festival of our Lady of La Rabida and on that of the
patron saint of the order, the solitude and silence of the convent are
interrupted by the intrusion of a swarming multitude, composed of the
inhabitants of Moguer, of Huelva, and the neighboring plains and
mountains. The open esplanade in front of the edifice resembles a fair,
the adjacent forest teems with the motley throng, and the image of our
Lady of La Rabida is borne forth in triumphant procession.

While the friar was thus dilating upon the merits and renown of the image,
I amused myself with those day-dreams, or conjurings of the imagination,
to which I am a little given. As the internal arrangements of convents are
apt to be the same from age to age, I pictured to myself this chamber as
the same inhabited by the guardian, Juan Perez de Marchena, at the time of
the visit of Columbus. Why might not the old and ponderous table before me
be the very one on which he displayed his conjectural maps, and expounded
his theory of a western route to India? It required but another stretch of
the imagination to assemble the little conclave around the table; Juan
Perez the friar, Garci Fernandez the physician, and Martin Alonzo Pinzon
the bold navigator, all listening with rapt attention to Columbus, or to
the tale of some old seaman of Palos, about islands seen in the western
parts of the ocean.

The friars, as far as their poor means and scanty knowledge extended, were
disposed to do every thing to promote the object of my visit. They showed
us all parts of the convent, which, however, has little to boast of,
excepting the historical associations connected with it. The library was
reduced to a few volumes, chiefly on ecclesiastical subjects, piled
promiscuously in the corner of a vaulted chamber, and covered with dust.
The chamber itself was curious, being the most ancient part of the
edifice, and supposed to have formed part of a temple in the time of the
Romans.

We ascended to the roof of the convent to enjoy the extensive prospect it
commands. Immediately below the promontory on which it is situated, runs a
narrow but tolerably deep river, called the Domingo Rubio, which empties
itself into the Tinto. It is the opinion of Don Luis Fernandez Pinzon,
that the ships of Columbus were careened and fitted out in this river, as
it affords better shelter than the Tinto, and its shores are not so
shallow. A lonely bark of a fisherman was lying in this stream, and not
far off, on a sandy point, were the ruins of an ancient watchtower. From
the roof of the convent, all the windings of the Odiel and the Tinto were
to be seen, and their junction into the main stream, by which Columbus
sallied forth to sea. In fact the convent serves as a landmark, being,
from its lofty and solitary situation, visible for a considerable distance
to vessels coming on the coast. On the opposite side I looked down upon
the lonely road, through the wood of pine trees, by which the zealous
guardian of the convent, Fray Juan Perez, departed at midnight on his
mule, when he sought the camp of Ferdinand and Isabella in the Vega of
Granada, to plead the project of Columbus before the queen.

Having finished our inspection of the convent, we prepared to depart, and
were accompanied to the outward portal by the two friars. Our calasero
brought his rattling and rickety vehicle for us to mount; at sight of
which one of the monks exclaimed, with a smile, "Santa Maria! only to
think! A calesa before the gate of the convent of La Rabida!" And, indeed,
so solitary and remote is this ancient edifice, and so simple is the mode
of living of the people in this by-corner of Spain, that the appearance of
even a sorry calesa might well cause astonishment. It is only singular
that in such a by-corner the scheme of Columbus should have found
intelligent listeners and coadjutors, after it had been discarded, almost
with scoffing and contempt, from learned universities and splendid courts.

On our way back to the hacienda, we met Don Rafael, a younger son of Don
Juan Fernandez, a fine young man, about twenty-one years of age, and who,
his father informed me, was at present studying French and mathematics. He
was well mounted on a spirited gray horse, and dressed in the Andalusian
style, with the little round hat and jacket. He sat his horse gracefully,
and managed him well. I was pleased with the frank and easy terms on which
Don Juan appeared to live with his children. This I was inclined to think
his favorite son, as I understood he was the only one that partook of the
old gentleman's fondness for the chase, and that accompanied him in his
hunting excursions.

A dinner had been prepared for us at the hacienda, by the wife of the
capitaz, or overseer, who, with her husband, seemed to be well pleased
with this visit from Don Juan, and to be confident of receiving a pleasant
answer from the good-humored old gentleman whenever they addressed him.
The dinner was served up about two o'clock, and was a most agreeable meal.
The fruits and wines were from the estate, and were excellent; the rest of
the provisions were from Moguer, for the adjacent village of Palos is too
poor to furnish any thing. A gentle breeze from the sea played through the
hall, and tempered the summer heat. Indeed I do not know when I have seen
a more enviable spot than this country retreat of the Pinzons. Its
situation on a breezy hill, at no great distance from the sea, and in a
southern climate, produces a happy temperature, neither hot in summer nor
cold in winter. It commands a beautiful prospect, and is surrounded by
natural luxuries. The country abounds with game, the adjacent river
affords abundant sport in fishing, both by day and night, and delightful
excursions for those fond of sailing. During the busy seasons of rural
life, and especially at the joyous period of vintage, the family pass some
time here, accompanied by numerous guests, at which times, Don Juan
assured me, there was no lack of amusements, both by land and water.

When we had dined, and taken the siesta, or afternoon nap, according to
the Spanish custom in summer time, we set out on our return to Moguer,
visiting the village of Palos in the way. Don Gabriel had been sent in
advance to procure the keys of the village church, and to apprise the
curate of our wish to inspect the archives. The village consists
principally of two streets of low whitewashed houses. Many of the
inhabitants have very dark complexions, betraying a mixture of African
blood.

On entering the village, we repaired to the lowly mansion of the curate. I
had hoped to find him some such personage as the curate in Don Quixote,
possessed of shrewdness and information in his limited sphere, and that I
might gain some anecdotes from him concerning the parish, its worthies,
its antiquities, and its historical events. Perhaps I might have done so
at any other time, but, unfortunately, the curate was something of a
sportsman, and had heard of some game among the neighboring hills. We met
him just sallying forth from his house, and, I must confess, his
appearance was picturesque. He was a short, broad, sturdy little man, and
had doffed his cassock and broad clerical beaver, for a short jacket and a
little round Andalusian hat; he had his gun in hand, and was on the point
of mounting a donkey which had been led forth by an ancient withered
handmaid. Fearful of being detained from his foray, he accosted my
companion the moment he came in sight. "God preserve you, Senor Don Juan!
I have received your message, and have but one answer to make. The
archives have all been destroyed. We have no trace of any thing you seek
for--nothing--nothing. Don Rafael has the keys of the church. You can
examine it at your leisure--Adios, caballero!" With these words the
galliard little curate mounted his donkey, thumped his ribs with the butt
end of his gun, and trotted off to the hills.

In our way to the church we passed by the ruins of what had once been a
fair and spacious dwelling, greatly superior to the other houses of the
village. This, Don Juan informed me, was an old family possession, but
since they had removed from Palos it had fallen to decay for want of a
tenant. It was probably the family residence of Martin Alonzo or Vicente
Yafiez Pinzon, in the time of Columbus.

We now arrived at the Church of St. George, in the porch of which Columbus
first proclaimed to the inhabitants of Palos the order of the sovereigns,
that they should furnish him with ships for his great voyage of discovery.
This edifice has lately been thoroughly repaired, and, being of solid
mason-work, promises to stand for ages, a monument of the discoverers. It
stands outside of the village, on the brow of a hill, looking along a
little valley toward the river. The remains of a Moorish arch prove it to
have been a mosque in former times; just above it, on the crest of the
hill, is the ruin of a Moorish castle.

I paused in the porch, and endeavored to recall the interesting scene that
had taken place there, when Columbus, accompanied by the zealous friar
Juan Perez, caused the public notary to read the royal order in presence
of the astonished alcaldes, regidors, and alguazils; but it is difficult
to conceive the consternation that must have been struck into so remote a
little community, by this sudden apparition of an entire stranger among
them, bearing a command that they should put their persons and ships at
his disposal, and sail with him away into the unknown wilderness of the
ocean.

The interior of the church has nothing remarkable, excepting a wooden
image of St. George vanquishing the Dragon, which is erected over the high
altar, and is the admiration of the good people of Palos, who bear it
about the streets in grand procession on the anniversary of the saint.
This group existed in the time of Columbus, and now flourishes in
renovated youth and splendor, having been newly painted and gilded, and
the countenance of the saint rendered peculiarly blooming and lustrous.

Having finished the examination of the church, we resumed our seats in the
calesa and returned to Moguer. One thing only remained to fulfill the
object of my pilgrimage. This was to visit the chapel of the Convent of
Santa Clara. When Columbus was in danger of being lost in a tempest on his
way home from his great voyage of discovery, he made a vow, that, should
he be spared, he would watch and pray one whole night in this chapel; a
vow which he doubtless fulfilled immediately after his arrival.

My kind and attentive friend, Don Juan, conducted me to the convent. It is
the wealthiest in Moguer, and belongs to a sisterhood of Franciscan nuns.
The chapel is large, and ornamented with some degree of richness,
particularly the part about the high altar, which, is embellished by
magnificent monuments of the brave family of the Puerto Carreros, the
ancient lords of Moguer, and renowned in Moorish warfare. The alabaster
effigies of distinguished warriors of that house, and of their wives and
sisters, lie side by side, with folded hands, on tombs immediately before
the altar, while others recline in deep niches on either side. The night
had closed in by the time I entered the church, which made the scene more
impressive. A few votive lamps shed a dim light about the interior; their
beams were feebly reflected by the gilded work of the high altar, and the
frames of the surrounding paintings, and rested upon the marble figures of
the warriors and dames lying in the monumental repose of ages. The solemn
pile must have presented much the same appearance when the pious
discoverer performed his vigil, kneeling before this very altar, and
praying and watching throughout the night, and pouring forth heartfelt
praises for having been spared to accomplish his sublime discovery.

I had now completed the main purpose of my journey, having visited the
various places connected with the story of Columbus. It was highly
gratifying to find some of them so little changed though so great a space
of time had intervened; but in this quiet nook of Spain, so far removed
from the main thoroughfares, the lapse of time produces but few violent
revolutions. Nothing, however, had surprised and gratified me more than
the contiuued stability of the Pinzon family. On the morning after my
excursion to Palos, chance gave me an opportunity of seeing something of
the interior of most of their households. Having a curiosity to visit the
remains of a Moorish castle, once the citadel of Moguer, Don Fernandez
undertook to show me a tower which served as a magazine of wine to one of
the Pinzon family. In seeking for the key we were sent from house to house
of nearly the whole connection. All appeared to be living in that golden
mean equally removed from the wants and superfluities of life, and all to
be happily interwoven by kind and cordial habits of intimacy. We found the
females of the family generally seated in the patios, or central courts of
their dwellings, beneath the shade of awnings and among shrubs and
flowers. Here the Andalusian ladies are accustomed to pass their mornings
at work, surrounded by their handmaids, in the primitive, or rather
oriental style. In the porches of some of the houses I observed the
coat-of-arms granted to the family by Charles V, hung up like a picture in
a frame. Over the door of Don Luis, the naval officer, it was carved on an
escutcheon of stone, and colored. I had gathered many particulars of the
family also from conversation with Don Juan, and from the family legend
lent me by Don Luis. From all that I could learn, it would appear that the
lapse of nearly three centuries and a half has made but little change in
the condition of the Pinzons. From generation to generation they have
retained the same fair standing and reputable name throughout the
neighborhood, filling offices of public trust and dignity, and possessing
great influence over their fellow-citizens by their good sense and good
conduct. How rare is it to see such an instance of stability of fortune in
this fluctuating world, and how truly honorable is this hereditary
respectability, which has been secured by no titles nor entails, but
perpetuated merely by the innate worth of the race! I declare to you that
the most illustrious descents of mere titled rank could never command the
sincere respect and cordial regard with which I contemplated this stanch
and enduring family, which for three centuries and a half has stood merely
upon its virtues.

As I was to set off on my return to Seville before two o'clock, I partook
of a farewell repast at the house of Don Juan, between twelve and one, and
then took leave of his household with sincere regret. The good old
gentleman, with the courtesy, or rather the cordiality, of a true
Spaniard, accompanied me to the posada, to see me off. I had dispensed but
little money in the posada--thanks to the hospitality of the Pinzons--yet
the Spanish pride of my host and hostess seemed pleased that I had
preferred their humble chamber, and the scanty bed they had provided me,
to the spacious mansion of Don Juan; and when I expressed my thanks for
their kindness and attention, and regaled mine host with a few choice
segars, the heart of the poor man was overcome. He seized me by both hands
and gave me a parting benediction, and then ran after the calasero, to
enjoin him to take particular care of me during my journey.

Taking a hearty leave of my excellent friend Don Juan, who had been
unremitting in his attentions to me to the last moment, I now set off on
my wayfaring, gratified to the utmost with my visit, and full of kind and
grateful feelings towards Moguer and its hospitable inhabitants.




Index.



A.


Acuna, Don Alonzo de, summons Columbus to give an account of himself, on
his return from the New World.

Address of an Indian of Cuba to Columbus.

Adelantado, title of, given to Christopher Columbus, confirmed by the
king.

Adrian de Moxica.

Admiral, the, a title granted to Columbus and his descendants.

Africa, essay on the navigation of, by the ancients.

Aguado, Juan, recommended to the Spanish Government by Columbus; appointed
commissioner to inquire into the conduct of Columbus; arrives at Isabella;
his insolent behavior; his interview with Columbus: the Caciques having
preferred complaints against Columbus, he determines on returning to
Spain.

Alexander VI., pope, character of; famous bulls of, relative to the New
World; letter of Columbus to.

Aliaco, Pedro, work of, referred to, note.

Alligators, found in great numbers at Puerto Bello.

All Saints, discovery of the bay of.

Alonzo, Don, heir-apparent of Portugal, his marriage with the princess
Isabella.

Alpha and Omega, the extreme point of Cuba.

Alva, duke of, Don Diego Columbus marries his daughter; he assists in
obtaining justice for his son-in-law.

Alvaro, Don, de Portugal, attack upon, in the royal tent.

Amazons, an island of supposed; warlike women of the Caribbee islands.
Amazons, river of, discovered by Vicente Pinzon.

Amber, specimens of, among the mountains of Cibao.

Anacaona, wife to Caonabo, retires with her brother Behechio, after the
great battle of the Vega; composes legendary ballads; her admiration of
the Spaniards; counsels her brother to conciliate the friendship of the
Spaniards; her reception of the Adelantado; her wonder and delight at
seeing a Spanish ship; her grief at the departure of the Adelantado; her
conduct in respect to her daughter and Guevara; her admiration of the
Spaniards turned into detestation; receives a visit from Ovando; is
seized; carried in chains to St. Domingo; and ignominiously hanged; her
fine character.

Anana, or the pine-apple, first met with.

Angel, Luis de St., his remonstrance with the queen relative to the
project of Columbus; succeeds.

Antigua, island of, discovered.

Antilles, the, discovered; taken possession of.

Apparitions, ideas of the Haytiens in respect to.

Appendix, containing illustrations and documents.

Arana, Diego de, left in charge of Hispaniola, during the first absence of
Columbus, history of the disaster which occurred to him after the
departure of Columbus.

Arano, Pedro de, commander of one of Columbus's ships on his third voyage.

Areytos, or ballads, of the Haytiens.

Aristizabal, Don Gabriel de, solicits the removal of the remains of
Columbus.

Arriaga, Luis de, is shut up within the walls of Magdalena.

Astrolabe, the, applied to navigation.

Atalantis, Plato's observations on.

Audience, royal, court of, established.

Augustine, St., his arguments against the existence of Antipodes.

Augustine, St., Cape of, discovered by Pinzon.

Aurea Cheraonesus, the place whence Solomon is supposed to have had gold.

Azores, the, when discovered; arrival at by Columbus on his return from
his first voyage.



B.


Babeque, a supposed island, Columbus goes in search of.

Bahama Islands, discovery of; cruise among the.

Ballads of the Haytiens.

Ballester, Miguel, his conduct during the conspiracy of Roldan; receives a
letter from Columbus; his character; interview with Roman; second
interview: sends advice to the admiral; is besieged in the fortress of
Conception; sails for Spain.

Barbas, Las, islands of, discovered.

Barrantes, Garcia de, sails for Spain.

Barros, Joam de, his account of Columbus's proposition to John II. king of
Portugal.

Basil, St., his description of Paradise.

Bastides, Rodrigo, of Seville, explores the coast of Terra Firma.

Baza, surrender of.

Beata, Cape, sailors of Columbus climb the rock of.

Behem, Martin, his planisphere; an account of; the assertion relative to
his having discovered the western world previous to Columbus considered.

Behechio assists Caonabo, and kills one of the wives of Guacanagari; the
only Cacique who does not sue for peace; receives a visit from Bartholomew
Columbus; his reception of him; consents to pay tribute; invites the
Adelantado to come and receive it; his astonishment at visiting a Spanish
ship.

Bolen, river of, discovered; abounds in fish; Columbus commences a
settlement on its banks.

Bell of Isabella, the superstitious ideas of the Haytiens in respect to
it.

Belvis, Pablo, sent to Hayti in the place of Fermin Cedo.

Berahoma, condemned to death for having violated the wife of the Cacique
of the Vega; is pardoned.

Bernaldez, Andres, a short account of his life and writings.

Bernardo of Valentia, his conspiracy at Jamaica.

Bloodhounds, first use of in the New World; employed by Columbus in his
wars with the Haytiens.

Bobadilla, Don Francisco de, charged with a commission to Hispaniola to
inquire into the conduct of Columbus; his character; instructions with
which he is charged; sails; arrives at St. Domingo; his judgment formed
before he leaves his ship; assumes power on landing; storms the fortress
of St. Domingo; assumes the government before he investigates the conduct
of Columbus; seizes his arms, gold, secret papers, etc.; summons Columbus
to appear before him; his baseness in collecting evidence; puts Don Diego
in chains; also Columbus; his fears in respect to the Adelantado; puts him
in irons; his mal-administration; a saying of his; superseded in his
government by Ovando; sails for Spain and is lost, with all his crew, in a
violent hurricane.

Boca del Sierpe.

Borgonon, Juan, labors to convert the Haytiens.

Boyle, Bernardo, friar, appointed apostolical vicar for the New World; his
advice to Columbus in respect to Guacanagari; confirms the accounts sent
home by Columbus; consecrates the first church at Isabella; his character
and conduct; his hatred of Columbus; encourages the misconduct of
Margarite; forms the plan of seizing Bartholomew Columbus's ships and
returning to Spain; sees sail; his accusations of Columbus at the court of
Madrid.

Brandan, St., imaginary island of.

Brazils, the, discovered by Vicente Pinzon; a part discovered and taken
possession of for the Portuguese crown by Cabral.

Breviesca, Ximeno de, a worthless hireling; his conduct and punishment.

Bucklers, used by the natives of Trinidad.  Bull of Partition issued by
Pope Martin V.; relative to the New World, issued by Pope Alexander VI..

---- of Demarcation.

Burgos, the court held at.

Butios, the priests of the Haytiens.

Butterflies, clouds of, seen on the southern coast of Cuba.



C.


Cabot, Sebastian, discovers Labrador, supposed to be the first that
visited the main-land of the New World.

Cabral, Pedro Alvarez de, discovers part of the Brazils, and takes
possession of it in the name of the king of Portugal.  Cabron, Cape, or
Capo del Enamorado.

Cacao, first known to the Spaniards.

Caciques, seizure of fourteen, in the night, by Bartholomew Columbus and
his officers.

Canaries, an optical delusion seen by the people of the; arrival of
Columbus at, in his first voyage.

Canoes, capable of containing 150 persons, seen at Puerto Santo; large
size of those at Jamaica.

Caonabo, character and conduct of; takes the fortress at La Navidad; and
massacres the Spaniards; assembles his warriors; Columbus leaves
directions with Margarite to surprise; besieges Ojeda; gives up the siege
and retires; forms a plan of exterminating the Spaniards; invades the
territories of Guacanagari; character of; is visited by Ojeda, with a
design to entrap him; agrees to wait upon Columbus, and sets forward; is
taken by stratagem; is chained; his conduct when in the presence of
Columbus; embarks for Spain; a Guadaloupe woman falls in love with him;
dies on the voyage.

Carocol, Island of.

Cariari, transactions at.

Caribbee Islands, discovered.

Caribs, character of the; origin of; cruelty to.

Caravajal, Don Garcia Lopez de, his embassy to Portugal.

Carvajal, Alonzo de, commander of one of Columbus's ships, on his third
voyage; arrives at Hispaniola; volunteers to endeavor to bring the rebels
of Xavagua to obedience; his ship strikes on a sand-bank; arrives at St.
Domingo by land; suspicions entertained against him; takes a letter from
the admiral to Roldan; takes propositions from Roldan to the admiral;
another interview with Boldan; appointed factor to Columbus; his evidence
relative to the discovery of the coast of Paria by Columbus.

Carracks, description of.

Casas, Las, his character of Don Diego Columbus; his observations
relative to Hayti; his account of two Spaniards; his picture of the
consequences of the administration of Ovando; his account of a combat
between one Indian and two mounted cavaliers; is present at a battle in
Higuey; his remark on the cold reception of Columbus by the king; his
remark in respect to the injustice of Ferdinand; an account of; his zeal
in behalf of the slaves; his dubious expedient to lessen the quantum of
human misery; character of his General History of the Indies.

Castaneda, Juan de, his disgraceful reception of Columbus on his return
from the New World; cause of his conduct.

Catalina, a Carib, her admiration of Guacanagari; proposes to her
captive companions an attempt to regain their liberty; escapes by
swimming.

Catalina, a female Cacique, falls in love with Miguel Diaz; imparts to
him a knowledge of the gold mines of Hayna.

Cathay, accounts of Marco Polo in respect to; of Sir John Mandeville.

Catherine, St., discovery of.

Cavern, near Cape Francois, description of.

Caymans, islands of.

Cedo, Fermin, his opinion in respect to the gold found in Hispaniola;
Belvis sent in Ms place.

Ceuta, the bishop of, his arguments against the proposition of Columbus;
proposes to the council to keep Columbus in suspense, and in the mean time
to send a ship in the route proposed; this advice acted upon; and fails.

Chanca, Dr., confirms the accounts sent home by Columbus.

Charles VIII., king of France, his kindness to Bartholomew Columbus.

Charles V. succeeds his grandfather, Ferdinand; recognizes the innocence
of Don Diego Columbus; acknowledges the right of Don Diego to exercise the
office of viceroy; his orders in respect to the claims of Don Diego's
widow; his ordinances relative to the slave trade.

Charlevoix, his description of the sea of the Antilles, Chaufepic, Jacques
George, a passage from, in respect to the Coloinbos.

Chvistoval, St., fortress of, erected by Bartholomew Columbus;
mountains of.

Cibao, Columbus's expedition to the mountains of; meaning of the word
Cibao; Luxan's description of the mountains of.

Ciguayens, a warlike Indian tribe, account of.

Cintra, rock of, arrival at, by Columbus, on his return from the New
World.

Cipango (or Japan), Marco Polo's account of.

Cities, island of the seven.

Cladera, Don Christoval, his refutation of a letter written by M. Otto, to
Dr. Franklin.

Colon, Diego, acts as interpreter; his speech to the natives of Cuba;
marries the daughter of the Cacique Guarionex.

Colombo, the old Genoese admiral, conveys the king of Portugal to the
Mediterranean coast of France.

Colombo, the younger (nephew of the old admiral), a famous corsair.

----, Balthazar, of Cuccaro, loses his cause in respect to the heirship of
Columbus.

----, Juan, commander of one of Columbus's ships on his third voyage.

Colombos, the navigators, an account of; capture of the Venetian galleys.

Columbus, Bartholomew, accompanies Bartholomew Diaz along the coast of
Africa; an account of his proceedings; arrives at Valladolid; sent to
assist his brother with three ships; character of; is invested by
Columbus with the title and authority of Adelantado; attends his brother
in his expedition against the Indians of the Vega; goes to the mines of
Ilayna; is invested with the command on the return of Columbus to Spain;
takes Porras prisoner; sails to meet his brother; account of his
administration during the absence of Columbus; sends 300 Indians to Spain
to be sold as slaves; erects the fortress of San Domingo; pays a visit to
Behechio; his reception; demands a tribute; establishes a chain of
military posts; causes several Indians who had broken some Christian
images, etc., to be burnt; marches against the Caciques, who had formed a
conspiracy against the Spaniards; causes them to be seized; pardons most
of them; again visits Behechio to receive the tribute of cotton; his skill
in government; a conspiracy formed against him by Roldan; narrowly escapes
assassination; repairs to the Vega in relief of Fort Conception; his
interview with Roldan; is shut up in Fort Conception; relieved by the
arrival of Coronal; publishes an amnesty to all who return to their duty;
marches against Guarionex, who has rebelled; his campaign in the mountains
of Ciguay; releases the wife of one of the Caciques whom he had taken with
Mayobanex; favorable consequences of this; his vigorous proceedings
against the rebels engaged in the conspiracy of Guevara and Moxica; is put
in irons by Bobadilla; accompanies Columbus on his fourth voyage; waits on
the governor of Ercilla; takes possession of Cape Honduras in the name of
the sovereigns of Castile; lands at Cariari; forms a plan to seize
Quibian; does so, with his wives and children; Quibian escapes; and
attacks in return; is finally compelled to remove the settlement to
another place; is in great danger; compelled to embark with his brother
and all his men; sets sail from St. Domingo for Spain with his brother;
proceeds to court to urge the justice of the king; accompanies his brother
to court; goes to represent his brother on the arrival of the new king
and queen of Castile; is sent out to St. Domingo by Ferdinand to admonish
his nephew, Don Diego; is presented with the property and government of
Mona for life, etc.; dies at St. Domingo; his character.

Columbus, Christopher, account of his birth, parentage, and education;
early life of; his first voyage; engages in the service of Reinier, king
of Naples; alters the point of the compass of his ship to deceive his
discontented crew; engaged in the Mediterranean and the Levant; said to be
appointed captain of several Genoese ships in the service of Louis XI.;
his gallant conduct when sailing with Colombo the younger; goes to Lisbon,
where he takes up his residence; picture of his person; early character;
becomes enamored of Dona Felipa Monis de Palestrello, whom he marries;
becomes possessed of his father-in-law's charts, journals, etc.; removes
to the island of Porto Santo; becomes acquainted with Pedro Correo, a
navigator of note; is animated with a wish to make discoveries; grounds on
which he founds his belief of the existence of undiscovered countries in
the West; correspondence of Columbus with Paulo Toscanelli: makes a voyage
to the north of Europe; the astrolabe having been applied to navigation,
Columbus proposes a voyage of discovery to John II. king of Portugal; this
proposition is referred to a junto charged with all matters relating to
maritime discovery; who regard the project as visionary; the king then
refers it to his council; by whom it is condemned; a ship is secretly sent
in the direction proposed, but returns: Columbus's indignation; loses his
wife; quits Portugal; goes to Genoa and proposes his project to the
government; it is rejected; supposed by some to have carried his plan to
Venice; visits his father; arrives in Spain, and requests a little bread
and water at a convent of Franciscan friars; the prior detains him as a
guest; and invites Garcia Fernandez to meet him; gives him letters of
introduction to Fernando de Talavera, queen Isabella's confessor; sets out
for Cordova; arrives there; finds it impossible to obtain a hearing; the
queen's confessor regards his plan as impossible; maintains himself by
designing maps and charts; is received into the house of Alonzo de
Quintanilla; introduced to the archbishop of Toledo; who gives him an
attentive hearing; becomes his friend and procures him an audience of the
king; who desires the prior of Prado to assemble astronomers, etc. to hold
conference with him; Columbus appears before the assembly at Salamanca;
arguments against his theory; his reply; the subject experiences
procrastination and neglect; is compelled to follow the movements of the
court; his plan recommended by the marchioness of Moya; receives an
invitation to return to Portugal from John II.; receives a favorable
letter from Henry VII. of England; distinguishes himself in the campaign
of 1489, and is impressed deeply with the arrival and message of two
friars from the soldan of Egypt relative to the Holy Land; determines to
devote the profits arising from his intended discovery to the purpose of
rescuing the holy sepulchre from the hands of the infidels; council of
learned men again convened; who pronounce the scheme vain and impossible;
receives a message from the sovereigns; has an audience of the sovereigns:
leaves Seville in disgust; forms a connection with Beatrix Enriquez;
applies to the duke of Medina Sidonia, who rejects his plan; applies to
the duke of Medina Celi, who is prevented from acceding to his plan from a
fear of the court; returns to the convent of La Rabida; Alonzo Pinzon
offers to pay his expenses in a renewed application to the court; returns
at the desire of the queen; witnesses the surrender of Granada to the
Spanish arms; negotiation with persons appointed by the sovereigns; his
propositions are considered extravagant; are pronounced inadmissible;
lower terms are offered him, which he rejects; the negotiation broken off;
quits Santa Fe; Luis de St. Angel reasons with the queen; who at last
consents; a messenger dispatched to recall Columbus; he returns to Santa
Fe; arrangement with the Spanish sovereigns; his son appointed page to
prince Juan; he returns to La Rabida; preparations at the Port of Palos,
and apprehensions there relative to the expedition; not a vessel can be
procured; they are at last furnished; Columbus hoists his flag; sails;
prologue to his voyage; an account of the map he had prepared previous to
sailing; difficulties begin to arise; arrives at the Canaries; comes in
sight of Mount Teneriffe; arrives at Gomera; the news which reached him
there; alarm of his sailors on losing all sight of land; begins to keep
two reckonings; falls in with part of a mast; notices a variation of the
needle; his opinion relative to that phenomenon; they are visited by two
birds; terrors of the seamen; sees large patches of weeds; his situation
becomes more critical; part of his crew determine, should he refuse to
return, to throw him into the sea; false appearance of land; his crew
become exceedingly clamorous; the assertion that he capitulated with them
disproved; his address to the crew; sees a light; land discovered; the
reward for land adjudged to him; lands on the island of St. Salvador;
which he takes possession of in the name of the Castilian sovereigns; the
surprise of the natives: gold first discovered; reconnoitres the island;
takes seven of the inhabitants to teach them Spanish that they might
become interpreters; discovers Santa Maria de la Conception; discovers
Exuma; discovers Isabella; hears of two islands called Cuba and Bohio:
sails in search of the former; discovers it; takes formal possession;
sends two Spaniards up the country; coasts along the shore; return of the
Spaniards with their report; goes in search of the supposed island of
Babeque; discovers an archipelago, to which he gives the name of the
King's Garden; desertion of Alonzo Pinzon; discovers St. Catherine, in
which he finds stones veined with gold; specimen of his style in
description; reaches what be supposes to be the eastern extremity of Asia;
discovers Hispaniola; its transcendent appearance; enters a harbor, to
which he gives the name of St. Nicholas; a female brought to him who wore
an ornament of gold in her nose; coasts along the shores; is visited by a
Cacique; receives a message from Guacanagari; his ship strikes upon a
sand-bank in the night; some of his crew desert in a boat; the ship
becomes a wreck, and he takes refuge on board a caravel; receives
assistance from Guacanagari; transactions with the natives; is invited to
the residence of Guacanagari; his affectionate reception of him; his
people desire to have permission to remain in the island; he forms the
plan of a colony and the design of constructing a fortress; and of
returning to Spain for reinforcements; entertained in the most hospitable
manner by Guacanagari; who procures for him a great quantity of gold
previous to his departure; his address to the people; gives a feast to the
chieftains; sails; coasts towards the eastern end of Hispaniola: meets
with Pinzon; Pinzon's apology; account of the Ciguayens; the first native
blood shed by the whites; account of the return voyage; encounters violent
storms; the crew draw lots who shall perform pilgrimages; two lots fall to
the admiral; vows made; commits an account of his voyage in a barrel to
the sea; land discovered; which proves to be the Azores; transactions at
St. Mary's; receives supplies and a message from the governor; attempted
performance of the vow made during the storm; the seamen taken prisoners
by the rabble, headed by the governor; the governor's disgraceful conduct;
seamen liberated; cause of the governor's conduct; violent gales; lots for
pilgrimages again cast; arrives off Cintra, in Portugal; writes to the
sovereigns and the king of Portugal; is summoned by a Portuguese admiral
to give an account of himself; effect of his return at Lisbon; receives an
invitation from the king of Portugal; interview with the king; jealousy of
the king excited; a proposition to the king by some of his courtiers to
assassinate Columbus and take advantage of his discoveries; rejected by
the king; disgraceful plot of the king to rob Spain of the newly-
discovered possessions; his interview with the queen of Portugal; enters
the harbor of Palos; account of his reception there; arrival of Pinzon;
receives an invitation from the sovereigns at Barcelona; his reception on
the road; is received in a magnificent manner by the courtiers; and the
sovereigns; his vow in respect to the holy sepulchre; the manner in which
his discoveries were received throughout Europe; a coat of arms given him;
the manner in which he receives the honors paid to him; preparations for a
second voyage; agreement made with the sovereigns; powers with which he is
invested; takes leave of the sovereigns at Barcelona; arrives at Seville;
prepares for the voyage; ideas of Columbus and the people relative to the
New World; insolence of Juan de Soria; conduct of Fonseca: departure on
his second voyage; anchors at Gornera; gives sealed instructions to the
commander of each vessel; sees a swallow; encounters a storm; sees the
lights of St. Elmo; discovers the Caribbee Islands; takes possession of
them; discovers Guadaloupe; transactions there; cruises among the
Caribbees; arrives at Hispaniola; at the gulf of Samana; anchors at Monte
Christi; arrives at La Navidad; is visited by a cousin of the Cacique;
learns a disaster which had occurred at the fortress; visits Guacanagari:
abandons La Navidad: founds the city of Isabella at Monte Christi; falls
sick; sends Alonzo de Ojeda to explore the interior of the island;
dispatches twelve ships to Spain; requests fresh supplies; recommends
Pedro Margarite and Juan Aguado to the patronage of the government;
recommends a curious plan in respect to an exchange of Caribs for live
stock; recommendation of Columbus in respect to the Caribs; his conduct in
respect to Diaz's mutiny; consequences; sets out on an expedition to the
mountains of Cibao; erects a fortress of wood among the mountains; returns
to Isabella; receives unpleasant intelligence from Pedro Margarite;
sickness in the colony; puts his people on short allowance, Sol; offends
the Hidalgos, by making them share the common labors of the colony;
distributes his forces in the interior; gives the command of them to Pedro
Margarite; his instructions to that officer; instructs Margarite to
surprise and secure Caonabo; his conduct in respect to Haytien thieves;
sails for Cuba; visits La Navidad; arrives at St. Nicholas; lands at
Guantanamo; anchors at St. Jago; sails in search of Bubeque; discovers
Jamaica; received in a hostile manner: takes possession of the island;
amicable intercourse with the natives; returns to Cuba; lands at Cabo de
la Cruz; encounters a storm; becomes engaged in a most difficult
navigation; discovers an archipelago, to which he gives the name of the
Queen's Gardens; hears of a province called Mangon, which greatly excites
his attention; coasts along the southern side of Cuba; encounters a
dangerous navigation in A white pea; sends parties to explore the interior
of the country; deceives himself in respect to what he wishes; fancies he
has arrived on that part of Asia which is beyond the boundaries of the Old
World, laid down by Ptolemy; anticipates returning to Spain by the Aurea
Chersonesus, Taprobana, the Straits of Babelmandel, and the Red Sea, or
the Coast of Africa; returns along the southern coast of Cuba, in the
assurance that Cuba was the extremity of the Asiatic continent; discovers
the island of Evangelista; his ship runs aground; sails along the province
of Ornofay: erects crosses in conspicuous situations to denote his
discoveries; is addressed by an Indian; takes an Indian with him: his ship
leaks; reaches Santa Cruz; coasts along the south side of Jamaica; his
ship visited by a Cacique and his whole family; who offer to accompany him
to Spain to do homage to the king and queen; he evades this offer; coasts
along the south side of Hispaniola; makes an error in reckoning; arrives
at Mona; is suddenly deprived of all his faculties; arrives at Isabella;
is joined by his brother Bartholomew; invests him with the title and
authority of Adelantado; is visited by Guacanagari, who informs him of a
league formed against him by the Haytien Caciques; his measures to restore
the quiet of the island; wins over Guarionex, and prevails upon him to
give his daughter in, marriage to Diego Colon; builds Fort, Conception in
the territories of Guarionex; Caonabo is delivered into his hands by
Ojeda; he puts him in chains; his interview with him; his anxiety relieved
by the arrival of Antonio de Torres; sends home specimens of gold, plants,
etc., and five hundred Indian prisoners to be sold as slaves; undertakes
an expedition against the Indians of the Vega; a battle ensues; the
Indians defeated; makes a military tour through various parts of the
island, and reduces is to obedience; imposes a tribute; refuses the offer
of Guarionex to cultivate grain, instead of paying in gold; erects forts;
the natives having destroyed the crops, are hunted and compelled to return
to their labors; account of the intrigues against Columbus in the court of
Spain; charges brought against him; his popularity declines in
consequence; measures taken in Spain; Aguado arrives at Isabella to
collect information relative to the state of the colony; his dignified
conduct at his first interview with Aguado; the Caciques prefer complaints
against him: he resolves on returning to Spain; a violent hurricane occurs
previous to his departure, which sinks six caravels; pleased with the
discovery of the gold mines of Hayna; orders a fort to be erected; invests
his brother with the command; fails for Spain; arrives at Guadaloupe; his
politic conduct there; leaves Guadaloupe: a famine on board the ships; his
magnanimous conduct; arrives in Spain.; his representation of things;
writes instructions for ibe conduct of Bartholomew; invited to court;
favorably received; proposes a third voyage of discovery; the king
promises him ships; delays and their causes; refuses the title of duke or
marquess, and a grant of lands in Hispaniola; terms on winch he was to
sail: honors bestowed upon him; his respect and love for Genoa; makes his
will; odium thrown upon his enterprises; plan to which he was compelled to
resort to procure men for his third voyage; in consequence of delays, he
almost resolves to give up all further enterprise; chastises a minion of
Fonseca; consequences of this chastisement; sets sail; his opinion in
respect to a continent in the Southern Ocean; arrives at Gomera; retakes a
Spanish ship; is seized with a fit of the gout; arrives among the Cape de
Verde Islands: sees the island Bel Fuego; arrives under the line; the heat
becomes intolerable, and he alters his course; discovers Trinidad;
discovers Terra Firma; steers along the coast of Trinidad; difficulty in
respect to a rapid current; enters the Gulf of Paria; suffers from a
complaint in the eyes; discovers the islands of Margarita and Cubagua;
exchanges plates, etc., for pearls; his complaint in the eyes increases;
arrives at Hispaniola; his brother soils to meet him; his constitution
seems to give way; his speculations relative to the coast of Paria; polar
star augmentation; doubts the received theory of the earth; accounts for
variation of the needle; difference of climate, etc.; arrives at San
Domingo; state of his health, on arriving at Hispaniola; state of the
colony; negotiates with the rebels; offers free passage to all who desire
to return to Spain; offers a pardon to Roldan, which is received with
contempt; writes to Spain an account of the rebellion, etc., and requires
a judge and some missionaries to be sent out: writes a conciliating letter
to Roldan; interviews with Roldan; issues a proclamation of pardon;
receives proposals, which he accedes to; goes on a tour to visit the
various stations; receives a cold letter from the sovereigns, written by
Fonseca; the former arrangement with Roldan not having been carried into
effect, enters into a second; grants lands to Roldan's followers;
considers Hispaniola in the light of a conquered country; reduces the
natives to the condition of villains or vassals: grants lands to Roldan;
determines on returning to Spain; but is prevented by circumstances;
writes to the sovereigns, entreating them to inquire into the truth of the
late transactions; requests that his son, Diego, might be sent out to him;
sends Roldan to Alonzo de Ojeda, who has arrived on the western coast on a
voyage of discovery; his indignation at the breach of prerogative implied
by this voyage; hears of a conspiracy entered into against him by Guevara
and Moxica; seizes Moxica; and orders him to be flung headlong from the
battlements of Fort Conception; vigorous proceedings against the rebels;
beneficial consequences; visionary fancy at night; representations at
court against him; his sons insulted at Granada; the queen is offended at
his pertinacity in making slaves of those taken in warfare; and consents
to the sending out a commission to investigate his conduct; Bobadilla is
sent out; and arrives at St. Domingo; his judgment formed before he leaves
his ship; he seizes upon the government before he investigates the conduct
of Columbus; Columbus is summoned to appear before Bobadilla; goes to St.
Domingo without guards or retinue, and is put in irons and confined in the
fortress; his magnanimity; charges against him; jubilee of miscreants on
his degradation; his colloquy with Villejo, previous to their sailing;
sails; arrives at Cadiz; sensation in Spain on his arrival in irons; sends
a letter to Dona Juana de la Torre, with an account of his treatment;
indignation of the sovereigns at reading this account; is invited to
court; his gracious reception there; his emotion; is promised a full
restitution of his privileges and dignities; disappointed in receiving
them; causes; his interests ordered to be respected in Hispaniola by
Ovando; remembers his vow to furnish an army wherewith to recover the Holy
Sepulchre; endeavors to incite the sovereigns to the enterprise; forms a
plan for a fourth voyage, which is to eclipse all former ones; writes to
Pope Alexander VII.; manuscript copy of, note; takes measures to secure
his fame by placing it under the guardianship of his native country; sails
from Cadiz; arrives at Ercilla; at the Grand Canary; at St. Domingo;
requests permission to shelter in the harbor, as he apprehends a storm;
his request refused; a violent hurricane soon after sweeps the sea, in
which he and his property are preserved, and several of his bitterest
enemies overwhelmed; encounters another storm; discovers Guanaga; a
Cacique eomes on board his ship with a multitude of articles, the produce
of the country; selects some to send them to Spain; is within two days'
sail of Yucatan; natives different from any he had yet seen; voyages along
the coast of Honduras; encounters violent storms of thunder and lightning;
voyage along the Mosquito shore; passes a cluster of islands, to which he
gives the name of Limonares; comes to an island, to which he gives the
name of La Huerta, or the Garden; transactions at Cariari; voyage along
Costa Rica; speculations concerning the isthmus of Veragua; discovery of
Puerto Bello; discovery of El Retrete; disorders of his men at this port,
and the consequences; relinquishes the further prosecution of his voyage
eastward; returns to Puerto Bello; encounters a furious tempest; is near
being drowned by a water-spout; returns to Veragua; regards gold as one of
the mystic treasures, note; is nearly being wrecked in port; gives his
name to the mountains of Veragua; sends his brother to explore the
country; which appears to be impregnated with gold; believes that he has
reached one of the most favored ports of the Asiatic continent; commences
a settlement on the river Belen; determines on returning to Spain for
reinforcements; is stopped by discovering a conspiracy of the natives;
sends his brother to surprise Quibian; who is seized; and afterwards
escapes; disasters at the settlement stop his sailing; some of his
prisoners escape, and others destroy themselves; his anxiety produces
delirium; is comforted by a vision; the settlement is abandoned, and the
Spaniards embark for Spain; departure from the coast of Veragua; sails for
Hispaniola; arrives at Puerto Bello: at the entrance of the Gulf of
Darien; at the Queen's Gardens; encounters another violent tempest;
arrives at Cape Cruz; at Jamaica; runs his ships on shore; arranges with
the natives for supplies of provisions; his conversation with Diego Mendez
to induce him to go in a canoe to St. Domingo; Mendez offers to go;
Columbus writes to Ovando for a ship to take him and his crew to
Hispaniola; writes to the sovereigns; Mendez embarks; the Porras engage in
a mutiny; the mutiny becomes general; is confined by the gout; rushes out
to quell the mutiny, but is borne back to the cabin by the few who remain
faithful; the mutineers embark on board ten Indian canoes; provisions
become exceedingly scarce; employs a stratagem to obtain supplies from the
natives; another conspiracy is formed; arrival of Diego de Escobar from
Hispaniola on a mission from the governor, promising that a ship shall
soon be sent to his relief; overtures of the admiral to the mutineers; not
accepted; they send a petition for pardon; it is granted; two ships arrive
from Hispaniola; departure of Columbus; arrives at Beata; anchors in the
harbor of St. Domingo; is enthusiastically received by the people; is
grieved at the desolation he sees everywhere around him; finds that his
interests had been disregarded; sets sail for Spain; encounters several
tempests; anchors in the barbor of St. Luear; finds all his affairs in
confusion; is compelled to live by borrowing; writes to King Ferdinand;
but, receiving unsatisfactory replies, would have set out for Seville, but
is prevented by his infirmities: death of Queen Isabella; is left to the
justice of Ferdinand; employs Vespucci; goes with his brother to court,
then held at Segovia; is received in a very cold manner; Don Diego de Deza
is appointed arbitrator between the king and the admiral; his claims are
referred to the Junta de Descargos; is confined with a violent attack of
the gout; petitions the king that his son Diego may be appointed, in his
place, to the government of which lie bad been so long deprived; his
petition remains unattended to; writes to the new king and queen of
Castile; who promise a speedy and prosperous termination to his suit; his
last illness; writes a testamentary codicil on the blank page of a little
breviary; writes a final codicil; receives the sacrament; dies; his
burial; his remains removed to Hispaniola, disinterred and conveyed to the
Havana; epitaph; observations on his character; his remains removed with
great ceremony to Cuba; reflections thereon; historical account of his
descendants; an important lawsuit relative to the beirship (in the female
line) to the family titles and property; decided in favor of Don Nuno
Golves do Portugallo; an account of his lineage; an account of his
birthplace; an account of the ships he used; an examination of his route
in the first voyage; the effect of the travels of Marco Polo on his mind;
his belief in the imaginary island of St. Brandan; an account of the
earliest narratives of his first and second voyages; his ideas relative to
the situation of the terrestrial paradise; his will; his signature.

Columbus, Don Diego, character of; intrusted with the command of the ships
during the expedition of Columbus to the mountains of Cibao; made
president of the junta; reproves Pedro Margarito for his irregularities;
the Hidalgos form a faction against him during the absence of his brother;
returns to Isabella; a conspiracy formed against him by Roldan; left in
command at St. Domingo, during the tour of Columbus; his conduct on the
arrival of Bobadilla; seized by order of Bobadilla, thrown in irons, and
confined on board of a caravel.

----, Don Diego (son to Christopher), appointed page to Queen Isabella:
embarks with his father on his second expedition; left in charge of his
father's interests in Spain; his ingratitude to Mendez, and falsification
of his promise; his character; succeeds to the rights of his father, as
viceroy and governor of the New World; urges the king to give him those
rights; commences a process against the king before the council of the
Indies; the defence set up: the suit lasts several years; becomes enamored
of Dona Maria Toledo; a decision, in respect to part of his claim, raises
him to great wealth; marries Dona Maria, niece to the Duke of Aiva;
through this connection he obtains the dignities and powers enjoyed by
Nicolas de Ovando; embarks for Hispaniola; keeps up great state; becomes
embroiled with some of his father's enemies; the court of royal audience
established as a check upon him; opposes the repartimientos; his virtues
make him unpopular, subjugates and settles the island of Cuba without the
loss of a single man; sails for Spain to vindicate his conduct; is well
received; the death of Ferdinand; obtains a recognition of his innocence
of all charges against him from Charles V.: and has his right acknowledged
to exercise the office of viceroy and governor in all places discovered by
his father; sails for St. Domingo, where he arrives; difficulties he has
to encounter; African slaves having been introduced and most cruelly used,
they revolt; are subdued; is accused of usurping too much power; receives
in consequence a severe letter from the council of the Indies; and is
desired to repair to court to vindicate himself; sails, lands, and appears
before the court at Victoria; clears himself; prosecutes his claims,
follows the court from city to city; is attacked by a slow fever; dies;
his family.

Columbus, Fernando (son to Christopher), accompanies his father on his
fourth voyage; his father's encomium on him; embarks for Hispaniola with
Don Diego; an account of him; writes a history of his father.

----, Don Luis (son to Don Diego), prosecutes the claims of his father and
grandfather; compromises all claims for two titles and a pension; dies.

Commerce, despotic influence of the Spanish crown in respect to.

Compass, the, brought into more general use.

Conception, Santa Maria de la, discovery of.

---- Fort, erected by Columbus; present state of, note.

Contradictions, the coast of.

Convicts who had accompanied Columbus, conduct of, in Hispaniola.

Copper hatchets seen among the Indians of Guanaca.

Coral found in Veragua.

Cormorants, large nights of, seen on the south coast of Cuba.

Coronel, Pedro Fernandez, sails for Hayti with two ships; arrives at St.
Domingo with supplies; is sent to persuade Roldan to return to his duty.

Correo, Pedro, a navigator of note, with whom Columbus becomes acquainted.

Cortez, Hernando, conduct of Fonseca to.

Costa Rica, Columbus sails along the.

Cotabanama, Cacique of Higuey; massacres eight Spaniards; Ovando marches
against him; sues for peace; visits the Spanish camp; another war ensues;
cruelty to his tribe; takes shelter with his wife and children in a large
cavern; his rencounter with Juan Lopez; is overpowered and chained; sent
to St. Domingo and hanged.

Cotton, where first seen in the Western hemisphere; seen in large
quantities in Cuba; tribute of.

Cranes, flocks of large, seen in Cuba.

Creation, ideas in respect to the, entertained by the Haytiens.

Crocodiles found at El Betrete similar to those of the Nile.

Crosses erected by Columbus to denote his discoveries. Crusade to
recover the holy sepulchre proposed by Columbus.

Cruz, Cabo de la, so named by Columbus.

Cuba, island of, Columbus bears of; sails in quest of it; discovery of;
description of its appearance: hurricanes seldom known in; belief of the
inhabitants in a future state; Columbus revisits the consts of; natives
of; Columbus coasts along the southern side; natives; subjugated and
settled by Don Diego Columbus; the remains of Columbus removed to.
Cubagua, Isle of, discovery of; natives; pearl fisheries on the coast of,
established. Cubiga, a village in Veragua where the country of gold was
supposed to terminate.

Cucumbers first seen in Hayti.

Currency, principles on which the sums mentioned in this work have been
reduced to modern currency.



D.


Dances of the Haytiens.

Darien, Gulf of.

Dead and dying, manner of treating the, by the Haytiens.

Delphin, island of.

Deluge, universal, ideas entertained by the Haytiens in respect to.
323.

Deza, Diego de, character of; coincides with Columbus at the council of
Salamanca; assists him with his purse; made archbishop of Seville; is
chosen arbitrator between the king and Columbus.

Diaz, Bartholomew, account of his discoveries.

----, Miguel, his romantic history; discovers the gold mines of Hayna;
commands the fortress of St. Domingo at the time Bobadilla arrives; his
conduct on being desired to give up his prisoners.

----, de Pisa, mutiny of; confined on board one of the ships.

Disaster, river of.

Discovery, progress of, under prince Henry of Portugal.

Dogs, dumb, found at Santa Marta.

Domingo, San, foundation of the city of.

Dominica, island of, discovered.

Doves, stock, presented to Columbus by the natives of Cuba.

Drogeo, a vast country, fabled to have been discovered by some fishermen
of Friseland.

Drum, a species of, used by the Haytiens.

Dying, manner of treating the.



E.


Ear, coast of the.

Eden, garden of, speculation of Columbus in respect to.

Egg, anecdote of the.

Egypt, soldan of, his message to Ferdinand.

Elmo, St., electrical lights seen by Columbus.

Enchanters, the natives of Cariari taken to be.

Enriqueis, Beatrix, her connnection with Columbus; Columbus's legacy to,
ii.

Escobar, Diego de, arrives at Jamaica on a mission to Columbus from the
governor of Hispaniola; returns to his ship immediately.

----, Rodrigo de, chief notary to Columbus's first expedition.

Escobedo, Rodrigo de, his conduct after the departure of Columbus; death
of.

Espinal, Antonio de, the first prelate sent to the New World.

Esquibel, Juan de, employed against the natives of Higuey; his atrocious
conduct to his prisoners; causes the natives to be hunted like wild beasts.

Estotiland, a supposed island on the coast of North America, said to have
been discovered by some fishermen of Friseland.

Eudoxus, remarks on his voyage.  Evangelista, island of, discovered by
Columbus.

Exuma, discovery of; named Fernandina by Columbus.



F.


Farol, Cape, at Jamaica.

Ferdinand, king of Aragon and Castile, character of; engagements of, on
the arrival of Columbus at Cordova; lays siege to the city of Loxa; grants
an audience to Columbus; desires the prior of Prado to assemble men of
science to consider his plan; attempt to assassinate him; takes Malaga;
forms an alliance with Henry VII. of England; one of the rival kings of
Granada surrenders his pretensions; receives a message from the soldan of
Egypt; his message to Columbus on learning the unfavorable decision of the
council; refers his plan to persons of confidence; his reluctance to the
plan after the queen has consented; his joy on learning the success of
Columbus; his reception of him; prepares a second expedition; his
negotiations with John II. in respect to the new discoveries; listens to
the charges against Columbus; his conduct; his reception of Columbus on
his second return; lays the foundation of the power of Charles V.;
promises Columbus to furnish him with ships for a third voyage;
disappointed that his newly-discovered possessions have not become a
source of profit; assaulted by the clamors of ruffians who had returned
from Hispaniola; his ingratitude to Columbus becomes evident; listens to
the rebels who had been permitted to return to Spain: sends out a
commission to inquire into the conduct of Columbus; reprobates the conduct
pursued against Columbus, and invites him to court; promises to restore
him to all his rights and privileges; his jealousy awakened at the
discoveries of the English and Portuguese. 131; his ingratitude to
Columbus; listens to the project of Columbus for a fourth voyage; his
ingratitude more evinced on the return of Columbus from his last voyage;
erects a monument over Columbus; his conduct to Don Diego Columbus's son;
consents that Don Diego should commence a process against him before the
council of the Indies; the defence set up; separates the Isthmus of Darien
into two great provinces; death.

Fernandez, Garcia, physician of Palos, his account of Columbus at the gate
of the convent on his first arrival in Spain; testimony of, relative to
Pinzon.

Ferrer, Jayme, an eminent lapidary, substance of his letter to Columbus,
note.

Festival, religious, of a Haytien Cacique, description of.

Fiesco, Bartholomew, embarks with Mendez from Jamaica to Hispaniola;
attends the last moments of Columbus.

Fish, curious.

Fishing, curious method of.

Fonseca, Juan Rodriguez de, appointed superintendent of Indian affairs;
his character; his difference with Columbus; impedes the affairs of
Columbus; writes a cold letter to Columbus, by order of the sovereigns;
shows Columbus's letter to Alonzo de Ojeda; his baseness fully displayed;
supposed to have instigated the violent measures of Bobadilla; throws
impediments in the way of Columbus's fourth voyage; supposed to have been
the cause of Ovando's disgrace; by order of Ferdinand, establishes a
court, called the Royal Audience; becomes interested in continuing the
slave trade; his opposition to Las Casas; an account of; character of; his
conduct to Cortez; accused of having fomented a conspiracy to assassinate
Cortez.

Fountain of pure water in the sea, note.

Franciscans, the order first introduced into the New World.

Fuego, del, island of, seen by Columbus.



G.


Galleys, Venetian, capture of, by Colombo the younger.

Gama, Vasquez de, doubles the Cape of Good Hope, and opens a new road for
the trade of the East.

Garcia de Barrantee, his conduct during the conspiracy of Boldan.

Gardens, the, coast so called.

---- King's islands.

---- Queen's, islands of.

---- the Hesperian, observations in respect to.

Gato, Paulo, a species of monkey.

Genoa, Columbus shows great respect to.

Gentlemen, the pass of, a road so called.

Geraldini, Alexandria and Antonio, warmly enter into the views of
Columbus; they introduce him to the archbishop of Toledo.

Gold (Western), discovered first in St. Salvador; specimens of virgin ore
found in the interior of Hispaniola; particles found in the streams; and
pieces.

----, tribute of.

---- mine discovered in Hayti; a solid mass of, which weighed 3600
castellanos: superstitious notions in respect to, note: gathered from the
roots of the trees in Veragua.

Golden river, arrival at, in second voyage.

Gods of the Haytiens.

Goinarn, Fernando Lopez de, examination of his chargo relative to a
pilot's having died in the house of Columbus.

Gorvalan explores part of the interior of Hispaniola; returns to Spain

Gourds introduced into Hayti.

Gracias a Dios, cape of.

Granada, discovery of.

Grape-vines, very luxuriant, found in Cuba.

Greenland, assertions relative to its discovery by the Scandinavians.
379.

Granada, surrender of.

Guadaloupe, island of, discovered; houses, furniture, etc. of the natives;
supposed to be cannibals; description of the island; Columbus revisits it;
women of.

Guacanagari, Cacique of Hispaniola, sends a message to Columbus, receives
the Spaniards with great courtesy; sheds tears on learning the shipwreck
of Columbus; his assistance; and kindness; invites Columbus to his
residence; manners of; hospitality; procures a great quantity of gold for
the Admiral previous to his departure for Spain; sends his cousin to greet
Columbus on his second arrival; his suspicious conduct during the disaster
at La Navidad; visits Columbus's ships; admires a captive Carib woman; his
flight into the interior; his mysterious conduct continued; refuses to
partake in the plan formed by Caonabo, of exterminating the Spaniards;
incurs the hostility of his fellow Caciques; visits Columbus during his
sickness, and informs him of a league formed against him: assists Columbus
in his expedition against the Indians of the Vega: is present at a battle;
incurs the hatred of all the Caciques; is nevertheless compelled to pay
tribute; takes refuge in the mountains and dies in misery; his character.

Guana, regarded with disgust by the Spaniards; they conquer their
prejudice.

Guanaja, discovery of.

Guaora, Cacique, hunted like a wild beast, and afterwards hanged.

Guarionex, Cacique of the royal Vega; visits Columbus, and is prevailed on
to give his daughter to Diego Colon, the interpreter; permits Columbus to
build a fortress; character of; submits to the domination of the
Spaniards; compelled to pay tribute; offers to cultivate grain; refused;
learns the Pater-noster, Ave-Maria, etc.: relapses, and the cause of it;
becomes incensed at several Indians being burnt for destroying some
images; takes arms; conspires to assassinate the Spaniards; is seized; is
pardoned; enters into a conspiracy with Roldan against the Adelantado;
puts a Cacique to death; flies to the mountains of Ciguay; is compelled to
retire into the most desolate places; is seized and taken in chains to
Fort Conception; lost in a hurricane.

Guatiguana, a Cacique of Hayti, puts ten Spaniards to death, and sets fire
to a house.

Guevara, Don Hernando de, falls in love with Higuamota; is seized in the
dwelling of Anacaona; and sent to San Domingo.

Gulf stream.

Gutierrez, Pedro, his conduct after the departure of Columbus; death of.



H.


Hamacs, used by the natives of Exuma.

Hanno, remarks on the Periplus of.

Haro, Bernaldo de, his evidence relative to the discovery of the coast of
Paria by Columbus.

Hatchets of iron, said to be found at Guadaloupe.

Hawk's bells, delight of the Haytiens on wearing.

Hayna, mines of, discovered.

Henry, prince of Portugal, progress of discovery under; account of;
considers Africa to be circumnavigable; conceives the idea of turning the
trade of the East; establishes a naval college at Sagres; death.

Henry VII. of England, writes a favorable letter to Columbus.

Herbs, European, introduced in Hispaniola.

Herrera, Antonio de, a short account of his life and writings; Vossius's
eulogium on.

Herrera, Don Lepo de, his mission to the court of Lisbon.

Hayti (see Hispaniola), discovery of.

Haytiens, description of their manners, customs, religion, etc.; their
character; defeated in the battle of the Vega; subjugated; a tribute
imposed upon them; their despair; they enter into an association to
destroy the crops; the evils fall upon themselves.

Hidalgos, compelled at Hayti to share the common labors of the settlement;
character of the; form a faction against Diego Columbus, during the
absence of his brother.

Higuamota, daughter of Caonabo, falls in love with Don Hernando de
Guevara.

Higuanama, a female Cacique, hanged by order of Ovando.

Higuey, domain of: character of its inhabitants; Ovando's war with the
natives; martial character of the people; multitudes of them destroyed;
sue for peace; again revolt; and slaughter their tyrants;
situation of their towns; are defeated and compelled to conceal themselves
in the fastnesses; are hunted like wild beasts.

Hipparchus, error of, in respect of Africa, and India. Hispaniola,
discovery of; cause of its being so called; description of the
inhabitants; of the country; transactions with the natives; form of
government; alarm created by a discharge of cannon; general description
of; domains into which it was divided; made the metropolis of the New
World: thought to have been the ancient Ophir; an account of the numbers
of the natives who perished, victims to the avarice of the whites; ceded
to the French. 317. Honduras, cape of, discovered by Columbus.;
inhabitants.

Honey and wax found at Guadaloupe.

Horses, fear of the Haytiens of; terror inspired by them at the battle of
the Vega; a remarkable one which moved in curvets to the music of a viol.

Huelva, Alonzo Sanchez de, the pilot, fabled to have died in the house of
Columbus.

Huerta, La, delightful island of, H. 167; inhabitauts of.

Humboldt, his account of the present condition of the southern side of
Cuba; account of the route of Columbus, note.

Hurricanes, seldom known in Cuba; a violent one in Hayti; reflections of
the Haytiens previous to it.



I.


Iceland, Columbus supposed to have visited; assertions relative to its
discovery by the Scandinavians.

Impressment resorted to on Columbus's third voyage.

Indians, six taken from the New World; arrival of in Spain; are baptized;
an Indian, of Jamaica, desires Columbus to take him to Spain.

Iron, a pan of, seen at Guadaloupe.

Isabella, discovery of the island of.

----, princess, marriage of, with the heir-apparent of Portugal.

----, queen of Aragon and Castile, character of; engagements of, on the
arrival of Columbus in Spain: repairs to the seat of war in Granada;
thence to Gallicia and Salamanca; an attempt to assassinate her; Columbus
recommended to her by the marchioness of Moya; her ability in military
affairs; receives a letter from the prior of La Rabida; invites Columbus
to court; Luis de St. Angel reasons with her; signifies her assent;
declares her resolution to pawn her jewels to defray the expenses; her
enthusiasm in the cause; her motives; her joy at learning the success of
Columbus; her reception of him; her zeal for the welfare of the Indians;
her anxiety in respect to the conversion of the Haytiens; humanely
prevents the Haytien slaves from being sold to slavery; orders them to be
sent back to Hayti; enters into the views of Columbus in respect to a
third voyage; her humane directions; death of her son, Prince Juan; makes
Columbus's two sons her pages; begins to doubt the conduct of Columbus;
offended at his pertinacity in making slaves of the Indians taken in war;
orders all those sent to Spain to be restored to their country and
friends; consents to the sending out a commission to investigate his
conduct; filled with sympathy and indignation on reading Columbus's letter
to Dona de la Torre; invites him to court; is moved to tears at beholding
him; her concern for the welfare of the Indians; listens with complacency
to the proposition of Columbus for a fourth voyage; receives the news of
the sanguinary acts of Ovando with horror and indignation; exacts a
promise from the king that he shall be superseded in the government;
causes of the melancholy under which she labored; her death; and character.



J.


Jamaica discovered by Columbus; the natives receive Columbus in a hostile
manner; Columbus takes possession of it; amicable intercourse with the
natives; their character; their canoes; subjugated by Don Diego.

----, Cacique of, visits Columbus, and oifers to go and do homage to the
king and queen of Spain; this offer evaded by Columbus.

Japan (Cipango), Marco Polo's account of it.

Jasper, specimens found among the mountains of Cibao.

Jerez, Rodrigo de, sent up the island of Cuba by Columbus; account of his
journey.

Jews not allowed to establish themselves in the colonies, or undertake
voyages of discovery.

John of Anjou, an account of his expedition against Naples.

---- II. king of Portugal, the passion for maritime discovery revives
under; sends missions in quest of Prester John; receives a proposition of
a voyage of discovery from Columbus; refers it to a junto and his council,
who report it to be visionary; consents to use an unwarrantable stratagem;
desires to renew the negotiation with Columbus; who refuses and quits
Portugal; invites Columbus to Portugal, and promises protection; invites
Columbus on his return from the New World; his jealousy excited; his
armament; his negotiations with Ferdinand in respect to the new
discoveries; his idea in respect to a continent in the southern ocean.

Josephus, his opinion relative to the gold used in the temple of
Jerusalem.

Juan, prince, his nuptials; his death.

Juana, queen of Castile, arrival of; promises a prosperous termination to
the suit of Columbus.

Junta de Descargos, the claims of Columbus referred to the.



K.


Kings, Moorish, of Granada, one of them surrenders hie pretensions to
Ferdinand; the other surrenders Granada.

Kircher, Athanasius, his opinion relative to the travels of Marco Polo.



L.


Labrador, discovered by Sebastian Cabot.

Lactantius, passage quoted from, to prove the impossibility of their being
antipodes.

Lapis lazuli, specimens found among the mountains of Cibao.

Ledesma, Pedro, his gallant conduct; involves himself in Porra's mutiny,
and receives a multitude of wounds; is assassinated.

Lepe, Diego de, discovers more of the southern continent than any voyager
of his day. Lineage of Christopher Columbus, an account of.

Lombards, the extent of their trade.

Lopez, Juan, his rencontre with Cotabanaina.

Lots for Pilgrimages, drawing of.

Luxan, Juan de, hie excursion among the mountains of Cibao.



M.


Macham, his discovery of Madeira; an account of his adventures.

Madeira, an account of the discovery of the island of.

Magellan, electrical lights seen during his voyage on the masts of ships.

Maguana, domain of, an account of.

Mahogany, canoes made of.

Maize, cultivated in Ilayti.

Maladies of the Spaniards in Hayti,330.

Malaga, eiege and capture of.

Maldonado, Don Alonzo, appointed Alguazil-mayor in the place of Roldan, in
Hispaniola.

Maldonado, Melchor, visits Guacanagari; proceeds along the coast.

Malte-Brun, his conjecture relative to Columbus considered.

Man, origin of, according to the Haytiens.

Manicaotex, succeeds Caonabo; commands in a battle; is conquered and sues
for peace; compelled to pay half a calabash of gold every three months;
assembly of the Caciques at his house to prefer complaints against
Columbus.

Mandeville, Sir John, a short account of his travels; held in great
authority by Columbus.

Mangon, a province of Cuba.

Map, Paulo Toscanelli's, used by Columbus on hia first voyage.

Maps, a great improvement made in.

Marble, masses of, found among the mountains of Cibao.

Marcolini, his account of Estotiland and Drogeo.

Margarita, island of, discovery of.

of Austria, her nuptials with prince Juan.

Margnrite, Pedro, recommended to a command by Columbus; made commander of
the fortress of St. Thomas; sends an account of the conduct of his colony,
etc.; is invested with the command of the forces; disregards his
instructions; his misconduct during the absence of Columbus; is censured
by Diego Columbus; forms a plan of returning to Spain; sets sail; his
accusations of Columbus at Madrid.

Marque, Diego, missed at Guadaloupe; his return; is placed under arrest.

Maria, Santa, discovery of.

Marien, domain, account of.

Martin V., Pope, concedes to the crown of Portugal all the lands it might
discover from Cape Bajador to the Indies.

Marta, Santa, discovery of.

Martin, San, island of, discovered.

Martyr, Peter, his account of Cuba; his description of the natives of
Hispaniola; sent to the soldan of Egypt to make arrangements for the
conservation of the holy sepulchre: short account of his life and
writings; passages from his letters relative to Columbus; his character of
Amerigo Vespucci.

Marigalante, island of, discovery of.

Mateo, Juan, a Haytien converted to Christianity.

Mauro, constructs a celebrated map, note.

Mayobanex, Cacique of the Cignayens; Guarionex flies to him for refuge;
his answer to the Adelantado, when desired to give up Guarionex; is
deserted in his need; compelled to fly; is seized with his wife and
children.

Medina Celi, duke of, entertains Columbus; application of Columbus to;
writes to the queen.

----, Sidonia, duke of, application of Columbus to; plan rejected.

Melons introduced into Hayti.

Mendez, Diego, his bold conduct at Veragua; his reward; his meritorious
conduct at Jamaica; his conversation with Columbus; undertakes to go in a
canoe to St. Domingo; departs with one Spaniard and six Indians; narrowly
escapes being murdered by the Indians of the coast and returns; account of
his voyage; sails for Spain; his subsequent history, note. Mendoza, Pedro
Gonzalez de. See Toledo, Archbishop of. Meneses, Don Pedro de, his answer
to the bishop of Ceuta in respect to the propriety of maritime
discoveries.

Mermaids, three supposed, seen by Columbus.

Mexiatrillo, Rodrigo, commands the soldiery at the massacre of Xaragua.
ii. 264.

Misa, Rio de la, so called from mass performed on its banks.

Monis de Palestrello, Dona Felipa, her marriage with Columbus.

Monte Christi, description of; Columbus founds the city of Isabella.

Montserrat, discovery of.

Moors, war against the.

----, none permitted to establish themselves in the colonies or go on
voyages of discovery.

Morales, Francisco, his evidence relative to the discovery of the coast of
Paria by Columbus.

Mother-of-pearl found on the coast of Paria.

Moxica, Adrian de, conspiracy of; meditates the death of the Admiral and
Roldan; is seized; and flung headlong froin the battlements of Fort
Conception.

Moya, marchioness of, becomes a friend to Columbus; and recommends his
suit to the queen; also.

Mulatas, islands of, discovered.

Mules, the employment of, under the saddle, prohibited in Spain.

Music of the Haytiens.

Musicians sent to Hayti to enliven the spirits of the colony.



N.


Names, exchanging, an Indian league of fraternity.

Navarrete, his opinion relative to the island first discovered by
Columbus.

Navasa, island of; fountain near.

Navidad, La, or the Nativity, construction of the fortress of; disasters
at the fortress; abandoned by Columbus.

Needle, variation of the, first noticed; inclines a whole point;
Columbus's speculation in respect to.

Negroes of Africa introduced into Hispaniola; their first revolt.

Negotiations, diplomatic, between the courts of Spain and Portugal, with
respect to the new discoveries.

Newfoundland, assertions relative to the discovery of, by the
Scandinavians.

Nicholas, St., harbor of.

Nicuesa, Diego de, appointed governor of Golden Castile.

Nino, Pedro Alonzo, sails for Hayti; arrives at Cadiz from Hispaniola,
with a number of Indian prisoners.

Noya, Juan de, his escape by diving.



O.


Ocean, line of demarkation of the, between Spain and Portugal.

Oderigo, documents in the possession of the family of, relative to
Columbus.

Ojeda, Don Alonzo de, goes in search of Diego Marque, at Guadaloupe; his
expedition to explore the interior of Iliwpaniola; sallies from Isabella;
character of; his conduct in respect to some Haytien thieves; character
of; is besieged by Caonabo; anecdote of; undertakes to seize Caonabo, and
deliver him alive into the hands of Columbus; visits him; offers him the
bell of Isabella; his stratagem to take him off; conquers in an engagement
with a brother of Caonabo; his conduct at the battle of the Vega; arrives
at the western part of Hispaniola on a voyage of discovery; cause of his
voyage; his manoeuvres with Roldan; leaves the inland with a threat;
returns to Spain with a drove of slaves; appointed governor of New
Andalusia; fails in his undertaking to colonize that country; his evidence
relative to the discovery of the coast of Paria by Columbus.

Oro, Rio del, or Santiago, discovered.

Otto, Mons., remarks on his letter to Dr. Franklin relative to Martin
Behem.

Ovando, Don Nicholas de, chosen to supersede Bobadilla; character of;
great privileges granted to; his fleet; allowed to wear silk, precious
stones, etc.; sails; reaches St. Domingo and assumes the government;
refuses to let Columbus take shelter; his mysterious conduct to Columbus
in his distress as Jamaica; an account of his administration and
oppression; sufferings of the natives under the civil policy of; view of
the military operations of: visits Anneaona: takes it into his head that
she intends to massacre him and all his attendants; seizes Anacaona and
burns all the Caciques: massacres the populace; and causes Anacaona to be
ignominiously hanged; his further atrocious conduct, to the unfortunate
Indians; founds Santa Maria in commemoration of his atrocities. 267; wages
war against the natives of Higuey; causes many of them to be slaughtered
and their chieftains to be burnt; hangs a female Cacique of distinction;
causes 600 Indians of Saona to be imprisoned in one dwelling and put to
the sword; receives Columbus on his arrival at St. Domingo with a
hypocritical politeness.

Oviedo, Gonzalo Fernandez de, a short account of his life and writings.

Oysters, in the Gulf of Paria, round the roots of the Mangrove trees.

Ozema, river of, and the country through which it flows.



P.


Palos, the port whence Columbus sailed on his first expedition; present
state of; visit to.

Palms, Cape of, discovered.

Pane, Roman, labors to convert the Haytiens.

Paradise, observations on the situation of the terrestrial; of the
Haytiens.

Paria., Gulf of, Columbus's voyage through the; description of the coast
of; manners of the natives; current of the sea.

Parrots, first seen in the western hemisphere; large flights of, seen;
found on the coast of Paria.

Partition, papal bull of; line of, removed.

Pasamonte, Miguel, becomes an enemy to Don Diego Columbus.

Pearls, the Gulf of.

---- of Cubagua. Pepper, Agi.

Perez, Alonzo, discovers land in Columbus's third voyage.

----, Pray Juan, prior of the convent of La Raibida, entertains Columbus
on his first entry into Spain; gives him letters of introduction to the
queen's confessor, and educates his son; reception of Columbus; writes to
Queen Isabella; invited to court; pleads the cause of Columbus; receives a
visit from Columbus after his success.

Philip, king of Castile, listens to the request of Columbus, and promises
a prosperous termination to his suit.

Pigeons, wood, vast numbers seen on the south side of Cuba.

Pilgrimages, lots for, drawing of.

Pilot, observations on the rumor of a pilot having died in the house of
Columbus.

Pine-apple first met with.

Pines, island of, discovered by Columbus.

Pinos, Isla de, discovery of.

Pinta, desertion of.

Pinzons, family of, they enable Columbus to offer to bear one-eighth of
the charge of the expedition, and to add a third ship to the armament.
100; their activity and interest in the voyage; furnish Columbus with
money to defray the eighth share of the expense; account of their family,
note. Pinzon, Martin Alonzo, offers to bear the expenses of Columbus in a
renewed application to the court; his opinion relative to the nearness of
land; begins to lose confidence in the course they are pursuing; crediting
the accounts of the Indians in respect to a very rich island, deserts and
goes in search of it; Columbus meets him; his apology: account of his
proceedings; his duplicity becomes more evident: his arrival at Palos;
effect of his treacherous conduct; his death; reflections on; observations
relative to the supposed idea of Columbus owing to him the success of his
great enterprise: his character.

----, Vicente Yanes, obtains a license for voyages of discovery; sails on
a voyage of discovery; discovers the Brazils; discovers the river of
Amazons; is allowed, as a reward, to colonize and govern the lands which
he had discovered.

Planisphere of Martin Behein. Pliny, his notice of electrical lights on
the masts of ships.

Poetry of the Haytiens.

Polo, Nicholas and Matteo, an account of their travels into the east;
their first journey; return: their second journey: their return; invite
their relatives to a splendid banquet.

----, Marco, influence of his travels upon the mind of Columbus; ii. 406;
short account of his travels; his return; commands a galley at the battle
of Cuzzola: is taken prisoner and sent in chains to Genoa; writes an
account of his travels; is liberated and returns to Venice; an account of
his work.

Porras, Francisco de, engages in a mutiny at Jamaica; they embark with
most of Columbus's erew in ten Indian canoes; are driven back; and with
their companions rove about the island; refuses an offer of pardon;
attacks the Admiral and Adelantado; taken prisoner: is set at liberty by
Ovando; and sent to Spain to be examined by the Indian board. 284.

Porto Rico, or Boriquen, discovery of.

Portugal and Spain, diplomatic negotiations between the courts of, with
respect to the new discoveries.

Potato in Hayti.

Prado, prior of. See Talavera.

Prester John, an imaginary Christian king; account of.

Priests of the Haytiens.

Ptolemy, difficulty at the council of Salamanaca to reconcile the theory
of Columbus with that of.

Puerto de Bastimento, harbor of.

---- Bello, discovery of, by Columbus.

---- Santo, Columbus's description of.



Q.


Queen's Gardens, Columlms's arrival at, in his third voyage; archipelago
of, discovered.

Question, the territorial, how settled.

Quibian, Cacique of Veragua, interview with Bartholomew Columbus: second
interview; determines on preventing the Spaniards from obtaining a
settlement in his territories; conspires to burn their houses and murder
them; is seized by the Adelantado with his wives and children; escapes in
a very extraordinary manner 199; attacks the Spaniards and is defeated.

Quinsai, Marco Polo's account of.

Quintanilla, Alonzo de, receives Columbus into his house.



R.


Rabida, La, convent of, Columbus is entertained at, on his first arrival
in Spain; present state.

Reeds, river of.

----, immense, seen on the Mosquito coast.

Reinier, king of Naples, Columbus engages in his service.

Religion of the natives of Hayti.

Repartimientos, origin of: opposition of Don Diego Columbus to the.

Rewards and punishments, ideas of the Haytiens in respect to.

Rio Verde, or the green river.

Riquelme, Pedro, makes his house the headquarters of the rebels at
Hispaniola; made Alcalde by Roldan: joins in a conspiracy with Adrian de
Moxica; is taken.

Road, the first constructed by Europeans in the New World.

Rodriguez, Sebastian, takes a letter from the prior Perez to the queen.
91.

Roldan, Francisco, history and character of: an account of his conspiracy;
takes possession of Xaragua; his conduct in respect to the ships sent
forward by Columbus: promises to repair to St. Domingo on the arrival of
Columbus; his interview with Ballester; rejects an offer of pardon;
demands his discharge; his interview with Carvajal, etc.; determines on
going to the admiral; correspondence with the admiral; sends propositions
by Carvajal; which are accepted; circumstances prevent their being acted
upon; makes a second arrangement with the admiral; is permitted to resume
his office of Alcalde-mayor; receives a grant of lands; visits his lands;
assumes new authority; is sent to meet Alonzo de Ojeda; his manoeuvres
with him; his rivalship with Guevara; seizes him in the dwelling of
Anacaona; treated with confidence by Bobadilla; his conduct investigated
by Ovando; sails for Spain, and is lost in a violent hurricane.

Roman, Friar, his account of the natives of Hispauiola.



S.


Sabellicus, his account of the capture of the Venetian galleys.

Salamanca, the learned assemble at, to consider the proposition of
Columbus; pronounce the plan to be vain and impossible.

Salcedo, Diego de, arrives at Jamaica with succors from Ovando.

Salvador, St., discovery of; awe and surprise of the natives on first
beholding the ships of Columbus; description of them; gold first
discovered in this island.

Samana, Gulf of, discovered.

San Rafael, discovery of.

Sanchez, Juan, takes charge of Quibian. ii. 196; who escapes; killed in
battle by the Adelantado.

Sande, Don Ruy do, his mission to the Spanish court.

Santa Marta, island of, discovered.

Santa, La Isla, discovery of.

Santa Cruz, island of, discovery of.

Santa Gloria, (St. Ann's Bay), discovered by Columbus.

Santiago. See Jamaica; letter of Heneken, note.

----, river of, discovered.

Saometa, discovery of.

Saona, island of, discovered; difference of longitude between, and Cadiz

Scandinavians, an essay relative to the voyages of.

Schedel, remarks on an interpolation in his chronicle.

Seneca, his notice of electrical lights on the masts of ships.

Serafin Point.

Sharks, a multitude of, seen on the coast of Veragua; curious method of
taking them; superstition concerning.

Ships, observation relative to the size of those employed by Columbus.

Slaves, five hundred are sent to Spain; three hundred sent by Bartholomew
Columbus; arrival in Spain; Queen Isabella interests herself in their
favor; orders them to be sent back to Hayti; negroes first introduced to
the New World; revolt of; Hispaniola the first island to exhibit an awful
retribution; regulations in respect to.

Solomon, the gold used in the temple of.

Soria, Juan de, his insolence to Columbus.

Soul, ideas of the Haytiens in respect to the; the after-state of,
believed by the natives of Cuba.

Spain and Portugal, diplomatic negotiations between the courts of, with
respect to the new discoveries.

Spotorno, Gio, publishes documents relative to Columbus, note.

Sugar-cane introduced into Hayti.

Superstition of St. Elmo lights.

Swallow, a, encircles the ships of Columbus.



T.


Talavera, Fernando de, prior of Prado and confessor to Queen Isabella.
85; esteems Columbus's plan impossible; he is desired by the king to
assemble men of science to consider the matter; reports to the king that
the council had pronounced the plan vain and impossible; takes a message
from the king;' disgusted at the high terms insisted on by Columbus.

Teneriffe, fears of the crew at beholding Mount.

Territory, question of, how settled.

Thomas, St., fortress of, erected; see note; conduct of the colonists
there; attacks of.

Tobacco, first seen in the island of Cuba.

Tobago, discovery of.

Toledo, archbishop of, his character; gives Columbus an attentive hearing;
and procures him an audience of the king.

Toledo, Dona Maria de, Don Diego Columbus becomes enamored of: their
marriage; and embarkation for Hispaniola; is left as vice-queen at St.
Domingo on the sailing of Don Diego for Spain; becomes a widow.

Torre, Dona Juana de la, receives a letter from Columbus with an account
of his treatment.

Torres, Antonio de, dispatched from Hispaniola, with twelve ships, to
Spain; arrives at Cadiz; dismissed from office.

----, Luis de, sent up the island of Cuba by Columbus; an account of his
journey.

Tortoises, sea covered with, on the southern coast of Cuba; curious method
of taking; a living one taken out of the maw of a shark.

Tortugas, beautiful island of, discovery of.

Toscanelli, Paulo, his correspondence with Columbus.

Trade of the colonies monopolized by the crown of Spain; the Spanish
system the scoff of modern times.

Trasierra, Juan de.

Triana, Rodrigo de, first sees the land of the western world; account of.

Tribute imposed upon the Haytiens.

Trinidad, island of, discovered; description of its appearance; curious
account of the natives.

Tristan, Diego; is killed.

Tudela, Benjamin, travels of.

Turk's island, observations relative to.



U.


Ursula, Santa, island of, discovered.



V.


Vassals, natives of Hispaniola reduced to the condition of.

Vega, Garcilasso de la, his tale relative to a pilot having died in the
house of Columbus.

----, river; called by the natives Yagui.

----, Real, the royal plain.

Velasco, Francisco.

Velasquez, Diego, commands the soldiery at the massacre of Xaragua.

Veragua, coast of, discovery of; warlike spirit of the inhabitants; soil
appears to be impregnated with gold; Golden Castile.

Voraguas, duke of, consents to have the remains of Columbus removed to
Cuba.

----, the heirship to Columbus decided in his favor.

Verde, Cape de, discovery of.

Vespucci, Amerigo, first notice of his expedition; employed by Columbus at
court; an account of; a summary view of his claim to the title of a
discoverer; the voyage whence his name was given to the American
continent; Columbus's letter to his son relative to the merit and
misfortunes of; Peter Martyr's character of: his letter to Rene, duke of
Lorraine; observations relative to the points in controversy; author's
conclusion, that the voyage asserted to have been made by Amerigo Vespucci
never took place.

Vessel, stern-post of a, found in one of the houses at Guadaloupe.

Villains, natives of Hispaniola reduced to the condition of.

Villego, Alonzo de, appointed to carry Columbus to Spain; character of;
his colloquy with Columbus previous to their sailing.

Vines introduced into Hayti.

Vinland, a supposed discovery.

Virgins, the eleven thousand, islands of, discovered.

Vows made in a storm by Columbus and his crew; attempt at fulfilment.



W.


Waterspout, a remarkable, seen on the coast of Veragua.

Wax, cake of, presented to the sovereigns by Columbus.

Wheat, introduced into Hayti.

Wolves, sea, several killed on the coast of Hispaniola.

Woman, account of a very strong, of Guadaloupe; taken to Columbus's ship;
falls in love with Caonabo, and refuses to return on shore.

Women, origin of, according to the Haytiens.

Writing, fear of the Indians of Cariari at seeing the Spaniards write.



X.


Xagua, gulf of.

Xaragua, domain of, an account of; description of its inhabitants; Roldan
takes possession of; massacre at.


Xerif al Edrizi, his description of the Atlantic.

Ximenes, cardinal; prohibits licenses to import slaves from Africa to the
colonies.



Y.


Yanique, river of.



Z.


Zemes, inferior deities of the Haytiens.

Zipangu (Japan), Marco Polo's account of.

Zones, the, observations relative to.





Footnotes



[1]: Peter Martyr, decad. i. lib. iv.

[2]: Ibid., lib. v.

[3]: Peter Martyr, decad. i. lib. v.

[4]: Charlevoix, Hist. St. Domingo, lib. ii. p. 147. Munoz, Hist. N. Mundo,
lib. vi. Sec. 6.

[5]: Peter Martyr, decad. i. lib. v.

[6]: "These serpentes are lyke unto crocodiles, saving in bygness; they
call them guanas. Unto that day none of owre men durste adventure to taste
of them, by reason of theyre horrible deformitie and lothsomnes. Yet the
Adelantado being entysed by the pleasantnes of the king's sister,
Anacaona, determined to taste the serpentes. But when he felte the flesh
thereof to be so delycate to his tongue, he fel to amayne without al
feare. The which thyng his companions perceiving, were not behynde hym in
greedynesse: insomuche that they had now none other talke than of the
sweetnesse of these serpentes, which, they affirm to be of more pleasant
taste, than eyther our phesantes or partriches." Peter Martyr, decad. i.
book v. Eden's Eng. Trans.

[7]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., tom. i. cap. 113.

[8]: Ibid, lib. i. cap. 114.

[9]: P. Martyr, decad. i. lib. v. Of the residence of Guarionex, which must
have been a considerable town, not the least vestige can be discovered at
present. Vol. II.--2.

[10]: Escritura de Fr. Roman, Hist. del Almirante.

[11]: Peter Martyr, decad. i. lib. ix.

[12]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 121.

[13]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 65. Peter Martyr, decad. vi. lib.
v.

[14]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 7.

[15]: Peter Martyr, decad. i. lib. v.  Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib.
iii. cap. 6.

[16]: Peter Martyr, decad. i. lib. v.  Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 6.

[17]: Ramusio, vol. iii. p. 9.

[18]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 1.

[19]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 118.

[20]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 73.

[21]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 73.

[22]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 7. Hist, del Almirante, cap. 74.

_Extract of a letter from T. S. Heneken, Esq.,_ 1847.--Fort
Conception is situated at the foot of a hill now called Santo Cerro. It is
constructed of bricks, and is almost as entire at the present day as when
just finished. It stands in the gloom of an exuberant forest which has
invaded the scene of former bustle and activity; a spot once considered of
great importance and surrounded by swarms of intelligent beings.

What has become of the countless multitudes this fortress was intended to
awe? Not a trace of them remains excepting in the records of history. The
silence of the tomb prevails where their habitations responded to their
songs and dances. A few indigent Spaniards, living in miserable hovels,
scattered widely apart in the bosom of the forest, are now the sole
occupants of this once fruitful and beautiful region.

A Spanish town gradually grew up round the fortress; the ruins of which
extend to a considerable distance. It was destroyed by an earthquake, at
nine o'clock of the morning of Saturday, 20th April, 1564, during the
celebration of mass. Part of the massive walls of a handsome church still
remain, as well as those of a very large convent or hospital, supposed to
have been constructed in pursuance of the testamentary dispositions of
Columbus. The inhabitants who survived the catastrophe retired to a small
chapel, on the banks of a river,  about a league distant, where the new
town of La Vega was afterwards built.

[23]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 7. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 74.

[24]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 74. Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 7.

[25]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 118.

[26]: Ibid., cap. 119.

[27]: Las Casas. Herrera. Hist. del Almirante.

[28]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 8.

[29]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., cap. 121, MS. Peter Martyr, decad. i. cap. 5.

[30]: The particulars of this chapter are chiefly from P. Martyr, decad. i.
lib. vi.; the manuscript history of Las Casas, lib. i. cap. 121; and
Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 8, 9.

[31]: Las Casas, lib. i. cap. 149,150. Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap.
12. Hist, del Almirante, cap. 77.

[32]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 153.

[33]: Hist, del Almirante, cap. 78.

[34]: In one of these ships sailed the father of the venerable historian
Las Casas, from whom he derived many of the facts of his history. Las
Casas, lib. i. cap. 153.

[35]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 157.

[36]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 78.

[37]: Ibid., cap. 79. Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap 13.

[38]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 153.

[39]: Ibid., cap. 158.

[40]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 79.

[41]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 80.

[42]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 16.

[43]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 16.

[44]: Herrera, decad. I. lib. iii. cap. 16.

[45]: Idem. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 38.

[46]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 16.

[47]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib. iii cap. 16.

[48]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 16.

[49]: Munoz, Hist. N. Mundo, lib. vi. Sec. 50.

[50]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 84.

[51]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 16.

[52]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 16. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 83,
84.

[53]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 16.

[54]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iii. cap. 16.

[55]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iv. cap. 3.

[56]: Las Casas.

[57]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib. iv. cap. 4. Munoz, Hist. N.
Mundo, part in MS. unpublished.

[58]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 84.

[59]: Hist. del Almirante, ubi sup.

[60]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 169, MS.

[61]: Letter of Columbus to the nurse of Prince Juan.

[62]: Las Casas, lib. i. cap. 169.

[63]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iv. cap. 5.

[64]: Lag Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 170, MS. Herrera, decad. i. lib.
iv. cap. 7.

[65]: Letter of Columbus to the nurse of Prince Juan. Hist, del Almirante,
cap. 84.

[66]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 85.

[67]: Munoz, Hist. N. Mundo, part unpublished.

[68]: Las Casas, lib. i.

[69]: Oviedo, Cronica, lib. iii. cap. 6.

[70]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iv. cap. 7.

[71]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib i. cap. 169. Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad.
i. lib. iv. cap. 8.

[72]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 179.

[73]: Las Casas, ubi sup. Herrera, ubi sup.

[74]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 85. Las Casas. Herrera, ubi sup.

[75]: Letter of Columbus to the nurse of Prince Juan.

[76]: Ibid.

[77]: Letter of Columbus to the nurse of Prince Juan.

[78]: Idem. Herrera, decad. i. lib. iv.

[79]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iv. cap. 9. Letter to the nurse of Prince
Juan.

[80]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 180.

[81]: Idem, lib. i. cap. 180.

[82]: Peter Martyr mentions a vulgar rumor of the day, that the admiral,
not knowing what might happen, wrote a letter in cipher to the Adelantado,
urging him to come with arms in his hands to prevent any violence that
might be contrived against him; that the Adelantado advanced, in effect,
with his armed force, but having the imprudence to proceed some distance
ahead of it, was surprised by the governor, before his men could come to
his succor, and that the letter in cipher had been sent to Spain. This
must have been one of the groundless rumors of the day, circulated to
prejudice the public mind. Nothing of the kind appears among the charges
in the inquest made by Bobadilla, and which was seen, and extracts made
from it, by Las Casas, for his history. It is, in fact, in total
contradiction to the statements of Las Casas, Herrera, and Fernando
Columbus.

[83]: Charlevoix, in his History of San Domingo (lib. iii. p. 199), states
that the suit against Columbus was conducted in writing; that written
charges were sent to him, to which he replied in the same way. This is
contrary to the statements of Las Casas, Herrera, and Fernando Columbus.
The admiral himself, in his letter to the nurse of Prince Juan, after
relating the manner in which he and his brothers had been thrown into
irons, and confined separately, without being visited by Bobadilla, or
permitted to see any other persons, expressly adds, "I make oath that I do
not know for what I am imprisoned." Again, in a letter written some time
afterwards from Jamaica, he says, "I was taken and thrown with two of my
brothers in a ship, loaded with irons, with little clothing and much
ill-treatment, without being summoned or convicted by justice."

[84]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iv. cap. 10. Oviedo, Cronica. lib. iii. cap.
6.

[85]: Munoz, Hist. N. Mundo, part unpublished.

[86]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 86.

[87]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 180, MS.

[88]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 180, MS.

[89]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 86.

[90]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 182.

[91]: Oviedo, Cronica, lib. iii. cap. 6.

[92]: Las Casas, lib. i. cap. 182. Two thousand ducats, or two thousand
eight hundred and forty-six dollars, equivalent to eight thousand five
hundred and thirty-eight dollars of the present day.

[93]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iv. cap. 10.

[94]: Peter Martyr, decad. i. lib. ix.

[95]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. iv. cap. 12. Munoz, Hist. N. Mundo, part
unpublished.

[96]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 2. Munoz, part unpublished.

[97]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 2 Munoz, part unpublished.

[98]: Hakluyt's Collection of Voyages, vol. iii. p. 7. Vol. II.-9

[99]: Lafiteau, Conquetes des Portugais, lib. ii.

[100]: Robertson, Hist. America, book ii.

[101]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 3.

[102]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 1, MS.

[103]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind. lib. ii. cap. 3, MS.

[104]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib. iv. cap. 12.

[105]: Munoz, part inedit. Las Casas says the fleet consisted of thirty-two
sail. He states from memory, however; Munoz from documents.

[106]: Munoz, H. N. Mundo, part inedit.

[107]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 3, MS.

[108]: Garibay, Hist. Espana, lib. xix. cap. 6. Among the collections
existing in the library of the late Prince Sebastian, there is a folio
which, among other things, contains a paper or letter, in which is a
calculation of the probable expenses of an army of twenty thousand men,
for the conquest of the Holy Land. It is dated in 1509 or 1510, and the
handwriting appears to be of the same time.

[109]: Columbus was not singular in his belief; it was entertained by many
of his zealous and learned admirers. The erudite lapidary, Jayme Ferrer,
in the letter written to Columbus in 1495, at the command of the
sovereigns, observes: "I see in this a great mystery: the divine and
infallible Providence sent the great St. Thomas from the west into the
east, to manifest in India our holy and Catholic faith; and you, Senor, he
sent in an opposite direction, from the east into the west, until you have
arrived in the Orient, into the extreme part of Upper India, that the
people may hear that which their ancestors neglected of the preaching of
St. Thomas. Thus shall be accomplished what was written, _in omnem
terram exibit sonus eorum_." ... And again, "The office which you hold,
Senor, places you in the light of an apostle and ambassador of God, sent
by his divine judgment, to make known his holy name in unknown
lands."--Letra de Mossen, Jayme Ferrer, Navarrete, Coleccion, tom. ii.
decad. 68. See also the opinion expressed by Agostino Giustiniani, his
contemporary, in his Polyglot Psalter.

[110]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 4. Las Casas specifics the vicinity of
Nombre de Dios as the place.

[111]: Navarrete, Colec. Viag., tom. ii. p. 145.

[112]: A manuscript volume containing a copy of this letter and of the
collection of prophecies is in the Columbian Library, in the Cathedral of
Seville, where the author of this work has seen and examined it since
publishing the first edition. The title and some of the early pages of the
work are in the handwriting of Fernando Columbus; the main body of the
work is by a strange hand, probably by the Friar Gaspar Gorricio, or some
brother of his Convent. There are trifling marginal notes or corrections,
and one or two trivial additions in the handwriting of Columbus,
especially a passage added after his return from his fourth voyage, and
shortly before his death, alluding to an eclipse of the moon which took
place during his sojourn in the island of Jamaica. The handwriting of this
last passage, like most of the manuscript of Columbus which the author has
seen, is small and delicate, but wants the firmness and distinctness of
his earlier writing, his hand having doubtless become unsteady by age and
infirmity.

This document is extremely curious as containing all the passages of
Scripture and of the works of the fathers which had so powerful an
influence on the enthusiastic mind of Columbus, and were construed by him
into mysterious prophecies and revelations. The volume is in good
preservation, excepting that a few pages have been cut out. The writing,
though of the beginning of the fifteenth century, is very distinct and
legible. The library-mark of the book is Estante Z. Tab. 138, No. 25.

[113]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 4.

[114]: These documents lay unknown in the Oderigo family until 1670, when
Lorenzo Oderigo presented them to the government of Genoa, and they were
deposited in the archives. In the disturbances and revolutions of after
times, one of these copies was taken to Paris, and the other disappeared.
In 1816 the latter was discovered in the library of the deceased Count
Michel Angelo Cambiaso, a senator of Genoa. It was procured by the king of
Sardinia, then sovereign of Genoa, and given up by him to the city of
Genoa in 1821. A custodia, or monument, was erected in that city for its
preservation, consisting of a marble column supporting an urn, surmounted
by a bust of Columbus. The documents were deposited in the urn. These
papers have been published, together with an historical memoir of
Columbus, by D. Gio. Battista Spotorno, Professor of Eloquence, etc. in
the University of Genoa.

[115]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 88.

[116]: Senor Navarrete supposes this island to be the same at present
called Santa Lucia. From the distance between it and Dominica, as stated
by Fernando Columbus, it was more probably the present Martinica.

[117]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 88.

[118]: Letter of Columbus from Jamaica. Journal of Porras, Navarrete, tom.
i.

[119]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 88. Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 5.

[120]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 3.

[121]: Las Casas, cap. 5.

[122]: Las Casas, cap. 5.

[123]: Las Casas ubi sup.

[124]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 5. Hist. del Almirante, cap.
88.

[125]: Supposed to be the Morant Keys.

[126]: Called in some of the English maps Bonacca.

[127]: Journal of Porras, Navarrete, tom. i.

[128]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 20. Letter of Columbus from Jamaica.

[129]: Journal of Porras, Navarrete, Colec., tom. i.

[130]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 21. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 90.

[131]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 80.

[132]: Letter from Jamaica. Navarrete, Colec., tom. i.

[133]: Las Casas, lib ii. cap. 21. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 91.

[134]: P. Martyr, decad. iii. lib. iv. These may have been the lime, a
small and extremely acid species of the lemon.

[135]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 21. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 91. Journal
of Porras.

[136]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 91.

[137]: Letter from Jamaica.

[138]: Note.--We find instances of the same kind of superstition in the
work of Marco Polo, and as Columbus considered himself in the vicinity of
the countries described by that traveler, he may have been influenced in
this respect by his narrations. Speaking of the island of Soccotera
(Socotra), Marco Polo observes: "The inhabitants deal more in sorcery and
witchcraft than any other people, although forbidden by their archbishop,
who excommunicates and anathematizes them for the sin. Of this, however,
they make little account, and if any vessel belong to a pirate should
injure one of theirs, they do not fail to lay him under a spell, so that
he cannot proceed on his cruise until he has made satisfaction for the
damage; and even although he should have a fair and leading wind, they
have the power of causing it to change, and thereby obliging him, in spite
of himself, to return to the island. They can, in like manner, cause the
sea to become calm, and at their will can raise tempests, occasion
ship-wrecks, and produce many other extraordinary effects that need not be
particularized."--Marco Polo, Book iii. cap. 35, Eng. translation by W.
Marsden.

[139]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 21. Hist. del Almirante cap. 91.

[140]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 21. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 91. Letter of
Columbus from Jamaica.

[141]: In some English maps this bay is called Almirante, or Carnabaco Bay.
The channel by which Columbus entered is still called Boca del Almirante,
or the mouth of the Admiral.

[142]: Journal of Porras, Navarrete, tom. i.

[143]: P. Martyr, decad. iii. lib. v.

[144]: Columbus' Letter from Jamaica.

[145]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 92.

[146]: Idem.

[147]: Letter of Columbus from Jamaica. Navarrete, Colec., tom. i. Vol.
II.--12.

[148]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 23. Hist. del Almirante.

[149]: Peter Martyr, decad. iii. lib. iv.

[150]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 23. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 92.

[151]: Las Casas. lib. ii. cap. 23. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 92.

[152]: It appears doubtful whether Columbus was acquainted with the exact
particulars of that voyage, as they could scarcely have reached Spain
previously to his sailing. Bastides had been seized in Hispaniola by
Bobadilla, and was on board of that very fleet which was wrecked at the
time that Columbus arrived off San Domingo. He escaped the fate that
attended most of his companions, and returned to Spain, where he was
rewarded by the sovereigns for his enterprise. Though some of his seamen
had reached Spain previous to the sailing of Columbus, and had given a
general idea of the voyage, it is doubtful whether he had transmitted his
papers and charts. Porras, in his journal of the voyage of Columbus,
states that they arrived at the place where the discoveries of Bastides
terminated; but this information he may have obtained subsequently at San
Domingo.

[153]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 24. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 90.

[154]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 94.

[155]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 94.

[156]: A superstitious notion with respect to gold appears to have been
very prevalent among the natives. The Indians of Hispaniola observed the
same privations when they sought for it, abstaining from food and from
sexual intercourse. Columbus, who seemed to look upon gold as one of the
sacred and mystic treasures of the earth, wished to encourage similar
observances among the Spaniards; exhorting them to purify themselves for
the research of the mines by fasting, prayer, and chastity. It is scarcely
necessary to add, that his advice was but little attended to by his
rapacious and sensual followers.

[157]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 95.

[158]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 25. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 95.

[159]: Peter Martyr, decad. iii. lib. iv.

[160]: Letter of the Admiral from Jamaica.

[161]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 25. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 95.

[162]: Letter of Columbus from Jamaica.

[163]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 96.

[164]: Letter from Jamaica.

[165]: Equivalent to one thousand two hundred and eighty-one dollars at the
present day.

[166]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 98. Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 27. Many of
the particulars of this chapter are from a short narrative given by Diego
Mendez, and inserted in his last will and testament. It is written in a
strain of simple egotism, as he represents himself as the principal and
almost the sole actor in every affair. The facts, however, have all the
air of veracity, and being given on such a solemn occasion, the document
is entitled to high credit. He will be found to distinguish himself on
another hazardous and important occasion in the course of this
history.--Vide Navarrete, Colec., tom. i.

[167]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 98. Las Casas, lib. ii. Letter of Columbus
from Jamaica. Relation of Diego Mendez, Navarrete, tom. i. Journal of
Porras, Navarrete, tom. i.

[168]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 99.

[169]: Letter of Columbus from Jamaica.

[170]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 99, 100. Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 29.
Relacion por Diego Mendez. Letter of Columbus from Jamaica. Journal of
Porras, Navarrete, Colec., tom. i.

[171]: Hist. del Almirante. Letter from Jamaica.

[172]: Journal of Porras, Navarrete, Colec., tom. i.

[173]: Letter from Jamaica.

[174]: Testimony of Pedro de Ledesma. Pleito de los Colones.

[175]: Letter from Jamaica.

[176]: Idem.

[177]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 100. Letter of Columbus from Jamaica.

[178]: Hist. del Almirante. Journal of Porras.

[179]: Relacion por Diego Mendez. Navarrete, torn. i.

[180]: Relacion por Diego Mendez. Navarrete, Colec, torn. i.

[181]: Joachim, native of the burgh of Celico, near Cozenza, traveled in
the Holy Land. Returning to Calabria, he took the habit of the Cistercians
in the monastery of Corazzo, of which he became prior and abbot, and
afterwards rose to higher monastic importance. He died in 1202, having
attained 72 years of age, leaving a great number of works; among the most
known are commentaries on Isaiah, Jeremiah, and the Apocalypse. There are
also prophecies by him, "which," (says the Dictionnaire Historique,)
"during his life, made him to be admired by fools, and despised by men of
sense; at present the latter sentiment prevails. He was either very weak
or very presumptuous, to flatter himself that he had the keys of things of
which God reserves the knowledge to himself."--Dict. Hist., tom. 5, Caen,
1785.

[182]: Hist, del Almirante, cap. 101.

[183]: Hist, del Almirante, cap. 102.

[184]: Letter of Columbus to his son Diego. Navarrete, Colec. Vol. II.-15

[185]: Hist, del Almirante, cap. 102.

[186]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 32. Hist, del Almirante, cap.
102.

[187]: Hist, del Almirante, cap. 102.

[188]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 32.

[189]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 102. Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 32.

[190]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 103. Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap.
33.

[191]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 104.

[192]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 33.

[193]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 33. Hist. del Almirante cap.
103.

[194]: Las Casas, ubi sup. Hist. del Almirante, ubi sup.

[195]: Not far from the Island of Navasa there gushes up in the sea a pure
fountain of fresh water that sweetens the surface for some distance: this
circumstance was of course unknown to the Spaniards at the time. (Oviedo,
Cronica, lib. vi. cap. 12.)

[196]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 105. Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 31.
Testament of Diego Mendez. Navarrete, tom. i.

[197]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 35. Hist. del Almirante, cap. 106.

[198]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 106. Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 35.

[199]: At present Mammee Bay.

[200]: Hist. del Almirante, ubi sup.

[201]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 107. Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib ii. cap.
35.

[202]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 35.

[203]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 32.

[204]: Some brief notice of the further fortunes of Diego Mendez may be
interesting to the reader. When King Ferdinand heard of his faithful
services, says Oviedo, he bestowed rewards upon Mendez, and permitted him
to bear a canoe in his coat of arms, as a memento of  his loyalty. He
continued devotedly attached to the admiral, serving him zealously after
his return to Spain, and during his last illness. Columbus retained the
most grateful and affectionate sense of his fidelity. On his death-bed he
promised Mendez that, in reward for his services, he should be appointed
principal Alguazil of the island of Hispaniola; an engagement which the
admiral's son, Don Diego, who was present, cheerfully undertook to
perform. A few years afterwards, when the latter succeeded to the office
of his father, Mendez reminded him of the promise, but Don Diego informed
him that he had given the office to his uncle Don Bartholomew; he assured
him, however, that he should receive something equivalent. Mendez shrewdly
replied, that the equivalent had better be given to Don Bartholomew, and
the office to himself, according to agreement. The promise, however,
remained unperformed, and Diego Mendez unrewarded. He was afterwards
engaged on voyages of discovery in vessels of his own, but met with many
vicissitudes, and appears to have died in impoverished circumstances. His
last will, from which these particulars are principally gathered, was
dated in Valladolid, the 19th of June, 1536, by which it is evident he
must have been in the prime of life at the time of his voyage with the
admiral. In this will he requested that the reward which had been promised
to him should be paid to his children, by making his eldest son principal
Alguazil for life of the city of San Domingo, and his other son lieutenant
to the admiral for the same city. It does not appear whether this request
was complied with under the successors of Don Diego.

In another clause of his will, he desired that a large stone should be
placed upon his sepulchre, on which should be engraved, "Here lies the
honorable Cavalier Diego Mendez, who served greatly the royal crown of
Spain, in the conquest of the Indies, with the admiral Don Christopher
Columbus, of glorious memory, who made the discovery; and afterwards by
himself, with ships at his own cost. He died, &c., &c. Bestow in charity a
Paternoster, and an Ave Maria."

He ordered that in the midst of this stone there should be carved an
Indian canoe, as given him by the king for armorial bearings in memorial
of his voyage from Jamaica to Hispaniola, and above it should be engraved
in large letters the word "CANOA." He enjoined upon his heirs to be loyal
to the admiral (Don Diego Columbus), and his lady, and gave them much
ghostly counsel, mingled with pious benedictions. As an heirloom in his
family, he bequeathed his library, consisting of a few volumes, which
accompanied him in his wanderings; viz. "The Art of Holy Dying, by
Erasmus; A sermon of the same author, in Spanish; The Lingua, and the
Colloquies of the same; The History of Josephus; The Moral Philosophy of
Aristotle; The Book of the Holy Land; A Book called the Contemplation of
the Passion of our Savior; A Tract on the Vengeance of the Death of
Agamemnon, and several other short treatises." This curious and
characteristic testament is in the archives of the Duke of Veragua in
Madrid.

[205]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 6.

[206]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 14, MS.

[207]: Idem, ubi sup.

[208]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 9.

[209]: Oviedo, Cronica de las Indias, lib. iii. cap. 12.

[210]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 9.

[211]: Charlevoix, Hist. San Domingo, lib. xxiv. p. 235.

[212]: Relacion hecha por Don Diego Mendez. Navarrete, Col., tom. i. p.
314.

[213]: Oviedo, Cronica de las Indias, lib. iii. cap. 12. Las Casas, Hist.
Ind., lib. ii. cap. 9.

[214]: Oviedo, Cronica de las Indias, lib. iii. cap. 12.

[215]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 8.

[216]: Las Casas, ubi. sup.

[217]: Las Casas, ubi. sup.

[218]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 17, MS.

[219]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 18.

[220]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 36.

[221]: Letter of Columbus to his son Diego, Seville, Nov. 21, 1504.
Navarrete, Colec., tom. i.

[222]: Letter of Columbus to his son Diego, dated Seville, 3d Dec., 1504.
Navarrete, tom. i. p. 341.

[223]: Navarrete, Colec., tom. ii. decad. 151, 152.

[224]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib. v. cap. 12.

[225]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 108. Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii.
cap. 36.

[226]: Let. Seville, 13 Dec., 1504. Navarrete, v. i. p. 343.

[227]: The dying command of Isabella has been obeyed. The author of this
work has seen her tomb in the royal chapel of the Cathedral of Granada, in
which her remains are interred with those of Ferdinand. Their effigies,
sculptured in white marble, lie side by side on a magnificent sepulchre.
The altar of the chapel is adorned with bas reliefs representing the
conquest and surrender of Granada.

[228]: Elogio de la Reina Catolica por D. Diego Clemencin. Illustration 19.

[229]: Letter to his son Diego, Dec. 3,1504.

[230]: Letter of December 21,1504. Navarrete, torn. i. p. 346.

[231]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 37. Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad.
i. lib. vi. cap. 13.

[232]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind, lib. ii. cap. 37, MS.

[233]: Navarrete, Colec., tom. i.

[234]: Diego, the son of the admiral, notes in his own testament this
bequest of his father, and says, that he was charged by him to pay Beatrix
Enriquez 10,000 maravedis a year, which for some time he had faithfully
performed; but as he believes that for three or four years previous to her
death he had neglected to do so, he orders that the deficiency shall be
ascertained and paid to her heirs. Memorial ajustado sobre la propriedad
del mayorazgo que foudo D. Christ. Colon, Sec. 245.

[235]: Cura de los Palacios, cap. 121.

[236]: Las Casas, Hist. Ind., lib. ii. cap. 38. Hist, del Almirante, cap.
108.

[237]: D. Humboldt. Examen Critique.

[238]: Cladera, Investigaciones historias, p. 43.

[239]: Navarrete, Colec., tom. ii. p. 365.

[240]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. ii. lib. vii. cap. 4.

[241]: Extracts from the minutes of the process taken by the historian
Munoz, MS.

[242]: Further mention will be found of this lawsuit in the article
relative to Amerigo Vespucci.

[243]: Charlevoix, ut supra, v. i. p. 272, id. 274.

[244]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 49, MS.

[245]: Las Casas, lib. ii. cap. 49, MS.

[246]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. vii. cap, 12.

[247]: Idem.

[248]: Charlevoix, Hist. St. Domingo, p. 321.

[249]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad i. lib. ix. cap. 5.

[250]: Idem.

[251]: Herrera, decad. ii. lib. ii. cap. 7.

[252]: Idem, decad. 1. lib. x. cap. 16.

[253]: Charlevoix, Hist. St. Doming., lib. v.

[254]: Herrera, decad. ii. lib. ix. cap. 7.

[255]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. iii. lib. iv. cap. 9.

[256]: Idem, decad. iii. lib. v. cap. 4.

[257]: Charlevoix, Hist. St. Doming., lib. Ti.

[258]: Herrera, decad. Hi. lib. Tut. cap. 15.

[259]: Memorial ajustado sobre el estado de Veragua.

Charlevoix mentions another son called Diego, and calls one of the
daughters Phillipine. Spotorno says that the daughter Maria took the veil;
confounding her with a niece. These are trivial errors, merely noticed to
avoid the imputation of inaccuracy. The account of the descendants of
Columbus here given, accords with a genealogical tree of the family,
produced before the council of the Indies, in a great lawsuit for the
estates.

[260]: Herrern, decad. iv. lib. ii. cap. 6.

[261]: Charlevoix, Hist. St. Doming., lib. vi. p. 443.

[262]: Idem, tom. i. lib. vi. p. 446.

[263]: Spotorno, Hist. Colom., p. 123.

[264]: Bossi, Hist. Colom. Dissert., p. 67.

[265]: Idem, Dissert. on the Country of Columbus, p. 03.

[266]: Bossi, Dissertation on the Country of Columbus.

[267]: Spotorno, p. 127.

[268]: Literally, in the original, _Cazador de Volateria_, a Falconer.
Hawking was in those days an amusement of the highest classes; and to keep
hawks was almost a sign of nobility.

[269]: Herrera, decad. i. lib. i. cap. 7.

[270]: Dissertation, &c.

[271]: Bossi. French Translation, Paris, 1824, p. 09.

[272]: Idem.

[273]: Correspondence Astronom. Geograph. &c. de Baron du Zach, vol. 14,
cabier 6, lettera 29. 1826.

[274]: Felippo Alberto Pollero, Epicherema, cioe breve discorso per difess
di sua persona e carrattere. Torino, per Gio Battista Zappata. MCDXCVI.
(read 1696) in 40. pag. 47.

[275]: Spotorno, Eng. trans., pp. xi, xii.

[276]: Bossi, French trans., p. 76.

[277]: Idem, p. 88.

[278]: Cura de los Palacios, MS., cap. 118.

[279]: Alex. Geraldini, Itin. ad. Reg. sub. Aquinor.

[280]: Antonio Gallo, Anales of Genoa, Muratori, tom. 23.

[281]: Senarega, Muratori, tom. 24.

[282]: Foglieta, Elog. Clar. Ligur.

[283]: Grineus, Nov. Orb.

[284]: "Item. Mando el dicho Don Diego mi hijo, a la persona que heredare
el dicho mayorazgo, que tenga y sostenga siempre en la ciudad de Genova
una persona de nuestro linage que tenga alli casa e muger, e le ordene
renta con que pueda vivir honestamente, como persona tan llegada a nuestro
linage, y haga pie y raiz en la dicha ciudad como natural della, porque
podra baber de la dicha ciudad ayuda e favor en las cosas del menester
suyo, _pues que della sali y en ella naci_."

[285]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 1.

[286]: Duke of Calabria was a title of the heir apparent to the crown of
Naples.

[287]: Colenuccio, Hist. Nap., lib. vii. cap. 17.

[288]: Zurita, Anales de Aragon, lib. xx. cap. 64.

[289]: Obras de Gareta de Resende, cap. 58, Avora, 1554.

[290]: Marco Antonio Coccio, better known under the name of Sabellicus, a
cognomen which he adopted on being crowned poet in the pedantic academy of
Pomponius Laetus. He was a contemporary of Columbus, and makes brief
mention of his discoveries in the eighth book of the tenth Ennead of his
universal history. By some writers he is called the Livy of his time;
others accuse him of being full of misrepresentations in favor of Venice.
The older Scaliger charges him with venality, and with being swayed by
Venetian gold.

[291]: Bandini vita d'Amerigo Vespucci.

[292]: Cosm. Munst., p. 1108.

[293]: These particulars are from manuscript memoranda, extracted from the
royal archives, by the late accurate historian Munoz.

[294]: Bartolozzi, Recherche Historico. Firenze, 1789.

[295]: Panzer, tom. vi. p. 33, apud Esame Critico, p. 88, Antazione 1.

[296]: This rare book, in the possession of O. Rich, Esq., is believed to
be the oldest printed collection of voyages extant. It has not the pages
numbered; the sheets are merely marked with a letter of the alphabet at
the foot of each eighth page--It contains the earliest account of the
voyages of Columbus, from his first departure until his arrival at Cadiz
in chains. The letter of Vespucci to Lorenzo de Medici occupies the fifth
book of this little volume. It is stated to have been originally written
in Spanish, and translated into Italian by a person of the name of
Jocondo. An earlier edition is stated to have been printed in Venice by
Alberto Vercellese, in 1504. The author is said to have been Angelo
Trivigiani, secretary to the Venetian ambassador in Spain. This Trivigiani
appears to have collected many of the particulars of the voyages of
Columbus from the manuscript decades of Peter Martyr, who erroneously lays
the charge of the plagiarism to Aloysius Cadamosto, whose voyages are
inserted in the same collection. The book was entitled, "_Libretto di
tutta la navigazione del Re de Espagna, delle Isole e terreni nuovamente
trovati._"

[297]: Letter of Vespucci to Soderini or Renato--Edit. of Canovai.

[298]: Navarrete, Colec. Viag., tom. i. p. 351.

[299]: Peter Martyr, decad. iii. lib. v. Eden's English trans.

[300]: En este viage que este dicho testigo hizo trujo consigo a Juan de la
Cosa, piloto, e Morego Vespuche, e otros pilotos.

[301]: Per la necessita del mantenimento fummo all' Isola d'Antiglia
(Hispaniola) che e questa che descoperse Cristoval Colombo piu anni fa,
dove facemmo molto mantenimento, e stemmo due mesi e 17 giorni; dove
passammo moti pericoli e travagli con li medesimi christiani que in questa
isola stavanno col Colombo (credo per invidia). Letter of Vespucci.--Edit.
of Canovai.

[302]: Preguntado como lo sabe; dijo--que lo sabe porque vio este testigo
la figura que el dicho Almirante al dicho tiempo embio a Castilla al Rey e
Reyna, nuestros Senores, de lo que habia descubierto, y porque este
testigo luego vino a descubrir y hallo que era verdad lo que dicho tiene
que el dicho Almirante descubrio MS. Process of D. Diego Colon, Pregunta
2.

[303]: Este testigo escrivio una carta que el Almirante escriviera al Rey a
Reyna N. N. S. S. haciendo les saber las perlas e cosas que habia hallado,
y le embio senalado con la dieba carta, en una carta de marear, los rumbos
y vientos por donde habia llegado a la Paria, e que este testigo oyo decir
como pr. aquella carte se habian hecho otras e por ellas habian venido
Pedro Alonzo Merino (Nino) e Ojeda e otros que despues han ido a aquellas
partes. Process of D. Diego Colon, Pregunta 9.

[304]: Idem, Pregunta 10.

[305]: Que en todos los viages qne algunos hicieron descubriendo en la
dicha tierra, ivan personas que ovieron navegado con el dicho Almirante, y
a ellos mostro muchas cosas de marear, y ellos por imitacion e industria
del dicho Almirante las aprendian y aprendieron, e seguendo ag deg.. que el
dicho Almirante les habia mostrado, hicieron los viages que desenbrieron
en la Tierra Firma. Process, Pregunta 10.

[306]: The first suggestion of the name appears to have been in the Latin
work already cited, published in St. Diez, in Lorraine, in 1507, in which
was inserted the letter of Vespucci to king Rene. The author, after
speaking of the other three parts of the world, Asia, Africa, and Europe,
recommends that the fourth ehall be called Amerigo, or America, after
Vespucci, whom he imagined its discoverer.

_Note to the Revised Edition, 1848._--Humboldt, in his Examen
Critique, published in Paris, in 1837, says: "I have been so happy as to
discover, very recently, the name and the literary relations of the
mysterious personage who (in 1507) was the first to propose the name of
America to designate the new continent, and who concealed himself under
the Grecianized name of Hylacomylas." He then, by a long and ingenious
investigation, shows that the real name of this personage was Martin
Waldseemueller, of Fribourg, an eminent cosmographer, patronized by Rene,
duke of Lorraine; who no doubt put in his hands the letter received by him
from Amerigo Vespucci. The geographical works of Waldseemueller, under the
assumed name of Hylacomylas, had a wide circulation, went through repeated
editions, and propagated the use of the name America throughout the world.
There is no reason to suppose that this application of the name was in any
wise suggested by Amerigo Vespucci. It appears to have been entirely
gratuitous on the part of Waldseemueller.

[307]: An instance of these errors may be cited in the edition of the
letter of Amerigo Vespucci to king Rene, inserted by Grinaeus in his Novus
Orbis, in 1532. In this Vespucci is made to state that he sailed from
Cadiz May 20, MCCCCXCVII. (1497,) that he was eighteen months absent, and
returned to Cadiz October 15, MCCCCXCIX. (1499,) which would constitute an
absence of 29 months. He states his departure from Cadiz, on his second
voyage, Sunday, May 11th, MCCCCLXXXIX. (1489,) which would have made his
second voyage precede his first by eight years. If we substitute 1499 for
1489, the departure on his second voyage would still precede his return
from his first by five months. Canovai, in his edition, has altered the
date of the first return to 1498, to limit the voyage to eighteen months.

[308]: Gomara, Hist. Ind., cap. 14.

[309]: Navigatio Christophori Columbi, Madrignano Interprete. It is
contained in a collection of voyages called Novus Orbis Regionum, edition
of 1555, but was originally published in Italian as written by Montalbodo
Francanzano (or Francapano de Montaldo), in a collection of voyages
entitled Nuovo Mundo, in Vicenza, 1507.

[310]: Girolamo Benzoni, Hist, del Nuevo Mundo, lib. i. fo. 12. In Venetia,
1572.

[311]: Padre Joseph de Acosta, Hist. Ind., lib. i. cap. 19.

[312]: Juan de Mariana, Hist. Espana, lib. xxvi. cap. 3.

[313]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. ii. lib. iii. cap. 1.

[314]: Commentarios de los Incas, Lib. i. cap. 3.

[315]: Names of historians who either adopted this story in detail, or the
charge against Columbus, drawn from it.

  Bernardo Aldrete, Antiguedad de Espana, lib. iv. cap. 17, p. 567.
  Roderigo Caro, Antiguedad, lib. iii. cap. 76.
  Juan de Solorzano, Ind. Jure, tom. i. lib. i. cap. 5.
  Fernando Pizarro, Varones Ilust. del Nuevo Mundo, cap. 2.
  Agostino Torniel, Annal. Sacr., tom. i. ann. Mund., 1931,  No. 48.
  Pet. Damarez or De Mariz, Dial. iv. de Var. Hist., cap. 4.
  Gregorio Garcia, Orig. de los Indies, lib. i. cap. 4, 1.
  Juan de Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. xviii. cap. 1.
  John Baptiste Riccioli, Geograf. Reform., lib. iii.

To this list of old authors may be added many others of more recent date.

[316]: "Francisco Lopez de Gomara, Presbitero, Sevillano, escribio con
elegante estilo acerca de las cosas de las Indies, pero dexandose llevar
de falsas narraciones." Hijos de Sevilla, Numero ii. p. 42, Let. F. The
same is stated in Bibliotheca Hispana Nova, lib. i. p. 437. "El Francisco
Lopez de Gomara escrivio tantos borrones e cosas que no son verdaderas, de
que ha hecho mucho dano a muchos escritores e coronistas, que despues del
Gomara han escrito en las cosas de la Nueva Espana ... es porque les ha
hecho errar el Gomara." Bernal Diaz del Castillo, Hist. de la Conquest de
la Nueva Espana, Fin de cap. 13.

"Tenia Gomara doctrina y estilo ... per empleose en ordinar sin
discernimiento lo que hallo escrito por sus antecesores, y dio credito a
petranas no solo falsas sino inverisimiles." Juan Bautista Munoz, Hist. N.
Mundo, Prologo, p 18.

[317]: Vasconcelos, lib. 4.

[318]: Murr, Notice sur M. Behaim.

[319]: Barros, decad. i. lib. ii. cap. 1. Lisbon, 1552.

[320]: Investigations Historicas, Madrid, 1794.

[321]: Cladera, Investig. Hist., p. 115.

[322]: Forster's Northern Voyages, book ii. chap. 2.

[323]: This account is taken from Hakluyt, vol. iii. p. 123. The passage
about gold and other metals is not to be found in the original Italian of
Ramusio, (tom. ii. p. 23,) and is probably an interpolation.

[324]: Hakluyt, Collect., vol. iii. p. 127.

[325]: Malte-Brun, Hist, de Geog., tom. i. lib. xvii.

[326]: Idem, Geog. Unirerselle, tom. xiv. Note sur la decouverte de
l'Amerique.

[327]: Gosselin, Recherches sur la Geographic des Anciens, tom. i. p. 162,
&c.

[328]: Memoirs de l'Acad. des Inscript., tom. xxvi.

[329]: Capmany, Questiones Criticas, Quest. 6.

[330]: Archives de Ind. en Sevilla.

[331]: Capmany, Queat. Crit.

[332]: The author of this work is indebted for this able examination of the
route of Columbus to an officer of the navy of the United States, whose
name he regrets the not being at liberty to mention. He has been greatly
benefited, in various parts of this history, by nautical information from
the same intelligent source.

[333]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. i. lib. ix. cap. 10.

[334]: In the first chapter of Herrera's description of the Indies,
appended to his history, is another scale of the Bahama islands, which
corroborates the above. It begins at the opposite end, at the N. W., and
runs down to the S.E. It is thought unnecessary to cite it particularly.

[335]: See Caballero Pesos y Medidas. J. B. Say. Economic Politique.

[336]: In preparing the first edition of this work for the press the author
had not the benefit of the English translation of Marco Polo, published a
few years since, with admirable commentaries, by William Marsden, F. R. S.
He availed himself, principally, of an Italian version in the Venetian
edition of Ramusio (1606), the French translation by Bergeron, and an old
and very incorrect Spanish translation. Having since procured the work of
Mr. Marsden, he has made considerable alterations in these notices of
Marco Polo.

[337]: Ramusio, tom. iii.

[338]: Bergeron, by blunder in the translation from the original Latin, has
stated that the Khan sent 40,000 men to escort them. This has drawn the
ire of the critics upon Marco Polo, who have cited it as one of his
monstrous exaggerations.

[339]: Hist. des Voyages, tom, xxvii. lib. iv. cap. 3. Paris, 1549.

[340]: Ramusio, vol. ii. p. 17.

[341]: Mr. Marsden, who has inspected a splendid fac-simile of this map
preserved in the British Museum, objects even to the fundamental part of
it: "where," he observes, "situations are given to places that seem quite
inconsistent with the descriptions in the travels, and cannot be
attributed to their author, although inserted on the supposed authority of
his writings." Marsden's M. Polo, Introd., p. xlii.

[342]: Hist, des Voyages, torn. xl. lib. xi. ch, 4.

[343]: Another blunder in translation has drawn upon Marco Polo the
indignation of George Hornius, who (in his Origin of America, IV. 3)
exclaims, "Who can believe all that, he says of the city of Quinsai? as,
for example, that it has stone bridges twelve thousand miles high!" &c. It
is probable that many of the exaggerations in the accounts of Marco Polo
are in fact the errors of his translators.

Mandeville, speaking of this same city, which he calls Causai, says it is
built on the sea like Venice, and has twelve hundred bridges.

[344]: Sir George Staunton mentions this lake as being a beautiful sheet of
water, about three or four miles in diameter; its margin ornamented with
houses and gardens of Mandarines, together with temples, monasteries for
the priests of Fo, and an imperial palace.

[345]: Supposed to be those islands collectively called Japan. They are
named by the Chinese Ge-pen; the terminating syllable _go_, added by
Marco Polo, is supposed to be the Chinese word _kue_, signifying
kingdom, which is commonly annexed to the names of foreign countries. As
the distance of the nearest part of the southern island from the coast of
China near Ning-po is not more than five hundred Italian miles, Mr.
Marsden supposes Marco Polo, in stating it to be 1500, means Chinese miles
or li, which are in the proportion of somewhat more than one-third of the
former.

[346]: Aristot., 2 Met. cap. 5.

[347]: Pliny, lib. i. cap. 61.

[348]: Feyjoo, Theatre Critico, tom. iv. d. 10, Sec. 29.

[349]: Lib. iv. de la Chancelaria del Key Dn. Juan II, fol. 101.

[350]: Torre do Tombo. Lib. das Ylhas, f. 119.

[351]: Fr. Gregorio Garcia, Origen de los Indios, lib. i. cap. 9.

[352]: Sigeberto, Epist. ad Tietmar. Abbat.

[353]: Nunez de la l'ena. Conquist de la Gran Canaria.

[354]: Ptolemy, lib. iv. tom. iv.

[355]: Fr. D. Philipo, lib. viii. fol. 25.

[356]: Hist. Isl. Can., lib. i. cap. 28.

[357]: Nunez de la Pena, lib. i. cap. 1. Viera, Hist Isl. Can., tom. i.
cap. 28.

[358]: Nunez, Conquista le Gran Canaria. Viera, Hist. &c.

[359]: Viera, Hist. Isl. Can., tom. i. cap. 28.

[360]: Idem.

[361]: Viera, Hist. Isl. Can., tom. i. cap. 28.

[362]: Viera, ubi sup.

[363]: Theatro Critico, tom. iv. d. x.

[364]: Hist. del Almirante, cap. 10.

[365]: Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana, lib. iv. cap. 4. Origen de los Indios
por Fr. Gregorio Garcia, lib. iv. cap. 20.

[366]: Barros, Asia, decad. i. lib. i. cap. 3.

[367]: Navarrete, Colec. Viag., tom. i. Introd. p. lxx.

[368]: T. A. Llorente, Oeuvres de Las Casas, p. xi. Paris, 1822.

[369]: Herrera clearly states this as an expedient adopted when others
failed. "Bartolome de las Casas, viendo que sus conceptos hallaban en
todas partes dificultad, i que las opiniones que tenla, por mucha
familiaridad que havia seguido i gran credito con el gran Canciller, no
podian haber efecto, _se volvio a otros expedientes, &c_."--Decad.
ii. lib. ii. cap. 2.

[370]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. iii. lib. ii. cap. 4.

[371]: Idem, decad. ii. lib. ii. cap. 20.

[372]: Idem, decad. ii. lib. iii. cap. 8.

[373]: 1 Herrera, d. i. lib. vi. cap. 20.

[374]: Idem, d. i. lib. viii. cap. 9.

[375]: Idem, d. i. lib. ix. cap. 5.

[376]: Robertson, Hist. America, p. 3.

[377]: Porque como iban faltando los Indios i se conocia que un negro
trabajaba, mas que quatro, por lo qual habia gran dem anda de ellos,
parccia que se podia poner algun tributo en la saca, de que resultaria
provecho a la Rl. Hacienda. Herrera, decad. ii. lib. ii. cap. 8.

[378]: De Marsolier, Hist. du Ministere Cardinal Ximenes, lib. vi.
Toulouse, 1694.

[379]: In this notice the author has occasionally availed himself of the
interesting memoir of Mon. J. A. Idorente, prefixed to his collection of
the works of Las Casas, collating it with the history of Herrera, from
which its facts are principally derived.

[380]: Navarrete, Colec. de Viag., tom. i. p. lxxv.

[381]: Opus Epist. P. Martyris Anglerii, Epist. 131.

[382]: Opus Epist. P. Martyris Anglerii, Epist. 134.

[383]: Opus Epist. P. Martyrin Anglerii, Epist. 135.

[384]: Idem, Epist. 141.

[385]: Idem, Epist. 147.

[386]: Cura de los Palacios, cap. 7.

[387]: Bibliotheca Pinello.

[388]: Herrera, decad ii. lib. ii. cap. 3.

[389]: Idem, decad. iii. lib. iv. cap. 3.

[390]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. iii. lib. i. cap. 15.

[391]: Idem, decad. iii. lib. iv. cap. 3.

[392]: Salazar, Conq. de Mexico, lib. i. cap. 2.

[393]: Herrera, Hist. Ind., decad. iii. lib. i. cap. 1.

[394]: Idem, decad. iii. lib. iv. cap. 3.

[395]: Gosselin, Recherches sur la Geog. des Anciens, tom. i.

[396]: Feyjoo, Theatro Critico, lib. vii. Sec. 2.

[397]: Herodot., lib. iii. Virg. Georg. i. Pomp. Mela, lib. iii. cap. 10.

[398]: St. August., lib. ix. cap. 6. Sup. Genesis.

[399]: St. Basillius was called the great. His works were read and admired
by all the world, even by Pagans. They are written in an elevated and
majestic style, with great splendor of idea, and vast erudition.

[400]: St. Ambros., Opera. Edit. Coignard. Parisiis, MDCXC.

[401]: Paradisus autem in Oriente, in altissimo monte, de cujus cacumine
cadentes aquos, maximum faciunt lacum, que in suo casu tantum faciunt
strepitum et fragorem, quod ornnes incolae, juxta praedictum lacum nascuntur
surdi, ex immoderato sonitu seu fragore sensum auditus in parvulis
corrumpente. _Ul dicit Basilius in Hexameron, similiter et Ambros._
Ex illo lacu, velut ex uno fonte, procedunt ilia flumina quatuor, Phison,
qui et Ganges, Gyon, qui et Nilus dicitur, et Tigris ac Euphrates. Bart.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life and Voyages of Christopher
Columbus (Vol. II), by Washington Irving





Produced by Charles Franks and the DP Team




 [Illustration: "'WHO ARE YOU, MY CHILD?' I SAID'--Page 3
(_Frontispiece_)]



J. COLE

BY

EMMA GELLIBRAND



J. COLE.

"HONNERD MADAM,

"Wich i hav seed in the paper a page Boy wanted, and begs to say J.
Cole is over thertene, and I can clene plate, wich my brutther is
under a butler and lernd me, and I can wate, and no how to clene
winders and boots. J. Cole opes you will let me cum. I arsks 8 and
all found. if you do my washin I will take sevven. J. Cole will serve
you well and opes to giv sattisfaxshun. i can cum tomorrer.
     J. COLE.

"P.S.--He is not verry torl but growin. My brutther is a verry good
hite. i am sharp and can rede and rite and can hadd figgers if you
like."

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I.


I had advertised for a page-boy, and having puzzled through some
dozens of answers, more or less illegible and impossible to
understand, had come to the last one of the packet, of which the
above is an exact copy.

The epistle was enclosed in a clumsy envelope, evidently home-made,
with the aid of scissors and gum, and was written on a half-sheet of
letter-paper, in a large hand, with many blots and smears, on
pencilled lines.

There was something quaint and straightforward in the letter, in
spite of the utter ignorance of grammar and spelling; and while I
smiled at the evident pride in the "brutther" who was a "verry good
hite," and the offer to take less wages if "I would do his washin," I
found myself wondering what sort of waif upon the sea of life was
this not very tall person, over thirteen, who "would serve me well."

I had many letters to answer and several appointments to make, and
had scarcely made up my mind whether or not to trouble to write to my
accomplished correspondent, who was "sharp, and could rede and rite,
and hadd figgers," when, a shadow falling on the ground by me as I
sat by the open window, I looked up, and saw, standing opposite my
chair, a boy,--the very smallest boy, with the very largest blue eyes
I ever saw. The clothes on his little limbs were evidently meant for
somebody almost double his size, but they were clean and tidy.

In one hand he held a bundle, tied in a red handkerchief, and in the
other a bunch of wild-flowers that bore signs of having travelled far
in the heat of the sun, their blossoms hanging down, dusty and
fading, and their petals dropping one by one on the ground.

"Who are you, my child?" I said, "and what do you want?"

At my question the boy placed his flowers on my table, and, pulling
off his cap, made a queer movement with his feet, as though he were
trying to step backwards with both at once, and said, in a voice so
deep that it quite startled me, so strangely did it seem to belong to
the size of the clothes, and not the wearer,--

"Please'm, it's J. Cole; and I've come to live with yer. I've brought
all my clothes, and every think."

For the moment I felt a little bewildered, so impossible did it seem
that the small specimen of humanity before me was actually intending
to enter anybody's service; he looked so childish and wistful, and
yet with a certain honesty of purpose shining out of those big, wide-
open eyes, that interested me in him, and made me want to know more
of him.

"You are very small to go into service," I said, "and I am afraid you
could not do the work I should require; besides, you should have
waited to hear from me, and then have come to see me, if I wanted you
to do so."

"Yes, I know I'm not very big," said the boy, nervously fidgeting
with his bundle; "leastways not in hite; but my arms is that long,
they'll reach ever so 'igh above my 'ed, and as for bein' strong, you
should jest see me lift my father's big market basket when it's
loaded with 'taters, or wotever is for market, and I hope you'll not
be angry because I come to-day; but Dick--that's my brutther Dick--he
says, 'You foller my advice, Joe,' he says, 'and go arter this 'ere
place, and don't let no grass grow under your feet. I knows what it is
goin' arter places; there's such lots a fitin' after 'em, that if you lets
so much as a hour go afore yer looks 'em up, there's them as slips in
fust gets it; and wen yer goes to the door they opens it and sez, "It
ain't no use, boy, we're sooted;" and then where are yer, I'd like to
know? So,' sez he, 'Joe, you look sharp and go, and maybe you'll get
it.' So I come, mum, and please, that's all."

"But about your character, my boy," I said. "You must have somebody
to speak for you, and say you are honest, and what you are able to
do. I always want a good character with my servants; the last page-
boy I had brought three years' good character from his former
situation."

"Lor!" said Joe, with a serious look, "did he stay three years in a
place afore he came to you? Wotever did he leave them people for,
where he were so comfortable? If I stay with you three years, you
won't catch me a leavin' yer, and goin' somewheres else. Wot a muff
that chap was!"

I explained that it did not always depend on whether a servant wanted
to stay or not, but whether it suited the employers to keep him.

"'Praps he did somethin', and they giv' 'im the sack," murmured Joe;
"he was a flat!"

"But about this character of yours," I said; "if I decide to give you
a trial, although I am almost sure you are too small, and won't do,
where am I to go for your character? Will the people where your
brother lives speak for you?"

"Oh, yes!" cried the little fellow, his cheeks flushing; "I know
Dick'll ask 'em to give me a caricter. Miss Edith, I often cleaned
'er boots. Once she come 'ome in the mud, and was a-goin' out agin
directly; and they was lace-ups, and a orful bother to do up even;
and she come into the stable-yard with 'er dog, and sez: 'Dick, will
you chain Tiger up, and this little boy may clean my boots if he
likes, on my feet?' So I cleaned 'em, and she giv' me sixpence; and
after that, when the boots come down in the mornin', I got Dick
always to let me clean them little boots, and I kep 'em clean in the
insides, like the lady's maid she told me not to put my 'ands inside
'em if they was black. Miss Edith, she'll giv me a caricter, if Dick
asks 'er."

Just then the visitors' bell rang; and I sent my would-be page into
the kitchen to wait until I could speak to him again, and told him to
ask the cook to give him something to eat.

"Here are your flowers," I said; "take them with you."

He looked at me, and then, as if ashamed of having offered them,
gathered them up in his hands, and with the corner of the red
handkerchief wiped some few leaves and dust-marks off my table, then
saying in a low voice, "I didn't know you 'ad beauties of yer own,
like them in the glass pots, but I'll giv' 'em to the cook." So
saying, he went away into the kitchen, and my visitors came in, and
by and by some more friends arrived.

The weather was very warm, and we sat chattering and enjoying the
shade of the trees by the open French window. Presently, somebody
being thirsty, I suggested lemonade and ice, and I offered
strawberries, and (if possible) cream; though my mind misgave me as
to the latter delicacy, for we had several times been obliged to do
without some of our luxuries if they entailed "_fetching_," as we had
no boy to run errands quickly on an emergency and be useful. However,
I rang the bell; and when the housemaid, whose temper, since she had
been what is curiously termed in servants'-hall language "single-
handed," was most trying, entered, I said, "Make some lemonade, Mary,
and ask cook to gather some strawberries quickly, and bring them,
with some cream."

Mary looked at me as who should say, "Well, I'm sure! and who's to do
it all? You'll have to wait a bit." And I know we should have to
wait, and therefore resigned myself to do so patiently, keeping up
the ball of gossip, and wondering if a little music later on would
perhaps while away the time.

Much to my amazement, in less than a quarter of an hour Mary entered
with the tray, all being prepared; and directly I looked at the
strawberry-bowl I detected a novel feature in the table decoration. A
practised hand had evidently been at work; but whose? Mary was far
too matter-of-fact a person. Food, plates, knives and forks, glasses,
and a cruet-stand were all she ever thought necessary; and even for a
centre vase of flowers I had to ask, and often to insist, during the
time she was single-handed.

But here was my strawberry-bowl, a pretty one, even when unadorned,
with its pure white porcelain stem, intwined with a wreath of blue
convolvulus, and then a spray of white, the petals just peeping over
the edge of the bowl, and resting near the luscious red fruit; the
cream-jug, also white, had twining flowers of blue, and round the
lemonade-jug, of glass, was a wreath of yellow blossoms.

"How exquisite!" exclaimed we all. "What fairy could have bestowed
such a treat to our eyes and delight to our sense of the beautiful?"

I supposed some friend of the cook's or Mary's had been taking
lessons in the art of decoration, and had given us a specimen.

Soon after, my friends having gone, I thought of J. Cole waiting to
be dismissed, and sent for him.

Cook came in, and with a preliminary "Ahem!" which I knew of old
meant, "I have an idea of my own, and I mean to get it carried out,"
said, "Oh, if you please 'm, if I might be so bold, did you think
serious of engagin' the boy that's waitin' in the kitchen?"

"Why do you ask, Cook? "I said.

"Well, ma'am," she replied, trying to hide a laugh, "of course it's
not for me to presume; but, if I might say a word for him, I think
he's the very handiest and the sharpest one we've ever had in this
house, and we've had a many, as you know. Why, if you'd only have
seen him when Mary come in in her tantrums at 'aving to get the tray
single-handed, and begun a-grumblin' and a-bangin' things about, as
is her way, being of a quick temper, though, as I tells her, too slow
a-movin' of herself. As I were a-sayin', you should have seen that
boy. If he didn't up and leave his bread and butter and mug of milk,
as he was a-enjoyin' of as 'arty as you like, and, 'Look 'ere,' says
he, 'giv' me the jug. I'll make some fine drink with lemons. I see
Dick do it often up at his place. Giv' me the squeezer. Wait till I
washes my 'ands. I won't be a minnit.' Then in he rushes into the
scullery, washes his hands, runs back again in a jiffy. 'Got any snow
sugar? I mean all done fine like snow.' I gave it him; and, sure
enough, his little hands moved that quick, he had made the lemonade
before Mary would have squeezed a lemon. 'Where do yer buy the
cream?' he says next. 'I'll run and get it while you picks the
strawberries.' Perhaps it wasn't right, me a trustin' him, being a
stranger, but he was that quick I couldn't say no. Up he takes the
jug, and was off; and when I come in from the garden with the
strawberries, if he hadn't been and put all them flowers on the
things. He begs my pardon for interfering like, and says, 'I 'ope
you'll excuse me a-doin' of it, but the woman at the milk-shop said I
might 'ave 'em; and I see the butler where Dick lives wind the
flowers about like that, and 'ave 'elped 'im often; and, please, I
paid for the cream, because I'd got two bob of my own, Dick giv' me
on my birthday. Oh, I do 'ope, Mrs. Cook,' he says, 'that the lady'll
take me; I 'll serve 'er well, I will, indeed;' and then he begins to
cry and tremble, poor little chap, for he'd been running about a lot,
and never eaten or drank what I gave him, because he wanted to help,
and it was hot in the kitchen, I suppose, and he felt faint like, but
there he is, crying; and just now, when the bell rung, which was two
great big boys after the place, he says, 'Oh, please say "We're
sooted," and ask the lady if I may stay.' So, I've taken the liberty,
ma'am," said Cook, "for somehow I like that little chap, and there's
a deal in him, I do believe."

So saying, Cook retired; and, in a moment, J. Cole was standing in
her place, the blue eyes brimming over with tears, and an eager
anxiety as to what his fate would be making his poor little hands
clutch at his coat-sleeves, and his feet shuffle about so nervously,
that I had not the courage to grieve him by a refusal.

"Well, Joseph," I said, "I have decided to give you a month's trial.
I shall write to the gentleman who employs your brother; and if he
speaks well of you, you may stay."

"And may I stay now, please?" he said. "May I stay before you gets
any answer to your letter to say I'm all right? I think you'd better
let me; there ain't no boy; and Mrs. Cook and Mary'll 'ave a lot to
do. I can stay in the stable, if you don't like to let me be in the
house, afore you writes the letter."

"No, Joe," I replied: "you may not be a good, honest boy, but I think
you are; and you shall stay here. Now go back to Mrs. Wilson, and
finish your milk, and eat something more if you can, then have a good
rest and a wash; they will show you where you are to sleep, and at
dinner, this evening, I shall see if you can wait at table."

"Thank you very kindly," said the boy, his whole face beaming with
delight, "and I'll be sure and do everythink I can for you." Then he
went quickly out of the room; for I could see he was quite overcome,
now that the uncertainty was over.

Alone once more, I reasoned with myself, and felt I was doing an
unwise thing. Just at that time my husband was away on business for
some months; and I had no one to advise me, and no one to say me nay
either. My conscience told me my husband would say, "We cannot tell
who this boy is, where he has lived, or who are his associates; he
may be connected with a gang of thieves for what we know to the
contrary. Wait, and have proper references before trusting him in the
house."

And he would be right to say so to me, but not every one listens to
conscience when it points the opposite way to inclination. Well, J.
Cole remained; and when I entered the dining-room, to my solitary
dinner, he was there, with a face shining from soap and water, his
curls evidently soaped too, to make them go tidily on his forehead.
The former page having left his livery jacket and trousers, Mary had
let Joe dress in them, at his earnest request.

She told me afterwards that he had sewn up the clothes in the neatest
manner wherever they could be made smaller; and the effect of the
jacket, which he had stuffed out in the chest with hay, as we
discovered by the perfume, was very droll. He had a great love of
bright colors, and the trousers being large, showed bright red socks;
the jacket sleeves being much too short for the long arms, of which
he was so proud, allowed the wristbands of a vivid blue flannel shirt
to be seen.

I was alone, so could put up with this droll figure at my elbow; but
the seriousness of his face was such a contrast to the comicality of
the rest of him, that I found myself beginning to smile every now and
then, but directly I saw the serious eyes on me, I felt obliged to
become grave at once.

The waiting at table I could not exactly pronounce a success; for,
although Joe's quick eyes detected in an instant if I wanted
anything, his anxiety to be "first in the field," and give Mary no
chance of instructing him in his duties, made him collide against her
more than once in his hasty rushes to the sideboard and back to my
elbow with the dishes, which he generally handed to me long before he
reached me, his long arms enabling him to reach me with his hands
while he was yet some distance from me, and often on the wrong side.
I also noticed when I wanted water he lifted the water-bottle on
high, and poured as though it was something requiring a "head." Mary
nearly caused a catastrophe at that moment by frowning at him, and
saying, sotto voce, "Whatever are you doing? Is that the way to pour
out water? It ain't hale, stoopid!"

Joe's face became scarlet; and to hide his confusion he seized a
dish-cover, and hastily went out of the room with it, returning in a
moment pale and serious as became one who at heart was every inch a
family butler with immense responsibilities.

Joe was quiet and sharp, quick and intelligent; but I could see he
was quite new to waiting at table. To remove a dish was, I could see,
his greatest dread; and it amused me to see the cleverness with which
he managed that Mary should do that part of the duty.

When only my plate and a dish remained to be cleared away, he would
slowly get nearer as I got towards the last morsel, and before Mary
had time, would take my plate, and go quite slowly to the sideboard
with it, leisurely remove the knife and fork, watching meanwhile in
the mirror if Mary was about to take the dish away; if not he would
take something outside, or bring a decanter, and ask if I wanted
wine.

I was, however, pleased to find him no more awkward, as I feared he
would have been, and when, having swept the grate and placed my
solitary wineglass and dessert-plate on the table, he retired, softly
closing the door after him, I felt I should make something of J.
Cole, and hoped his character would be good.




CHAPTER II.


The next morning a tastefully arranged vase of flowers in the centre
of the breakfast-table, and one magnificent rose and bud by my plate,
were silent but eloquent appeals to my interest on behalf of my
would-be page; and when Joe himself appeared, fresh from an hour's
self-imposed work in my garden, I saw he had become quite one of the
family; for Bogie, my little terrier, usually very snappish to
strangers, and who considered all boys as his natural enemies, was
leaping about his feet, evidently asking for more games, and our old
magpie was perched familiarly on his shoulder.

"Good-morning, Joe," I said. "You are an early riser, I can see, by
the work you have already done in the garden."

"Why, yes," replied Joe, blushing, and touching an imaginary cap;
"I'm used to bein' up. There was ever so much to do of a mornin' at
'ome; and I 'ad to 'elp father afore I could go to be with Dick, and
I was with Dick a'most every mornin' by seven, and a good mile and a
arf to walk to 'is place. Shall I bring in the breakfust, mum? Mary's
told me what to do."

Having given permission, Joe set to work to get through his duties,
this time without any help, and I actually trembled when I saw him
enter with a tray containing all things necessary for my morning
meal, he looked so over-weighted; but he was quite equal to it as far
as landing the tray safely on the sideboard. But, alas! then came the
ordeal; not one thing did poor Joe know where to place, and stood
with the coffeepot in his hand, undecided whether it went before me,
or at the end of the table, or whether he was to pour out my coffee
for me.

I saw he was getting very nervous, so took it from him, and in order
to put him at his ease, I remarked,--

"I think, perhaps, I had better show you, Joe, just for once, how I
like my breakfast served, for every one has little ways of their own,
you know; and you will try to do it my way when you know how I like
it, won't you?"

Thereupon I arranged the dishes, etc., for him, and his big eyes
followed my every movement. The blinds wanted pulling down a little
presently, and then I began to realize one of the drawbacks in having
such a very small boy as page. Joe saw the sun's rays were nearly
blinding me, and wanted to shut them out; but on attempting to reach
the tassel attached to the cord, it was hopelessly beyond his reach.
In vain were the long arms stretched to their utmost, till the
sleeves of the ex-page's jacket retreated almost to Joe's elbows, but
no use.

I watched, curious to see what he would do.

"Please 'm, might I fetch an 'all chair?" said Joe; "I'm afraid I'm
not big enuf to reach the tossle, but I won't pull 'em up so 'igh to-
morrow."

I gave permission, and carefully the chair was steered among my
tables and china pots. Then Joe mounted, and by means of rising on
the tips of his toes he was able to accomplish the task of lowering
the blinds.

I noticed at that time that Joe wore bright red socks, and I little
thought what a shock those bright-colored hose were to give me later
on under different circumstances.

That evening I had satisfactory letters regarding Joe's character,
and by degrees he became used to his new home, and we to him. His
quaint sayings and wonderful love of the truth, added to extreme
cleanliness, made him welcome in the somewhat exclusive circle in
which my housekeeper, Mrs. Wilson, reigned supreme.

Many a hearty burst of laughter came to me from the open kitchen-
window across the garden in the leisure hour, when, the servants' tea
being over, they sat at work, while Joe amused them with his stories
and reminiscences of the sayings and doings of his wonderful brother
Dick.

This same Dick was evidently the one being Joe worshipped on earth,
and to keep his promises to Dick was a sacred duty.

"You don't know our Dick, Mrs. Wilson," said Joe, to the old
housekeeper; "if you did, you'd understand why I no more dare go agen
wot Dick told me, than I dare put my 'and in that 'ere fire. When I
were quite a little chap, I took some big yaller plums once, out of
one of the punnits father was a-packin' for market, and I eat 'em. I
don't know to this hour wot made me take them plums; but I remember
they were such prime big uns, big as eggs they was, and like lumps of
gold, with a sort of blue shade over 'em. Father were very partikler
about not 'avin' the fruit 'andled and takin' the bloom off, and told
me to cover 'em well with leaves. It was a broilin' 'ot day, and I
was tired, 'avin' been stoopin' over the baskits since four in the
morning, and as I put the leaves over the plums I touched 'em; they
felt so lovely and cool, and looked so juicy-like, I felt I must eat
one, and I did; there was just six on 'em, and when I'd bin and eat
one, there seemed such a empty place left in the punnit, that I knew
father'd be sure to see it, so I eat 'em all, and then threw the
punnit to one side. Just then, father comes up and says, "Count them
punnits, Dick! there ought to be forty on 'em. Twenty picked large
for Mr. Moses, and twenty usuals for Marts!'--two of our best
customers they was. Well, Dick, he counts 'em, and soon misses one.
'Thirty-eight, thirty-nine,' he sez, and no more; 'but 'ere's a empty
punnit,' he sez. I was standing near, feelin' awful, and wished I'd
said I'd eat the plums afore Dick begun to count 'em, but I didn't,
and after that I couldn't. 'Joe!' sez Dick, 'I wants yer! 'Ow come
this empty punnit 'ere, along of the others? there's plums bin in it,
I can see, 'cos it's not new. Speak up, youngster!' I looked at
Dick's face, Mrs. Wilson, and his eyes seemed to go right into my
throat, and draw the truth out of me. 'Speak up,' he sez, a-gettin'
cross; 'if you've prigged 'em, say so, and you'll get a good hidin'
from me, for a-doin' of it; but if you tells me a lie, you'll get
such a hidin' for that as 'll make you remember it all your life; so
speak up, say you did it, and take your hidin' like a brick, and if
you didn't prig 'em, say who did, 'cos you must 'av' seen 'em go.'

"I couldn't do nothin', Mrs. Wilson, but keep my 'ed down, and
blubber out, 'Please, Dick, I eat 'em.'

"'Oh, you did, yer young greedy, did yer,' he sez; 'I'm glad yer
didn't tell me a lie. I've got to giv' yer a hidin', Joe; but giv' us
yer 'and, old chap, first, and mind wot I sez to yer: "_Own up to it,
wotever you do_," and take your punishment; it's 'ard to bear, but
when the smart on it's over yer forgets it; but if yer tells a lie to
save yerself, yer feels the smart of _that_ always; yer feels ashamed
of yerself whenever yer thinks of it.' And then Dick give me a
thrashin', he did, but I never 'ollered or made a row, tho' he hit
pretty 'ard. And, Mrs. Wilson, I never could look in Dick's face if I
told a lie, and I never shall tell one, I 'ope, as long as ever I
live. You should just see Dick, Mrs. Wilson, he is a one-er, he is."

"Lor' bless the boy," said Mary, the housemaid; "why, if he isn't a-
cryin' now. Whatever's the matter? One minnit you're makin' us larf
fit to kill ourselves, and then you're nearly makin' us cry with your
Dick, and your great eyes runnin' over like that. Now get away, and
take the dogs their supper, and see if you can't get a bit of color
in your cheeks before you come back."

So off Joe went, and soon the frantic barking in the stable-yard
showed he had begun feeding his four-footed pets.

Time went on; it was a very quiet household just then--my husband
away in America, and my friends most of them enjoying their summer
abroad, or at some seaside place--all scattered here and there until
autumn was over, and then we were to move to town, and spend the
winter season at our house there. I hoped my dear sister and her
girls would then join us, and, best of all, my dear husband be home
to make our circle complete.

Day by day Joe progressed in favor with everybody; his size was
always a trouble, but his extreme good nature made everybody willing
to help him over his difficulties. He invented all sorts of curious
tools for reaching up to high places; and the marvels he would
perform with a long stick and a sort of claw at the end of it were
quite astonishing.

I noticed whenever I spoke of going to town Joe did not seem to look
forward to the change with any pleasure, although he had never been
to London, he told me; but Dick had been once with his father, and
had seen lots of strange things; among others a sad one, that made a
great impression on Dick, and he had told the tale to Joe, so as to
have almost as great an effect on him.

It appeared that one night Dick and his father were crossing Waterloo
Bridge, and had seen a young girl running quickly along, crying
bitterly. Dick tried to keep up with her, and asked her what was the
matter. She told him to let her alone, that she meant to drown
herself, for she had nothing to live for, and was sick of her life.
Dick persuaded her to tell him her grief, and heard from her that her
mother and father had both been drowned in a steamer, and she was
left with a little brother to take care of; he had been a great
trouble to her, and had been led away by bad companions until he
became thoroughly wicked. She had been a milliner, and had a room of
her own, and paid extra for a little place where her brother could
sleep. She fed and clothed him out of her earnings, although he was
idle, and cruel enough to scold and abuse her when she tried to
reason with him, and refused to let him bring his bad companions to
her home. At last he stole nearly all she had, and pawned it; and
among other things, some bonnets and caps belonging to the people who
employed her, given as patterns for her to copy. These she had to pay
for, and lost her situation besides. By degrees all her clothes, her
home, and all she had, went for food; and then this wicked boy left
her, and the next thing she knew was that he had been taken up with a
gang of burglars concerned in a jewel robbery. That day she had seen
him in prison, and he was to be transported for seven years; so the
poor creature, mad with grief, was about to end her life. Dick and
his father would not leave her until she was quiet, and promised them
she would go and get a bed and supper with the money they gave her,
and they promised to see her again the next day at a place she named.
The next morning they went to the address, and found a crowd round
the house. Somebody said a young woman had thrown herself out of a
window, and had been taken up dead. It was too true; and the girl was
the wretched, heart-broken sister they had helped over night. Her
grief had been too much for her, and, poor thing, she awoke to the
light of another day, and could not face it alone and destitute; so,
despairing, she had ended her life. They went to the hospital, and
were allowed to see all that remained of the poor creature; and
Dick's description of it all, and his opinion that the brother "might
have been just such another little chap at first as Joe," and "What
would that brother feel," said Dick, "when he knew what he had done?
for he done it," said Dick; "he done that girl to death, the same as
if he'd shov'd her out of that winder hisself."

"And," said Joe, "I wonder if them chaps is goin' about London now
wot led her brother wrong? I don't like London; and I wish we could
stop 'ere."

I assured Joe that in London there was no danger of meeting such
people if he kept to himself, and made no friends of strangers.

Joe was also much afraid of having to wait at table when there were
guests. In spite of all I could do, he was hopelessly nervous and
confused when he had to wait on more than two or three people; and as
I expected to entertain a good deal when we were in town, I could not
help fearing Joe would be unequal to the duties.

I could not bear the idea of parting with the little fellow, for,
added to his good disposition, Joe, in his dark brown livery, with
gilt buttons, his neat little ties, and clean hands; his carefully
brushed curls, by this time trained into better order, and shining
like burnished gold in the sun; his tiny feet, with the favorite red
socks, which he could and did darn very neatly himself when they
began to wear out (and when he bought new ones they were always
bright red),--Joe, let me tell you, was quite an ornament in our
establishment, and the envy of several boys living in families round
about, who tried in vain to get acquainted with him, but he would not
be friends, although he always refused their advances with civil
words.

Sometimes a boy would linger when bringing a note or message for me,
and try to draw Joe into conversation. In a few minutes I would hear
Joe's deep voice say, "I think you had better go on now. I've got my
work to do, and I reckon you've got yours a-waiting for yer at your
place." Then the side-door would shut, and Joe was bustling about his
work.




CHAPTER III.


In the beginning of October we arrived in London. There had been much
packing up, and much extra work for everybody, and Joe was in his
element.

What those long arms, and that willing heart, and those quick little
hands got through, nobody but those he helped and worked for could
tell. Whatever was wanted Joe knew where to find it. Joe's knife was
ready to cut a stubborn knot; Joe's shoulders ready to be loaded with
as heavy a weight as any man could carry. More than once I met him
coming down-stairs with large boxes he himself could almost have been
packed in, and he declared he did not find them too heavy.

"You see, Missis," he said, "I'm that strong now since I've been
here, with all the good food I gets, and bein' so happy like, that I
feel almost up to carryin' anythink. I do believe I could lift that
there pianner, if somebody would just give it a hoist, and let me get
hold of it easy."

Yes, Joe was strong and well, and I am sure, happy, and I had never
had a single misgiving about him since he stood with his fading
flowers and shabby clothes at my window that summer day.

At last we were settled in town, and the winter season beginning. Our
house was situated in the West End of London, a little beyond
Bayswater. One of a row of detached houses, facing another row
exactly similar in every way, except that the backs of those we lived
in had small gardens, with each its own stable wall at the end, with
coachman's rooms above, the front of the stable facing the mews, and
having the entrance from there; the mews ran all along the backs of
these houses. On the opposite side the houses facing ours had their
gardens and back windows facing the high-road, and no stables. There
was a private road belonging to this, Holling Park as it was called,
and a watchman to keep intruders out, and to stop organ-grinders,
beggars, and such invaders of the peace from disturbing us.

Somehow I was never as comfortable as in my snug cottage in the
country. Rich, fashionable people lived about us, and all day long
kept up the round of "society life."

In the morning the large handsome houses would seem asleep, nothing
moving inside or out, except a tradesman's cart, calling for orders,
or workmen putting up or taking down awnings, at some house where
there would be, or had been, a ball or entertainment of some kind.
About eleven a carriage or two would be driven round from the mews,
and stop before a house to take some one for a morning drive; but
very seldom was anybody on foot seen about. In the afternoon it was
different,--carriages rolled along incessantly, and streams of
afternoon callers were going and coming from the houses when the
mistress was "at home;" and at my door, too, soon began the usual din
of bell and knocker. Joe was quite equal to the occasion, and enjoyed
Friday, the day I received. Dressed in his very best, and with a
collar that kept his chin in what seemed to me a fearful state of
torture, but added to his height by at least half an inch, Joe stood
behind the hall-door, ready to open it directly the knocker was
released. He ushered in the guests as though "to the manner born,"
giving out the names correctly, and with all the ease of an
experienced groom of the chambers.

The conservatory leading out of the drawing-room was Joe's especial
pride; it was his great pleasure to syringe the hanging baskets, and
 attend to the ferns and plants. Many shillings from his pocket-money
were spent in little surprises for me in the form of pots of musk,
maiden-hair, or anything he could buy; his wages were all sent home,
and he only kept for his own whatever he had given to him, and
sometimes a guest would "tip" him more generously than I liked, for
his bright eyes and ready hands were always at everybody's service.

After my husband's return home, who from the first became Joe's
especial care, as to boots, brushing of clothes, etc., it became
necessary to give two or three dinner-parties, and I must confess I
felt nervous as to how Joe would acquit himself.

In our dining-room was a very large bear-skin rug, and the floor
being polished oak, it was dangerous to step on this rug, for it
would slip away from the feet on the smooth surface, and even the
dogs avoided it, so many falls had they met with upon it.

The first day of my husband's arrival we had my sister and a friend
to dine, and had been talking about Joe in the few moments before
dinner.

My husband had been laughing at the size of my page, and scolding me
a little, or rather pretending to do so, for taking a written
character.

"Little woman," he said, "don't be surprised if one night a few
country burglars make us a visit, and renew their acquaintance with
Mr. J. Cole."

"You don't know Joe," I replied, "or you would never say that."

"Do you know him so well, little wife?" said my dear sensible
husband; "remember he has only been in our service six months. In the
country he had very little of value in his hands, but here, it seems
to me, he has too much. All the plate, and indeed everything of
value, is in his pantry, and he is a very young boy to trust. One of
the women servants should take charge of the plate-chest, I think.
Where does this paragon sleep?"

"Down-stairs," I said, "next to the kitchen, at the back of the
house; and you should see how carefully every night he looks to the
plate-basket, counts everything, and then asks Mrs. Wilson to see it
is right, locks it up, and gives her the key to take care of. No one
can either open or carry away an iron safe easily, and there is
nothing else worth taking; besides, I know Joe is honest, I feel it."

"Well, I hope so, dear," was my husband's reply, but I could see he
was not quite comfortable about it.

At dinner that day Joe had an accident; he was dreadfully nervous, as
usual, and when waiting, he forgot to attend to my guests first, but
always came to me. The parlor-maid, a new one, and not a great
favorite with Joe, made matters worse by correcting him in an audible
voice; and once, when somebody wanted oyster-sauce, she told Joe to
hand it. The poor boy, wishing to obey quickly, forgot to give the
bear-skin a wide berth, slipped on it, and in a moment had fallen
full length, having in his fall deposited the contents of the sauce-
tureen partly into a blue leather armchair, and the rest onto my
sister's back.

The boy's consternation was dreadful. I could see he was completely
overcome with fright and sorrow for what he had done. He got up, and
all his trembling lips could say was, "Oh, please, I'm so sorry; it
was the bear as tripped me up. I am so very sorry."

Even my husband could scarcely keep from smiling, the sorrow was so
genuine, the sense of shame so true.

"There, never mind, Joe," he said kindly; "you must be more careful.
Now run and get a sponge, and do the best you can with it."

After that Joe had the greatest terror of that treacherous skin, and
I heard him telling the parlor-maid about it.

"You mind," he said, "or that bear'll ketch 'old of yer. I shan't
forget how he ketched 'old of my leg that day and knocked me over; so
you'd better take care, and not go nigher than you can 'elp. He's
always a-lookin' out to ketch yer, but he won't 'ave me no more, I
can tell him."

This fall of Joe's made him still more nervous of waiting at table,
and at last, when he had made some very serious mistakes, I had to
speak to him and tell him I was afraid, if he did not soon learn to
wait better, I must send him away, for his master was annoyed at the
mistakes he made, such as pouring port instead of sherry, giving cold
plates when hot ones were required, handing dishes on the wrong side,
etc.

My little lecture was listened to quietly and humbly, and Joe had
turned to go away, when, to my surprise and distress, he suddenly
burst into a perfect passion of tears and sobs.

"I will try and learn myself," he said, as well as his sobs would let
him, "indeed, I will. I know I'm stoopid. I sez to myself every time
company comes, 'I'll mind wot I'm about, and remember dishes left-
'anded, pour-in's out right, sherry wine's yeller, and port wine
afterwards with the nuts, grapes, and things; and the cruits when
there's fish, and begin with the strangerest lady next to master's
side, and 'elp missus last.' I knows it all, but when they're all
sittin' down, and everybody wantin' somethin', I don't know if Jane's
a-goin' to giv' it 'em, or I am; and I gets stoopid, and my 'ands
shakes, and somehow I can't do nothin'; but please don't send me
away. I do like you and the master. I'll ask Jane to learn me better.
You see if I don't. Oh, please'm, say you'll try me!"

What could I say but "yes," and for a day or two Joe did better, but
we were a small party, and the waiting was easy; but shortly we were
to have a large dinner-party, and as the time drew near, Joe became
quite pale and anxious.

About this time, too, I had been awakened at night by curious sounds
down-stairs, as of somebody moving about, and once I heard an
unmistakable fall of some heavy article.

My husband assured me it was nothing alarming, and he went down-
stairs, but could neither hear or see anything unusual. All was
quiet.

Another night I felt sure I heard sounds down-stairs; and in spite of
my husband's advice to remain still, I called Mrs. Wilson, and
entreated her to come down to the kitchen-floor with me. It was so
very easy, I knew, for anybody to enter the house from the back, and
there being a deep area all round, they could work away with their
tools at the ground-floor back windows unseen. Any one could get on
the top of the stable from the mews, drop into the garden, and be
safe; for the watchman and policeman were on duty in the front of the
house only, the back was quite unprotected. True, there were iron
bars to Joe's window and the kitchen, but iron bars could be sawed
through, and I lived in dread of burglars.

This night Mrs. Wilson and I went softly down, and as we neared the
kitchen stairs, I heard a voice say in a whisper, "Make haste!"

"There, Mrs. Wilson, did you hear that?" I said. "Was that
imagination?"

"No, ma'am," she replied; "there's somebody talking, and I believe
it's in Joe's room. Let us go up and fetch the master."

So we returned up-stairs, and soon my husband stood with us at the
door of Joe's room.

"Open the door, Joe!" cried my husband. "Who have you got there?"

"Nobody, please, sir," said a trembling voice.

"Open the door at once!" said the master, and in a moment it was
opened. Joe stood there very pale, but with no sort of fear in his
face. There was nobody in the room, and as Joe had certainly been in
bed, we concluded he must have talked in his sleep, and, perhaps,
walked about also, for what we knew.

The day before the dinner-party, Cook came and told me she felt sure
there was something wrong with Joe. He was so changed from what he
used to be; there was no getting him to wake in the morning, and he
seemed so heavy with sleep, as if he had no rest at night. Also Cook
had proofs of his having been in her kitchen after he was supposed to
have gone to bed; chairs were moved, and several things not where she
had left them. She had asked Joe, and he replied he did go into the
kitchen, but would not say what for.

I did not like to talk to Joe that day, so decided to wait till after
the dinner, and I would then insist on the mystery being cleared up.
I knew Joe would tell the truth; my trust was unshaken, although
circumstances seemed against him.

That night Mrs. Wilson came to my door, and said she was sure Joe was
at his nightwork again, for she could see from her bedroom window a
light reflected on the stable wall, which must be in his room.

"How can we find out," I said, "what he is doing?"

"That is easily done," said my husband. "We can go out at the garden-
door, and down the steps leading from the garden into the area; they
are opposite his window. We can look through the Venetian blinds, if
they are down, and see for ourselves. He won't be able to see us."

Accordingly, having first wrapped up in our furs, we went down, and
were soon at Joe's window, standing in the area that surrounded the
house. The laths of the blind were some of them open, and between
them we saw distinctly all over the room.

At first we could not understand the strange sight that met our gaze.

In the middle of Joe's room was a table, spread with a cloth, and on
it saucers from flower-pots, placed at intervals down each side;
before each saucer a chair was placed, and in the centre of the table
a high basket, from which a Stilton cheese had been unpacked that
morning,-this was evidently to represent a tall _epergne_. On Joe's
wash-stand were several bottles, a jug, and by each flower-pot saucer
two vessels of some kind--by one, two jam-pots of different sizes; by
another, a broken specimen glass and a teacup--and so on; and from
chair to chair moved Joe, softly but quickly, on tiptoe, now with
bottles which contained water. We could see his lips move, and
concluded he was saying something to imaginary persons, for he would
put a jampot on his tray, and pour into it from the bottle, and then
replace it. Sometimes he would go quickly to his bed, which we saw
represented the dinner-wagon, or sideboard, and bring imaginary
dishes from there and hand them. Then he would go quickly from chair
to chair, always correcting himself if he went to the wrong side, and
talking all the time softly to himself. So here was the solution of
the mystery; here melted into air the visions of Joe in league with
midnight burglars.

The poor boy, evidently alarmed at the prospect of the dinner-party,
and feeling that he must try to improve in waiting at table before
that time somehow, had stolen all those hours nightly from his rest,
to practise with whatever substitutes were at hand for the usual
table requisites.

Here every night, when those who had worked far less during the day
were soundly sleeping, had that anxious, striving little heart shaken
off fatigue, and the big blue eyes refused to yield to sleep, in
order to fight with the nervousness that alone prevented his willing
hands acting with their natural cleverness. I felt a choking in my
throat, when I saw the thin, pale little face, that should have been
on the pillow hours before, lighted up with triumph as the supposed
guests departed; the dumb show of folding the dinner napkins
belonging to myself and the master, and putting them in their
respective rings, told us the ordeal was over. What a weird scene it
was,--the dim light, the silent house, the spread table, and the
empty chairs! One could imagine ghostly revellers, visible only to
that one fragile attendant, who ministered so willingly to their
numerous wants. The sort of nervous thrill that heralds hysterical
attacks was rapidly overcoming me, and I whispered to my husband,
"Let us go now;" but he lingered yet a few seconds, and silently drew
my attention again to the window.

Joe was on his knees by his bedside, his face hidden in his hands.
What silent prayer was ascending to the Throne of Grace, who shall
say? I only know that it were well if many a kneeling worshipper in
"purple and fine linen" could feel as sure of being heard as Joe did
when, his victory won, he knelt, in his humble servant's garb, and
said his prayers that night in spite of the aching head and weary
limbs that needed so badly the few hours' rest that remained before
six o'clock, the time Joe always got up.

Silently we stole away, and in my mind from that moment my faith in
Joe never wavered. Not once, in spite of sad events that came to pass
later on, when even I, his staunchest friend, had to recall to memory
that kneeling little form in the silence of the night, alone with his
God, in order to stifle the cruel doubts of his truth that were
forced upon us all by circumstances I must soon relate.

The famous dinner passed off well. Joe was splendid; his midnight
practice had brought its reward, and he moved about so swiftly, and
anticipated everybody's wants so well, that some of my friends asked
me where I got such a treasure of a page; he must have had a good
butler or footman to teach him, they said; he is evidently used to
waiting on many guests. I was proud of Joe.

The next day he came to me with more than a sovereign in silver, and
told me the gentlemen had been so very kind to him, "and a'most every
one had given him somethin', tho' he never arst, or waited about, as
some fellers did, as if they wouldn't lose sight of a gent till he
paid 'em. But," said Joe, "they would giv' it me; and one gent, he
follered me right up the passage, he did, and sez, 'Ere, you small
boy,' he sez, and he give me a whole 'arf-crown. Whatever for, I
don't know."

But I knew that must have been Dr. Loring, a celebrated physician,
and my husband's dearest friend. We had told him about Joe's midnight
self-teaching, and he had been much interested in the story.

You little thought, Joe, the hand that patted your curly head so
kindly that night would one day hold your small wrist, and count its
feeble life-pulse beating slowly and yet more slowly, while we, who
loved you, should watch the clever, handsome face, trying in vain to
read there the blessed word "Hope."




CHAPTER IV.


And now I must confess to those--for surely there will be a few--who
have felt a little interest, so far, in the fortunes of J. Cole, that
a period in my story has arrived when I would fain lay down my pen,
and not awaken the sleeping past, to recall the sad trouble that
befell him.

I am almost an old woman now, and all this happened many years ago,
when my hair was golden instead of silver. I was younger in those
days, and now am peacefully and hopefully waiting God's good time for
my summons. Troubles have been my lot, many and hard to bear. Loss of
husband, children, dear, good friends, many by death, and some
troubles harder even than those, the loss of trust, and bitter
awakening to the ingratitude and worthlessness of those in whom I
have trusted,--all these I have endured. Yet time and trouble have
not sufficiently hardened my heart that I can write of what follows
without pain.  Christmas was over, and my dear husband again away for
some months. As soon as I could really say, "Spring is here," we were
to leave London for our country home; and Joe was constantly talking
to Mrs. Wilson about his various pets, left behind in the gardener's
care. There was an old jackdaw, an especial favorite of his, a
miserable owl, too, who had met with an accident, resulting in the
loss of an eye; a more evil-looking object than "Cyclops," as my
husband christened him, I never saw. Sometimes on a dark night this
one eye would gleam luridly from out the shadowy recesses of the
garden, and an unearthly cry of "Hoo-oo-t," fall on the ear, enough
to give one the "creeps for a hour," as Mary, the housemaid, said.
But Joe loved Cyclops, or rather "Cloppy," as he called him; and the
bird hopped after Joe about the garden, as if he quite returned the
feeling.

All our own dogs, and two or three maimed ones, and a cat or two,
more or less hideous, and indebted to Joe's mercy in rescuing them
from traps, snares, etc.,--all these creatures were Joe's delight.
Each week the gardener's boy wrote a few words to Joe of their health
and wonderful doings, and each week Joe faithfully sent a shilling,
to be laid out in food for them. Then there was Joe's especial
garden, also a sort of hospital, or convalescent home rather, where
many blighted, unhealthy-looking plants and shrubs, discarded by the
gardener, and cast aside to be burnt on the weed-heap, had been
rescued by Joe, patiently nursed and petted as it were into life
again by constant care and watching, and, after being kept in pots a
while, till they showed, by sending forth some tiny shoot or bud,
that the sap of life was once more circulating freely, were then
planted in the sheltered corner he called "his own."

What treasures awaited him in this small square of earth. What
bunches of violets he would gather for the Missis; and his longing to
get back to his various pets, and his garden, was the topic of
conversation on many a long evening between Joe and Mrs. Wilson.

Little Bogie, the fox-terrier, was the only dog we had with us in
town, and Bogie hated London. After the quiet country life, the
incessant roll of carriages, tramping of horses, and callings of
coachmen, shrill cab-whistles, and all the noises of a fashionable
neighborhood at night during a London season, were most objectionable
to Bogie; he could not rest, and often Joe got out of bed in the
night, and took him in his arms, to prevent his waking all of us,
with his shrill barking at the unwonted sounds.

As I have said before, I am very nervous, and the prospect of
spending several more weeks in the big London house, without my
husband, was far from pleasant; so I invited my widowed sister and
her girls to stay with me some time longer, and made up my mind to
banish my fears, and think of nothing but that the dark nights would
be getting shorter and shorter, and meanwhile our house was well
protected, as far as good strong bolts and chains could do so.

One night I felt more nervous than usual. I had expected a letter
from America for some days past, and none had arrived. On this
evening I knew the mail was due, and I waited anxiously for the last
ring of the postman at ten o'clock; but I was doomed to listen in
vain. There was the sharp, loud ring next door, but not at ours; and
I went to my room earlier than the others, really to give way to a
few tears that I could not control.

I sat by my bedroom fire, thinking, and, I am afraid, conjuring up
all sorts of terrible reasons for my dear husband's silence, until I
must have fallen asleep, for I awoke chilly and cramped from the
uncomfortable posture I had slept in. The fire was out, and the house
silent as the grave; not even a carriage passing to take up some late
guest. I looked at the clock, half-past three, and then from my
window. It was that "darkest hour before dawn," and I hurried into
bed, and endeavored to sleep; but no, I was hopelessly wide awake. No
amount of counting, or mental exercise on the subject of "sheep going
through a hedge," had any effect, and I found myself lying awake,
listening. Yes, I knew that I was _listening for something that I
should hear before long, but I did not know what._

"Hark! what was that?"--a sudden thud, as if something had fallen
somewhere in the house; then silence, except for the loud beating of
my heart, that threatened to suffocate me. "Nonsense," I said to
myself, "I am foolishly nervous to-night. It is nothing here, or
Bogie would bark;" so I tried again to sleep. Hush! Surely that was a
footstep going up or down the stairs! I could not endure the agony of
being alone any longer, but would go to my sister's room, just across
the landing, and get her to come and stay the rest of the night with
me. I put on my slippers and dressing-gown, and opening my door, came
face to face with my sister, who was coming to me.

"Let me come in," she said, "and don't let us alarm the girls; but I
feel certain something is going on down-stairs. Bogie barked
furiously an hour ago, and then was suddenly silent."

"That must have been when I was asleep," I replied; "but no doubt Joe
heard him, and has taken him in."

"That may be," said my sister, "but I have kept on hearing queer
noises at the back of the house; they seemed in Joe's room at first.
Come and listen yourself on the stairs."

It is strange, but true, that many persons, horribly nervous at the
thought of danger, find all their presence of mind in full force when
actually called upon to face it. So it is with me, and so it was on
that night. I stood on the landing, and listened, and in a few
moments heard muffled sounds down-stairs, like persons moving about
stealthily.

"There is certainly somebody down there, Nelly," I said to my sister,
"and they are down in the basement. If we could creep down quietly
and get into the drawing-room, we might open the window and call the
watchman or policeman; both are on duty until seven."

"But think," said my sister, "of the fright of the girls if they hear
us, and find they are left alone. The servants, too, will scream, and
rush about, as they always do. Let us go down and make sure there are
thieves, and then see what is best to be done. The door at the top of
the kitchen stairs is locked, so they must be down there; and perhaps
if we could get the watchman to come in quietly, we might catch them
in a trap, by letting him through the drawing-room, and into the
conservatory. He could get into the garden from there, and as they
must have got in that way from the mews, over the stable wall, and
through the garden, they would try to escape the same way, and the
watchman would be waiting for them, and cut off their retreat."

I agreed, and we stole down-stairs into the drawing-room, where we
locked ourselves in, then very gently and carefully drew up one of
the side blinds of the bay window. The morning had begun to break,
and everything in the wide road was distinctly visible. In the
distance I could see the policeman on duty, but on the opposite side,
and going away from our house instead of towards it. He would turn
the corner at the top of the road, and go past the houses parallel
with the backs of our row, and then appear at the opposite end of the
park, and come along our side; there was no intermediate turning--
nothing but an unbroken row of about forty detached houses facing
each other.

What could we do? I dared not wait until the policeman came back;
quite twenty minutes must pass before then, and day being so near at
hand, the light was increasing every moment, and the burglars would
surely not leave without visiting the drawing-room and dining-room,
and would perhaps murder us to save themselves from detection.

If I could only attract the policeman's attention, but how?

My sister was close to the door listening, and every instant we
dreaded hearing them coming up the kitchen stairs. I could not
understand Bogie not barking, and Joe not waking, for where I was I
could distinctly hear the men moving about in the pantry and kitchen.

"I wonder," I said to my sister, "if I could put something across
from this balcony to the stonework by the front steps? It seems such
a little distance, and if I could step across, I could open the front
gate in an instant, and run after the policeman. I shall try."

"You will fall and kill yourself," my sister said; "the space is much
wider than you think."

But I was determined to try; for if I let that policeman go out of
sight, what horrors might happen in the twenty minutes before he
would come back.

The idea of one of the girls waking and calling out, or Joe waking
and being shot or stabbed, gave me a feeling of desperation, as
though I alone could and must save them.

Luckily the house was splendidly built, every window-sash sliding
noiselessly and easily in its groove. I opened the one nearest to the
hall door steps, and saw that the stone ledge abutted to within about
two feet of the low balcony of the window; but I was too nervous to
trust myself to spring across even that distance. At that moment my
sister whispered:--

"I hear somebody coming up the kitchen stairs!"

Desperately I cast my eyes round the room for something to bridge the
open space, that would bear my weight, if only for a moment. The
fender-stool caught my eye; that might do, it was strong, and more
than long enough. In an instant we had it across, and I was out of
the window and down the front steps.


As I turned the handle of the heavy iron gate, I looked down at the
front kitchen window. A man stood in the kitchen, and he looked up
and saw me--such a horrible-looking ruffian, too. Fear lent wings to
my feet, and I flew up the road. The watchman was just entering the
park from the opposite end; he saw me, and sounded his whistle; the
policeman turned and ran towards me. I was too exhausted to speak,
and he caught me, just as, having gasped "Thieves at 50!" (the number
of our house), I fell forward in a dead swoon.

When I recovered, I was lying on my own bed, my sister, the scared
servants, and the policeman, all around me. From them I heard that
directly the man in the kitchen caught sight of me, he warned his
companion, who was busy forcing the lock of the door at the head of
the kitchen stairs, and my sister heard them both rushing across the
garden, where they had a ladder against the stable-wall. They must
have pulled this up after them, and tossed it into the next garden,
where it was found, to delay pursuit. The park-keeper had, after
sounding his whistle, rushed to our house, got in at the window, and
ran to the door at the top of the kitchen stairs, but it was quite
impossible to open it; the burglars had cleverly left something in
the lock when disturbed, and the key would not turn. He then went
through the drawing-room into the conservatory, where a glass door
opened on the garden; but by the time the heavy sliding glass panel
was unfastened, and the inner door unbolted, the men had disappeared.
They took with them much less than they hoped to have done, for there
were parcels and packets of spoons, forks, and a case of very
handsome gold salt-cellars, a marriage gift, always kept in a baize-
lined chest in the pantry, the key of which I retained, and which
chest was supposed until now to be proof against burglars; the lock
had been burnt all round with some instrument, most likely a poker
heated in the gas, and then forced inwards from the burnt woodwork.

"How was it," I asked, "Joe did not wake during all this, or Bogie
bark?"

As I asked the question, I noticed that my sister turned away; and
Mrs. Wilson, after vainly endeavoring to look unconcerned, threw her
apron suddenly over her head, and burst out crying.

"What is the matter?" I said, sitting up; "what are you all hiding
from me? Send Joe to me; I will learn the truth from him."

At this the policeman came forward, and then I heard that Joe was
missing, his room was in great disorder, and one of his shoes,
evidently dropped in his hurry, had been found in the garden, near
some spoons thrown down by the thieves; his clothes were gone, so he
evidently had dressed himself after pretending to go to bed as usual;
his blankets and sheets were taken away, used no doubt, the policeman
said, to wrap up the stolen things.

"Is it possible," I asked, "that you suspect Joe is in league with
these burglars?"

"Well, mum," said the man, "it looks queer, and very like it. He
slept down-stairs close to the very door where they got in; he never
gives no alarm, he must have been expecting something, or else why
was he dressed? And how did his shoe come in the garden? And what's
more to the point, if so be as he's innercent, where is he? These
young rascals is that artful, you'd be surprised to know the dodges
they're up to."

"But," I interrupted, "it is impossible, it is cruel to suspect him.
He is gone, true enough, but I'm sure he will come back. Perhaps he
ran after the men to try and catch them, and dropped his shoe then."

"That's not likely, mum," said he, with a pitying smile at my
ignorance of circumstantial evidence; "he'd have called out to stop
'em, and it 'aint likely they'd have let him get up their ladder,
afore chucking of it into the next garden, if so be as he was a-
chasing of 'em to get 'em took. No, mar'm; I'm very sorry, particular
as you seem so kindly disposed; but, in my humble opinion, he's a
artful young dodger, and this 'ere job has been planned ever so long,
and he's connived at it, and has hooked it along with his pals. I
knows 'em, but we'll soon nab him; and if so be as you'll be so kind
as to let me take down in writin' all you knows about 'J. Cole,'
which is his name, I'm informed, where you took him from, his
character, and previous career, it will help considerable in laying
hands on him; and when he's found we'll soon find his pals."

Of course, I told all I knew about Joe. I felt positive he would come
back, perhaps in a few minutes, to explain everything. Besides, there
was Bogie, too. Why should he take Bogie? The policeman suggested
that "perhaps the dawg foller'd him, and he had taken it along with
him, to prevent being traced by its means."

At length, all this questioning being over, the household settled
down into a sort of strange calm. It seemed to us days since we had
said "Good-night," and sought our rooms on that night, and yet it was
only twenty-four hours ago; in that short time how much had taken
place! On going over all the plate, etc., we missed many more things;
and Mrs. Wilson, whose faith in Joe's honesty never wavered, began to
think the poor boy might have been frightened at having slept through
the robbery; and as he was so proud of having the plate used every
day in his charge, when he discovered it had been stolen, he might
have feared we should blame him so much for it, that he had run away
home to his people in his fright, meaning to ask his father, or his
adored Dick, to return to me and plead for him. I thought, too, this
was possible, for I knew how terribly he would reproach himself for
letting anything in his care be stolen. I therefore made up my mind
to telegraph to his father at once; but, not to alarm him, I said:--

"Is Joe with you? Have reason to think he has gone home. Answer
back."

The answer came some hours after, for in those small villages
communication was difficult. The reply ran thus:--

"We have not seen Joe; if he comes to-night will write at once.
Hoping there is nothing wrong."

So that surmise was a mistake, for Joe had money, and would go by
train if he went home, and be there in two hours.

All the household sat up nearly all that night, or rested
uncomfortably on sofas and armchairs; we felt too unsettled to go to
bed, though worn out with suspense, and the previous excitement and
fright. Officials and detectives came and went during the evening,
and looked about for traces of the robbers, and before night a
description of the stolen things, and a most minute one of Joe, were
posted outside the police-stations, and all round London for miles. A
reward of twenty pounds was offered for Joe, and my heart ached to
know there was a hue and cry after him like a common thief.

What would the old parents think? and how would Dick feel?--Dick
whose good counsels and careful training had made Joe what I _knew_
he was, in spite of every suspicion.

The next day I still felt sure he would come, and I went down into
the room where he used to sleep, and saw Mrs. Wilson had put all in
order, and fresh blankets sheets were on the little bed, all ready
for him. So many things put me in mind of the loving, gentle
disposition. A little flower-vase I valued very much had been broken
by Bogie romping with one of my nieces, and knocking it down. It was
broken in more than twenty pieces; and after I had patiently tried to
mend it myself, and my nieces, with still greater patience, had had
their turn at it, we had given it up as a bad job, and thought it had
long ago gone onto the dust-heap.

There were some shelves on the wall of Joe's room where his treasures
were kept; and on one of these shelves, covered with an old white
handkerchief, was a little tray containing the vase, a bottle of
cement, and a camel's-hair brush. The mending was finished, all but
two or three of the smallest pieces, and beautifully done; it must
have taken time, and an amount of patience that put my efforts and
those of the girls to shame; but Joe's was a labor of love, and did
not weary him. He would probably have put it in its usual place one
morning, when mended, and said nothing about it until I found it out,
and then confessed, in his own queer way, "Please, I knew you was
sorry it was broke, and so I mended it;" then he would have hurried
away, flushed with pleasure at my few words of thanks and praise.

On the mantelpiece were more of Joe's treasures, four or five cheap
photographs, the subjects quite characteristic of Joe. One of them
was a religious subject, "The Shepherd with a little lamb on his
shoulders." A silent prayer went up from my heart that somewhere that
same Good Shepherd was finding lost Joe, and bringing him safely back
to us.

There were some pebbles he had picked up during a memorable trip to
Margate with Dick, a year before I saw him; which pebbles he firmly
believed were real "aggits," and had promised to have them polished
soon, and made into brooch and earrings for Mrs. Wilson.

There was a very old-fashioned photograph of myself that I had torn
in half, and thrown into the waste-paper basket. I saw this had been
carefully joined together and enclosed in a cheap frame--the only one
that could boast of being so preserved. I suppose Joe could only
afford one frame, and his sense of the fitness of things made him
choose the Missis's picture to be first honored.

How sad I felt looking round the room! People may smile at my feeling
so sad and concerned about a servant, a common, lowborn page-boy. Ay,
smile on, if you will, but tell me, my friend, can you say, if you
were in Joe's position at that time, with circumstantial evidence so
strong against you, poor and lowly as he was, are there four or five,
or even two or three of your friends who would believe in you, stand
up for you, and trust in you, in spite of all, as we did for Joe?

I had gone up to my sitting-room, after telling Mary to light the
fire in poor Joe's room, and let it look warm and cosey; for I had
some sort of presentiment that I should see the poor boy again very
soon--how, I knew not, but I have all my life been subject to
spiritual influences, and have seldom been mistaken in them.

We were all thinking of going early to rest, for since the robbery
none of us had had any real sleep. Suddenly the front door-bell rang
timidly, as if the visitor were not quite sure of its being right to
pull the handle.

"Perhaps that's Joe," said my sister.

But I knew Joe would not ring that bell.

We heard Mary open the door, and a man's voice ask if Mr. Aylmer
lived there.

"Yes," said Mary, "but he is abroad; but you can see Mrs. Aylmer."
Then came a low murmuring of voices, and Mary came in, saying:--

"Oh, ma'am, it's Dick, Joe's brother; and he says may he see you?"

"Send him in here at once," I replied.

And in a moment Dick stood before me--Dick, Joe's beau-ideal of all
that was good, noble, and to be admired. I must say the mind-picture
I had formed of Dick was totally unlike the reality. I had expected
to see a sunburnt, big fellow, with broad shoulders and expressive
features.

The real Dick was a thin, delicate-looking young man, with a pale
face, and black straight hair. He stood with his hat in his hand,
looking down as if afraid to speak.

"Oh, pray come in," I cried, going forward to meet him. "I know who
you are. Oh, have you brought me any news of poor Joe? We are all his
friends here, his true friends, and you must let us be yours too in
this trouble. Have you seen him?"

At my words the bowed head was lifted up, and then I saw Dick's face
as it was. If ever truth, honor, and generosity looked out from the
windows of a soul, they looked out of those large blue eyes of
Dick's--eyes so exactly like Joe's in expression, that the black
lashes instead of the fair ones seemed wrong somehow.

"God bless you, lady, for them words," said Dick; and before I could
prevent it, he had knelt at my feet, caught my hand and pressed it to
his lips, while wild sobs broke from him.

"Forgive me," he said, rising to his feet, and leaning with one hand
on the back of a chair, his whole frame shaking with emotion.
"Forgive me for givin' way like this; but I've seen them papers about
our Joe, and I know what's being thought of him, and I've come here
ashamed to see you, thinkin' you believed as the rest do, that Joe
robbed you after all your goodness to him. Why, lady, I tell you,
rather than I'd believe that of my little lad, as I thrashed till my
heart almost broke to hear him sob, for the only lie as he ever told
in all his life; if I could believe it, I'd take father's old gun and
end my life, for I'd be a beast, not fit to live any longer. And I
thought you doubted him too; but now I hear you say you're his
friend, and believes in him, and don't think he robbed you, I know
now there's good folks in the world, and there's mercy and justice,
and it ain't all wrong, as I'd come a'most to think as it was, when I
first know'd about this 'ere."

"Sit down, Dick," I said, "and recover yourself, and let us see what
can be done. I will tell you all that has happened, and then perhaps
you can throw some light on Joe's conduct--you who know him so well."

Dick sat down, and shading his eyes with his hand that his tears
might not betray his weakness any more, he listened quietly while I
went over all the events of that dreadful night.

When I had finished, Dick sat for some moments quite silent, then
with a weary gesture, passing his hand across his forehead, he
remarked sadly:--

"I can't make nothing of it; it's a thing beyond my understanding.
I'm that dazed like, I can't see nothin' straight. However, what I've
got to do is to find Joe, and that I mean to do; if he's alive I'll
find him, and then let him speak for hisself. I don't believe he's
done nothing wrong, but if he has done ever so little or ever so
much, he'll '_own up to it whatever it is_,' that's what Joe'll do. I
told him to lay by them words and hold to 'em, and I'll lay my life
he'll do as I told him. I've got a bed down Marylebone way, at my
aunt's what's married to a policeman; I'm to stay there, and I'll
have a talk with 'em about this and get some advice. I know Joe's
innercent, and why don't he come and say so? But I'll find him."

I inquired about the old people, and how they bore their trial.

"Father's a'most beside hisself," said Dick; "and only that he's got
to keep mother in the dark about this, he'd have come with me; but
mother, she's a-bed with rheumatics, and doctor told father her heart
was weak-like, and she mustn't be told, or it would p'raps kill her.
She thinks a deal of Joe, does mother, being the youngest, and always
such a sort of lovin' little chap he were." And here Dick's voice
broke again, and I made him go down to Mrs. Wilson, and have some
refreshment before leaving, and he promised to see me again the first
thing in the morning, when he had talked to his friend, the
policeman.

Scarcely had Dick gone, when a loud, and this time firm ring,
announced another visitor, and in a cab, too, I could hear. Evidently
there was no going to rest early that night, as ten o'clock was then
striking.

Soon, to my surprise, I heard a well-known voice, and Mary announced
Dr. Loring, my husband's old friend, of whom I have already spoken.

"Well, my dear," he cried, in his pleasant, cheerful voice, that in
itself seemed to lift some of the heaviness from my heart, "are you
not astonished to see me at such an hour?"

"Astonished, certainly," I replied; "but very, very glad. You are
always welcome; and more than ever now, when we are in trouble and
sorrow. Do sit down, and stay with me awhile."

"Yes, I will, for an hour, gladly," he said. "But there's something
outside that had better be brought in first. You know I've only just
arrived from Devonshire, and there are two barrels of Devonshire
apples on that cab, one for you, and one for the wife, that is why
you see me here; for I thought it would not be ten minutes out of my
road to pass by here, and leave them with you, and so save the
trouble of sending them by carrier to-morrow."

I rang for Mary, and the doctor suggested the apples being put
somewhere where the smell of them could not penetrate up-stairs; for,
as he truly remarked, "Though a fine ripe pippin is delicious to eat
at breakfast or luncheon, the smell of them shut up in a house is
horrible."

"I dare say Mrs. Wilson will find a place in the basement," I said;
"for we don't use half the room there is down there."

Having ordered the barrel to be stowed away, I soon settled my
visitor comfortably in an armchair by the fire, with a cup of his
favorite cocoa by his side.

"And now, my dear," said he, "tell me about this burglary that has
taken place, and which has made you look as if you wanted me to take
care of you a while, and bring back some color to your pale cheeks.
And what about this boy? Is it the same queer little fellow who chose
midnight to play his pranks in once before? I'm not often deceived in
a face, and I thought his was an honest one. I"--

"So it was," I interrupted; "don't say a word until I've told you
all, and you will"--

I had scarcely begun speaking, when a succession of the most fearful
screams arose from down-stairs, each rising louder and louder, in the
extreme of terror. My sister, who had gone to her room, rushed down
to me; the girls, in their dressing-gowns, just as they were
preparing for bed, followed, calling out, "Auntie! O Auntie! what is
it? Who is screaming? What can be the matter?" Hardly were they in
the room when Mary rushed in, ghastly, her eyes staring, and in a
voice hoarse with terror, gasped out, "Come! come! he's found! he's
murdered! I saw him. He's lying in the cellar, with his throat cut.
Oh, it's horrible!" Then she began to scream again.

The doctor tried to hold me back, but I broke from him, and ran down-
stairs, where I could find no one; all was dark in the kitchens, but
there was a light in the area, and I was soon there, followed by Dr.
Loring.

By the open cellar-door stood Mrs. Wilson, and the cabman with her.
Directly she saw me, she called out, "Oh, dear mistress, don't you
come here; it's not a sight for you. Take her away, Dr. Loring, she
musn't see it."

"What is it?" I cried; "Mary says it's"--I could not say the words,
but seizing the candle from Mrs. Wilson's hand, I went into the
cellar.

The good doctor was close to me, with more light, by the aid of which
we beheld, in the far corner, facing us, what seemed to be a bundle
of blankets, from which protruded a head, a horrible red stream
surrounding it, and flowing, as it were, from the open mouth. One
second brought me close. It was Joe--Joe, with his poor limbs bound
with cruel ropes, and in his mouth for a gag they had forced one of
those bright red socks he would always wear. Thank God, it was only
that red sock, and not the horrible red stream I had feared. He was
dead, of course; but not such a fearful death as that.

The doctor soon pulled the horrid gag from his mouth, and the good-
natured cabman, who evidently felt for us, helped to cut the ropes,
and lift up the poor cold little form.

As they lifted him, something that was in the blankets fell heavily
to the ground. It was poor Bogie's dead body, stabbed in many places,
each wound enough to have let out the poor dumb creature's life.

By this time help had arrived, and once more the police took
possession of us, as it were.

Of course, _now_ everything was explained. The burglars had evidently
entered Joe's room, and Bogie, being in his arms, had barked, and
wakened him. A few blows had soon silenced poor Bogie, and a gag and
cords had done the same for Joe.

When the man saw me from the kitchen window he must have known that
help would soon come, and to prevent Joe giving information too soon
they had hastily seized him, bed-clothes and all, and put him into
that cellar, to starve if he were not discovered.

Perhaps they did not really mean to kill the poor child, and if we
had been in the habit of using that cellar we might have found him in
a few hours or less; but, unfortunately, it was a place we never
used, it reached far under the street, and was too large for our use.
Our coal-cellar was a much smaller one, inside the scullery; the door
of poor Joe's prison closed with a common latch.

Had there been any doubt in the detective's mind as to Joe's guilt,
he might have taken more trouble, and searched for him, even there;
but from the first everybody but ourselves had been sure Joe had
escaped with the burglars, so the cellar remained unsearched.

Mrs. Wilson, wishing to spare me the smell of the apples, thought
that cellar, being outside the house, a very suitable place for them,
and on opening the door had caught sight of something in the distant
corner, and sent Mary to see what it was. Then arose those fearful
shrieks we had heard, and Mary had rushed out of the cellar half mad
with fright.

In less time than it has taken me to relate this, Joe was laid on the
rug before the drawing-room fire, and I summoned courage to look on
the changed face.

"Could that be Joe--so white, so drawn, so still?"

Dr. Loring was kneeling by the little form, chafing and straightening
the poor stiffened arms, so bent with their cruel pinioning behind
the shoulders.

"Doctor," I said, "why do you do any more? Nothing can bring back the
poor fellow, murdered while doing his duty." Then I, too, knelt down,
and took the poor cold hands in mine,

"Oh, my poor child!" I cried, "my little brave heart; who dared say
you were false? Let those who doubted you look at you now, with dry
eyes, if they can."

"My dear," said Dr. Loring suddenly, "have you always hot water in
your bathroom?"

"Yes, doctor," I said; "yes. Why do you ask? Do you mean--is it
possible--there is life?" And I took Joe's little head in my arms,
and forgot he was only a servant, only a poor, common little page-
boy. I only know I pressed him to my breast, and called him by all
the endearing names I used to call my own children in after years,
when God gave me some, and kissed his white forehead in my joy at the
blessed ray of hope.

No want of willing arms to carry Joe up-stairs. Mrs. Wilson had the
bath filled before the doctor was in the room with his light burden.

"A few drops of brandy, to moisten the lips, first of all," said the
good doctor, "then the bath and gentle friction; there is certainly
life in him."

Now my good sister's clever nursing proved invaluable. All that night
we fought every inch of ground, as it were, with our grim enemy; the
dear, good doctor never relaxed in his efforts to bring back life to
the cramped limbs. The burglars had unknowingly helped to keep alight
Joe's feeble spark of life by wrapping the blankets round him; they
had meant, no doubt, to stifle any sound he might make; but by
keeping him from actual contact with the stone floor, and protecting
him from the cold, they had given him his little chance of life.

Oh, how I blessed that kind thought of Dr. Loring's to bring me a
barrel of apples! Had there been no occasion to open the cellar-door,
Joe would have died before another morning had dawned, died! starved!
What a horrible death! And to know that within a few steps were food,
warmth, and kind hearts--hearts even then saddened by his absence,
and grieving for him. What hours of agony he must have passed in the
cold and darkness, hearing the footsteps of passers-by above his
living tomb, and feeling the pangs of hunger and thirst. What weeks
those three days must have seemed to him in their fearful darkness,
until insensibility mercifully came to his aid, and hushed his senses
to oblivion.

Morning was far advanced when, at last, Joe's eyelids began to
flutter, and his eyes opened a very little, to close again
immediately; even the subdued light we had let into the room being
too much for him to bear after so long a darkness; but in that brief
glance he had recognized me, and seeing his lips move, I bent my head
close to them.

Only a faint murmuring came, but I distinguished the words:

"Missis, I couldn't 'elp it! Forgive me. Say 'Our Father.'"

I knelt down, and as well as I could for the tears that almost choked
me, repeated that most simple, yet all-satisfying petition to the
Throne of Grace.

Meanwhile the doctor held Joe's wrist, and my sister, at a sign from
him, put a few drops of nourishment between the pale lips.

"My dear," at length said the doctor, "did you say the boy's brother
was in London?"

"Yes," I replied, "but I have no address, as I expect him here this
morning."

"That is well; he may be in time."

"In time?" I repeated; "in time for what? Is he dying? Can nothing
be done?"

The good doctor looked again with moistened eyes on the little white
face, and said sadly--

"I fear not, but the sight of this brother he seems to have such a
strong love for may rouse him for a while. As it is, he is sinking
fast. I can do no more, he is beyond human skill; but love and God's
help may yet save him. Poor little fellow, he has done his duty
nobly, and even to die doing _that_ is an enviable fate; but we want
such boys as this to live, and show others the way."

There was a slight sound at the room door, and on turning round I saw
Dick--Dick with wild, dumb entreaty in his eyes.

I pointed to the bed, and with a whispered "Hush!" beckoned him to
enter.

The shock of seeing his loved little lad so changed was too much for
even his man's courage, for, with a cry he in vain strove to smother,
he sunk on his knees with his face hidden in his hands.

But only for a moment he let his grief overcome him; then, rising, he
took Joe's little form in his arms, and in a voice to which love gave
the softest and gentlest tones said:--

"Joe, lad! Joe, little chap! here's Dick. Look at poor old Dick.
Don't you know him? Don't go away without sayin' good-by to Dick wot
loves you."

Slowly a little fluttering smile parted the lips, and the blue eyes
unclosed once more. "Dick!" he gasped; "I wanted to tell you, Dick,
but--I--can't. I--ain't--forgot. 'Own--up--to--it--wotever'--I minded
it all. Kiss me--Dick. God--bless--missis. Dick--take me--home--to--
mother!"

And with a gentle sigh, in the arms of the brother he loved, Joe fell
into a deep sleep, a sleep from which we all feared he would no more
awake on earth, and we watched him, fearing almost to move.

Dick held him in his arms all that morning, and presently towards
noon the doctor took the little wrist, and found the pulse still
feebly beating; a smile lit up his good, kind face, and he whispered
to me, "There is hope."

"Thank God!" I whispered back, and ran away into my own room to sob
out grateful prayers of thanksgiving to Heaven for having spared the
life so nearly lost to us.

When I went back, Joe had just begun to awaken, and was looking up
into his beloved Dick's face, murmuring: "Why, it's Dick. Are you a-
crying about _me_, Dick? Don't cry--I'm all right--I'm only so
tired."

And having drank some wine the doctor had ordered should be given
him, he nestled close to Dick's breast, and again fell into a sweet
sleep, a better, life-giving sleep this time, for the faint color
came to his pale little lips, and presently Dick laid him down on the
pillows, and rested his own weary arms. He would not move from Joe's
side for fear, he might wake and miss him, but for many hours our
little fellow slept peacefully, and so gradually came back to life.

We never quite knew the particulars of the robbery, for, when Joe was
well enough to talk, we avoided speaking of it. Dr. Loring said, "The
boy only partly remembers it, like a dream, and it is better he
should forget it altogether; he will do so when he gets stronger.
Send him home to his mother for a while; and if he returns to you,
let it be to the country house where there is nothing to remind him
of all this."

Joe did get strong, and came back to us, but no longer as a page-boy;
he was under-gardener, and his time was spent among his favorite
flowers and pet animals, until one day Dick wrote to say his father
had bought more land to be laid out in gardens, and if Joe could be
spared he and Dick could work together, and in time set up for
themselves in the business.

So Joe left us, but not to forget us, or be forgotten. On each
anniversary of my birthday I find a bunch of magnificent roses on my
breakfast table--"With J. and R. Cole's respectful duty," and I know
the sender is a fine, strong young market-gardener; but sometimes I
look back a few years, and instead of the lovely roses, and the big,
healthy giver, I seem to see a faded dusty bunch of wild-flowers,
held towards me by the little hot hand of a tired child with large
blue eyes, and I hear a timid voice say, "Please'm, it's J. Cole; and
I've come to stay with yer!"

THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of J. Cole, by Emma Gellibrand





Produced by Suzanne Shell, Beginners Projects,
Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




                        THE CONQUEST OF AMERICA

            A Romance of Disaster and Victory: U.S.A., 1921 A. D.

                   BASED ON EXTRACTS FROM THE DIARY
                OF JAMES E. LANGSTON, WAR CORRESPONDENT
                        OF THE "LONDON TIMES"


                                  BY
                            CLEVELAND MOFFETT

                                 1916

                 AUTHOR OF "THROUGH THE WALL," "THE BATTLE,"
                     "CAREERS OF DANGER AND DARING,"
                                ETC., ETC.




[Illustration: ABOUT NOON ON THE DAY OF CAPITULATION, MAY 25, 1921, A
DETACHMENT OF GERMAN SOLDIERS MARCHED QUIETLY UP BROADWAY, TURNED INTO
WALL STREET, AND STOPPED OUTSIDE THE BANKING HOUSE OF J. P. MORGAN &
COMPANY.]



_Thus saith the Lord, Behold, a people cometh from the north country; and
a great nation shall be stirred up from the uttermost parts of the earth.
They lay hold on bow and spear; they are cruel, and have no mercy; their
voice roareth like the sea, and they ride upon horses; every one set in
array, as a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Zion_.

Jeremiah 6: 22, 23.


_They seemed as men that lifted up
Axes upon a thicket of trees.
And now all the carved work thereof together
They break down with hatchet and hammers.
They have set thy sanctuary on fire;
They have profaned the dwelling place of thy name even to the ground.
They said in their heart, Let us make havoc of them altogether:
They have burned up all the synagogues of God in the land_.

Psalms 74: 5-8.



CONTENTS

CHAPTER

TO MY FELLOW AMERICANS

    I. I WITNESS THE BLOWING UP OF THE PANAMA CANAL

   II. AMERICAN AEROPLANES AND SUBMARINES BATTLE DESPERATELY AGAINST THE
       GERMAN FLEET

  III. GERMAN INVADERS DRIVE THE IRON INTO THE SOUL OF UNPREPARED
       AMERICA

   IV. INVASION OF LONG ISLAND AND THE BATTLE OF BROOKLYN

    V. GENERAL VON HINDENBURG TEACHES NEW YORK CITY A LESSON

   VI. VARIOUS UNPLEASANT HAPPENINGS IN MANHATTAN

  VII. NEW HAVEN IS PUNISHED FOR RIOTING AND INSUBORDINATION

 VIII. I HAVE A FRIENDLY TALK WITH THE GERMAN CROWN PRINCE AND SECURE A
       SENSATIONAL INTERVIEW

   IX. BOSTON OFFERS DESPERATE AND BLOODY RESISTANCE TO THE INVADERS

    X. LORD KITCHENER VISITS AMERICA AND DISCUSSES OUR MILITARY PROBLEMS

   XI. HEROIC ACT OF BARBARA WEBB SAVES AMERICAN ARMY AT THE BATTLE OF
       TRENTON

  XII. REAR ADMIRAL THOMAS Q. ALLYN WEIGHS CHANCES OF THE AMERICAN FLEET
       IN IMPENDING NAVAL BATTLE

 XIII. THE GREAT NAVAL BATTLE OF THE CARIBBEAN SEA

  XIV. PHILADELPHIA'S FIRST CITY TROOPS DIE IN DEFENCE OF THE LIBERTY
       BELL

   XV. THRILLING INCIDENT AT WANAMAKER'S STORE WHEN GERMANS DISHONOUR
       AMERICAN FLAG

  XVI. AN AMERICAN GIRL BRINGS NEWS THAT CHANGES THE COURSE OF THE MOUNT
       VERNON PEACE CONFERENCE

 XVII. THOMAS A. EDISON MAKES A SERIOUS MISTAKE IN ACCEPTING A DINNER
       INVITATION

XVIII. I WITNESS THE BATTLE OF THE SUSQUEHANNA FROM VINCENT ASTOR'S
       AEROPLANE

  XIX. GENERAL WOOD SCORES ANOTHER BRILLIANT SUCCESS AGAINST THE CROWN
       PRINCE

   XX. THIRD BATTLE OF BULL RUN WITH AEROPLANES CARRYING LIQUID CHLORINE

  XXI. THE AWAKENING OF AMERICA

 XXII. ON CHRISTMAS EYE BOSTON THRILLS THE NATION WITH AN ACT OF
       MAGNIFICENT HEROISM

XXIII. CONFESSIONS OF AN AMERICAN SPY AND BRAVERY OF BUFFALO SCHOOLBOYS

 XXIV. NOVEL ATTACK OF AMERICAN AIRSHIP UPON GERMAN SUPER-DREADNOUGHT

  XXV. DESPERATE EFFORT TO RESCUE THOMAS A. EDISON FROM THE GERMANS

 XXVI. RIOTS IN CHICAGO AND GERMAN PLOT TO RESCUE THE CROWN PRINCE

XXVII. DECISIVE BATTLE BETWEEN GERMAN FLEET AND AMERICAN SEAPLANES
       CARRYING TORPEDOES



ILLUSTRATIONS

ABOUT NOON ON THE DAY OF CAPITULATION, MAY 25, 1921, A DETACHMENT OF
GERMAN SOLDIERS MARCHED UNOBSERVED UP BROADWAY, TURNED INTO WALL STREET,
AND STOPPED OUTSIDE THE BANKING HOUSE OP J. P. MORGAN & COMPANY

AS THE GERMAN LANDING OPERATIONS PROCEEDED, THE NEWS OF THE INVASION
SPREAD OVER THE WHOLE REGION WITH THE SPEED OF ELECTRICITY. THE ENEMY WAS
COMING! THE ENEMY WAS HERE! WHAT WAS TO BE DONE?

THEN, FACING INEXORABLE NECESSITY, GENERAL WOOD ORDERED HIS ENGINEERS TO
BLOW UP THE BRIDGES AND FLOOD THE SUBWAYS THAT LED TO MANHATTAN. IT WAS
AS IF THE VAST STEEL STRUCTURE OF BROOKLYN BRIDGE HAD BEEN A THING OF
LACE. IN SHREDS IT FELL, A TORN, TRAGICALLY WRECKED PIECE OF MAGNIFICENCE

THE PEOPLE KNEW THE ANSWER OF VON HINDENBURG. THEY HAD READ IT, AS HAD
ALL THE WORLD FOR MILES AROUND, IN THE CATACLYSM OF THE PLUNGING TOWERS.
NEW YORK MUST SURRENDER OR PERISH!

GERMAN GUNS DESTROY THE HOTEL TAFT

"YOU KNOW, MARK TWAIN WAS A GREAT FRIEND OF MY FATHER'S," SAID THE CROWN
PRINCE. "I REMEMBER HOW MY FATHER LAUGHED, ONE EVENING AT THE PALACE IN
BERLIN, WHEN MARK TWAIN TOLD US THE STORY OF 'THE JUMPING FROG.'"

AND ON THE MORNING OF JULY 4, TWO OF VON KLUCK'S STAFF OFFICERS,
ACCOMPANIED BY A MILITARY ESCORT, MARCHED DOWN STATE STREET TO ARRANGE
FOR THE PAYMENT OF AN INDEMNITY PROM THE CITY OF BOSTON OF THREE HUNDRED
MILLION DOLLARS

"MY FRIENDS, THEY SAY PATRIOTISM Is DEAD IN THIS LAND. THEY SAY WE ARE
EATEN UP WITH LOVE OF MONEY, TAINTED WITH A YELLOW STREAK THAT MAKES US
AFRAID TO FIGHT. IT'S A LIE! I AM SIXTY YEARS OLD, BUT I'LL FIGHT IN THE
TRENCHES WITH MY FOUR SONS BESIDE ME, AND YOU MEN WILL DO THE SAME. AM I
RIGHT?"




THE CONQUEST OF AMERICA



TO MY FELLOW AMERICANS

The purpose of this story is to give an idea of what might happen to
America, being defenceless as at present, if she should be attacked, say
at the close of the great European war, by a mighty and victorious power
like Germany. It is a plea for military preparedness in the United
States.

As justifying this plea let us consider briefly and in a fair-minded
spirit the arguments of our pacifist friends who, being sincerely opposed
to military preparedness, would bring us to their way of thinking.

On June 10, 1915, in a statement to the American people, following his
resignation as Secretary of State, William Jennings Bryan said:

Some nation must lead the world out of the black night of war into the
light of that day when "swords shall be beaten into plow-shares." Why not
make that honour ours? Some day--why not now?--the nations will learn
that enduring peace cannot be built upon fear--that good-will does not
grow upon the stalk of violence. Some day the nations will place their
trust in love, the weapon for which there is no shield; in love, that
suffereth long and is kind; in love, that is not easily provoked, that
beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all
things; in love, which, though despised as weakness by the worshippers of
Mars, abideth when all else fails.

These are noble words. They thrill and inspire us as they have thrilled
and inspired millions before us, yet how little the world has seen of the
actual carrying out of their beautiful message! The average individual in
America still clings to whatever he has of material possessions with all
the strength that law and custom give him. He keeps what he has and takes
what he can honourably get, unconcerned by the fact that millions of his
fellow men are in distress or by the knowledge that many of the rich whom
he envies or honours may have gained their fortunes, privilege or power
by unfair or dishonest means.

In every land there are similar extremes of poverty and riches, but these
could not exist in a world governed by the law of love or ready to be so
governed, since love would destroy the ugly train of hatreds, arrogances,
miseries, injustices and crimes that spread before us everywhere in the
existing social order and that only fail to shock us because we are
accustomed to a regime in which self-interest rather than love or justice
is paramount.

My point is that if individuals are thus universally, or almost
universally, selfish, nations must also be selfish, since nations are
only aggregations of individuals. If individuals all over the world
to-day place the laws of possession and privilege and power above the law
of love, then nations will inevitably do the same. If there is constant
jealousy and rivalry and disagreement among individuals there will surely
be the same among nations, and it is idle for Mr. Bryan to talk about
putting our trust in love collectively when we do nothing of the sort
individually. Would Mr. Bryan put his trust in love if he felt himself
the victim of injustice or dishonesty?

Once in a century some Tolstoy tries to practise literally the law of
love and non-resistance with results that are distressing to his family
and friends, and that are of doubtful value to the community. We may be
sure the nations of the world will never practise this beautiful law of
love until average citizens of the world practise it, and that time has
not come.

Of course, Mr. Bryan's peace plan recognises the inevitability of
quarrels or disagreements among nations, but proposes to have these
settled by arbitration or by the decisions of an international tribunal,
which tribunal may be given adequate police power in the form of an
international army and navy.

It goes without saying that such a plan of world federation and world
arbitration involves universal disarmament, all armies and all navies
must be reduced to a merely nominal strength, to a force sufficient for
police protection, but does any one believe that this plan can really be
carried out? Is there the slightest chance that Russia or Germany will
disarm? Is there the slightest chance that England will send her fleet to
the scrap heap and leave her empire defenceless in order to join this
world federation? Is there the slightest chance that Japan, with her
dreams of Asiatic sovereignty, will disarm?

And if the thing were conceivable, what a grim federation this would be
of jealousies, grievances, treacheries, hatreds, conflicting patriotisms
and ambitions--Russia wanting Constantinople, France Alsace-Lorraine,
Germany Calais, Spain Gibraltar, Denmark her ravished provinces, Poland
her national integrity and so on. Who would keep order among the
international delegates? Who would decide when the international judges
disagreed? Who would force the international policemen to act against
their convictions? Could any world tribunal induce the United States to
limit her forces for the prevention of a yellow immigration from Asia?

General Homer Lea in "The Valour of Ignorance" says:

Only when arbitration is able to unravel the tangled skein of crime and
hypocrisy among individuals can it be extended to communities and
nations, as nations are only man in the aggregate, they are the aggregate
of his crimes and deception and depravity, and so long as these
constitute the basis of individual impulse, so long will they control the
acts of nations.

Dr. Charles W. Eliot, president emeritus of Harvard University and
trustee of the Carnegie Peace Foundation, makes this admission in _The
Army and Navy Journal:_

I regret to say that international or national disarmament is not taken
seriously by the leaders and thinking men of the more important peoples,
and I fear that for one reason or another neither the classes nor the
masses have much admiration for the idea or would be willing to do their
share to bring it about.

Here is the crux of the question, the earth has so much surface and
to-day this is divided up in a certain way by international frontiers.
Yesterday it was divided up in a different way. To-morrow it will again
be divided up in a new way, unless some world federation steps in and
says: "Stop! There are to be no more wars. The present frontiers of the
existing fifty-three nations are to be considered as righteously and
permanently established. After this no act of violence shall change
them."

Think what that would mean! It would mean that nations like Russia, Great
Britain and the United States, which happened to possess vast dominions
when this world federation peace plan was adopted would continue to
possess vast dominions, while other nations like Italy, Greece, Turkey,
Holland, Sweden, France, Spain (all great empires once), Germany and
Japan, whose present share of the earth's surface might be only one-tenth
or one-fiftieth or one-five-hundredth as great as Russia's share or Great
Britain's share, would be expected to remain content with that small
portion.

Impossible! These less fortunate, but not less aspiring nations would
never agree to such a policy of national stagnation, to such a stifling
of their legitimate longings for a "greater place in the sun." They would
point to the pages of history and show how small nations have become
great and how empires have fallen. What was the mighty United States of
America but yesterday? A handful of feeble colonies far weaker than the
Balkan States to-day.

"Why should this particular moment be chosen," they would protest, "to
render immovable international frontiers that have always been shifting?
Why should the maps of the world be now finally crystallised so as to
give England millions of square miles in every quarter of the globe,
Canada, Australia, India, Egypt, while we possess so little? Did God make
England so much better than he made us? Why should the Russian Empire
sweep across two continents while our territory is crowded into a corner
of one? Is Russia so supremely deserving? And why should the United
States possess as much of the earth's surface as Germany, France, Italy,
Belgium, Holland, Austria-Hungary, Denmark, Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria,
Roumania, Spain, Norway, Sweden and Japan all together and, besides that,
claim authority to say, through the Monroe Doctrine, what shall happen or
shall not happen in South America, Mexico, the West Indies and the
Pacific? How did the United States get this authority and this vast
territory? How did Russia get her vast territory? How did England get her
vast territory?"

The late Professor J. A. Cramb, an Englishman himself, gives us one
answer in his powerful and illuminating book, "Germany and England," and
shows us how England, in the view of many, got _her_ possessions:

England! The successful burglar, who, an immense fortune amassed, has
retired from business, and having broken every law, human and divine,
violated every instinct of honour and fidelity on every sea and on every
continent, desires now the protection of the police!... So long as
England, the great robber-state, retains her booty, the spoils of a
world, what right has she to expect peace from the nations?

In reply to Mr. Bryan's peace exhortations, some of the smaller but more
efficient world powers, certainly Germany and Japan, would recall similar
cynical teachings of history and would smilingly answer: "We approve of
your beautiful international peace plan, of your admirable world police
plan, but before putting it into execution, we prefer to wait a few
hundred years and see if we also, in the ups and downs of nations, cannot
win for ourselves, by conquest or cunning or other means not provided for
in the law of love, a great empire covering a vast portion of the earth's
surface."

The force and justice of this argument will be appreciated, to use a
homely comparison, by those who have studied the psychology of poker
games and observed the unvarying willingness of heavy winners to end the
struggle after a certain time, while the losers insist upon playing
longer.

It will be the same in this international struggle for world supremacy,
the only nations willing to stop fighting will be the ones that are far
ahead of the game, like Great Britain, Russia and the United States.

We may be sure that wars will continue on the earth. War may be a
biological necessity in the development of the human race--God's
housecleaning, as Ella Wheeler Wilcox calls it. War may be a great soul
stimulant meant to purge mankind of evils greater than itself, evils of
baseness and world degeneration. We know there are blighted forests that
must be swept clean by fire. Let us not scoff at such a theory until we
understand the immeasurable mysteries of life and death. We know that,
through the ages, two terrific and devastating racial impulses have made
themselves felt among men and have never been restrained, sex attraction
and war. Perhaps they were not meant to be restrained.

Listen to John Ruskin, apostle of art and spirituality:

All the pure and noble arts of peace are founded on war. No great art
ever rose on earth but among a nation of soldiers. There is no great art
possible to a nation but that which is based on battle. When I tell you
that war is the foundation of all the arts, I mean also that it is the
foundation of all the high virtues and faculties of men. It was very
strange for me to discover this, and very dreadful, but I saw it to be
quite an undeniable fact. The common notion that peace and the virtues of
civil life flourished together I found to be utterly untenable. We talk
of peace and learning, of peace and plenty, of peace and civilisation;
but I found that these are not the words that the Muse of History coupled
together; that on her lips the words were peace and sensuality, peace and
selfishness, peace and death. I found in brief that all great nations
learned their truth of word and strength of thought in war; that they
were nourished in war and wasted in peace; taught by war and deceived by
peace; trained by war and betrayed by peace; in a word, that they were
born in war and expired in peace.

We know Bernhardi's remorseless views taken from Treitschke and adopted
by the whole German nation:

"War is a fiery crucible, a terrible training school through which the
world has grown better."

In his impressive work, "The Game of Empires," Edward S. Van Zile quotes
Major General von Disfurth, a distinguished retired officer of the German
army, who chants so fierce a glorification of war for the German idea,
war for German Kultur, war at all costs and with any consequences that
one reads with a shudder of amazement:

Germany stands as the supreme arbiter of her own methods. It is of no
consequence whatever if all the monuments ever created, all the pictures
ever painted, and all the buildings ever erected by the great architects
of the world be destroyed, if by their destruction we promote Germany's
victory over her enemies. The commonest, ugliest stone that marks the
burial place of a German grenadier is a more glorious and venerable
monument than all the cathedrals of Europe put together. They call us
barbarians. What of it? We scorn them and their abuse. For my part, I
hope that in this war we have merited the title of barbarians. Let
neutral peoples and our enemies cease their empty chatter, which may well
be compared to the twitter of birds. Let them cease to talk of the
cathedral of Rheims and of all the churches and all the castles in France
which have shared its fate. These things do not interest us. Our troops
must achieve victory. What else matters?

Obviously there are cases where every noble sentiment would impel a
nation to go to war. A solemn promise broken, a deliberate insult
to the flag, an act of intolerable bullying, some wicked purpose of
self-aggrandisement at the expense of weaker nations, anything, in short,
that flaunted the national honour or imperilled the national integrity
would be a call to war that must be heeded by valiant and high-souled
citizens, in all lands. Nor can we have any surety against such wanton
international acts, so long as the fate of nations is left in the hands
of small autocracies or military and diplomatic cliques empowered to act
without either the knowledge or approval of the people. Wars will never
be abolished until the war-making power is taken from the few and
jealously guarded by the whole people, and only exercised after public
discussion of the matters at issue and a public understanding of
inevitable consequences. At present it is evident that the pride, greed,
madness of one irresponsible King, Emperor, Czar, Mikado or President may
plunge the whole world into war-misery that will last for generations.

There are other cases where war is not only inevitable, but actually
desirable from a standpoint of world advantage. Imagine a highly
civilised and progressive nation, a strong prosperous nation, wisely and
efficiently governed, as may be true, some day, of the United States of
America. Let us suppose this nation to be surrounded by a number of weak
and unenlightened states, always quarrelling, badly and corruptly
managed, like Mexico and some of the Central American republics. Would it
not be better for the world if this strong, enlightened nation took
possession of its backward neighbours, even by force of arms, and taught
them how to live and how to make the best of their neglected resources
and possibilities? Would not these weak nations be more prosperous and
happier after incorporation with the strong nation? Is not Egypt better
off and happier since the British occupation? Were not the wars that
created united Italy and united Germany justified? Does any one regret
our civil war? It was necessary, was it not?

Similarly it is better for the world that we fought and conquered the
American Indians and took their land to use it, in accordance with our
higher destiny, for greater and nobler purposes than they could either
conceive of or execute. It is better for the world that by a revolution
(even a disingenuous one) we took Panama from incompetent Colombians
and, by our intelligence, our courage and our vast resources, changed a
fever-ridden strip of jungle into a waterway that now joins two oceans
and will save untold billions for the commerce of the earth.

Carrying a step farther this idea of world efficiency through war, it is
probable that future generations will be grateful to some South American
nation, perhaps Brazil, or Chile or the Argentine Republic, that shall
one day be wise and strong enough to lay the foundations on the field of
battle (Mr. Bryan may think this could be accomplished by peaceful
negotiations, but he is mistaken) for the United States of South America.

And why not ultimately the United States of Europe, the United States of
Asia, the United States of Africa, all created by useful and progressive
wars? Consider the increased efficiency, prosperity and happiness that
must come through such unions of small nations now trying separately and
ineffectively to carry on multiple activities that could be far better
carried on collectively. Our American Union, born of war, proves this,
does it not?

"United we stand, divided we fall," applies not merely to states,
counties and townships, but to nations, to empires, to continents.
Continents will be the last to join hands across the seas (having first
waged vast inter-continental wars) and then, after the rise and fall of
many sovereignties, there will be established on the earth the last great
government, the United States of the World!

That is the logical limit of human activities. Are we not all citizens of
the earth, descended from the same parents, born with the same needs and
capacities? Why should there be fifty-three barriers dividing men into
fifty-three nations? Why should there be any other patriotism than world
patriotism? Or any other government than one world government?

When this splendid ultimate consummation has been achieved, after ages of
painful evolution (we must remember that the human race is still in its
infancy) our remote descendants, united in language, religion and
customs, with a great world representative government finally established
and the law of love prevailing, may begin preparations for a grand world
celebration of the last war. Say, in the year A.D. 2921!

But not until then!

If this reasoning is sound, if war must be regarded, for centuries to
come, as an inevitable part of human existence, then let us, as loyal
Americans, realise that, hate war as we may, there is only way in which
the United States can be insured against the horrors of armed invasion,
with the shame of disastrous defeat and possible dismemberment, and that
is by developing the strength and valiance to meet all probable
assailants on land or sea.

Whether we like it or not we are a great world power, fated to become far
greater, unless we throw away our advantages; we must either accept the
average world standards, which call for military preparedness, or impose
new standards upon a world which concedes no rights to nations that have
not the might to guard and enforce those rights.

Why should we Americans hesitate to pay the trifling cost of insurance
against war? Trifling? Yes. The annual cost of providing and maintaining
an adequate army and navy would be far less than we spend every year on
tobacco and alcohol. Less than fifty cents a month from every citizen
would be sufficient. That amount, wisely expended, would enormously
lessen the probability of war and would allow the United States, if war
came, to face its enemies with absolute serenity. The Germans are willing
to pay the cost of preparedness. So are the French, the Italians, the
Japanese, the Swiss, the Balkan peoples, the Turks. Do we love our
country less than they do? Do we think our institutions, our freedom less
worthy than theirs of being guarded for posterity?

Why should we not adopt a system of military training something like the
one that has given such excellent results in Switzerland? Why not cease
to depend upon our absurd little standing army which, for its strength
and organisation, is frightfully expensive and absolutely inadequate, and
depend instead upon a citizenry trained and accustomed to arms, with a
permanent body of competent officers, at least 50,000, whose lives would
be spent in giving one year military training to the young men of this
nation, all of them, say between the ages of eighteen and twenty-three,
so that these young men could serve their country efficiently, if the
need arose? Why not accept the fact that it is neither courageous nor
democratic for us to depend upon hired soldiers to defend our country?

Does any one doubt that a year of such military training would be of
lasting benefit to the men of America? Would it not school them in
much-needed habits of discipline and self-control, habits which must be
learned sooner or later if a man is to succeed? Would not the open air
life, the physical exercise, the regularity of hours tend to improve
their health and make them better citizens?

Suppose that once every five years all American men up to fifty were
required to go into military camp and freshen up on their defence duties
for twenty or thirty days. Would that do them any harm? On the contrary,
it would do them immense good.

And even if war never came, is it not evident that America would benefit
in numberless ways by such a development of the general manhood spirit?
Who can say how much of Germany's greatness in business and commerce, in
the arts and sciences, is due to the fact that _all_ her men, through
military schooling, have learned precious lessons in self-control and
obedience?

The pacifists tell us that after the present European war, we shall have
nothing to fear for many years from exhausted Europe, but let us not be
too sure of that. History teaches that long and costly wars do not
necessarily exhaust a nation or lessen its readiness to undertake new
wars. On the contrary, the habit of fighting leads easily to more
fighting. The Napoleonic wars lasted over twenty years. At the close of
our civil war we had great generals and a formidable army of veteran
soldiers and would have been willing and able immediately to engage in a
fresh war against France had she not yielded to our demand and withdrawn
Maximilian from Mexico. Bulgaria recently fought two wars within a year,
the second leaving her exhausted and prostrate; yet within two years she
was able to enter upon a third war stronger than ever.

If Germany wins in the present great conflict she may quite conceivably
turn to America for the vast money indemnity that she will be unable to
exact from her depleted enemies in Europe; and if Germany loses or half
loses she may decide to retrieve her desperate fortunes in this tempting
and undefended field. With her African empire hopelessly lost to her,
where more naturally than to facile America will she turn for her coveted
place in the sun?

And if not Germany, it may well be some other great nation that will
attack us. Perhaps Great Britain! Especially if our growing merchant
marine threatens her commercial supremacy of the sea, which is her life.
Perhaps Japan! whose attack on Germany in 1914 shows plainly that she
merely awaits favourable opportunity to dispose of any of her rivals in
the Orient. Let us bear in mind that, in the opinion of the world's
greatest authorities, we Americans are to-day totally unprepared to
defend ourselves against a first-class foreign power. My story aims to
show this, and high officers in our army and navy, who have assisted me
in the preparation of this book and to whom I am grateful, assure me that
I have set forth the main facts touching our military defencelessness
without exaggeration.        C. M.

WASHINGTON'S BIRTHDAY, 1916.




CHAPTER I


I WITNESS THE BLOWING UP OF THE PANAMA CANAL

In my thirty years' service as war correspondent of the London _Times_ I
have looked behind the scenes of various world happenings, and have known
the thrill of personally facing some great historic crises; but there is
nothing in my experience so dramatic, so pregnant with human
consequences, as the catastrophe of April 27, 1921, when the Gatun Locks
of the Panama Canal were destroyed by dynamite.

At that moment I was seated on the shaded, palm-bordered piazza of the
Grand Hotel at Colon, discussing with Rear-Admiral Thomas Q. Allyn of the
United States Navy the increasing chances that America might find herself
plunged into war with Japan. For weeks the clouds had been darkening, and
it was now evident that the time had come when the United States must
either abandon the Monroe Doctrine and the open door in China, or fight
to maintain these doctrines.

"Mr. Langston," the Admiral was saying, "the situation is extremely
grave. Japan intends to carry out her plans of expansion in Mexico and
China, and possibly in the Philippines; there is not a doubt of it. Her
fleet is cruising somewhere in the Pacific,--we don't know where,--and
our Atlantic fleet passed through the Canal yesterday, as you know, to
make a demonstration of force in the Pacific and to be ready for--for
whatever may come."

His hands closed nervously, and he studied the horizon with half-shut
eyes.

In the course of our talk Admiral Allyn had admitted that the United
States was woefully unprepared for conflict with a great power, either on
sea or land.

"The blow will be struck suddenly," he went on, "you may be sure of that.
Our military preparations are so utterly inadequate that we may suffer
irreparable harm before we can begin to use our vast resources. You know
when Prussia struck Austria in 1866 the war was over in three months.
When Germany struck France in 1870 the decisive battle, Sedan, was fought
forty-seven days later. When Japan struck Russia, the end was foreseen
within four or five months."

"It wasn't so in the great European war," I remarked.

"Why not? Because England held the mastery of the sea. But we hold the
mastery of nothing. Our fleet is barely third among the nations and we
are frightfully handicapped by our enormous length of coast line and by
this canal."

"The Canal gives us a great advantage, doesn't it? I thought it doubled
the efficiency of our fleet?"

"It does nothing of the sort. The Canal may be seized. It may be put out
of commission for weeks or months by landslides or earthquakes. A few
hostile ships of the _Queen Elizabeth_ class lying ten miles off shore at
either end, with ranges exactly fixed, or a good shot from an aeroplane,
could not only destroy the Canal's insufficient defences, but could
prevent our fleet from coming through, could hold it, useless, in the
Atlantic when it might be needed to save California or useless in the
Pacific when it might be needed to save New York. If it happened when war
began that one half of our fleet was in the Atlantic and the other half
in the Pacific, then the enemy could keep these two halves separated and
destroy them one by one."

"I suppose you mean that we need two fleets?"

"Of course we do--a child can see it--if we are to guard our two
seaboards. We must have a fleet in the Atlantic strong enough to resist
any probable attack from the East, and another fleet in the Pacific
strong enough to resist any probable attack from the West.

"But listen to this, think of this," the veteran warrior leaned towards
me, shaking an eager fore-finger. "At the present moment our entire
fleet, if massed off Long Island, would be inferior to a fleet that
Germany could send across the Atlantic against us by many ships, many
submarines and many aeroplanes. And hopelessly inferior in men and
ammunition, including torpedoes."

As I listened I felt myself falling under the spell of the Admiral's
eloquence. He was so sure of what he said. These dangers unquestionably
existed, but--were they about to descend upon America? Must we really
face the horrors of a war of invasion?

"Your arguments are very convincing, sir, and yet--" I hesitated.

"Well?"

"You speak as if these things were going to happen _right now,_ but there
are no signs of war, no clouds on the horizon."

The Admiral waved this aside with an impatient gesture.

"I tell you the blow will come suddenly. Were there any clouds on the
European horizon in July, 1914? Yet a few persons knew, just as I have
known for months, that war was inevitable."

"Known?" I repeated.

Very deliberately the grizzled sea fighter lighted a fresh cigar before
replying.

"Mr. Langston, I'll tell you a little story that explains why I am posing
as a prophet. You can put it in your memoirs some day--if my prophecy
comes true. It's the story of an American naval officer, a young
lieutenant, who--well, he went wrong about a year ago. He got into the
clutches of a woman spy in the employ of a foreign government. He met
this woman in Marseilles on our last Mediterranean cruise and fell in
love with her--hopelessly. She's one of those devilish sirens that no
full-blooded man can resist and, the extraordinary part of it is, she
fell in love with him--genuinely in love.

"Well--it was a bad business. This officer gave the woman all he had,
told her all he knew, and finally he asked her to marry him. Yes. He
didn't care what she was. He just wanted her. And she was so happy, so
crazy about him, that she almost yielded; she was ready to turn over a
new leaf, to settle down as his wife, but--"

"But she didn't do it?" I smiled.

The Admiral shook his head.

"He was a poor man--just a lieutenant's pay and she couldn't give up her
grand life. But she loved him enough to try to save him, enough to leave
him. She wrote him a wonderful letter, poured her soul out to him, gave
him certain military secrets of the government she was working for--they
would have shot her in a minute, you understand, if they had known
it--and she told him to take this information as a proof of her love and
use it to save the United States."

I was listening now with absorbed interest.

"What government was she working for?"

The Admiral paused to relight his cigar.

"Wait! The next thing was that this lieutenant came to me, as a friend of
his father and an admiral of the American fleet, and made a clean breast
of everything. He made his confession in confidence, but asked me to use
the knowledge as I saw fit without mentioning his name. I did use it
and"--the Admiral's frown deepened--"the consequence was no one believed
me. They said the warning was too vague. You know the attitude of recent
administrations towards all questions of national defence. It's always
politics before patriotism, always the fear of losing middle west
pacifist votes. It's disgusting--horrible!"

"Was the warning really vague?"

"Vague. My God!" The old sea dog bounded from his chair. "I'll tell you
how vague it was. A statement was definitely made that before May 1,
1921, a great foreign power would make war upon the United States and
would begin by destroying the Panama Canal. To-day is April 27, 1921. I
don't say these things are going to happen within three days but, Mr.
Langston, as purely as the sun shines on that ocean, we Americans are
living in a fool's paradise. We are drunk with prosperity. We are deaf
and blind to the truth which is known to other nations, known to our
enemies, known to the ablest officers in our army and navy.

"The truth is that, as a nation, we have learned nothing from our past
wars because we have never had to fight a first-class power that was
prepared. But the next war, and it is surely coming, will find us held in
the grip of an inexorable law which provides that nations imitating the
military policy of China must suffer the fate of China."

The Admiral now explained why he had sent for me. It was to suggest that
I cable the London _Times_, urging my paper to use its influence, through
British diplomatic channels, to avert another great war. I pointed out
that the chances of such intervention were slight. Great Britain was
still smarting under the memory of Americans' alleged indifference to
everything but money in 1918 when the United States stood by,
unprotesting, and saw England stripped of her mastery of the sea after
the loss of Gibraltar and the Suez Canal.

"There are two sides to that," frowned the Admiral, "but one thing is
certain--it's England or no one. We have nothing to hope for from Russia;
she has what she wants--Constantinople. Nothing to hope for from France;
she has her lost provinces back. And as for Germany--Germany is waiting,
recuperating, watching her chance for a place in the South American sun."

"Germany managed well in the Geneva Peace Congress of 1919," I said.

The veteran of Manila threw down his cigarette impatiently.

"Bismarck could have done no better. They bought off Europe, they
crippled England and--they isolated America."

"By the way," continued the Admiral, "I must show you some things in my
scrap book. You will be astonished. Wait a minute. I'll get it."

The old fellow hurried off and presently returned with a heavy volume
bound in red leather.

"Take it up to your room to-night and look it over. You will find the
most overwhelming mass of testimony to the effect that to-day, in spite
of all that has been said and written and all the money spent, the United
States is totally unprepared to defend its coasts or uphold its national
honour. Just open the book anywhere--you'll see."

I obeyed and came upon this statement by Theodore Roosevelt:

What befell Antwerp and Brussels will surely some day befall New York or
San Francisco, and may happen to many an inland city also, if we do not
shake off our supine folly, if we trust for safety to peace treaties
unbacked by force.

"Pretty strong words for an ex-President of the United States to be
using," nodded the Admiral. "And true! Try another place."

I did so and came upon this from the pen of Gerhard von
Schulze-Gaevernitz, professor of political economy at the University of
Freiburg and a member of the Reichstag:

Flattered and deftly lulled to sleep by British influence, public
opinion in the United States will not wake up until the 'yellow New
England' of the Orient, nurtured and deflected from Australia by England
herself, knocks at the gates of the new world. Not a patient and meek
China, but a warlike and conquest-bound Japan will be the aggressor when
that day comes. Then America will be forced to fight under unfavourable
conditions.

The famous campaigner's eyes flashed towards the Pacific.

"When that day comes! Ah! Speaking of Japan," he turned over the pages in
nervous haste. "Here we are! You can see how much the Japanese love us!
Listen! This is an extract from the most popular book in Japan to-day. It
is issued by Japan's powerful and official National Defence Association
with a view to inflaming the Japanese people against the United States
and preparing them for a war of invasion against this country. Listen to
this:

"Let America beware! For our cry, 'On to California! On to Hawaii!
On to the Philippines!' is becoming only secondary to our imperial
anthem!... To arms! We must seize our standards, unfurl them to the winds
and advance without the least fear, as America has no army worthy the
name, and with the Panama Canal destroyed, its few battleships will be of
no use until too late.

"I tell you, Mr. Langston," pursued the Admiral, "we Americans are to-day
the most hated nation on earth. The richest, the most arrogant, the most
hated nation on earth! And helpless! Defenceless! Believe me, that's a
bad combination. Look at this! Read this! It's a cablegram to the New
York _Tribune_, published on May 21, 1915, from Miss Constance Drexel, an
American delegate to the Woman's Peace Conference at The Hague:

"I have just come out of Germany and perhaps the predominating impression
I bring with me is Germany's hatred of America. Germany feels that war
with America is only a matter of time. Everywhere I went I found the same
sentiment, and the furthest distance away I found the war put was ten
years. It was said to me: 'We must settle with England first, but then
will come America's turn. If we don't make war on you ourselves we will
get Japan into a war with you, and then we will supply arms and munitions
to Japan.'"

At this point, I remember, I had turned to order an orange liqueur, when
the crash came.

It was terrific. Every window in the hotel was shattered, and some scores
of labourers working near the Gatun Locks were killed instantly. Six
hundred tons of dynamite, secreted in the hold of a German merchantman,
had been exploded as the vessel passed through the locks, and ten
thousand tons of Portland cement had sunk in the tangled iron wreck, to
form a huge blockading mass of solid rock on the floor of the narrow
passage.

Needless to say, every man on the German ship thus sacrificed died at his
post.

The Admiral stared in dismay when the news was brought to him.

"Germany!" he muttered. "And our fleet is in the Pacific!"

"Does it mean war?" I asked.

"Yes, of course. Unquestionably it means war. We have been misled. We
were thinking of one enemy, and we have been struck by another. We
thought we could send our fleet through the Canal and get it back easily;
but--now we cannot get it back for at least two months!"



CHAPTER II


AMERICAN AEROPLANES AND SUBMARINES BATTLE DESPERATELY AGAINST THE GERMAN
FLEET

A week later--or, to be exact, on May 4, 1921--I arrived in New York,
following instructions from my paper, and found the city in a state of
indescribable confusion and alarm.

War had been declared by Germany against the United States on the day
that the Canal was wrecked, and German transports, loaded with troops and
convoyed by a fleet of battleships, were known to be on the high seas,
headed for American shores. As the Atlantic fleet had been cut off in the
Pacific by that desperate piece of Panama strategy (the Canal would be
impassable for months), it was evident that those ships could be of no
service for at least eight weeks, the time necessary to make the trip
through the Straits of Magellan; and meanwhile the Atlantic seaboard from
Maine to Florida was practically unguarded.

No wonder the newspapers shrieked despairingly and bitterly upbraided
Congress for neglecting to provide the country with adequate naval
defences.

Theodore Roosevelt came out with a signed statement:

"Four years ago I warned this country that the United States must have
two great fleets--one for the Atlantic, one for the Pacific."

Senator Smoot, in a sensational speech, referred to his vain efforts
to secure for the country a fleet of fifty sea-going submarines and
twenty-five coast-defence submarines. Now, he declared, the United States
would pay for its indifference to danger.

In the House of Representatives, Gardner and Hobson both declared that
our forts were antiquated, our coast-defence guns outranged, our
artillery ridiculously insufficient, and our supply of ammunition not
great enough to carry us through a single month of active warfare.

On the night of my arrival in Manhattan I walked through scenes of
delirious madness. The town seemed to reel in a sullen drunkenness.
Throngs filled the dark streets. The Gay White Way was no longer either
white or gay. The marvellous electrical display of upper Broadway had
disappeared--not even a street light was to be seen. And great hotels,
like the Plaza, the Biltmore, and the new Morgan, formerly so bright,
were scarcely discernible against the black skies. No one knew where the
German airships might be. Everybody shouted, but nobody made very much
noise. The city was hoarse. I remembered just how London acted the night
the first Zeppelin floated over the town.

At five o'clock the next morning, Mayor McAneny appointed a Committee of
Public Safety that went into permanent session in Madison Square Garden,
which was thronged day and night, while excited meetings, addressed by
men and women of all political parties, were held continuously in Union
Square, City Hall Park, Columbus Circle, at the Polo Grounds and in
various theatres and motion-picture houses.

Such a condition of excitement and terror necessarily led to disorder and
on May 11, 1921, General Leonard Wood, in command of the Eastern Army,
placed the city under martial law.

And now on every tongue were frantic questions. When would the Germans
land? To-day? To-morrow? Where would they strike first? What were we
going to do? Every one realised, when it was too late, the hopeless
inadequacy of our aeroplane scouting service. To guard our entire
Atlantic seaboard we had fifty military aeroplanes where we should have
had a thousand and we were wickedly lacking in pilots. Oh, the shame of
those days!

In this emergency Rodman Wanamaker put at the disposal of the government
his splendid air yacht the _America II_, built on the exact lines of the
_America I_, winner of across-the-Atlantic prizes in 1918, but of much
larger spread and greater engine power. The America II could carry a
useful load of five tons and in her scouting work during the next
fortnight she accommodated a dozen passengers, four officers, a crew of
six, and two newspaper men, Frederick Palmer, representing the Associated
Press, and myself for the London _Times._

What a tremendous thing it was, this scouting trip! Day after day, far
out over the ocean, searching for German battleships! Our easy jog trot
speed along the sky was sixty miles an hour and, under full engine
pressure, the _America II_ could make a hundred and twenty, which was
lucky for us as it saved us many a time when the slower German aircraft
came after us, spitting bullets from their machine guns.

On the morning of May 12, a perfect spring day, circling at a height of
half a mile, about fifty miles off the eastern end of Long Island, we had
our first view of the German fleet as it ploughed through smooth seas to
the south of Montauk Point.

We counted eight battle cruisers, twelve dreadnoughts, ten
pre-dreadnoughts, and about sixty destroyers, in addition to transports,
food-ships, hospital-ships, repair-ships, colliers, and smaller fighting
and scouting vessels, all with their full complement of men and
equipment, moving along there below us in the pleasant sunshine. Among
the troopships I made out the _Kaiserin Auguste Luise_ and the
_Deutschland,_ on both of which I had crossed the summer following the
Great Peace. I thought of the jolly old commander of the latter vessel
and of the capital times we had had together at the big round table in
the dining-saloon. It seemed impossible that this was war!

I subsequently learned that the original plan worked out by the German
general staff contemplated a landing in the sheltered harbour of Montauk
Point, but the lengthened range (21,000 yards) of mortars in the American
forts on Fisher's Island and Plum Island, a dozen miles to the north, now
brought Montauk Point under fire, so the open shore south of East Hampton
was substituted as the point of invasion.

"There's no trouble about landing troops from the open sea in smooth
weather like this," said Palmer, speaking through his head-set. "We did
it at Santiago, and the Japs did it at Port Arthur."

"And the English did it at Ostend," I agreed. "Hello!"

As I swept the sea to the west with my binoculars I thought I caught the
dim shape of a submerged submarine moving slowly through the black
depths like a hungry shark; but it disappeared almost immediately, and I
was not sure. As a matter of fact, it was a submarine, one of six
American under-water craft that had been assigned to patrol the south
shore of Long Island.

The United States still had twenty-five submarines in Atlantic waters, in
addition to thirty that were with the absent fleet; but these twenty-five
had been divided between Boston Harbour, Narragansett Bay, Delaware
Bay, Chesapeake Bay, and other vulnerable points, so that only six were
left to defend the approaches to New York City. And, of these six, five
were twenty-four hours late, owing, I heard later, to inexcusable
delays at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, where they had been undergoing repairs.
The consequence was that only the K-2 was here to meet the German
invasion--one lone submarine against a mighty fleet.

Still, under favourable conditions, one lone submarine is a force to be
reckoned with, as England learned in 1915.

The K-2 attacked immediately, revealing her periscope for a minute as she
took her observations. Then she launched a torpedo at a big German
supply-ship not more than a thousand yards away.

"Good-bye, ship!" said Palmer, and we watched with fascinated interest
the swift white line that marked the course of the torpedo. It struck the
vessel squarely amidships, and she sank within five minutes, most of the
men aboard being rescued by boats from the fleet.

It now went ill with the K-2, however; for, having revealed her presence,
she was pursued by the whole army of swift destroyers. She dived, and
came up again two miles to the east, bent on sinking a German
dreadnought; but, unfortunately, she rose to the surface almost under the
nose of one of the destroyers, which bombarded her with its rapid-fire
guns, and then, when she sank once more, dropped on her a small mine that
exploded under water with shattering effect, finishing her.

As I think it over, I feel sure that if those other five submarines had
been ready with the K-2, we might have had another story to tell.
Possibly the slowness of the Brooklyn Navy Yard--which is notorious, I
understand--may have spoiled the one chance that America had to resist
this invasion.

The next day the five tardy submarines arrived; but conditions were
now less favourable, since the invaders had had time to prepare their
defence against this under-water peril. As we flew over East Hampton on
the following afternoon, we were surprised to see five fully inflated
air-ships of the nonrigid Parseval type floating in the blue sky, like
grim sentinels guarding the German fleet. Down through the sun-lit ocean
they could see the shadowy underwater craft lurking in the depths, and
they carried high explosives to destroy them.

"How about our aeroplanes?" grumbled Palmer.

"Look!" I answered, pointing toward the Shinnecock Hills, where some tiny
specks appeared like soaring eagles. "They're coming!"

The American aeroplanes, at least, were on time, and as they swept nearer
we counted ten of them, and our spirits rose; for ten swift aeroplanes
armed with explosive bombs can make a lot of trouble for slower and
clumsier aircraft.

But alas for our hopes! The invaders were prepared also, and, before the
American fliers had come within striking distance, they found themselves
opposed by a score of military hydroplanes that rose presently, with a
great whirring of propellers, from the decks of the German battle-ships.
Had the Americans been able to concentrate here their entire force of
fifty aeroplanes, the result might have been different; but the fifty had
been divided along the Atlantic coast--ten aeroplanes and five submarines
being assigned to each harbour that was to be defended.

Now came the battle. And for hours, until night fell, we watched a
strange and terrible conflict between these forces of air and water. With
admirable skill and daring the American aeronauts manoeuvred for
positions above the Parsevals, whence they could drop bombs; and so swift
and successful were they that two of the enemy's air-ships were destroyed
before the German aeroplanes really came into the action. After that it
went badly for the American fliers, which were shot down, one by one,
until only three of the ten remained. Then these three, seeing
destruction inevitable, signalled for a last united effort, and, all
together, flew at full speed straight for the great yellow gas-bag of the
biggest Parseval and for certain death. As they tore into the flimsy
air-ship there came a blinding flash, an explosion that shook the hills,
and that brave deed was done.

There remained two Parsevals to aid the enemy's fleet in its fight
against American submarines, and I wish I might describe this fight in
more detail. We saw a German transport torpedoed by the B-1; we saw
two submarines sunk by rapid-fire guns of the destroyers; we saw a
battle-cruiser crippled by the glancing blow of a torpedo; and we saw the
K-1 blown to pieces by bombs from the air-ships. Two American submarines
were still fighting, and of these one, after narrowly missing a
dreadnought, sent a troop-ship to the bottom, and was itself rammed and
sunk by a destroyer, the sea being spread with oil. The last submarine
took to flight, it seems, because her supply of torpedoes was exhausted.
And this left the invaders free to begin their landing operations.

During four wonderful days (the Germans were favoured by light northeast
breezes) Palmer and I hovered over these East Hampton shores, watching
the enemy construct their landing platforms of brick and timbers from
dynamited houses, watching the black transports as they disgorged from
lighters upon the gleaming sand dunes their swarms of soldiers, their
thousands of horses, their artillery, their food supplies. There seemed
no limit to what these mighty vessels could carry.

We agreed that the great 50,000-ton _Imperator_ alone brought at least
fifteen thousand men with all that they needed. And I counted twenty
other huge transports; so my conservative estimate, cabled to the paper
by way of Canada,--for the direct cables were cut,--was that in this
invading expedition Germany had successfully landed on the shores of Long
Island one hundred and fifty thousand fully equipped fighting-men. It
seemed incredible that the great United States, with its vast wealth and
resources, could be thus easily invaded; and I recalled with a pang what
a miserable showing England had made in 1915 from similar unpreparedness.

[Illustration: AS THE GERMAN LANDING OPERATIONS PROCEEDED, THE NEWS OF
THE INVASION SPREAD OVER THE WHOLE REGION WITH THE SPEED OF ELECTRICITY.
THE ENEMY WAS COMING! THE ENEMY WAS HERE. WHAT WAS TO BE DONE?]

As the German landing operations proceeded, the news of the invasion
spread over the whole region with the speed of electricity, and in every
town and village on Long Island angry and excited and terrified crowds
cursed and shouted and wept in the streets.

The enemy was coming!

The enemy was here!

What was to be done?

Should they resist?

And many valorous speeches in the spirit of '76 were made by farmers and
clerks and wild-eyed women. What was to be done?

In the peaceful town of East Hampton some sniping was done, and afterward
bitterly repented of, the occasion being the arrival of a company of
Uhlans with gleaming helmets, who galloped down the elm-lined main street
with requisitions for food and supplies.

Suddenly a shot was fired from Bert Osborne's livery stable, then another
from White's drug store, then several others, and one of the Uhlans
reeled in his saddle, slightly wounded. Whereupon, to avenge this attack
and teach Long Islanders to respect their masters, the German fleet was
ordered to shell the village.

Half an hour later George Edwards, who was beating up the coast in his
trim fishing schooner, after a two weeks' absence in Barnegat Bay (he
had heard nothing about the war with Germany), was astonished to see a
German soldier in formidable helmet silhouetted against the sky on the
eleventh tee of the Easthampton golf course, one of the three that rise
above the sand dunes along the surging ocean, wigwagging signals to the
warships off shore. And, presently, Edwards saw an ominous puff of white
smoke break out from one of the dreadnoughts and heard the boom of a
twelve-inch gun.

The first shell struck the stone tower of the Episcopal church and hurled
fragments of it against the vine-covered cottage next door, which had
been the home a hundred and twenty years before of John Howard Payne, the
original "home sweet home."

The second shell struck John Drew's summer home and set it on fire; the
third wrecked the Casino; the fourth destroyed Albert Herter's studio and
slightly injured Edward T. Cockcroft and Peter Finley Dunne, who were
playing tennis on the lawn. That night scarcely a dozen buildings in this
beautiful old town remained standing. And the dead numbered more than
three hundred, half of them being women and children.



CHAPTER III


GERMAN INVADERS DRIVE THE IRON INTO THE SOUL OF UNPREPARED AMERICA

The next week was one of deep humiliation for the American people. Our
great fleet and our great Canal, which had cost so many hundreds of
millions and were supposed to guarantee the safety of our coasts, had
failed us in this hour of peril.

Secretary Alger, in the Spanish War, never received half the punishment
that the press now heaped on the luckless officials of the War and the
Navy Departments.

The New York _Tribune_, in a scathing attack upon the administration,
said:

The blow has fallen and the United States is totally unprepared to meet
it. Why? Because the Democratic party, during its eight years' tenure of
office, has obstinately, stupidly and wickedly refused to do what was
necessary to make this country safe against invasion by a foreign power.
There has been a surfeit of talking, of explaining and of promising, but
of definite accomplishment very little, and to-day, in our extreme peril,
we find ourselves without an army or a navy that can cope with the
invaders and protect our shores and our homes.

Richard Harding Davis, in the _Evening Sun_, denounced unsparingly those
Senators and Congressmen who, in 1916, had voted against national
preparedness:

For our present helpless condition and all that results from it, let the
responsibility rest upon these Senators and Congressmen, who, for their
own selfish ends, have betrayed the country. They are as guilty of
treason as was ever Benedict Arnold. Were some of them hanged, the sight
of them with their toes dancing on air might inspire other Congressmen to
consider the safety of this country rather than their own re-election.

The New York _World_ published a memorable letter written by Samuel J.
Tilden in December, 1885, to Speaker Carlisle of the Forty-ninth Congress
on the subject of national defence and pointed out that Mr. Tilden was a
man of far vision, intellectually the foremost democrat of his day. In
this letter Mr. Tilden said:

The property exposed to destruction in the twelve seaports, Portland,
Portsmouth, Boston, Newport, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore,
Charleston, Savannah, New Orleans, Galveston and San Francisco, cannot be
less in value than five thousand millions of dollars.... While we may
afford to be deficient in the means of offence we cannot afford to be
defenceless. The notoriety of the fact that we have neglected the
ordinary precautions of defence invites want of consideration in our
diplomacy, injustice, arrogance and insult at the hands of foreign
nations.

To add to the general indignation, it transpired that the American
reserve fleet, consisting of ten predreadnoughts, was tied up in the
docks of Philadelphia, unable to move for lack of officers and men to
handle them. After frantic orders from Washington and the loss of
precious days, some two thousand members of the newly organised naval
reserve were rushed to Philadelphia; but eight thousand men were needed
to move this secondary fleet, and, even if the eight thousand had been
forthcoming, it would have been too late; for by this time a German
dreadnought was guarding the mouth of Delaware Bay, and these inferior
ships would never have braved its guns. So here were seventy-five million
dollars' worth of American fighting-ships rendered absolutely useless and
condemned to be idle during the whole war because of bad organisation.

Meantime, the Germans were marching along the Motor Parkway toward New
York City with an army of a hundred and fifty thousand, against which
General Wood, by incredible efforts, was able to oppose a badly
organised, inharmonious force of thirty thousand, including Federals and
militia that had never once drilled together in large manoeuvres. Of
Federal troops there was one regiment of infantry from Governor's Island,
and this was short of men. There were two infantry regiments from Forts
Niagara and Porter, in New York State. Also a regiment of colored cavalry
from Fort Ethan Allen, Vermont, a battalion of field artillery from Fort
Myer, Virginia, a battalion of engineers from Washington, D. C., a
battalion of coast artillery organised as siege artillery from Fort
Dupont, Delaware, a regiment of cavalry from Fort Oglethorpe, Georgia,
two regiments of infantry from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, one regiment of
field artillery from Fort Sheridan, Illinois, one regiment of horse
artillery from Fort Riley, Kansas, one regiment of infantry and one
regiment of mountain guns from Fort D. A. Russell, Wyoming.

I may add that at this time the United States army, in spite of many
efforts to increase its size, numbered fewer than 70,000 men; and so many
of these were tied up as Coast Artillery or absent in the Philippines,
Honolulu, and the Canal Zone, that only about 30,000 were available as
mobile forces for the national defence.

As these various bodies of troops arrived in New York City and marched
down Fifth Avenue with bands playing "Dixie" and colours flying, the
excitement of cheering multitudes passed all description, especially when
Theodore Roosevelt, in familiar slouch hat, appeared on a big black horse
at the head of a hastily recruited regiment of Rough Riders, many of them
veterans who had served under him in the Spanish War.

Governor Malone reviewed the troops from the steps of the new Court House
and the crowd went wild when the cadets from West Point marched past, in
splendid order. At first I shared the enthusiasm of the moment; but
suddenly I realised how pathetic it all was and Palmer seemed to see that
side of it, too, though naturally he and I avoided all discussion of the
future. In addition to such portions of the regular army as General Wood
could gather together, his forces were supplemented by infantry and
cavalry brigades of militia from New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
Connecticut, and Massachusetts, these troops being more or less
unprepared for battle, more or less lacking in the accessories of
battles, notably in field artillery and in artillery equipment of men and
horses. One of the aides on General Wood's staff told me that the
combined American forces went into action with only one hundred and fifty
pieces of artillery against four hundred pieces that the Germans brought.

"And the wicked part of it is," he added, "that there were two hundred
other pieces of artillery we might have used if we had had men and horses
to operate them; but--you can't make an artillery horse overnight."

"Nor a gun crew," said I.



CHAPTER IV


INVASION OF LONG ISLAND AND THE BATTLE OF BROOKLYN

To meet this desperate situation and the enemy's greatly superior forces,
General Wood decided not to advance against the Germans, but to intrench
his army across the western end of Long Island, with his left flank
resting on Fort Totten, near Bayside, and his nine-mile front extending
through Creedmore, Rosedale, and Valley Stream, where his right flank
would be guarded from sea attack by the big guns of Fort Hancock on Sandy
Hook, which would hold the German fleet at a distance.

Any military strategist will agree that this was the only course for the
American commander to pursue under the circumstances; but unfortunately
popular clamour will often have its way in republics, and in this case a
violent three days' gale--which arrived providentially, according to some
of the newspapers--gave an appearance of reason to the general demand.

This gale interfered seriously with the German landing operations,--in
fact, it wrecked one of their supply-ships,--and, in consequence, such
strong political pressure was brought to bear upon the President that
orders came from Washington to General Wood that he advance his army
against the invaders and drive them into the sea. The General made a few
remarks not for publication, and obeyed. As he told me afterward, it is
doubtful whether the result would have been different in any event.

In throwing forward his forces, General Wood used the three lines of
railroad that cross Long Island from west to east; and on May 17 his
battleline reached from Patchogue through Holtsville to Port Jefferson.
Meantime, the Germans had advanced to a line that extended from East
Moriches to Manorville; and on May 18 the first clash came at daybreak in
a fierce cavalry engagement fought at Yaphank, in which the enemy were
driven back in confusion. It was first blood for the Americans.

This initial success, however, was soon changed to disaster. On May 19
the invaders advanced again, with strengthened lines, under the support
of the big guns of their fleet, which stood offshore and, guided by
aeroplane observers, rained explosive shells upon General Wood's right
flank with such accuracy that the Americans were forced to withdraw.
Whereupon the Germans, using the famous hook formation that served them
so well in their drive across northern France in the summer of 1914,
pressed forward relentlessly, the fleet supporting them in a deadly
flanking attack upon the American right wing.

On May 20 von Hindenburg established his headquarters at Forest Hills,
where, less than a year before, his gallant countryman, the great
Fraitzheim, had made an unsuccessful effort to wrest the Davis cup from
the American champion and ex-champion, Murray and McLoughlin.

But that was a year ago!

In the morning General Wood's forces continued to retreat, fighting with
dogged courage in a costly rear-guard action, and destroying railroads
and bridges as they went. The carnage wrought by the German six- and
eleven-inch explosive shells with delayed-action fuses was frightful
beyond anything I have ever known. Ten feet into the ground these
projectiles would bury themselves before exploding, and then--well, no
army could stand against them.

On May 22 General Wood was driven back to his original line of defences
from Fort Totten to Valley Stream, where he now prepared to make a last
stand to save Brooklyn, which stretched behind him with its peaceful
spires and its miles of comfortable homes. Here the Americans were safe
from the hideous pounding of the German fleet, and, although their losses
in five days amounted to more than six thousand men, these had been
replaced by reinforcements of militia from the West and South. There was
still hope, especially as the Germans, once they advanced beyond Westbury
and its famous polo fields, would come within range of the heavy mortars
of Fort Totten. and Fort Hamilton, which carried thirteen miles.

That night the German commander, General von Hindenburg, under a flag of
truce, called upon the Americans to surrender in order to save the
Borough of Brooklyn from destruction.

General Wood refused this demand; and on May 23, at dawn, under cover of
his heavy siege-guns, von Hindenburg threw forward his veterans in
terrific massed attack, striking simultaneously at three points with
three army divisions--one in a drive to the right toward Fort Totten, one
in a drive to the left toward Fort Hamilton, and one in a drive straight
ahead against General Wood's centre and the heart of Brooklyn.

All day the battle lasted--the battle of Brooklyn--with house-to-house
fighting and repeated bayonet charges. And at night the invaders,
outnumbering the American troops five to one, were everywhere victorious.
The defender's line broke first at Valley Stream, where the Germans, led
by the famous Black Hussars, flung themselves furiously with cold steel
upon the militiamen and put them to flight. By sundown the Uhlans were
galloping, unopposed, along the broad sweep of the Eastern Parkway and
parallel streets towards Prospect Park, where the high land offered an
admirable site for the German artillery, since it commanded Fort Hamilton
from the rear and the entire spread of Brooklyn and Manhattan.

It was now that Field Marshal von Hindenburg and his staff, speeding
along the Parkway in dark grey military automobiles, witnessed a famous
act of youthful heroism. As they swung across the Plaza to turn into
Flatbush Avenue von Hindenburg ordered his chauffeur to slow up so that
he might view the Memorial Arch and the MacMonnies statues of our Civil
War heroes, and at this moment a sharp burst of rifle fire sounded across
Prospect Park.

"What is that?" asked the commander, then he ordered a staff officer to
investigate.

It appears that on this fateful morning five thousand American High
School lads, from fifteen to eighteen years of age, members of the
Athletic League of New York Public Schools, who had been trained in these
schools to shoot accurately, had answered the call for volunteers and
rallied to the defence of their city. By trolley, subway and ferry they
came from all parts of Brooklyn, Manhattan, Harlem, Staten Island and the
Bronx, eager to show what their months of work with subtarget gun
machines, practice rods and gallery shooting, also their annual match on
the Peekskill Rifle Range, would now avail against the enemy. But when
they assembled on the Prospect Parade Ground, ready to do or die, they
found that the entire supply of rifles for their use was one hundred and
twenty-five! Seventy-five Krags, thirty Springfields and one hundred and
twenty Winchesters, 22-calibre muskets--toys fit for shooting squirrels,
and only a small supply of cartridges. The rifles available were issued
to such of the boys as had won their badges of sharpshooter and marksman,
two boys being assigned to each gun, so that if one was shot the other
could go on fighting.

"It was pitiful," said General George W. Wingate, President of the
League, who was directing their movements, "to see the grief of those
brave boys as they heard the German guns approaching and realised that
they had nothing to fight with. Five thousand trained riflemen and no
rifles!"

Nearer and nearer came the flanking force of the invading host and
presently it reached the outskirts of this beautiful park, which with
hill and lake and greensward covers five hundred acres in the heart of
Brooklyn. A few boys were deployed as skirmishers along the eastern edge
of the Park, but the mass occupied hastily dug trenches near the monument
to the Maryland troops on Lookout Hill and the brass tablet that
commemorate the battle of Long Island. At these historic points for half
an hour they made a stand against a Bavarian regiment that advanced
slowly under cover of artillery fire, not realising that they were
sweeping to death a crowd of almost unarmed schoolboys.

Even so the Americans did deadly execution until their ammunition was
practically exhausted. Then, seeing the situation hopeless, the head
coaches, Emanuel Haug, John A. C. Collins, Donald D. Smith and Paul
B. Mann, called for volunteers to hold the monument with the few remaining
cartridges, while the rest of the boys retreated. Hundreds clamoured for
this desperate honour, and finally the coaches selected seventy of those
who had qualified as sharpshooters to remain and face almost certain
death, among these being: Jack Condon of the Morris High School, J.
Vernet (Manual Training), Lynn Briggs (Erasmus), Isaac Smith (Curtis),
Charles Mason (Commercial), C. Anthony (Bryant), J. Rosenfeld
(Stuyvesant), V. Doran (Flushing), M. Marnash (Eastern District), F.
Scanlon (Bushwick), Winthrop F. Foskett (De Witt Clinton), and Richard
Humphries (Jamaica).

Such was the situation when Field Marshal von Hindenburg dashed up in his
motor car. Seventy young American patriots on top of Lookout Hill, with
their last rounds of toy ammunition, were holding back a German regiment
while their comrades fled for their lives. And surely they would have
been a martyred seventy, since the Bavarians were about to charge in full
force, had not von Hindenburg taken in the situation at a glance and
shouted:

"Halt! It is not fitting that a German regiment shall use its strength
against a handful of boys. Let them guard their monument! March on!"

Meantime, to the east and north of the city the battle raged and terror
spread among the populace. All eyes were fixed on New York as a haven of
refuge and, by the bridge, ferry and tunnel, hundreds of thousands made
their escape from Brooklyn.

The three great bridges stretching their giant black arms across the
river were literally packed with people--fathers, mothers, children, all
on foot, for the trolleys were hopelessly blocked. A man told me
afterwards that it took him seven hours to cross with his wife and their
two little girls.

Other swarms hovered about the tunnel entrances and stormed the
ferry-boats at their slips. Every raft in the harbour carried its load.
The Pennsylvania and Erie ferries from the other side of Manhattan, the
Staten Island boats, the Coney Island and other excursion steamers,
struggled through the press of sea traffic and I heard that three of
these vessels sank of their own weight. Here and there, hardly
discernible among the larger craft, were the small boats, life-boats,
canoes, anything and everything that would float, each bearing its little
group to a precarious safety on Manhattan Island.

Meantime, Fort Totten and Fort Hamilton had been taken from the rear by
overwhelming forces, and their mortars had been used to silence the guns
of Fort Schuyler and Fort Wadsworth. In this emergency, seeing the
situation hopeless, General Wood withdrew his forces in good order under
cover of a rear-guard action between the Uhlans and the United States
colored cavalry, and, hurrying before him the crowds of fleeing
civilians, marched his troops in three divisions across the Brooklyn
Bridge, leaving Brooklyn in flames behind him. Then facing inexorable
necessity, he ordered his engineers to blow up these three beautiful
spans that had cost hundreds of millions, and to flood the subways
between Brooklyn and Manhattan.

Seen through the darkness at the moment of its ruin the vast steel
structure of the Brooklyn Bridge, with its dim arches and filaments, was
like a thing of exquisite lace. In shreds it fell, a tangled, twisted,
tragically wrecked piece of magnificence.



CHAPTER V


GENERAL VON HINDENBURG TEACHES NEW YORK CITY A LESSON

On May 24, 1921, the situation of New York City was seen to be desperate,
and most of the newspapers, even those that had clamoured loudest for
resistance and boasted of American valour and resourcefulness, now
admitted that the metropolis must submit to a German occupation.

Even the women among the public officials and political leaders were
inclined to a policy of nonresistance. General Wood was urged to
surrender the city and avoid the horrors of bombardment; but the
commander replied that his first duty was to defend the territory of the
United States, and that every day he could keep the enemy isolated on
Long Island was a day gained for the permanent defences that were
frantically organising all over the country.

It was vital, too, that the immense stores of gold and specie in the
vaults of the Federal Reserve and other great New York banks should be
safely transported to Chicago.

All day and all night, automobile trucks, operated under orders from
William G. McAdoo, Governor of the Federal Reserve Bank, loaded with
millions and millions of gold, passed unprotected and almost unheeded
through the crowded section between Wall Street and the Grand Central
Station. The people stared at them dumbly. They knew what was going on.
They knew they could have a fortune by reaching out their hands. But at
this moment, with their eternities in their eyes, they had no thought of
gold. Hour after hour the work went on. Finally, subway trains and street
cars were pressed into service as treasure-carriers.

By night $800,000,000 had started West and the next morning Chicago was
the financial capital of America.

At midnight General Wood gave final orders for resistance to the last gun
and the last man; and, when early the next morning the German general
again sent officers with a flag of truce demanding the surrender of
Manhattan Island, Wood's reply was a firm refusal. He tried, however, to
gain time in negotiations; and a few hours later I accompanied a
delegation of American staff officers with counter-proposals across the
East River in a launch. I can see von Hindenburg now, in his high boots
and military coat, as he received the American officers at the foot of
the shattered Brooklyn Bridge. A square massive head with close-cropped
white hair, brushed straight back from a broad forehead. And sad
searching eyes--wonderful eyes.

"Then you refuse to surrender? You think you can fight?" the Field
Marshal demanded.

At which the ranking American officer, stung by his arrogance, declared
that they certainly did think they could fight, and would prove it.

"Ah! So!" said von Hindenburg, and he glanced at a gun crew who were
loading a half-ton projectile into an 11.1-inch siege-gun that stood on
the pavement. "Which is the Woolworth Building?" he asked, pointing
across the river.

"The tallest one, Excellency--the one with the Gothic lines and gilded
cornices," replied one of his officers.

"Ah, yes, of course. I recognise it from the pictures. It's beautiful.
Gentlemen,"--he addressed the American officers,--"I am offering
twenty-dollar gold pieces to this gun crew if they bring down
that tower with a single shot. Now, then, careful!...

"Ready!"

We covered our ears as the shot crashed forth, and a moment later the
most costly and graceful tower in the world seemed to stagger on its
base. Then, as the thousand-pound shell, striking at the twenty-seventh
story, exploded deep inside, clouds of yellow smoke poured out through
the crumbling walls, and the huge length of twenty-four stories above the
jagged wound swayed slowly toward the east, and fell as one piece,
flinging its thousands of tons of stone and steel straight across the
width of Broadway, and down upon the grimy old Post Office Building
opposite.

_"Sehr gut!"_ nodded von Hindenburg. "It's amusing to see them fall.
Suppose we try another? What's that one to the left?"

"The Singer Building, Excellency," answered the officer.

"Good! Are you ready?"

Then the tragedy was repeated, and six hundred more were added to the
death toll, as the great tower crumbled to earth.

"Now, gentlemen,"--von Hindenburg turned again to the American officers
with a tiger gleam in his eyes,--"you see what we have done with
two shots to two of your tallest and finest buildings. At this time
to-morrow, with God's help, we shall have a dozen guns along this bank of
the river, ready for whatever may be necessary. And two of our
_Parsevals_, each carrying a ton of dynamite, will float over New York
City. I give you until twelve o'clock to-morrow to decide whether you
will resist or capitulate. At twelve o'clock we begin firing."

Our instructions were to return at once in the launch by the shortest
route to the Battery, where automobiles were waiting to take us to
General Wood's headquarters in the Metropolitan Tower. I can close my
eyes to-day and see once more those pictures of terror and despair that
were spread before us as we whirled through the crowded streets behind
the crashing hoofs of a cavalry escort. The people knew who we were,
where we had been, and they feared what our message might be.

Broadway, of course, was impassable where the mass of red brick from the
Singer Building filled the great canyon as if a glacier had spread over
the region, or as if the lava from a man-made Aetna had choked this great
thoroughfare.

Through the side streets we snatched hasty impressions of unforgetable
scenes. Into the densely populated regions around Grand and Houston
Streets the evicted people of Brooklyn had poured. And into the homes of
these miserably poor people, where you can walk for blocks without
hearing a word in the English tongue, Brooklyn's derelicts had been
absorbed by tens of thousands.

Here came men and women from all parts of Manhattan, the rich in their
automobiles, the poor on foot, bearing bundles of food and eager to help
in the work of humanity. And some, alas, were busy with the sinister
business of looting.

Above Fourteenth Street we had glimpses of similar scenes and I learned
later that almost every family in Manhattan received some Brooklyn
homeless ones into their care. New York--for once--was hospitable.

In Madison Square the people waited in silence as we approached the great
white tower from which the Commander of the Army of the East, unmindful
of the fate of the Woolworth and the Singer buildings, watched for
further moves from the fortified shores of Brooklyn. Not a shout greeted
our arrival at the marble entrance facing the square, not even that
murmur of expectancy which sweeps over a tense gathering. The people knew
the answer of von Hindenburg. They had read it, as had all the world for
miles around, in the cataclysm of the plunging towers.

New York must surrender or perish!

Scarcely three blocks away, the Committee of Public Safety, numbering one
hundred, sat in agitated council at the Madison Square Garden, while
enormous crowds, shouting and murmuring, surged outside, where five
hundred armed policemen tried vainly to quell the spirit of riot that was
in the air. Far into the night the discussion lasted, while overhead in
the purple-black sky floated the two _Parsevals_, ominous visitors, their
search-lights playing over the helpless city that was to feel their wrath
on the morrow unless it yielded.

Meantime, on the square platform within the great Moorish building, a
hundred leading citizens of Manhattan, including the ablest and the
richest and a few of the most radical, spoke their minds, while thousands
of men and women, packed in the galleries and the aisles, listened
heart-sick for some gleam of comfort.

And there was none.

Among the Committee of Public Safety I recognised J. P. Morgan, Jacob H.
Sehiff, John D. Rockefeller, Charles F. Murphy, Andrew Carnegie, Vincent
Astor, Cardinal Farley, Colonel Jacob Ruppert, Nicholas Murray Butler, S.
Stanwood Menken, Paul M. Warburg, John Finley, Mrs. O. H. P. Belmont,
James E. Gaffney, Ida Tarbell, Norman Hapgood, William Randolph Hearst,
Senator Whitman, Bernard Ridder, Frank A. Munsey, Henry Morgenthau, Elihu
Root, Henry L. Stimson, Franklin Q. Brown, John Mitchell, John Wanamaker,
Dr. Parkhurst, Thomas A. Edison, Colonel George Harvey, Douglas Robinson,
John Hays Hammond, Theodore Shonts, William Dean Howells, Alan R. Hawley,
Samuel Gompers, August Belmont, Dr. Anna Howard Shaw, the Rev. Percy
Stickney Grant, Judge E. H. Gary, Emerson McMillin, Cornelius Vanderbilt,
and ex-Mayor Mitchel.

Former President Wilson motored over from Princeton, accompanied by
Professor McClellan, and was greeted with cheers. Ex-President Taft was
speaking at the time, advocating a dignified appeal to the Hague Tribunal
for an adjudication of the matter according to international law. Nearly
all of the speakers favoured non-resistance, so far as New York City was
concerned. With scarcely a dissenting voice, the great financial and
business interests represented here demanded that New York City
capitulate immediately.

Whereupon Theodore Roosevelt, who had just entered the Garden with his
uniform still smeared with Long Island mud, sprang to his feet and cried
out that he would rather see Manhattan Island sunk in the Bay than
disgraced by so cowardly a surrender. There was still hope, he declared.
The East River was impassable for the enemy. All shipping had been
withdrawn from Brooklyn shores, and the German fleet dared not enter the
Ambrose Channel and the lower bay so long as the Sandy Hook guns held
out.

"We are a great nation," Roosevelt shouted, "full of courage and
resourcefulness. Let us stand together against these invaders, as our
forefathers stood at Lexington and Bunker Hill!"

During the cheers that followed this harangue, my attention was drawn to
an agitated group on the platform, the central figure being Bernard
Ridder, recognised leader of the large German-American population of New
York City that had remained staunchly loyal in the crisis. Presently a
clamour from the crowd outside, sharper and fiercer than any that had
preceded it, announced some new and unexpected danger close at hand.

White-faced, Mr. Ridder stepped to the edge of the platform and lifted
his hand impressively.

"Let me speak," he said. "I must speak in justice to myself and to half a
million German-Americans of this city, who are placed in a terrible
position by news that I have just received. I wish to say that we are
Americans first, not Germans! We are loyal to the city, loyal to this
country, and whatever happens here tonight--"

At this moment a tumult of shouts was heard at the Madison Avenue
entrance, and above it a shrill purring sound that seemed to strike
consternation into an army officer who sat beside me.

"My God!" he cried. "The machine-guns! The Germans are in the streets!"



CHAPTER VI


VARIOUS UNPLEASANT HAPPENINGS IN MANHATTAN

I shall never forget the horror of that hoarse cry:

"The Germans are in the streets!"

What followed was still more terrifying. Somewhere at the back of the
Garden, a piercing whistle cut the air--evidently a signal--and suddenly
we found ourselves facing a ghastly tragedy, and were made to realise the
resistless superiority of a small body of disciplined troops over a
disorganised multitude.

"_Fertig! Los! Hup!_" shouted a loud voice (it was a man with a
megaphone) in the first gallery opposite the platform. Every face in that
tremendous throng turned at once in the direction of the stranger's
voice. And before the immense audience knew what was happening, five
hundred German soldiers, armed with pistols and repeating rifles, had
sprung to life, alert and formidable, at vantage-points all over the
Garden. Two hundred, with weapons ready, guarded the platform and the
Committee of Public Safety. And, in little groups of threes and fives,
back to back, around the iron columns that rose through the galleries,
stood three hundred more with flashing barrels levelled at the crowds.

I counted fifteen of these dominating groups of soldiers in the northern
half of the lower gallery, and it was the same in the southern half and
the same on both sides of the upper gallery, which made sixty armed
groups in sixty strategic positions. There was nothing for the crowd to
do but yield.

"Pass out, everybody!" screamed the megaphone man. "We fire at the first
disorder."

"Out, everybody!" roared the soldiers. "We fire at the first disorder."

As if to emphasise this, an automatic pistol crackled at the far end of
the Garden, and frantic crowds pushed for the doors in abject terror.
There was no thought of resistance.

"Use all the exits," yelled the megaphone man; and the order was passed
on by the soldiers from group to group. And presently there rolled out
into the streets and avenues through the thirty great doors and down the
six outside stairways that zigzag across the building such streams of
white-faced, staggering, fainting humanity as never had been seen on
Manhattan Island.

I was driven out with the others (except the Committee of Public Safety),
and was happy to find myself with a whole skin in Twenty-sixth Street
opposite the Manhattan Club. As I passed a group of German soldiers near
the door, I observed that they wore grey uniforms. I wondered at this
until I saw overcoats at their feet, and realised that they had entered
the Garden like spies with the audience of citizens, their uniforms and
weapons being concealed under ordinary outer garments, which they had
thrown off at the word of command.

We stumbled into the street, and were driven roughly by other German
soldiers toward the open space of Madison Square. We fled over red and
slippery pavements, strewn with the bodies of dead and wounded policemen
and civilians--the hideous harvest of the machine-guns. At the corner of
Madison Avenue and Twenty-fifth Street I saw an immense coal-carrying
motor-truck with plates of iron covering its four sides, and through
loopholes in the plates I saw murderous muzzles protruding.

It appears that shortly after midnight, at the height of the debate, four
of these armoured cars came lumbering toward the Garden from west and
east, north and south; and, as they neared the four corners of the
immense yellow building, without warning they opened fire upon the
police, which meant inevitably upon the crowd also. In each truck were a
dozen soldiers and six machine-guns, each one capable of firing six
hundred shots a minute. There was no chance for resistance, and within a
quarter of an hour the streets surrounding the Garden were a shambles. On
Madison Avenue, just in front of the main entrance, I saw bodies lying
three deep, many of them hideously mutilated by the explosive effects of
these bullets at short range. As I stepped across the curb in front of
the S.P.C.A. building, I cried out in horror; for there on the sidewalk
lay a young mother--But why describe the horror of that scene?

With difficulty I succeeded in hiring a taxicab and set out to find
General Wood or some officer of his staff from whom I might get an
understanding of these tragic events. Who were those German soldiers at
the Garden? Where did they come from? Were they German-Americans?

It was four o'clock in the morning before I located General Wood at the
plaza of the Queensborough Bridge, where he was overseeing the placing of
some artillery pieces. He was too busy to talk to me, but from one of his
aides I learned that the soldiers at the Madison Square Garden were not
German-Americans and were not von Hindenburg's men, but were part of that
invisible army of German spies that invariably precedes the invading
forces of the Kaiser. Arriving a few hundred at a time for a period of
more than three years, 50,000 of these German spies, fully armed and
equipped, now held New York at their mercy. More than that, they had in
their actual physical possession the men who owned half the wealth of the
nation. That New York would capitulate was a foregone conclusion.

After cabling this news, I went back to my hotel, the old Brevoort,
for a snatch of sleep; and at half-past eight I was out in the streets
again. The first thing that caught my eye was a black-lettered
proclamation--posted by German spies, no doubt--over Henri's barber shop,
and signed by General von Hindenburg, announcing the capitulation of New
York City. The inhabitants were informed that they had nothing to fear.
Their lives and property would be protected, and they would find the
Germans just and generous in all their dealings. Food and supplies would
be paid for at the market price, and citizens would be recompensed for
all services rendered. The activities of New York would go on as usual,
and there would be no immediate occupation of Manhattan Island by German
troops. All orders from the conquering army in Brooklyn must be
implicitly obeyed, under penalty of bombardment.

I could scarcely believe my eyes. New York City had capitulated! I asked
a man beside me--an agitated citizen in an orange tie--whether this could
be true. He said it was--all the morning papers confirmed it. The immense
pressure from Wall Street upon Washington, owing to the hold-up of
multimillionaires, had resulted in orders from the President that the
city surrender and that General Wood's forces withdraw to New Jersey.

"What about John D. Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie and J. P. Morgan and
the other hostages?" I asked.

"The _Sun_ says they have been taken over to Brooklyn where the German
army is, and they've got to raise a billion dollars in gold."

"A billion dollars in gold!"

"Sure; as an indemnity for New York City. You'll notice we could have
bought a few defences for that billion," sniffed the angry citizen.

Things moved rapidly after this. All the shipping in waters about the
island metropolis, including ferry-boats, launches, pilot-boats,
everything that floated, was delivered over to the Germans. The Sandy
Hook defences were delivered over, and the rivers and bays were cleared
of mines. All motor-cars, supplies of gasolene, firearms, and ammunition
in New York City were seized and removed to Brooklyn. The telephone
service was taken over by the Germans and operated by them, chiefly for
military purposes. The mail service ceased. The newspapers were ordered
not to appear--with the exception of the _Staats-Zeitung_, which became
the official organ of the invaders and proceeded to publish editions in
English as well as German.

"What will happen if we go ahead and get out the paper in spite of your
order?" inquired the city editor of the _Evening Journal_ when a youthful
Prussian officer informed him that the paper must not appear.

"Oh, you will be shot and William Randolph Hearst will be shot," said the
officer pleasantly.

About noon on the day of capitulation, May 25, 1921, a company of German
soldiers with two machine guns, two ammunition carts and a line of motor
trucks landed at the Battery and marched quietly up Broadway, then turned
into Wall Street and stopped outside the banking house of J. P. Morgan &
Co. A captain of hussars in brilliant uniform and wearing an eyeglass
went inside with eight of his men and explained politely to the manager
that the Germans had arranged with J. P. Morgan personally that they were
to receive five million dollars a day in gold on account of the indemnity
and, as four days' payment, that is twenty million dollars, were now due,
the captain would be obliged if the manager would let him have twenty
million dollars in gold immediately. Also a match for his cigarette.

The manager, greatly disturbed, assured the captain that there was not as
much money as that in the bank, all the gold in New York having been sent
out of the city.

"Ah!" said the officer with a smile. "That will simply put you to the
trouble of having it sent back again. You see, we hold the men who own
this gold. Besides, I think you can, with an effort, get together this
trifling amount."

The manager vowed it was utterly impossible, whereupon the captain
motioned to one of his men, who, it turned out, had been for years a
trusted employee of J. P. Morgan & Co. and had made himself familiar with
every detail of Wall Street affairs. He knew where a reserve store of
gold was hidden and the consequence was that half an hour later the
German soldiers marched back to the Battery, their motor trucks groaning
under the weight of twenty million dollars in double eagles and bullion.

"You see, we need some small change to buy eggs and chickens and
vegetables with," laughed the officer. "We are very particular to pay for
everything we take."

An hour later the first show of resistance to German authority came when
a delegation of staff officers from General von Hindenburg visited the
city hall to instruct Mayor McAneny as to the efficient running of the
various municipal departments. I had the details of this conference from
the mayor's private secretary. The officers announced that there would be
no interference with the ordinary life of the city so long as the results
were satisfactory. Business must go on as usual. Theatres and places of
amusement were to remain open. The city must be gay, just as Berlin was
gay in 1915.

On the other hand any disorder or failure to provide for German needs in
the matter of food and supplies would be severely dealt with. Every
morning there must be delivered at the foot of Fulton Street, Brooklyn,
definite quantities of meat, poultry, eggs, butter, vegetables, flour,
milk, sugar, fruits, beer, coffee, tea, besides a long and detailed list
of army supplies.

"Suppose we cannot get these things?" protested the mayor. "Suppose the
train service to New York is cut off by General Wood's army?"

"Hah!" snorted a red-faced colonel of artillery. "There are two and a
half million Americans on Manhattan Island--and we'll see that they stay
there--who will starve within one week if General Wood cuts off the train
service. I don't think he will cut it off, Mr. McAneny."

"Besides, my dear sir," drawled a slender English-looking officer,
wearing the iron cross, "if there should be any interference with our
food supply, remember that we can destroy your gas and electric lighting
plants, we can cripple your transportation system and possibly cut off
your water supply with a few well directed shots. Don't forget that, Mr.
McAneny."

The trouble began as these German officers walked down Broadway with a
small escort of soldiers. Whenever they passed a policeman they required
him to salute, in accordance with published orders, but a big Irishman
was defiant and the officers stopped to teach him manners. At which a
crowd gathered that blocked Broadway and the officers were insulted and
jostled and one of them lost his helmet. There was no serious disorder,
but the Germans made it a matter of principle and an hour later the
_Staats Zeitung_ came out with a special edition announcing that,
inasmuch as disrespect had been shown to five German officers by a
Broadway crowd, it now became necessary to give the city an object lesson
that would, it was hoped, prevent such a regrettable occurrence in the
future. That evening five six-inch shells would be fired by German siege
guns in Brooklyn at five indicated open spaces in Manhattan, these being
chosen to avoid losses of life and property. The first shell would be
fired at seven o'clock and would strike in Battery Park; the second at
7.05 and would strike in Union Square; the third at 7.10 and would strike
in Madison Square; the fourth at 7.15 and would strike in Stuyvesant
Square; the fifth at 7.20 and would strike in Central Park just north of
the Plaza.

This announcement was carried out to the letter, the five shells
exploding at the exact points and moments indicated, and the people
realised with what horrible precision the German artillery-men held
Manhattan island at their mercy.

The newspapers also received their object lesson through the action of
the _Evening Telegram_ in bringing out an extra announcing the
bombardment. My own desk being in the foreign editor's room, I witnessed
this grim occurrence. At half-past five a boyish-looking lieutenant
sauntered in and asked for the managing editor, who was sitting with his
feet on a desk.

"Good-evening," said the German. "You have disobeyed orders in getting
out this edition. I am sorry."

The editor stared at him, not understanding. "Well, what's the answer?"

The officer's eyes were sympathetic and his tone friendly. He glanced at
his wrist watch. "The answer is that I give you twenty minutes to
telephone your family, then I'm going to take you up on the roof and have
you shot. I am sorry."

Twenty minutes later they stood up this incredulous editor behind the
illuminated owls that blinked down solemnly upon the turmoil of Herald
Square and shot him to death as arranged.



CHAPTER VII


NEW HAVEN IS PUNISHED FOR RIOTING AND INSUBORDINATION

Meantime the United States from coast to coast was seething with rage
and humiliation. This incredible, impossible thing had happened. New
York City was held by the enemy, and its greatest citizens, whose names
were supposed to shake the world--Rockefeller, Morgan, Carnegie,
Vanderbilt,--were helpless prisoners. General Wood's defeated army had
been driven back into New Jersey, and was waiting there for von
Hindenburg's next move, praying for more artillery, more ammunition, more
officers, and more soldiers. Let this nation be threatened, Secretary of
State Bryan had said, and between sunrise and sunset a million men would
spring to arms. Well, this was the time for them to spring; but where
were the arms? Nowhere! It would take a year to manufacture what was
needed! A year to make officers! A year to make soldiers! And the enemy
was here with mailed fist thundering at the gates!

The question now heard in all the clubs and newspaper offices, and in
diplomatic circles at Washington, was, which way would von Hindenburg
strike when he left New York? Would it be toward Boston or toward
Philadelphia? And why did he delay his blow, now that the metropolis,
after a week's painful instruction, was resigning itself to a Germanised
existence, with German officials collecting the New York custom house
revenues and a German flag flying from the statue of Liberty? What was
von Hindenburg waiting for?

On the 3d of June these questions were dramatically answered by the
arrival of another invading expedition, which brought a second force of
one hundred and fifty thousand German soldiers. What cheering there was
from Brooklyn shores as these transports and convoys, black with men,
steamed slowly into the ravished upper bay, their bands crashing out
"Deutschland Ueber Alles" and their proud eagles floating from all the
mast-heads!

"This makes three hundred thousand first-class fighting-men," scowled
Frederick Palmer as we watched the pageant. "What is Leonard Wood going
to do about it?"

"I know what von Hindenburg is going to do," said I, taking the role of
prophet. "Divide his forces and start two drives--one through New England
to Boston, and one to Washington."

As a matter of fact, this is exactly what the German general did do--and
he lost no time about it. On June 5, von Hindenburg, with an army of
125,000, began his march toward Trenton, and General von Kluck, who had
arrived with the second expedition, started for Boston with an equal
force. This left 50,000 German troops in Brooklyn to control New York
City and to form a permanent military base on Long Island.

General Wood's position was terribly difficult. His army, encamped half
way between Trenton and Westfield, had been increased to 75,000 men; but
50,000 of these from the militia were sadly lacking in arms and
organisation, and 5,000 were raw recruits whose first army work had been
done within the month. He had 20,000 regulars, not half of whom had ever
seen active warfare. And against these von Hindenburg was advancing with
125,000 veterans who had campaigned together in France and who were
equipped with the best fighting outfit in the world!

It would have been madness for the American commander to divide his
outclassed forces; and yet, if he did not divide them, von Kluck's army
would sweep over New England without resistance. In this cruel dilemma,
General Wood decided--with the approval of the President--to make a stand
against von Hindenburg and save Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington,
if he could, and to leave New England to its fate.

At this critical moment I was instructed by my paper to accompany a
raiding expedition sent by General von Hindenburg into northern New
Jersey, with the object of capturing the Picatinny arsenal near Dover;
and this occupied me for several days, during which General von Kluck's
army, unresisted, had marched into Connecticut up to a line reaching from
beyond Bridgeport to Danbury to Washington, and had occupied New
Rochelle, Greenwich, Stamford, South Norwalk, and Bridgeport. The Germans
advanced about fifteen miles a day, living off the country, and carefully
repairing any injuries to the railways, so that men and supplies from
their Long Island base could quickly follow them.

On June 10, when I rejoined General von Kluck's staff (to which I had
been assigned), I found that he was accompanied by the Crown Prince and
the venerable Count Zeppelin, both of whom seemed more interested in this
New England occupation than in the activities of von Hindenburg's army.
They realised, it appears, the great importance of controlling the
industrial resources, the factories and machine-shops of Connecticut and
Massachusetts. It was this interest, I may add, that led to the first
bloodshed on Connecticut soil.

Thus far not a shot had been fired by the invaders, who had been received
everywhere by sullen but submissive crowds. Only a small part of the
population had fled to the north and east, and the activities of occupied
towns and cities went on very much as usual under German orders and
German organisation. The horrible fate of Brooklyn, the wreck of the
Woolworth and Singer buildings were known everywhere; and if New York
City, the great metropolis, had been forced to meek surrender by the
invaders, what hope was there for Stamford and Bridgeport and South
Norwalk?

[Illustration: THEN, FACING INEXORABLE NECESSITY, GENERAL WOOD ORDERED
HIS ENGINEERS TO BLOW UP THE BRIDGES AND FLOOD THE SUBWAYS THAT LED TO
MANHATTAN. IT WAS AS IF THE VAST STEEL STRUCTURE OF BROOKLYN BRIDGE HAD
BEEN A THING OF LACE. IN SHREDS IT FELL, A TORN, TRAGICALLY WRECKED PIECE
OF MAGNIFICENCE.]

But in Hartford a different spirit was stirring. By their admirable spy
service, their motorcycle service, and their aeroplane service, the
German staff were informed of defiant Hartford crowds gathering in
Bushnell Park; of the Putnam Phalanx parading in continental uniforms,
and of the Governor's First Company Foot Guards marching past the
monument where the Charter Oak had stood facing the South Congregational
Church; and of patriotic speeches from beside the statue of Nathan Hale
on Main Street.

Also in New Haven, city of elms and of Yale College, the Second Company
of Governor's Foot Guards and the valiant New Haven Grays, followed by
cheering crowds, had marched down Chapel and Meadow streets to the Second
Regiment Armory, home of joyous Junior promenades; and here vehement
orators had recalled how their ancestors, the minute-men of 1776, had
repelled the British there to the west of the city, where Columbus and
Congress and Davenport avenues meet at the Defenders' Monument. Why
should not this bravery and devotion be repeated now in 1921 against the
Germans? Why not?

The answer was spoken clearly in a widely published appeal to the people
of New England, made by the Governor of Connecticut and supported by
Simeon E. Baldwin, ex-Governor of the State, and Arthur T. Hadley,
president of Yale, in which the utter folly and hopelessness of
resistance without army or militia was convincingly set forth. Professor
Taft declared it the duty of every loyal citizen to avoid nameless
horrors of bloodshed and destruction of property by refraining from any
opposition to an overwhelmingly superior force.

We entered New Haven on June 12, and for forty-eight hours there was no
disorder. German siege guns were placed on the sheer precipice of East
Rock, ranged alongside the grey shaft of the Soldiers' Monument,
dominating the city; machine-guns were set up at the four corners of the
Green, at points surrounding the college buildings, and at other
strategic points. Students were not allowed to leave the college grounds
without military permission.

To further insure the good behaviour of the city, twenty hostages were
taken, including ex-President William H. Taft, President Arthur T. Hadley
of Yale University, Thomas G. Bennett, ex-president of the Winchester
Repeating Arms Company, Major Frank J. Rice, ex-Governor Simeon E.
Baldwin, Edward Malley, General E. E. Bradley, Walter Camp, and three
members of the graduating class of Yale University, including the
captains of the baseball and football teams. These were held as prisoners
within the grey granite walls and towers of Edgerton, the residence of
Frederick F. Brewster. As staff headquarters, General von Kluck and the
Crown Prince occupied the palatial white marble home of Louis Stoddard,
the famous polo-player.

The trouble began on June 14, when the invaders tried to set going
the manufacturing activities of New Haven, shut down during the past
week--especially he Winchester Repeating Arms Company, mploying about
eleven thousand men, and the Sargent Hardware Manufacturing Company,
employing eight thousand. Large numbers of these employees had fled from
New Haven in spite of offers of increased wages, so that the Germans had
been obliged to bring on men from New York to fill their places. This led
to rioting and scenes of violence, with a certain amount of looting, in
various parts of the city; and toward evening German troops fired upon
the crowds, killing and wounding about two hundred.

In punishment of this insubordination, General von Kluck ordered the guns
on East Rock to destroy the Hotel Taft and the new Post Office Building,
and this was done as the sun was setting. He also ordered that two of the
hostages, chosen by lot, should be led out before Vanderbilt Hall, at the
corner of College and Chapel streets, the next day at noon, and shot.

However, this grim fate was averted through the intercession of an
American woman, a white-haired lady whose husband, a Northern general,
had fought with Count Zeppelin in the American Civil War, and who at
midnight went to the Whitney mansion, where the Count and his staff were
quartered, and begged on her knees for mercy. And, for the sake of old
times and old friendship, Count Zeppelin had this penalty remitted.



CHAPTER VIII


I HAVE A FRIENDLY TALK WITH THE GERMAN CROWN PRINCE AND SECURE A
SENSATIONAL INTERVIEW

After the pacification of New Haven and the re-establishment of its
industries, our division of the German army, numbering about five
thousand men, swung to the north, through Wallingford, Meriden, and
Middletown, and marched toward the capital of the State.

I shall always remember the morning of June 17, 1921, when, at the
request of the Crown Prince, I rode at his side for an hour before we
entered Hartford. I was amazed at the extent of the Prince's information
and at his keen desire for new knowledge. He asked about the number of
men employed in the Hartford rubber works, in Colt's armory, in the Pratt
& Whitney machine-shops, and spoke of plans for increasing the efficiency
of these concerns. He knew all about the high educational standards of
the Hartford High School. He had heard of the Hotel Heublein, and of the
steel tower built by its proprietor on the highest point of Talcott
Mountain--had already arranged to have this tower used for wireless
communication between Hartford and the German fleet. He knew exactly how
many Germans, Italians, and Swedes there were in Hartford, exactly how
many spans there were in the new three-million-dollar bridge across the
Connecticut. He looked forward with pleasure to occupying as his Hartford
headquarters the former home on Farmington Avenue of Mark Twain, whose
works he had enjoyed for years.

"You know Mark Twain was a great friend of my father's," said the Crown
Prince. "I remember how my father laughed, one evening at the palace in
Berlin, when Mark Twain told us the story of 'The Jumping Frog of
Calaveras County.' It's rather a pity that afterward Mark--but never mind
that."

"Your Imperial Highness has a wonderful memory for details," I remarked.

"That is nothing," he smiled. "It's our business to know these things;
that is why we are here. We must know more about New England than the New
Englanders themselves. For example, ask me something."

"Does your Imperial Highness--" I began. But he stopped me with a jolly
laugh. I can still see the eager, boyish face under its flashing helmet,
and the slim, erect figure in its blue-and-silver uniform.

"Never mind the Imperial Highness," he said. "Just ask some
questions--any question about Hartford."

"The insurance companies?" I suggested.

"Ah! Of course I know that. We considered the insurance companies in
fixing the indemnity. Hartford is the richest city in America in
proportion to her population. Let's see. Of her life insurance companies,
the Aetna has assets of about a hundred and twenty million dollars; the
Travellers' about a hundred million; the Connecticut Mutual about seventy
million; the Phoenix Mutual about forty million--besides half a dozen
small-fry fire insurance companies. We're letting them off easily with
twenty million dollars indemnity. Don't you think so, Mr. Langston?"

This informal talk continued for some time, and I found the Prince
possessed of equally accurate and detailed information regarding other
New England cities. It was positively uncanny. He inquired about the
Bancroft Japanese collection in Worcester, Massachusetts, and wanted to
know the number of women students at Wellesley College. He asked if I had
seen the portrait by Sir Joshua Reynolds at the Athenaeum in Providence.
He had full details about the United States Armory at Springfield, and he
asked many questions about the Yale-Harvard boat races at New London,
most of which I was, fortunately, able to answer.

Frederick William was curious to know what had given Newport its great
popularity as a summer resort, and asked me to compare the famous
cottages of the Vanderbilts, the Belmonts, the Astors, along the cliffs,
with well-known country houses in England. He knew that Siasconset on
Nantucket Island was pronounced "Sconset," and he had read reports on
marine biology from Woods Hole. He even knew the number of watches made
at Waltham every year, and the number of shoes made at Lynn.

I was emboldened by the Crown Prince's good humour and friendly manner to
ask the favour of an interview for publication in the London _Times_,
and, to my great satisfaction, this was granted the next day when we were
settled in our Hartford quarters, with the result that I gained high
commendation; in fact my interview not only made a sensation in England,
but was cabled back to the United States and reprinted all over America.
Needless to say, it caused bitter resentment in both countries against
Frederick William.

"The responsibility for the present war between Germany and the United
States must be borne by England," he said in this memorable utterance.
"It was the spirit of hatred against Germany spread through the world by
England and especially spread through America that made the United States
unwilling to deal with the Imperial government in a fair and friendly
way, touching our trade and colonising aspirations in South America and
Mexico.

"We Germans regard this as a most astonishing and deplorable thing, that
the American people have been turned against us by British
misrepresentations. Why should the United States trust England? What has
England ever done for the United States? Who furnished the South with
arms and ammunition and with blockade runners during the Civil War?
England! Who placed outrageous restrictions upon American commerce during
the great European war and, in direct violation of International law,
prohibited America from sending foodstuffs and cotton to Germany?
England!

"What harm has Germany ever done to the United States? Turn over the
pages of history. Remember brave General Steuben, a veteran of Frederick
the Great, drilling with Washington's soldiers at Valley Forge. Remember
the German General De Kalb who fell pierced by red-coat balls and
bayonets at the battle of Camden. Remember General Herckheimer with his
band of German farmers who fought and died for American independence at
the battle of Oriskany.

"Then go to Greenwood cemetery and look at the graves of German soldiers,
rows and rows of them, who gave their lives loyally for the Union at
Antietam, at Bull Run and at Gettysburg.

"The United States is a great nation with vast resources," he went on,
"but these have been largely wasted, owing to the inefficiency and
corruption inevitable in all democracies."

"Your Imperial Highness does not think much of American efficiency?"

The prince threw back his head with a snort of contemptuous amusement.

"Ha! What can one expect from a government like yours? A government of
incompetents, politicians, office seekers."

"I beg your pardon," I protested.

"I do not mean to offend you," he laughed, "but hasn't the whole world
known for years that America was utterly defenceless? Haven't you
Americans known it since 1914? Haven't you read it in all your
newspapers? Hasn't it been shouted at you from the housetops by all your
leading men?

"And yet your senators, your congressmen, your presidents and their
cabinet officers did nothing about it, or very little. Is that what you
call efficiency? America remained lacking in all that makes for military
preparedness, did she not? And she tried to be a world power and defend
the Monroe doctrine! She told Germany in 1915 what Germany might do with
her submarines and what she might not do. Ha! We were at a disadvantage
then, but we remembered! You, with your third-rate navy and your
tenth-rate army, told us what we might do! Well, you see where your
efficiency has brought you."

I sat silent until this storm should pass, and was just making bold to
speak when the prince continued:

"Do you know where America made her great mistake? Oh, what a chance you
had and missed it! Why did you not declare war on Germany after our
invasion of Belgium? Or after the sinking of the _Lusitania?_ Or after
the sinking of the _Arabic?_ You had your justification and, with your
money and resources, you could have changed the course of the great war.
That is what we feared in Berlin. We were powerless to hurt you then and
we knew you would have time to get ready. Yes, if America had gone into
the war in 1915, she would be the greatest power on earth to-day instead
of being a conquered province."

These words hurt.

"America is a long way from being a conquered province," I retorted.

He shook his head good-naturedly, whereupon I resolved to control my
temper. It would be folly to offend the prince and thus lose my chance to
secure an interview of international importance, which this proved to be.

"We hold New York already," he continued. "Within three weeks we shall
hold New England. Within three months we shall hold your entire Atlantic
seaboard."

"We may win back our lost territory," said I.

"Never. We are conquerors. We will stay here exactly as the Manchu
conquerors stayed in China. Exactly as the Seljuk conquerors stayed in
Asia Minor. Your military strength is broken. Your fleet will be
destroyed when it reaches the Caribbean. How can you drive us out?"

"Our population is over a hundred million."

"China's population is over three hundred million and a handful of
Japanese rule her. Remember, America is not like Russia with her heart
deep inland. The military heart of America lies within a radius of 180
miles from New York City and we hold it, or soon will. In that small
strip, reaching from Boston to Delaware Bay, are situated nine-tenths of
the war munition factories of the United States, the Springfield Armory,
the Watervliet Arsenal, the Picatinny Arsenal, the Frankfort Arsenal, the
Dupont powder works, the Bethlehem steel works, and all these will
shortly be in our hands. How can you take them from us? How can you get
along without them?"

"We can build other munition factories in the West."

"That will take a year or more, in which time we shall have fortified the
whole Appalachian Mountain system from Florida to the St. Lawrence, so
that no army can ever break through. Do you see?"

The prince paused with a masterful smile and played with a large signet
ring on his third finger.

"Surely Your Imperial Highness does not think that Germany can conquer
the whole of America?"

"Of course not, at least not for many years. We are content with your
Atlantic seaboard, the garden spot of the earth in climate and resources.
We shall hold this region and develop it along broad lines of German
efficiency and German _kultur._ What wonderful improvements we will make!
How we will use the opportunities you have wasted!

"Ha! Let me give you one instance among many of your incredible
inefficiency. Those disappearing carriages of your coast defence guns! I
suppose they were the pet hobby of some politician with an interest in
their manufacture, but Gott in Himmel! what foolishness! The guns
themselves are good enough, but the carriages allow them an elevation
of only ten percent against a thirty percent elevation that is possible
for guns of equal calibre on our battleships, which means that our
twelve-inch guns outrange yours by a couple of miles simply because we
can fire them at a higher angle."

"You mean that one of your super-dreadnoughts--"

"Exactly. One of our super-dreadnoughts can lie off Rockaway Beach
and drop shells from her twelve-inch guns into Union Square, and the
twelve-inch guns of your harbour forts, handicapped by their stupid
carriages, could never touch her."

The conversation now turned to other subjects and presently the prince
was led by enthusiasm or arrogance to make a series of statements that
gave extraordinary importance to my interview, since they enraged the
whole Anglo-Saxon world, particularly our Western and Middle Western
states. Fortunately I submitted my manuscript to Frederick William before
cabling the interview to London, so there was no danger of his
repudiating my words.

With brutal frankness this future ruler of a nation maintained that
against German arms America must now go down to defeat just as England
went down to partial defeat in 1917 and for the same unchangeable reason
that the fittest among nations inevitably survive.

"Ask your readers in the London Times, Mr. Langston, why it was that in
the fall of 1915 Germany had been able to put into the field nine million
fully equipped, highly efficient soldiers, whereas England, with nearly
the same population, counting her white colonies, had been able to send
out only two and a half million, a third of these being physically
defective? Why was that?

"Was it lack of guns and ammunition? Lack of officers and training?
Partly so, but something else was lacking, I mean patriotism among the
English masses that would give them the desire to fight for England, also
a high standard of physical excellence that would make them able to fight
effectively and to endure the hardships of the trenches.

"Now why should there be more patriotism in Germany than in England? Why
should the masses of Germany excel the masses of England in physical
vigour?

"I will tell you why, and the answer applies in some degree to America;
it is because the German system of government is better calculated to
create patriotism and physical vigour, just as it is better calculated to
create an efficient war machine. In Germany we have concentration of
power, a benevolent paternalism that knows the needs of the people and
supplies them whether the people wish it or not. For example, in Germany
we have to a great extent abolished poverty and such degrading slum
conditions as prevail in English and American cities. We know that slums
lead to drink, vice and physical unfitness. We know that we must kill the
slums or see the slums kill efficiency and kill patriotism.

"In Germany we hold the capitalist class within strict bounds. We allow
no such heaping up of huge fortunes as are common in America through the
exploitation of the weak by the strong. We Germans protect the weak and
make them stronger, but you English and Americans make them weaker by
oppressing them. You make slaves of children in a thousand factories,
crushing out their strength and their hope, so that a few more of you can
become millionaires. Do you think those children, grown to manhood, will
fight for you very loyally or very effectively when you call on them to
rally to the flag? What does such a flag mean to them?"

"What does the American flag mean to thousands of American steel workers
forced to toil at the furnaces twelve hours a day for two dollars? Twelve
hours a day and often seven days a week lest they starve! Why should
these men fight for a flag that has waved, unashamed, over their misery
and over the unearned and undeserved fortunes of their task masters,
Andrew Carnegie and J. P. Morgan? Why should the down-trodden miners in
Colorado fight to perpetuate a John D. Rockefeller system of government?"

"What does Your Imperial Highness mean by a John D. Rockefeller system of
government?"

"I mean the English and American system of individualism gone mad--every
man for himself and the devil take the hindermost. The result is a
trampling on the many by the few, a totally unfair division of the
products of toil and such wicked extremes of poverty and riches as are
familiar in London and New York but are unknown in Germany.

"In Germany the masses are well housed and well nourished. In all our
cities cheap and wholesome pleasures abound, music, beer gardens, great
parks with playgrounds and dancing pavilions. It is literally true that
work at fair wages with reasonable hours is provided for every German
citizen who is able to work. And those unable to work are taken care
of,--pensions for the aged, homes for the disabled, state assistance for
poor mothers. There are no paupers, no factory slaves in Germany. The
central government sees to this, not only as a matter of humanity, but as
good policy. We know that every German citizen will fight for the German
flag because he is proud of it and has personal reason to be grateful to
it, since it represents fair play, large opportunity, a satisfactory life
for him and his children."

The prince maintained that here were new elements in the problem of
Germany's conquest of America. Not only were the invaders more valiant
warriors possessed of a better fighting machine, but they came with a
moral and spiritual superiority that must make strong appeal to Americans
themselves.

"After yielding to us by force of arms," he went on, "your people will
come to welcome us when they see how much better off, how much happier
they will be under our higher civilisation. Mr. Langston, we understand
your nation better than it understands itself. I assure you, Americans
are sick of their selfish materialism, they are ashamed of the degrading
money worship that has stifled their national spirit."

Here I challenged him angrily.

"Do you mean to say that we have no national spirit in America?"

"Not as Germans understand it. You live for material things, for
pleasures, for business. You are a race of money schemers, money
grovellers, lacking in high ideals and genuine spiritual life without
which patriotism is an empty word. Who ever heard of an American working
for his country unless he was paid for it?

"Think what America did in the great war! Why was your president so
wrought up in 1915 when he assailed Germany with fine phrases? Was it
because we had violated Belgium? No! When that happened he had nothing to
say, although the United States, equally with England, was a signatory of
the Hague Conference that guaranteed Belgium's integrity. Why did not
your president protest then? Why did he not use his fine phrases then?
Because the United States had suffered no material injury through
Belgium's misfortune. On the contrary, the United States was sure to gain
much of the trade that Belgium lost. And that was what he cared about,
commercial advantage. You were quick enough to protect your trade and
your money interests. You were ready enough to do anything for gold,
ready enough, by the sale of war munitions, to bring death and misery
upon half of Europe so long as you got gold from the other half. High
ideals! National spirit! There they are!"



CHAPTER IX


BOSTON OFFERS DESPERATE AND BLOODY RESISTANCE TO THE INVADERS

Our wing of the advancing German army remained in Hartford for four days,
at the end of which all signs of disorder had ceased; in fact, there was
little disorder at any time. The lesson of New Haven's resistance had
been taken to heart, and there was the discouraging knowledge that a row
of German six-inch siege-guns were trained on the city from the heights
of Elizabeth Park, their black muzzles commanding the grey towers and
golden dome of State House, the J. Pierpont Morgan Memorial, the gleaming
white new City Hall, the belching chimneys of the Underwood typewriter
works, and the brown pile of Trinity College.

There was the further restraining fact that leading citizens of Hartford
were held as hostages, their lives in peril, in James J. Goodwin's
palatial home, among these being ex-Governor Morgan G. Buckley, Mayor
Joseph H. Lawler, Bishop Chauncey B. Brewster, Dr. Flavel S. Luther,
Bishop John J. Nilan, Mrs. Richard M. Bissell, Mrs. Thomas N. Hepburn,
the Rev. Rockwell Harmon Potter, Charles Hopkins Clark, Rolland F.
Andrews, the Rev. Francis Goodwin, Thomas J. Spellacy, and Sol
Sontheimer.

So the invaders' march through New England continued. It is a pitiful
story. What could Connecticut and Massachusetts do? With all their wealth
and intelligence, with all their mechanical ingenuity, with all their
pride and patriotism, what could they do, totally unprepared, more
helpless than Belgium, against the most efficient army in Europe?

Three times, between Hartford and Springfield, unorganised bands of
Americans, armed with shotguns and rifles, lay in ambush for the
advancing enemy and fired upon them. These men declared that they would
die before they would stand by tamely and see the homes and fields of New
England despoiled by the invader. Whereupon the Germans announced, by
means of proclamations showered upon towns and villages from their
advance-guard of aeroplanes, that for every German soldier thus killed by
Americans in ambush a neighbouring town or village would be burned by
fire bombs dropped from the sky. And they carried out this threat to the
letter, so that for every act of resistance by the fathers and brothers
and sons of New England there resulted only greater suffering and
distress for the women and the children.

The average man, especially one with a wife and children, is easily cowed
when he has no hope; and presently all resistance ceased. What feeble
opposition there was in the first week dwindled to almost nothing in the
second week and to less than nothing in the third week. Stamford paid two
million dollars in gold, Bridgeport five million, New Haven five million,
Hartford twenty million, Fall River three million, Springfield five
million, Worcester two million, Providence ten million, Newport fifty
million. The smaller cities got off with half a million each, and some of
the towns paid as little as one hundred thousand dollars. But every
community paid something, and the total amount taken from New England,
including a hundred million from New Hampshire, a hundred million from
Vermont, and a hundred million from Maine, was eight hundred million
dollars, about a third of which was in gold.

With a battle-front fifty or seventy-five miles long, von Kluck's forces
strolled across this fertile and populous region, living off the land,
leaving small holding forces with artillery at every important point, a
few hundred or a few thousand, while the main army swept relentlessly and
resistlessly on. It was a delightful four weeks' picnic for von Kluck and
his men; and at the end of four weeks everything in New England had
fallen before them up to the city of Boston, which had been left for the
last. _And the total German losses in killed and wounded were less than
twenty!_

On July 2, General von Kluck's army, sweeping forward unopposed, reached
the western and southwestern suburbs of Boston, passing through Newton
and Brookline, and making a detour to avoid ruining the beautiful golf
links where Ouimet won his famous victory over Ray and Vardon. This
sportsmanlike consideration was due to the fact that several of the
German officers and the Crown Prince himself were enthusiastic golfers.

Meantime there was panic in the city. For days huge crowds had swarmed
through Boston's great railway stations, fleeing to Maine and Canada; and
across the Charles River bridge there had passed an endless stream of
automobiles bearing away rich families with their jewels and their
silver. Among them were automobile trucks from the banks, laden with tons
of gold. No boats left the harbour through fear of a grim German
battleship that lay outside, plainly visible from the millionaire homes
of Nahant and Manchester.

Even now there was talk of resistance, and German Taubes looked down upon
a mass meeting of ten thousand frantic citizens gathered in Mechanics
Hall on Huntington Avenue; but prudent counsels prevailed. How could
Boston resist without soldiers or ammunition or field artillery? Brooklyn
had resisted, and now lay in ruins. New Haven had tried to resist, and
what had come of it?

At three o'clock on this day of sorrow, with banners flying and bands
playing, the German forces--horse, foot, and artillery--entered the
Massachusetts capital in two great columns, the one marching down Beacon
Street, past the homes of Oliver Wendell Holmes and Julia Ward Howe, the
other advancing along Commonwealth Avenue, past the white-columned
Harvard Club, past the statues of Alexander Hamilton and William Lloyd
Garrison, on under the shade of four rows of elms that give this noble
thoroughfare a resemblance to the Avenue de la Grande Armee in Paris.

It was a perfect summer's day. The sun flashed from the golden dome of
the State House on the hill over Boston Common, and from the great white
Custom House tower that rose impressively in the distance above the green
of the Public Gardens. Boston looked on, dumb with shame and stifled
rage, as the invaders took possession of the city and ran up their flags,
red, white, and black, above the Old South Meeting House on Washington
Street, where Benjamin Franklin was baptised, and above the sacred, now
dishonoured, shaft of the Bunker Hill Monument.

Hostages were taken, as usual, these including Major Henry L. Higginson,
President A. Lawrence Lowell of Harvard University, Major James M.
Curley, Edward A. Filene, Margaret Deland, William A. Paine, Ellery
Sedgwick, Mrs. John L. Gardner, Charles W. Eliot, Louis D. Brandeis,
Bishop William Lawrence, Amy Lowell, T. Jefferson Coolidge, Thomas W.
Lawson, Guy Murchie, and Cardinal O'Connell.

A proclamation was made in the _Transcript_ (now forced to be the
official German organ and the only newspaper that was allowed to appear
in Boston) that these prominent persons would be held personally
responsible for any public disorder or for any failure of the city to
furnish the army of occupation with all necessary food and supplies.

On the night of occupation there were scenes of violence, with rioting
and looting in various parts of Boston, notably in Washington Street and
Tremont Street, where shops were wrecked by mobs from the South End,
several thousand of the unruly foreign element, crazed with drink and
carrying knives. Against this drunken rabble the American police, sullen
and disorganised, could do nothing or would do nothing; and the situation
was becoming desperate, when German troops advanced along Washington
Street, firing into the crowd and driving back the looters, who surged
through Winter Street, a frantic, terrified mass, and scattered over
Boston Common.

Here, in front of the Park Street Church, another huge mob of citizens
had gathered--five thousand wildly patriotic Irishmen. Armed with clubs,
rifles, and pistols, and madly waving the Stars and Stripes, they cursed,
cheered, and yelled out insults to the Germans. Suddenly a company of
German soldiers with machine-guns appeared on the high ground in front of
the State House. Three times a Prussian officer, standing near the St.
Gaudens Shaw Memorial, shouted orders to the crowd to disperse; but the
Irishmen only jeered at him.

"They want it; let them have it," said the Prussian. "Fire!"

And three hundred fell before the blast of rifles and machine-guns.

At which the mob of Irish patriots went entirely mad, and, with yells of
hatred and defiance, swarmed straight up the hill at the battery that was
slaughtering them, shouting: "To hell with 'em!" "Come on, boys!"
charging so fiercely and valiantly, that the Germans were swept from
their position, and for a short time a victorious American mob held the
approaches to the State House.

Alas, it was for only a short time! The enemy quickly brought forward
reinforcements in overwhelming strength, and an hour later there were
only dead, wounded and prisoners to tell of this loyal but hopeless
effort.

In other parts of the city during this night of terror there were similar
scenes of bloodshed, the Germans inflicting terrible punishment upon the
people, innocent and guilty suffering alike for every act of disobedience
or resistance. There were a few cases of sniping from houses; and for
these a score of men, seized indiscriminately in the crowds, were hanged
from windows of the offending or suspected buildings. As a further lesson
to the city, two of the hostages, chosen by lot, were led out into the
Public Gardens the next morning at sunrise and shot near the statue of
Edward Everett Hale.

Machine-guns were now placed on the high ground before the Soldiers'
Monument and at other strategic points, and ten thousand soldiers were
encamped on Boston Common, the main part of the army being withdrawn,
after this overwhelming show of force, to Franklin Park on the outskirts,
where heavy siege-guns were set up.

The _Transcript_ appeared that day with a black-lettered proclamation,
signed by General von Kluck, to the effect that at the next disorder five
hostages would be shot, and six beautiful buildings--the State House, the
Custom House, the Boston Public Library, the Opera House, the Boston
Art Museum, and the main building of the Massachusetts School of
Technology--would be wrecked by shells. This reduced the city to absolute
submission.

Mrs. John L. Gardner's fine Italian palace in the Fenway, with its wealth
of art treasures, was turned into a staff headquarters and occupied by
the Crown Prince, General von Kluck, and Count Zeppelin. The main body of
officers established themselves in the best hotels and clubs, the Copley
Plaza, the Touraine, the Parker House, the Somerset, the St. Botolph, the
City Club, the Algonquin, the Harvard Club, paying liberally for the
finest suites and the best food by the simple method of signing checks to
be redeemed later by the city of Boston.

Non-commissioned officers made themselves comfortable in smaller hotels
and in private houses and boarding-houses to which they were assigned. A
popular eating-place was Thompson's Spa, where a crush of brass-buttoned
German soldiers lunched every day, perched on high stools along the
counters, and trying to ogle the pretty waitresses, who did not hide
their aversion.

It is worthy of note that the Tavern Club was burned by its own members
to save from desecration a spot hallowed by memories of Oliver Wendell
Holmes, James Russell Lowell, Charles Eliot Norton, and George William
Curtis.

I must mention another instance of the old-time indomitable New England
spirit that came to my knowledge during these sad days. The Germans
levied upon the city of Boston an indemnity of three hundred million
dollars, this to be paid at the rate of three million dollars a day; and
on the morning of July 4, two of von Kluck's staff officers, accompanied
by a military escort, marched down State Street into the now deserted
region of banks and vaults and trust companies, to arrange for the
regular payment of this sum. Entering the silent halls of a great banking
house, they came to a rear office with the door locked. A summons to open
being unanswered, they broke down this door; whereupon a shot, fired from
within, killed the first soldier who crossed the threshold. A German
volley followed, and, when the smoke cleared away, there sat a prominent
Boston financier, his father's Civil War musket clutched in his hands and
the look of a hero in his dying eyes. All alone, this uncompromising
figure of a man had waited there in his private office ready to defy the
whole German army and die for his rights and his convictions.



CHAPTER X


LORD KITCHENER VISITS AMERICA AND DISCUSSES OUR MILITARY PROBLEMS

I was standing with Count Zeppelin in the doorway of Mrs. John L.
Gardner's Fenway palace when the news of the great sea horror reached
Boston. The German submarine U-68, scouting off the coast of Maine,
had sunk the American liner _Manhattan_, the largest passenger vessel
in the world, as she raced toward Bar Harbor with her shipload of
non-combatants. Eighteen hundred and sixty-three men, women, and children
went down with the ship. No warning had been given. No chance had been
offered for women or children or neutral passengers to escape. The
disaster duplicated the wrecking of the _Lusitania_ in 1915, but it
exceeded it in loss of human life. The American captain and all his men
shared the fate of the passengers intrusted to their care.

In Boston the effect on the German officers and men was unbelievable.
Tremont and Boylston and Washington streets, echoing with cheers of the
exulting conquerors, resembled the night of a Harvard-Yale football game
when Brickley used to play for Cambridge University. The citizens of the
big town, their senses deadened by their own disaster, received the news,
and the ghastly celebration that followed it, without any real interest.
The fact that an ex-Mayor of Boston and the son of the present Governor
were among those that perished failed to rouse them. Boston, mentally as
well as physically, was in the grip of the enemy.

That this was just the effect the Germans planned to produce is shown by
General von Kluck's own words. In an interview that he gave me for the
London _Times_, after the occupation of Boston on July 2, 1921, General
von Kluck said:

"The way to end a war quickly is to make the burden of it oppressive upon
the people. It was on this principle that General Sherman acted in his
march from Atlanta to the sea. It was on this principle that General
Grant acted in his march from Washington to Richmond. Grant said he would
fight it out on those lines if it took all summer--meaning lines of
relentless oppression. In modern war a weak enemy like Belgium or like
New England, which is far weaker than Belgium was in 1914, must be
crushed immediately. Think of the bloodshed that would have stained the
soil of Connecticut and Massachusetts if we had not spread terror before
us. As it is, New England has suffered very little from the German
occupation, and in a very short time everything will be going on as
usual."

The veteran warrior paused, and added with a laugh: "Better than usual."

As a matter of fact, within a week Boston had resumed its ordinary life
and activities. Business was good, factories were busy, and the theatres
were crowded nightly, especially Keith's, where the latest military
photo-play by Thomas Dixon and Charles T. Dazey--with Mary Pickford as
the heroine and Charley Chaplin as the comedy relief--was enjoyed
immensely by German officers.

As to the commerce of Boston Harbor, it was speedily re-established, with
ships of all nations going and coming, undisturbed by the fact that it
was now the German flag on German warships that they saluted.

I received instructions from my paper about this time to leave New
England and join General Wood's forces, which had crossed the Delaware
into Pennsylvania, where they were battling desperately with von
Hindenburg's much stronger army. On the day following my arrival at the
American headquarters, I learned that Lord Kitchener had come over from
England to follow the fighting as an eye-witness; and I was fortunate
enough to obtain an interview with his lordship, who remembered me in
connection with his Egyptian campaigns.

"The United States is where England would have been in 1914 without her
fleet," said Lord Kitchener.

"Where is that?"

"If England had been invaded by a German army in 1914," replied the great
organiser gravely, "she would have been wiped off the map. It was
England's fleet that saved her. And, even so, we had a hard time of it.
Everything was lacking--officers, men, uniforms, ammunition, guns,
horses, saddles, horse blankets, everything except our fleet."

A sudden light burned in Lord Kitchener's strange eyes, and he added
earnestly: "There is something more than that. In 1914 Germany was
wonderfully prepared in material things, but her greatest advantage over
all other nations, except Japan, lay in her dogged devotion to her own
ideals. She may have been wrong, as we think, but she believed in
herself. There was nothing like it in England, and there is nothing like
it in America. The German masses, to the last man, woman, and child, were
inspired to give all that they had, their lives included, for the Empire.
In England there was more selfishness and self-indulgence. We had labour
troubles, strike troubles, drink troubles; and finally, as you know, in
1916 we were forced to adopt conscription. It will be the same story here
in America."

"Don't you think that America will ultimately win?"

Lord Kitchener hesitated.

"I don't know. Germany holds New York and Boston and is marching on
Philadelphia. Think what that means! New York is the business capital of
the nation. It is hard to conceive of the United States without New
York."

"The Americans will get New York back, won't they?"

"How? When? It is true you have a population of eighty millions west of
the Allegheny Mountains, and somehow, some day, their American spirit and
their American genius ought to conquer; but it's going to be a job.
Patriotism is not enough. Money is not enough. Potential resources are
not enough. It is a question of doing the essential thing before it is
too late. We found that out in England in 1916. If America could have
used her potential resources when the Germans landed on Long Island, she
would have driven her enemies into the sea within a week; but the thing
was not possible. You might as well expect a gold mine in Alaska to stop
a Wall Street panic."

I found that Lord Kitchener had very definite ideas touching great social
changes that must come in America following this long and exhausting war,
assuming that we finally came out of it victorious.

"America will be a different land after this war," he said. "You will
have to reckon as never before with the lowly but enlightened millions
who have done the actual fighting. The United States of the future must
be regarded as a vast-co-operative estate to be managed for the benefit
of all who dwell in it, not for the benefit of a privileged few. And
America may well follow the example of Germany, as England has since the
end of the great war in 1919, in using the full power of state to lessen
her present iniquitous extremes of poverty and wealth, which weaken
patriotism, and in compelling a division of the products of toil that is
really fair.

"I warn you that America will escape the gravest labour trouble with the
possibility of actual revolution only by admitting, as England has
admitted, that from now on labour has the whip hand over capital and must
be placated by immense concessions. You must either establish state
control in many industries that are now privately owned and managed and
establish state ownership in all public utilities or you must expect to
see your whole system of government swing definitely toward a socialistic
regime. The day of the multi-millionaire is over."

I found another distinguished Englishman at General Wood's headquarters,
Lord Northcliffe, owner of the London _Times_, and I had the unusual
experience of interviewing my own employer for his own newspaper. As
usual, Lord Northcliffe took sharp issue with Lord Kitchener on several
points. His hatred of the Germans was so intense that he could see no
good in them.

"The idea that Germany will be able to carry this invasion of America to
a successful conclusion is preposterous," he declared. "Prussian
supermen! What are they? Look at their square heads with no backs to them
and their outstanding ears! Gluttons of food! Guzzlers of drink! A race
of bullies who treat their women like squaws and drudges and then cringe
to every policeman and strutting officer who makes them goose-step before
him. Bismarck called them a nation of house-servants, and knew that
in racial aptitude they are and always will be hopelessly inferior to
Anglo-Saxons.

"Conquer America? They can no more do it than they could conquer England.
They can make you suffer, yes, as they made us suffer; they can fill you
with rage and shame to find yourselves utterly unprepared in this hour of
peril, eaten up with commercialism and pacifism just as we were. But
conquer this great nation with its infinite resources and its splendid
racial inheritance--never!

"The Germans despise America just as they despised England. John Bull was
an effete old plutocrat whose sons and daughters were given up to sport
and amusement. The Kaiser, in his famous Aix-la-Chapelle order, referred
scornfully to our 'contemptible little army.' He was right, it was a
contemptible little army, but by the end of 1917 we had five million
fully equipped men in the field and in the summer of 1918 the Kaiser saw
his broken armies flung back to the Rhine by these same contemptible
Englishmen and their brave allies. There will be the same marvellous
change here when the tortured American giant stirs from his sleep of
indifference and selfishness. Then the Prussian superman will learn
another lesson!"



CHAPTER XI


HEROIC ACT OF BARBARA WEBB SAVES AMERICAN ARMY AT THE BATTLE OF TRENTON

Coming now to the campaign in New Jersey, let me recall that on the
evening of June 18, American scouting aeroplanes, under Squadron
Commander Harry Payne Whitney, reported that a strong force of Germans,
cavalry, infantry, and artillery, had occupied the heights above
Bordentown, New Jersey, and were actively proceeding to build pontoons
across the Delaware. It seemed clear that von Hindenburg was preparing to
cross the river at the very point where Washington made his historic
crossing in 1776; and General Wood proceeded to attack the enemy's
position with his artillery, being assisted by four light-draught
gunboats from the Philadelphia navy-yard, which lay in the deepened
channel at the head of tide-water and dropped shells inside the enemy's
lines. The Germans replied vigorously, and a smart engagement at long
range ensued, lasting until darkness fell. We fully expected that the
next day would see a fierce battle fought here for the command of the
river. No one dreamed that this was a trap set by von Hindenburg.

As a matter of fact, the crossing movement from above Bordentown was a
feint in which not more than 8,000 Germans were engaged, their main army
being gathered twenty miles to the north, near Lambertville, for the real
crossing. And only the prompt heroic action of three young Americans, two
boys and a girl, saved our forces from immediate disaster.

The heroine of this adventure was Barbara Webb, a beautiful girl of
sixteen, who, with her brother Dominick and their widowed mother, lived
in a lonely farm-house on Goat Hill, back of Lambertville. They had a boy
friend, Marshall Frissell, in Brownsburg, Pennsylvania, on the other side
of the river, and Marshall and Dominick had learned to wigwag signals, in
boy-scout fashion, back and forth across the Delaware.

It seems that, on this memorable night, the brother and sister discovered
a great force of Germans building pontoons about a mile below the wrecked
Lambertville bridge. Whereupon Dominick Webb, knowing that all telegraph
and telephone wires were cut, leaped upon a horse and set out to carry
the news to General Wood. But he was shot through the thigh by a Prussian
sentry, and, hours later, fainting from loss of blood, he returned to the
farm-house and told his sister that he had failed in his effort.

Then Barbara, as day was breaking, climbed to the crest of Goat Hill, and
began to signal desperately toward Brownsburg, in the hope that Marshall
Frissell might see and understand. For an hour she waved, but all in
vain. Marshall was asleep. Still she waved; and finally, by a miracle of
faith, the boy was roused from his slumbers, drawn to his window as the
sun arose, and, looking out, saw Barbara's familiar flag wigwagging
frantically on the heights of Lambertville three miles away. Then he
answered, and Barbara cried out in her joy.

Just then a German rifle spoke from the riverbank below, a thousand yards
away, where the enemy were watching, and a bullet pierced the Stars and
Stripes as the flag fluttered over that slim girlish figure silhouetted
against the glory of the eastern sky. Then another bullet came,