nly through what I have here, a prism
of calcite, or Iceland spar, commonly called a Nicol prism. Light
fully polarized consists of vibrations transverse to the direction
of the ray, all in one plane. Ordinary light has transverse
vibrations in all planes. Certain substances, due to their
molecular structure, are transparent to vibrations in one plane,
but opaque to those at right angles.

"Here we have," he explained, tapping the parts in order, "a
source of light, passing in through this aperture, here a Nicol
polarizer, next a liquid to be examined in a glass-capped tube;
here on this other side an arrangement of quartz plates with
rotary power which I will explain in a moment, next an analyzer,
and finally the aperture for the eye of an observer."

Kennedy adjusted the glass tube containing the liquid which bore
the substance scraped from the cartridge--he had picked up in the
office of Jose. "Look through the eyepiece, Walter," he directed.

The field appeared halved. He made an adjustment and at once the
field of vision appeared wholly the same tint. When he removed the
tube it was dark.

"If a liquid has not what we call rotary power both halves of the
double disk appear of the same tint," he explained. "If it has
rotary power, the halves appear of different tints and the degree
of rotation is measured by the alteration of thickness of this
double quartz plate necessary to counteract it. It is, as I told
Mr. Jameson early to-day, a rather abstruse subject, this of
polarized light. I shall not bore you with it, but I think you
will see in a moment why it is necessary, perhaps why some one who
knew thought it would never be used.

"What I am getting at now is that some substances with the same
chemical formula rotate polarized light to the right, are dextro-
rotary, as, for instance, what is known as dextrose. Others rotate
it to the left, are levo-rotary, as the substance called levose.
Both of them are glucose. So there are substances which give the
same chemical reactions which can only be distinguished by their
being left or right rotary."

Craig took a bit of crystalline powder and dissolved it in ether.
Then he added some strong sulphuric acid. The liquid turned
yellow, then slowly a bright scarlet. Beside the first he repeated
the operation with another similar-looking powder, with the
identical result.

"Both of those," he remarked, holding up the vials, "were samples
of pure veratrine, but obtained from different sources. You see
the brilliant reaction--unmistakable. But it makes all the
difference in the world in this case what was the source of the
veratrine. It may mean the guilt or innocence of one of you."

He paused, to let the significance of his remark sink in.
"Veratrine," he resumed, "is a form of hellebore, known to
gardeners for its fatal effect on insects. There are white and
green hellebore, Veratrum alba and Veratrum viride. It is the pure
alkaloid, or rather one of them, that we have to deal with here--
veratrine.

"There are various sources of veratrine. For instance, there is
the veratrine that may be derived from the sabadilla seeds which
grow in the West Indies and Mexico. It is used, I am informed, by
the Germans in their lachrymatory and asphyxiating bombs."

The mention of the West Indies brought, like a flash, to my mind
Sandoval and Senorita de Leon.

"Then, too," continued Kennedy, "there is a plant out in our own
Western country, of which you may have heard, known as the death
camas, very fatal to cattle when they eat it. The active principle
in this is also veratrine."

I began to see what Kennedy was driving at. If it were veratrine
derived from death camas it would point toward Page.

"Abderhalden, the great German physiological chemist, has
discovered that substances that once get into the blood produce
specific ferments. Not long ago, in a case, I showed it by the use
of dialyzing membranes. But Abderhalden has found that the
polariscope can show it also. And in this case only the
polariscope can show what chemistry cannot show when we reach the
point of testing Senor Barrios's blood--if that becomes
necessary."

It was plain that Kennedy was confident. "There are other sources
of drugs of the nature used in this case to asphyxiate and kill,
but the active principle of all is veratrine. The point is,
veratrine from what source? The sabadilla is dextro-rotary; the
death camas is levo-rotary. Which is it here?"

As I tried to figure out the ramifications of the case, I could
see that it was a cruel situation for one or the other of the
girls. Was one of her lovers the murderer of Anitra's brother? Or
was her own brother the murderer of Eulalie's lover? I looked at
the faces before me, now tensely watching Kennedy, forgetful of
the wire-like strings which they held in their hands. I studied
Teresa de Leon intently for a while. She was still the enigma
which she had been the first time I saw her.

Kennedy paused long enough to look through the eyepiece again as
if to reassure himself finally that he was right. There was a
tantalizing suspense as we waited for the verdict of science on
this intensely human tragedy. Then he turned to the queer
instrument over which the needle-hand was moving.

"Though some scientists would call this merely a sensitive form of
galvanometer," he remarked, "it is, to me, more than that. It
registers feelings, emotions. It has been registering your own
every moment that I have been talking.

"But most of all it registers the grand passion. I might even call
it a love meter. Love might seem to be a subject which could not
be investigated. But even love can be attributed to electrical
forces, or, perhaps better, is expressed by the generation of an
electric current, as though the attraction between men and women
were the giving off of electrons or radiations of one to the
other. I have seen this galvanometer stationary during the
ordinary meeting of men and women, yet exhibit all sorts of
strange vibrations when true lovers meet."

Not used to Kennedy's peculiar methods, they were now on guard,
ignorant of the fact that that alone was sufficient to corroborate
unescapably any evidence they had already given of their feelings
toward each other.

Kennedy passed lightly over the torn and bleeding heart of
Eulalie. But, much as he disliked to do so, he could not so
quickly pass Anitra. In spite of her grief, I could see that she
was striving to control herself. A quick blush suffused her face
and her breath came and went faster.

"This record," went on Kennedy, lowering his voice, "tells me that
two men are in love with Anitra Barrios. I will not say which
exhibits the deeper, truer passion. You shall see for yourself in
a moment. But, more than that, it tells me which of the two she
cares for most--a secret her heart would never permit her lips to
disclose. Nor will I disclose it.

"One of them, with supreme egotism, was so sure that he would win
her heart that he plotted this murder of her brother so that she
would have the whole estate to bring to him--a terrible price for
a dowry. My love meter tells me, however, that Anitra has
something to say about it yet. She does not love this man.

"As for Teresa de Leon, it was jealousy that impelled her to
follow Jose Barrios from Cuba to New York. The murderer, in his
scheming, knew it, saw a chance to use her, to encourage her,
perhaps throw suspicion on her, if necessary. When I came
uncomfortably close to him he even sent an anonymous telegram that
might point toward her. It was sent by the same person who stole
in Barrios's office and shot him with an asphyxiating pistol which
discharged a fatal quantity of pure veratrine full at him.

"My love meter, in registering hidden emotions, supplements what
the polarimeter tells me. It was the levo-rotary veratrine of the
fatal death camas which you used, Page," concluded Craig, as again
the electric attachment clicked shut the lock on the laboratory
door.




VIII

THE VITAL PRINCIPLE


"That's the handwriting of a woman--a jealous woman," remarked
Kennedy, handing to me a dainty note on plain paper which had come
in the morning mail.

     I did not stop to study the writing, for the contents of the
     letter were more fascinating than even Kennedy's new science
     of graphology.

     You don't know me [the note read], but I know of your work
     of scientific investigation.

     Let me inform you of something that ought to interest you.

     In the Forum Apartments you will find that there is some
     strange disease affecting the Wardlaw family. It is a queer
     disease of the nerves. One is dead. Others are dying.

     Look into it.

     A FRIEND.

As I read it I asked myself vainly what it could mean. There was
no direct accusation against any one, yet the implication was
plain. A woman had been moved by one of the primal passions to
betray--some one.

I looked up from the note on the table at Craig. He was still
studying the handwriting.

"It's that peculiar vertical, angular hand affected by many
women," he commented, half to himself. "Even at a glance you can
see that it's written hastily, as if under the stress of
excitement and sudden resolution. You'll notice how those
capitals--" The laboratory door opened, interrupting him.

"Hello, Kennedy," greeted Doctor Leslie, our friend, the coroner's
physician, who had recently been appointed Health Commissioner of
the city.

It was the first time we had seen him since the appointment and we
hastened to congratulate him. He thanked us absently, and it was
evident that there was something on his mind, some problem which,
in his new office, he felt that he must solve if for no other
purpose than to justify his reputation. Craig said nothing,
preferring to let the commissioner come to the point in his own
way.

"Do you know, Kennedy," he said, at length, turning in his chair
and facing us, "I believe we have found one of the strangest cases
in the history of the department."

The commissioner paused, then went on, quickly, "It looks as if it
were nothing less than an epidemic of beriberi--not on a ship
coming into port as so often happens, but actually in the heart of
the city."

"Beriberi--in New York?" queried Craig, incredulously.

"It looks like it," reiterated Leslie, "in the family of a Doctor
Wardlaw, up-town here, in the Forum--"

Kennedy had already shoved over the letter he had just received.
Leslie did not finish the sentence, but read the note in
amazement.

"What are the symptoms?" inquired Craig.

"What makes you think it is beriberi, of all things?"

"Because they show the symptoms of beriberi," persisted Leslie,
doggedly. "You know what they are like. If you care to go into the
matter I think I can convince you."

The commissioner was still holding the letter and gazing, puzzled,
from it to us. It seemed as if he regarded it merely as confirming
his own suspicions that something was wrong, even though it shed
no real light on the matter.

"How did you first hear of it?" prompted Kennedy.

Leslie answered frankly. "It came to the attention of the
department as the result of a reform I have inaugurated. When I
went in office I found that many of the death certificates were
faulty, and in the course of our investigations we ran across one
that seemed to be most vaguely worded. I don't know yet whether it
was ignorance--or something worse. But it started an inquiry. I
can't say that I'm thoroughly satisfied with the amended
certificate of the physician who attended Mrs. Marbury, the mother
of Doctor Wardlaw's wife, who died about a week ago--Doctor
Aitken."

"Then Wardlaw didn't attend her himself?" asked Kennedy.

"Oh no. He couldn't, under the circumstances, as I'll show you
presently, aside from the medical ethics of the case. Aitken was
the family physician of the Marburys."

Kennedy glanced at the note. "One is dead. Others are dying," he
read. "Who are the others? Who else is stricken?"

"Why," continued Leslie, eager to unburden his story, "Wardlaw
himself has the marks of a nervous affection as plainly as the eye
can see it. You know what it is in this disease, as though the
nerves were wasting away. But he doesn't seem half as badly
affected as his wife. They tell me Maude Marbury was quite a
beauty once, and photographs I have seen prove it. She's a wreck
now. And, of course, the old lady must have been the most
seriously affected of them all."

"Who else is there in the household?" inquired Kennedy, growing
more and more interested.

"Well," answered Leslie, slowly, "they've had a nurse for some
time, Natalie Langdale. Apparently she has escaped."

"Any servants?"

"Some by the day; only one regularly--a Japanese, Kato. He goes
home at night, too. There's no evidence of the disease having
affected him."

I caught Leslie's eye as he gave the last information. Though I
did not know much about beriberi, I had read of it, and knew that
it was especially prevalent in the Orient. I did not know what
importance to attach to Kato and his going home at night.

"Have you done any investigating yourself?" asked Kennedy.

Leslie hesitated a moment, as though deprecating his own efforts
in that line, though when he spoke I could see no reason why he
should, except that it had so often happened that Kennedy had seen
the obvious which was hidden from most of those who consulted him.

"Yes," he replied, "I thought perhaps there might be some motive
back of it all which I might discover. Possibly it was old Mrs.
Marbury's fortune--not a large one, but substantial. So it
occurred to me that the will might show it. I have been to the
surrogate."

"And?" prompted Kennedy, approvingly.

"Mrs. Marbury's will has already been offered for probate. It
directs, among other things, that twenty-five thousand dollars be
given by her daughter, to whom she leaves the bulk of her fortune,
to Doctor Aitken, who had been Mr. Marbury's physician and her
own."

Leslie looked at us significantly, but Kennedy made no comment.

"Would you like to go up there and see them?" urged the
commissioner, anxious to get Craig's final word on whether he
would co-operate in the affair.

"I certainly should," returned Kennedy, heartily, folding up the
letter which had first attracted his interest. "It looks as if
there were more to this thing than a mere disease, however
unusual."

Doctor Leslie could not conceal his satisfaction, and without
delaying a moment more than was necessary hurried us out into one
of the department cars, which he had left waiting outside, and
directed the driver to take us to the Forum Apartments, one of the
newest and most fashionable on the Drive.

Miss Langdale met us at the door and admitted us into the
apartment. She was a striking type of trained nurse, one of those
who seem bubbling over with health and vivacity. She seemed
solicitous of her patients and reluctant to have them disturbed,
yet apparently not daring to refuse to admit Doctor Leslie. There
was nothing in her solicitude, however, that one could take
exception to.

Miss Langdale conducted us softly down a hallway through the
middle of the apartment, and I noted quickly how it was laid out.
On one side we passed a handsomely furnished parlor and dining-
room, opposite which were the kitchen and butler's pantry, and,
farther along, a bedroom and the bath. On down the hall, on the
right, was Doctor Wardlaw's study, or rather den, for it was more
of a library than an office.

The nurse led the way, and we entered. Through the windows one
caught a beautiful vista of the Drive, the river, and the Jersey
shore. I gazed about curiously. Around the room there were
bookcases and cabinets, a desk, some easy-chairs, and in the
corner a table on which were some of Wardlaw's paraphernalia, for,
although he was not a practising physician, he still specialized
in his favorite branches of eye and ear surgery.

Miss Langdale left us a moment, with a hasty excuse that she must
prepare Mrs. Wardlaw for the unexpected visit. The preparation,
however, did not take long, for a moment later Maude Wardlaw
entered, supported by her nurse.

Her lips moved mechanically as she saw us, but we could not hear
what she said. As she walked, I could see that she had a peculiar
gait, as though she were always lifting her feet over small
obstacles. Her eyes, too, as she looked at us, had a strange
squint, and now and then the muscles of her face twitched. She
glanced from Leslie to Kennedy inquiringly, as Leslie introduced
us, implying that we were from his office, then dropped into the
easy-chair. Her breathing seemed to be labored and her heart
action feeble, as the nurse propped her up comfortably.

As Mrs. Wardlaw's hand rested on the arm of the chair I saw that
there was a peculiar flexion of her wrist which reminded me of the
so-called "wrist-drop" of which I had heard. It was almost as if
the muscles of her hands and arms, feet and legs, were weak and
wasting. Once she had been beautiful, and even now, although she
seemed to be a wreck of her former self, she had a sort of
ethereal beauty that was very touching.

"Doctor is out--just now," she hesitated, in a tone that hinted at
the loss of her voice. She turned appealingly to Miss Langdale.
"Oh," she murmured, "I feel so badly this morning--as if pins and
needles were sticking in me--vague pains in all my limbs--"

Her voice sank to a whisper and only her lips moved feebly. One
had only to see her to feel sympathy. It seemed almost cruel to
intrude under the circumstances, yet it was absolutely necessary
if Craig were to accomplish anything. Maude Wardlaw, however, did
not seem to comprehend the significance of our presence, and I
wondered how Kennedy would proceed.

"I should like to see your Japanese servant, Kato," he began,
directly, somewhat to my surprise, addressing himself rather to
Miss Langdale than to Mrs. Wardlaw.

The nurse nodded and left the room without a word, as though
appreciating the anomalous position in which she was placed as
temporary mistress of the household.

A few moments later Kato entered. He was a typical specimen of the
suave Oriental, and I eyed him keenly, for to me East was East and
West was West, and I was frankly suspicious, especially as I saw
no reason to be otherwise in Kennedy's manner. I waited eagerly to
see what Craig would do.

"Sit here," directed Kennedy, indicating a straight-backed chair,
on which the Japanese obediently sat. "Now cross your knees."

As Kato complied, Kennedy quickly brought his hand, held flat and
palm upward, sharply against the Jap's knee just below the
kneecap. There was a quick reflex jerk of the leg below the knee
in response.

"Quite natural," Kennedy whispered, turning to Leslie, who nodded.

He dismissed Kato without further questioning, having had an
opportunity to observe whether he showed any of the symptoms that
had appeared in the rest of the family. Craig and the Health
Commissioner exchanged a few words under their breath, then Craig
crossed the room to Mrs. Wardlaw. The entrance of Kato had roused
her momentarily and she had been watching what was going on.

"It is a simple test," explained Kennedy, indicating to Miss
Langdale that he wished to repeat it on her patient.

Mrs. Wardlaw's knee showed no reflex! As he turned to us, we could
see that Kennedy's face was lined deeply with thought, and he
paced up and down the room once or twice, considering what he had
observed.

I could see that even this simple interview had greatly fatigued
Mrs. Wardlaw. Miss Langdale said nothing, but it was plainly
evident that she objected strongly to the strain on her patient's
strength.

"That will be sufficient," nodded Craig, noticing the nurse.
"Thank you very much. I think you had better let Mrs. Wardlaw rest
in her own room."

On the nurse's arm Mrs. Wardlaw withdrew and I looked inquiringly
from Kennedy to Doctor Leslie. What was it that had made this
beautiful woman such a wreck? It seemed almost as though the hand
of fate had stretched out against one who had all to make her
happy--wealth, youth, a beautiful home--for the sullen purpose of
taking away what had been bestowed so bounteously.

"It is polyneuritis, all right, Leslie," Craig agreed, the moment
we were alone.

"I think so," coincided Leslie, with a nod. "It's the CAUSE I
can't get at. Is it polyneuritis of beriberi--or something else?"
Kennedy did not reply immediately.

"Then there are other causes?" I inquired of Leslie.

"Alcohol," he returned, briefly. "I don't think that figures in
this instance. At least I've seen no evidence."

"Perhaps some drug?" I hazarded at a venture.

Leslie shrugged.

"How about the food?" inquired Craig. "Have you made any attempt
to examine it?"

"I have," replied the commissioner. "When I came up here first I
thought of that. I took samples of all the food that I could find
in the ice-box, the kitchen, and the butler's pantry. I have the
whole thing, labeled, and I have already started to test them out.
I'll show you what I have done when we go down to the department
laboratory."

Kennedy had been examining the books in the bookcase and now
pulled out a medical dictionary. It opened readily to the heading,
"Polyneuritis--multiple neuritis."

I bent over and read with him. In the disease, it seemed, the
nerve fibers themselves in the small nerves broke down and the
affection was motor, sensory, vasomotor, or endemic. All the
symptoms described seemed to fit what I had observed in Mrs.
Wardlaw.

"Invariably," the article went on, "it is the result of some toxic
substance circulating in the blood. There is a polyneuritis
psychosis, known as Korsakoff's syndrome, characterized by
disturbances of the memory of recent events and false
reminiscences. the patient being restless and disorientated."

I ran my finger down the page until I came to the causes. There
were alcohol, lead, arsenic, bisulphide of carbon, diseases such
as diabetes, diphtheria, typhoid, and finally, much to my
excitement, was enumerated beriberi, with the added information,
"or, as the Japanese call it, kakke."

I placed my finger on the passage and was about to say something
about my suspicions of Kato when we heard the sound of footsteps
in the hall, and Craig snapped the book shut, returning it hastily
to the bookcase. It was Miss Langdale who had made her patient
comfortable in bed and now returned to us.

"Who is this Kato?" inquired Craig, voicing what was in my own
mind. "What do you know about him?"

"Just a young Japanese from the Mission downtown," replied the
nurse, directly. "I don't suppose you know, but Mrs. Wardlaw used
to be greatly interested in religious and social work among the
Japanese and Chinese; would be yet, but," she added,
significantly, "she is not strong enough. They employed him before
I came here, about a year ago, I think."

Kennedy nodded, and was about to ask another question, when there
was a slight noise out in the hall. Thinking it might be Kato
himself, I sprang to the door.

Instead, I encountered a middle-aged man, who drew back in
surprise at seeing me, a stranger.

"Oh, good morning, Doctor Aitken!" greeted Miss Langdale, in quite
the casual manner of a nurse accustomed to the daily visit at
about this hour.

As for Doctor Aitken, he glanced from Leslie, whom he knew, to
Kennedy, whom he did not know, with a very surprised look on his
face. In fact, I got the impression that after he had been
admitted he had paused a moment in the hall to listen to the
strange voices in the Wardlaw study.

Leslie nodded to him and introduced us, without quite knowing what
to say or do, any more than Doctor Aitken.

"A most incomprehensible case," ventured Aitken to us. "I can't,
for the life of me, make it out." The doctor showed his perplexity
plainly, whether it was feigned or not.

"I'm afraid she's not quite so well as usual," put in Miss
Langdale, speaking to him, but in a manner that indicated that
first of all she wished any blame for her patient's condition to
attach to us and not to herself.

Doctor Aitken pursed up his lips, bowed excusingly to us, and
turned down the hall, followed by the nurse. As they passed on to
Mrs. Wardlaw's room, I am sure they whispered about us. I was
puzzled by Doctor Aitken. He seemed to be sincere, yet, under the
circumstances, I felt that I must be suspicious of everybody and
everything.

Alone again for a moment, Kennedy turned his attention to the
furniture of the room, and finally paused before a writing-desk in
the corner. He tried it. It was not locked and he opened it.
Quickly he ran through a pile of papers carefully laid under a
paper-weight at the back.

A suppressed exclamation from him called my attention to something
that he had discovered. There lay two documents, evidently
recently drawn up. As we looked over the first, we saw that it was
Doctor Wardlaw's will, in which he had left everything to his
wife, although he was not an especially wealthy man. The other was
the will of Mrs. Wardlaw.

We devoured it hastily. In substance it was identical with the
first, except that at the end she had added two clauses. In the
first she had done just as her mother had directed. Twenty-five
thousand dollars had been left to Doctor Aitken. I glanced at
Kennedy, but he was reading on, taking the second clause. I read
also. Fifty thousand dollars was given to endow the New York
Japanese Mission.

Immediately the thought of Kato and what Miss Langdale had just
told us flashed through my mind.

A second time we heard the nurse's footsteps on the hardwood floor
of the hall. Craig closed the desk softly.

"Doctor Aitken is ready to go," she announced. "Is there anything
more you wish to ask?"

Kennedy spoke a moment with the doctor as he passed out, but,
aside from the information that Mrs. Wardlaw was, in his opinion,
growing worse, the conversation added nothing to our meager store
of information.

"I suppose you attended Mrs. Marbury?" ventured Kennedy of Miss
Langdale, after the doctor had gone.

"Not all the time," she admitted. "Before I came there was another
nurse, a Miss Hackstaff."

"What was the matter? Wasn't she competent?"

Miss Langdale avoided the question, as though it were a breach of
professional etiquette to cast reflections on another nurse,
although whether that was the real reason for her reticence did
not appear. Craig seemed to make a mental note of the fact.

"Have you seen anything--er--suspicious about this Kato?" put in
Leslie, while Kennedy frowned at the interruption.

Miss Langdale answered quickly, "Nothing."

"Doctor Aitken has never expressed any suspicion?" pursued Leslie.

"Oh no," she returned. "I think I would have known it if he had
any. No, I've never heard him even hint at anything." It was
evident that she wished us to know that she was in the confidence
of the doctor.

"I think we'd better be going," interrupted Kennedy, hastily, not
apparently pleased to have Leslie break in in the investigation
just at present.

Miss Langdale accompanied us to the door, but before we reached it
it was opened from the outside by a man who had once been and yet
was handsome, although one could see that he had a certain
appearance of having neglected himself.

Leslie nodded and introduced us. It was Doctor Wardlaw.

As I studied his face I could see that, as Leslie had already told
us, it plainly bore the stigma of nervousness.

"Has Doctor Aitken been here?" he inquired, quickly, of the nurse.
Then, scarcely waiting for her even to nod, he added: "What did he
say? Is Mrs. Wardlaw any better?"

Miss Langdale seemed to be endeavoring to make as optimistic a
report as the truth permitted, but I fancied Wardlaw read between
the lines. As they talked it was evident that there was a sort of
restraint between them. I wondered whether Wardlaw might not have
some lurking suspicion against Aitken, or some one else. If he
had, even in his nervousness he did not betray it.

"I can't tell you how worried I am," he murmured, almost to
himself. "What can this thing be?"

He turned to us, and, although he had just been introduced, I am
sure that our presence seemed to surprise him, for he went on
talking to himself, "Oh yes--let me see--oh yes, friends of
Doctor--er--Leslie."

I had been studying him and trying to recall what I had just read
of beriberi and polyneuritis. There flashed over my mind the
recollection of what had been called Korsakoff's syndrome, in
which one of the mental disturbances was the memory of recent
events. Did not this, I asked myself, indicate plainly enough that
Leslie might be right in his suspicions of beriberi? It was all
the more apparent a moment later when, turning to Miss Langdale,
Wardlaw seemed almost instantly to forget our presence again. At
any rate, his anxiety was easy to see.

After a few minutes' chat during which Craig observed Wardlaw's
symptoms, too, we excused ourselves, and the Health Commissioner
undertook to conduct us to his office to show us what he had done
so far. As for me, I could not get Miss Langdale out of my mind,
and especially the mysterious letter to Kennedy. What of it and
what of its secret sender?

None of us said much until, half an hour later, in the department
laboratory, Leslie began to recapitulate what he had already done
in the case.

"You asked whether I had examined the food," he remarked, pausing
in a corner before several cages in which were a number of
pigeons, separated and carefully tagged. With a wave of his hand
at one group of cages he continued: "These fellows I have been
feeding exclusively on samples of the various foods which I took
from the Wardlaw family when I first went up there. Here, too, are
charts showing what I have observed up to date. Over there are the
'controls'--pigeons from the same group which have been fed
regularly on the usual diet so that I can check my tests."

Kennedy fell to examining the pigeons carefully as well as the
charts and records of feeding and results. None of the birds fed
on what had been taken from the apartment looked well, though some
were worse than others.

"I want you to observe this fellow," pointed out Leslie at last,
singling out one cage. The pigeon in it was a pathetic figure. His
eyes seemed dull and glazed. He paid little or no attention to us;
even his food and water did not seem to interest him. Instead of
strutting about, he seemed to be positively wabbly on his feet.
Kennedy examined this one longer and more carefully than any of
the rest.

"There are certainly all the symptoms of beriberi, or rather,
polyneuritis, in pigeons, with that bird," admitted Craig,
finally, looking up at Leslie.

The commissioner seemed to be gratified. "You know," he remarked,
"beriberi itself is a common disease in the Orient. There has been
a good deal of study of it and the cause is now known to be the
lack of something in the food, which in the Orient is mostly rice.
Polishing the rice, which removes part of the outer coat, also
takes away something that is necessary for life, which scientists
now call 'vitamines.'"

"I may take some of these samples to study myself?" interrupted
Kennedy, as though the story of vitamines was an old one to him.

"By all means," agreed Leslie.

Craig selected what he wanted, keeping each separate and marked,
and excused himself, saying that he had some investigations of his
own that he wished to make and would let Leslie know the result as
soon as he discovered anything.

Kennedy did not go back directly to the laboratory, however.
Instead, he went up-town and, to my surprise, stopped at one of
the large breweries. What it was that he was after I could not
imagine, but, after a conference with the manager, he obtained
several quarts of brewer's yeast, which he had sent directly down
to the laboratory.

Impatient though I was at this seeming neglect of the principal
figures in the case, I knew, nevertheless, that Kennedy had
already schemed out his campaign and that whatever it was he had
in mind was of first importance.

Back at last in his own laboratory, Craig set to work on the
brewer's yeast, deriving something from it by the plentiful use of
a liquid labeled "Lloyd's reagent," a solution of hydrous aluminum
silicate.

After working for some time, I saw that he had obtained a solid
which he pressed into the form of little whitish tablets. He had
by no means finished, but, noticing my impatience, he placed the
three or four tablets in a little box and handed them to me.

"You might take these over to Leslie in the department laboratory,
Walter," he directed. "Tell him to feed them to that wabbly-
looking pigeon over there--and let me know the moment he observes
any effect."

Glad of the chance to occupy myself, I hastened on the errand, and
even presided over the first feeding of the bird.

When I returned I found that Kennedy had finished his work with
the brewer's yeast and was now devoting himself to the study of
the various samples of food which he had obtained from Leslie.

He was just finishing a test of the baking-powder when I entered,
and his face showed plainly that he was puzzled by something that
he had discovered.

"What is it?" I asked. "Have you found out anything?"

"This seems to be almost plain sodium carbonate," he replied,
mechanically.

"And that indicates?" I prompted.

"Perhaps nothing, in itself," he went on, less abstractedly. "But
the use of sodium carbonate and other things which I have
discovered in other samples disengages carbon dioxide at the
temperature of baking and cooking. If you'll look in that public-
health report on my desk you'll see how the latest investigations
have shown that bicarbonate of soda and a whole list of other
things which liberate carbon dioxide destroy the vitamines Leslie
was talking about. In other words, taken altogether I should
almost say there was evidence that a concerted effort was being
made to affect the food--a result analogous to that of using
polished rice as a staple diet--and producing beriberi, or,
perhaps more accurately, polyneuritis. I can be sure of nothing
yet, but--it's worth following up."

"Then you think Kato--"

"Not too fast," cautioned Craig. "Remember, others had access to
the kitchen, too."

In spite of his hesitancy, I could think only of the two
paragraphs we had read in Mrs. Wardlaw's will, and especially of
the last. Might not Kato have been forced or enticed into a scheme
that promised a safe return and practically no chance of
discovery? What gruesome mystery had been unveiled by the
anonymous letter which had first excited our curiosity?

It was late in the afternoon that Commissioner Leslie called us
up, much excited, to inform us that the drooping pigeon was
already pecking at food and beginning to show some interest in
life. Kennedy seemed greatly gratified as he hung up the receiver.

"Almost dinner-time," he commented, with a glance at his watch. "I
think we'll make another hurried visit to the Wardlaw apartment."

We had no trouble getting in, although as outsiders we were more
tolerated than welcome. Our excuse was that Kennedy had some more
questions which we wished to ask Miss Langdale.

While we waited for her we sat, not in the study, but in the
parlor. The folding-doors into the dining-room were closed, but
across the hall we could tell by the sound when Kato was in the
kitchen and when he crossed the hall.

Once I heard him in the dining-room. Before I knew it Kennedy had
hastily tiptoed across the hall and into the kitchen. He was gone
only a couple of minutes, but it was long enough to place in the
food that was being prepared, and in some unprepared, either the
tablets he had made or a powder he had derived from them crushed
up. When he returned I saw from his manner that the real purpose
of the visit had been accomplished, although when Miss Langdale
appeared he went through the form of questioning her, mostly on
Mrs. Marbury's sickness and death. He did not learn anything that
appeared to be important, but at least he covered up the reason
for his visit. Outside the apartment, Kennedy paused a moment.
"There's nothing to do now but await developments," he meditated.
"Meanwhile, there is no use for us to double up our time together.
I have decided to watch Kato to-night. Suppose you shadow Doctor
Aitken. Perhaps we may get a line on something that way."

The plan seemed admirable to me. In fact, I had been longing for
some action of the sort all the afternoon, while Kennedy had been
engaged in the studies which he evidently deemed more important.

Accordingly, after dinner, we separated, Kennedy going back to the
Forum Apartments to wait until Kato left for the night, while I
walked farther up the Drive to the address given in the directory
as that of Doctor Aitken.

It happened to be the time when the doctor had his office hours
for patients, so that I was sure at least that he was at home when
I took my station just down the street, carefully scrutinizing
every one who entered and left his house.

Nothing happened, however, until the end of the hour during which
he received office calls. As I glanced down the street I was glad
that I had taken an inconspicuous post, for I could see Miss
Langdale approaching. She was not in her nurse's uniform, but
seemed to be off duty for an hour or two, and I must confess she
was a striking figure, even in that neighborhood which was noted
for its pretty and daintily gowned girls. Almost before I knew it
she had entered the English-basement entrance of Doctor Aitken's.

I thought rapidly. What could be the purpose of her visit? Above
all, how was I, on the outside, to find out? I walked down past
the house. But that did no good. In a quandary, I stopped.
Hesitation would get me nothing. Suddenly an idea flashed through
my mind. I turned in and rang the bell.

"It's past the doctor's office hours," informed a servant who
opened the door. "He sees no one after hours."

"But," I lied, "I have an appointment. Don't disturb him. I can
wait."

The waiting-room was empty, I had seen, and I was determined to
get in at any cost. Reluctantly the servant admitted me.

For several moments I sat quietly alone, fearful that the doctor
might open the double doors of his office and discover me. But
nothing happened and I grew bolder. Carefully I tiptoed to the
door. It was of solid oak and practically impervious to sound. The
doors fitted closely, too. Still, by applying my ear, I could make
out the sound of voices on the other side. I strained my ears both
to catch a word now and then and to be sure that I might hear the
approach of anybody outside.

Was Aitken suspiciously interested in the pretty nurse--or was she
suspiciously interested in him?

Suddenly their voices became a trifle more distinct. "Then you
think Doctor Wardlaw has it, too?" I heard her ask. I did not
catch the exact reply, but it was in the affirmative.

They were approaching the door. In a moment it would be opened. I
waited to hear no more, but seized my hat and dashed for the
entrance from the street just in time to escape observation. Miss
Langdale came out shortly, the doctor accompanying her to the
door, and I followed her back to the Forum.

What I had heard only added to the puzzle. Why her anxiety to know
whether Wardlaw himself was affected? Why Aitken's solicitude in
asserting that he was? Were they working together, or were they
really opposed? Which might be using the other?

My queries still unanswered, I returned to Aitken's and waited
about some time, but nothing happened, and finally I went on to
our own apartment.

It was very late when Craig came in, but I was still awake and
waiting for him. Before I could ask him a question he was drawing
from me what I had observed, listening attentively. Evidently he
considered it of great importance, though no remark of his
betrayed what interpretation he put on the episode.

"Have you found anything?" I managed to ask, finally.

"Yes, indeed," he nodded, thoughtfully. "I shadowed Kato from the
Forum. It must have been before Miss Langdale came out that he
left. He lives down-town in a tenement-house. There's something
queer about that Jap."

"I think there is," I agreed. "I don't like his looks."

"But it wasn't he who interested me so much to-night," Craig went
on, ignoring my remark, "as a woman."

"A woman?" I queried, in surprise. "A Jap, too?"

"No, a white woman, rather good-looking, too, with dark hair and
eyes. She seemed to be waiting for him. Afterward I made
inquiries. She has been seen about there before."

"Who was she?" I asked, fancying perhaps Miss Langdale had made
another visit while she was out, although from the time it did not
seem possible.

"I followed her to her house. Her name is Hackstaff--"

"The first trained nurse!" I exclaimed.

"Miss Hackstaff is an enigma," confessed Kennedy. "At first I
thought that perhaps she might be one of those women whom the
Oriental type fascinated, that she and Kato might be plotting.
Then I have considered that perhaps her visits to Kato may be
merely to get information--that she may have an ax to grind. Both
Kato and she will bear watching, and I have made arrangements to
have it done. I've called on that young detective, Chase, whom
I've often used for the routine work of shadowing. There's nothing
more that we can do now until to-morrow, so we might as well turn
in."

Early the next day Kennedy was again at work, both in his own
laboratory and in that of the Health Department, making further
studies of the food and the effect it had on the pigeons, as well
as observing what changes were produced by the white tablets he
had extracted from the yeast.

It was early in the forenoon when the buzzer on the laboratory
door sounded and I opened the door to admit Chase in a high state
of excitement.

"What has happened?" asked Craig, eagerly.

"Many things," reported the young detective, breathlessly. "To
begin with, I followed Miss Hackstaff from her apartment this
morning. She seemed to be worked up over something--perhaps had
had a sleepless night. As nearly as I could make out she was going
about aimlessly. Finally, however, I found that she was getting
into the neighborhood of Doctor Aitken and of the Forum. Well,
when we got to the Forum she stopped and waited in front of it--
oh, I should say almost half an hour. I couldn't make out what it
was she wanted, but at last I found out."

He paused a moment, then raced on, without urging. "Miss Langdale
came out--and you should have seen the Hackstaff woman go for
her." He drew in his breath sharply at the reminiscence. "I
thought there was going to be a murder done--on Riverside Drive.
Miss Langdale screamed and ran back into the apartment. There was
a good deal of confusion. The hall-boys came to the rescue. In the
excitement, I managed to slip into the elevator with her. No one
seemed to think it strange then that an outsider should be
interested. I went up with her--saw Wardlaw, as she poured out the
story. He's a queer one. Is he RIGHT?" "Why?" asked Craig,
indulgently.

"He seems so nervous; things upset him so easily. Yet, after we
had taken care of Miss Langdale and matters had quieted down, I
thought I might get some idea of the cause of the fracas and asked
him if he knew of any reason. Why, he looked at me kind of
blankly, and I swear he acted as though he had almost forgotten it
already. I tell you, he's not RIGHT."

Remembering our own experience, I glanced significantly at Craig.
"Korsakoff's syndrome?" I queried, laconically. "Another example
of a mind confused even on recent events?"

Kennedy, however, was more interested in Chase. "What did Miss
Hackstaff do?" he asked.

"I don't know. I missed her. When I got out again she was gone."

"Pick her up again," directed Craig. "Perhaps you'll get her at
her place. And see, this time, if you can get what I asked you."

"I'll try," returned Chase, much pleased at the words of
commendation which Craig added as he left us again.

On what errand Chase had gone I could not guess, except that it
had something to do with this strange woman who had so
unexpectedly entered the case. Nor was Craig any more
communicative. There were evidently many problems which only
events could clear up even in his mind. Though he did not say
anything, I knew that he was as impatient as I was, and as Leslie,
too, who called up once or twice to learn whether he had
discovered anything. There was nothing to do but wait.

It was early in the afternoon that the telephone rang and I
answered it. It was Chase calling Kennedy. I heard only half the
conversation and there was not much of that, but I knew that
something was about to happen. Craig hastily summoned a cab, then
in rapid succession called up Doctor Aitken and Leslie, for whom
we stopped as our driver shot us over to the Forum Apartments.

There was no ceremony or unnecessary explanation about our
presence, as Kennedy entered and directed Miss Langdale to bring
her patients into the little office-study of Doctor Wardlaw.

Miss Langdale obeyed reluctantly. When she returned I felt that it
was appreciable that a change had taken place. Mrs. Wardlaw, at
least, was improved. She was still ill, but she seemed to take a
more lively interest in what was going on about her. As for Doctor
Wardlaw, however, I could not see that there had been any
improvement in him. His nervousness had not abated. Kato, whom
Kennedy summoned at the same time, preserved his usual
imperturbable exterior. Miss Langdale, in spite of the incident of
the morning, was quite as solicitous as ever of her charges.

We had not long to wait for Doctor Aitken. He arrived, inquiring
anxiously what had happened, although Kennedy gave none of us any
satisfaction immediately as to the cause of his quick action.
Aitken fidgeted uneasily, glancing from Kennedy to Leslie, then to
Miss Langdale, and back to Kennedy, without reading any
explanation in the faces. I knew that Craig was secretly taking
his time both for its effect on those present and to give Chase a
chance.

"Our poisons and our drugs," he began, leisurely, at length, "are
in many instances the close relatives of harmless compounds that
represent the intermediate steps in the daily process of
metabolism. There is much that I might say about protein poisons.
However, that is not exactly what I want to talk about--at least
first."

He stopped to make sure that he had the attention of us all. As a
matter of fact, his manner was such that he attracted even the
vagrant interest of the Wardlaws.

"I do not know how much of his suspicions Commissioner Leslie has
communicated to you," he resumed, "but I believe that you have all
heard of the disease beriberi so common in the Far East and known
to the Japanese as kakke. It is a form of polyneuritis and, as you
doubtless know, is now known to be caused, at least in the Orient,
by the removal of the pericarp in the polishing of rice. Our
milling of flour is, in a minor degree, analogous. To be brief,
the disease arises from the lack in diet of certain substances or
bodies which modern scientists call vitamines. Small quantities of
these vital principles are absolutely essential to normal growth
and health and even to life itself. They are nitrogenous compounds
and their absence gives rise to a class of serious disorders in
which the muscles surrender their store of nitrogen first. The
nerves seems to be the preferred creditors, so to speak. They are
affected only after the muscles begin to waste. It is an abstruse
subject and it is not necessary for me to go deeper into it now."

I controlled my own interest in order to watch those about me.
Kato, for one, was listening attentively, I saw.

"In my studies of the diet of this household," continued Kennedy,
"I have found that substances have been used in preparing food
which kill vitamines. In short, the food has been denatured.
Valuable elements, necessary elements, have been taken away."

"I, sir, not always in kitchen, sir," interrupted Kato, still
deferential. "I not always know--"

With a peremptory wave of his hand Kennedy silenced the Jap.

"It has long been a question," he hurried on, "whether these
vitamines are tangible bodies or just special arrangements of
molecules. Recently government investigators have discovered that
they are bodies that can be isolated by a special process from the
filtrate of brewer's yeast by Lloyd's reagent. Five grams of
this"--he held up some of the tablets he had made--"for a sixty-
kilogram person each day are sufficient. Unknown to you, I have
introduced some of this substance into the food already deficient
in vitamines. I fancy that even now I can detect a change," he
nodded toward Mrs. Wardlaw.

There was a murmur of surprise in the room, but before Craig could
continue further the door opened and Mrs. Wardlaw uttered a
nervous exclamation. There stood Chase with a woman. I recognized
her immediately from Kennedy's description as Miss Hackstaff.

Chase walked deliberately over to Kennedy and handed him
something, while the nurse glanced calmly, almost with pity, at
Mrs. Wardlaw, ignoring Wardlaw, then fixing her gaze venomously on
Miss Langdale. Recalling the incident of the morning, I was ready
to prevent, if necessary, a repetition now. Neither moved. But it
was a thrilling, if silent, drama as the two women glared at each
other.

Kennedy was hastily comparing the anonymous note he had received
with something Chase had brought.

"Some one," he shot out, suddenly, looking up and facing us, "has,
as I have intimated, been removing or destroying the vital
principle in the food--these vitamines. Clearly the purpose was to
make this case look like an epidemic of beriberi, polyneuritis.
That part has been clear to me for some time. It has been the
source of this devilish plot which has been obscure. Just a
moment, Kato, I will do the talking. My detective, Chase, has been
doing some shadowing for me, as well as some turning over of past
history. He has found a woman, a nurse, more than a nurse, a
secret lover, cast off in favor of another. Miss Hackstaff--you
wrote that letter--it is your hand--for revenge--on Miss Langdale
and--"

"You shan't have him!" almost hissed Helen Hackstaff. "If I
cannot--no one shall!"

Natalie Langdale faced her, defiant. "You are a jealous,
suspicious person," she cried. "Doctor Aitken knows--"

"One moment," interrupted Craig. "Mrs. Marbury is gone. Mrs.
Wardlaw is weakened. Yet all who are affected with nerve troubles
are not necessarily suffering from polyneuritis. Some one here has
been dilettanting with death. It is of no use," he thundered,
turning suddenly on a cowering figure. "You stood to win most,
with the money and your unholy love. But Miss Hackstaff, cast off,
has proved your Nemesis. Your nervousness is the nervousness not
of polyneuritis, but of guilt, Doctor Wardlaw!"




IX

THE RUBBER DAGGER


"Hypnotism can't begin to accomplish what Karatoff claims. He's a
fake, Kennedy, a fake."

Professor Leslie Gaines of the Department of Experimental
Psychology at the university paced excitedly up and down Craig's
laboratory.

"There have been complaints to the County Medical Society," he
went on, without stopping, "and they have taken the case up and
arranged a demonstration for this afternoon. I've been delegated
to attend it and report."

I fancied from his tone and manner that there was just a bit more
than professional excitement involved. We did not know Gaines
intimately, though of course Kennedy knew of him and he of
Kennedy. Some years before, I recollected, he had married Miss
Edith Ashmore, whose family was quite prominent socially, and the
marriage had attracted a great deal of attention at the time, for
she had been a student in one of his courses when he was only an
assistant professor.

"Who is Karatoff, anyhow?" asked Kennedy. "What is known about
him?"

"Dr. Galen Karatoff--a Russian, I believe," returned Gaines. "He
claims to be able to treat disease by hypnotism-suggestion, he
calls it, though it is really something more than that. As nearly
as I can make out it must almost amount to thought transference,
telepathy, or some such thing. Oh, he has a large following; in
fact, some very well-known people in the smart set are going to
him. Why," he added, facing us, "Edith--my wife--has become
interested in his hypnotic clinics, as he calls them. I tell her
it is more than half sham, but she won't believe it."

Gaines paused and it was evident that he hesitated over asking
something.

"When is the demonstration?" inquired Kennedy, with unconcealed
interest.

The professor looked at his watch. "I'm going over there now; in
fact, I'm just a bit late--only, I happened to think of you and it
occurred to me that perhaps if you could add something to my
report it might carry weight. Would you like to come with me?
Really, I should think that it might interest you."

So far Kennedy had said little besides asking a question or two. I
knew the symptoms. Gaines need not have hesitated or urged him. It
was just the thing that appealed to him.

"How did Mrs. Gaines become interested in the thing?" queried
Craig, a moment later, outside, as we climbed into the car with
the professor.

"Through an acquaintance who introduced her to Karatoff and the
rest. Carita Belleville, the dancer, you know?"

Kennedy glanced at me and I nodded that I had heard of her. It was
only a few nights before that I had seen Carita at one of the
midnight revues, doing a dance which was described as the
"hypnotic whirl," a wild abandon of grace and motion. Carita
Belleville had burst like a meteor on the sky of the "Great White
Way," blazing a gorgeous trail among the fixed stars of that gay
firmament. She had even been "taken up" by society, or at least a
certain coterie of it, had become much sought after to do
exhibition dancing at social affairs, and now was well known in
the amusement notes of the newspapers and at the fashionable
restaurants. She had hosts of admirers and I had no doubt that
Mrs. Gaines might well have fallen under the spell of her
popularity.

"What is Miss Belleville's interest in Karatoff?" pursued Craig,
keenly.

Gaines shrugged his shoulders. "Notoriety, perhaps," he replied.
"It is a peculiar group that Karatoff has gathered about him, they
tell me."

There was something unsatisfactory about the answer and I imagined
that Gaines meant purposely to leave it so as not to prejudice the
case. Somehow, I felt that there must be something risque in the
doings of Karatoff and his "patients." At any rate, it was only
natural with anything that Carita Belleville was likely to be
concerned with.

There was little time for further questions, for our destination
was not far down the Drive from the university, and the car pulled
up before one of the new handsome and ornate "studio apartments"
up-town.

We followed Gaines into the building, and the hall-boy directed us
to a suite on the first floor.

A moment later we were admitted by Karatoff himself to what had
become known as his "hypnotic clinic," really a most artistically
furnished studio.

Karatoff himself was a tall, dark-haired fellow, bearded, somewhat
sallow. Every feature of his remarkable face, however, was
subordinate to a pair of wonderful, deep-set, piercing eyes. Even
as he spoke, greeting Gaines on the rather ticklish mission he had
come, and accepting us with a quick glance and nod, we could see
instantly that he was, indeed, a fascinating fellow, every inch a
mystic.

His clinic, or, as I have said, studio, carried out well the
impression of mysticism that one derived from the strange
personality who presided over it. There were only two or three
rooms in the apartment, one being the large room down the end of a
very short hall to which he conducted us. It was darkened,
necessarily, since it was on the first floor of the tall building,
and the air seemed to be heavy with odors that suggested the
Orient. Altogether there was a cultivated dreaminess about it that
was no less exotic because studied. Doctor Karatoff paused at the
door to introduce us, and we could see that we were undergoing a
close scrutiny from the party who were assembled there.

On a quaint stand tea was brewing and the whole assemblage had an
atmosphere of bohemian camaraderie which, with the professions of
Karatoff, promised well that Kennedy was not wasting time.

I watched particularly the exchange of greetings between Professor
Gaines and Edith Gaines, who was already there. Neither of them
seemed to be perfectly at ease, though they betrayed as little as
they could. However, one could not help noticing that each was
watching the other, naturally.

Edith Gaines was a pretty little woman, petite, light of hair,
dainty, the very type of woman who craved for and thrived on
attention. Here at least there seemed to be no lack of it. There
was only one other woman in the room who attracted the men
equally, Carita Belleville herself. Carita was indeed a stunning
woman, tall, slender, dark, with a wonderful pair of magnetic
eyes.

As I watched, I could see that both women were quite friendly with
Doctor Karatoff--perhaps even rivals for his attentions. I saw
Gaines watching Carita attentively, never in the mean time failing
for long to lose sight of Mrs. Gaines. Was he trying to estimate
the relative popularity of the two in this strange group? If so, I
failed to see any approval of either.

Introductions were now coming so fast that neither Kennedy nor I
had much opportunity except for the most cursory observation of
the people. Among the men, however, I noticed two especially who
proved worth observation. One was Armand Marchant, well known as a
broker, not so much for his professional doings as for his other
activities. Though successful, he was better known as one of those
who desert Wall Street promptly at the hour of closing, to be
found late in the afternoon at the tea dances up-town.

Another was Cyril Errol, a man of leisure, well known also in the
club world. He had inherited an estate, small, perhaps, but ample
to allow him to maintain appearances. Errol impressed you as being
one to whom the good things of the world appealed mightily, a
hedonist, and, withal, very much attracted to and by the ladies.

It was fortunate that the serving of tea enabled us to look about
and get our bearings. In spite of the suppressed excitement and
obvious restraint of the occasion, we were able to learn much over
the tea-cups.

Errol seemed to vibrate between the group about Mrs. Gaines and
that about Miss Belleville, welcome wherever he went, for he was
what men commonly call a "good mixer." Marchant, on the other
hand, was almost always to be found not far from Edith Gaines.
Perhaps it was the more brilliant conversation that attracted him,
for it ran on many subjects, but it was difficult to explain it so
to my satisfaction. All of which I saw Gaines duly noting, not for
the report he had to make to the Medical Society, but for his own
information. In fact, it was difficult to tell the precise degree
of disapproval with which he regarded Karatoff, Errol, and
Marchant, in turn, as he noted the intimacy of Edith Gaines with
them. I wished that we might observe them all when they did not
know it, for I could not determine whether she was taking pleasure
in piquing the professor or whether she was holding her admirers
in leash in his presence. At any rate, I felt I need lay no claim
to clairvoyance to predict the nature of the report that Gaines
would prepare.

The conversation was at its height when Karatoff detached himself
from one of the groups and took a position in a corner of the
room, alone. Not a word was said by him, yet as if by magic the
buzz of conversation ceased. Karatoff looked about as though proud
of the power of even his silence. Whatever might be said of the
man, at least his very presence seemed to command respect from his
followers.

I had expected that he would make some reference to Gaines and
ourselves and the purpose of the meeting, but he avoided the
subject and, instead, chose to leap right into the middle of
things.

"So that there can be no question about what I am able to do," he
began, "I wish each of you to write on a piece of paper what you
would like to have me cause any one to do or say under hypnotism.
You will please fold the paper tightly, covering the writing. I
will read the paper to myself, still folded up, will hypnotize the
subject, and will make the subject do whatever is desired. That
will be preliminary to what I have to say later about my powers in
hypnotic therapeutics."

Pieces of paper and little lead-pencils were distributed by an
attendant and in the rustling silence that followed each cudgeled
his brain for something that would put to the test the powers of
Karatoff.

Thinking, I looked about the room. Near the speaker stood a table
on which lay a curious collection of games and books, musical
instruments, and other things that might suggest actions to be
performed in the test. My eye wandered to a phonograph standing
next the table. Somehow, I could not get Mrs. Gaines and Carita
Belleville out of my head.

Slowly I wrote, "Have Mrs. Gaines pick out a record, play it on
the phonograph, then let her do as she pleases."

Some moments elapsed while the others wrote. Apparently they were
trying to devise methods of testing Doctor Karatoff's mettle. Then
the papers were collected and deposited on the table beside him.

Apparently at random Karatoff picked out one of the folded papers,
then, seemingly without looking at it and certainly without
unfolding it, as far as I could determine, he held it up to his
forehead.

It was an old trick, I knew. Perhaps he had palmed a sponge wet
with alcohol or some other liquid, had brushed it over the paper,
making the writing visible through it, and drying out rapidly so
as to leave the paper opaque again long before any of us saw it a
second time. Or was he really exercising some occult power? At any
rate, he read it, or pretended to read it, at least.

"I am asked to hypnotize Mrs. Gaines," he announced, dropping the
paper unconcernedly on the table beside the other pile, as though
this were mere child's play for his powers. It was something of a
shock to realize that it was my paper he had chanced to pick up
first, and I leaned forward eagerly, watching.

Mrs. Gaines rose and every eye was riveted on her as Karatoff
placed her in an easy-chair before him. There was an expectant
silence, as Karatoff moved the chair so that she could concentrate
her attention only on a bright silver globe suspended from the
ceiling. The half-light, the heavy atmosphere, the quiet, assured
manner of the chief actor in the scene, all combined to make
hypnotization as nearly possible as circumstances could. Karatoff
moved before her, passing his hands with a peculiar motion before
her eyes. It seemed an incredibly short time in which Edith Gaines
yielded to the strange force which fascinated the group.

"Quite susceptible," murmured Kennedy, beside me, engrossed in the
operation.

"It is my test," I whispered back, and he nodded.

Slowly Edith Gaines rose from the chair, faced us with unseeing
eyes, except as Karatoff directed. Karatoff himself was a study.
It seemed as if he had focused every ounce of his faculties on the
accomplishment of the task in hand. Slowly still the woman moved,
as if in a dream walk, over toward the phonograph, reached into
the cabinet beneath it and drew forth a book of records. Karatoff
faced us, as if to assure us that at that point he had resigned
his control and was now letting her act for her subconscious self.

Her fingers passed over page after page until finally she stopped,
drew forth the record, placed it on the machine, wound it, then
placed the record on the revolving disk.

My first surprise was quickly changed to gratification. She had
picked out the music to the "Hypnotic Whirl." I bent forward, more
intent. What would she do next?

As she turned I could see, even in the dim light, a heightened
color in her cheeks, as though the excitement of the catchy music
had infected her. A moment later she was executing, and very
creditably, too, an imitation of Carita herself in the Revue. What
did it mean? Was it that consciously or unconsciously she was
taking the slender dancer as her model? The skill and knowledge
that she put into the dance showed plainly.

Next to Kennedy, I saw Gaines leaning far forward, looking now at
his wife, now at the little group. I followed his eyes. To my
surprise, I saw Marchant, his gaze riveted on Edith Gaines as if
she had been the star performer in a play. Evidently my chance
request to Karatoff had been builded better than I knew. I ran my
gaze over the others. Errol was no less engrossed than Marchant.
Quickly I glanced at Carita, wondering whether she might be
gratified by the performance of a pupil. Whether it was natural
grace or real hypnotism in the "Hypnotic Whirl," I was surprised
to see on Carita's face something that looked strangely akin to
jealousy. It was as though some other woman had usurped her
prerogative. She leaned over to speak to Errol with the easy
familiarity of an old admirer. I could not hear what was said and
perhaps it was inconsequential. In fact, it must have been the
very inconsequentiality of his reply that piqued her. He glanced
at Marchant a moment, as if she had said something about him, then
back at Edith Gaines. On his part, Professor Gaines was growing
more and more furious.

I had just about decided that the little drama in the audience was
of far more importance and interest than even the dance, when the
music ceased. Karatoff approached, took Mrs. Gaines by the hand,
led her back to the chair, and, at a word, she regained her normal
consciousness. As she rose, still in a daze it seemed, it was
quite evident that she had no waking realization of what had
happened, for she walked back and sat down beside her husband,
quite as though nothing had happened.

As for me, I could not help wondering what had actually happened.
What did it all mean? Had Mrs. Gaines expressed her own self--or
was it Karatoff--or Marchant--or Errol? What was the part played
by Carita Belleville? Gaines did not betray anything to her, but
their mutual attitude was eloquent. There was something of which
he disapproved and she knew it, some lack of harmony. What was the
cause?

As for Karatoff's exhibition, it was all truly remarkable, whether
in his therapeutics the man was a faker or not.

Karatoff seemed to realize that he had made a hit. Without giving
any one a chance to question him, he reached down quickly and
picked up another of the papers, repeating the process through
which he had gone before.

"Mr. Errol," he summoned, placing the second folded paper on the
table with the first.

Errol rose and went forward and Karatoff placed him in the chair
as he had Mrs. Gaines. There seemed to be no hesitation, at least
on the part of Karatoff's followers, to being hypnotized.

Whatever it was written on the paper, the writer had evidently not
trusted to chance, as I had, but had told specifically what to do.

At the mute bidding of Karatoff Errol rose. We watched
breathlessly. Deliberately he walked across the room to the table,
and, to the astonishment of all save one, picked up a rubber
dagger, one of those with which children play, which was lying in
the miscellaneous pile on the table. I had not noticed it, but
some one's keen eye had, and evidently it had suggested a
melodramatic request.

Quickly Errol turned. If he had been a motion-picture actor, he
could not have portrayed better the similitude of hate that was
written on his face. A few strides and he had advanced toward our
little audience, now keyed up to the highest pitch of excitement
by the extraordinary exhibition.

"Of course," remarked Karatoff, as at a word Errol paused, still
poising the dagger, "you know that under hypnotism in the
psychological laboratory a patient has often struck at his 'enemy'
with a rubber dagger, going through all the motions of real
passion. Now!"

No word was said by Karatoff to indicate to Errol what it was that
he was to do. But a gasp went up from some one as he took another
step and it was evident that it was Marchant whom he had singled
out. For just a moment Errol poised the rubber dagger over his
"victim," as if gloating. It was dramatic, realistic. As Errol
paused, Marchant smiled at the rest of us, a sickly smile, I
thought, as though he would have said that the play was being
carried too far.

Never for a moment did Errol take from him the menacing look. It
was only a moment in the play, yet it was so unexpected that it
seemed ages. Then, swiftly, down came the dagger on Marchant's
left side just over the breast, the rubber point bending pliantly
as it descended.

A sharp cry escaped Marchant. I looked quickly. He had fallen
forward, face down, on the floor.

Edith Gaines screamed as we rushed to Marchant and turned him
over. For the moment, as Kennedy, Karatoff, and Gaines bent over
him and endeavored to loosen his collar and apply a restorative,
consternation reigned in the little circle. I bent over, too, and
looked first at Marchant's flushed face, then at Kennedy. Marchant
was dead!

There was not a mark on him, apparently. Only a moment before he
had been one of us. We could look at one another only in
amazement, tinged with fear. Killed by a rubber dagger? Was it
possible?

"Call an ambulance--quick!" directed Kennedy to me, though I knew
that he knew it was of no use except as a matter of form.

We stood about the prostrate form, stunned. In a few moments the
police would be there. Instinctively we looked at Karatoff.
Plainly he was nervous and overwrought now. His voice shook as he
brought Errol out of the trance, and Errol, dazed,
uncomprehending, struggled to take in the horribly unreal tragedy
which greeted his return to consciousness.

"It--it was an accident," muttered Karatoff, eagerly trying to
justify himself, though trembling for once in his life.
"Arteriosclerosis, perhaps, hardening of the arteries, some
weakness of the heart. I never--"

He cut the words short as Edith Gaines reeled and fell into her
husband's arms. She seemed completely prostrated by the shock. Or
was it weakness following the high mental tension of her own
hypnotization? Together we endeavored to revive her, waiting for
the first flutter of her eyelids, which seemed an interminable
time.

Errol in the mean time was pacing the floor like one in a, dream.
Events had followed one another so fast in the confusion that I
had only an unrelated series of impressions. It was not until a
moment later that I realized the full import of the affair, when I
saw Kennedy standing near the table in the position Karatoff had
assumed, a strange look of perplexity on his face. Slowly I
realized what was the cause. The papers on which were written the
requests for the exhibitions of Karatoff's skill were gone!

Whatever was done must be done quickly, and Kennedy looked about
with a glance that missed nothing. Before I could say a word about
the papers he had crossed the room to where Marchant had been
standing in the little group about Edith Gaines as we entered. On
a side-table stood the teacup from which he had been sipping. With
his back to the rest, Kennedy drew from his breast pocket a little
emergency case he carried containing a few thin miniature glass
tubes. Quickly he poured the few drops of the dregs of the tea
into one of the tubes, then into others tea from the other cups.

Again he looked at the face of Marchant as though trying to read
in the horrified smile that had petrified on it some mysterious
secret hidden underneath. Slowly the question was shaping in my
mind, was it, as Karatoff would have us believe, an accident?

The clang of a bell outside threw us all into worse confusion, and
a moment later, almost together, a white-coated surgeon and a
blue-coated policeman burst into the room. It seemed almost no
time, in the swirl of events, before the policeman was joined by a
detective assigned by the Central Office to that district.

"Well, doctor," demanded the detective as he entered, "what's the
verdict?"

"Arteriosclerosis, I think," replied the young surgeon. "They tell
me there was some kind of hypnotic seance going on. One of them
named Errol struck at him with a rubber dagger, and--"

"Get out!" scoffed the Central Office man. "Killed by a rubber
dagger! Say, what do you think we are? What did you find when you
entered, sergeant?"

The policeman handed the detective the rubber dagger which he had
picked up, forgotten, on the floor where Errol had dropped it when
he came out from the hypnotization.

The detective took it gingerly and suspiciously, with a growl.
"I'll have the point of this analyzed. It may be--well--we won't
say what may be. But I can tell you what is. You, Doctor Karatoff,
or whatever your name is, and you, Mr. Errol, are under arrest.
It's a good deal easier to take you now than it will be later.
Then if you can get a judge to release you, we'll at least know
where you are."

"This is outrageous, preposterous!" stormed Karatoff.

"Can't help it," returned the officer, coolly.

"Why," exclaimed Carita Belleville, excitedly projecting herself
before the two prisoners, "it's ridiculous! Even the ambulance
surgeon says it was arteriosclerosis, an accident. I--"

"Very well, madam," calmed the sergeant. "So much the better.
They'll get out of our hands that much quicker. Just at present it
is my duty."

Errol was standing silent, his eyes averted from the hideous form
on the floor, not by word or action betraying a feeling. The
police moved to the door.

Weak and trembling still from the triple shock she had received,
Edith Gaines leaned heavily on the arm of her husband, but it was,
as nearly as I could make out, only for physical support.

"I told you, Edith, it was a dangerous business," I heard him
mutter. "Only I never contemplated that they'd carry it this far.
Now you see what such foolishness can lead to."

Weak though she was, she drew away and flashed a glance at him,
resenting his man's "I-told-you-so" manner. The last I saw of them
in the confusion was as they drove off in the car, still
unreconciled.

Kennedy seemed well contented, for the present at least, to allow
the police a free hand with Errol and Karatoff. As for me, Mrs.
Gaines and Carita Belleville presented a perplexing problem, but I
said nothing, for he was hurrying back now to his laboratory.

At once he drew forth the little tube containing the few drops of
tea and emptied a drop or two into a beaker of freshly distilled
water as carefully as if the tea had been some elixir of life. As
he was examining the contents of the beaker his face clouded with
thought.

"Do you find anything?" I asked, eagerly.

Kennedy shook his head. "There's something wrong," he hazarded.
"Perhaps it's only fancy, but I am sure that there is something
with a slight odor in the tea, something tea-like, but with a more
bitter taste, something that would be nauseous if not concealed in
the tea. There's more than tannin and sugar here."

"Then you think that some one present placed something in the
tea?" I inquired, shuddering at the thought that we had run some
unknown danger.

"I can't just say, without further investigation of this and the
other samples I took."

"Still, you have eliminated that ridiculous dagger theory," I
ventured.

"The police can never appreciate the part it played," Craig
answered, non-committally, laying out various chemicals
preparatory to his exhaustive analysis. "I began to suspect
something the moment I noticed that those notes which we all wrote
were gone. When we find out about this tea we may find who took
them. Perhaps the mystery is not such a mystery after all, then."

There seemed to be nothing that I could do, in the mean time,
except to refrain from hindering Kennedy in his investigations,
and I decided to leave him at the laboratory while I devoted my
time to watching what the police might by chance turn up, even if
they should prove to be working on the wrong angle of the case.

I soon found that they were showing energy, if nothing else.
Although it was so soon after the death of Marchant, they had
determined that there could not have been anything but rubber on
the end of the toy dagger which had excited the doubts of the
detective.

As for the autopsy that was performed on Marchant, it did, indeed,
show that he was suffering from hardening of the arteries, due to
his manner of living, as Karatoff had asserted. Indeed, the police
succeeded in showing that it was just for that trouble that
Marchant was going to Karatoff, which, to my mind, seemed quite
sufficient to establish the therapeutic hypnotist as all that
Gaines had accused him of being. Even to my lay mind the treatment
of arteriosclerosis by mental healing seemed, to say the least,
incongruous.

Yet the evidence against Karatoff and Errol was so flimsy that
they had little trouble in getting released on bail, though, of
course, it was fixed very high.

My own inquiries among the other reporters on the Star who might
know something offered a more promising lead. I soon found that
Errol had none too savory a reputation. His manner of life had
added nothing to his slender means, and there was a general
impression among his fellow club-members that unfortunate
investments had made serious inroads into the principal of his
fortune. Still, I hesitated to form even an opinion on gossip.

Quite unsatisfied with the result of my investigation, I could not
restrain my impatience to get back to the laboratory to find out
whether Kennedy had made any progress in his tests of the tea.

"If you had been five minutes earlier," he greeted me, "you would
have been surprised to find a visitor."

"A visitor?" I repeated. "Who?"

"Carita Belleville," he replied, enjoying my incredulity.

"What could she want?" I asked, at length.

"That's what I've been wondering," he agreed "Her excuse was
plausible. She said that she had just heard why I had come with
Gaines. I suppose it was half an hour that she spent endeavoring
to convince me that Karatoff and Errol could not possibly have had
any other connection than accidental with the death of Marchant."

"Could it have been a word for them and half an hour for herself?"
I queried, mystified.

Kennedy shrugged. "I can't say. At any rate, I must see both
Karatoff and Errol, now that they are out. Perhaps they did send
her, thinking I might fall for her. She hinted pretty broadly at
using my influence with Gaines on his report. Then, again. she may
simply have been wondering how she herself stood."

"Have you found anything?" I asked, noticing that his laboratory
table was piled high with its usual paraphernalia.

"Yes," he replied, laconically, taking a bottle of concentrated
sulphuric acid and pouring a few drops in a beaker of slightly
tinged water.

The water turned slowly to a beautiful green. No sooner was the
reaction complete than he took some bromine and added it. Slowly
again the water changed, this time from the green to a peculiar
violet red. Adding more water restored the green color

"That's the Grandeau test," he nodded, with satisfaction. "I've
tried the physiological test, too, with frogs from the biological
department, and it shows the effect on the heart that I--"

"What shows the effect?" I interrupted, somewhat impatiently.

"Oh, to be sure," he smiled. "I forgot I hadn't told you what I
suspected. Why, digitalis--foxglove, you know. I suppose it never
occurred to the police that the rubber dagger might have covered
up a peculiar poisoning? Well, if they'll take the contents of the
stomach, in alcohol, with a little water acidulated, strain off
the filtrate and try it on a dog, they will see that its effect is
the effect of digitalis. Digitalis is an accumulative poison and a
powerful stimulant of arterial walls, by experimental evidence an
ideal drug for the purpose of increasing blood pressure. Don't you
see it?" he added, excitedly. "The rubber dagger was only a means
to an end. Some one who knew the weakness of Marchant first placed
digitalis in his tea. That was possible because of the taste of
the tea. Then, in the excitement of the act pantomimed by Errol,
Marchant's disease carried him off, exactly as was to be expected
under the circumstances. It was clever, diabolically clever.
Whoever did it destroyed the note in which the act was suggested
and counted that no one would ever stop to search for a poison in
the tangle of events."

Slowly but clearly I began to realize how certainly Kennedy was
reconstructing the strange case. But who was it? What was the
motive back of this sinister murder that had been so carefully
planned that no one would ever suspect a crime?

I had hardly framed the queries when our telephone rang. It was
the Central Office man. The detective had anticipated my own line
of inquiry, only had gone much further with it. He had found a
clear record of the business relations existing between Errol and
Marchant. One episode consisted of a stock deal between them in
which Errol had invested in a stock which Marchant was promoting
and was known to be what brokers call "cats and dogs." That, I
reasoned, must have been the basis of the gossip that Errol had
suffered financial losses that seriously impaired his little
fortune. It was an important item and Kennedy accepted it gladly,
but said nothing of his own discovery. The time had not arrived
yet to come out into the open.

For a few moments after the talk with the detective Kennedy seemed
to be revolving the case, as though in doubt whether the new
information cleared it up or added to the mystery. Then he rose
suddenly.

"We must find Karatoff," he announced.

Whatever might have been the connection of the hypnotist with this
strange case, he was far too clever to betray himself by any such
misstep as seeming to avoid inquiry. We found him easily at his
studio apartment, nor did we have any difficulty in gaining
admittance. He knew that he was watched and that frankness was his
best weapon of defense.

"Of course," opened Kennedy, "you know that investigation has
shown that you were right in your diagnosis of the trouble with
Marchant. Was it arteriosclerosis for which you were treating
him?"

"It would be unprofessional to discuss it," hastily parried
Karatoff, "but, since Mr. Marchant is now dead, I think I may say
that it was. In fact, few persons, outside of those whom I have
associated about me, realize to what a wonderful extent hypnotism
may be carried in the treatment of disease. Why, I have even had
wonderful success with such disorders as diabetes mellitus. We are
only on the threshold of understanding what a wonderful thing is
the human mind in its effect on the material body."

"But another patient might have known what Marchant was being
treated for?" interrupted Kennedy, ignoring the defense of
Karatoff, which was proceeding along the stereotyped lines of such
vagaries which seem never to be without followers.

Karatoff looked at him a moment in surprise. Evidently he was
doing some hasty mental calculation to determine what was Craig's
ulterior motive. And, in spite of his almost uncanny claims and
performances, I could see that he was able to read Kennedy's mind
no whit better than myself.

"I suppose so," he admitted. "No doctor was ever able to control
his patients' tongues. Sometimes they boast of their diseases."

"Especially if they are women?" hinted Kennedy, watching the
effect of the remark keenly. "I have just had the pleasure of a
visit from Carita Belleville in my laboratory."

"Indeed?" returned Karatoff, with difficulty restraining his
curiosity. "Miss Belleville has been very kind in introducing me
to some of her friends and acquaintances, and I flatter myself
that I have been able to do them much good."

"Then she was not a patient?" pursued Kennedy, studiously avoiding
enlightening Karatoff on the visit.

"Rather a friend," he replied, quickly. "It was she who introduced
Mr. Errol."

"They are quite intimate, I believe," put in Kennedy at a chance.

"Really, I knew very little about it," Karatoff avoided.

"Did she introduce Mr. Marchant?"

"She introduced Mrs. Gaines, who introduced Mr. Marchant," the
hypnotist replied, with apparent frankness.

"You were treating Mrs. Gaines?" asked Craig, again shifting the
attack unexpectedly.

"Yes," admitted Karatoff, stopping.

"I imagine her trouble was more mental than physical," remarked
Kennedy, in a casual tone, as though feeling his way.

Karatoff looked up keenly, but was unable to read Kennedy's face.
"I think," he said, slowly, "that one trouble was that Mrs. Gaines
liked the social life better than the simple life."

"Your clinic, Mr. Marchant, and the rest better than her husband
and the social life at the university," amplified Kennedy. "I
think you are right. She had drifted away from her husband, and
when a woman does that she has hosts of admirers--of a certain
sort. I should say that Mr. Errol was the kind who would care more
for the social life than the simple life, as you put it, too."

I did not gather in what direction Kennedy was tending, but it was
evident that Karatoff felt more at ease. Was it because the quest
seemed to be leading away from himself?

"I had noticed something of the sort," he ventured. "I saw that
they were alike in that respect, but, of course, Mr. Marchant was
her friend."

Suddenly the implication flashed over me, but before I could say
anything Kennedy cut in, "Then Mr. Errol might have been enacting
under hypnotism what were really his own feelings and desires?"

"I cannot say that," replied Karatoff, seeking to dodge the issue.
"But under the influence of suggestion I suppose it is true that
an evil-minded person might suggest to another the commission of a
crime, and the other, deprived of free will, might do it. The
rubber dagger has often been used for sham murders. The
possibility of actual murder cannot be denied. In this case,
however, there can be no question that it was an unfortunate
accident."

"No question?" demanded Kennedy, directly.

If Karatoff was concealing anything, he made good concealment.
Either to protect himself or another he showed no evidence of
weakening his first theory of the case.

"No question as far as I know," he reiterated.

I wondered whether Kennedy planned to enlighten him on the results
of his laboratory tests, but was afraid to look at either for fear
of betraying some hint. I was glad I did not. Kennedy's next
question carried him far afield from the subject.

"Did you know that the Medical Society were interested in you and
your clinic before the demonstration before Professor Gaines was
arranged?"

"I suspected some one was interested," answered Karatoff, quickly,
"But I had no idea who it might be. As I think it over now,
perhaps it was Professor Gaines who instigated the whole inquiry.
He would most likely be interested. My work is so far in advance
of any that the conservative psychologists do that he would
naturally feel hostile, would he not?"

"Especially with the added personal motive of knowing that his
wife was one of your patients, along with Carita Belleville,
Marchant, Errol, and the rest," added Kennedy.

Karatoff smiled. "I would not have said that myself. But since you
have said it, I cannot help admitting its truth. Don't you suppose
I could predict the nature of any report he would make?"

Karatoff faced Kennedy squarely. There was an air almost of
triumph in his eyes. "I think I had better say no more, except
under the advice of my lawyer," he remarked, finally. "When the
police want me, they can find me here."

Quite evident to me now, as we went out of the studio, was the
fact that Karatoff considered himself a martyr, that he was not
only the victim of an accident, but of persecution as well.

"The fishing was good," remarked Kennedy, tersely, as we reached
the street. "Now before I see Errol I should like to see Gaines
again."

I tried to reason it out as we walked along in silence. Marchant
had known Edith Gaines intimately. Carita Belleville had known
Errol as well. I recalled Errol hovering about Mrs. Gaines at the
tea and the incident during the seance when Carita Belleville had
betrayed her annoyance over some remark by Errol. The dancing by
Edith Gaines had given a flash of the jealous nature of the woman.
Had it been interest in Errol that had led her to visit the
laboratory? Kennedy was weaving a web about some one, I knew. But
about whom?

As we passed a corner, he paused, entered a drugstore and called
up several numbers at a pay-station telephone booth. Then we
turned into the campus and proceeded rapidly toward the laboratory
of the psychological department. Gaines was there, sitting at his
desk, writing, as we entered.

"I'm glad to see you," he greeted, laying down his work. "I am
just finishing the draft of my report on that Karatoff affair. I
have been trying to reach you by telephone to know whether you
would add anything to it. Is there anything new?"

"Yes," returned Kennedy, "there is something new. I've just come
from Karatoff's and on the way I decided suddenly that it was time
we did something. So I have called up, and the police will bring
Errol here, as well as Miss Belleville. Karatoff will come--he
won't dare stay away; and I also took the liberty of calling Mrs.
Gaines."

"To come here?" repeated Gaines, in mild surprise. "All of them?"

"Yes. I hope you will pardon me for intruding, but I want to
borrow some of your psychological laboratory apparatus, and I
thought the easiest way would be to use it here rather than take
it all over to my place and set it up again."

"I'm sure everything is at your service," offered Gaines. "It's a
little unexpected, but if the others can stand the chaotic
condition of the room, I guess we can."

Kennedy had been running his eye over the various instruments
which Gaines and his students used in their studies, and was now
examining something in a corner on a little table. It was a
peculiar affair, quite simple, but conveying to me no idea of its
use. There seemed to be a cuff, a glass chamber full of water into
which it fitted, tubes and wires that attached various dials and
recording instruments to the chamber, and what looked like a
chronograph.

"That is my new plethysmograph," remarked Gaines, noting with some
satisfaction how Kennedy had singled it out.

"I've heard the students talk of it," returned Kennedy. "It's an
improved apparatus, Walter, that records one's blood flow." I
nodded politely and concealed my ignorance in a discreet silence,
hoping that Gaines would voluntarily enlighten us.

"One of my students is preparing an exhaustive table," went on
Gaines, as I had hoped, "showing the effects on blood distribution
of different stimuli--for instance, cold, heat, chloroform,
arenalin, desire, disgust, fear; physical conditions, drugs,
emotions--all sorts of things can be studied by this
plethysmograph which can be set to record blood flow through the
brain, the extremities, any part of the body. When the thing is
charted I think we shall have opened up a new field."

"Certainly a very promising one for me," put in Kennedy. "How has
this machine been improved? I've seen the old ones, but this is
the first time I've seen this. How does it work?"

"Well," explained Gaines, with just a touch of pride, "you see,
for studying blood flow in the extremities, I slip this cuff over
my arm, we'll say. Suppose it is the effect of pain I want to
study. Just jab that needle in my other arm. Don't mind. It's in
the interest of science. See, when I winced then, the
plethysmograph recorded it. It smarts a bit and I'm trying to
imagine it smarts worse. You'll see how pain affects blood flow."

As he watched the indicator, Kennedy asked one question after
another about the working of the machine, and the manner in which
the modern psychologist was studying every emotion.

"By the way, Walter," he interrupted, glancing at his watch, "call
up and see if they've started with Errol and the rest yet. Don't
stop, Gaines. I must understand this thing before they get here.
It's just the thing I want."

"I should be glad to let you have it, then," replied Gaines.

"I think I'll need something new with these people," went on
Kennedy. "Why, do you know what I've discovered?"

"No, but I hope it's something I can add to my report?"

"Perhaps. We'll see. In the first place, I found that digitalis
had been put in Marchant's tea."

"They'll be here directly," I reported from the telephone, hanging
it up and joining them again.

"It couldn't have been an accident, as Karatoff said," went on
Kennedy, rapidly. "The drug increased the blood pressure of
Marchant, who was already suffering from hardening of the
arteries. In short, it is my belief that the episode of the rubber
dagger was deliberately planned, an elaborate scheme to get
Marchant out of the way. No one else seems to have noticed it, but
those slips of paper on which we all wrote have disappeared. At
the worst, it would look like an accident, Karatoff would be
blamed, and--" There was a noise outside as the car pulled up.

"Here, let me take this off before any of them see it," whispered
Gaines, removing the cuff, just as the door opened and Errol and
Karatoff, Carita Belleville and Edith Gaines entered.

Before even a word of greeting passed, Kennedy stepped forward.
"It was NOT an accident," he repeated. "It was a deliberately
planned, apparently safe means of revenge on Marchant, the lover
of Mrs. Gaines. Without your new plethysmograph, Gaines, you might
have thrown it on an innocent person!"




X

THE SUBMARINE MINE


"Here's the bullet. What I want you to do, Professor Kennedy, is
to catch the crank who fired it."

Capt. Lansing Marlowe, head of the new American Shipbuilding
Trust, had summoned us in haste to the Belleclaire and had met us
in his suite with his daughter Marjorie. Only a glance was needed
to see that it was she, far more than her father, who was worried.

"You must catch him," she appealed. "Father's life is in danger.
Oh, you simply MUST."

I knew Captain Marlowe to be a proverbial fire-eater, but in this
case, at least, he was no alarmist. For, on the table, as he
spoke, he laid a real bullet.

Marjorie Marlowe shuddered at the mere sight of it and glanced
apprehensively at him as if to reassure herself. She was a tall,
slender girl, scarcely out of her teens, whose face was one of
those quite as striking for its character as its beauty. The death
of her mother a few years before had placed on her much of the
responsibility of the captain's household and with it a charm
added to youth.

More under the spell of her plea than even Marlowe's vigorous
urging, Kennedy, without a word, picked up the bullet and examined
it. It was one of the modern spitzer type, quite short, conical in
shape, tapering gradually, with the center of gravity back near
the base.

"I suppose you know," went on the captain, eagerly, "that our
company is getting ready to-morrow to launch the Usona, the
largest liner that has ever been built on this side of the water--
the name is made up of the initials of the United States of North
America.

"Just now," he added, enthusiastically, "is what I call the golden
opportunity for American shipping. While England and Germany are
crippled, it's our chance to put the American flag on the sea as
it was in the old days, and we're going to do it. Why, the
shipyards of my company are worked beyond their capacity now."

Somehow the captain's enthusiasm was contagious. I could see that
his daughter felt it, that she was full of fire over the idea. But
at the same time something vastly more personal weighed on her
mind.

"But, father," she interrupted, anxiously, "tell them about the
BULLET."

The captain smiled indulgently as though he would say that he was
a tough old bird to wing. It was only a mask to hide the fighting
spirit underneath.

"We've had nothing but trouble ever since we laid the keel of that
ship," he continued, pugnaciously, "strikes, a fire in the yard,
delays, about everything that could happen. Lately we've noticed a
motor-boat hanging about the river-front of the yards. So I've had
a boat of my own patrolling the river."

"What sort of craft is this other?" inquired Kennedy, interested
at once.

"A very fast one--like those express cruisers that we hear so much
about now."

"Whose is it? Who was in it? Have you any idea?"

Marlowe shook his head doubtfully. "No idea. I don't know who owns
the boat or who runs it. My men tell me they think they've seen a
woman in it sometimes, though. I've been trying to figure it out.
Why should it be hanging about? It can't be spying. There isn't
any secrecy about the Usona. Why is it? It's a mystery."

"And the shot?" prompted Craig, tapping the bullet.

"Oh yes, let me tell you. Last night, Marjorie and I arrived from
Bar Harbor on my yacht, for the launching. It's anchored off the
yard now. Well, early this morning, while it was still gray and
misty, I was up. I'll confess I'm worried over to-morrow. I hadn't
been able to forget that cruiser. I was out on the deck, peering
into the mist, when I'm sure I saw her. I was just giving a signal
to the boat we have patrolling, when a shot whistled past me and
the bullet buried itself in the woodwork of the main saloon back
of me. I dug it out of the wood with my knife--so you see I got it
almost unflattened. That's all I have got, too. The cruiser made a
getaway, clean."

"I'm sure it was aimed at him," Marjorie exclaimed. "I don't think
it was chance. Don't you see? They've tried everything else. Now
if they could get my father, the head of the company, that would
be a blow that would cripple the trust."

Marlowe patted his daughter's hand reassuringly and smiled again,
as though not to magnify the incident.

"Marjorie was so alarmed," he confessed, "that nothing would
satisfy her but that I should come ashore and stay here at the
Belleclaire, where we always put up when we are in town."

The telephone rang and Marjorie answered it. "I hope you'll pardon
me," she excused, hanging up the receiver. "They want me very much
down-stairs." Then appealing, she added: "I'll have to leave you
with father. But, please, you must catch that crank who is
threatening him."

"I shall do my level best," promised Kennedy. "You may depend on
that."

"You see," explained the captain as she left us, "I've invited
quite a large party to attend the launching, for one reason or
another. Marjorie must play hostess. They're mostly here at the
hotel. Perhaps you saw some of them as you came in."

Craig was still scanning the bullet. "It looks almost as if some
one had dum-dummed it," he remarked, finally. "It's curiously
done, too. Just look at those grooves."

Both the captain and I looked. It had a hard jacket of cupro-
nickel, like the army bullet, covering a core of softer metal.
Some one had notched or scored the jacket as if with a sharp
knife, though not completely through it. Had it been done for the
purpose of inflicting a more frightful wound if it struck the
captain?

"There've been other shots, too," went on Marlowe. "One of my
watchmen was wounded the night before. It didn't took like a
serious wound, in the leg. Yet the poor fellow seems to be in a
bad way, they tell me."

"How is that?" asked Craig, glancing up quickly from studying the
bullet.

"The wound seems to be all puffed up, and very painful. It won't
heal, and he seems to be weak and feverish. Why, I'm afraid the
man will die."

"I'd like to see that case," remarked Kennedy, thoughtfully.

"Very well. I'll have you driven to the hospital where we have had
to take him."

"I'd like to see the yards, too, and the Usona," he added.

"All right. After you go to the hospital I'll meet you at the
yards at noon. Now if you'll come down-stairs with me, I'll get my
car and have you taken to the hospital first."

We followed Marlowe into the elevator and rode down. In the large
parlor we saw that Marjorie Marlowe had joined a group of the
guests, and the captain turned aside to introduce us.

Among them I noticed a striking-looking woman, somewhat older than
Marjorie. She turned as we approached and greeted the captain
cordially.

"I'm so glad there was nothing serious this morning," she
remarked, extending her hand to him.

"Oh, nothing at all, nothing at all," he returned, holding the
hand, I thought, just a bit longer than was necessary. Then he
turned to us, "Miss Alma Hillman, let me present Professor Kennedy
and Mr. Jameson."

I was not so preoccupied in taking in the group that I did not
notice that the captain was more than ordinarily attentive to her.
Nor can I say that I blamed him, for, although he might almost
have been her father in age, there was a fascination about her
that youth does not often possess.

Talking with her had been a young man, slender, good-looking, with
almost a military bearing.

"Mr. Ogilvie Fitzhugh," introduced Marjorie, seeing that her
father was neglecting his duties.

Fitzhugh bowed and shook hands, murmured something stereotyped,
and turned again to speak to Marjorie.

I watched the young people closely. If Captain Marlowe was
interested in Alma, it was more than evident that Fitzhugh was
absolutely captivated by Marjorie, and I fancied that Marjorie was
not averse to him, for he had a personality and a manner which
were very pleasing.

As the conversation ran gaily on to the launching and the
gathering party of notables who were expected that night and the
next day, I noticed that a dark-eyed, dark-haired, olive-
complexioned young man approached and joined us.

"Doctor Gavira," said Marlowe, turning to us, his tone indicating
that he was well acquainted about the hotel. "He is our house
physician."

Gavira also was welcomed in the party, chatting with animation. It
was apparent that the physician also was very popular with the
ladies, and it needed only half an eye to discern that Fitzhugh
was jealous when he talked to Marjorie, while Marlowe but ill
concealed his restlessness when Gavira spoke to Alma. As for Alma,
she seemed to treat all men impartially, except that just now it
pleased her to bestow the favor of her attention on the captain.

Just then a young lady, all in white, passed. Plainly she did not
belong to the group, though she was much interested in it. As his
eye roved over the parlor, Gavira caught her glance and bowed. She
returned it, but her look did not linger. For a moment she glanced
sharply at Fitzhugh, still talking to Marjorie, then at Marlowe
and Alma Hillman. She was a very pretty girl with eyes that it was
impossible to control. Perhaps there was somewhat of the flirt in
her. It was not that that interested me. For there was something
almost akin to jealousy in the look she gave the other woman.
Marlowe was too engrossed to see her and she passed on slowly.
What did it mean, if anything?

The conversation, as usual at such times, consisted mostly of
witticisms, and just at present we had a rather serious bit of
business in hand. Kennedy did not betray any of the impatience
that I felt, yet I knew he was glad when Marlowe excused himself
and we left the party and passed down the corridor while the
captain called his car.

"I don't know how you are going to get at this thing," he
remarked, pausing after he had sent a boy for his driver. "But
I'll have to rely on you. I've told you all I know. I'll see you
at noon, at the yards. My man will take you there."

As he turned and left us I saw that he was going in the direction
of the barber-shop. Next to it and in connection with it, though
in a separate room, was a manicure. As we passed we looked in.
There, at the manicure's table, sat the girl who had gone by us in
the parlor and had looked so sharply at Marlowe and Alma.

The boy had told us that the car was waiting at a side entrance,
but Kennedy seemed now in no haste to go, the more so when
Marlowe, instead of going into the barber-shop, apparently changed
his mind and entered the manicure's. Craig stopped and watched.
Prom where we were we could see Marlowe, though his back was
turned, and neither he nor the manicure could see us.

For a moment the captain paused and spoke, then sat down. Quite
evidently he had a keen eye for a pretty face and trim figure. Nor
was there any mistaking the pains which the manicure took to
please her rich and elderly customer. After watching them a moment
Kennedy lounged over to the desk in the lobby.

"Who is the little manicure girl?" he asked.

The clerk smiled. "Seems as if she was a good drawing-card for the
house, doesn't it?" he returned. "All the men notice her. Why, her
name is Rae Melzer." He turned to speak to another guest before
Kennedy could follow with another inquiry.

As we stood before the desk, a postman, with the parcel post,
arrived. "Here's a package addressed to Dr. Fernando Gavira," he
said, brusquely. "It was broken in the mail. See?"

Kennedy, waiting for the clerk to be free again, glanced casually
at the package at first, then with a sudden, though concealed,
interest. I followed his eye. In the crushed box could be seen
some thin broken pieces of glass and a wadding of cotton-wool.

As the clerk signed for another package Craig saw a chance,
reached over and abstracted two or three of the broken pieces of
glass, then turned with his back to the postman and clerk and
examined them.

One I saw at once had a rim around it. It was quite apparently the
top of a test-tube. The other, to which some cotton-wool still
adhered, was part of the rounded bowl. Quickly Craig dropped the
pieces into one of the hotel envelopes that stood in a rack on the
desk, then, changing his mind about asking more now about the
little manicure, strode out of the side entrance where Marlowe's
car was waiting for us.

Hurriedly we drove across town to the City Hospital, where we had
no difficulty in being admitted and finding, in a ward, on a white
cot, the wounded guard. Though his wound was one that should not
have bothered him much, it had, as Marlowe said, puffed up angrily
and in a most peculiar manner. He was in great pain with it and
was plainly in a bad way.

Though he questioned the man, Craig did not get anything out of
him except that the shot had come from a cruiser which had been
hanging about and was much faster than the patrol boat. The nurse
and a young intern seemed inclined to be reticent, as though we
might imply that the mail's condition reflected on the care he had
received, which they were at pains to convince us had been
perfect.

Puzzled himself, Craig did not say much, but as he pondered the
case, shook his head gravely to himself and finally walked out of
the hospital abstractedly.

"We have almost an hour before we are to meet Marlowe at the
yard," he considered, as we came to the car. "I think I'll go up
to the laboratory first."

In the quiet of his own workshop, Kennedy carefully examined again
the peculiar grooves on the bullet. He was about to scrape it, but
paused. Instead, he filled a tube with a soapy solution, placed
the bullet in it, and let it stand. Next he did the same with the
pieces of glass from the envelope.

Then he opened a drawer and from a number of capillary pipettes
selected a plain capillary tube of glass. He held it in the flame
of a burner until it was red hot. Then carefully he drew out one
end of the tube until it was hair fine. Again he heated the other
end, but this time he let the end alone, except that he allowed it
to bend by gravity, then cool. It now had a siphon curve. Another
tube he treated in the same way.

By this time he was ready to proceed with what he had in mind. He
took a glass slide and on it placed a drop from each of the tubes
containing the bullet and the glass. That done, he placed the
bent, larger end of the capillary tubes in turn on each of the
drops on the slide. The liquid ascended the tubes by capillary
attraction and siphoned over the curve, running as he turned the
tubes up to the finely pointed ends.

Next in a watch glass he placed some caustic soda and in another
some pyrogallic acid, from each of which he took just a drop, as
he had done before, inclining the tubes to let the fluid gravitate
to the throttle end. Finally in the flame he sealed both the tip
and butt of the tubes.

"There's a bubble of air in there," he remarked. "The acid and the
soda will absorb the oxygen from it. Then I can tell whether I'm
right. By the way, we'll have to hurry if we're to be on time to
meet Marlowe in the yard," he announced, glancing at his watch as
he placed the tubes in his little electric incubator.

We were a little late as the chauffeur pulled in at the executive
offices at the gate of the shipyard, and Marlowe was waiting
impatiently for us. Evidently he wanted action, but Kennedy said
nothing yet of what he suspected and appeared now to be interested
only in the yard.

It was indeed something to interest any one. Everywhere were
tokens of feverish activity, in office, shop, and slip. As we
picked our way across, little narrow and big wide gauge engines
and trains whistled and steamed about. We passed rolling-mills,
forging-machines, and giant shearing-machines, furnaces for
heating the frames or ribs, stone floors on which they could be
pegged out and bent to shape, places for rolling and trimming the
plates, everything needed from the keel plates to the deck.

In the towering superstructure of the building slip we at last
came to the huge steel monster itself, the Usona. As we
approached, above us rose her bow, higher than a house, with
poppets both there and at the stern, as well as bracing to support
her. All had been done up to the launching, the stem and stern
posts set in place, her sides framed and plated up, decks laid,
bulkheads and casings completed, even much of her internal fitting
done.

Overhead and all about the huge monster was a fairy network of
steel, the vast permanent construction of columns and overhead
girders. Suspended beneath was a series of tracks carrying
traveling and revolving cranes capable of handling the heaviest
pieces. We climbed to the top and looked down at the vast stretch
of hundreds of feet of deck. It was so vast that it seemed rather
the work of a superman than of the puny little humans working on
her.

As I looked down the slip where the Usona stood inclined about
half an inch to the foot, I appreciated as never before what a
task it was merely to get her into the water.

Below again, Marlowe explained to us how the launching ways were
composed of the ground ways, fastened to the ground as the name
implied, and the sliding ways that were to move over them. The
sliding ways, he said, were composed of a lower course and an
upper course, on which rested the "cradle," fitting closely the
side of the ship.

To launch her, she must be lifted slightly by the sliding ways and
cradle from the keel blocks and bilge blocks, and this was done by
oak wedges, hundreds of which we could see jammed between the
upper and lower courses of sliding ways. Next he pointed out the
rib-bands which were to keep the sliding ways on the ground ways,
and at the bow the points on either side where the sliding and
ground ways were bolted together by two huge timbers known as sole
pieces.

"You see," he concluded, "it is a gigantic task to lift thousands
of tons of steel and literally carry it a quarter of a mile to
forty feet of water in less than a minute. Everything has to be
calculated to a nicety. It's a matter of mathematics--the moment
of weight, the moment of buoyancy, and all that. This launching
apparatus is strong, but compared to the weight it has to carry it
is really delicate. Why, even a stray bolt in the ways would be a
serious matter. That's why we have to have this eternal
vigilance."

As he spoke with a significant look at Kennedy, I felt that it was
no wonder that Marlowe was alarmed for the safety of the ship.
Millions were at stake for just that minute of launching.

It was all very interesting and we talked with men whom it was a
pleasure to see handling great problems so capably. But none could
shed any light on the problem which it was Kennedy's to solve. And
yet I felt sure, as I watched Craig, that unsatisfactory as it
appeared to Marlowe and to myself, he was slowly forming some kind
of theory, or at least plan of action, in his head.

"You'll find me either here or at the hotel--I imagine," returned
Marlowe to Kennedy's inquiry as we parted from him. "I've
instructed all the men to keep their eyes open. I hope some of us
have something to report soon."

Whether or not the remark was intended as a hint to Kennedy, it
was unnecessary. He was working as fast and as surely as he could,
going over in hours what others had failed to fathom in weeks.

Late in the afternoon we got back to the laboratory and Craig
began immediately by taking from the little electric incubator the
two crooked tubes he had left there. Breaking off the ends with
tweezers, he began examining on slides the two drops that exuded,
using his most powerful microscope. I was forced to curb my
impatience as he proceeded carefully, but I knew that Craig was
making sure of his ground at each step.

"I suppose you're bursting with curiosity," he remarked at last,
looking up from his examination of one of the slides. "Well, here
is a drop that shows what was in the grooves of that bullet. Just
take a look."

I applied my eye to the microscope. All I could see was some dots
and rods, sometimes something that looked like chains of dots and
rods, the rods straight with square ends, sometimes isolated, but
more usually joined end to end in long strings.

"What is it?" I asked, not much enlightened by what he had
permitted me to see. "Anaerobic bacilli and spores," he replied,
excitedly. "The things that produce the well-known 'gas gangrene'
of the trenches, the gas phlegmon bacilli--all sorts, the bacillus
aerogenes capsulatus, bacillus proteus, pyogenic cocci, and
others, actively gas-forming microbes that can't live in air. The
method I took to develop and discover them was that of Col. Sir
Almroth Wright of the British army medical corps."

"And that is what was on the bullet?" I queried.

"The spores or seeds," he replied. "In the tubes, by excluding the
air, I have developed the bacilli. Why, Walter," he went on,
seriously, "those are among the microbes most dreaded in the
infection of wounds. The spores live in the earth, it has been
discovered, especially in cultivated soil, and they are
extraordinarily long-lived, lying dormant for years, waiting for a
chance to develop. These rods you saw are only from five to
fifteen thousandths of a millimeter long and not more than one-
thousandth of a millimeter broad.

"You can't see them move here, because the air has paralyzed them.
But these vibrios move among the corpuscles of the blood just as a
snake moves through the grass, to quote Pasteur. If I colored them
you would see that each is covered with fine vibrating hairs three
or four times as long as itself. At certain times an oval mass
forms in them. That is the spore which lives so long and is so
hard to kill. It was the spores that were on the bullet. They
resist any temperature except comparatively high and prolonged,
and even resist antiseptics for a long time. On the surface of a
wound they aren't so bad; but deep in they distil minute gas
bubbles, puff up the surrounding tissues, and are almost
impossible to combat."

As he explained what he had found, I could only stare at him while
the diabolical nature of the attack impressed itself on my mind.
Some one had tried to murder Marlowe in this most hideous way. No
need to be an accurate marksman when a mere scratch from such a
bullet meant ultimate death anyhow.

Why had it been done and where had the cultures come from? I asked
myself. I realized fully the difficulty of trying to trace them.
Any one could purchase germs, I knew. There was no law governing
the sale.

Craig was at work again over his microscope. Again he looked up at
me. "Here on this other film I find the same sort of wisp-like
anaerobes," he announced. "There was the same thing on those
pieces of glass that I got."

In my horror at the discovery, I had forgotten the broken package
that had come to the hotel desk while we stood there.

"Then it was Gavira who was receiving spores and cultures of the
anaerobes!" I exclaimed, excitedly.

"But that doesn't prove that it was he who used them," cautioned
Craig, adding, "not yet, at least."

Important as the discoveries were which he had made, I was not
much farther along in fixing the guilt of anybody in particular in
the case. Kennedy, however, did not seem to be perturbed, though I
wondered what theory he could have worked out.

"I think the best thing for us to do will be to run over to the
Belleclaire," he decided as he doffed his laboratory coat and
carefully cleansed his hands in an antiseptic almost boiling hot.
"I should like to see Marlowe again, and, besides, there we can
watch some of these people around him."

Whom he meant other than Gavira I had no idea, but I felt sure
that with the launching now only a matter of hours something was
bound to happen soon.

Marlowe was out when we arrived; in fact, had not yet returned
from the yard. Nor had many of the guests remained at the hotel
during the day. Most of them had been out sightseeing, though now
they were returning, and as they began to gather in the hotel
parlor Marjorie was again called on to put them at their ease.

Fitzhugh had returned and had wasted no time dressing and getting
down-stairs again to be near Marjorie. Gavira also appeared,
having been out on a case.

"I wish you would call up the shipyard, Walter," asked Kennedy, as
we stood in the lobby, where we could see best what was going on.
"Tell him I would like to see him very urgently."

I found the number and entered a booth, but, as often happens, the
telephone central was overwhelmed by the rush of early-evening
calls, and after waiting some time the only satisfaction I got was
that the line was busy.

Meanwhile I decided to stick about the booth so that I could get
the yard as soon as possible. From where I stood I could see that
Kennedy was closely watching the little manicure, Rae Melzer. A
moment later I saw Alma Hillman come out of the manicure shop, and
before any one else could get in to monopolize the fascinating
little manicure I saw Craig saunter over and enter.

I was so interested in what he was doing that for the moment I
forgot about my call and found myself unconsciously moving over in
that direction, too. As I looked in I saw that he was seated at
the little white table, in much the same position as Marlowe had
been, deeply in conversation with the girl, though of course I
could not make out what they were talking about.

Once she turned to reach something on a shelf back of her. Quick
as a flash Kennedy abstracted a couple of the nearest implements,
one being a nail file and the other, I think, a brush. A moment
later she resumed her work, Kennedy still talking and joking with
her, though furtively observing.

"Where is my nail file--and brush?" I could imagine her saying, as
she hunted for them in pretty confusion, aided by Kennedy who,
when he wanted to, could act the Fitzhugh and Gavira as well as
they. The implements were not to be found and from a drawer she
took another set.

Just then Gavira passed on his way to his office in the front of
the building, saw me, and smiled. "Kennedy's cut you out," he
laughed, catching a glimpse through the door. "Never mind. I used
to think I had some influence there myself--till the captain came
along. I tell you these oldsters can give us points."

I laughed, too, and joined him down the hall, not because I cared
what he thought, but because his presence had reminded me of my
original mission to call up Marlowe. However, I decided to
postpone calling another moment and take advantage of the chance
to talk to the house physician.

"Yes," I agreed, as long as he had opened the subject. "I fancy
the captain likes young people. He seems to enjoy being with them-
-Miss Hillman, for instance."

Gavira shot a sidelong glance at me. "The Belleclaire's a
dangerous place for a wealthy widower," he returned. "I had some
hopes in that direction myself--in spite of Fitzhugh--but the
captain seems to leave us all at the post. Still, I suppose I may
still be a brother to her--and physician. So, I should worry."

The impression I got of Gavira was that he enjoyed his freedom too
much ever to fall in love, though an intimacy now and then with a
clever girl like Alma Hillman was a welcome diversion.

"I'm sorry I sha'n't be able to be with you until late to-night,"
he said, as he paused at his office door. "I'm in the medical
corps of the Guard and I promised to lecture to-night on gunshot
wounds. Some of my material got smashed up, but I have my lantern
slides, anyhow. I'll try to see you all later, though."

Was that a clever attempt at confession and avoidance on his part?
I wondered. But, then, I reflected he could not possibly know that
we knew he had anaerobic microbes and spores in his possession. I
had cleared up nothing and I hastened to call up the shipyard,
sure that the line could not be busy still.

Whatever it was that was the matter, central seemed unable to get
me my number. Instead, I found myself cut right into a
conversation that did not concern me, evidently the fault of the
hotel switchboard operator. I was about to protest when the words
I heard stopped me in surprise. A man and a woman were talking,
though I could not recognize the voices and no names were used.

"I tell you I won't be a party to that launching scheme," I heard
the man's voice. "I wash my hands of it. I told you that all
along."

"Then you're going to desert us?" came back the woman's voice,
rather tartly. "It's for that girl. Well, you'll regret it. I'll
turn the whole organization on you--I will--you--you--" The voices
trailed off, and, try as I could to get the operator to find out
who it was, I could not.

Who was it? What did it mean?

Kennedy had finished with the manicure some time before and was
waiting for me impatiently.

"I haven't been able to get Marlowe," I hastened, "but I've had an
earful." He listened keenly as I told him what I had heard, adding
also the account of my encounter with Gavira.

"It's just as I thought--I'll wager," he muttered, excitedly,
under his breath, taking a hurried turn down the corridor, his
face deeply wrinkled.

"Well! Anything new? I expected to hear from you, but haven't,"
boomed the deep voice of Marlowe, who had just come in from an
entrance in another direction from that which we were pacing. "No
clue yet to my crank?"

Without a word, Kennedy drew Marlowe aside into a little deserted
alcove. Marlowe followed, puzzled at the air of mystery.

Alone, Craig leaned over toward him. "It's no crank," he
whispered, in a low tone. "Marlowe, I am convinced that there is a
concerted effort to destroy your plans for American commerce
building. There isn't the slightest doubt in my mind that it is
more serious than you think--perhaps a powerful group of European
steamship men opposed to you. It is economic war! You know they
have threatened it at meetings reported in the press all along.
Well, it's here!"

Half doubting, half convinced, Marlowe drew back. One after
another he shot a rapid fire of questions. Who, then, was their
agent who had fired the shot? Who was it who had deserted, as I
had heard over the wire? Above all, what was it they had planned
for the launching? The deeper he got the more the beads of
perspiration came out on his sunburnt forehead. The launching was
only eighteen hours off, too, and ten of them were darkness. What
could be done?

Kennedy's mind was working rapidly in the crisis as Marlowe
appealed to him, almost helplessly.

"May I have your car to-night?" asked Craig, pausing.

"Have it? I'll give it to you if it'll do any good."

"I'll need it only a few hours. I think I have a scheme that will
work perfectly--if you are sure you can guard the inside of the
yard to-morrow."

"I'm sure of that. We spent hours to-day selecting picked men for
the launching, going over everything."

Late as it was to start out of town, Craig drove across the bridge
and out on Long Island, never stopping until we came to a small
lake, around the shores of which he skirted, at last pausing
before a huge barn-like structure.

As the door swung open to his honking the horn, the light which
streamed forth shone on a sign above, "Sprague Aviation School."
Inside I could make out enough to be sure that it was an aeroplane
hangar.

"Hello, Sprague!" called Kennedy, as a man appeared in the light.

The man came closer. "Why, hello, Kennedy! What brings you out
here at such an hour?"

Craig had jumped from the car, and together the two went into the
hangar, while I followed. They talked in low tones, but as nearly
as I could make out Kennedy was hiring a hydro-aeroplane for to-
morrow with as much nonchalance as if it had been a taxicab.

As Kennedy and his acquaintance, Sprague, came to terms, my eye
fell on a peculiar gun set up in a corner. It had a tremendous
cylinder about the barrel, as though it contained some device to
cool it. It was not a machine-gun of the type I had seen, however,
yet cartridges seemed to be fed to it from a disk on which they
were arranged radially rather than from a band. Kennedy had risen
to go and looked about at me.

"Oh, a Lewis gun!" he exclaimed, seeing what I was looking at.
"That's an idea. Sprague, can you mount that on the plane?"

Sprague nodded. "That's what I have it here for," he returned.
"I've been testing it. Why, do you want it?"

"Indeed I do! I'll be out here early in the morning, Sprague."

"I'll be ready for you, sir," promised the aviator.

Speeding back to the city, Kennedy laid out an extensive program
for me to follow on the morrow. Together we arranged an elaborate
series of signals, and that night, late as it was, Craig returned
to the laboratory, where he continued his studies with the
microscope, though what more he expected to discover I did not
know.

In spite of his late hours, it was Craig who wakened me in the
morning, already prepared to motor out to the aviation school to
meet Sprague. Hastily he rehearsed our signals, which consisted
mostly of dots and dashes in the Morse code which Craig was to
convey with a flag and I to receive with the aid of a powerful
glass.

I must admit that I felt somewhat lost when, later in the morning,
I took my place alone on the platform that had been built for the
favored few of the launching party at the bow of the huge Usona,
without Craig. Already, however, he had communicated at least a
part of his plan to Marlowe, and the captain and Marjorie were
among the first to arrive. Marjorie never looked prettier in her
life than she did now, on the day when she was to christen the
great liner, nor, I imagine, had the captain ever been more proud
of her.

They had scarcely greeted me when we heard a shout from the men
down at the end of the slip that commanded a freer view of the
river. We craned our necks and in a moment saw what it was. They
had sighted the air-boat coming down the river.

I turned the glass on the mechanical bird as it soared closer.
Already Kennedy had made us on the platform and had begun to
signal as a test. At least a part of the suspense was over for me
when I discovered that I could read what he sent.

So fixed had my attention been that I had not noticed that slowly
the members of the elect launching party had arrived, while other
thousands of the less favored crowded into the spaces set apart
for them. On the stand now with us were Fitzhugh and Miss Hillman,
while, between glances at Kennedy, I noticed little Rae Melzer
over at the right, and Doctor Gavira, quite in his element,
circulating about from one group to another.

Every one seemed to feel that thrill that comes with a launching,
the appreciation that there is a maximum of risk in a minimum of
time.

Down the slip the men were driving home the last of the huge oak
wedges which lifted the great Usona from the blocks and
transferred her weight to the launching ways as a new support. All
along the stationary, or ground, ways and those which were to
glide into the water with the cradle and the ship, trusted men
were making the final examination to be as sure as human care can
be that all was well.

As the clock neared noon, which was high water, approximately, all
the preparatory work was done. Only the sole pieces before us held
the ship in place. It was as though all bridges had been burned.

High overhead now floated the hydro-aeroplane, on which I kept my
eye fixed almost hypnotically. There was still no signal from
Kennedy, however. What was it he was after? Did he expect to see
the fast express cruiser, lurking like a corsair about the islands
of the river? If so, he gave no sign.

Men were quitting now the work of giving the last touches to the
preparations. Some were placing immense jack-screws which were to
give an initial impulse if it were needed to start the ship down
the ways. Others were smearing the last heavy dabs of tallow, lard
oil, and soft soap on the ways, and graphite where the ways
stretched two hundred feet or so out into the water, for the ship
was to travel some hundreds of feet on the land and in the water,
and perhaps an equal distance out beyond the end of the ways.

Late comers still crowded in. Men now reported that everything was
ready. Steadily the time of high water approached.

"Saw the sole pieces!" finally rang out the order.

That was a thing that must be done by two gangs, one on each side,
and evenly, too. If one gang got ahead of the other, they must
stop and let the second catch up.

"Zip--zip--zip," came the shrill singing tone of the saws.

Was everything all right? Kennedy and Sprague were still circling
overhead, at various altitudes. I redoubled my attention at the
glass.

Suddenly I saw Craig's flag waving frantically. A muffled
exclamation came from my lips involuntarily. Marlowe, who had been
watching me, leaned closer.

"What is it--for God's sake?" he whispered, hoarsely.

"Stop them!" I shouted as I caught Kennedy's signal. At a hurried
order from Marlowe the gangs quit. A hush fell over the crowd.

Kennedy was circling down now until at last the air-boat rested on
the water and skimmed along toward the ways.

Out on the ways, as far as they were not yet submerged, some men
ran, as if to meet him, but Kennedy began signaling frantically
again. Though I had not been expecting it, I made it out.

"He wants them to keep back," I called, and the word was passed
down the length of the ship.

Instead of coming to rest before the slip, the plane turned and
went away, making a complete circle, then coming to rest. To the
surprise of every one, the rapid staccato bark of the Lewis gun
broke the silence. Kennedy was evidently firing, but at what?
There was nothing in sight.

Suddenly there came a tremendous detonation, which made even the
launching-slip tremble, and a huge column of water, like a geyser,
rose in the air about eight hundred feet out in the river,
directly in front of us.

The truth flashed over us in an instant. There, ten feet or so in
the dark water out in the river, Craig had seen a huge circular
object, visible only against a sandy bottom from the hydro-
aeroplane above, as the sun-rays were reflected through the water.
It was a contact submarine mine.

Marlowe looked at me, his face almost pale. The moment the great
hulk of the Usona in its wild flight to the sea would have hit
that mine, tilting it, she would have sunk in a blast of flame.

The air-boat now headed for the shore, and a few moments later, as
Craig climbed into our stand, Marlowe seized him in congratulation
too deep for words.

"Is it all right?" sang out one of the men in the gangs, less
impressionable than the rest.

"If there is still water enough," nodded Craig.

Again the order to saw away the sole pieces was given, and the
gangs resumed. "Zip--zip," again went the two saws.

There were perhaps two inches more left, when the hull quivered.
There was a crashing and rending as the timbers broke away.

Marjorie Marlowe, alert, swung the bottle of champagne in its
silken net on a silken cord and it crashed on the bow as she
cried, gleefully, "I christen thee Usona!"

Down the ship slid, with a slow, gliding motion at first, rapidly
gathering headway. As her stern sank and finally the bow dipped
into the water, cheers broke forth. Then a cloud of smoke hid her.
There was an ominous silence. Was she wrecked, at last, after all?
A puff of wind cleared the smoke.

"Just the friction of the ways--set the grease on fire," shouted
Marlowe. "It always does that."

Wedges, sliding ways, and other parts of the cradle floated to the
surface. The tide took her and tugs crept up and pulled her to the
place selected for temporary mooring. A splash of a huge anchor,
and there she rode--safe!

In the revulsion of feeling, every eye on the platform turned
involuntarily to Kennedy. Marlowe, still holding his hand, was
speechless. Marjorie leaned forward, almost hysterical.

"Just a moment," called Craig, as some turned to go down. "There
is just one thing more."

There was a hush as the crowd pressed close.

"There's a conspiracy here," rang out Craig's voice, boldly, "a
foreign trade war. From the start I suspected something and I
tried to reason it out. Having failed to stop the work, failed to
kill Marlowe--what was left? Why, the launching. How? I knew of
that motor-boat. What else could they do with it? I thought of
recent tests that have been made with express cruisers as mine-
planters. Could that be the scheme? The air-boat scheme occurred
to me late last night. It at least was worth trying. You see what
has happened. Now for the reckoning. Who was their agent? I have
something here that will interest you."

Kennedy was speaking rapidly. It was one of those occasions in
which Kennedy's soul delighted. Quickly he drew a deft contrast
between the infinitely large hulk of the Usona as compared to the
infinitely small bacteria which he had been studying the day
before. Suddenly he drew forth from his pocket the bullet that had
been fired at Marlowe, then, to the surprise of even myself, he
quietly laid a delicate little nail file and brush in the palm of
his hand beside the bullet.

A suppressed cry from Rae Melzer caused me to recollect the file
and brush she had missed.

"Just a second," raced on Kennedy. "On this file and brush I found
spores of those deadly anaerobes--dead, killed by heat and an
antiseptic, perhaps a one-per-cent. solution of carbolic acid at
blood heat, ninety-eight degrees--dead, but nevertheless there. I
suppose the microscopic examination of finger-nail deposits is too
minute a thing to appeal to most people. But it has been
practically applied in a number of criminal cases in Europe.
Ordinary washing and even cleaning doesn't alter microscope
findings. In this case this trifling clue is all that leads to the
real brain of this plot, literally to the hand that directed it."
He paused a moment.

"Yesterday I found that anaerobe cultures were being received by
some one in the Belleclaire, and--"

"They were stolen from me. Some one must have got into my office,
where I was studying them." Doctor Gavira had pressed forward
earnestly, but Craig did not pause again.

"Who were these agents sent over to wage this secret war at any
cost?" he repeated. "One of them, I know now, fell in love with
the daughter of the man against whom he was to plot." Marjorie
cast a furtive glance at Fitzhugh.

"Love has saved him. But the other? To whom do these deadly germs
point? Who dum-dummed and poisoned the bullet? Whose own fingers,
in spite of antiseptics and manicures, point inexorably to a
guilty self?"

Rae Melzer could restrain herself no longer. She was looking at
the file and brush, as if with a hideous fascination. "They are
mine--you took them," she cried, impulsively. "It was she--always
having her nails manicured--she who had been there just before--
she--Alma Hillman!"




XI

THE GUN-RUNNER


"With the treaty ratified, if the deal goes through we'll all be
rich."

Something about the remark which rose over the babel of voices
arrested Kennedy's attention. For one thing, it was a woman's
voice, and it was not the sort of remark to be expected from a
woman, at least not in such a place.

Craig had been working pretty hard and began to show the strain.
We had taken an evening off and now had dropped in after the
theater at the Burridge, one of the most frequented midnight
resorts on Broadway.

At the table next to us--and the tables at the Burridge were so
close that one almost rubbed elbows with those at the next--sat a
party of four, two ladies in evening gowns and two men in
immaculate black and white.

"I hope you are right, Leontine," returned one of the men, with an
English accent. "The natural place for the islands is under the
American flag, anyway."

"Yes," put in the other; "the people have voted for it before.
They want it."

It was at the time that the American and Danish governments were
negotiating about the transfer of the Danish West Indies, and
quite evidently they were discussing the islands. The last speaker
seemed to be a Dane, but the woman with him, evidently his wife,
was not. It was a curious group, worth more than a passing glance.
For a moment Craig watched them closely.

"That woman in blue," he whispered, "is a typical promoter."

I recognized the type which is becoming increasingly frequent in
Wall Street as the competition in financial affairs grows keener
and women enter business and professional life.

There were plenty of other types in the brilliantly lighted
dining-room, and we did not dwell long on the study of our
neighbors. A few moments later Kennedy left me and was visiting
another table. It was a habit of his, for he had hundreds of
friends and acquaintances, and the Burridge was the place to which
every one came.

This time I saw that he had stopped before some one whom I
recognized. It was Captain Marlowe of the American Shipping Trust,
to whom Kennedy had been of great assistance at the time of the
launching of his great ship, the Usona. Marlowe's daughter
Marjorie was not with him, having not yet returned from her
honeymoon trip, and he was accompanied by a man whose face was
unfamiliar to me.

As I recognized who it was to whom Kennedy was speaking, I also
rose and made my way over to the table. As I approached, the
captain turned from Kennedy and greeted me cordially.

"Mr. Whitson," he introduced the man with him. "Mr. Whitson is
sailing to-morrow for St. Thomas on the Arroyo. We're preparing to
extend our steamship lines to the islands as soon as the
formalities of the purchase are completed."

Marlowe turned again to Kennedy and went on with the remark he had
evidently been making.

"Of course," I heard him say, "you know we have Mexico practically
blockaded as far as arms and munitions go. Yet, Kennedy, through a
secret channel I know that thousands of stands of arms and
millions of rounds of ammunition are filtering in there. It's
shameful. I can't imagine anything more traitorous. Whoever is at
the bottom of it ought to swing. It isn't over the border that
they are going. We know that. The troops are there. How is it,
then?"

Marlowe looked at us as if he expected Kennedy to catch some one
by pure reason. Kennedy said nothing, but it was not because he
was not interested.

"Think it over," pursued Marlowe, who was a patriot above
everything else. "Perhaps it will occur to you how you can be of
the greatest service to the country. The thing is damnable--
damnable."

Neither Kennedy nor I having anything definite to contribute to
the subject, the conversation drifted to the islands and Whitson's
mission. Whitson proved to be very enthusiastic about it. He knew
the islands well and had already made a trip there for Marlowe.

A few moments later we shook hands and returned to our own table.
It was getting late and the only type that was left to study was
the common Broadway midnight-life genus. We paid our check and
were about to leave. For an instant we stopped at the coat-room to
watch the late arrivals and the departing throng.

"Hello!" greeted a familiar voice beside us. "I've been looking
all over town for you. They told me you had gone to the theater
and I thought I might possibly find you here."

We turned. It was our old friend Burke, of the Secret Service,
accompanied by a stranger.

"I'd like you to meet Mr. Sydney, the new special consular agent
whom the government is sending to the Danish West Indies to
investigate and report on trade conditions," he introduced. "We're
off for St. Thomas on the Arroyo, which sails to-morrow noon."

"Great Scott!" ejaculated Kennedy. "Is everybody daffy over those
little islands? What takes you down there, Burke?" Burke looked
about hastily, then drew us aside into a recess in the lobby.

"I don't suppose you know," he explained, lowering his voice, "but
since these negotiations began, the consular service has been
keenly interested in the present state and the possibilities of
the islands. The government sent one special agent there, named
Dwight. Well, he died a few days ago. It was very suspicious, so
much so that the authorities in the island investigated. Yet the
doctors in the island have found no evidence of anything wrong, no
poison. Still, it is very mysterious--and, you know," he hinted,
"there are those who don't want us down there."

The Secret Service man paused as though he had put the case as
briefly and pointedly as he could, then went on: "I've been
assigned to accompany the new consul down there and investigate.
I've no particular orders and the chief will honor any reasonable
expense account--but--" He hesitated and stopped, looking keenly
at Kennedy's face. I saw what he was driving at.

"Well--to come to the point--what I wanted to see you about,
Kennedy, is to find out whether you would go with me. I think," he
added, persuasively, "it would be quite worth your while. Besides,
you look tired. You're working too hard. The change will do you
good. And your conscience needn't trouble you. You'll be working,
all right."

Burke had been quick to note the haggard expression on Kennedy's
face and turn it into an argument to carry his point. Kennedy
smiled as he read the other's enthusiasm. I would have added my
own urging, only I knew that nothing but a sense of duty would
weigh with Craig.

"I'd like to think the proposal over," he conceded, much to my
surprise. "I'll let you know in the morning."

"Mind," wheedled Burke, "I won't take no for an answer. We need
you."

The Secret Service man was evidently delighted by the reception
Kennedy had given his scheme.

Just then I caught sight of the party of four getting their hats
and wraps preparatory to leaving, and Kennedy eyed them sharply.

Marlowe and Whitson passed. As they did so I could not help seeing
Whitson pause and shoot a quick glance at the four. It was a
glance of suspicion and it was not lost on Craig. Did they know
more of this Mexican gun-running business than Marlowe had hinted
at? I watched Kennedy's face. Evidently his mind was at work on
the same idea as mine.

Burke accompanied us almost all the way home, with Sydney adding
his urging. I could tell that the whole combination of
circumstances at the Burridge had had an effect on Kennedy.

I went to bed, tired, but through the night I knew Craig was
engaged on some work about which he seemed to be somewhat
secretive. When I saw him again in the laboratory, in the morning,
he had before him a large packing-case of stout wood bound with
steel bands.

"What's that?" I asked, mystified. He opened the lid, a sort of
door, on which was a strong lock, and I looked inside.

"My traveling laboratory," he remarked, with pride.

I peered in more closely. It was a well-stocked armamentarium, as
the doctors would have called it. I shall not make any attempt to
describe its contents. They were too varied and too numerous, a
little bit of everything, it seemed. In fact, Craig seemed to have
epitomized the sciences and arts. It was not that he had anything
so wonderful, or even comparable to the collection of his
laboratory. But as I ran my eye over the box I would have wagered
that from the contents he might have made shift to duplicate in
some makeshift form almost anything that he might need. It was
truly amazing, representing in miniature his study of crime for
years.

"Then you are going with Burke to St. Thomas?" I queried,
realizing the significance of it.

Kennedy nodded. "I've been thinking of what I would do if an
important case ever called me away. Burke's proposal hurried me,
that's all. And you are going, also," he added. "You have until
noon to break the news to the Star."

I did not say anything more, fearful lest he might change his
mind. I knew he needed the rest, and that no matter what the case
was in the islands he could not work as hard as he was doing in
New York.

Accordingly my own arrangements with the Star were easily made. I
had a sort of roving commission, anyhow, since my close
association with Kennedy. Moreover, the possibility of turning up
something good in the islands, which were much in the news at the
time, rather appealed to the managing editor. If Kennedy could
arrange his affairs, I felt that the least I could do was to
arrange my own.

Thus it came about that Craig and I found ourselves in the
forenoon in a taxicab, on the front of which was loaded the
precious box as well as our other hastily packed luggage, and we
were on our way over to Brooklyn to the dock from which the Arroyo
sailed.

Already the clearance papers had been obtained, and there was the
usual last-moment confusion among the passengers as the hour for
sailing approached. It seemed as if we had scarcely boarded the
ship when Kennedy was as gay as a school-boy on an unexpected
holiday. I realized at once what was the cause. The change of
scene, the mere fact of cutting loose, were having their effect.

As we steamed slowly down the bay, I ran my eye over the other
passengers at the rail, straining their eyes to catch the last
glimpse of the towers of New York. There were Burke and Sydney,
but they were not together, and, to all appearances, did not know
each other. Sydney, of course, could not conceal his identity, nor
did he wish to, no matter how beset with unseen perils might be
his mission. But Burke was down on the passenger-list as, and had
assumed the role of, a traveling salesman for a mythical novelty-
house in Chicago. That evidently was part of the plan they had
agreed on between themselves. Kennedy took the cue.

As I studied the various groups, I paused suddenly, surprised.
There was the party which had sat at the table next to us at the
Burridge the night before. Kennedy had already seen them and had
been watching them furtively.

Just then Craig jogged my elbow. He had caught sight of Whitson
edging his way in our direction. I saw what it was that Craig
meant. He wanted purposely to avoid him. I wondered why, but soon
I saw what he was up to. He wanted introductions to come about
naturally, as they do on shipboard if one only waits.

On deck and in the lounging and smoking rooms it did not take long
for him to contrive ways of meeting and getting acquainted with
those he wished to know, without exciting suspicion. Thus, by the
time we sat down to dinner in the saloon we were all getting
fairly chummy.

We had met Burke quite as naturally as if we were total strangers.
It was easy to make it appear that Whitson and Sydney were
shipboard acquaintances. Nor was it difficult to secure an
introduction to the other party of four. The girl whom we had
heard addressed as Leontine seemed to be the leader of the group.
Leontine Cowell was a striking personality. Her clear blue eyes
directed a gaze at one which tested one's mettle to meet. I was
never quite sure whether she remembered seeing us at the Burridge,
whether she penetrated the parts we were playing. She was none the
less feminine because she had aspirations in a commercial way. As
Kennedy had first observed, she was well worth study.

Her companion, Barrett Burleigh, was a polished, deferential
Englishman, one of those who seem to be citizens of the world
rather than subjects of any particular country. I wondered what
were the real relations of the two.

Jorgen Erickson was, as I had surmised, a Dane. He proved to be
one of the largest planters in the island, already wealthy and
destined to be wealthier if real estate advanced. The other woman,
Nanette, was his wife. She was also a peculiarly interesting type,
a Frenchwoman from Guadeloupe. Younger and more vivacious than her
husband, her snappy black eyes betokened an attractive
personality.

Leontine Cowell, it seemed, had been in the islands not long
before, had secured options on some score of plantations at a low
figure, and made no secret of her business. When the American flag
at last flew over the islands she stood to win out of the increase
of land values a considerable fortune.

Erickson also, in addition to his own holdings, had been an agent
for some other planters and thus had met Leontine, who had been
the means of interesting some American capital.

As for Burleigh, it seemed that he had made the acquaintance of
Leontine in Wall Street. He had been in the Caribbean and the
impending changes in the Danish West Indies had attracted his
notice. Whether he had some money to invest in the speculation or
hoped to profit by commissions derived from sales did not appear.
But at any rate some common bond had thrown the quartet together.

I need not dwell on the little incidents of life on ship. It must
have been the second day out that I observed Leontine and Sydney
together on the promenade-deck. They seemed to be quite interested
in each other, though I felt sure that Leontine was making a play
for him. At any rate, Burleigh was jealous. Whatever might be the
scheme, it was apparent that the young Englishman was head over
heels in love with her.

What did it mean? Was she playing with Sydney, seeking to secure
his influence to further her schemes? Or did it mask some deeper,
more sinister motive? From what I had seen of Sydney, I could not
think that he was the man to take such an affair seriously. I felt
that he must be merely amusing himself.

Busy with my speculations, I was astonished soon after to realize
that the triangle had become a hexagon, so to speak. Whitson and
Nanette Erickson seemed to be much in each other's company. But,
unlike Burleigh, Erickson seemed to be either oblivious or
complacent.

Whatever it might all portend, I found that it did not worry
Kennedy, although he observed closely. Burke, however, was
considerably excited and even went so far as to speak to Sydney,
over whom he felt a sort of guardianship. Sydney turned the matter
off lightly. As for me, I determined to watch both of these women
closely.

Kennedy spent much time not only in watching the passengers, but
in going about the ship, talking to the captain and crew and every
one who knew anything about the islands. In fact, he collected
enough information in a few days to have satisfied any ordinary
tourist for weeks.

Even the cargo did not escape his attention, and I found that he
was especially interested in the rather heavy shipments of
agricultural implements that were consigned to various planters in
the islands. So great was his interest that I began to suspect
that it had some bearing on the gun-running plot that had been
hinted at by Marlowe.

It was the evening after one of Kennedy's busy days scouting about
that he quietly summoned both Burke and Sydney to our cabin.

"There's something queer going on," announced Craig, when he was
sure that we were all together without having been observed.
"Frankly, I must confess that I don't understand it--yet."

"You needn't worry about me," interrupted Sydney, hastily. "I can
take care of myself."

Kennedy smiled quietly. We knew what Sydney meant. He seemed to
resent Burke's solicitude over his acquaintance with Leontine and
was evidently warning us off. Kennedy, however, avoided the
subject.

"I may as well tell you," he resumed, "that I was quite as much
influenced by a rumor that arms were somehow getting into Mexican
ports as I was by your appeal, Burke, in coming down here. So far
I've found nothing that proves my case. But, as I said, there is
something under the surface which I don't understand. We have all
got to stick together, trust no one but ourselves, and, above all,
keep our eyes open."

It was all that was said, but I was relieved to note that Sydney
seemed greatly impressed. Still, half an hour later, I saw him
sitting in a steamer-chair beside Leontine again, watching the
beautiful play of the moonlight on the now almost tropical ocean
after we had emerged from the Gulf Stream. I felt that it was
rather dangerous, but at least he had had his warning.

Seeking Kennedy, I found him at last in the smoking-room, to my
surprise talking with Erickson. I joined them, wondering how I was
to convey to Craig what I had just seen without exciting
suspicion. They were discussing the commercial and agricultural
future of the islands under the American flag, especially the
sugar industry, which had fallen into a low estate.

"I suppose," remarked Kennedy, casually, "that you are already
modernizing your plant and that others are doing the same, getting
ready for a revival."

Erickson received the remark stolidly. "No," he replied, slowly.
"Some of us may be doing so, but as for me, I shall be quite
content to sell if I can get my price."

"The planters are not putting in modern machinery, then?" queried
Kennedy, innocently, while there flashed over me what he had
discovered about shipments of agricultural implements.

Erickson shook his head. "Some of them may be. But for one that
is, I know twenty whose only thought is to sell out and take a
profit."

The conversation trailed off on other subjects and I knew that
Kennedy had acquired the information which he sought. As neatly as
I could I drew him apart from Erickson.

"Strange he should tell me that," ruminated Kennedy as we gained a
quiet corner of the deck. "I know that there is a lot of stuff
consigned to planters in the island, some even to himself."

"He must be lying, then," I hastened. "Perhaps these promoters are
really plotters. By the way, what I wanted to tell you was that I
saw Sydney and Leontine together again."

He was about to reply when the sound of some one approaching
caused us to draw back farther into the shadow. It proved to be
Whitson and Nanette.

"Then you do not like St. Thomas?" we heard Whitson remark, as if
he were repeating something she had just said.

"There is nothing there," she replied. "Why, there aren't a
hundred miles of good roads and not a dozen automobiles."

Evidently the swiftness of life in New York of which she had
tasted was having its effect.

"St. Croix, where we have the plantation, is just as bad. Part of
the time we live there, part of the time at Charlotte Amalie in
St. Thomas. But there is little difference. I hope Jorgen is able
to sell. At least I should like to live a part of the year in the
States."

"Would he like that, too?"

"Many of us would," she replied, quickly. "For many years things
have been getting worse with us. Just now it seems a bit better
because of the high price of sugar. But who knows how long that
will last? Oh, I wish something would happen soon so that we might
make enough money to live as I want to live. Think; here the best
years of life are slipping away. Unless we do something soon, it
will be too late! We must make our money soon."

There was an air of impatience in her tone, of restless
dissatisfaction. I felt also that there was an element of danger,
too, in a woman just passing from youth making a confidant of
another man.

It was a mixed situation with the quartet whom we were watching.
One thing was sufficiently evident. They were all desperately
engaged in the pursuit of wealth. That was a common bond. Nor had
I seen anything to indicate that they were over-scrupulous in that
pursuit. Within half an hour I had seen Leontine with Sydney and
Nanette with Whitson. Both Sydney as consular agent and Whitson
through his influence with the shipping trust possessed great
influence. Had the party thought it out and were they now playing
the game with the main chance in view?

I looked inquiringly at Kennedy as the voices died away while the
couple walked slowly down the deck. He said nothing, but he was
evidently pondering deeply on some problem, perhaps that which the
trend of affairs had raised in my own mind.

Our delay had not been long, but it had been sufficient to cause
us to miss finding Leontine and Sydney. We did, however, run
across Burke, bent evidently on watching, also.

"I don't like this business," he confessed, as we paused to
compare experiences. "I've been thinking of that Mexican business
you hinted at, Kennedy. You know the islands would be an ideal
out-of-the-way spot from which to start gun-running expeditions to
Mexico. I don't like this Leontine and Burleigh. They want to make
money too bad."

Kennedy smiled. "Burleigh doesn't seem to approve of everything,
though," he remarked.

"Perhaps not. That's one reason why I think it may be more
dangerous for Sydney than he realizes. I know she's a fascinating
girl. All the more reason to watch out for her. But I can't talk
to Sydney," he sighed.

It was an enigma and I had not solved it, though I felt much as
Burke did. Kennedy seemed to have determined to allow events to
take their course, perhaps in the hope that developments would be
quicker that way than by interfering with something which we did
not understand.

In the smoking-room, after we left Burke, Kennedy and I came upon
Erickson and Burleigh. They had just finished a game of poker with
some of the other passengers, in which Burleigh's usual run of
luck and skill had been with him.

"Lucky at cards, unlucky in love," remarked Burleigh as we
approached.

He said it with an air of banter, yet I could not help feeling
that there was a note of seriousness at the bottom of it. Had he
known that Leontine had been with Sydney on the deck? His very
success at poker had its effect on me. I found myself eying him as
if he had been one of the transatlantic card sharps, perhaps an
international crook. Yet when I considered I was forced to admit
that I had nothing on which to base such a judgment.

Erickson presented a different problem, to my mind, There was
indeed something queer about him. Either he had not been perfectly
frank with us in regard to the improvement of his properties or he
was concealing something much more sinister. Again and again my
mind reverted to the hints that had been dropped by Marlowe, and I
recalled the close scrutiny Whitson had given the four that night.
So far, I had felt that in any such attempt we might count on
Whitson playing a lone hand and perhaps finding out something to
our advantage.

It was the morning of the last day of the voyage that most of the
passengers gathered on the deck for the first glimpse of the land
to which we had been journeying.

Before us lay the beautiful and picturesque harbor and town of
Charlotte Amalie, one of the finest harbors in the West Indies,
deep enough to float the largest vessels, with shipyards, dry-
docks, and repair shops. From the deck it was a strikingly
beautiful picture, formed by three spurs of mountains covered with
the greenest of tropical foliage. From the edge of the dancing
blue waves the town itself rose on the hills, presenting an
entrancing panorama.

All was bustle and excitement as the anchor plunged into the
water, for not only was this the end of our journey, but the
arrival of the boat from New York was an event for the town.

There was much to watch, but I let nothing interfere with my
observation of how the affair between Sydney and Leontine was
progressing. To my surprise, I saw that this morning she was
bestowing the favor of her smile rather on Burleigh. It was
Sydney's turn now to feel the pangs of jealousy, and I must admit
that he bore them with better grace than Burleigh, whatever that
might indicate.

As I watched the two and recalled their intimacy at the Burridge
the first night we had seen them, I almost began to wonder whether
I might not have been wrong about Leontine. Had it been that I had
distrusted the woman merely because I was suspicious of the type,
both male and female? Had I been finding food for suspicion
because I was myself suspicious?

Erickson was standing beside Sydney, while we were not far away.
Evidently he had been saving up a speech for the occasion and now
was prepared to deliver it.

"Mr. Sydney," he began, with a wave of his arm that seemed to
include us all, "it is a pleasure to welcome you here to our
island. Last night it occurred to me that we ought to do something
to show that we appreciate it. You must come to dinner to-night at
my villa here in the town. You are all invited, all of us who have
become so enjoyably acquainted on this voyage which I shall never
forget. Believe me when I say that it will be even more a tribute
to you personally than because of the official position you are to
hold among us."

It was a graceful invitation, more so than I had believed Erickson
capable of framing. Sydney could do nothing less than thank him
cordially and accept, as we all did. Indeed, I could see that
Kennedy was delighted at the suggestion. It would give him an
opportunity to observe them all under circumstances different
enough to show something.

While we were thanking Erickson, I saw that Whitson had taken the
occasion also to thank Mrs. Erickson, with whom he had been
talking, just a bit apart from the group. He made no secret of his
attentions, though I thought she was a bit embarrassed by them at
such a time. Indeed, she started rather abruptly toward the group
which was now intent on surveying the town, and as she did so, I
noted that she had forgotten her hand-bag, which lay on a deck-
chair near where they had been sitting.

I picked it up to restore it. Some uncontrollable curiosity
prompted me and I hesitated. All were still looking at the town. I
opened the bag. Inside was a little bottle of grayish liquid. What
should I do? Any moment she or Whitson might turn around. Hastily
I pulled off the cap of my fountain-pen and poured into it some of
the liquid, replacing the cork in the bottle and dropping it back
into the bag, while I disposed of the cap as best I could without
spilling its contents.

Whether either she or any one else had observed me, I was not
going to run any chances of being seen. I called a passing
steward. "Mrs. Erickson forgot her bag," I said, pointing hastily
to it. "You'll find her over there with Mr. Whitson." Then I
mingled in the crowd to watch her. She did not seem to show any
anxiety when she received it.

I lost no time in getting back to Kennedy and telling him what I
had found, and a few moments later he made an excuse to go to our
state-room, as eager as I was to know what had been in the little
bottle.

First he poured out a drop of the liquid from the cap of my
fountain-pen in some water. It did not dissolve. Successively he
tried alcohol, ether, then pepsin. None of them had any effect on
it. Finally, however, he managed to dissolve it in ammonia.

"Relatively high amount of sulphur," he muttered, after a few
moments more of study. "Keratin, I believe."

"A poison?" I asked.

Kennedy shook his head. "No; harmless."

"Then what is it for?"

He shrugged his shoulders. He may have had some half-formed idea,
but if he did it was still indefinite and he refused to commit
himself. Instead, he placed the sample in his traveling
laboratory, closed and locked it, and, with our luggage, the box
was ready to be taken ashore.

Nearly every one had gone ashore by the time we returned to the
deck. Whitson was there yet, talking to the captain, for the
shipping at the port interested him. I wondered whether he, too,
might be suspicious of those cases consigned to Erickson and
others. If so, he said nothing of it.

By this time several vessels that looked as if they might be
lighters, though fairly large, had pulled up. It seemed that they
had been engaged to carry shipments of goods to the other islands
of St. John and St. Croix.

Kennedy seemed eager now to get ashore, and we went, accompanied
by Whitson, and after some difficulty established ourselves in a
small hotel.

Most of the tourists were sightseeing, and, while we had no time
for that, still we could not help doing so, in going about the
town.

Charlotte Amalie, I may say, proved to be one of the most
picturesque towns in the Windward Islands. The walls of the houses
were mostly of a dazzling whiteness, though some were yellow,
others gray, orange, blue. But the roofs were all of a generous
bright red which showed up very effectively among the clumps of
green trees. Indeed, the town seemed to be one of gaily tinted
villas and palaces. There were no factories, no slums. Nature had
provided against that and man had not violated the provision.

The people whom we met on the streets were mostly negroes, though
there was a fair sprinkling of whites. What pleased us most was
that nearly everywhere we went English was spoken. I had half
expected Danish. But there was even very little Spanish spoken.

Burke was waiting for us, and in spite of his playing the role of
traveling salesman managed to direct us about so that we might as
quickly as possible pick up the thread of the mysterious death of
Dwight. It did not take long to gather such meager information as
there was about the autopsy that had followed the strange death of
Sydney's predecessor.

We were able to find out little from either the authorities or the
doctor who had investigated the case. Under the stress of
suspicion, both the stomach and the contents of the stomach of the
unfortunate man had been examined. No trace of anything out of the
way had been found, and there the matter had rested, except for
suspicion.

One of our first visits was to the American consulate. There
Sydney, by virtue of his special commission, had, with
characteristic energy, established himself with the consul.
Naturally, he, too, had been making inquiries. But they had led
nowhere. There seemed to be no clue to the mysterious death of
Dwight, not even a hint as to the cause.

All that we were able to discover, after some hours of patient
inquiry, was that Dwight had suffered from great prostration,
marked cyanosis, convulsions, and coma. Whether it was the result
of some strange disease or of a poison no one, not even the
doctor, was prepared to say. All that was known was that the blow,
if blow it had been, was swift, sudden, sure.

We ran across Whitson once or twice during the day, busily engaged
renewing acquaintance with merchants and planters whom he had
known before, but I do not recall having seen either Burleigh or
Leontine, which, at the time, I thought rather strange, for the
town was small and strangers were few. The more I thought of it
the more firmly convinced I was that Dwight had discovered some
secret which it was extremely inconvenient for somebody to have
known. What was it? Was it connected with the rumors we had heard
of gun-running to Mexico?

Erickson had invited us to come late in the afternoon to the
dinner and we did not delay in getting there. His house proved to
be a veritable palace on the side of one of the hills rising
abruptly back of the shore. Flights of massive stone steps, quaint
walls covered with creepers, balustrades overlooking charming
gardens, arcades from which one looked out on splendid vistas and
shady terraces combined to make it a veritable paradise such as
can be found only in tropical and subtropical lands. Most
wonderful of all was the picture of the other hills unfolded,
especially of the two ruined pirates' castles belonging to semi-
mythical personages, Bluebeard and Blackbeard.

The Ericksons were proud of their home, as well they might be, in
spite of the complaints we had heard Nanette utter and the efforts
of Erickson to sell his holdings. Mrs. Erickson proved to be a
charming hostess and the host extended a hospitality such as one
rarely meets. It quite made me uncomfortable to accept it at the
same time that I knew we must view it all with suspicion. Nor did
it make matters any better, but rather worse, to feel that there
was some color of excuse for the suspicion.

Burleigh arrived proudly with Leontine, followed closely by
Sydney. At once the game was on again, Leontine pitting one
against the other. Whitson came, his attentions to Mrs. Erickson a
trifle restrained, but still obvious. Burke and ourselves
completed the party.

To the repeated urging of Erickson we made ourselves quite as much
at home as we politely could. Kennedy and Burke, acting under his
instructions, seemed to be ubiquitous. Yet, beyond a continuation
of the drama that had been unfolded on the ship it did not seem to
me at first that we were getting anywhere.

Kennedy and I were passing alone along a colonnade that opened off
from the large dining-hall, when Craig paused and looked in
through an open door at the massive table set for the dinner.

A servant had just completed setting out cocktails at the various
places, pouring them from a huge tankard, for the purpose, which
had been standing on a sideboard. Guests had been walking past
through the colonnade ever since we arrived, but at the moment
there was no one about, and even the servant had disappeared.

Kennedy stepped lightly into the dining-hall and looked about
sharply. Instinctively I stepped to a window where I could hear
any one approaching. Out of the corner of my eye I saw him
narrowly scrutinizing the table. Finally he pulled from his pocket
a clean linen handkerchief. Into an empty glass he poured the
contents of one of the cocktail-glasses, straining the liquid
through the handkerchief. Then he poured the filtrate, if I may
call it such, back into the original glass. A second he treated in
the same way, and a third. He had nearly completed the round of
the table when I heard a light step.

My warning came only just in time. It was Burleigh. He saw us
standing now in the colonnade, made some hasty remark, then walked
on, as if in search for some one. Had it been interest in Leontine
or in the dining-room that had drawn him thither?

Kennedy was now looking closely at the handkerchief, and I looked
also. In the glasses had been innumerable little seeds as if from
the fruit juice used in concocting the appetizer. The fine meshes
of the linen had extracted them. What were they?

I took one in my fingers and crushed it between my nails. There
was an unmistakable odor of bitter almonds. What did it mean?

We had no time now for speculation. Our prolonged absence might be
noticed and we hastened to join the other guests after finishing
the round of glasses in which he had been interrupted.

How, in my suppressed excitement, I managed to get through that
dinner I do not know. It was a brilliant affair, yet I found that
I had completely lost my appetite, as well one might after having
observed Kennedy's sleuthing.

However, the dinner progressed, though each course that brought it
nearer a conclusion afforded me an air of relief. I was quite
ready when, over the coffee, Kennedy contrived to make some excuse
for us, promising to call again and perhaps to visit the Erickson
plantation.

In the secrecy of our room in the little hotel, Craig was soon
deeply buried in making use of his traveling laboratory. As he
worked I could no longer restrain my impatience. "What about that
little bottle of keratin?" I asked, eagerly.

"Oh yes," he replied, not looking up from the tests he was making.
"Well, keratin, you know, is also called epidermose. It is a
scleroprotein present largely in cuticular structures such as
hair, nails, horn. I believe it is usually prepared from pieces of
horn steeped in pepsin, hydrochloric acid, and water for a long
time. Then the residue is dissolved in ammonia and acetic acid."

"But what's its use?" I demanded. "You said it was harmless."

"Why, the pepsin of the stomach won't digest it," he returned.
"For that reason its chief use is for coating what are known as
'enteric capsules.' Anything coated with keratin is carried on
through the stomach into the intestines. It is used much in hot
countries in order to introduce drugs into the intestines in the
treatment of the tropical diseases that affect the intestines." He
paused and devoted his entire attention to his work, but he had
told me enough to assure me that at least the bottle of keratin I
had found had proved to be a clue.

I waited as long as I could, then interrupted again. "What are the
seeds?" I queried. "Have you found out yet?"

He paused as though he had not quite finished his hasty
investigation, yet had found out enough to convince him. "There
seem to be two kinds. I wish I had had time to keep each lot
separate. Some of them are certainly quite harmless. But there are
others, I find, that have been soaked in nitro-benzol, artificial
oil of bitter almonds. Even a few drops, such as might be soaked
up in this way, might be fatal. The new and interesting phase, to
me, is that they were all carefully coated with keratin. Really,
they are keratin-coated enteric capsules of nitro-benzol, a deadly
poison."

I looked at him, aghast at what some of us had been rescued from
by his prompt action.

"You see," he went on, excitedly, "that is why the autopsies
probably showed nothing. These doctors down here sought for a
poison in the stomach. But if the poison had been in the stomach
the odor alone would have betrayed it. You smelt it when you
crushed a seed. But the poisoning had been devised to avoid just
that chance of discovery. There was no poison in the stomach.
Death was delayed long enough, also, to divert suspicion from the
real poisoner. Some one has been diabolically clever in covering
up the crimes."

I could only gasp my amazement. "Then," I blurted out, "you think
the Ericksons--"

Our door burst open. It was Burke, in wild excitement.

"Has anybody--died?" I managed to demand.

He seemed not to hear, but dashed to the window and threw it open.
"Look!" he exclaimed.

We did. In the late twilight, through the open sash we could see
the landlocked basin of the harbor. But it was not that at which
Burke pointed. On the horizon an ugly dark cloud rose menacingly.
In the strange, unearthly murkiness, I could see people of the
town pouring out into the narrow streets, wildly, fearfully, with
frantic cries and gesticulations.

For a moment I gazed at the sight blankly. Then I realized that
sweeping on us was one of those sudden, deadly West-Indian
hurricanes. Our harbor was sheltered from the north and east
winds. But this wind was southern born, rare, oncoming in a fury
against which we had no protection.

Hastily closing his armamentarium, Kennedy also hurried out on the
street. The gale had become terrific already in the few minutes
that had elapsed. From our terrace we could see the water, gray
and olive, with huge white breakers, like gnashing teeth, coming
on to rend and tear everything in their path. It was as though we
stood in an amphitheater provided by nature for a great spectacle,
the bold headlands standing out like the curves of a stadium.

I looked about. The Ericksons had just driven up with Burleigh and
Leontine, as well as Whitson, all of whom were stopping at our
hotel, and were about to take Sydney on to the consulate when the
approach of the storm warned them to stay.

Leontine had hurried into the hotel, evidently fearful of the loss
of something she treasured, and the rest were standing apart from
the trees and buildings, where the formation of the land offered
some protection. As we joined them I peered at the pale faces in
the ghastly, unnatural light. Was it, in a sense, retribution?

Suddenly, without further warning, the storm broke. Trees were
turned up by roots, like weeds, the buildings rocked as if they
had been houses of cards. It was a wild, catastrophic spectacle.

"Leontine," I heard a voice mutter by my side, as a form
catapulted itself past through the murkiness into the crazily
swaying hotel. It was Burleigh. I turned to speak to Kennedy. He
was gone. Where to find him I had no idea. The force of the wind
was such that search was impossible. All we could do was to huddle
back of such protection as the earth afforded against the million
needles of rain that cut into our faces.

The wind almost blew me flat to the earth as, no longer able to
stand the suspense, I stumbled toward the hotel, thinking perhaps
he had gone to save his armamentarium, although if I had stopped
to think I should have realized that that strong box was about the
safest piece of property on the island.

I was literally picked up and hurled against an object in the
darkness--a man. "In the room--more keratin--more seeds."

It was Kennedy. He had taken advantage of the confusion to make a
search which otherwise might have been more difficult. Together we
struggled back to our shelter.

Just then came a crash, as the hotel crumpled under the fierce
stress of the storm. Out of the doorway struggled a figure just in
time to clear the falling walls. It was Burleigh, a huge gash from
a beam streaming blood down his forehead which the rain washed
away almost as it oozed. In his arms, clinging about his neck, was
Leontine, no longer the sophisticated, but in the face of this
primeval danger just a woman. Burleigh staggered with his burden a
little apart from us, and in spite of everything I could fancy him
blessing the storm that had given him his opportunity.

Far from abating, the storm seemed increasing in fury, as though
all the devils of the underworld were vexed at anything remaining
undestroyed. It seemed as if even the hills on which the old
pirates had once had their castles must be rocking.

"My God!" exclaimed a thick voice, as an arm shot out, pointing
toward the harbor.

There was the Arroyo tugging at every extra mooring that could be
impressed into service. The lighters had broken or been cut away
and were scudding, destruction-bent, squarely at the shore almost
below us. A moment and they had crashed on the beach, a mass of
timbers and spars, while the pounding waves tore open and flung
about heavy cases as though they were mere toys.

Then, almost as suddenly as it had come, the storm began to abate,
the air cleared, and nothing remained but the fury of the waves.

"Look!" exclaimed Kennedy, pointing down at the strange wreckage
that strewed the beach. "Does that look like agricultural
machinery?" We strained our eyes. Kennedy did not pause. "The
moment I heard that arms were getting into Mexico I suspected that
somewhere here in the Caribbean munitions were being transhipped.
Perhaps they have been sent to Atlantic ports ostensibly for the
Allies. They have got down here disguised. Even before the storm
exposed them I had reasoned it out. From this port, the key to the
vast sweep of mainland, I reasoned that they were being taken over
to secret points on the coast where big ships could not safely go.
It was here that blockade-runners were refitted in our Civil War.
It is here that this new gun-running plot has been laid."

He turned quickly to Sydney. "The only obstacle between the
transfer of the arms and success was the activity of an American
consulate. Those lighters were not to carry goods to other
islands. They were really destined for Mexico. It was profitable.
And the scheme for removing opposition was evidently safe."

Kennedy was holding up another bottle of keratin and some fruit
seeds. "I found these in a room in the hotel," he added.

I did not comprehend. "But," I cut in, "the hand-bag--the dinner--
what of them?"

"A plant--a despicable trespass on hospitality--all part of a
scheme to throw the guilt on some one else, worthy of a renegade
and traitor."

Craig wheeled suddenly, then added, with an incisive gesture, "I
suppose you know that there is reputed to have been on one of
these hills the headquarters of the old pirate, Teach--'the
mildest manner'd man that ever scuttled ship or cut a throat!'"

Kennedy paused, then added, quickly, "In respect to covering up
your gun-running, Whitson, you are superior even to Teach!"




XII

THE SUNKEN TREASURE


     "Get story Everson and bride yacht Belle Aventure
     seeking treasure sunk Gulf liner Antilles."

Kennedy and I had proceeded after a few leisurely days in St.
Thomas to Porto Rico. We had no particular destination, and San
Juan rather appealed to us as an objective point because it was
American.

It was there that I found waiting for me the above message by
wireless from the Star in New York.

San Juan was, as we had anticipated, a thoroughly Americanized
town and I lost no time in getting around at once to the office of
the leading newspaper, the Colonial News. The editor, Kenmore,
proved to be a former New York reporter who had come out in answer
to an advertisement by the proprietors of the paper.

"What's the big story here now?" I asked by way of preface,
expecting to find that colonial newspapermen were provincial.

"What's the big story?" repeated Kenmore, impatiently pushing
aside a long leader on native politics and regarding me
thoughtfully. "Well, I'm not superstitious, but a honeymoon spent
trying to break into Davy Jones's locker for sunken treasure--I
guess that's a good story, isn't it?"

I showed him my message and he smiled. "You see, I was right," he
exclaimed. "They're searching now at the Cay d'Or, the Golden Key,
one of the southernmost of the Bahamas, I suppose you would call
it. I wish I was like you. I'd like to get away from this
political stuff long enough to get the story."

He puffed absently on a fragrant native cigar. "I met them all
when they were here, before they started," he resumed,
reminiscently. "It was certainly a picturesque outfit--three
college chums--one of them on his honeymoon, and the couple
chaperoning the bride's sister. There was one of the college boys-
-a fellow named Gage--who fairly made news."

"How was that?" inquired Kennedy, who had accompanied me, full of
zest at the prospect of mixing in a story so romantic.

"Oh, I don't know that it was his fault--altogether," replied
Kenmore. "There's a young lady here in the city, the daughter of a
pilot, Dolores Guiteras. She had been a friend of some one in the
expedition, I believe. I suppose that's how Gage met her. I don't
think either of them really cared for each other. Perhaps she was
a bit jealous of the ladies of the party. I don't know anything
much about it, only I remember one night in the cafe of the Palace
Hotel, I thought Gage and another fellow would fight a duel--
almost--until Everson dropped in and patched the affair up and the
next day his yacht left for Golden Key."

"I wish I'd been here to go with them," I considered. "How do you
suppose I'll be able to get out there, now?"

"You might be able to hire a tug," shrugged Kenmore. "The only one
I know is that of Captain Guiteras. He's the father of this
Dolores I told you about."

The suggestion seemed good, and after a few moments more of
conversation, absorbing what little Kenmore knew, we threaded our
way across the city to the home of the redoubtable Guiteras and
his pretty daughter.

Guiteras proved to be a man of about fifty, a sturdy, muscular
fellow, his face bronzed by the tropical sun.

I had scarcely broached the purpose of my visit when his restless
brown eyes seemed literally to flash. "No, sir," he exclaimed,
emphatically. "You cannot get me to go on any such expedition. Mr.
Everson came here first and tried to hire my tug. I wouldn't do
it. No, sir--he had to get one from Havana. Why, the whole thing
is unlucky--hoodooed, you call it. I will not touch it."

"But," I remonstrated, surprised at his unexpected vehemence, "I
am not asking you to join the expedition. We are only going to--"

"No, no," he interrupted. "I will not consider it. I--"

He cut short his remarks as a young woman, radiant in her Latin-
American beauty, opened the door, hesitated at sight of us, then
entered at a nod from him. We did not need to be told that this
was the Dolores whom Kenmore's rumor had credited with almost
wrecking Everson's expedition at the start. She was a striking
type, her face, full of animation and fire, betraying more of
passion than of intellect.

A keen glance of inquiry from her wonderful eyes at her father was
followed by a momentary faraway look, and she remained silent,
while Guiteras paused, as if considering something.

"They say," he continued, slowly, his features drawn sharply,
"that there was loot of Mexican churches on that ship--the jewels
of Our Lady of the Rosary at Puebla.... That ship was cursed, I
tell you!" he added, scowling darkly.

"No one was lost on it, though," I ventured at random.

"I suppose you never heard the story of the Antilles?" he
inquired, turning swiftly toward me. Then, without stopping: "She
had just sailed from San Juan before she was wrecked--on her way
to New York from Vera Cruz with several hundred Mexican refugees.
Treasure? Yes; perhaps millions, money that belonged to wealthy
families in Mexico--and some that had the curse on it.

"You asked a moment ago if everybody wasn't rescued. Well,
everybody was rescued from the wreck except Captain Driggs. I
don't know what happened. No one knows. The fire had got into the
engine-room and the ship was sinking fast. Passengers saw him,
pale, like a ghost, some said. Others say there was blood
streaming from his head. When the last boat-load left they
couldn't find him. They had to put off without him. It was a
miracle that no one else was lost."

"How did the fire start?" inquired Kennedy, much interested.

"No one knows that, either," answered Guiteras, shaking his head
slowly. "I think it must have been smoldering in the hold for
hours before it was discovered. Then the pumps either didn't work
properly or it had gained too great headway for them. I've heard
many people talk of it and of the treasure. No, sir, you wouldn't
get me to touch it. Maybe you'll call it superstition. But I won't
have anything to do with it. I wouldn't go with Mr. Everson and I
won't go with you. Perhaps you don't understand, but I can't help
it."

Dolores had stood beside her father while he was speaking, but had
said nothing, though all the time she had been regarding us from
beneath her long black eyelashes. Arguments with the old pilot had
no effect, but I could not help feeling that somehow she was on
our side, that whether she shared his fears and prejudices, her
heart was really somewhere near the Key of Gold.

There seemed to be nothing for us to do but wait until some other
way turned up to get out to the expedition, or perhaps Dolores
succeeded in changing the captain's mind. We bowed ourselves out,
not a little puzzled by the enigma of the obdurate old man and his
pretty daughter. Try as I might among the busy shipping of the
port, I could find no one else willing at any reasonable price to
change his plans to accommodate us.

It was early the next morning that a young lady, very much
perturbed, called on us at our hotel, scarcely waiting even the
introduction of her plainly engraved card bearing the name, Miss
Norma Sanford.

"Perhaps you know of my sister, Asta Sanford, Mrs. Orrin Everson,"
she began, speaking very rapidly as if under stress. "We're down
here on Asta's honeymoon in Orrin's yacht, the Belle Aventure."
Craig and I exchanged glances, but she did not give us a chance to
interrupt.

"It all seems so sudden, so terrible," she cried, in a burst of
wild, incoherent feeling. "Yesterday Bertram Traynor died, and
we've put back to San Juan with his body. I'm so worried for Orrin
and my sister. I heard you were here, Professor Kennedy, and I
couldn't rest until I saw you."

She was looking anxiously at Craig. I wondered whether she had
heard of our visit to the Guiterases and what she knew about that
other woman.

"I don't quite understand," interposed Kennedy, with an effort to
calm her. "Why do you fear for your sister and Mr. Everson? Was
there something--suspicious--about the death of Mr. Traynor?"

"Indeed I think there was," she replied, quickly. "None of us has
any idea how it happened. Let me tell you about our party. You
see, there are three college chums, Orrin and two friends, Bertram
Traynor and Donald Gage. They were all on a cruise down here last
winter, the year after they graduated. It was in San Juan that
Orrin first met Mr. Dominick, who was the purser on the Antilles--
you know, that big steamer of the Gulf Line that was burned last
year and went down with seven million dollars aboard?"

Kennedy nodded to the implied query, and she went on: "Mr.
Dominick was among those saved, but Captain Driggs was lost with
his ship. Mr. Dominick had been trying to interest some one here
in seeking the treasure. They knew about where the Antilles went
down, and the first thing he wanted to do was to locate the wreck
exactly. After that was done of course Mr. Dominick knew about the
location of the ship's strong room and all that."

"That, of course, was common knowledge to any one interested
enough to find out, though," suggested Kennedy.

"Of course," she agreed. "Well, a few months later Orrin met Mr.
Dominick again, in New York. In the mean time he had been talking
the thing over with various people and had become acquainted with
a man who had once been a diver for the Interocean Marine
Insurance Company--Owen Kinsale. Anyhow, so the scheme grew. They
incorporated a company, the Deep Sea Engineering Company, to
search for the treasure. That is how Orrin started. They are using
his yacht and Mr. Dominick is really in command, though Mr.
Kinsale has the actual technical knowledge."

She paused, but again her feelings seemed to get the better of
her. "Oh," she cried, "I've been afraid all along, lately. It's
dangerous work. And then, the stories that have been told of the
ship and the treasure. It seems ill-fated. Professor Kennedy," she
appealed, "I wish you would come and see us. We're not on the
yacht just now. We came ashore as soon as we arrived back, and
Asta and Orrin are at the Palace Hotel now. Perhaps Orrin can tell
you more. If you can do nothing more than quiet my fears--"

Her eyes finished the sentence. Norma Sanford was one of those
girls who impress you as quite capable of taking care of
themselves. But in the presence of the tragedy and a danger which
she felt but could not seem to define, she felt the need of
outside assistance and did not hesitate to ask it. Nor was Kennedy
slow in responding. He seemed to welcome a chance to help some one
in distress.

We found Everson and his young wife at the hotel, quite different
now from the care-free adventurers who had set out only a few days
before to wrest a fortune from chance.

I had often seen portraits of the two Sanford sisters in the
society pages of the papers in the States and knew that the
courtship of Orrin Everson and Asta Sanford had been a true bit of
modern romance.

Asta Everson was a unique type of girl. She had begun by running
fast motor cars and boats. That had not satisfied her, and she had
taken up aviation. Once, even, she had tried deep-sea diving
herself. It seemed as if she had been born with the spirit of
adventure.

To win her, Everson had done about everything from Arctic
exploration one summer when he was in college to big-game hunting
in Africa, and mountain-climbing in the Andes. Odd though the
romance might seem to be, one could not help feeling that the
young couple were splendidly matched in their tastes. Each had
that spirit of restlessness which, at least, sent them out playing
at pioneering.

Everson had organized the expedition quite as much in the spirit
of revolt against a prosaic life of society at home as for gain.
It had appealed strongly to Asta. She had insisted that nothing so
much as a treasure hunt would be appropriate for their wedding-
trip and they had agreed on the unconventional. Accordingly, she
and her sister had joined Everson and his party, Norma, though a
year younger, being quite like her sister in her taste for
excitement.

"Of course, you understand," explained Everson, as he hurriedly
tried to give us some idea of what had happened, "we knew that the
Antilles had sunk somewhere off the Cay d'Or. It was first a
question of locating her. That was all that we had been doing when
Bertram died. It is terrible, terrible. I can't believe it. I
can't understand it."

In spite of his iron nerve, the tragedy seemed to have shaken
Everson profoundly.

"You had done nothing that might have been dangerous?" asked
Kennedy, pointedly.

"Nothing," emphasized Everson. "You see, we located the wreck in a
way somewhat similar to the manner in which they sweep the seas
for mines and submarines. It was really very simple, though it
took us some time. All we did was to drag a wire at a fixed depth
between the yacht and the tug, or rather, I suppose you'd almost
call it a trawler, which I chartered from Havana. What we were
looking for was to have the wire catch on some obstruction. It
did, too, not once, but many times, due to the unevenness of the
ocean bed. Once we located a wreck, but it was in shallow water, a
small boat, not the one we were looking for."

"But you succeeded finally?"

"Yes, only day before yesterday we located her. We marked the spot
with a buoy and were getting ready for real work. It was just
after that that Bertram was taken ill and died so suddenly. We've
left Dominick, Kinsale, Gage, and the rest on the trawler there,
while I came here with Traynor's body. God! but it was awful to
have to send the news back to New York. I don't know what to think
or what to do."

"How did he die?" asked Kennedy, endeavoring to gain the
confidence of young Everson. "Do you recall any of his symptoms?"

"It came on him so suddenly," he replied, "that we hadn't much
time to think. As nearly as we could make out, it began with a
faintness and difficulty in breathing. We asked him how he felt--
but it seemed as if he was deaf. I thought it might be the
'bends'--you know, caisson disease--and we started to put him in
the medical lock which we had for the divers, but before we could
get it ready he was unconscious. It was all so sudden that it
stunned us. I can't make it out at all."

Neither Asta nor Norma seemed able to tell anything. In fact, the
blow had been so swift and unexpected, so incomprehensible, that
it had left them thoroughly alarmed.

The body of Traynor had already been brought ashore and placed in
a local undertaking shop. With Everson, Kennedy and I hastened to
visit it.

Traynor had been an athlete and powerfully built, which made his
sudden death seem all the more strange. Without a word, Craig set
to work immediately examining his body, while we stood aside,
watching him in anxious silence. Kennedy consumed the greater part
of the morning in his careful investigation, and after some time
Everson began to get restless, wondering how his wife and sister-
in-law were getting on in his absence. To keep him company I
returned to the hotel with him, leaving Kennedy to pursue his work
alone.

There was nothing much that either of us could say or do, but I
thought I observed, on closer acquaintance with Norma, that she
had something weighing on her mind. Was it a suspicion of which
she had not told us? Evidently she was not prepared to say
anything yet, but I determined, rather than try to quiz her, to
tell Kennedy, in the hope that she might confide in him what she
would not breathe to any one else.

It was perhaps an hour or more later that we returned to Craig. He
was still at work, though from his manner it was evident that his
investigations had begun to show something, however slight.

"Have you found anything?" asked Everson, eagerly.

"I think I have," returned Craig, measuring his words carefully.
"Of course you know the dangers of diving and the view now
accepted regarding the rapid effervescence of the gases which are
absorbed in the body fluids during exposure to pressure. I think
you know that experiment has proved that when the pressure is
suddenly relieved the gas is liberated in bubbles within the body.
That is what seems to do the harm. His symptoms, as you described
them, seemed to indicate that. It is like charged water in a
bottle. Take out the cork and the gas inside which has been under
pressure bubbles up. In the human body, air and particularly the
nitrogen in the air, literally form death bubbles."

Everson said nothing as he regarded Kennedy's face searchingly,
and Craig went on: "Set free in the spinal cord, for instance,
such bubbles may cause partial paralysis, or in the heart may lead
to stoppage of the circulation. In this case I am quite sure that
what I have found indicates air in the arteries, the heart, and
the blood vessels of the brain. It must have been a case of air
embolism, insufflation."

Though Everson seemed all along to have suspected something of the
sort, Kennedy's judgment left him quite as much at a loss for an
explanation. Kennedy seemed to understand, as he went on:

"I have tried to consider all the ways such a thing could have
happened," he considered. "It is possible that air might have been
introduced into the veins by a hypodermic needle or other
instrument. But I find no puncture of the skin or other evidence
that would support that theory. I have looked for a lesion of the
lungs, but find none. Then how could it have occurred? Had he done
any real deep diving?"

Everson shook his head slowly. "No," he replied. "As I said, it
wouldn't have been so incomprehensible if he had. Besides, if we
had been diving, we should have been on the lookout. No, Bertram
had only tested the apparatus once, after we located the wreck. He
didn't much more than go under the surface--nothing like the
practice dives we all made up in Long Island Sound before we came
down here. He was only testing the pumps and other things to see
whether they had stood the voyage. Why, it was nothing at all! I
don't see how it could have given any one the 'bends'--much less a
fellow like Traynor. Why, I think he could have stood more than
Kinsale with a little practice. Kennedy, I can't get it out of my
mind that there's something about this that isn't RIGHT."

Craig regarded Everson gravely. "Frankly," he confessed, "I must
say that I don't understand it myself--at this distance."

"Would you come out to the Key with me?" hastened Everson, as
though grasping at a possible solution.

"I should be delighted to help you in any manner that I can,"
returned Craig, heartily.

Everson could not find words to express his gratitude as we
hurried back to the hotel. In the excitement, I had completely
forgotten the despatch from the Star, but now I suddenly realized
that here, ready to hand, was the only way of getting out to the
Key of Gold and securing the story.

Asta Everson and Norma, especially, were overjoyed at the news
that Kennedy had consented to accompany them back to the wreck.
Evidently they had great faith in him, from what they had heard at
home.

Accordingly, Everson lost no time in preparing to return to the
yacht. Nothing more now could be done for poor Traynor, and delay
might mean much in clearing up the mystery, if mystery it should
prove. We were well on our way toward the landing place before I
realized that we were going over much the same route that Kennedy
and I had taken the day before to reach the home of Guiteras.

I was just about to say something about it to Kennedy, and of the
impression that Norma had made on me, when suddenly a figure
darted from around a corner and confronted us. We stopped in
surprise. It was no other than Dolores herself--not the quiet,
subdued Dolores we had seen the day before, but an almost wild,
passionate creature. What it was that had transformed her I could
not imagine. It was not ourselves that she seemed to seek, nor yet
the Eversons. She did not pause until she had come close to Norma
herself.

For a moment the two women, so different in type, faced each
other, Dolores fiery with the ardent beauty of her race, Norma
pulsating with life and vigor, yet always mistress of herself.

"I warn you!" cried Dolores, unable to restrain herself. "You
thought the other was yours--and he was not. Do not seek revenge.
He is mine--MINE, I tell you. Win your own back again. I was only
making sport of him. But mine--beware!"

For a moment Norma gazed at her, then, without a word, turned
aside and walked on. Another instant and Dolores was gone as
suddenly as she had appeared. Asta looked inquiringly, but Norma
made no attempt at explanation. What did it mean? Had it anything
to do with the dispute in the hotel which Kenmore had witnessed?

At the landing we parted for a time with Everson, to return to our
hotel and get what little we needed, including Kennedy's traveling
laboratory, while Everson prepared quarters for our reception on
the yacht.

"What do you make of that Dolores incident?" I hastened to ask the
moment we were alone.

"I don't know," he replied, "except that I feel it has an
important bearing on the case. There is something that Norma
hasn't told us, I fear."

While we waited for a wagon to transfer our goods to the dock,
Kennedy took a moment to call up Kenmore on the News. As he turned
to me from the telephone, I saw that what he had learned had not
helped him much in his idea of the case.

"It was the Interocean Company which had insured the Antilles,"
was all he said.

Instantly I thought of Kinsale and his former connection. Was he
secretly working with them still? Was there a plot to frustrate
Everson's plans? At least the best thing to do was to get out to
the wreck and answer our many questions at first hand.

The Belle Aventure was a trim yacht of perhaps seventy feet, low,
slim, and graceful, driven by a powerful gas-engine and capable of
going almost anywhere. An hour later we were aboard and settled in
a handsomely appointed room, where Craig lost no time in
establishing his temporary traveling crime clinic.

It was quite late before we were able to start, for Everson had a
number of commissions to attend to on this his first visit to port
since he had set out so blithely. Finally, however, we had taken
aboard all that he needed and we slipped out quietly past the
castle on the point guarding the entrance to the harbor. All night
we plowed ahead over the brilliant, starry, tropical sea, making
splendid time, for the yacht was one of the fastest that had ever
been turned out by the builders.

Now and then I could see that Kennedy was furtively watching
Norma, in the hope that she might betray whatever secret it was
she was guarding so jealously. Though she betrayed nothing, I felt
sure that it had to do with some member of the expedition and that
it was a more than ordinarily complicated affair of the heart. The
ladies had retired, leaving us with Everson in the easy wicker
chairs on the after-deck.

"I can't seem to get out of my mind, Everson, that meeting with
the Spanish girl on the street," suddenly remarked Kennedy, in the
hope of getting something by surprise. "You see, I had already
heard of a little unpleasantness in a hotel cafe, before the
expedition started. Somehow I feel that there must be some
connection."

For a moment Everson regarded Kennedy under the soft rays of the
electric light under the awning as it swayed in the gentle air,
then looked out over the easy swell of the summer sea.

"I don't understand it myself," he remarked, at length, lowering
his voice. "When we came down here Dominick knew that girl,
Dolores, and of course Kinsale met her right away, too. I thought
Gage was head over ears in love with Norma--and I guess he is.
Only that night in the cafe I just didn't like the way he proposed
a toast to Dolores. He must have met her that day. Maybe he was a
bit excited. What she said to-day might mean that it was her
fault. I don't know. But since we've been out to the Key I fancy
Norma has been pretty interested in Dominick. And Kinsale doesn't
hesitate to show that he likes her. It all sets Donald crazy. It's
so mixed up. I can't make anything of it. And Norma--well, even
Asta can't get anything out of her. I wish to Heaven you could
straighten the thing out."

We talked for some time, without getting much more light than
Everson had been able at first to shed on the affair, and finally
we retired, having concluded that only time and events would
enable us to get at the truth.

It was early in the morning that I was wakened by a change in the
motion of the boat. There was very little vibration from the
engine, but this motion was different. I looked out of the port-
hole which had been very cleverly made to resemble a window and
found that we had dropped anchor.

The Key of Gold was a beautiful green island, set, like a
sparkling gem, in a sea of deepest turquoise. Slender pines with a
tuft of green at the top rose gracefully from the wealth of
foliage below and contrasted with the immaculate white of the
sandy beach that glistened in the morning sun. Romance seemed to
breathe from the very atmosphere of the place.

We found that the others on the yacht were astir, too, and,
dressing hastily, we went out on deck. Across the dancing waves,
which seemed to throw a mocking challenge to the treasure-seekers
to find what they covered, we could see the trawler. Already a
small power-boat had put out from her and was plowing along toward
us.

It was as the boat came alongside us that we met Gage for the
first time. He was a tall, clean-cut fellow, but even at a glance
I recognized that his was an unusual type. I fancied that both
proctors and professors had worried over him when he was in
college.

Particularly I tried to discover how he acted when he met Norma.
It was easy to see that he was very eager to greet her, but I
fancied that there was some restraint on her part. Perhaps she
felt that we were watching and was on her guard.

Dominick greeted Everson warmly. He was a man of about thirty-five
and impressed one as having seen a great deal of the world. His
position as purser had brought him into intimate contact with many
people, and he seemed to have absorbed much from them. I could
imagine that, like many people who had knocked about a great deal,
he might prove a very fascinating person to know.

Kinsale, on the other hand, was a rather silent fellow and
therefore baffling. In his own profession of deep-sea diving he
was an expert, but beyond that I do not think he had much except
an ambition to get ahead, which might be praiseworthy or not,
according as he pursued it.

I fancied that next to Everson himself, Norma placed more
confidence in Dominick than in any of the others, which seemed to
be quite natural, though it noticeably piqued Gage. On the part of
all three, Gage, Dominick, and Kinsale, it was apparent that they
were overjoyed at the return of Norma, which also was quite
natural, for even a treasure-hunt has hours of tedium and there
could be nothing tedious when she was about. Asta was undoubtedly
the more fascinating, but she was wrapped up in Everson. It was
not long before Kennedy and I also fell under the spell of Norma's
presence and personality.

We hurried through breakfast and lost no time in accepting
Everson's invitation to join him, with the rest, in the little
power-boat on a visit to the trawler.

It was Dominick who took upon himself the task of explaining to us
the mysteries of treasure-hunting as we saw them. "You see," he
remarked, pointing out to us what looked almost like a strangely
developed suit of armor, "we have the most recent deep-sea diving-
outfit which will enable us to go from two hundred to three
hundred feet down--farther, and establish a record if we had to do
it. It won't be necessary, though. The Antilles lies in about two
hundred and fifty feet of water, we have found. This armor has to
be strong, for, with the air pressure inside, it must resist a
pressure of nearly half a pound per square inch for each foot we
go--to be exact, something like a hundred and five pounds per
square inch at the depth of the wreck. Perhaps if Traynor had been
diving we might have thought that that was the trouble."

It was the first reference since we arrived to the tragedy. "He
had only had the suit on once," went on Dominick, confirming
Everson, "and that was merely to test the pumps and valves and
joints. Even Kinsale, here, hasn't been down. Still, we haven't
been idle. I have something to report. With our instruments we
have discovered that the ship has heeled over and that it will be
a bit harder job to get into my office and get out the safe than
we hoped--but feasible."

Kennedy showed more interest in the diving apparatus than he had
shown in anything else so far. The trawler was outfitted most
completely as a tender, having been anchored over the exact spot
at which the descents were to be made, held by four strong cables,
with everything in readiness for action.

I saw him cast a quick glance at the others. For the moment
Dominick, Gage, and Kinsale seemed to have forgotten us in their
interest explaining to Norma what had been accomplished in her
absence. He seized the occasion to make an even closer examination
of the complicated apparatus. So carefully had accident been
guarded against that even a device for the purification of the air
had been installed in the machine which forced the fresh air down
to the diver, compressed.

It was this apparatus which I saw Kennedy studying most,
especially one part where the air was passed through a small
chamber containing a chemical for the removal of carbon dioxide.
As he looked up, I saw a peculiar expression on his face. Quickly
he removed the chemical, leaving the tube through which the air
passed empty.

"I think the air will be pure enough without any such treatment,"
he remarked, glancing about to be sure no one had observed.

"How is that?" I inquired, eagerly.

"Well, you know air is a mechanical mixture of gases, mainly
oxygen and nitrogen. Here's something that gives it an excess of
nitrogen and a smaller percentage of oxygen. Nitrogen is the more
dangerous gas for one under compressed air. It is the more inert
nitrogen that refuses to get out of the blood after one has been
under pressure, that forms the bubbles of gas which cause all the
trouble, the 'bends,' compressed-air sickness, you know."

"Then that is how Traynor died?" I whispered, coming hastily to
the conclusion. "Some one placed the wrong salt in there--took out
oxygen, added nitrogen, instead of removing carbon dioxide?"

Norma had turned toward us. It was too early for Kennedy to accuse
anybody, whatever might be his suspicions. He could not yet come
from under cover. "I think so," was all he replied.

A moment later the group joined us. "No one has been down on the
wreck yet?" inquired Craig, at which Everson turned quickly to the
three companions he had left in charge, himself anxious to know.

"No," replied Kinsale before any one else could answer. "Mr.
Dominick thought we'd better wait until you came back."

"Then I should like to be the first," cut in Craig, to my utter
surprise. Remonstrance had no effect with him. Neither Norma nor
Asta could dissuade him. As for the rest of us, our objections
seemed rather to confirm him in his purpose.

Accordingly, in spite of the danger, which now no one no more than
he knew, all the preparations were made for the first dive. With
the aid of Kinsale, whom I watched closely, though no more so than
Craig, he donned the heavy suit of rubberized reinforced canvas,
had the leads placed on his feet and finally was fitted with the
metal head and the "bib"--the whole weighing hardly short of three
hundred pounds. It was with serious misgiving that I saw him go
over the side of the trawler and shoot down into the water with
its dark mystery and tragedy.

The moments that he was down seemed interminable. Suspiciously I
watched every move that the men made, fearful that they might do
something. I longed for the technical knowledge that would have
enabled me to handle the apparatus. I tried to quiet my fears by
reasoning that Craig must have had perfect confidence in the value
of his discovery if he were willing to risk his life on it, yet I
felt that at least a show of vigilance on my part might bluff any
one off from an attempt to tamper again with the air-supply. I
stuck about closely.

Yet, when there came a hasty signal on the indicator from below,
although I felt that he had been down for ages, I knew that it had
been only a very short time. Could it be a signal of trouble? Had
some one again tampered with the apparatus?

Would they never bring him up? It seemed as if they were working
fearfully slow. I remembered how quickly he had shot down. What
had seemed then only a matter of seconds and minutes now seemed
hours. It was only by sheer will power that I restrained myself as
I realized that going under the air pressure might be done safely
quite fast, that he must come out slowly, by stages, that over the
telephone that connected with his helmet he was directing the
decompression in accordance with the latest knowledge that medical
science had derived of how to avoid the dread caisson disease.

I don't know when I have felt more relief than I did at seeing his
weird headgear appear at the surface. The danger from the "bends"
might not be entirely over yet, but at least it was Craig himself,
safe, at last.

As he came over the side of the trawler I ran to him. It was like
trying to greet a giant in that outlandish suit which was so
clumsy out of the water. Craig's back was turned to the others,
and when I realized the reason I stood aghast. He had brought up a
skull and had handed the gruesome thing to me with a motion of
secrecy. Meanwhile he hastened to get out of the cumbersome suit,
and, to my delight, showed no evidence yet of any bad effects.

That he should have made the descent and returned so successfully
I felt must be a surprise to some one. Who was it? I could not
help thinking of Kinsale again. Was he working for two masters?
Was he still employed by the insurance company? Was this a scheme
to capture all the rich salvage of the ship instead of that
percentage to which Everson had secured an agreement with the
underwriters?

Kennedy lost no time in getting back to the Belle Aventure with
the skull which I had concealed for him. It was a strange burden
and I was not loath to resign it to him. None of the others,
apparently, knew that he had brought up anything with him, and to
all questions he replied as though he had merely been testing out
the apparatus and, except in a most cursory way, had not made an
examination of the ship, although what he had observed confirmed
the investigations they had already made from the surface.

In our cabin, Kennedy set to work immediately after opening his
traveling laboratory and taking from it a small kit of tools and
some materials that looked almost like those for an actor's make-
up.

I saw that he wished to be left alone and retired as gracefully as
I could, determined to employ the time in watching the others. I
found Norma seated in one of the wicker chairs on the after-deck,
talking earnestly with Dominick, and, hesitating whether I should
interrupt them, I paused between the library and the sumptuously
fitted main saloon. I was glad that I did, for just that moment of
hesitation was enough for me to surprise a man peering out at them
through the curtains of a window, with every evidence of intense
dislike of the situation. Looking closer, I saw that it was Gage.
Had I expected anything of the sort I should have gone even more
cautiously. As it was, though I surprised him, he heard me in time
to conceal his real intentions by some trivial action.

It seemed as if our arrival had been succeeded by a growth of
suspicion among the members of the little party. Each, as far as I
could make out, was now on guard, and, remembering that Kennedy
had often said that that was a most fruitful time, since it was
just under such circumstances that even the cleverest could not
help incriminating himself, I hastened back to let Craig know how
matters were. He was at work now on a most grotesque labor, and,
as he placed on it the finishing touches, he talked abstractedly.

"What I am using, Walter," he explained, "might be called a new
art. Lately science has perfected the difficult process of
reconstructing the faces of human beings of whom only the skull or
a few bones, perhaps, are obtainable.

"To the unskilled observer a fleshless skull presents little human
likeness and certainly conveys no notion of the exact appearance
in life of the person to whom it belonged. But by an ingenious
system of building up muscles and skin upon the bones of the skull
this appearance can be reproduced with scientific accuracy.

"The method, I might say, has been worked out independently by
Professor von Froriep, in Germany, and by Dr. Henri Martin, in
France. Its essential principle consists in ascertaining from the
examination of many corpses the normal thickness of flesh that
overlies a certain bone in a certain type of face. From these
calculations the scientists by elaborate processes build up a face
on the skull."

I watched him, with an uncontrollable fascination. "For instance,"
he went on, "a certain type of bone always has nearly the same
thickness of muscle over it. A very fine needle with graduations
of hundredths of an inch is used in these measurements. As I have
done here, a great number of tiny plaster pyramids varying in
height according to the measurements obtained by these researches
are built up over the skull, representing the thickness of the
muscles. The next step will be to connect them together by a layer
of clay the surface of which is flush with the tips of the
pyramids. Then wax and grease paint and a little hair will
complete it. You see, it is really scientific restoration of the
face. I must finish it. Meanwhile, I wish you would watch Norma.
I'll join you in a short time."

Norma was not on deck when I returned, nor did I see any one else
for some time. I walked forward, and paused at the door to the
little wireless-room on the yacht, intending to ask the operator
if he had seen her.

"Where's Mr. Kennedy?" he inquired, before I had a chance to put
my own question. "Some one has been in this wireless-room this
morning and must have been sending messages. Things aren't as I
left them. I think he ought to know."

Just then Everson himself came up from below, his face almost as
white as the paint on the sides of his yacht. Without a word, he
drew me aside, looking about fearfully as though he were afraid of
being overheard. "I've just discovered half a dozen sticks of
dynamite in the hold," he whispered, hoarsely, staring wide-eyed
at me. "There was a timing device, set for to-night. I've severed
it. Where's Kennedy?"

"Your wireless has been tampered with, too," I blurted out,
telling what I had just learned.

We looked at each other blankly. Clearly some one had plotted to
blow up the yacht and all of us on board. Without another word, I
took his arm and we walked toward our state-room, where Kennedy
was at work. As we entered the narrow passage to it I heard low
voices. Some one was there before us. Kennedy had shut the door
and was talking in the hall. As we turned the corner I saw that it
was Norma, whom I had forgotten in the surprise of the two
discoveries that had been so suddenly made.

As we approached she glanced significantly at Kennedy as if
appealing to him to tell something. Before he could speak, Everson
himself interrupted, telling of his discovery of the dynamite and
of what the wireless operator had found.

There was a low exclamation from Norma. "It's a plot to kidnap
me!" she cried, in a smothered voice. "Professor Kennedy--I told
you I thought so!"

Everson and I could only look our inquiries at the startling new
turn of events.

"Miss Sanford has just been to her state-room," hastily explained
Craig. "There she found that some one had carefully packed up a
number of her things and hidden them, as if waiting a chance to
get them off safely. I think her intuition is correct. There would
be no motive for robbery--here."

Vainly I tried to reason it out. As I thought, I recalled that
Gage had seemed insanely jealous of both Dominick and Kinsale,
whenever he saw either with Norma. Did Gage know more about these
mysterious happenings than appeared? Why had he so persistently
sought her? Had Norma instinctively fled from his attentions?

"Where are the others?" asked Craig, quickly. I turned to Everson.
I had not yet had time to find out.

"Gone back to the trawler," he replied.

"Signal them to come aboard here directly," ordered Craig.

It seemed an interminable time as the message was broken out in
flags to the trawler, which was not equipped with the wireless.
Even the hasty explanation which Kennedy had to give to Asta
Everson, as she came out of her cabin, wondering where Orrin had
gone, served only to increase the suspense. It was as though we
were living over a powder-magazine that threatened to explode at
any moment. What did the treachery of one member of the expedition
mean? Above all, who was it?

We had been so intent watching from the deck the all too slow
approach of the little power-boat from the trawler that we had
paid no attention to what was on our other quarter.

"A tug approaching, sir," reported the man on watch to Everson.
"Seems to be heading for us, sir."

We turned to look. Who was she, friend or foe? We knew not what to
expect. Everson, pale but with a firm grip on his nerves, did not
move from the deck as the power-boat came alongside, and Dominick,
Gage, and Kinsale swung themselves up the ladder to us.

"It's the tug of that pilot, Guiteras, sir," interposed the man
who had spoken before. Not a word was spoken, though I fancied
that a quiet smile flitted over Kennedy's face as we waited.

The tug ranged up alongside us. To my utter astonishment, I saw
Dolores, her black eyes eagerly scanning our faces. Was she
looking for Gage, I wondered? It was only a moment when the party
that had put out from the tug also came tumbling aboard.

"I got your message, Kennedy, and brought Guiteras. He wouldn't
join the expedition, but he thought more of his daughter than of
anything else."

It was Kenmore, who had at last achieved his wish to get on the
treasure-hunt story. Everson looked inquiringly at Craig.

"Message?" repeated Kennedy. "I sent no message."

It was Kenmore's turn to stare. Had some one hoaxed him into a
wild-goose chase, after all?

"Nothing? About Dolores being deserted, and--"

"He shall marry my daughter!" boomed a gruff voice as Guiteras
shouldered his way through the little group, his hand shooting
back to a pocket where bulged a huge Colt.

Like a flash Kennedy, who had been watching, caught his wrist.
"Just a second, Captain," he shouted, then turned to us, speaking
rapidly and excitedly. "This thing has all been carefully,
diabolically laid out. All who stood in the way of the whole of
the treasure were to be eliminated. One person has sought to get
it all--at any cost."

In Craig's own hand now gleamed a deadly automatic while with the
other he held Guiteras's wrist.

"But," he added, tensely, "an insane passion has wrecked the
desperate scheme. A woman has been playing a part--leading the man
on to his own destruction in order to save the man she really
loves."

I looked over at Norma. She was pale and agitated, then burning
and nervous by turns. It was only by a most heroic effort that she
seemed able to restrain herself, her eyes riveted on Kennedy's
face, weighing every word to see whether it balanced with a
feeling in her own heart.

"The Antilles," shot out Kennedy, suddenly, "was burned and sunk,
not by accident, but with a purpose. That purpose has run through
all the events I have seen--the use of Mr. Everson, his yacht, his
money, his influence. Come!" He strode down the passage to our
state-room, and we followed in awed silence.

"It is a vast, dastardly crime--to get the Mexican millions," he
went on, pausing, his hand on the knob of the door while we
crowded the narrow passage. "I have brought up from the wreck a
skull which I found near a safe, unlocked so that entrance would
be easy. The skull shows plainly that the man had been hit on the
head by some blunt instrument, crushing him. Had he discovered
something that it was inconvenient to know? You have heard the
stories of the ill-fated ship--"

Craig flung open the door suddenly. We saw a weird face--the head
apparently streaming blood from a ghastly wound. There was a
shrill cry beside me.

"It's his ghost--Captain Driggs! God save me--it's his ghost come
to haunt me and claim the treasure!"

I turned quickly. Dominick had broken down.

"You were--just leading him on--tell me--Norma." I turned again
quickly. It was Gage, who had taken Norma's hand, quivering with
excitement.

"You never cared for her?" she asked, with the anxiety that showed
how in her heart she loved him.

"Never. It was part of the plot. I sent the message to get her
here to show you. I didn't know you were playing a game--"

Suddenly the sharp crack of a pistol almost deafened us in the
close passageway. As the smoke cleared, I saw Dolores, her eyes
blazing with hatred, jealousy, revenge. In her hand was the pistol
she had wrenched from her father.

On the floor across the door-sill sprawled a figure. Dominick had
paid the price of his faithlessness to her also.

THE END






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Treasure-Train, by Arthur B. Reeve





Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




TRY AND TRUST

Or, Abner Holden's Bound Boy

BY

HORATIO ALGER, JR.
AUTHOR OF "PAUL THE PEDDLER," "FROM FARM BOY TO
SENATOR," "SLOW AND SURE," ETC.

THE MERSHON COMPANY
RAHWAY, N.J.          NEW YORK


TO MY YOUNG FRIEND,

A. FLORIAN HENRIQUES
(BOISIE),

THIS VOLUME IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED



CONTENTS

I.     AROUND THE BREAKFAST TABLE
II.    INTRODUCING THE HERO
III.   A COLLISION
IV.    A DISAGREEABLE SURPRISE
V.     THE ENVELOPE
VI.    ON THE WAY
VII.   A NEW HOME
VIII.  THE GHOST IN THE ATTIC
IX.    EXPOSING A FRAUD
X.     THE CLOUDS GATHER
XI.    A CRISIS
XII.   RALPH THE RANGER
XIII.  A MOMENT OF PERIL
XIV.   TAKEN PRISONER
XV.    A FOUR-FOOTED FOE
XVI.   JUST TOO LATE
XVII.  NEW ACQUAINTANCES
XVIII. A YOUNG ARISTOCRAT
XIX.   A SUSPICIOUS CHARACTER
XX.    FACING A BURGLAR
XXI.   HERBERT'S REWARD
XXII.  ROBBED IN THE NIGHT
XXIII. A BUSINESS CALL
XXIV.  FINDING A BOARDING PLACE
XXV.   GETTING A SITUATION
XXVI.  A FAMILY COUNCIL
XXVII. AT THE CONCERT
XXVIII. PETER GREENLEAF AGAIN
XXIX.  SPARRING
XXX.   AN UNEXPECTED BLOW
XXXI.  MR. STANTON IS SURPRISED
XXXII. RISEN FROM THE DEAD
XXXIII. A FRIEND IN NEED
XXXIV. CONCLUSION



CHAPTER I

AROUND THE BREAKFAST TABLE


"Well, wife," said Mr. Benjamin Stanton, as he sat down to a late
breakfast, "I had a letter from Ohio yesterday."

"From Ohio? Who should write you from Ohio? Anyone I know?"

"My sister, Margaret, you remember, moved out there with her husband ten
years ago."

"Oh, it's from her, is it?" said Mrs. Stanton, indifferently.

"No," said her husband with momentary gravity. "It's from a Dr. Kent,
who attended her in her last illness. Margaret is dead!"

"Dear me!" returned Mrs. Stanton, uncomfortably; "and I am just out of
mourning for my aunt. Do you think it will be necessary for us to go
into mourning for your sister?"

"No, I think not," said her husband. "Margaret has lived away from us so
long, and people won't know that we have had a death in the family
unless we mention it."

"Was that all the letter said--about the death, I mean?"

"Why, no," said Mr. Stanton, with a little frown. "It seems Margaret
left a child--a boy of fourteen; and, as she left no property, the
doctor suggests that I should send for the boy and assume the care of
him."

"Upon my word!" said Mrs. Stanton; "you will find yourself in business
if you undertake to provide for all the beggars' brats that apply to you
for assistance."

"You must remember that you are speaking of my sister's child," said Mr.
Stanton, who, cold and selfish and worldly as he was, had some touch of
decency about him, and did not relish the term "beggars' brats," as
applied to one so nearly related to him.

"Well, call him what you like," said his wife; "only don't be so foolish
as to go spending your money on him when our children need all we have.
There's Maria needs a new dress immediately. She says all the girls at
Signor Madalini's dancing academy dress elegantly, and she's positively
ashamed to appear in any of her present dresses."

"How much will it cost?" asked Mr. Stanton, opening his pocketbook.

"You may hand me seventy-five dollars. I think I can make that do."

Without a word of remonstrance, the money was placed in her hand.

"I want some money, too," said Tom Stanton, who had just disposed of a
very hearty meal.

"What do you want it for, Tom?"

"Oh, some of the fellows are getting up a club. It's going to be a
select affair, and of course each of us has got to contribute some
money. You see, we are going to hire a room, furnish it nicely with a
carpet, black walnut furniture, and so on, and that'll cost something."

"Whose idea is it?"

"Well, Sam Paget was the first boy that mentioned it."

"Whose son is he?"

"His father belongs to the firm of Paget, Norwood & Co. He's awful
rich."

"Yes, it is one of our first families," said Mr. Stanton, with
satisfaction. "Is he a friend of yours, Tom?"

"Oh, yes, we are quit intimate."

"That's right!" said his father, approvingly. "I am glad you choose your
friends so well. That's one of the principal reasons I have for sending
you to an expensive school, to get you well launched into good society."

"Yes, father, I understand," said Tom. "You won't find me associating
with common boys. I hold my head a little too high for that, I can tell
you."

"That's right, my boy," said Mr. Stanton, with satisfaction. "And now
how much money do you want for this club of yours?"

"Well," said Tom, hesitatingly, "thirty or forty dollars."

"Isn't that considerable?" said his father, surprised at the amount.

"Well, you see, father, I want to contribute as much as any of the boys.
It would seem mean if I didn't. There's only a few of us to stand the
expense, and we don't want to let in any out of our own set."

"That's true," said Mr. Stanton; "I approve of that. It's all very well
to talk about democracy, but I believe in those of the higher orders
keeping by themselves."

"Then you'll give the money, father?" said Tom, eagerly.

"Yes, Tom, there's forty dollars. It's more than I ought to spare, but I
am determined you shall stand as good a chance as any of your school-
fellows. They shan't be able to say that your father stints you in
anything that your position requires."

"Thank you, father," said Tom, pocketing the two twenty-dollar bills
with great satisfaction.

The fact was that Tom's assessment amounted to only twenty dollars, but
he thought it would be a good excuse for getting more out of his father.
As to the extra money, Tom felt confident that he could find uses enough
for it. He had latterly, though but fourteen years of age, contracted
the habit of smoking cigars; a habit which he found rather expensive,
especially as he felt bound occasionally to treat his companions. Then
he liked, now and then, to drop in and get an ice-cream or some
confectionery, and these little expenses counted up.

Mr. Stanton was a vain, worldly man. He was anxious to obtain an
entrance into the best society. For this reason, he made it a point to
send his children to the most expensive schools; trusting to their
forming fashionable acquaintances, through whom his whole family might
obtain recognition into those select circles for which he cherished a
most undemocratic respect. For this reason it was that, though not
naturally liberal, he had opened his purse willingly at the demands of
Mrs. Stanton and Tom.

"Well," said Mrs. Stanton, after Tom's little financial affair had been
adjusted, "what are you going to write to this doctor? Of course you
won't think of sending for your nephew?"

"By no means. He is much better off where he is. I shall write Dr. Kent
that he is old enough to earn his own living, and I shall recommend that
he be bound out to some farmer or mechanic in the neighborhood. It is an
imposition to expect, because I am tolerably well off, that it is my
duty to support other people's children. My own are entitled to all I
can do for them."

"That's so, father," said Tom, who was ready enough to give his consent
to any proposition of a selfish nature. "Charity begins at home."

With Tom, by the way, it not only began at home, but it ended there, and
the same may be said of his father. From time to time Mr. Stanton's name
was found in the list of donors to some charitable object, provided his
benevolence was likely to obtain sufficient publicity, Mr. Stanton did
not believe in giving in secret. What was the use of giving away money
unless you could get credit for it? That was the principle upon which he
always acted.

"I suppose," continued Tom, "this country cousin of mine wears cowhide
boots and overalls, and has got rough, red hands like a common laborer.
I wonder what Sam Paget would say if I should introduce such a fellow to
him as my cousin. I rather guess he would not want to be quite so
intimate with me as he is now."

If anything had been needed, this consideration would have been
sufficient to deter Mr. Stanton from sending for his nephew. He could
not permit the social standing of his family to be compromised by the
presence of a poor relation from the country, rough and unpolished as he
doubtless was.

Maria, too, who had been for some time silent, here contributed to
strengthen the effect of Tom's words.

"Yes," said she, "and Laura Brooks, my most intimate friend, who is
shocked at anything vulgar or countrified--I wouldn't have her know that
I have such a cousin--oh, not for the world!"

"There will be no occasion for it," said her father, decidedly. "I shall
write at once to this Dr. Kent, explaining to him my views and wishes,
and how impossible it is for me to do as he so inconsiderately
suggests."

"It's the wisest thing you can do, Mr. Stanton," said his wife, who was
to the full as selfish as her husband.

"What is his name, father?" asked Maria.

"Whose name?"

"The boy's."

"Herbert Mason."

"Herbert? I thought it might be Jonathan, or Zeke, or some such name.
Herbert isn't at all countrified."

"No," said Tom, slyly; "of course not. We all know why you like that
name."

"Oh, you're mighty wise, Mr. Tom!" retorted his sister.

"It's because you like Herbert Dartmouth; but it isn't any use. He's in
love with Lizzie Graves."

"You seem to know all about it," said Maria, with vexation; for Tom was
not far from right in speaking of her preference for Herbert Dartmouth.

"Of course I do," said Tom; "I ought to, for he told me so himself."

"I don't believe it!" said Maria, who looked ready to cry.

"Well, you needn't; but it's so."

"Be quiet, children," said Mrs. Stanton. "Thomas, you mustn't plague
your sister."

"Don't take it so hard, Maria," said Tom, in rather an aggravating tone.
"There's other boys you could get. I guess you could get Jim Gorham for
a beau, if you tried hard enough."

"I wouldn't have him," said Maria. "His face is all over freckles."

"Enough of this quarreling, children," said Mrs. Stanton. "I hope," she
continued, addressing her husband, "you won't fail to write at once.
They might be sending on the boy, and then we should be in a pretty
predicament."

"I will write at once. I don't know but I ought to inclose some money."

"I don't see why you need to."

"Perhaps I had better, as this is the last I intend to do for him."

"At any rate, it won't be necessary to send much," said Mrs. Stanton.

"How much?"

"Five dollars will do, I should think. Because he happens to be your
nephew, there is no good reason why he should be thrown upon you for
support."

"Perhaps it will be best to send ten dollars," said Mr. Stanton. "People
are unreasonable, you know, and they might charge me with meanness, if I
sent less."

"Then make it ten. It's only for once. I hope that will be the last we
shall hear of him."

The room in which this conversation took place was a handsomely
furnished breakfast room, all the appointments of which spoke not only
of comfort, but of luxury. Mr. Stanton had been made rich by a series of
lucky speculations, and he was at present carrying on a large wholesale
store downtown. He had commenced with small means twenty years before,
and for some years had advanced slowly, until the tide of fortune set in
and made him rich. His present handsome residence he had only occupied
three years, having moved to it from one of much smaller pretensions on
Bleecker Street. Tom and Maria were forbidden to speak of their former
home to their present fashionable acquaintances, and this prohibition
they were likely to observe, having inherited to the full the worldly
spirit which actuated their parents. It will be seen that Herbert Mason
was little likely to be benefited by having such prosperous relations.




CHAPTER II

INTRODUCING THE HERO


If my young readers do not find the town of Waverley on the map of Ohio,
they may conclude that it was too small to attract the notice of the
map-makers. The village is small, consisting of about a dozen houses, a
church, a schoolhouse, and, as a matter of course, one of that well-
known class of stores in which everything required for the family is
sold, from a dress-pattern to a pound of sugar. Outside of the village
there are farmhouses, surrounded by broad acres, which keep them at
respectable distances from each other, like the feudal castles of the
Middle Ages. The land is good, and the farmers are thrifty and well-to-
do; but probably the whole town contains less than a thousand
inhabitants.

In one of the houses, near the church, lived Dr. Kent, whose letter has
already been referred to. He was a skillful physician, and a very worthy
man, who would have been very glad to be benevolent if his limited
practice had supplied him with the requisite means. But chance had
directed him to a healthy and sparsely-settled neighborhood, where he
was able only to earn a respectable livelihood, and indeed found himself
compelled to economize at times where he would have liked to indulge
himself in expense.

When Mrs. Mason died it was found that the sale of her furniture barely
realized enough to defray the expenses of her funeral. Herbert, her only
son, was left wholly unprovided for. Dr. Kent, knowing that he had a
rich uncle in New York, undertook to communicate to him the position in
which his nephew had been left, never doubting that he would cheerfully
extend a helping hand to him. Meanwhile he invited Herbert to come to
his house and make it his home till his uncle should send for him.

Herbert was a handsome, well-grown boy of fourteen, and a general
favorite in the village. While his mother lived he had done all he could
to lighten her tasks, and he grieved deeply for her loss now that she
was gone. His father had ten years before failed in business in the city
of New York, and, in a fit of depression, had emigrated to this obscure
country village, where he had invested the few hundred dollars remaining
to him in a farm, from which he was able to draw a scanty income. Being
a man of liberal education, he had personally superintended the
education of his son till his death, two years before, so that Herbert's
attainments were considerably in advance of those of other boys of his
age in the neighborhood. He knew something of Latin and French, which
made him looked upon as quite a model of learning by his playmates.
After his father's death he had continued the daily study of the
languages, so that he was able to read ordinary French with nearly as
much ease as if it were English. Though studious, he was not a bookworm,
but was distinguished in athletic sports popular with boys of his age.

Enough has been said of our hero by way of introduction. Herbert's
faults and virtues will appear as the record of his adventures is
continued. It may be hinted only that, while he was frank, manly, and
generous in his disposition, he was proud and high-spirited also, and
perhaps these qualities were sometimes carried to excess. He would not
allow himself to be imposed upon if he could help it. Being strong for
his age, he was always able to maintain his rights, but never abused his
strength by making it the instrument of tyrannizing over weaker boys.

Of course Herbert felt somewhat anxious as to his future prospects. He
knew that the doctor had written to his Uncle Benjamin about him, and he
hoped that he might be sent for to New York, having a great curiosity to
see the city, of which he had heard so much.

"Have you heard from my uncle, Dr. Kent?" he inquired, a few days after
the scene recorded in our first chapter.

His question was prompted by seeing the doctor coming into the yard with
an open letter in his hand.

"Yes," said Dr. Kent, with troubled expression and perplexed took.

"What does Uncle Benjamin say?" asked our young hero, eagerly.

"Nothing very encouraging, Herbert, I am sorry to say," returned the
doctor. "However, here is the letter; you may read it for yourself."

Herbert received the letter from the doctor's hands and read it through
with feelings of mortification and anger.

Here it is:

"DEAR SIR: I have to acknowledge yours of the 10th inst. I regret to
hear of my sister's decease. I regret, also, to hear that her son,
Herbert, is left without a provision for his support. My brother-in-law
I cannot but consider culpable in neglecting to lay up something during
his life upon which his widow and son might depend. I suspect that he
must have lived with inconsiderate extravagance.

"As for myself, I have a family of my own to provide for, and the
expense of living in a city like this is very great. In justice to them,
I do not feel that it would be right for me to incur extra expense. You
tell me that he is now fourteen and a stout boy. He is able, I should
think, to earn his own living. I should recommend that he be bound out
to a farmer or mechanic. To defray any little expenses that may arise, I
enclose ten dollars, which I hope he may find serviceable. Yours etc.,

"BENJAMIN STANTON."

This cold and selfish letter Herbert read with rising color, and a
feeling of bitterness found a place in his young heart, which was quite
foreign to him.

"Well, Herbert, what do you think of it?" asked the doctor.

"I think," said Herbert, hotly, "that I don't want to have anything to
do with an uncle who could write such a letter as that."

"He doesn't seem to write with much feeling." acknowledged the doctor.

"Feeling!" repeated Herbert; "he writes as if I were a beggar, and asked
charity. Where is the money he inclosed, Dr. Kent?"

"I have it here in my vest pocket. I was afraid it would slip out of the
letter, and so took care of it."

"Will you let me send it back to my uncle?" asked Herbert.

"Send it back?"

"Yes, Dr. Kent; I don't want any of his charity, and I'll tell him so."

"I am afraid, Herbert, that you are giving way to your pride."

"But isn't it a proper pride, doctor?"

"I hardly know what to say, Herbert. You must remember, however, that,
as you are left quite unprovided for, even this small sum may be of use
to you."

"It isn't the smallness of the sum that I mind," said Herbert. "If Uncle
Benjamin had written a kind letter, or showed the least feeling in it
for me, or for--for mother [his voice faltered a moment], I would have
accepted it thankfully. But I couldn't accept money thrown at me in that
way. He didn't want to give it to me, I am sure, and wouldn't if he
hadn't felt obliged to."

Dr. Kent paced the room thoughtfully. He respected Herbert's feelings,
but he saw that it was not wise for him to indulge them. He was in a
dependent situation, and it was to be feared that he would have much to
suffer in time to come from the coldness and selfishness of the world.

"I will tell you what to do, Herbert," he said, after a while. "You can
accept this money as a loan, and repay it when you are able."

"With interest?"

"Yes, with interest, if you prefer it."

"I shall be willing to accept it on those terms," said Herbert; "but I
want my uncle to understand it."

"You may write to your uncle to that effect, if you like."

"Very well, Dr. Kent. Then I will write to him at once."

"You will find some paper in my desk, Herbert. I suppose you will not
object to my seeing your letter."

"No, doctor, I intended to show it to you. You won't expect me to show
much gratitude, I hope?"

"I won't insist upon it, Herbert," said the doctor, smiling.

Herbert in about half an hour submitted the following note to the
doctor's inspection. It had cost him considerable thought to determine
how to express himself, but he succeeded at last to his tolerable
satisfaction.

"UNCLE BENJAMIN [so the letter commenced]: Dr. Kent has just shown me
your reply to his letter about me. You seem to think I wish you to
support me, which is not the case. All I should have asked was your
influence to help me in obtaining a situation in the city, where I might
support myself. I am willing to work, and shall probably find some
opportunity here. The ten dollars, which you inclose, I will accept AS A
LOAN, and will repay you as soon as I am able, WITH INTEREST. HERBERT
MASON."

"Will that do?" asked Herbert.

Dr. Kent smiled.

"You were careful not to express any gratitude, Herbert," he said.

"Because I don't feel any," returned Herbert, promptly. "I feel grateful
to you, Dr. Kent, for your great kindness. I wish I could pay you for
that. I shall never forget how you attended my mother in her sickness,
when there was small prospect of your being paid."

"My dear boy," said the doctor, resting his hand affectionately on
Herbert's shoulder, "I have been able to do but very little. I wish I
could do more. If you wish to repay me, you can do it a hundred times
over by growing up a good and honorable man; one upon whom your mother
in heaven can look down with grateful joy, if it is permitted her to
watch your progress here."

"I will do my best, doctor," said Herbert.

"The world is all before you," proceeded Dr. Kent. "You may not achieve
a brilliant destiny. It is permitted to few to do that. But whether your
sphere is wide or narrow, you may exert an influence for good, AND LEAVE
THE WORLD BETTER FOR YOUR HAVING LIVED IN IT."

"I hope it may be so," said Herbert, thoughtfully. "When I am tempted to
do wrong, I will think of my mother."

"It is the very best thing you can do, Herbert. And now for your plans.
I wish I were in a situation to have you remain with me. But as that
cannot be, I will do my best to get you a place."

"I ought to be at work," said Herbert, "as I have my living to get. I
want you to take that ten dollars, doctor, as part payment of the debt I
owe you."

The doctor shook his head.

"I can't do that, Herbert, not even to oblige you. You were too proud to
accept a favor from your uncle. You will not be too proud, I hope, to
accept one from me?"

"No, doctor; I am not too proud for that. You are my friend, and my
uncle cares nothing for me."

When Herbert's letter reached New York, his uncle felt a momentary
shame, for he saw that his nephew had rightfully interpreted his own
selfishness and lack of feeling, and he could not help involuntarily
admiring the independent spirit which would not allow him to accept the
proffered money, except as a loan. But mingled with his shame was a
feeling of relief, as he foresaw that Herbert's pride would not suffer
him to become a burden upon him in the future. He hardly expected ever
to see the ten dollars returned with interest; but even if he lost it,
he felt that he should be getting off cheap.




CHAPTER III

A COLLISION


It was a week later when an incident befell Herbert which is worthy of
mention, since it brought him into collision with a man who was destined
to have some influence over his future life.

A neighboring farmer, for whom, during his mother's life, he had
occasionally gone on errands, drove up in front of the doctor's house,
and asked Herbert if he could take his horse and wagon and drive over to
the mill village to get some corn ground. Herbert was rather glad to
accept this proposal, not only because he was to receive twenty-five
cents for so doing, but also because he was fond of driving a horse.

He was only about a mile from the mill village, when he saw approaching
him a man in a light open buggy. Herbert knew every horse in Waverley,
and every man, woman, and child, for that matter, and he perceived at
once that the driver was a stranger. To tell the truth, he was not very
favorably impressed by his appearance. The man was very dark, with black
hair and an unshaven beard of three days' growth, which did not set off
his irregular and repulsive features. His mouth, partly open, revealed
several yellow tusks, stained with tobacco juice. On his head he wore a
broad-brimmed straw hat, rather the worse for wear.

It so happened that just at this point the middle of the road was much
better than the sides, which sloped considerably, terminating in gullies
which were partly full from the recent rains. The road was narrow, being
wide enough for two vehicles to pass each other, if each veered to the
side, but not otherwise.

Herbert observed that the buggy, which was now rapidly approaching, was
kept in the center of the road, and that the driver appeared to have no
intention of turning out.

"What does he mean?" thought our hero. "He cannot expect me to do the
whole of the turning out. I will turn out my half, and if he wants to
get by, he must do the same."

Accordingly, he turned partially to one side, as much as could be
reasonably expected, and quietly awaited the approach of the man in the
buggy. The latter still kept the center of the road, and did not turn
out his carriage at all. As soon as it was close at hand, the driver
leaned forward and exclaimed angrily:

"Turn out, boy!"

If he expected that Herbert would be intimidated by his tone he was much
mistaken. Our hero was bold, and not easily frightened. He looked
quietly in the man's face, and said composedly, "I have turned out."

"Then turn out more, you young vagabond! Do you hear me?"

"Yes, sir, I hear you, and should if you didn't speak half so loud."

"Curse your impudence! I tell you, turn out more!" exclaimed the
stranger, becoming more and more angry. He had expected to get his own
way without trouble. If Herbert had been a man, he would not have been
so unreasonable; but he supposed he could browbeat a boy into doing
whatever he chose to dictate. But he had met his match, as it turned
out.

"I have already given you half the road," said Herbert, firmly, "and I
don't intend to give you any more."

"You don't, eh? Young man, how old are you?"

"I am fourteen."

"I should think you were forty by the airs you put on."

"Is it putting on airs to insist on my rights?" asked our hero.

"Your rights!" retorted the other, laughing contemptuously.

"Yes, my rights," returned Herbert, quietly. "I have a right to half of
the road, and I have taken it. If I turn out any more, I shall go into
the gully."

"That makes no difference. A wetting won't do you any harm. Your
impudence needs cooling."

"That may be," said Herbert, who did not choose to get angry, but was
resolved to maintain his rights; "but I object to the wetting, for all
that, and as this wagon is not mine, I do not choose to upset it."

"You are the most insolent young scamp I ever came across!" exclaimed
the other, furiously. "I've a good mind to give you something much worse
than a wetting."

"Such as what?" asked our hero, coolly. In reply the man flourished his
whip significantly. "Do you see that?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Oh, very well," said the other, ironically; "I'm glad you do. Perhaps
you wouldn't like to feel it?"

"No, I don't think I should," said Herbert, not exhibiting the least
apprehension.

The stranger handled his whip, eyeing our hero viciously at the same
time, as if it would have afforded him uncommon pleasure to lay it over
his back. But there was something in the look of our hero which
unconsciously cowed him, and, much as he wished to strike him, he held
back.

"Well, you're a cool hand," he said, after a moment's hesitation.

To this our hero did not see fit to make any reply. But he grasped his
own whip a little tighter. So brutal had been the tone assumed by the
stranger, that he was not sure but he might proceed to carry out his
threat, and lay the whip over his back. He determined, in that case, to
give him as good as he sent. I will not express any opinion as to the
propriety of this determination, but I am certain, from what I know of
our hero's fearless spirit, that he would not have hesitated to do it,
be the consequences what they might. But he did not have the
opportunity.

"Once more," demanded the stranger, furiously; "are you going to turn
out?"

"No," said the boy, decidedly.

"Then--I'll run you down."

So saying, he brought the whip violently on the horse's back. The latter
gave a convulsive spring forward. But his driver had not taken into
consideration that the farm-wagon was the stronger of the two vehicles,
and that in any collision the buggy must come off second best. So it
happened that a wheel of the buggy was broken, and the driver, in the
shock, thrown sprawling into a puddle on the other side of the road. The
wagon suffered no damage, but the old horse, terrified, set off at a
rapid pace. Herbert looked back to see if the stranger was injured, but
seeing that he had already picked himself up unwounded, but decidedly
dirty, he concluded to keep on his way to the mill.

The driver of the overturned vehicle was considerably more angry than
hurt at this catastrophe.

It chafed his pride not a little to think that, after all his vaunts,
the boy had maintained his ground, and got the better of him. For a man
of forty-five to be worsted by a boy of fourteen was, it must be
confessed, a little mortifying. It was something like a great ship of
the line being compelled to surrender to a little monitor.

No one feels particularly dignified or good-natured when he is picking
himself out of a mud puddle. Our black-haired acquaintance proved no
exception to this remark. He shook his fist at the receding wagon and
its occupant--a demonstration of defiance which our hero did not
witness, his back being now turned to his late opponent.

Mr. Abner Holden--for this was the stranger's name--next turned his
attention to the buggy, which had been damaged to some extent, and so
was likely to involve him in expense. This was another uncomfortable
reflection. Meanwhile, as it was no longer in a fit state for travel, he
must contrive some way to have it carried back to the stable, and,
unless he could procure another vehicle, perform the rest of the journey
on foot.

Luckily, some men in a neighboring field had witnessed the collision,
and, supposing their services might be required, were now present to
lend their aid.

"Pretty bad accident," remarked one of them. "That 'ere wheel'll need
considerable tinkering afore it's fit for use. How came you to get it
broke so, squire?"

"A little rascal had the impudence to dispute the road with me, and
would not turn out at my bidding," said Mr. Holden, in a tone of
exasperation, which showed that his temper had been considerably soured
by the accident.

"Wouldn't turn out? Seems to me from the marks of the wheels, you must
have been drivin' along in the middle of the road. I guess you didn't
take the trouble to turn out, yourself."

"Well, there was room enough for the boy to turn out one side," said
Holden, doggedly.

"You are slightly mistaken, stranger," said the other, who was disgusted
at the traveler's unreasonableness. "There wasn't room; as anyone can
see that's got eyes in his head. Didn't the youngster turn out at all?"

"Yes," snapped Holden, not relishing the other's free speech.

"Then it seems you were the one that would not turn out. If you had been
a leetle more accommodating, this accident couldn't have happened. Fair
play's my motto. If a feller meets you halfway, it's all you have a
right to expect. I reckon it'll cost you a matter of ten dollars to get
that 'ere buggy fixed."

Holden looked savagely at the broken wheel, but that didn't mend
matters. He would have answered the countryman angrily, but, as he stood
in need of assistance, this was not good policy.

"What would you advise me to do about it?" he inquired.

"You will have to leave the buggy where it is just now. Where did you
get it?"

"Over at the mill village."

"Well, you'd better lead the horse back--'tain't more'n a mile or so--
get another wagon, and tell 'em to send for this."

"Well, perhaps that is the best way."

"Where was you goin'?"

"Over to Waverley."

"That's where the boy came from."

"What boy?"

"The boy that upset you."

"What is his name?" asked Abner Holden, scowling.

"His name is Herbert Mason, son of the Widder Mason that died two or
three weeks since. Poor boy, he's left alone in the world."

"Where's he stopping?" asked Holden, hardly knowing why he asked the
question.

"Dr. Kent took him in after the funeral, so I heard; but the selectmen
of Waverley are trying to find him a place somewheres, where he can earn
his own livin'. He's a smart, capable boy, and I guess he can do 'most a
man's work."

Abner Holden looked thoughtful. Some plan had suggested itself to him
which appeared to yield him satisfaction, for he began to look decidedly
more comfortable, and he muttered to himself: "I'll be even with him
YET. See if I don't."

"How far am I from Waverley?" he asked, after a slight pause.

"Well, risin' three miles," drawled the other.

"If I could get somebody to go back with this horse, I don't know but
what I'd walk to Waverley. Are you very busy?"

"Well, I don't know but I could leave off for a short time," said the
other, cautiously. "Work's pretty drivin', to be sure. What do you
cal'late to pay?"

"How much would it be worth?"

"Well, there's the walk there and back, and then again there's the
time."

"You can mount the horse going."

"I guess fifty cents'll about pay me."

Mr. Holden took out his pocketbook and paid the required sum.

"By the way," he said, as if incidentally, "who is the chairman of the
selectmen in the village of Waverley?" "You ain't thinkin' of takin'
that boy, be you?" said the other, curiously.

"I've had enough to do with him; I don't want ever to lay eyes on him
again."

"Well, I dunno as I should, if I was you," said the countryman, rather
slyly.

"You haven't answered my question yet," said Holden, impatiently.

"Oh, about the cheerman of the selectmen. It's Captain Joseph Ross."

"Where does he live?"

"A leetle this side of the village. You'll know the house, well enough.
It's a large, square house painted white, with a well-sweep in front."

Without a word of thanks for the information, Abner Holden turned, and
began to walk toward Waverley. Perhaps his object in making these
inquiries has been guessed. It happened that he needed a boy, and, for
more reasons than one, he thought he should like to have Herbert bound
to him. Herbert, as he had noticed, was a stout boy, and he probably
could get a good deal of work out of him. Then, again, it would be
gratifying to him to have our hero in subjection to him. He could pay
him off then, ten times over, for his insolence, as he chose to term it.

"I'll break his proud spirit," thought Abner Holden. "He'll find he's
got a master, if I get hold of him. He don't know me yet, but he will
some time."

Mr. Holden resolved to wait on Captain Ross at once, and conclude
arrangements with him to take Herbert before our hero had returned from
the mill village. He pictured, with a grim smile, Herbert's dismay when
he learned who was to be his future master.

With the help of a handkerchief dipped into a crystal stream at the
roadside, Abner Holden succeeded in effacing some of the muddy stains
upon his coat and pantaloons, and at length got himself into presentable
trim for calling upon a "selectman."

At length he came in sight of the house which had been described to him
as that of Captain Ross. There was a woman at the well-sweep engaged in
drawing water.

"Does Captain Ross live here?" he inquired.

"Yes, sir."

"Is he at home?"

"He's over in the three-acre lot. Was you wantin' to see him?"

"I should like to. Is the field far away?"

"No, it's just behind the house."

"Then I guess I'll go and find him. I want to see him on a little matter
of business."

Mr. Holden crossed a mowing-field, and then, climbing over a stone wall,
found himself at the edge of the three-acre lot. The captain was
superintending one or two hired men, and, as he had his coat off, had
probably been assisting them.

"Captain Ross?" said Abner Holden, interrogatively.

"That's my name."

"You are chairman of the selectmen, I believe?"

"Yes, sir."

"I understand that you have a boy that you want to bind out."

"I reckon you mean Herbert Mason."

"Yes, I believe that's the name I heard."

"Are you in want of a boy?"

"Yes, I am looking out for one."

"What is your business?"

"I keep a store, but I should want him to work on land part of the
time."

"Do you live hereabouts?"

"Over at Cranston."

"If you'll come to the house, we'll talk the matter over. The boy's a
good boy, and we want to get a good place for him. His mother was a
widder, and he's her only son. He's a smart, capable lad, and good to
work."

"I've no doubt he'll suit me. I'll take him on your recommendation."

"We should want him to go to school winters. He's a pretty good scholar
already. His father was a larned man, and used to teach him before he
died. If he had lived, I reckon Herbert would certainly have gone to
college."

"I'll agree to send him to school in the winter for the next two years,"
said Holden, "and will give him board and clothes, and when he's twenty-
one a freedom suit, and a hundred dollars. Will that do?"

"I don't know but that's reasonable," said Captain Ross, slowly. "The
boy's a bit high-spirited, but if you manage him right, I guess you'll
like him."

"I'll manage him!" thought Abner Holden. "Can I take him with me to-
morrow?" he asked. "I don't come this way very often."

"Well, I guess that can be arranged. We'll go over to Dr. Kent's after
dinner, and see if they can get him ready."

"In the meantime," said Holden, afraid that the prize might slip through
his fingers, "suppose we make out the papers. I suppose you have full
authority in the matter."

Captain Ross had no objection, and thus poor Herbert was unconsciously
delivered over to the tender mercies of a man who had very little love
for him.




CHAPTER IV

A DISAGREEABLE SURPRISE


After his collision with the traveler, Herbert hurried on to the mill,
intent upon making up for lost time. He was satisfied with having
successfully maintained his rights; and, as he had no reason to suppose
he should ever again see his unreasonable opponent, dismissed him from
his thoughts.

On reaching the mill, he found he should have to remain an hour or two
before he could have his grain ground. He was not sorry for this, as it
would give him an opportunity to walk around the village.

"I wish," he thought, "I could get a place in one of the stores here.
There's more going on than there is in Waverley, and I could go over
Sundays to see Dr. Kent's family."

On the spur of the moment, he resolved to inquire if some of the
storekeepers did not require help. There was a large dry-goods store--
the largest in the village--kept by Beckford & Keyes. He entered and
inquired for the senior partner.

"Mr. Beckford is not in," said the clerk. "Mr. Keyes is standing at that
desk."

Herbert went up to the desk, and said inquiringly, "Mr. Keyes?"

"That is my name," said that gentleman, pleasantly. "Is there anything I
can do for you?"

"I am in search of a place," said our hero, "and I thought you might
have a vacancy here."

"We have none just at present," said Mr. Keyes, who was favorably
impressed by Herbert's appearance; "but it is possible we may have in a
few weeks. Where do you live? Not in the village, I suppose?"

"No, sir," said Herbert, and a shadow passed over his face, "My mother
died three weeks since, and I am now stopping at the house of Dr. Kent."

"Dr. Kent--ah, yes, I know the doctor. He is an excellent man."

"He is," said Herbert, warmly. "He has been very kind to me."

"What is your name?"

"Herbert Mason."

"Then, Herbert, I will promise to bear you in mind. I will note down
your name and address, and as soon as we have a vacancy I will write to
you. Come into the store whenever you come this way."

"Thank you," said Herbert.

He left the store feeling quite encouraged. Even if the chance never
amounted to anything, the kind words and manner of the storekeeper gave
him courage to hope that he would meet with equal kindness from others.
Kind words cost nothing, but they have a marvelous power in lightening
the burdens of the sorrowful and cheering the desponding.

Herbert left the store, feeling that he should consider himself truly
fortunate if he could obtain a place in such an establishment. But there
was a rough experience before him, of which at present he guessed
nothing.

After sauntering about the village a little longer, and buying a stick
of candy for little Mary Kent, the doctor's only daughter, who was quite
attached to Herbert, our hero got back to the mill in time to receive
his bags of meal, with which he was soon on his way homeward.

About the place where he met Mr. Holden he was hailed by a man at work
in the field--the same who had taken back that gentleman's horse to the
stable.

"Well, boy, you had a kind of scrimmage, didn't you, coming over?"

"Did you see it?" asked Herbert.

"Yes," said the other, grinning. "I seed the other feller in the mud
puddle. He was considerably riled about it."

"It was his own fault. I gave him half the road."

"I know it; but there's some folks that want more than their share."

"Was his buggy broken? I don't know but I ought to have stopped to help
him, but he had been so unreasonable that I didn't feel much like it."

"His wheel got broken. I drawed the buggy into the bushes. There 'tis
now. It'll cost him a matter of ten dollars to fix it."

"I'm sorry for that," said Herbert; "but I can't see that I was to blame
in the matter. If I had turned out as he wanted me to, I should have
tipped over, and, as the wagon didn't belong to me, I didn't think it
right to risk it."

"Of course not. You wasn't called on to give in to such
unreasonableness."

"Where did the man go?"

"He concluded to walk on to Waverley, and hired me to take the horse
back to the stable. He wanted to know who you were."

"Did he?"

"Maybe he's goin' to sue you for damages."

"I don't believe he'll get much if he does," laughed our hero. "My
property is where he can't get hold of it."

"Ho! ho!" laughed the other, understanding the joke.

After this conversation Herbert continued on his way, and, after
delivering the grain, took his way across the fields to his temporary
home. He entered by the back yard. Little Mary came running out to meet
him.

"Have oo come back, Herbert?" she said. "Where have oo been?"

"Been to buy Mary some candy," he said, lifting her up and kissing her.

"Whose horse is that at the gate?" asked Herbert, as the doctor's wife
entered the room.

"It belongs to Captain Ross," she said. "He has come on business
connected with you."

"Connected with me!" repeated Herbert, in surprise.

"Yes, my dear boy, I am afraid we must make up our minds to lose you."

"Has he found a place for me?" asked Herbert, in a tone of
disappointment.

"Yes, I believe he has bound you out to a man in Cranston."

"I am sorry," said Herbert.

"I shall be sorry to have you go, Herbert, but I thought you wanted to
go."

"So I do; but by waiting a few weeks I could probably get a place in
Beckford & Keyes' store, at the mill village."

"What makes you think so?"

Herbert detailed his interview of the morning with the junior partner.
Just at this moment the doctor entered the kitchen.

"Have you told him?" he inquired, looking at his wife.

"Yes, and he says that but for this he might probably have got a chance
to go into Beckford's store at the mill village."

"I am sorry for this. They are good men, and he would have been near us,
while Cranston is forty miles away."

"Who is the man that wants me?" asked Herbert.

"A Mr. Holden. He is in the other room with Captain Ross. It was all
arranged before they came. He wants you to go with him to-morrow
morning."

"So soon?" said Herbert, in dismay.

"Yes. At first he wished you to set off with him this afternoon; but I
told him decidedly you could not be ready."

"Quite impossible," said Mrs. Kent. "Some of Herbert's clothes are in
the wash, and I can't have them ready till evening."

"You had better come into the other room, Herbert," said the doctor. "I
will introduce you to your new employer."

Herbert followed the doctor into the sitting-room. His first glance
rested on Captain Ross, whom he knew. He went up and shook hands with
him. Next he turned to Mr. Holden, and to his inexpressible
astonishment, recognized his opponent of the morning.

"Mr. Holden, Herbert," introduced the doctor. "Mr. Holden, this is the
boy we have been speaking of."

"I have seen Mr. Holden before," said Herbert, coldly.

"Yes," said Mr. Holden, writhing his disagreeable features into an
unpleasant smile. "We have met before."

Dr. Kent looked from one to the other in surprise, as if seeking an
explanation.

"Our acquaintance doesn't date very far back," said Mr. Holden. "We met
this morning between here and the mill village."

"Indeed," said the doctor; "you passed each other, I suppose."

"Well, no; I can't say we did exactly," said Mr. Holden, with the same
unpleasant smile, "We tried to, but the road being narrow, there was a
collision, and I came off second-best."

"I hope there was no accident."

"Oh, nothing to speak of. I got tipped out, and my clothes, as you may
observe, suffered some. As for my young friend here, he rode on
uninjured."

"You must excuse my not stopping to inquire if I could help you," said
Herbert; "but my horse was frightened by the collision, and I could not
easily stop him."

"Oh, it's of no consequence," said Mr. Holden, in an off-hand manner. He
was determined not to show himself out in his true colors until he had
got Herbert absolutely under his control.

"But where is your horse, Mr. Holden?" asked Captain Ross. "I think you
were walking when you came to my house."

"I sent it back to the village by a man I met on the road, my buggy
being disabled."

"Your carriage wasn't much injured, I hope."

"Oh, no, not much."

"I don't see exactly how it could happen," said Captain Ross. "I thought
the road from here to the mill village was broad enough at any point for
carriages to pass each other."

"I didn't dream," said Mr. Holden, not noticing this remark, "that the
young man I had engaged was my young acquaintance of the morning."

Herbert looked at him, puzzled by his entire change of manner--a change
so sudden that he suspected its genuineness.

The more he thought of it, the more unwilling he felt to live with Mr.
Holden. But could it be avoided? He resolved to try. He accordingly told
the doctor and Captain Ross of the promise that Mr. Keyes had made him.

"It would be a good place," said the captain; "but it ain't certain.
Now, here's Mr. Holden, ready to take you at once."

"If I was in the mill village I could come over and see my friends here
now and then. Besides, I think I should like being in a store."

"Oh, I've got a store, too," said Mr. Holden, "and I should expect you
to tend there part of the time. I don't think I can let you off, my
young friend," he added, with a disagreeable smile. "I think we shall
get along very well together."

Herbert did not feel at all sure of this, but he saw that it would do no
good to remonstrate farther, and kept silence. Soon after, Mr. Holden
and Captain Ross rose to go.

"I'll call round for my young friend about nine to-morrow morning," said
Abner Holden, with an ingratiating smile.

"We will endeavor to have him ready," said the doctor.

After they went away Herbert wandered about in not the best of spirits.
He was convinced that he should not be happy with Mr. Holden, against
whom he had conceived an aversion, founded partly upon the occurrences
of the morning, and partly on the disagreeable impression made upon him
by Abner Holden's personal appearance.




CHAPTER V

THE ENVELOPE


Herbert woke up early the next morning, and a feeling of sadness came
over him as he reflected that it was his last morning in Waverley. He
was going out into the world, and, as he could not help thinking, under
very unfavorable auspices. New scenes and new experiences usually have a
charm for a boy, but Mr. Holden's disagreeable face and unpleasant smile
rose before him, and the prospect seemed far from tempting.

When he came downstairs, he found Mrs. Kent in the kitchen.

"You are up early, Mrs. Kent," said Herbert.

"Yes, Herbert; I want you to have a good breakfast before you go."

It certainly was a nice breakfast. Tender beefsteak, warm biscuit,
golden butter, potatoes fried crisp and brown, and excellent coffee,
might have tempted any appetite. Herbert, in spite of his sadness, did
full justice to the bountiful meal.

The family had hardly risen from breakfast when the sound of wheels was
heard outside, and directly there was a knock at the door.

"It's Mr. Holden," said the doctor, looking from the front window.

"Must we part from you so soon, Herbert?" said Mrs. Kent,
affectionately.

"Where oo goin', Herbert?" asked little Mary, clinging to his knee,

"Herbert's going away, Mary," said he, stooping and kissing his little
friend.

"Herbert mustn't go 'way," said the little girl, in discontent.

"Herbert come back soon, and bring candy for Mary," he said, wishing
that his words might come true.

By that time Mr. Holden had entered, and was surveying the scene with
his disagreeable smile.

"Little Mary is quite attached to Herbert," said the doctor.

"I am sorry," said Mr. Holden, "that I have no little girls, as Herbert
seems fond of them."

Herbert doubted if he could become attached to anyone related to Mr.
Holden.

"I'm a bachelor," said Mr. Holden, "though perhaps I ought to be ashamed
to say so. If I had had the good fortune early in life to encounter a
lady like your good wife here, it might have been different."

"It isn't too late yet, Mr. Holden," said the doctor.

"Well, perhaps not. If Mrs. Kent is ever a widow, I may try my luck."

"What a disagreeable man," thought the doctor's wife, not propitiated by
the compliment. "Herbert," she said, "here are a couple of handkerchiefs
I bought in the village yesterday. I hope you will find them useful."

"Yes; no doubt he will," said Mr. Holden, laughing. "He will think of
you whenever he has a bad cold."

Nobody even smiled at this witty sally, and, Mr. Holden, a little
disappointed, remarked: "Well, time's getting on. I guess we must be
going, as we have a long journey before us."

The whole family accompanied Herbert to the road. After kissing Mary and
Mrs. Kent, and shaking the doctor cordially by the hand, Herbert jumped
into the wagon. Just before the horse started the doctor handed our hero
a sealed envelope, saying, "You can open it after a while."

Though, like most boys of his age, Herbert had a great horror of making
a baby of himself, he could hardly help crying as he rode up the street,
and felt that he had parted from his best friends. His eyes filled with
tears, which he quietly wiped away with the corner of his handkerchief.

"Come, come, don't blubber, boy," said Mr. Holden, coarsely.

Herbert was not weak enough to melt into tears at an unkind word. It
roused his indignation, and he answered, shortly, "When you see me
blubbering, it'll be time enough to speak, Mr. Holden."

"It looked a good deal like it, at any rate," said Abner. "However, I'm
glad if I'm mistaken. There's nothing to cry about that I can see."

"No, perhaps not," said Herbert; "but there's something to be sorry
for."

"Something to be sorry for, is there?" said Abner Holden.

"Yes."

"Well, what is it?"

"I've left my best friends, and I don't know when I shall see them
again."

"Nor I," said Mr. Holden. "But I think it's high time you left them."

"Why?" asked Herbert, indignantly.

"Because they were petting you and making too much of you. You won't get
such treatment as that from me."

"I don't expect it," said our hero.

"That's lucky," said Abner Holden, dryly. "It's well that people
shouldn't expect what they are not likely to get."

Here a sense of the ludicrous came over Herbert as he thought of being
Mr. Holden's pet, and he laughed heartily. Not understanding the reason
of his sudden mirth, that gentleman demanded, in a tone of irritation,
"What are you making a fool of yourself about?"

"What am I laughing at?" said Herbert, not liking the form of the
question.

"Yes," snarled Abner.

"The idea of being your pet," explained Herbert, frankly.

Mr. Holden did not appreciate the joke, and said roughly, "You better
shut up, if you know what's best for yourself."

They rode along in silence for a few minutes. Then Abner Holden,
thinking suddenly of the envelope which Dr. Kent had placed in Herbert's
hand at parting, and feeling curious as to its contents, asked:

"What did the doctor give you just as you were starting?"

"It was an envelope."

"I know that; but what was there in it?"

"I haven't looked," said our hero.

He felt a little satisfaction in snubbing Mr. Holden, whom he saw he
would never like.

"Why don't you open it?"

"I didn't think of it before."

"I suppose there is some present inside."

Herbert decided to open the envelope, out of respect for Dr. Kent. On
opening it, he drew out a five-dollar bill, and a few penciled words,
which were as follows:

"DEAR HERBERT: I would gladly give you more if I had the means. I hope
you will use the inclosed money in any way that may be most serviceable
to you. You must write to me often. Be a good boy, as you always have
been; let your aims be noble; try to do right at all hazards, and may
God bless your efforts, and make you a good and true man. Such is the
prayer of your affectionate friend, GEORGE KENT."

Herbert read these lines with emotion, and inwardly resolved that he
would try to carry out the recommendations laid down. His thoughts were
broken in upon by Mr. Holden, whose sharp eyes detected the bank-note.

"There's money in the letter, isn't there?"

"Yes."

"How much?"

"Five dollars."

"Five dollars, hey?" he said. "You'd better give it to me to keep for
you."

"Thank you, Mr. Holden; I can take care of it, myself."

"It isn't a good plan for boys to have so large a sum of money in their
possession," said Abner Holden, who was anxious to secure it himself.

"Why not?" asked Herbert.

"Because they are likely to spend it improperly."

"Dr. Kent didn't seem to think I was likely to do that."

"No; he trusted you too much."

"I hope it won't prove so."

"You'd better keep out of the way of temptation. You might lose it,
besides."

"I don't often lose things."

"Come, boy," said Mr. Holden, getting impatient; "Dr. Kent, no doubt,
intended that I should take care of the money for you. You'd better give
it up without further trouble."

"Why didn't he give it to you, then?" demanded Herbert.

"He supposed you would give it to me."

Mr. Holden's motive for getting the money into his own hands was
twofold. First, he knew that without money Herbert would be more
helpless and more in his power. Secondly, as he had agreed to supply
Herbert with clothing, he thought he might appropriate the money towards
this purpose, and it would be so much of a saving to his own pocket.
Perhaps Herbert suspected some such design. At any rate, he had no
intention of gratifying Mr. Holden by giving up the money.

"Well, are you going to give me the money?" blustered Abner Holden,
taking out his pocketbook, ready to receive it.

"No," said Herbert.

"You'll repent this conduct, young man," said Holden, scowling.

"I don't think I shall," said our hero. "I don't understand why you are
so anxious to get hold of the money."

"It is for your good," said Abner.

"I'd rather keep it," said Herbert.

Abner Holden hardly knew what to do. The money was by this time safely
stowed away in Herbert's pocket, where he could not very well get at it.
However, he had a plan for getting it which he resolved to put into
practice when they stopped for dinner.




CHAPTER VI

ON THE WAY


By the time they had ridden twenty miles both Herbert and Mr. Holden
felt hungry. The fresh air had produced a similar effect upon both. They
approached a broad, low building with a swinging sign and a long piazza
in front, which it was easy to see was a country tavern.

"Do you feel hungry, boy?" inquired Abner Holden.

"Yes, sir," returned our hero.

"So do I. I think I shall get some dinner here. You can get some, too,
if you like."

"Thank you, sir."

"Oh, there's no occasion to thank me," said Mr. Holden, dryly. "I shall
pay for my dinner, and if you want any, you can pay for yours."

Herbert looked surprised. As he had entered Mr. Holden's employ, he
supposed of course that the latter would feel bound to provide for him,
and it certainly seemed mean that he should be compelled to pay for his
own dinner. However, he was beginning to suspect that his new employer
was essentially a mean man.

"How much will it cost?" asked Herbert, at length.

"Thirty-seven cents," was the reply.

It must be remembered that this was in the day of low prices, when gold
was at par, and board could be obtained at first-class city hotels for
two dollars and a half a day, and in country villages at that amount by
the week.

"Thirty-seven cents!" Herbert hardly liked to break in upon his scanty
hoard, but the morning air had sharpened his appetite, and he felt that
he must have something to eat. Besides, he remembered one thing which
fortunately Mr. Holden did not know, that in addition to the five
dollars which Dr. Kent had given him he had the ten dollars sent him by
his uncle, and not only that, but a little loose change which he had
earned.

"Well, are you going to get out?" asked Abner Holden. "It's nothing to
me whether you take dinner or not."

"Yes, I guess I will."

"Very well," said Holden, who had a reason for being pleased with his
decision.

Both went into the tavern. There were two or three loungers on a settle,
who gazed at them curiously. One of them at once appeared to recognize
Abner Holden.

"How dy do, Holden?" he said. "Who've you got with you?"

"A boy I've taken," said Holden, shortly.

"A pretty smart-looking boy. Where'd you pick him up?"

"Over in Waverley. He's got some pretty high notions, but I guess I'll
take 'em out of him in time."

"Yes," chuckled the other; "I warrant you will."

While this conversation was going on Herbert had entered the tavern, but
he could not avoid hearing what was said, including Mr. Holden's reply.
He was not frightened, but inwardly determined that he would do his
duty, and then if Mr. Holden saw fit to impose upon him, he would make
what resistance he was able.

"I wonder what high notions he means," thought our hero. "If he expects
to make a slave of me, he will be mistaken, that's all."

"Sit down there, and I'll go and order dinner," said Mr. Holden,
entering.

Just then, however, the landlord came in and greeted Abner Holden, whom
he appeared to know.

"I want dinner for two, Mr. Robinson," he said.

"For two! You haven't brought your wife along with you, Holden?" he
said, jocosely.

"No, I haven't come across any such lady yet. I've got a boy here who is
bound to me. And hark you, landlord," he added, in a lower voice, that
Herbert might not hear, "he will pay you for his dinner out of a five-
dollar bill which he has with him. YOU NEEDN'T GIVE BACK THE CHANGE TO
HIM, BUT TO ME."

"Yes, I understand," said the landlord, winking.

"I prefer to keep the money for him. He has refused to give it up and
this will give me a chance to get hold of it without any fuss."

"All right."

"If he kept it himself he'd spend it in some improper way."

"Just so. I'll attend to it."

Now our hero was gifted with pretty sharp ears, and he caught enough of
this conversation to understand Mr. Holden's plot, which he straightway
determined should not succeed.

"You shan't take me in this time, Mr. Holden," he thought.

He opened his pocketbook to see if he had enough small change to pay for
his dinner without intrenching upon his bill. There proved to be a
quarter and two half-dimes, amounting, of course, to thirty-five cents.
This would not be quite sufficient.

"I must change the bill somewhere," he said to himself.

Looking out of the tavern window, he saw the village store nearly
opposite. He took his cap and ran over. There was a clerk leaning with
his elbows upon the counter, appearing unoccupied.

It occurred to Herbert that he might want some paper and envelopes. He
inquired the price.

"We sell the paper at a penny a sheet, and the envelopes will cost you
eight cents a package."

"Then you may give me twelve sheets of paper and a package of
envelopes," said Herbert.

The package was done up for him and in payment he tendered the bill.

The clerk gave him back four dollars and eighty cents in change. He put
the money in his pocketbook, and the paper and envelopes in his jacket-
pocket, and returned to the tavern well pleased with his success. Mr.
Holden was in the barroom, taking a glass of "bitters," and had not
noticed the absence of our hero.

Dinner was soon ready.

There was some beefsteak and coffee and a whole apple pie. Herbert
surveyed the viands with satisfaction, having a decidedly good appetite.
He soon found, however, that hungry as he was, he stood a poor chance
with Abner Holden; that gentleman, being a very rapid eater, managed to
appropriate two-thirds of the beefsteak and three-quarters of the pie.
However, the supply being abundant, Herbert succeeded in making a
satisfactory repast, and did not grudge the amount which he knew he
should have to pay for it before leaving.

"Now," said Abner Holden, his eyes twinkling at the thought of our
hero's coming discomfiture, "we'll go and settle our bill."

"Very well," said Herbert, quietly.

They entered the public room and advanced to the bar.

"This boy wants to pay for his dinner, Mr. Robinson," said Abner,
significantly.

"How much will it be?" asked Herbert.

"Thirty-seven cents."

Herbert took out of his vest pocket a quarter, a dime and two cents, and
handed them over.

To say that Abner Holden looked amazed is not sufficient. He looked
disgusted and wronged, and glared at Herbert as if to inquire how he
could have the face to outrage his feelings in that way.

"Ho! ho!" laughed the landlord, who, having no interest in the matter,
was amused at the course affairs had taken.

Herbert suppressed his desire to laugh, and looked as if he had no
knowledge of Mr. Holden's plans.

"Where did you get that money?" growled Abner, with a scowl.

"Out of my vest pocket," said Herbert, innocently.

"I know that, of course, but I thought you had only a bill."

"Oh, I got that changed at the store."

"How dared you go over there without my permission?" roared Abner.

"I didn't think it necessary to ask your permission to go across the
street."

"Well, you know it now. Don't you go there again without my knowledge."

"Very well, sir."

"Did you buy anything at the store?" continued Mr. Holden.

"Yes, sir."

"What was it?"

"Some paper and envelopes."

"Humph!" muttered Abner, discontentedly.

He proceeded to pay his own bill and in a few minutes got into the wagon
and drove off rather sulkily. Herbert saw that Mr. Holden was disturbed
by the failure of his little plan, and felt amused rather than
otherwise. But when he reflected that he was going to live with this
man, and be, to a considerable extent under his control, he felt
inclined to be sad. One thing he resolved that he would not submit to
tyranny. The world was wide, and he felt able to earn his own living. He
would give Mr. Holden a trial, and if he treated him with reasonable
fairness he would remain with him. But he was not going to be any man's
slave.

Meanwhile they were getting over the road, and a few more hours brought
them to their journey's end.

Abner Holden's house stood in considerable need of paint. It had no
great pretensions to architectural beauty, being about as handsome for a
house as Abner Holden was for a man. There was a dilapidated barn, a
little to one side, and the yard was littered up with a broken wagon, a
woodpile and various odds and ends, giving the whole a very untidy look.

"Is this where you live, Mr. Holden?" asked Herbert, looking about him.

"Yes, and I'm glad to get home. Do you know how to unharness a horse?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then jump out and unharness this horse. A man will come for it to-
morrow."

Herbert did as directed. Then he took his little trunk from the wagon,
and went with it to the back door and knocked.




CHAPTER VII

A NEW HOME


The door was opened by an elderly woman, rather stout, who acted as
Abner Holden's housekeeper. Though decidedly homely, she had a pleasant
look, which impressed Herbert favorably. He had feared she might turn
out another edition of Mr. Holden, and with two such persons he felt
that it would be difficult to get along.

"Come right in," said Mrs. Bickford, for that was her name. "Let me help
you with your trunk. You can set it down here for the present."

"Thank you," said Herbert.

"You must be tired," said the housekeeper.

"No, not very," said our hero. "We rode all the way."

"Well, it's tiresome riding, at any rate, when it's such a long
distance. You came from Waverley, Mr. Holden tells me."

"Yes."

"And that is more than thirty miles away, isn't it?"

"Yes, I believe so."

"So you've come to help Mr. Holden?" she added, after a pause.

"Yes, I suppose so," said Herbert, rather seriously.

"What is your name?"

"Herbert Mason."

"I hope, Herbert, we shall be able to make you comfortable."

"Thank you," said Herbert, a little more cheerful, as he perceived that
he was to have one friend in Mr. Holden's household.

"Has Mr. Holden generally kept a boy?" he asked.

"Yes, he calculates to keep one most of the time."

"Who was the last one?"

"His name was Frank Miles."

"Was he here long?" asked Herbert, in some curiosity.

"Well, no," said the housekeeper, "he did not stay very long."

"How long?"

"He was here 'most a month."

"'Most a month? Didn't he like it?"

"Well, no; he didn't seem to like Mr. Holden much."

Herbert was not much surprised to hear this. He would have thought Frank
Miles a singular sort of a boy if he had liked Abner Holden.

"Have any of the boys that have been here liked Mr. Holden?" he asked.

"I can't say as they have," said Mrs. Bickford, frankly; "and somehow
they don't seem to stay long."

"Why didn't they like him?"

"Sh!" said the housekeeper, warningly.

Herbert looked round and saw his employer entering the room.

"Well, boy, have you put up the horse?" he asked, abruptly.

"Yes sir."

"Did you give him some hay?"

"Yes, sir."

"And some grain?"

"No, I didn't know where it was kept. If you'll tell me, I'll do it
now."

"No, you needn't. He isn't to have any. He's only a hired horse."

Considering that the hired horse had traveled over thirty miles, Herbert
thought he was entitled to some oats; but Mr. Holden was a mean man, and
decided otherwise.

"Where is Herbert to sleep, Mr. Holden?" asked the housekeeper.

"Up garret."

"There's a small corner bedroom in the second story," suggested Mrs.
Bickford, who knew that the garret was not very desirable.

"I guess he won't be too proud to sleep in the garret," said Mr. Holden.
"Shall you?" he continued, turning to Herbert.

"Put me where you please," said Herbert, coldly.

"Then it shall be the garret. You can take your trunk up now. Mrs.
Bickford will show you the way."

"It's too heavy for you, Herbert," said the housekeeper; "I will help
you."

"Oh, he can carry it alone," said Abner Holden. "He isn't a baby."

"I'd rather help him," said the housekeeper, taking one handle of the
trunk. "You go first, Herbert, You're young and spry, and can go faster
than I."

On the second landing Herbert saw the little bedroom in which the
housekeeper wanted to put him. It was plainly furnished, but it was
light and cheerful, and he was sorry he was not to have it.

"You could have had that bedroom just as well as not," said Mrs.
Bickford. "It's never used. But Mr. Holden's rather contrary, and as
hard to turn as a--"

"A mule?" suggested Herbert, laughing.

"It's pretty much so," said the housekeeper, joining in the laugh.

They went up a narrow staircase and emerged into a dark garret, running
the whole length of the house without a partition. The beams and rafters
were visible, for the sloping sides were not plastered. Herbert felt
that he might as well have been in the barn, except that there was a
small cot bedstead in the center of the floor.

"It isn't very pleasant," said the housekeeper.

"No," said Herbert, "I don't think it is."

"I declare, it's too bad you should have to sleep here. Mr. Holden isn't
very considerate."

"I guess I can stand it," said our hero, "though I should rather be
downstairs."

"I'll bring up the trap and set it before you go to bed," said Mrs.
Bickford.

"The trap!" repeated Herbert, in surprise.

"Yes, there's rats about, and I suppose you'd rather have a trap than a
cat."

"Yes; the cat would be about as bad as the rats."

At this moment Abner Holden's voice was heard at the bottom of the
stairs, and Mrs. Bickford hurried down, followed by our hero.

"I thought you were going to stay up there all day," said Mr. Holden.
"What were you about up there?"

"That is my business," said Mrs. Bickford, shortly.

The housekeeper was independent in her feelings, and, knowing that she
could readily obtain another situation, did not choose to be browbeaten
by Mr. Holden. He was quite aware of her value, and the difficulty he
would experience in supplying her place, and he put some constraint over
himself in the effort not to be rude to her. With Herbert, however, it
was different. HE was BOUND to him, and therefore in his power. Abner
Holden exulted in this knowledge, and with the instinct of a petty
tyrant determined to let Herbert realize his dependence.

"You may go out and saw some wood," he said. "You'll find the saw in the
woodshed."

"What wood shall I saw?"

"The wood in the woodpile, stupid."

"Very well, sir," said our hero, quietly.

Herbert thought Mr. Holden was losing no time in setting him to work.
However, he had resolved to do his duty, unpleasant as it might be, as
long as Abner Holden only exacted what was reasonable, and Herbert was
aware that he had a right to require him to go to work at once. Mrs.
Bickford, however, said a word in his favor.

"I've got wood enough to last till to-morrow, Mr. Holden," she said.

"Well, what of it?"

"It's likely the boy is tired."

"What's he done to make him tired, I should like to know? Ridden thirty
miles, and eaten a good dinner!"

"Which I paid for myself," said Herbert.

"What if you did?" said Abner Holden, turning to him. "I suppose you'll
eat supper at my expense, and you'd better do something, first, to earn
it."

"That I am willing to do."

"Then go out to the woodpile without any more palavering."

"Mr. Holden," said the housekeeper, seriously, after Herbert had gone
out, "if you want to keep that boy, I think you had better be careful
how you treat him."

"Why do you say that?" demanded Abner, eying her sharply. "Has he been
saying anything to you about me?"

"No."

"Then why did you say that?"

"Because I can see what kind of a boy he is."

"Well, what kind of a boy is he?" asked Abner, with a sneer.

"He is high-spirited, and will work faithfully if he's treated well, but
he won't allow himself to be imposed upon."

"How do you know that?"

"I can read it in his face. I have had some experience with boys, and
you may depend upon it that I am not mistaken."

"He had better do his duty," blustered Abner, "if he knows what's best
for himself."

"He will do his duty," said the housekeeper, firmly, "but there is a
duty which you owe to him, as well as he to you."

"Don't I always do my duty by boys, Mrs. Bickford?"

"No, Mr. Holden, I don't think you do. You know very well you can never
get a boy to stay with you."

"This boy is bound to me, Mrs. Bickford--legally bound."

"That may be; but if you don't treat him as he ought to be treated, he
will run away, take my word for it."

"If he does, he'll be brought back, take my word for that, Mrs.
Bickford. I shall treat him as I think he deserves, but as to petting
and pampering the young rascal I shall do nothing of the kind."

"I don't think you will," said the housekeeper. "However, I've warned
you."

"You seem to take a good deal of interest in the boy," said Abner,
sneeringly.

"Yes, I do."

"After half an hour's acquaintance."

"I've known him long enough to see that he's better than the common run
of boys, and I hope that he'll stay."

"There's no doubt about that," said Abner Holden, significantly. "He'll
have to stay, whether he wants to or not."




CHAPTER VIII

THE GHOST IN THE ATTIC


After working two hours at the woodpile, Herbert was called in to tea.
There was no great variety, Abner Holden not being a bountiful provider.
But the bread was sweet and good, and the gingerbread fresh. Herbert's
two hours of labor had given him a hearty appetite, and he made a good
meal. Mrs. Bickford looked on approvingly. She was glad to see that our
hero enjoyed his supper.

There was tea on the table, and, after pouring out a cup for Mr. Holden,
the housekeeper was about to pour out one for Herbert.

"He don't want any tea," said Abner, noticing the action. "Keep the cup
for yourself, Mrs. Bickford."

"What do you mean, Mr. Holden?" asked the housekeeper, in surprise.

"Tea isn't good for a growing boy. A glass of cold water will be best
for him."

"I don't agree with you, Mr. Holden," said the housekeeper, decidedly.
"Herbert has been hard at work, and needs his tea as much as you or I
do."

Therefore, without waiting for his permission, she handed the cup to
Herbert, who proceeded to taste it.

Abner Holden frowned, but neither Herbert nor the housekeeper took much
notice of it. The latter was somewhat surprised at this new freak on the
part of Abner, as he had never tried to deprive any of Herbert's
predecessors of tea or coffee. But the fact was, Mr. Holden disliked
Herbert, and was disposed to act the petty tyrant over him. He had
neither forgotten nor forgiven the boy's spirited defiance when they
first met, nor his refusal to surrender into his hands the five dollars
which the doctor had given him.

Feeling tired by eight o'clock, Herbert went up to his garret room and
undressed himself. An instinct of caution led him to take out the money
in his porte-monnaie, and put it in his trunk, which he then locked, and
put the key under the sheet, so that no one could get hold of it without
awakening him. This precaution proved to be well taken.

Herbert lay down upon the bed, but did not immediately go to sleep. He
could not help thinking of his new home, and the new circumstances in
which he was placed. He did not feel very well contented, and felt
convinced from what he had already seen of Mr. Holden, that he should
never like him. Then thoughts of his mother, and of her constant and
tender love, and the kind face he would never more see on earth, swept
over him, and almost unmanned him. To have had her still alive he would
have been content to live on dry bread and water.

He thought, too, of the doctor's family and their kindness. How
different it would have been if he might have continued to find a home
with them! But when he was tempted to repine, the thought of his
mother's Christian instructions came to him, and he was comforted by the
reflection, that whatever happened to him was with the knowledge of his
Father in heaven, who would not try him above his strength.

Try and trust! That was almost the last advice his mother had given him,
as the surest way of winning the best success.

"Yes," he thought, "I will try and trust, and leave the rest with God."

Meanwhile Mr. Holden had not been able to keep out of his head the five
dollars which he knew Herbert possessed. He was a mean man, and wished
to appropriate it to his own use. Besides this, he was a stubborn man,
and our hero's resistance only made him the more determined to triumph
over his opposition by fair means or foul. It struck him that it would
be a good idea to take advantage of our hero's slumber, and take the
money quietly from his pocketbook while he was unconscious.

Accordingly, about eleven o'clock, he went softly up the attic stairs
with a candle in his hand, and, with noiseless steps, approached the
bed. Herbert's regular breathing assured him that he was asleep. Abner
Holden took up his pants and felt for his pocketbook. He found it, and
drew it out with exultation.

"Aha!" he thought; "I've got it."

But this brief exultation was succeeded by quick disappointment. The
pocketbook proved to be quite empty.

"Curse it!" muttered Abner, "what has the boy done with his money?"

It was at this moment that Herbert, his eyes possibly affected by the
light, awoke, and he discovered his employer examining his pocketbook.

His first feeling was indignation, but the sight of Abner Holden's
disappointed face amused him, and he determined not to reveal his
wakefulness, but to watch, him quietly.

"Perhaps he's got two pocketbooks," thought Abner. But in this he was
mistaken.

Next he went to Herbert's trunk, and tried it, but found it locked.

"I wonder where he keeps the key," was his next thought.

He searched Herbert's pockets, but the search was in vain.

"Plague take the young rascal!" he muttered, loud enough for Herbert to
hear.

Herbert turned in bed, and Abner Holden, fearing that he might wake up,
and being on the whole, rather ashamed of his errand, and unwilling to
be caught in it, went downstairs.

"Well, he didn't make much," thought our hero. "It's lucky I thought to
put the money in my trunk. If he only knew I had fifteen dollars,
instead of five, he would be all the more anxious to get hold of it."

"How did you sleep last night, Herbert?" inquired the housekeeper at
breakfast.

"Very well, thank you, Mrs. Bickford."

He was resolved not to drop a hint of what had happened, being curious
to see if Mr. Holden would make any further attempts to obtain his
money. As his employer might possibly find a key that would unlock the
trunk, he thought it prudent, during the day, to carry the money about
with him.

He hardly knew whether to expect a visit from Abner the next night, but
formed a little plan for frightening him if such a visit should take
place.

It so happened that he had in his trunk a fish horn which had been given
him by someone in Waverley. This he took out of the trunk before
retiring and hid it under his pillow. It was about nine o'clock when he
went to bed, but by considerable effort he succeeded in keeping awake
for an hour or two.

About eleven o'clock, Abner Holden, before going to bed himself, decided
to make one more attempt to obtain possession of Herbert's money. He
reflected that possibly our hero had only put away his money by chance
on the previous evening, and might have neglected to do so on the
present occasion. He desired to get possession of it before any part of
it was spent, as, judging from what he knew of boys, it would not remain
long unexpended.

Once more, therefore, he took his candle, and removing his thick-soled
shoes, which might betray him by their sound, crept softly up the steep
and narrow staircase.

But Herbert heard him, and moreover was warned of his visit by the light
of the candle which he carried. He closed his eyes, and awaited his
coming in silent expectation.

Abner Holden looked towards the bed. Herbert's eyes were closed, and his
breathing was deep and regular.

"He's sound asleep," thought Abner, with satisfaction.

He set down the candle on a chair beside the bed, and began to examine
our hero's pocketbook once more. But it proved to be empty as before. In
the pocketbook, however, he found a key, the key, as he supposed, to
Herbert's trunk. It was not, however, being only a key which Herbert had
picked up one day in the street, and kept. He had put it in his pocket
with a view to mislead his employer.

That gentleman uttered a low exclamation of satisfaction when his
fingers closed upon the key, never doubting for a moment that it would
open the trunk.

Leaving the candle in its place, he rose from his recumbent position,
threw the pants on the bed, and went round on the other side, to try the
key.

He got down on his knees before the trunk, and had inserted the key in
the lock, or rather had made an ineffectual attempt to do so, when
suddenly the candle was extinguished, and a horrible blast on the fish
horn resounded through the garret.

Now, Abner Holden was not a very courageous man. In fact, he was
inclined to superstition. He knew that he was engaged in a dishonorable
attempt to rob a boy who was placed in his charge, and there is an old
proverb that says "conscience makes cowards of us all." It must be
admitted that it was rather calculated to affect the nerves to find
one's self suddenly in the dark, and at the same time to hear such a
fearful noise proceeding from an unknown quarter.

Abner Holden jumped to his feet in dire dismay, and, without stopping to
reflect on the probable cause of this startling interruption, "struck a
bee line" for the staircase, and descended quicker, probably, than he
had ever done before, narrowly escaping tumbling the entire distance, in
his headlong haste.

Herbert had to stuff the bedclothes into his mouth to keep from bursting
into a shout of laughter, which would have revealed his agency in
producing the mysterious noise.

"I thought I heard a frightful noise last night soon after I went to
bed," said Mrs. Bickford, at the breakfast table. "Didn't you hear
anything, Mr. Holden?"

"No," said Abner, "I heard nothing. You were probably dreaming."

"Perhaps I was. Didn't you hear anything, Herbert?"

"I sleep pretty sound," said Herbert, quietly.

Abner Holden watched him as he said this, and was evidently more
perplexed than ever. But that was the last visit he paid to the garret
at night.




CHAPTER IX

EXPOSING A FRAUD


It would be hard to tell what Abner Holden's precise occupation was. He
had thirty or forty acres of land, but only cultivated enough to produce
supplies of vegetables for his own table, and grain for his horses. He
kept four cows, and he had, at this time, three horses. He had the
Yankee propensity for "swapping," and from time to time traded horses,
generally managing to get the best of the bargain, for he was tolerably
sharp and not much troubled by conscientious scruples about misstating
the merits of his horses.

But, about two months before Herbert came into his employ, he had
himself been overreached, and found himself the possessor of a horse of
excellent outward appearance, but blind of one eye, and with a very
vicious temper. He accepted the situation with a bad grace, and
determined, as soon as possible, to "trade" the horse to another party.

One day, about a fortnight after Herbert's arrival, a gentlemanly-
looking stranger knocked at Abner Holden's door.

The call was answered by the housekeeper.

"Is Mr. Holden at home?" he inquired.

"Yes, sir," was the reply.

"I should like to see him."

Abner Holden soon made his appearance.

"Mr. Holden." said the stranger "I am in search of a good family horse.
I am told that you have some animals for sale, and called on you,
thinking I might get suited through you."

"You've come to the right place," said Abner, glibly. "I've got just the
animal that will suit you."

"I should like to see it."

"He's in the pasture now. If you don't object to walking a short
distance, I will show him to you. I feel sure he will suit you."

"Very well, I will go with you."

"This way, then."

The two walked down a green lane at the back of the house to the
entrance of the pasture, where the three horses, at present comprising
Abner Holden's entire stock, were grazing leisurely.

Now, it happened that, of the three, the blind and vicious horse was
much the best looking. He held his head erect, had a graceful form, and
was likely to attract favorable notice at first sight.

Abner Holden paused at a little distance, and pointed him out.

"What do you think of that horse, Mr. Richmond?" he said.

"A very good-looking animal," said the stranger, with an approving
glance; "but I must explain that I want such an animal as my wife can
drive. It is absolutely necessary that he should be good-tempered and
gentle. If, with this, he is handsome, and of good speed, all the
better. Now you know what I am in search of. Can you recommend this
horse of yours?"

"Yes," said Abner, confidently, "he will just suit you. I did calculate
to keep him for my own use, but I'm rather short of money, and I shall
have to let him go."

"You say he is gentle?"

"Oh, yes, as gentle as need be."

"Could a woman drive him?"

"Oh, no trouble about that," said Abner.

"And he has no serious defect?"

"No."

"Well, that seems satisfactory. I like his appearance. He would look
well in harness. What is your price?"

"Two hundred and fifty dollars, cash down," said Abner. "That's too
cheap. He's worth a cool hundred more, but I got him cheap, and can
afford to sell him cheap."

The horse had cost Mr. Holden just a hundred and ten dollars, and at
this price he considered himself decidedly taken in; but this he did not
particularly care to mention.

"Two hundred and fifty dollars!" mused the stranger. "It is a little
more than I intended to pay. Still, if the animal is what you describe,
I don't know that I shall object on that score."

"You had better take him," said Abner. "It'll be the best bargain you
ever made, I'll warrant. You'll pay cash down, I suppose?"

"Of course."

"Then shall we say it's a bargain?"

"Not quite yet. I'll take till the afternoon to think about it."

"Better decide now. The fact is, Mr. Richmond, I ought not to let the
horse go at that figure, and I may change my mind."

"I think I shall take your horse, but I have agreed to look at another,
and must see that first."

"Whose?"

"It belongs to a man named Nichols."

"Sam Nichols?"

"I believe so."

"I wouldn't advise you to have anything to do with him."

"Why not?"

"He's a regular sharper. You can't depend on anything he says."

"Thank you for the caution. I will be on my guard. But I promised to
take a look at his horse before deciding. If I don't come to terms with
him, and I don't think I shall, I will come round some time this
afternoon and make a bargain with you."

Mr. Holden thought it was hardly politic to urge him farther. With a
renewed caution as to dealing with Sam Nichols, he let him go.

"Well," thought Abner, after he was gone, "it will be a pretty good
thing if I get rid of Spitfire"--he had named him thus--"for two hundred
and fifty dollars. He's a bad-tempered brute, and blind into the
bargain. But I'm not bound to tell Mr. Richmond that, and so spoil my
trade. I've put a flea in his ear about Nichols, and I guess he will be
back again."

The prospect of making a good bargain caused Abner to be unusually
pleasant and good-humored, so much so that Mrs. Bickford regarded him
with surprise. He voluntarily asked her if she did not wish something at
the store, volunteering to bring home whatever was needed.

"What's come over the man?" thought the housekeeper. "It's too good to
last."

She was quite correct there. Mr. Holden was naturally crabbed, and fair
weather with him was the exception rather than the rule. On the present
occasion it did not last many hours.

Abner Holden went to the store, but made other calls on the way, so that
he was three hours absent, and did not return till twelve o'clock, the
usual dinner hour in his household.

Meanwhile, Mr. Richmond, his caller of the morning, had been to see Sam
Nichols, and inspected the horse he had for sale. He did not altogether
like its appearance, and, moreover, he was prejudiced against him by
what he had heard from Abner Holden, and came away without effecting a
purchase.

"I don't think I can do better," he reflected, "than to take that horse
of Holden's. Let me see, it is only half-past ten. I shall have time to
go up there this morning. I suppose I might as well settle matters at
once."

Accordingly, eleven o'clock found him again in Abner Holden's yard.

Herbert was out in the yard, engaged in splitting wood.

"Is Mr. Holden at home?" inquired the stranger, pausing.

"No, sir."

"Will he be at home soon?"

"Yes, sir, I think so. He only went out to the store. He ought to be
home now."

"Then I think I will wait. I was here once before this morning. I was
talking with him about buying one of his horses. If you can spare the
time, I would like to have you go with me to the pasture, and I will
take another look at the one I saw this morning."

"Certainly, sir," said Herbert, driving the ax into the block upon which
he had been splitting, prepared to accompany Mr. Richmond to the
pasture.

They reached the bars dividing the pasture from the next field. Spitfire
was cropping the grass just on the other side.

"There," said the stranger, pointing him out, "that is the horse I was
looking at."

"THAT ONE!" repeated Herbert, in a tone of surprise.

"Yes, he is a fine-looking animal."

"Ye-es," said Herbert, hesitatingly.

"However, I don't so much care about that, as for his being gentle. I
want him for a family horse, such as my wife may drive, without fear,
while I am away."

"Did Mr. Holden say he's gentle?" asked Herbert.

"Yes. He recommended him highly for that, and told me he had no serious
defect."

"Are you sure this is the horse?" asked Herbert.

"Certainly. I am not likely to be mistaken in it. I suppose it is all as
he says?"

Herbert was in a perplexing position. He knew that if he told the truth
he should incur Abner Holden's anger, but his conscience revolted at
suffering the stranger to be taken in, and thus, perhaps, exposing his
wife to serious danger.

"I am afraid I cannot confirm what Mr. Holden says," he answered,
reluctantly. "The horse is very ill-tempered, and is blind of one eye."

"Is it possible? Then I have had a narrow escape. You have done me a
good service, my boy, in telling me the truth, for I am, myself, unused
to horses, and should have taken the animal on your employer's
recommendation. Accept this acknowledgment of my indebtedness."

He would have placed a five-dollar bill in Herbert's hand, but our hero
firmly refused to receive it.

"I have only done my duty, sir. I cannot accept money for doing that.
Thank you all the same."

"Perhaps you are right, my lad. If I ever have a chance to serve you,
don't hesitate to let me know it."

"There'll be a storm if Mr. Holden hears of this," thought Herbert. "But
I could not do otherwise."




CHAPTER X

THE CLOUDS GATHER


At twelve o'clock Abner Holden returned home, still in good humor. As he
did not anticipate another call from his expected customer until the
afternoon, he made no inquiries.

"Perhaps he won't hear about it," thought Herbert, and as he did not
wish to have any trouble with Mr. Holden, he hoped it might prove so.

Abner was so elated at the thought of his good bargain in prospect, that
he could not keep it to himself.

"I've about sold Spitfire, Mrs. Bickford," he said to the housekeeper.

"Sold Spitfire! Who wants to buy him?"

"A man that called here this morning. What do you think he wants him
for?"

"To break his neck," suggested the housekeeper.

"He wants him for a good family horse for his wife to drive," and Abner
Holden burst into a laugh.

"Perhaps he's anxious to become a widower," said Mrs. Bickford.

"No; the fact is he thinks the horse is gentle."

"You told him so, I suppose?"

"Of course, I did."

"Knowing it to be false?"

"Shut up, Mrs. Bickford. You know all is fair in trade."

"No, I don't, Mr. Holden. To my mind, a lie's just as much a lie in
trade as in anything else. I suppose the man trusted to your
recommendation."

"Suppose he did. I got cheated on the horse, and I've got to get rid of
it, somehow. As it is, I shall make a handsome profit."

"Well, Mr. Holden, all I've got to say is, I am glad I haven't got as
tough a conscience as you have."

"You don't know anything about business, Mrs. Bickford."

"Well, manage things your own way. I ain't responsible, but I pity the
poor man if he buys Spitfire."

"So do I," chuckled Abner. "That's where you and I agree, Mrs.
Bickford."

Herbert listened in silence. He was disgusted with the utter disregard
of fair dealing exhibited by Abner Holden, though he was not surprised
at it. He felt glad that he had been the means of saving Mr. Richmond
from being overreached, though he know very well that Mr. Holden's rage
would be furious when he learned what had interfered with the trade. He
did not feel under any obligations to reveal his own agency in the
matter, unless direct inquiry was made of him. In that case, he would
manfully stand by his acts.

"I'm expecting the man this afternoon, Mrs. Bickford," said Mr. Holden,
"and shall stay around home to see him. When he comes, call me at once;
and mind, not a word about Spitfire."

"Just as you say. I wash my hands of the whole affair."

"Washing your hands won't do you any harm," said Abner, with a laugh at
what he supposed to be a witticism.

Mrs. Bickford took no notice of this remark. It was not quite easy to
say why she remained in charge of Mr. Holden's household, for certainly,
she had no respect for her employer. However, he did not meddle with
her, or, if he did, he got the worst of it, and it was perhaps the
independence that she enjoyed which led her to remain in the house.
Knowing Abner's character, she was not particularly shocked at this last
evidence of it, but went about her work as usual, with scarcely a
thought of what had passed.

Abner Holden sat at the window, and looked up the road, awaiting
anxiously the appearance of the customer.

"I hope he'll bring the money with him," he thought. "I'd like to have
matters all arranged to-day, before he smells a rat. If I get the money
once in my hands, he may scold all he pleases about the horse. It won't
disturb my rest."

But the old clock in the corner kept ticking--minute after minute
passed--and still the stranger did not appear.

"He can't have struck a bargain with Sam Nichols," muttered Abner,
apprehensively. "If he has, it'll be sort of a swindle on me. Maybe
Nichols has been telling him lies about me."

Abner waxed so angry over this supposition, that although it was merely
conjecture, he already began to consider in what way he could "come up
with Sam Nichols."

"That money would come very handy," thought Abner. "There's a horse
worth two of Spitfire, I can get for a hundred and fifty, and that would
leave me a hundred. I wish he would come."

He looked out of the window, and, not content with that, went out of the
front door, and, shading his eyes with his hands, looked up the road.
But he could see nothing of Mr. Richmond. Abner began to fear that he
had lost his bargain.

"I guess I'll put on my hat and go round to the tavern," he said to Mrs.
Bickford. "If the gentleman I spoke of should call while I am away, just
send the boy around after me as quick as possible."

"Very well."

Abner Holden walked hurriedly to the tavern, determined to bring about a
bargain, which would be so desirable for him, if it were a possible
thing. He must and would get rid of Spitfire, however many falsehoods he
might have to tell. What was truth in comparison to two hundred and
fifty dollars! Suppose Spitfire should run away with the stranger's wife
and break her limbs, or even her neck, it was everybody's duty to look
out for himself in this world.

Thus reasoned Abner Holden. There is no particular need of my commenting
upon the fallacy of this reasoning, since it is not likely that any of
my young readers will sufficiently admire his character to be in any
danger of being led into imitation of it.

At the end of a very few minutes, Abner stood on the piazza, of the
tavern, a little out of breath with rapid walking.

"Is Mr. Richmond still here?" he inquired of the landlord, anxiously.

"Yes, but he means to leave in five minutes."

"Where is he?"

"In his room."

"I want to see him on particular business--I wish you would send up and
ask him to come down."

"Very well."

"William," said the landlord, summoning his son, "go up and tell Mr.
Richmond that Mr. Holden wishes to see him."

"You don't know of his having bought a horse of Sam Nichols, do you?"
asked Abner, nervously, of the landlord.

"No, I am sure he has not."

Abner felt somewhat relieved by this. As long as he was still unprovided
with a horse, there was still a chance of Spitfire. He resolved, if
necessary, to abate something from the rather high price he had demanded
in the morning.

Mr. Richmond followed William downstairs.

"You wish to see me?" he asked, glancing toward Mr. Holden.

"Yes, about the horse you were looking at this morning."

"I have concluded not to take him," said the other, coldly.

"You didn't buy of Sam Nichols, did you?"

"No; his horse did not suit me."

"You haven't any other in your eye, have you?" asked Mr. Holden.

"No."

"Then, hadn't you better look at mine again?" he said, persuasively.

"It would be of no use."

"If the price is any objection," said Abner, insinuatingly, "I don't
know but I might say a LEETLE less, though the animal's wuth more'n I
ask for it."

"It isn't the price that stands in the way, Mr. Holden."

"What is it, then? Sam Nichols hain't been slandering me, I hope. If he
has, I'll be even with him."

"Spare your anger against Sam Nichols. He said nothing against you;
though I believe you warned me against him."

"Yes, I did. I felt it my duty to caution you, so you might not be
overreached by him."

"You prefer to overreach me yourself," said the other, quietly.

Abner started, and changed color.

"What do you mean?" he said. "Who told you I wanted to overreach you?"

"Why, this is the way the matter stands. I asked you for a good family
horse, such as my wife might drive with safety. Didn't you understand me
so?"

"Of course."

"And you tried to sell me an ill-tempered brute, blind of one eye, for
an extortionate price. Can you deny it?"

"Somebody's been telling you a pack of lies," said Abner, hoarsely.

"I don't think they are lies. I have every reason to think they are
true. By the way, what is the animal's name?"

"Spitfire," said Abner, rather reluctantly.

"A good name for a family horse," said the stranger, sarcastically.

"Where did you learn all this?" demanded Abner. "Who's been slandering
the horse?"

"I got my information at your place, from one who ought to know."

A light dawned upon Abner Holden's mind.

"Herbert told him," muttered Abner to himself. "That cursed boy has
spoiled my bargain, and he shall smart for it."

In a furious rage, he retraced his steps homeward, breathing threats of
vengeance dire against our hero.




CHAPTER XI

A CRISIS


Abner Holden's disappointment was excessive at the sudden falling
through of his horse trade, and his feeling of anger against Herbert for
his agency in the matter was in proportion to his disappointment. His
chief thought, as he hurried home from the tavern, was that he would
make the boy smart for his interference.

"I'll give him a good flogging," muttered Abner to himself, and he felt
that this would be some slight compensation for the injury and slight
loss which Herbert had caused him to sustain.

"I'll teach him to spoil my bargains," he said, while his face wore an
expression decidedly ugly. "I reckon he won't do it a second time."

It was in this frame of mind that he reached home.

Herbert had just entered the kitchen with an armful of wood for the
housekeeper, and having thrown down his burden, was about to go back,
when, on turning, he confronted the stormy and wrathful face of his
employer.

"He's found out," Herbert concluded at once, and he braced his nerves
for the storm which he knew must come.

"Well, young man, I've an account to settle with you," said Abner,
abruptly.

Herbert did not reply, but waited for Mr. Holden to state the matter.
But in Abner's present angry condition, he chose to construe his silence
into cause of offense.

"Why don't you speak?" he said. "What do you mean by looking me
impudently in the face?"

"I have no intention of being impudent," said Herbert. "I think you are
mistaken, Mr. Holden."

"Do you dare to tell me I am mistaken?" roared Holden, lashing himself
into a rage.

"I don't mean to do or say anything that is not perfectly respectful,"
said Herbert, manfully, looking steadily in his employer's face.

"Why did you tell a pack of lies about my horse this morning, and so
make me lose my trade?"

"I didn't tell a pack of lies," said Herbert.

"Didn't you tell the man who came here that he was an ill-tempered
brute, and blind of one eye?"

Abner Holden glared upon the boy as if he wanted to spring upon him, and
give him a thrashing on the spot.

"I told him that Spitfire was not suitable for a family horse."

"What did you tell him that for?"

"Because it was true."

"Supposing it was true, didn't you know that you were spoiling my
trade?"

"I am sorry for that, Mr. Holden, but if he had bought the horse,
supposing it to be gentle, it might have broken his wife's neck."

"What business was that of yours? That was his lookout."

"I didn't look upon it in that way. I thought he ought to buy the horse
with his eyes open."

"You did, did you?" roared Abner. "Then I advise you to open your own
eyes, for you're going to get one of the worst lickings you ever had."

Abner Holden's anger now reached an ungovernable pitch. Looking about
him for a weapon, he espied the broom resting against the wall. He
seized it, and with a scream of rage, made for Herbert, shaking off the
grasp of the housekeeper, who tried to stay him.

Herbert, perceiving the peril in which he stood, ran round the table,
which stood, with leaves open, in the middle of the floor. Abner pursued
him with headlong haste.

"Lord preserve us! The man is mad!" ejaculated the housekeeper, trying
to get out of the way. But in this she was not successful. The kitchen
was small, and before she could guard against a collision, Abner had
stumbled over Mrs. Bickford, and both came down together. She uttered a
succession of piercing shrieks, and, with a view of relieving Herbert,
pretended that her life was in danger, grasping Abner by the hair and
holding him fast.

Herbert saw that this was the favorable moment for escape, and, seizing
his hat, dashed out of the house. He ran across the fields as fast as
his limbs could carry him, expecting that he would be pursued. Before we
follow him, we will describe the scene that took place after his flight.

"Let go my hair, Mrs. Bickford!" exclaimed Abner, tugging vainly to
break from the housekeeper's grasp.

"I dare not," she said. "I'm afraid you'll murder me."

"You are making a fool of yourself," retorted Abner. "What should I
murder you for? But I will, if you don't let go!"

"Hello, who's talking of murder?" demanded a rough voice.

The speaker was a neighbor, who chanced to be passing, and was led to
enter by the uproar, which was plainly audible outside.

"Save me!" exclaimed Mrs. Bickford. "He's threatened to murder me."

"Stop your nonsense, you old fool!" retorted Abner, vexed at the
equivocal position in which he was placed.

"What's all this row about? Mr. Holden, you ought to be ashamed of
yourself for attacking a defenseless woman."

"I didn't intend to," said Abner, sullenly. "She got in my way, and I
stumbled over her; and then she seized me by the hair."

"What were you going to do with that broom?" demanded the other,
suspiciously.

"What was I going to do? I was going to thrash that rascally boy of
mine, and Mrs. Bickford knew it perfectly well."

"What has he done?"

"He? He's spoiled a trade of mine by his lying, and I was going to flog
him for it, when Mrs. Bickford got in my way."

"Well, said the visitor, shrugging his shoulders, "I don't want to
interfere in your affairs. I suppose that you've a right to flog the
boy. but it strikes me that a broom handle is rather an ugly weapon."

"It isn't half heavy enough," said Abner, savagely; "but where is the
boy? Did you see him?"

"Given leg-bail, I reckon, and I don't wonder at it."

"Run away?" ejaculated Abner, disappointed. "Did you see where he went?"

"No, I didn't, and if I had, I'm not sure that I would tell you."

Abner would like to have thrashed the man who showed so little sympathy
with his anger, but he felt that it would hardly be prudent. He went to
the door and looked out. But there was no trace of Herbert to be
discovered.

"He'll get it when he does come back," he said to himself.

The idea that Herbert might not come back at all never once occurred to
him. He resolved that the flogging should lose nothing by being
deferred.

We must now return to Herbert, whom we left running across the fields.

His departure had been so sudden, that his prominent idea was to get out
of the way of his employer's violence. He was at first under the
impression that he was pursued, but when, after running perhaps a
quarter of a mile, he ventured to look around, he saw, to his great
relief, that there was no one on his track. Being out of breath, he
stopped, and, throwing himself down on the grass in the shadow of a
stone wall, began to consider his plans for the future.

Everything was in doubt except one point. He felt that he had broken,
finally, the tie that bound him to Mr. Holden. He would not return to
him. He had experienced enough of Abner's ugly and unreasonable temper
to feel that there could be no harmony between them, and as to
submitting to personal violence from such a man as that, his blood
boiled at the thought. He knew that he should resist with all the
strength he possessed, and what the result might be he did not dare to
think. What lay before him in the future he could not conjecture, but
whatever it might be, he felt that it was better than to remain an
inmate of Abner Holden's household, and in his power.

But where should he go? That was a question not easily answered. After
his experience of his uncle's indifference to him, he did not wish to
appeal to him for aid, yet he felt that he should like to go to New York
and try his fortune there. Thousands of people lived there, and earned
enough to support them comfortably. Why not he? It was a thousand miles
off, and he might be some time in getting there. He might have to stop
and work on the way. But, sooner or later, he resolved that he would
find his way to the great metropolis.

But there was one difficulty which presented itself at the outset. This
difficulty related to his clothing. He had on a pair of overalls and a
ragged vest which Abner had provided for him, intending that he should
save the good suit he brought with him for Sundays. His present suit,
which had been worn by half a dozen of his predecessors, Herbert
decidedly objected to wearing, as, in addition to being faded and worn,
it was by no means a good fit. He must get his other suit.

But this was in Mr. Holden's attic, and it would hardly be prudent to
venture back for it, as Abner was on the lookout for him, and there
would be a collision, and perhaps he might be forcibly detained.
Fortunately, his money he had about him. This amounted, as the reader
already knows, to nearly fifteen dollars, and would, no doubt, be of
essential service to him in the project which he had undertaken. As to
the clothes, he must think of a way of securing them, before setting out
on his journey to New York.




CHAPTER XII

RALPH THE RANGER


One thing was certain. There was no chance of obtaining the clothes at
present. Probably his best course would be to wait till night, and then
come back to the house on the chance of gaining Mrs. Bickford's
attention. In the meantime, probably, the best thing to be done was to
conceal himself temporarily in a belt of woods lying about a mile back
of Abner Holden's house.

As soon as his breath was recovered, Herbert got up, and headed for
these woods. A few minutes found him in the midst of them. He made his
way with some difficulty through the underbrush, parting the thick stems
with his hands, until he reached a comparatively open space of perhaps
an acre in extent. In the midst of this space a rude hut was visible,
constructed of logs, and covered with the branches of trees. In front of
it, sitting on the stump of a tree, which perhaps had been spared for
that purpose, sat a tall man, with very brown complexion, clad in a
rough hunting suit. His form, though spare, was tough and sinewy, and
the muscles of his bare arms seemed like whipcords. A short, black pipe
was in his mouth. The only covering of his head was the rough, grizzled
hair, which looked as if for months it had never felt the touch of a
comb or brush.

Herbert, though he had never before seen this singular being, recognized
him at once as Ralph the Ranger, as he was properly called in the
village. For years he had lived a hermit-like existence in the forest,
supporting himself mainly by his rifle. This was not difficult, for his
wants were few and simple. What cause led him to shun the habitations of
his kind, and make his dwelling in the woods, no one knew, and perhaps
no one ever would know, for of himself he was silent, and it was not
easy to draw him out.

He looked up as he heard Herbert's step, and said, abruptly: "Well, boy,
what do you want?"

His manner was rough, but our hero was not afraid. He answered frankly,
"I am hiding."

"Hiding? Who from?"

"From Abner Holden."

"Humph! Why should you hide from him? What has he to do with you?"

"I am bound to him, and he is angry with me because he thinks I
interfered in a trade of his. He wanted to beat me, so I ran away."

"Good!" said Ralph, approvingly. "Tell me about it."

Herbert drew near, and told his story.

Ralph listened attentively.

"Boy," said he, "I think you are honest. There are not many that can be
said of. As for Abner Holden, I know him. He's a mean skinflint. Pah!"
and he spit, contemptuously. "You'd better not go back to him."

"I don't mean to," said Herbert, promptly.

"What are your plans? Have you formed any?"

"I want to go to New York."

"To New York," repeated Ralph, thoughtfully. "You wish to get into the
crowd, while I seek to avoid it. But it is natural to youth. At your
age, it was so with me. I hope, my boy, the time will not come when you,
like me, will wish to shun the sight of men."

Herbert listened in sympathy, not unmingled with surprise, to the speech
of this man, which was quite superior to what might have been expected
from one of his appearance.

"When do you wish to start?" asked Ralph, after a pause.

"First, I want to get my clothes."

"Where are they?"

"In my room, at Mr. Holden's house."

"How do you expect to get them?"

"Mrs. Bickford, the housekeeper, is a friend of mine. I thought I might
go there to-night, and attract her attention without rousing Mr. Holden.
She would get them for me."

"Good! I will go with you."

"Will you?" asked Herbert, gladly.

He had felt a little doubt as to the result of his expedition, as, if
Mr. Holden should be awake and start in pursuit, he would stand a good
chance of being captured, which, above all things, he most dreaded. But
with so able an auxiliary as Ralph, he knew he could bid easy defiance
to Abner, however much the latter might desire to molest him.

"Yes, I will stand by you, and you shall share my cabin with me as long
as you like. You are not afraid of me?"

"No," said Herbert, quickly.

Ralph looked kindly at him.

"Some of the children run from me," he said. "It is not strange,
perhaps, for I look savage, I suppose, but you do well to trust me. I
will be your friend, and that is something I have not said to any living
being for years. I like your face. It is brave and true."

"Thank you for your favorable opinion, Mr.--" Here Herbert paused in
uncertainty, for he had never heard Ralph's surname.

"Call me Ralph. I have done with the title of \ civilization. Call me
Ralph. That will suit me best."

"Thank you for your kindness, then, Ralph."

"What is your name?"

"Herbert--Herbert Mason."

"Then, Herbert, I think you must be hungry. Have you eaten your dinner?"

"No," said Herbert.

"Then you shall share mine. My food is of the plainest, but such as it
is, you are welcome. Come in."

Herbert entered the cabin. The only table was a plank supported at each
end by a barrel. From a box in the corner Ralph drew out some corn-bread
and some cold meat. He took a tin measure, and, going out of the cabin,
filled it with water from a brook near by. This he placed on the rude
table.

"All is ready," he said. "Take and eat, if my food is not too rude."

Herbert did eat, and with appetite. He was a growing boy, whose appetite
seldom failed him, and he had been working hard since breakfast, which
he had taken at six, while it was now one o'clock. No wonder he was
hungry.

Ralph looked on with approval.

"You are the first that has shared my meal for many a long day," he
said. "Day after day, and year after year, I have broken my fast alone,
but it seems pleasant, after all," he said, musingly. "Men are
treacherous and deceitful, but you," he said, resting his glance on the
frank, ingenuous face of his youthful guest, "you must be honest and
true, or I am greatly deceived."

"I hope you will find me so," said Herbert, interested more and more in
the rough-looking recluse, about whose life he suspected there must be
some sad secret, of which the world knew nothing.

After dispatching the meal provided by his hospitable entertainer,
Herbert sat down on the grass just outside the cabin, and watched lazily
the smoke which issued from Ralph's pipe, as it rose in many a fantastic
curl.

"How long have you lived here, Ralph?" asked our hero at length.

"Ten years," said the recluse, removing his pipe from his lips.

"It is a long time."

"Yes, boy, a long time in the life of one as young as you, but to me it
seems but yesterday that I built this cabin and established myself
here."

"Are you not often lonely?"

"Lonely? Yes, but not more so than I should be in the haunts of men. I
have company, too. There are the squirrels that leap from bough to bough
of the tall trees. Then there are the birds that wake me with their
singing. They are company for me. They are better company than men.
They, at least, will not deceive me."

He paused, and bent his eyes upon the ground. He was thinking, not of
the boy beside him, but of some time in the past, and the recollection
apparently was not pleasant.

The afternoon wore away at length, and the shadows deepened in the
woods. Herbert wandered about, and succeeded in gathering some nuts,
which he carried to Ralph's cabin. When eight o'clock came, the Ranger
said: "You had better lie down and rest, my boy; I will wake you up at
twelve, and we will go together to Holden's place, and see if we can get
your clothes."

To this proposal Herbert willingly assented, as he began to feel tired.

He slept, he knew not how long, when he was gently shaken by Ralph.

"Where am I?" he asked, rubbing his eyes.

The sight of the Ranger bending over him soon brought back the
recollection of his position, and he sprang up promptly. Ralph showed
him an easier way out of the woods than that by which he had entered,
and less embarrassed by the growth of underbrush.

In half an hour they were standing by Abner Holden's house. It was
perfectly dark, the inmates probably being fast asleep.

"I know where the housekeeper sleeps," said Herbert. "I'll throw up a
pebble at her window, and perhaps it will wake her up."

He did as proposed. Mrs. Bickford, who was a light sleeper, heard, and
went to the window.

"Who's there?" she asked.

"It is I, Mrs. Bickford," said Herbert.

"What, Herbert? Shall I let you in?"

"No; I don't want to come in. All I want is my clothes. They are up in
my trunk."

"I'll go up and get them for you."

She went upstairs and quickly returned with the clothes, which she let
down from the window.

"Are you hungry, Herbert?" she asked. "Let me bring you something to
eat."

"No, thank you, Mrs. Bickford; I am stopping with Ralph the Ranger. He
has kindly given me all the food I want."

"What are you going to do? Are you going to stop with him?"

"No, I am going East in a day or two. I am going to New York. I will
write to you from there."

"I am sorry to have you go, Herbert. I wish things could have been
pleasanter, so that you might have stayed. But I think I hear Mr. Holden
stirring. Good-by, and may God be with you!"

She closed the window hastily, and Herbert, not wishing to get into a
collision with Abner Holden, who he suspected might have heard
something, withdrew swiftly. Ralph, who was standing near by, joined
him, and both together went back to the woods.




CHAPTER XIII

A MOMENT OF PERIL


Abner Holden did not suspect that Herbert actually intended to leave him
permanently; but when evening came, and he did not return, he became
apprehensive that such was the case. Now, for more than one reason, he
objected to our hero's leaving. First, because he was a strong, capable
boy, and his services were worth considerable, and, secondly, because he
disliked Herbert, and it was a satisfaction to tyrannize over him, as
his position enabled him to do. There are some men in whom the instinct
of petty tyranny exists to such an extent that they cannot feel happy
without someone to exercise their authority over. Such a man was Abner
Holden. He was a bully and a tyrant by nature, and decidedly objected to
losing one so completely in his power as Herbert was.

When night came and Herbert did not return, he decided to search for
him, and bring him back, if found, the very next day. He did not impart
his purpose to Mrs. Bickford, for he was at no loss to discover that the
sympathies of the kind-hearted housekeeper were not with him, but with
the boy whom he wished to abuse. When breakfast was over, therefore, he
merely said: "Mrs. Bickford, I am going out for a short time. If Herbert
should return while I am absent, you may tell him to finish hoeing those
potatoes in the garden."

"Do you think he will come back, Mr. Holden?" asked the housekeeper.

"Yes; he will soon be tired of wandering about. He will learn to prize a
good home after he has slept out of doors one night."

Mrs. Bickford did not reply; but she did not feel quite so much
confidence as her employer appeared to do in the excellence of the home
which Herbert had enjoyed under Abner Holden's roof.

"It's just as well he doesn't suspect Herbert's plan," she thought, and
without further words, began to clear away the breakfast dishes.

Abner was not long in deciding that Herbert was hidden in the woods.
That, indeed, seemed the most natural place of refuge for one placed in
his circumstances. He determined, therefore, to seek there first.

We must now return to Herbert.

"If you will wait till nightfall," said Ralph, "you will be more safe
from pursuit, and I will accompany you for a few miles."

This seemed plausible, and our hero consented.

Ralph went off on a hunting expedition, but Herbert remained behind,
fearing that he might tear or stain his clothes, of which it was
necessary, now, to be careful. How to pass the time was the question. To
tell the truth, the hunter's cabin contained little that would help him.
There were no books visible, for Ralph seemed to have discarded
everything that would remind him of that civilization which he had
forsaken in disgust.

Herbert went outside, and watched the squirrels that occasionally made
their appearance flitting from branch to branch of the tall trees. After
a while his attention was drawn to a bird, which flew with something in
its beak nearly to the top of a tall tree not far off.

"I shouldn't wonder," thought Herbert, interested, "if she's got a nest,
and some young ones up there. I have a great mind to climb up and see
whether she has or not."

He measured the tree with his eye. It was very tall, exceeding in its
height most of its forest neighbors.

"I don't know as I can climb it," he said to himself, a little
doubtfully; "but anyway, I am going to try. There's nothing like
trying."

This was a lucky determination for Herbert, as will speedily appear.

It was twenty feet to the first branching off, and this was, of course,
the most difficult part of the ascent, since it was necessary to "shin
up," and the body of the tree was rather too large to clasp comfortably.
However, it was not the first time that Herbert had climbed a tree, and
he was not deficient in courage as well as skill. So he pushed on his
way, and though once or twice in danger of falling, he at length
succeeded in reaching the first bough. From this point the ascent was
comparatively easy.

In a short time our hero was elated to find himself probably fifty feet
from the ground, so high it made him feel a little dizzy to look down.
He reached the nest, and found the young birds--three in number. The
parent bird hovered near by, evidently quite alarmed for the safety of
her brood. But Herbert had no intention of harming them. He only climbed
up to gratify his curiosity, and because he had nothing more important
to do. Though he did not know it, his own danger was greater than that
which threatened the birds. For, just at that moment, Mr. Holden, in his
wanderings, had reached Ralph's cabin, and Herbert, looking down,
beheld, with some anxiety, the figure of the unwelcome visitor. He saw
Abner enter the cabin, and, after a few moments' interval, issue from it
with an air of disappointment and dissatisfaction.

"How lucky," thought our hero, "that he did not find me inside!"

Abner Holden looked about him in every direction but the right one. He
little dreamed that the object of his pursuit was looking down upon him,
securely, from above.

"I don't think he'll find me," thought Herbert. "Wouldn't he give
something, though, to know where I am?"

But our young hero was doomed to disappointment. Just at that moment--
the unluckiest that could have been selected--he was seized with a
strong inclination to sneeze.

Alarmed lest the sound should betray him, he made desperate efforts to
suppress it but Nature would have its way, and probably did so with
greater violence than if no resistance had been made.

"Ker-chew!" sneezed Herbert, violently.

As he anticipated, Abner's attention was attracted by the loud noise,
which he rightly concluded could hardly proceed from a bird or squirrel.
He had just been on the point of leaving the cabin for some other part
of the woods, but at this sound he stood still. Looking up to discover
whence it proceeded, his keen eyes detected Herbert in his lofty perch.
His eyes sparkled with joy.

"Ha, you young rascal!" he exclaimed. "So you are there, are you? You
were going to run away, were you?"

Now that Herbert was actually discovered, his fear left him, and he
became perfectly self-possessed and confident.

"Yes, Mr. Holden," he answered, quietly; "such is my intention."

"Boldly spoken," said Abner, provoked by our hero's coolness, for he had
hoped to find him terrified and pleading for forgiveness. "I admire your
frankness, and will try to equal it. I suppose you'll give it up as a
bad job now."

"No, sir," said Herbert, firmly.

"Take care, sir," said Abner, in anger and astonishment. "Take care how
you defy me. Come down here at once."

"What for?" inquired Herbert, without stirring.

"What for?" repeated Abner Holden. "That I may flog you within an inch
of your life."

"That's no inducement," said our hero, coolly.

"Do you refuse to obey me?" shouted Abner, stamping angrily.

"I refuse to be flogged. You don't get me down for any such purpose, Mr.
Holden."

"Then, by Heaven, if you won't come otherwise, I'll come up and help you
down."

The angry man at once commenced the ascent. Anger gave him strength,
and, though he was unaccustomed to climbing, he continued to mount up
about halfway to the first branching off, somewhat to Herbert's
uneasiness, for he felt there was a chance that he might fall into
Abner's clutches.

But Abner's success was only temporary. At the height of a dozen feet he
began to slip, and, despite his frantic struggles, he slid gradually to
the ground, tearing his coat, which he had not taken the precaution to
remove, and blistering his hands.

What was to be done?

In his anger and excitement, he drew a pistol from his breast pocket,
and pointed upward, saying menacingly, "Come down at once, you young
rascal, or I will fire!"

Herbert was startled. He did not believe the pistol to be loaded. Still
it might be.

"Will you come down?" repeated Abner, fiercely. "Quick, or I fire."

Herbert's cheek was pale, but in a resolute voice he answered, "I will
not."

Abner Holder, laid his finger upon the trigger, and would, in his anger,
have carried his threat into execution; but at the critical moment he
was conscious of a violent blow, and the pistol was wrenched from his
hand.

Turning quickly, he met the stern glance of Ralph the Ranger.




CHAPTER XIV

TAKEN PRISONER


"What does all this mean?" demanded Ralph, in a tone of command.

"What right have you to interfere?" said Abner Holden, sulkily.

"The right that any man has to prevent murder," said Ralph, briefly.

"I wasn't going to murder him."

"What were you going to do?" asked Ralph, looking keenly at Abner. "Why
were you pointing the pistol at him?"

"I wanted to frighten him."

"You meant to have him think you were going to fire. I believe you
were."

"Why didn't he come down when I bade him?"

"I'll answer that question," said Herbert, from the top of the tree.
"Mr. Holden promised to beat me if I would come down, but I didn't think
that a sufficient inducement."

"I have a right to beat you," said Abner, doggedly. "Ain't you bound to
me; tell me that?"

"I was," said Herbert, "and if you had treated me well, I would have
stayed with you; but I don't mean to remain to be abused."

"You hear the lad's answer," said Ralph. "I like his spirit, and I'll
stand by him. He won't return with you."

While this conversation had been going on, Abner had been slowly edging
himself toward the spot upon which Ralph had thrown the pistol, which he
had wrenched from him. While Ralph was speaking, he suddenly darted
forward, seized the weapon, and, facing about, said, with malicious
triumph, "Now, you're in my power, both of you. We'll see whether he'll
go back with me or not."

As he spoke he pointed the pistol toward Ralph.

The latter laughed contemptuously.

This irritated Abner Holden.

"I will count ten," he said. "Unless the boy begins to come down before
I stop, I fire at you. One--two----"

"Hold!" said Ralph, and, drawing his revolver from beneath his hunting-
jacket, he pointed it at Abner. "Two can play at that game, Abner
Holden. This revolver is fully loaded. It gives me six chances of
hitting you. You have but one chance with your pistol. The moment your
finger touches the trigger, your doom is sealed. I never miss my aim."

A sickly hue overspread the face of Abner Holden. He had counted on
Ralph's being unarmed. He saw that he had made an important and most
unlucky mistake.

"Put down your revolver," he said, in a very different tone. "I wasn't
in earnest, you know."

"I know nothing of the kind," retorted Ralph. "You looked to me as if
you were very much in earnest."

Still with his revolver he covered Abner.

"Put down your weapon," said Abner, nervously. "It might go off."

"Yes, it might," returned Ralph. "I will lower it, on one condition."

"What is that?"

"That you lay down your pistol on the ground."

Abner demurred, but finally felt compelled to do as he was commanded.

"That is well," said Ralph, quietly. "Now, I will take care that you are
not tempted by it again."

He walked toward the pistol, lifted it, and, pointing it in the reverse
direction, fired it off among the trees.

"So much for that," he said. "Now, Herbert, you may come down."

Herbert complied promptly. He felt the utmost confidence in the prowess
and good faith of his new friend, and did not fear to descend, though
his bitterest enemy awaited him beneath.

Meanwhile an idea struck Abner Holden. He saw that he was no match for
Herbert as long as Ralph chose to befriend him. He resolved to enlist
the latter on his side.

"Hark you, Ralph," he said, "come aside with me. I wish to speak to you
a moment."

Ralph followed him a few paces in silence.

"Now what is it you have to say to me?" he demanded.

"About this boy," said Abner, insinuatingly. "He is bound to me."

"Well?"

"And the law gives me authority over him."

"Well?"

"I want him to go back with me."

"Well?"

"Will you promise not to interfere between us?"

"I can't promise that," said Ralph, briefly.

"Stay a moment," said Abner, seeing that he was on the point of leaving
him; "of course, I am willing to make it worth your while. I'll give
you--well, three dollars, to help me secure him, and carry him back to
my house."

"What do you take me for?" asked Ralph, looking at the other, steadily.

"For a poor man," said Abner. "Think a moment. Three dollars will buy
you provisions for a week. They couldn't be more easily earned. In fact,
you needn't do anything. Only promise not to interfere between the boy
and myself."

Ralph turned upon him scornfully.

"I have promised the boy my protection," he said, "and you would have me
forfeit my word for a paltry three dollars?"

"I'll give you five," said Abner, supposing that the sum he had offered
was not sufficient.

"Not for five dollars, nor five thousand," returned Ralph, shortly. "I
thought you meant to insult me, but I see you only judge me by yourself.
The boy shall not return with you. Make up your mind to that."

"I can have you arrested," said Abner, angrily.

Ralph laughed.

"Let that comfort you for the loss of the boy," he said.

"I'll have the boy, too," muttered Abner, turning to leave them.

"Where are you going?" demanded Ralph.

"I am going home."

"Not yet."

"Why not?" demanded Abner, facing about.

"Because I can't spare you yet."

"What right have you to interfere with my movements?" said Abner.

"None, perhaps; but I will inquire into that afterward. It is enough
that, for the present, you must stay here."

"I shall do no such thing," said Abner, and he again turned to go.

Ralph deliberately lifted his weapon, and took aim.

"What do you say now?" he asked.

"Surely, you will not fire at me," said Abner, turning pale.

"Not if you remain where you are."

"How long do you mean to keep me?" demanded Abner, sullenly.

"As long as may be necessary. That is all. Herbert, go into the cabin
and look in one corner for a cord."

Herbert soon returned with a stout cord, tough and strong.

"What are you going to do with that?" asked Abner suspiciously.

I'm going to bind you," said Ralph, coolly.

"I'll have the law on you for this," said Abner, hoarsely.

"All in good time," said Ralph. "But I advise you to consider whether
the law has nothing to say against attempted murder."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I mean that you attempted to murder this boy, and would have done so,
in all probability, if I had not interfered. When I am arrested, I shall
feel it my duty to make this known to the authorities."

Abner was silent. He felt that Ralph's testimony would have an ugly
look.

"Let me go," he said, after a pause. "You needn't be afraid of my
troubling either of you. Don't tie me."

"Abner Holden," said Ralph, "I know you, and I know you are not to be
trusted. I have resolved to help this boy to escape from you, and I mean
to do it effectually. For this purpose, I must subject you to temporary
inconvenience. I advise you not to resist."

He had already tied the hands of Abner Holden, who, as he looked into
the fearless, resolute face of the Ranger, felt that it would not do to
resist. It chafed him most to think that Herbert, his bound boy, should
be a witness of his humiliation, and he scowled savagely at our hero.
But Herbert showed no triumph. His was a brave and generous nature, and
had it rested with him, he would have let Mr. Holden go, but he did not
think it best to interfere.

Ralph quickly tied both hands and feet, and then took the helpless body
of Abner into the cabin, where he placed him in one corner.

"Are you thirsty?" he asked.

"Yes," said Abner, sullenly.

Ralph placed a cup of water to his lips. He also placed a loaf of bread
beside him, which, though his hands were tied at the wrist, he would
still be able to reach, and then beckoned to Herbert.

"Come," he said, "it is time that we were going."

Abner gnashed his teeth with anger, as he watched them issue from the
cabin together, and felt how utterly helpless he was to prevent them.




CHAPTER XV

A FOUR-FOOTED FOE


Abner Holden's reflections, when he found himself left alone in Ralph's
cabin, bound hand and foot, were not of the most agreeable nature. It
was humiliating to find himself baffled at every point, and, for once,
completely defeated in his attempt to exercise his authority over the
boy who had been bound to him.

That Herbert should escape from him beyond the chance of recovery seemed
now almost certain. If he were free, something might be done. But he was
so securely bound that it was impossible to get free without help, and
the lonely situation of the cabin made it very doubtful whether anyone
would come within hearing until the return of Ralph himself. When that
would be was uncertain.

Three hours passed, and still no prospect of release. The bonds chafed
his wrists, and his situation was far from comfortable. He tried to
loosen the cords, but without success.

"Must I stay here all night?" he thought, in alarm.

But deliverance was at hand, though its first approach was disagreeable.

A large dog entered the cabin through the open door, drawn thither,
probably, by curiosity. When he saw Abner he appeared to take a dislike
to him, and barked vehemently.

"Go away, you brute!" said Abner, wrathfully.

The dog, however, appeared instinctively to understand that Abner Holden
was able only to threaten him, and barked more furiously than before;
sometimes approaching within a foot of the helpless prisoner, and
showing a formidable row of teeth, which Abner feared every moment might
fasten upon his arm or leg.

Abner Holden was not a man of courage. Though his disposition was that
of a bully, he was easily frightened, and the fierce look of the dog
alarmed him not a little. In fact, it might have tested the courage of a
much braver man than Mr. Holden.

"Go away!" he shrieked, shrinking back as far as he could from the open
mouth of his persecutor.

A hoarse bark was the only reply, and the dog made an artful spring,
which was only a feint, but had too much the appearance of earnest to
suit his enemy.

"Oh, will nobody save me from the brute?" groaned Abner, in an ecstasy
of terror. "If I could only get my hands loose!" and he tugged
frantically at the cord.

Feeling how utterly he was at a disadvantage, he condescended to coax
his fierce antagonist.

"Be quiet, that's a good dog," he said, with hypocritical softness.

The dog noticed a change in his tone, and evidently viewed it with some
suspicion. Still his bark became less fierce and his looks less
threatening.

"Good dog!" repeated Abner, in wheedling tones. "There's some dinner."

And he pushed over the provisions which Ralph had left.

While the dog was apparently taking his offer into consideration, a
boy's voice was heard outside, calling "Carlo, Carlo!"

The dog pricked up his ears and ran out of the cabin.

"So you are here, you truant," said the boy. "Why did you run away? What
have you to say for yourself, sir?"

The dog answered by a wag of his tail.

"Oh, yes, you may wag your tail, but I've a great mind to punish you for
running away, and putting me to the trouble of finding you."

"Hello!" cried Abner, in a loud voice.

"Who's that?" thought the boy, surprised.

As the voice evidently came from within the cabin, he ventured to the
door, and looked in. He was considerably surprised to see Abner Holden,
whom he knew well by sight, lying bound hand and foot in the corner.

"Is that you, Mr. Holden?" he asked, in a tone of surprise.

"Of course it is," said Abner, who was not in a very pleasant frame of
mind.

"Are you tied?"

"Don't you see I am?" snarled Abner.

"Who tied you?"

"That rascal Ralph. I mean to have him hung, if I live."

"Ralph! Why, I thought he was quiet and peaceable."

"He tried to murder me, but changed his mind, and tied me, as you see."

"I can't understand it."

"There is no need of understanding it. Come and unfasten these cords. I
feel stiff and cramped."

The boy tried to unfasten the cord, but it was too securely tied.

"Where is your knife?"

"I haven't got any."

"Then take the axe."

There was an axe standing at the corner of the room. This the boy got,
and, with the keen edge, severed the string.

Abner stretched himself to relieve his cramped limbs. Then he bethought
himself of his late persecutor.

"Is that your dog?" he asked, surveying his four-legged enemy with no
friendly expression.

"Yes, that's Carlo. Come here, Carlo."

"He's been in here barking at me, and threatening to bite me, and now
I'll have my revenge."

"What do you mean?" inquired the boy, in alarm, as Abner seized the axe
and swung it over his head.

"Stand aside, boy!"

"What are you going to do?"

"I'm going to kill that brute."

"No, no, he's a good dog. He won't do any harm," said the boy, in alarm.

"I'll kill him," said Abner, fiercely.

The dog surveyed his enemy with suspicion. He seemed to understand that
danger menaced him. He growled in a low, hoarse, ominous tone, which
showed that he was on his guard, and meant to do his part of the
fighting, if necessary.

His owner had retreated to the door, and now tried to call him away.

"Carlo, Carlo, come out here, sir."

But Carlo would not come. He had no intention of shrinking from the
danger that threatened him, but was bent on defending himself, as became
a brave and dauntless dog, whose courage was above suspicion.

If Abner had not been so exasperated, he might have been terrified, but
anger re-enforced his courage, and, moreover, he had a great deal of
confidence that the axe which he held in his hand would make him more
than a match for the dog.

"I'll kill him!" he exclaimed, and once more he swung the axe over his
head, and brought it down with a tremendous force in the direction of
the dog.

Alas for poor Carlo, if the axe had struck him! But he was wary, and
knew something of warlike tactics, and with watchful eye carefully noted
Abner's movements. The boy uttered a cry of alarm at the peril of his
favorite, but Carlo sprang to one side just as the axe descended, and it
was buried in the earthen floor of the cabin so deeply that Abner could
not immediately recover it.

The advantage was thus transferred to the other side, and the dog was
not slow in perceiving it.

With a bound he sprang upon his adversary, and bore him to the floor,
seizing his coat between his strong teeth. He pulled and tugged at this
with a strength which no ordinary cloth could possibly withstand.

"Take him off! take him off!" shrieked Abner in terror.

The boy sprang to the rescue.

"Come away, Carlo," he said, grasping him by the collar; "come away,
that's a good dog."

But, habitually obedient as Carlo was, his young master found it
difficult to get him away. He felt that he had received a grievous
injury--that his life had been attempted--and he wanted to have
satisfaction. Finally his master succeeded in drawing him away, but not
till Mr. Holden's coat was badly torn.

The latter was crestfallen and angry, and not so grateful as he ought to
have been to his young defender.

"I'll make your father pay for this coat, you young rascal!" he said.

"It isn't my fault, Mr. Holden," said the boy.

"Yes, it is. It was your dog that tore my coat."

"Carlo wouldn't have torn it, if you hadn't attacked him."

"He attacked me first."

"You had better go away, Mr. Holden, or he may go at you again."

A low growl from the dog whom he held by the collar re-enforced this
suggestion, and Abner, uttering threats both against the dog and his
master, strode out of the cabin and bent his steps homeward.

As he entered the kitchen, the housekeeper turned, and, noticing his
torn coat, exclaimed, "Good gracious, Mr. Holden, what's happened to
you? How came your coat so badly torn?"

"It was a dog," muttered Abner, who did not care to be questioned.

Mrs. Bickford supposed he must have taken off the coat, and the dog had
torn it as it lay upon the ground.

"What a pity!" she exclaimed. "Whose dog was it?"

"Alfred Martin's. I'll make Martin pay for the coat. He has no right to
keep such a brute."

"You must be hungry, Mr. Holden."

"Yes, get me something as quick as possible."

"Have you seen anything of Herbert?" asked the housekeeper.

"No," snapped Abner.

This was a falsehood, of course, but he felt rather ashamed to confess
that he had seen Herbert, and that the latter had got the better of him.
Mrs. Bickford perceived that he was out of humor, and did not press the
question. She concluded that he was angry because his quest had been
unsuccessful.




CHAPTER XVI

JUST TOO LATE


Leaving Abner Holden bound in his cabin, Ralph led Herbert, by a short
path, out of the woods.

"Your best course," he said, "will be to take the cars for Columbus at
Vernon. At Columbus you will go to Wheeling, and from there, over the
Baltimore & Ohio Railroad to Baltimore, and thence to New York. But all
this will cost money."

"I have money," said Herbert.

"How much?"

"About fifteen dollars."

"Is that all?"

"Is it not enough to carry me to New York?"

"Hardly. Besides, when you get there, how will you get along? Have you
any relations in the city?"

"Yes, an uncle."

"Then you will go to him?"

"No," said Herbert, hastily.

"Why not?"

"He does not care to see me. Shall I tell you what sort of a letter he
wrote to Dr. Kent about me?"

"Yes, tell me."

Herbert, in indignant language, which correctly represented his
feelings, gave the substance of the letter, which is already known to
us.

"I shall not feel easy," he said, "until I am able to return the ten
dollars which my uncle sent me. I am not willing to remain under
obligations to one who cares so little for me."

"I think you are proud," said Ralph, bending his eyes upon the lad's
glowing countenance.

"Perhaps I am," said Herbert; "but is it not a proper pride?"

"I cannot say no," answered Ralph; "but would you feel the same about
incurring obligations to a friend?"

"No," said Herbert; "that would be different."

"I am glad to hear you say so, for I am going to ask you to accept help
from me."

To Herbert's surprise, Ralph drew out a small bag, originally intended
for shot, and drew therefrom five golden coins, of five dollars each.

"Take them," he said, simply.

Herbert hesitated, while his face indicated extreme surprise.

"I thought--" he commenced, and then paused.

"You thought me poor," said Ralph, finishing the sentence for him. "Is
it not so?"

"Yes," said Herbert.

"Most people think so," said Ralph. "But it was not poverty that drove
me from the busy world to this solitude. Rich or poor, I had money
enough for my wants. Here I have little use for money. To me it is a
useless and valueless thing. You need have no hesitation in taking this.
But on second thoughts, I had better give you more." And he was about to
draw forth more.

"No, no," said Herbert, hastily. "It is quite sufficient. You are very,
very kind. Some time I hope to repay you."

"No," said Ralph. "Do not talk of repayment. Let me have the pleasure of
giving you this small sum."

"How kind you are," said Herbert, impulsively, "and to a stranger."

"Yet my obligation to you is greater than yours to me," said Ralph.

"How can that be?" asked the boy, raising his eyes to Ralph's grave
face.

"You are the first human being in whose society I have taken pleasure
for years. Deeply injured by man, I conceived a hatred for the whole
race. But in your frank face I see much to like. I think I could trust
you."

"I hope so," said Herbert.

"You have inspired in me a new feeling, for which I cannot account.
Yesterday the world had no attractions for me. To-day I feel an interest
in your welfare, at least."

"Why do you bury yourself in this lonely place?" said Herbert. "You
cannot be happy in it. Come with me to New York. It must be a beautiful
place."

Ralph smiled gravely.

"To the young the world seems bright," he said. "It is after years have
swept away one illusion after another, after faith in one's fellowmen
has been sorely tried, and the hollowness of the world's friendship has
been proved, that the brightness fades."

"You have seen more of life than I," said Herbert, "and perhaps it is
presumption in me to question what you say; but I cannot help feeling
that you are mistaken. I am sure that there is such a thing as true
friendship."

"How many true friends are you blessed with?" asked Ralph, a little
sarcasm in his tone.

"Not many, perhaps, but some. There is good Dr. Kent and his family. I
am sure of their friendship. Then," he added, his color slightly rising,
"I think I have found another friend," and he looked in the face of his
guide.

The grave face softened.

"Thank you, my lad," said Ralph. "You are right there, at least. You can
rely upon my friendship being sincere."

"Then I am right, am I not?" said Herbert, smiling brightly.

"I believe you are," said the guide, after a pause, "and I thank you for
teaching me a lesson."

"Man was made in the image of God," said Herbert. "If we doubt man, I
think it is the same as doubting God."

Ralph did not reply, but walked on in thoughtful silence.

"How far is it to Vernon?" asked Herbert, when they had emerged from the
woods.

"It is five miles farther. Can you walk so far?"

"Oh, yes; I have good stout legs. But suppose Mr. Holden should escape.
He might pursue us."

Ralph smiled.

"I think I shall find him in the same place when I return," he said.

"He will be very angry with you."

"Yes, I suppose so," said Ralph, indifferently.

"Are you not afraid he will have you arrested?"

"No, I care little. If I am fined, I will pay the fine, and that will be
the end of it."

"But you might be imprisoned?"

"If I see any danger of that, I shall be tempted to charge Abner Holden
with his attempt upon your life. Don't make yourself anxious about me,
my lad. I have little fear of what the law may do as far as my agency in
this affair is concerned."

Ralph seemed so entirely unconcerned that something of his confidence
was imparted to Herbert. Noting the erect mien and fearless glance of
his guide, every movement betokening strength, he could not help feeling
that Abner Holden would be rash to make such a man his enemy. He felt
safe in his protection, and his apprehensions of capture passed away. So
with lightened heart he walked the five dusty miles to the village of
Vernon, accompanied by Ralph.

It was a thrifty village, with neat and tasteful dwellings lining the
principal street. The railroad and manufactories had built it up rapidly
and given it an air of prosperity which was pleasant to see.

"We will go at once to the railway station," said Ralph. "You may catch
the next train, and it will be as well to leave this neighborhood as
soon as possible."

They were fortunate enough to reach the station fifteen minutes before
the eastern train departed.

Herbert bought a ticket for Columbus, fifty miles distant, and entered
the train.

"Good-by, Herbert," said Ralph, from the platform.

"Good-by," said Herbert. "Thank you for all your kindness to me. Shall I
not see you again?"

"I do not know," said Ralph, musing. "I have no wish nor intention of
going to New York at present, yet I have a feeling that we shall meet
again."

"I hope it may be so," said Herbert. "I shall be glad to see you again."

While he spoke the shrill sound of the railway whistle was heard, the
train started, and Herbert was fairly off on his journey.

Just as he was leaving the depot, a wagon drove hastily up to the
station, and Abner Holden jumped out. Herbert saw him as he looked from
the window, and for a moment he was apprehensive, but the train was
fairly on the way.

"Stop! stop!" vociferated Abner. "Stop, I say!" for he had also caught
sight of his bound boy on the way to freedom.

"You don't think they will stop the train for you, you fool!" said a man
standing by. "You ought to have come sooner if you wanted to go by this
train."

"I don't want to go by it," said Abner.

"What do you want, then?"

"My boy's run away, and I have just seen him aboard the train."

"Oh, that's it, is it? Your son?"

"No, I hope not. It's a young rascal that's bound to me."

"If he's a young rascal, I shouldn't think you'd want him back."

Turning away, for he saw that he had failed, his glance rested on Ralph.

Instantly his anger rose.

"It's your doings," said he, shaking his fist in impotent wrath at the
sturdy hunter, whom he would have attacked had he dared. "It's your
fault, and you shall pay for it if there's law in the land."

"What will the law say to your attempt to shoot the boy?" demanded
Ralph, coolly.

Abner turned pale, and realized that his best course was to keep quiet
about an affair which might seriously compromise himself.




CHAPTER XVII

NEW ACQUAINTANCES


Herbert stopped overnight at Columbus.

The first train eastward left Columbus at seven o'clock in the morning.
It was Herbert's intention to take this train, but unfortunately, as he
thought at the time, the clock at the hotel by which his movements were
guided was ten minutes too slow. The consequence was, that before he had
quite reached the depot he saw the cars going out at the other end. He
ran as fast as possible, hoping still to make up for lost time, but it
was in vain.

"You're too late, youngster," said a porter, who had been assisting to
stow away baggage. "You'll have to wait till the next train."

"When does the next train start?" asked our hero.

"Twelve o'clock."

"Then I shall have to wait till that time," Herbert concluded, with
regret.

Yet, as he directly afterwards thought, it could make no particular
difference, since he had no stated engagement to meet, and this
consideration enabled him to bear the inevitable delay with a better
grace.

"I suppose," he reflected, "I might as well go back to the hotel."

He turned to leave the building when a carriage drove hastily up to the
station. It was drawn by two horses, and driven by a negro in livery. A
lady put her head out of the window and inquired anxiously if the train
had started. She addressed this question to Herbert, who happened to be
nearest.

"Yes, madam," he answered, respectfully.

"I am so sorry," said the lady, in a tone of vexation and perplexity.
"It was very important that my father should take that train."

"There is another train that starts at twelve," said Herbert. "It will
make a difference of a few hours only."

"Yes," said the lady, "but you do not understand my difficulty. The few
hours' difference in time would be of small importance, but my father is
blind, and is, of course, for that reason, dependent upon the kindness
of others. A gentleman of our acquaintance was going by this train, who
would have taken charge of him and seen him safe to his destination. By
losing the train we lose his services."

"My dear," said an elderly gentleman, sitting on the opposite seat, "if
I can get somebody to see me on board, I think I can manage very well."

"On no account, father," was the hasty reply, "particularly under
present circumstances."

"Where is the gentleman going?" asked Herbert, with interest.

"To Philadelphia."

"I am going on to New York," said our hero. "I have been disappointed
like you. I expected to take the early train."

"Do you intend to go by the next train, then?" asked the lady.

"Yes, madam."

"Then, perhaps--I have a great mind to ask you to take charge of my
father."

"I shall be very glad to be of service to you," said Herbert. "There is
only one objection," he added, with some embarrassment.

"What is that?"

"Why," said Herbert, frankly, "I am obliged to be economical, and I was
thinking of buying a second-class ticket."

"Oh," said the lady, promptly, "there need be no difficulty about that.
If you will take the trouble to look after my father, we will gladly pay
for your ticket."

"I am afraid my services will not be worth so much," said Herbert,
modestly.

"You must leave us to estimate them. If you do what you have undertaken,
we shall consider the expense well incurred."

Herbert made no further objection. He felt, indeed, that it would be
quite a lift to him, in the present state of his finances, and besides
would be a very easy way of earning the money. He therefore signified
his thanks and his acceptance of the offer.

"When did you say the train starts?" asked the lady.

"At twelve."

"Nearly five hours. That will be too long to wait. I think, father, we
will go home."

"Yes, my dear, I think that will be best."

"Are you obliged to go home before starting?" the lady inquired,
addressing Herbert.

"No, madam, I have no home in Columbus. I passed last night at a hotel."

"Have you any particular plan for spending the next few hours?"

Herbert answered in the negative.

"Then will you not ride home with us? You will then be ready to start
with my father."

"I shall be happy to do so."

"I think that will be much the best plan. Pompey, open the carriage door
for the young gentleman."

Our hero was about to say that he could just as well open the door for
himself, but he reflected that it was best to adapt himself to the
customs of those he was with. He bowed, therefore, and waited till the
coachman had opened the door for him, and stepped into the carriage. The
lady signed to him to take a seat beside her, and the door was closed.

"Home, Pompey," said she, briefly.

The coachman ascended to his seat, and the spirited grays were soon
whirling the party rapidly homeward.

It was a new position for our hero, and he felt it to be so. His parents
had never been rich, and latterly had been very poor. Living in a small
country village, he had never even seen so elegant a carriage as that in
which he was now riding He sank back upon the luxuriously cushioned
seat, and he could not help thinking how pleasant it would be if he
could command so comfortable a conveyance whenever he wanted to ride
out. But another thought succeeded this. If he were blind, like the
gentleman whom he was to take charge of, it would be a very poor
compensation to ride in a luxurious carriage. After all, things were not
so unequal as they seemed at first sight.

"Since you are to be my father's traveling companion," said the lady,
"perhaps you will not object to telling us your name."

"Certainly," said our hero, "my name is Herbert Mason."

"Are you going from home for the first time?" inquired the lady.

"I have no home," said Herbert. "My father and mother are both dead."

"Excuse me," said the lady, gently. "I am sorry to have touched upon a
subject which must awaken sorrowful recollections. My father's name is
Carroll. Father, you have heard that your young escort is Mr. Herbert
Mason."

The old gentleman extended his hand, which Herbert took respectfully.

"I am afraid you will find me a troublesome charge," he said. "Since I
have become blind I have been compelled to tax the kindness of others."

"The journey will be pleasanter to me," said Herbert, politely, "than if
I were alone."

Mr. Carroll was evidently pleased with this remark, for he turned toward
Herbert with increased interest.

"You can imagine how much more so it will be to me," he said. "I have
not your resources for beguiling the tedium of the way. I would give all
my possessions gladly, for your young eyes. All journeys are alike to me
now, since, however interesting the scenery, it is a blank to me."

"That is indeed a privation, sir."

"Especially in the journey we are about to take. The Baltimore & Ohio
Railroad, as it is called, runs through a romantic and charming country,
and affords views at once bold and beautiful. Have you ever traveled
over the road?"

"No, sir."

"Then you will have all the pleasure of a first discovery. Before I
became blind, before, indeed, the railway was located, I became, as a
young man, familiar with this whole section of country, so that I have,
at least, the remembrance of it. I am obliged now to live upon my
memory."

"You say you have never been over this railroad," said the lady. "Have
you ever been to the East?"

"No, madam, I have always lived in the State of Ohio."

"And you are now going to Philadelphia?" she inquired.

"I am going to New York," said Herbert.

"Indeed! Is it on a visit?"

"No, madam, I am expecting to live there; that is, if I can make a
living."

"Are you dependent, then, upon your own exertions for support?"

"Yes, madam."

"You seem very young for such a responsibility."

"I am fourteen."

"I thought you a year older. My Oscar is fourteen, and I am afraid he
would make a poor hand at supporting himself. What do you think,
father?"

"I think you are right, my dear. Oscar has not been placed in
circumstances to develop his self-reliance."

"No; that probably has something to do with it. But, Herbert, if you
will permit me to call you so, do you not look forward to the future
with apprehension?"

"No, madam," said Herbert. "I am not afraid but that I shall be able to
get along somehow. I think I shall find friends, and I am willing to
work."

"That is the spirit that leads to success," said the old gentleman,
approvingly. "Work comes to willing hands. I think you will succeed."

"I hope so, sir."

Our hero was gratified to meet with so much sympathy from those whose
wealth placed them far above him in the social scale. But it was not
surprising, for Herbert had a fine appearance and gentlemanly manners,
marked, too, by a natural politeness which enabled him to appear better
than most boys of his age.




CHAPTER XVIII

A YOUNG ARISTOCRAT


After a drive of three miles, which was accomplished in a short time by
the spirited horses, the carriage entered, through an ornamental gate,
upon a smooth driveway, which led up to a handsome mansion, of large
size, with a veranda stretching along the entire front.

A boy, a little smaller than Herbert, ran out of the front door, and
opened the door of the carriage before Pompey had time to descend from
the box.

"What, grandpa, come back?" he said, in surprise.

"Yes, Oscar, we were too late for the train," said his mother. "I
brought you back a companion for a, few hours. This is Herbert Mason,
whom I intrust to your care, depending upon you to see that he passes
his time pleasantly."

Oscar looked at Herbert inquisitively.

Herbert offered his hand, saying, "I am glad to make your acquaintance,
Oscar."

"How long are you going to stay?" asked Oscar, as his mother and
grandfather went into the house.

"I must return in time to take the twelve o'clock train."

"Is grandpa going, too?"

"Yes."

"And are you going to take care of him?"

"I believe so."

"I wouldn't want to.'

"Why not?"

"Oh, it's an awful bore to be tied to a blind man."

"You'd find it more of a bore to be blind yourself," said Herbert.

"Yes, I suppose I should. Grandpa wants me to go to walk with him
sometimes, but I don't like it."

"If I had a grandfather who was blind, I think I should be willing."

"Wait till you have one, and you'll see how it is then."

"I suppose he needs somebody."

"Oh, well, he can take one of the servants, then. It's their business to
work."

"Where do you live?" he asked, after a pause.

"I am going to live in New York."

"Are you? I should like to go there."

"Perhaps you wouldn't want to go as I am going."

"What, alone? Yes, I should rather go that way. Then I could do as I
pleased. Now it's 'Oscar, do this,' and 'You mustn't do that,' all the
time."

"That isn't what I mean exactly. I've got to earn my own living after I
get there, and I don't know anybody in the city."

"You haven't run away from home, have you?"

"I haven't got any home."

"Where's your father and mother?"

"They are both dead."

"What are you going to do?"

"I hope to get into a store or counting-room and learn to be a
merchant."

"I shan't have to work for a living," said Oscar, in a tone of
importance.

"Because your family is rich, I suppose," said Herbert.

"Yes, we've got a large estate, ever so many acres. That's what mother's
got. Then grandpa is rich besides, and I expect he will leave me a good
deal of his money. He's pretty old, and I don't believe he'll live very
long."

Oscar said this with such evident satisfaction that Herbert was
disgusted, thinking it not very creditable to him to speculate so
complacently upon his grandfather's speedy death.

"You seem to be well off, then," said he, at last, to the boy.

"Yes," said Oscar, "our family is one of the first in the State. My
father is a Peyton."

"Is he?" asked Herbert, not appearing as much awestruck as Oscar
expected.

"We've got a plantation in Virginia. We live there part of the year. My
father's there now. I hope we shall go there soon."

"Do you like it better than here?"

"Yes, a good deal."

"This is a handsome place."

"Yes, this is mother's estate. The other belongs to father."

"Have you any brothers and sisters, Oscar?"

"I've got one sister. She's about twelve. But, I say, I thought you were
a gentleman's son when I first saw you."

"So I am," said Herbert, emphatically.

"Was your father rich?"

"No."

"Did he have to work for a living?"

"Yes."

"Then he wasn't a gentleman," said Oscar, decidedly.

"Isn't anybody a gentleman that has to work for a living?" asked
Herbert, his indignation excited by his companion's assumption of
superiority.

"Of course not," said Oscar, coolly. "It isn't respectable to work.
Niggers and servants work."

"That is where I don't agree with you," said Herbert, his face flushing.

"You don't pretend to be a gentleman, do you?" demanded Oscar,
insolently.

"Yes, I do," said Herbert, firmly.

"But you're not one, you know."

"I don't know anything of the kind," said Herbert, angrily. "I suppose
you call yourself one."

"Of course, I am a gentleman," said Oscar, complacently.

"You don't talk like one, at any rate," retorted Herbert.

This was new language for Oscar to hear. He had been accustomed to have
his own way pretty much, and had been used to order round his father's
servants and slaves like a little despot. The idea of being told by a
boy who had to work for a living that he did not talk like a gentleman,
did not suit him at all. His black eyes flashed and he clenched his
fists.

"Do you mean to insult me?" he demanded.

"I never insult anybody," said Herbert, not feeling particularly alarmed
by this hostile demonstration. "It is you that have insulted me."

"Didn't you tell me I was not a gentleman?" said Oscar, hotly.

"I said you did not talk like one."

"That's about the same thing," said Oscar.

"Just as you like. Even if I did say so, you said the same of me,"

"Well, suppose I did."

"I am as much a gentleman as you, to say the least," asserted Herbert.

"If you say that again, I'll knock you down," said Oscar, furiously.

"I'll say it all day, if I like," said Herbert, defiantly.

Perhaps it would have been better for Herbert to stop disputing, and to
have taken no notice of Oscar's words. But Herbert was not perfect. He
had plenty of spirit, and he was provoked by the airs Oscar chose to
assume, and by no means inclined to allow him to arrogate a superiority
over himself, merely on account of his wealth. Though manly and
generous, he was quick to resent an insult, and accordingly, when Oscar
dared to repeat what he had said, he instantly accepted the challenge as
recorded above.

Had Oscar been prudent, he would have hesitated before endeavoring to
carry his threat into execution. A moment's glance at the two boys would
have satisfied anyone that the chances, in a personal contest, were
decidedly in our hero's favor. Herbert was not only a little taller than
Oscar, perhaps an inch and a half, but his shoulders were broader and
his frame more muscular. Oscar had never done any work to strengthen his
arms, while Herbert had been forced by circumstances to do so.

Oscar flung himself upon Herbert, and endeavored to bear him to the
ground. But the latter, without an effort, repelled the charge, and
flung himself free from his antagonist's grasp.

This naturally made Oscar more determined to overcome his foe. His face
red with passion, he showered blows upon Herbert, which the latter
parried with ease. At first he acted wholly upon the defensive, but,
finding that Oscar's impetuosity did not abate, suddenly closed with him
and threw him down.

Oscar rose but little hurt, for Herbert used no unnecessary force, and
recommenced the assault. But the result was the same as before. Oscar
was almost beside himself with mingled rage and mortification, and it is
hard to tell how long the contest would have lasted, had not a servant
come up and informed the boys that Mrs. Peyton wished to see them
immediately. She had witnessed the whole scene from a window and felt
called upon to interfere.

"How is this, young gentleman?" she asked, gravely. "You have scarcely
been together twenty minutes, and I find you fighting."

"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Peyton," said Herbert, in a manly tone. "I feel
ashamed of myself, but Oscar attacked me for claiming to be a gentleman,
and I am afraid that my blood was up, and so we got into a fight."

"How is this, Oscar?" said his mother. "Did you so wholly lose your
politeness as to attack your guest for asserting his claims to be a
gentleman? I am annoyed with you."

"He says he has to work for a living," said Oscar, sullenly.

"So may you, some time."

"I am rich."

"You may not always be. At any rate, being rich doesn't insure
gentlemanly behavior, as your conduct to-day clearly shows. Herbert, I
hope you will excuse my son's rudeness."

"Here is my hand, Oscar," said Herbert, cordially. "Let us be friends."

Oscar hardly knew how to receive this overture, but he was finally
thawed by Herbert's manner, and they were soon sauntering about on the
lawn on the best of terms.

At half-past eleven, after an inviting lunch, the carriage was ordered,
and Herbert and Mr. Carroll were driven to the depot, accompanied by
Oscar, who went in his mother's place.

Herbert purchased tickets for both, being intrusted with Mr. Carrol's
pocketbook for that purpose. He found a comfortable seat for the old
gentleman, and sat down beside him.




CHAPTER XIX

A SUSPICIOUS CHARACTER


I pass over the route pursued by the travelers from Columbus to
Wheeling, in West Virginia, as it possesses no special interest.

But after leaving Wheeling there is quite a change. Those of my readers
who are familiar with the Baltimore & Ohio Railway will be able to
understand the enjoyment which Herbert derived from the bold and
romantic scenery visible from the car windows. Mr. Carroll made him take
the seat nearest the window, that he might have a better view, and from
time to time Herbert described what he saw to his sightless fellow-
traveler.

Northwestern Virginia is very mountainous and the construction of a
railway through such a region was a triumph of engineering skill. At
times the road makes bold curves, so that the traveler, looking from the
car window, can see opposite him, across an intervening gulf, the track
over which the train was passing five minutes before. At some places the
track is laid on a narrow shelf, midway of the mountain, a steep and
rugged ascent on one side, a deep ravine on the other, somewhat like the
old diligence road over the Alpine Mt. Cenis. Here and there appear
small hamlets, consisting of one-story cabins, with the chimney built
alongside, instead of rising from the roof in the usual manner.

How long shall we be in reaching Baltimore, Mr. Carroll? "asked Herbert.

"I believe it takes about twenty-six hours," said the old gentleman.
"But I do not mean to go through without stopping."

"I didn't know what your plan was," said Herbert.

"I have been meaning to tell you. Our tickets will allow us to stop
anywhere, and resume our journey the next morning, or even stop two or
three days, if we like."

"That is convenient."

"Yes. If it had been otherwise, I should have purchased the ticket
piecemeal. I cannot endure to travel all night. It fatigues me too
much."

"Where shall we stop, then?"

"I have not yet quite made up my mind. We will ride till about eight
o'clock, and then stop over at whatever place we chance to have
reached."

This arrangement struck Herbert favorably. He was in no particular
hurry, and the scenery was so fine, that he feared that he should lose a
great deal by traveling at night, when, of course, he could not see
anything.

They sat for a while in silence. Then Mr. Carroll inquired, suddenly,
"Did you ever fire a pistol, Herbert?"

"Yes, sir," was the surprised reply.

"Then you understand how to use one?"

"Oh, yes, sir. There was a young man in Waverley, the town where I used
to live, who owned one, and I sometimes borrowed it to fire at a mark."

"Then I think I will intrust this weapon to your charge," said the old
gentleman, drawing from his pocket a handsome pistol, and placing it in
Herbert's hand.

"Is it loaded, sir?"

"No, not at present. We will have it loaded before going to bed. I will
tell you," he added, in a lower tone, "my reason for going armed. It so
happens that I have a large amount of money with me, and, of course, I
feel a little concerned about its safety."

"Perhaps it will be well not to say anything more about it at present,
sir," suggested Herbert, in a low voice. "You may be heard by someone
who would like to take advantage of his discovery."

"No doubt you are right. I will follow your advice."

Herbert would not have thought to give this caution, but, just as Mr.
Carroll uttered the words, "I have a large sum of money with me," a man
dressed in a rough frieze coat, with black whiskers, and a general
appearance, which, to say the least, did not prepossess Herbert in his
favor, chanced to walk through the car. Whether he caught the words
Herbert could not tell, but he paused a moment, and fixed an unpleasant
eye upon the two, as if determined to know them when he should meet them
again. There was another suspicious circumstance. It had evidently been
his intention to pass through the car, but he paused abruptly, and,
turning back, sank into an unoccupied seat a few feet back of that
occupied by Mr. Carroll and his young companion.

His attention naturally drawn by this suspicious conduct, Herbert was
impelled to glance back once or twice. Each time he met the watchful
look of the man fixed upon them, instead of being directed at the
scenery outside, as was the case with the other passengers. When he saw
that the boy was watching him, he turned his head carelessly, and
commenced whistling. But this apparent indifference did not deceive
Herbert for a moment.

"I will watch him," thought our hero. "I do not like his looks. If he
means mischief, as I think very probable, it is necessary that I should
be on my guard against him."

At half-past seven o'clock Mr. Carroll signified his intention of
getting out at the next station. "I am beginning to feel tired," he
said, "and shall feel the better for a good supper and a night's rest."

"Very well, sir," said Herbert.

It occurred to him that now they would get rid of the man who was
watching them so closely.

"If he gets out of the train with us," he thought, "I shall know what it
means."

The train slackened its speed, the sound of the whistle was heard, the
brakes were applied, and soon the conductor, putting his head in at the
door, called out "Oakland!"

"Here we are," said Herbert. "Give me your hand, Mr. Carroll, and I will
lead you out."

The old gentleman rose from his seat, and, guided by Herbert, walked to
the car door. At the door Herbert turned and looked back.

The man with the black whiskers, who a moment before seemed absorbed in
a newspaper, had left his seat, and was but a few feet behind him.

Herbert did not believe that this was an accident. He felt sure that it
meant mischief. But he did not on that account feel nervous, or regret
that he had assumed a charge which seemed likely to expose him to peril.
He had the pistol in his pocket, and that he knew would make him even
with the rascal who was following them.

There was a covered carriage waiting outside to convey passengers to the
only hotel which the village afforded.

"Shall we take the carriage, Mr. Carroll?" asked Herbert.

"Yes," was the reply.

Herbert assisted him in, and placed himself in a seat opposite.

There were two or three other passengers, but the man with the black
whiskers was not to be seen among them.

"I may be mistaken," thought Herbert, who had rather expected to see
him. "Perhaps he lives here, and I have been alarming myself without
reason. Still, it is always best to be on one's guard."

A ride of half a mile brought them to a small but comfortable-looking
inn. Herbert assisted Mr. Carroll to descend, and together they entered
the house of entertainment.

"We shall want some supper. Herbert," said Mr. Carroll. "You may order
some."

"What shall I order, sir?"

"I should like some tea and toast and some beef-steak. If there is
anything that you would prefer, you may order that also."

"No, sir, I should not wish anything better than you have ordered."

"Tell them to get it ready as soon as possible. I feel weary with my
day's ride, and shall retire early."

"I feel tired, too." thought Herbert, "but it won't do for me to sleep.
I must keep my eyes open, if possible."

Supper was soon served. The toast was well browned, and spread with
excellent butter. The steak was juicy and tender, contrary to the usual
custom of country inns, and the tea was fragrant and strong. Both the
travelers partook heartily, having eaten nothing since noon, with the
exception of a little fruit purchased from the car window at one of the
stations. Herbert was not usually in the habit of drinking tea at night,
but on this particular occasion he wanted to keep awake, and therefore
drank two cups, of undiminished strength.

"Now, Herbert," said Mr. Carroll, when they had finished supper, "you
may ask the clerk to assign me to a large room with a couple of beds in
it. I should prefer to have you in the same room with me."

"Very well, sir."

He rose from the table, and went to the public room, one portion of
which was occupied by the office. As he made his way to the desk, he
observed the man with black whiskers on a settee at one end of the room.
He was smoking a clay pipe. Herbert caught a stealthy glance directed
towards himself, but that was all. The man continued smoking, fixing his
eyes with apparent interest on a large yellow handbill pasted on the
opposite wall, announcing a performance by "The Great American Circus
Company" the succeeding evening.

Herbert succeeded in obtaining such a room as he sought, and accompanied
by a servant bearing a lamp, went back to the dining-room to accompany
Mr. Carroll to it.




CHAPTER XX

FACING A BURGLAR


Herbert deliberated as to whether it would be best to inform his aged
traveling companion of the suspicious-looking man, who appeared to have
followed them for no good purpose. He finally decided not to do so,
since it would only alarm Mr. Carroll, and prevent his sleeping off his
fatigue, while there would be no advantage gained, since a blind and
feeble man could be of little use in repelling the burglar, should the
stranger prove to be such.

The bedroom was large and square, and contained two beds. The larger of
these was placed in the corner, and this was assigned to the old
gentleman. The smaller was situated between the two side windows, and
was, of course, the more exposed of the two. This Herbert was to occupy.

"Do you know how to load the pistol, Herbert?" asked Mr. Carroll.

"Yes, sir," said Herbert, confidently.

"I don't anticipate any occasion for using it," continued the old
gentleman. "Still, it will be best to be prepared."

"So I think, sir."

"You won't be afraid to use it, if it should be necessary?"

"No, sir."

Mr. Carroll took a package from his carpet-bag and showed it to Herbert.

"This package," he said, "contains five thousand dollars in bank bills.
If it were known that I had it, I should be in danger. I suppose it will
be best to put it back in the carpet-bag."

"If it were mine," said Herbert, "I would not do that."

"Where, then, would you put it?"

"I would put it between the mattresses. If anyone should get into the
room, they would seize the carpet-bag first, and, perhaps, make off
before they could be stopped."

"I don't know but you are right," said Mr. Carroll. "Perhaps it will be
well to put my watch in the same place."

"Yes, sir; I think it would be well."

"You see, Herbert," continued the old gentleman, "how much confidence I
repose in you. Knowing where my watch and money are, it would be very
easy for you to secure both, and leave me here, destitute and helpless."

"But you don't think there is any danger of my doing so?"

"No," said the old gentleman. "Though our acquaintance is so recent, I
feel great confidence in you. As I cannot see the face, I have learned
to judge of the character by the tone of the voice, and I am very much
mistaken if you are not thoroughly honest and trustworthy."

"Thank you, sir," said Herbert, his face flushed with pleasure at this
evidently sincere commendation. "You shall not repent your confidence."

"I am sure of that, Herbert," said Mr. Carroll, kindly. "But I must bid
you good-night. This has been a fatiguing day, and I shall lose no time
in getting to sleep."

"Good-night. I hope you will sleep well, sir," said Herbert. "There
won't be much sleep for me," he thought.

Mr. Carroll lay down, and his deep, tranquil breathing soon assured our
hero that he was asleep. He rose from his bed and examined the windows.
All but one were provided with fastenings. But the one on the right-hand
side of his bed could be raised from the outside without difficulty.

"I wish I had a nail," thought Herbert. "I could soon make it fast."

But there was none in the room, and he did not wish to go downstairs for
one, since he would probably meet the stranger, who would then learn
what precautions he was taking, and so, perhaps, vary his attack.

"That window will need watching," thought Herbert. "I wonder whether I
shall be able to keep awake."

The excitement of his situation, and, perhaps, the strong tea, to which
he was unaccustomed, helped him to remain vigilant. His mind was active
and on the alert, and his ears were open to catch the least sound.

It was only half-past ten. Probably the attempt to enter the room would
not be made before twelve, at least, in order to insure their being
asleep.

Herbert examined his pistol. It was in excellent order, and was provided
with two barrels, both of which he loaded. Thus, he would have a double
chance to defend himself. He did not remove all his clothing, but kept
on his pants, in order to be prepared for emergencies.

There was an hour and a half to wait before midnight. The minutes passed
slowly. Herbert for a time heard the murmur of voices in the barroom
below, then steps ascended the stairs, and, after a while, all was
hushed.

"I wish the fellow would come quick," he thought, "if he is coming at
all, so that it might be all over, and I might go to sleep."

Time sped on. Herbert could hear the village clock striking twelve; but
still all around remained quiet.

It might have been a half an hour later when he heard a slight noise, as
he thought, under the window. Jumping softly out of bed, he took a peep
out. It was just light enough for him to distinguish a dark form moving
about, bearing something, which he soon perceived to be a ladder. That
it was the black-whiskered man who had followed them, he did not doubt,
and he felt confident that he intended to place the ladder against the
window. He was not mistaken. He heard the top of the ladder softly
inclined against the house, and then he felt that the critical moment,
which was to test his courage, was close at hand.

Herbert's heart began to beat rapidly. He felt that he was taking upon
himself a fearful responsibility in shooting this man, as he would
probably be obliged to do in self-defense. But one thing he resolved
upon. He would not take his life. He would only use such a degree of
violence as should be absolutely necessary. He would even give him a
chance by firing the first barrel in the air, in hope of frightening the
robber. If that failed, he must wound him. There was little time for
these thoughts to pass through his mind, for all the while the man was
creeping up the ladder.

Herbert had moved a little aside, that he might not be seen.

Soon he perceived, by the indistinct light, the face of the stranger
rising above the window-sill. Next, the window was slowly raised, and he
began to make preparations to enter the room. Then Herbert felt that it
was time for him to appear.

Stepping intrepidly to the window, he said: "I know your purpose. Unless
you go down instantly, I will shoot you."

There was no tremor in his voice as he said this. Courage came with the
occasion, and his tone was resolute, and self-possessed.

"So you're awake, are you, my chicken?" was the reply. "If you know
what's best for yourself, you'll hand over the old man's money, and save
me the trouble of getting in."

"Never!" said Herbert, firmly.

"Then I will take it myself, and give you something to remember me by,
you little fool!"

He placed his knee on the window-sill, and prepared to jump in.

"One step farther," said Herbert, resolutely, "and I fire!"

He displayed the pistol, at the sight of which the burglar hesitated.

"Hold on a bit," said he, pausing. "I'll give you some of the plunder,
if you'll put up that shooting iron, and make no trouble."

"Do you think me a villain, like yourself?" asked Herbert.

"By ----, you shall repent this," said the robber, with an oath, and he
made another attempt to enter.

Click!

There was a sharp report, but Herbert had fired in the air, and the
burglar was unhurt.

"Confusion!" he exclaimed; "that will raise the house!"

Then, espying the carpet-bag, he determined to jump in, seize it, and
get away before the people in the house were fairly awake. As for the
pistol, that had been discharged, and he supposed that nothing was to be
feared from it. But he reckoned without his host. As he put one leg
over, and had all but succeeded in getting in, Herbert fired once more,
this time hitting him in the shoulder. He uttered a shriek of pain, and,
losing his hold, tumbled backward to the ground.

The two reports alarmed the house.

"What's the matter?" exclaimed Mr. Carroll, awakened and alarmed.

"Don't be alarmed, sir," said Herbert. "A man just attempted to get in
through the window, and I have wounded him."

"You are a brave boy," said Mr. Carroll. "Where is he now?"

"He has tumbled to the ground, shot through the shoulder, I think."

There was a loud thumping at the door. Herbert opened it, and admitted
half a dozen guests, headed by the landlord.

"What's the matter?" exclaimed all, in chorus.

"If you will come to the window, gentlemen, I will show you," said
Herbert.

They followed him curiously, and the sight of the ladder and the wounded
man, who was uttering groans of pain from the ground below, told the
story at once.

"Served the rascal right," said the landlord. "Who is he?"

"The black-whiskered man who was in the barroom last night," said
Herbert.

"I remember now; he asked particularly where you were to sleep--you and
the old gentleman--but I did not suspect his purpose."

"I did," said Herbert, "and kept awake to be ready for him."

"You are a brave lad."

"I only did my duty," said Herbert, modestly.

"Help! help!" groaned the wretch below.

Herbert heard the cry of pain, and his heart was filled with pity. The
man was, indeed, a villain. He had only been served right, as the
landlord said. Still, he was a fellow-creature, and he was in pain.
Herbert could not regret that he had shot him; but he did regret the
necessity, and he felt sympathy for him in his suffering.

"Poor fellow!" he said, compassionately; "I am afraid he is a good deal
hurt."

"Poor fellow!" echoed the landlord. "It serves him right."

"Still, he is in pain, and he ought to be cared for."

"He has no claim upon us. He may he there till morning."

"No," said Mr. Carroll. "Herbert is right. He is guilty, but he is in
pain, and it is the part of humanity to succor him. Landlord, if you
will have him brought in, and send for the doctor, you may look to me
for your pay."

"Yet, he was going to rob you, sir," said the landlord, considerably
surprised.

"Yes, that is true; but you don't know how strongly he was tempted."

"He looks like a hard ticket. I didn't like to give him a bed, but we
can't well refuse travelers, if they have money to pay their reckoning.
I made him pay in advance."

"Pray, lose no time," said Herbert, as another groan was heard; "I will
go out and help you bring him in."

A lantern was lit, and the whole company followed the landlord out.

"Well," said he, throwing the light of the candle full on the sufferer's
face, "you've got yourself into a fine pickle, haven't you?"

"Oh," groaned the burglar, "if it hadn't been for that accursed boy!"

"You'd have got off with the old gentleman's money. Well, it was rather
unkind to interfere."

"Are you in much pain?" asked Herbert, bending over him.

There was something in his voice that betrayed the compassion he really
felt.

The burglar looked up.

"You're the boy that wounded me, ain't you?" he asked.

"Yes," said Herbert.

"Curse you! I don't know but you've killed me. I'm shot through the
shoulder. Then, that cursed fall! I feel as if I had broken my back."

"I did not want to shoot you," said Herbert.

"What did you do it for, then?"

"Because you forced me to it. You were after Mr. Carroll's money."

"Didn't I offer to divide with you?"

"Yes, but, of course, I would not agree to that."

"Are you so much better than common folks?" sneered the burglar.

"I don't know about that. I would not steal."

"Take him up," said the landlord to the hotel servants. "He don't
deserve it, but I've promised the old gentleman we'd see to him. Tom
White, you may go for the doctor."

Two men approached and attempted to lift the wounded burglar. But, in
the first attempt, they touched the injured shoulder. He uttered a
shriek of pain, and exclaimed, "You'll murder me!"

"Let me lift him," said Herbert. "Perhaps you were too rough."

At length, but not without much groaning on the part of the burglar, he
was got into the house, and laid on a bed in a small room on the first
floor.

"Do you feel better?" asked Herbert.

"A little."

"Do you think you have broken any bones in falling?"

"I thought so at first, but perhaps I am only bruised."

"When the doctor comes, he will extract the bullet, and relieve you of a
good deal of your pain."

"You are a strange boy," said the burglar, with a look of surprise.

"Why am I?"

"You shot me, and yet you pretend to be sorry for me now."

"So I am."

"Then, why did you shoot me?"

"I have already told you. Because I was obliged to. I would not have
done it, if there had been any other way. I shot the first barrel in the
air."

"By accident?"

"No; I thought it would alarm you, and I might save the money without
injuring you."

"Do you really mean that?"

"Yes."

"And you don't have any ill-will against me now?"

"No."

"That is strange."

"I don't know why it should be."

"I suppose I ought to hate you, because you have brought me to this
pass," said the burglar, thoughtfully, "but I don't. That is strange,
too."

"I am so glad you feel so," said Herbert. "I am very sorry for your
pain, and I will do what I can to relieve it."

"I have no money to pay the landlord and the doctor."

"Mr. Carroll says he will pay all needed expenses." "The man I wanted to
rob?"

"Yes."

"Then hang me, if I ain't ashamed of trying to rob him," said the
burglar, earnestly.

"Have you ever robbed anyone before?"

"No, I haven't. I'm a rough customer, and have done plenty of mean
things, but this is the first job of the kind I ever attempted. I
wouldn't have done it, only I heard the old man say in the cars, that he
had a lot of money with him. I was hard up, and on my way to Cedarville,
to try to get work, but when I heard what he said, the devil tempted me,
I believe, and I determined to keep you both in sight, and get out where
you did. I've tried and failed, and that's the end of it. It's my first
attempt at burglary."

"I hope it will be the last."

"You may bet your life on that!"

"Then," said Herbert, quietly, "I will intercede with Mr. Carroll for
you, and ask him not to have you arrested."

"Will you do that?" asked the wounded man, eagerly.

"I promise it."

"If you will, boy, I will bless you, and if God would listen to such a
scamp as I am, I'd pray for you."

"He will listen to you," said Herbert. "Try to lead a better life, and
He will help you."

"I wish I'd met with such as you before," said the burglar. "I'd have
been a better man than I am."

Here the doctor entered, and Herbert gave place to him. The wound was
discovered not to be serious, and, the bullet being extracted, the
sufferer found relief. Herbert returned to bed, and this time, having no
anxious thoughts to weigh upon his mind, he soon sank into a refreshing
sleep, in which the fatigues and excitements of the day were completely
forgotten.




CHAPTER XXI

HERBERT'S REWARD


"I owe the safety of my money to you, my brave boy," said Mr. Carroll,
the next morning, as, after rising, he replaced the package of bank
notes in his carpet-bag.

"I only did my duty," said Herbert, but his face flushed with pleasure
at the commendations bestowed upon him.

"But in doing your duty, you displayed a courage and fidelity rare in
one of your age."

"I am glad you approve of my conduct," said Herbert.

"If you continue to deserve as well of those who employ you, I am sure
you will achieve success."

"I hope so, sir," said our hero. "I shall try to do my duty in whatever
situation in life I may be placed."

"What are your plans when you reach New York?"

"I shall try to find a place in a store, or counting-room."

"Have you friends in the city on whose influence you can rely to help
you to such a situation as you desire?" "No, sir; I have only myself to
look to."

"Only yourself! It is a bold undertaking."

"Don't you think I shall succeed?" asked Herbert, a little anxiously.

"I do not doubt that you will succeed, after finding a place, but that
is the difficulty."

"I supposed there must be plenty to do in a great city like New York."

"There is truth in what you say, but, nevertheless, many are led astray
by it. There is, indeed, a great deal to do, but there are a great many
ready to do it, and generally--I may say, always--the laborers exceed
the work to be done."

"Perhaps," said Herbert, "many fail to get work, because they are
particular what they do. If I can find nothing better to do, I will
black boots."

"With such a spirit, I think you will succeed. But, perhaps, I can
smooth away some of the difficulties in your path. I know a firm in New
York--connections of our family--to whom I will give you a letter of
introduction. If they have no room for you in their house, they may
influence someone else to take you."

"I shall feel very much obliged to you for such a letter. It will do me
a great deal of good," said Herbert, gratefully.

"I will gladly write it, but now let us go down to breakfast."

After breakfast was over, they looked in upon the wounded man.

"How do you feel this morning?" asked Herbert, going up to the bedside.

"Rather stiff, but I am not in such pain as I was."

"I am glad to hear it."

"That is the gentleman I was going to rob?" said the burglar, looking in
the direction of Mr. Carroll.

"Yes."

"Is he--did you say anything to him about not prosecuting me?" he asked,
nervously.

"Be under no apprehension," said Mr. Carroll, mildly. "I do not care to
punish you more than you have already been punished. I prefer that you
should lead a better life."

"I will try to do so. sir; but I was poor, and that made the temptation
stronger."

"I can easily believe it. Are you wholly without means?"

"Nearly so."

"Here, then, is a purse containing a hundred dollars. It will probably
pay your expenses during your illness."

The wounded man looked up in surprise.

"There ain't many that would pay a man for trying to rob them," he said.

"I do not pay you for that," said Mr. Carroll, "but because I do not
wish you to be subjected to a similar temptation again."

The wounded man, who, under different treatment would have been defiant
and profane, seemed quite subdued by such unexpected kindness.

"Well, sir," he said. "all I can say is, that I am very much obliged to
you, and I hope you will be rewarded for your kindness."

"It is easier to lead men than to drive them," said Mr. Carroll, as they
left the chamber. "This man is rough, and not troubled much with a
conscience, but harshness would make him still worse."

"Yes, sir," said Herbert; "I think you are right."

After breakfast they resumed their journey. In due time they reached
Baltimore, and remained over night at a hotel. In the course of the
succeeding day they arrived at Philadelphia, which was the termination
of Mr. Carroll's journey. As the country through which they passed was
unknown to Herbert, the journey was full of interest, but there was no
adventure worth recording.

The time came when the two travelers were compelled to part.

"If I were going to a hotel, Herbert," said Mr. Carroll, "I would invite
you to remain with me a day or two; but I shall proceed at once to the
house of a friend, and I shall not feel at liberty to invite you."

"Thank you, sir," said Herbert. "I think it will be best for me to go on
to New York at once. I have got my living to make, and I am anxious to
get to work as soon as possible."

"It is a praiseworthy feeling," said the old gentleman. "Life lies
before you. I have left nearly the whole of it behind me. I am drawing
near the end of my journey. You are just at the beginning. I shall hope
to meet you again, but, if not, be assured that I shall always remember,
with pleasure, my young traveling companion."

"Thank you, sir," said Herbert.

"I shall not soon forget the essential service which you have rendered
me," continued the old gentleman.

"Don't think of it, sir," said Herbert, modestly, "Anyone would have
done the same thing in my place."

"I am by no means sure of that. At any rate, the obligation remains. You
must allow me to acknowledge it in some measure."

Mr. Carroll drew out his pocketbook and handed it to Herbert.

"Will you oblige me," he said, "by counting the bills in this
pocketbook?"

Herbert did so.

"There are sixty-five dollars," he said, passing it back.

"Will you take out fifty dollars?"

"Yes, sir--I have done it."

"That's the sum you will oblige me by keeping," said Mr. Carroll. "I
hope it may be of service to you."

"You give me so much money?" said Herbert, in surprise.

"It is but a very small sum, compared with that which you have saved
me."

"I don't think I ought to take so much," said Herbert, hesitating.

"You need not hesitate, my young friend. I am blessed with abundant
means, and very well able to part with it. Besides, it is only one per
cent. of the money which you have been instrumental in saving me, and
you are certainly entitled to as much as that."

"I thank you very much for the gift, Mr. Carroll," said our hero, "and
still more for the kind manner in which you give it to me."

"You accept it, then? That is well," said the old gentleman, with
satisfaction. "There is one thing more. You remember that I spoke to you
of a business firm in Pearl Street, New York, with the members of which
I am acquainted. Last evening I prepared a letter of introduction to
them for you. Here it is."

"Thank you, sir," said Herbert. "I was very fortunate in meeting with
one so able and willing to assist me."

"You are very welcome to all the help I am able to give you. I shall be
very glad if your life shall be as prosperous as mine has been. I must
trouble you to do me one more service. If you will find me a cab, I will
go at once to my friend's house."

No difficulty was experienced in obtaining a carriage. There was a
cordial leave-taking, and Herbert once more found himself alone. But
with rather more than sixty dollars in his pocket, he felt rich, and
looked forward eagerly to his arrival in the great city, where he hoped
to deserve and win success.




CHAPTER XXII

ROBBED IN THE NIGHT


Herbert entered the cars, and took a seat by the window. His small
bundle, containing all the extra clothing he had been able to bring away
from the inhospitable home of Mr. Holden, he placed in the seat beside
him.

It was yet early, and there were but few persons in the car. But as the
hour for starting approached, it gradually filled up. Still, the seat
next to Herbert remained untaken.

At length a young man, apparently about nineteen, walked up the aisle,
and, pausing, inquired, "Is this seat engaged?"

"No," said Herbert, at the same time removing his bundle.

"Then, if you have no objection, I'll take possession."

He accordingly seated himself, and commenced a conversation.

"Going to New York?" he asked.

"Yes," said Herbert.

"Do you live there?"

"No; I have never been there before."

"Are you going on a visit?"

"No; I am going to live there; that is, if I can find anything to do."

"Are you alone?"

"Yes."

"So am I. Suppose we hitch teams."

"I don't understand."

"Suppose we go to some hotel together. I have been there before, and can
tell you where to go. It's awful dull being alone. I always like to pick
up company."

Herbert hardly knew what to say to this proposition. He did not exactly
like the appearance, or fancy the free and easy manners of his new
acquaintance, but he felt lonely, and, besides, he hardly knew what
excuse to make. He, therefore, gave his assent to the arrangement
proposed.

"What's your name?" asked his new friend, familiarly.

"Herbert Mason."

"Mine is Greenleaf--Peter Greenleaf. Have you come from a distance?"

"From Waverley, in Ohio, not far from Cincinnati."

"I am from Philadelphia. I've been in a store there, but I didn't like
the style, and I concluded to go to New York. There's more chance for a
fellow of enterprise there."

"What sort of a store were you in?"

"Dry-goods store--Hatch & Macy. Old Hatch is a mean skinflint, and
wouldn't pay me half what I was worth. I don't want to brag, but there
wasn't a man in that store that sold as much as I did. And how much do
you think I got?"

"I don't know."

"Only seven dollars a week. If I hadn't made something another way. I
couldn't have paid my expenses."

"I should think you might live on seven dollars a week."

This was before the war had increased the expenses of living.

"Couldn't do it. Board cost me four dollars a week, and that only left
three for other expenses. My cigars cost me nearly that. Then I wanted
to go to the theater now and then, and, of course, I must dress like a
gentleman. I tell you what, seven dollars a week didn't begin to do me."

"How did you manage, then?"

"Oh, I made so much more by banking."

"By banking?" repeated Herbert, in astonishment.

"Yes; only it was a faro bank. I used to pick up considerable that way,
sometimes."

"A faro bank!" repeated Herbert, in dismay. "Why, that's the same as
gambling, isn't it?"

"Well, what's the odds? You take your chance, and you may win or lose.
It's a pretty fair thing."

After this confession, Herbert became more than ever doubtful whether he
should care to remain long in the company of his present companion.

Meanwhile, the cars were moving rapidly. Peter Greenleaf, as he called
himself, talked volubly, and appeared to have a considerable familiarity
with certain phases of life, the knowledge of which was not likely to
have been very profitable to him. Still, Herbert was interested in his
communications, though the opinion which he formed of him was far from
favorable.

"Where are you going to stop when you get to New York?" inquired Peter.

"I don't know anything about the city. I suppose I shall have to go to a
hotel first."

"Suppose we go to French's Hotel?"

"Where is that?"

"Near the park. It's on the European plan. You pay fifty cents a day for
your rooms, and whatever you please for your meals."

"I think I shall like that. I shall want to get into a boarding-house as
soon as possible."

"All right. We'll take a room together at the hotel."

This arrangement was not to Herbert's taste, but he did not care to
offend his companion by objecting to it, so by his silence, he gave
consent.

"What are you going to do in New York?" he asked.

"I shall look up a situation. I won't take less than fifteen dollars a
week. A man of my experience ought to be worth that. Don't you think
so?"

"Yes," said Herbert, dubiously, though it occurred to him that if he
were an employer, he would not be likely to engage such a clerk at any
price. But it is rather fortunate, all things considered, that we are
able to keep our thoughts to ourselves, otherwise, the complacency of
our companions, and sometimes our own, would run the risk of being
rudely disturbed.

In course of time the terminus of the road was reached, and, crossing
over from Jersey City, Herbert found himself, for the first time in his
life, in the noise and whirl of the great city.

"And I am actually to live here," thought Herbert. "I wonder what Mr.
Holden would say if he knew where I was?" Uncertain as his prospects
were, he felt very glad that he was out of the clutches of the petty
despot, whose chief pleasure was to make him uncomfortable. Here, at
least, the future was full of possibilities of good fortune; there, it
was certain discomfort and little to hope for.

"Where is the hotel you spoke of?" he asked, turning to Greenleaf.

"I'll lead you to it."

They walked up to Broadway, then up by the Astor House, and across the
park to the hotel.

"We'll go in and secure a room the first thing," he said.

They entered, Greenleaf taking the lead.

"Show us a room with two beds," said Peter to the clerk.

A servant was summoned, and the room assigned to them was indicated.

"Have you any baggage?" asked the clerk.

"No," said Greenleaf, carelessly. "Mine was checked through from
Philadelphia. I shan't send for it till morning."

"Then I must ask you to pay in advance."

"All right. Fifty cents, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"Mason," said Greenleaf, "have you got a dollar about you? I've got
nothing less than a ten."

Herbert drew out a dollar and paid for himself and his companion.

They were now shown up to a room on the third floor, which proved to be
a very comfortable one, looking out on the street. Herbert was glad to
get a chance to wash himself thoroughly after the dusty journey which he
had just completed. This ceremony over, they went down to the restaurant
connected with the hotel, and took a hearty meal. Greenleaf made an
effort to have Herbert pay for both, but this time Herbert also had a
bill to change. It was rather a suspicious circumstance, he thought,
that Greenleaf, who had no bill smaller than a ten, paid for his meal
out of a one-dollar bill.

After supper Greenleaf bought a couple of cigars, and offered Herbert
one.

"No, thank you," said our hero.

"Don't you smoke?"

"No."

"Where have you been living all your life? I couldn't get along without
my cigar."

"Don't you think it hurtful to a boy to smoke?"

"I don't know about that. I'm a man now, but I've smoked ever since I
was a boy. I think it does a fellow good."

"But it's expensive."

"Yes, that's so. I expect I've smoked a thousand dollars' worth of
cigars in the course of my life."

"Don't you wish you had the money instead?"

"Yes; I should rather like the money, but I shouldn't be half the man I
am if I hadn't smoked. It's mostly milksops that don't smoke. Nothing
personal, you know, Mason."

"Of course not," said Herbert, smiling.

"Better have a cigar."

"No; I guess not."

"You'll come to it in time. I'll smoke it for you, then."

After smoking, Greenleaf expressed his intention of going to the
theater. Herbert preferred to go to bed early, feeling rather tired. He
was kept awake at first by the noise of the horse-cars and the bustle of
the street outside, as well as by the exciting thoughts that crowded
upon him, suggested by his actual arrival in the city, where he hoped to
make a place for himself by energy and industry. But at last he fell
asleep.

He slept soundly through the night. But towards morning he had a dream
in which Abner Holden figured. His old employer seemed to be approaching
him with a smile of exultation, and was about to lay violent hands upon
him, when he awoke. It was broad daylight, being already seven o'clock
in the morning. Herbert remembered where he was, and looked across the
room for Greenleaf. But he was not visible. The bed was disarranged, and
evidently had been slept in, but the occupant had risen.

"I didn't think he was a fellow to rise early," thought Herbert. "I
suppose he is downstairs. I might as well get up, too."

Herbert jumped out of bed, and, going to the wash-stand, washed his face
and hands. He then proceeded to dress.

"I wonder Greenleaf didn't wake me up," he thought.

But the reason was too soon made evident. Happening to put his hand in
the pocket where he usually kept his pocketbook, he was startled at
finding it empty. Somewhat alarmed, he began to hunt round upon the
floor, thinking it possible that it might have dropped out. But his
search was vain. It was not to be found. He then examined carefully the
remaining pockets, still without success.

It was not until this moment that a suspicion entered his mind
concerning his companion.

"Is it possible," he thought, "that Greenleaf has been mean enough to
strip me of my money?"

Herbert did not want to believe this. He disliked to think badly of
anyone, and he still hoped it would prove otherwise. It was barely
possible that Greenleaf had taken his money by way of playing a
practical joke upon him, and he might now be downstairs, waiting to be
amused at Herbert's look of dismay when he discovered that he was
penniless. Drowning men will catch at straws, and Herbert, in his
trouble, tried to think this was probably the way it had happened.

"Greenleaf is rather a hard case, according to his own account," he said
to himself. "but I can't believe he would be mean enough to rob me. I
will go downstairs and see if I can find him."

Accordingly, leaving his chamber, he descended the staircase, and made
his way to the office.

Herbert went up and spoke to the clerk who chanced to be inside.

"Have you seen my roommate?" he asked.

"What is the number of your room?"

"No. ----."

"I remember now. He has gone."

"Gone!" echoed Herbert, in dismay.

"Yes; didn't you know of it?"

"He went away while I was asleep. How long since did he go?"

"He came to the office two hours since, and said he should not require
the room any longer."

"Did he leave any message for me?"

"No."

"Did he say where he was going?"

"No."

Such an expression of dismay and perplexity overspread Herbert's face
that the clerk could not help observing it.

"Is anything wrong?" he asked.

"Yes," said Herbert. "He has robbed me of my pocketbook, containing all
my money."

"Whew!" whistled the clerk. "How much had you?"

"About sixty dollars."

"You're unlucky, that's a fact. Have you nothing left?"

Just then it flashed across Herbert's mind that when he had paid for his
supper he had changed a five-dollar bill, and placed the balance, about
four dollars and a half in his vest pocket. He at once felt in that
pocket, and found it still there. Greenleaf had contented himself with
the pocketbook.

"I have a little left," he said.

He paid for his room in advance for another day, and went down to
breakfast.




CHAPTER XXIII

A BUSINESS CALL


It was certainly a startling discovery for Herbert to make, that out of
sixty dollars he had only four left, now that he had paid for another
day at the hotel, and this small sum must be further diminished by the
expense of a breakfast. Unfortunately, too, he was quite hungry, for his
misfortune had not taken away his appetite.

"I will make a good breakfast, at any rate," said Herbert,
philosophically. "Afterwards, I will consider what to do."

He ordered a substantial breakfast, which, even at the low prices of a
dozen years ago, amounted to fifty cents, and did full justice to what
was set before him.

After paying at the desk, he went outside.

It was a bright, sunshiny morning, and this, with the comfortable
feeling produced by having eaten a good breakfast, gave him courage for
the new career upon which he was about to enter.

While considering what he should do first, the thought of the letter
given him by Mr. Carroll flashed upon him. He felt for it hastily, and
was rejoiced to find that that was safe, at least. Greenleaf had not
taken that away, fortunately.

He looked at the direction. It was addressed to

                "Messrs. Godfrey & Lynn,
                               No. ---- Pearl St."

It was not sealed, and was probably meant to be read by Herbert. At any
rate, our hero so concluded, and opened the letter, not without
curiosity as to what Mr. Carroll had written about him. He knew it must
be favorable, of course, but found it even more so than he anticipated.

Here it is:

"MY DEAR MR. GODFREY: This letter will be handed you by a young friend
of mine, by name Herbert Mason. My acquaintance with him has been brief,
but he has been able, by his coolness and bravery, to do me a most
important service, having saved me from being robbed of a large sum of
money while acting as my escort from Ohio to Philadelphia. I have talked
with him freely about his plans, and find that he will reach New York
without friends, and with a very small sum of money, hoping before it is
gone to secure a place in some counting-room, where he can make an
honest living. I feel a strong interest in his success, and am persuaded
that wherever he is placed, he will show rare capacity and fidelity. I
wish it might be in your power to receive him into your own counting-
room. But, of course, that must be according to your convenience. At any
rate, may I rely on you to act a friendly part by my young friend, and
to exert your influence toward procuring him a position elsewhere, if
you cannot employ him yourself? Anything that you may have it in your
power to do for Herbert, I shall consider as a favor done to myself.

I have just left my daughter, who, with her family, is well. Sincerely,
your friend,
                                     JAMES CARROLL."

"That is a very kind letter," thought Herbert, gratefully. "I hope it
will do me good."

He decided to call and deliver it the same forenoon. If he had not been
robbed of nearly the whole of his small capital, he would, first, have
gone about the city, which was entirely new to him. But, with less than
four dollars between himself and utter destitution, he felt that he had
no time for sight-seeing. It was necessary that he should get to work as
soon as possible.

He waited till ten o'clock, thinking it possible that the heads of the
firm might not reach the counting-room till about that time. It was now
eight o'clock only. He had two hours, therefore, to look about him.

"Shine yer boots?" said a ragged urchin, approaching, with a suggestive
look at his soiled shoes.

It occurred to Herbert that it would be best to look as well as possible
when visiting Godfrey.

"Ten cents."

"It's too much," said Herbert, thinking how few dimes constituted his
entire worldly wealth.

"Well, five, then," said the bootblack, coming down to his regular
price.

"Do you get much to do?" asked our hero.

"Some days I get considerable."

"How much do you make?"

"Pleasant days I makes a dollar, but when it rains, there ain't much to
do."

"How much do you have to pay for sleeping?"

"Six cents."

"Six cents!" repeated Herbert, in surprise. "Where can you get lodged
for that?"

"At the lodgin' house, corner of Fulton and Nassau Streets."

"Well," thought Herbert, "I needn't starve. If I can't get anything
better to do, I can buy a box of blacking and a brush, and set up in
business for myself."

To be sure, this would not be an agreeable occupation, but Herbert was
bound to make a living by honest labor. If one avenue was closed to him,
he must enter such as were open to him. He could not afford to be
particular.

After his shoes were brushed, he crossed the park, and walked up
Broadway. It was a wonderful sight to the country-bred boy, this gay
thoroughfare, with its busy and bustling crowds, and its throngs of
vehicles, never ceasing wholly, save at the dead hours of night. He
thought to himself what a quantity of business there must be to do.
Certainly, there must be room for one more worker. So, on the whole, the
busy scene gave him courage, and he sauntered along as cheerfully as if
he were not next-door to a beggar.

But at last the time came when he might safely seek out the gentleman to
whom he had an introduction. Being a stranger in the city, he had to
inquire for Pearl Street from a policeman, who answered his inquiry very
civilly. He followed the direction, and found it at length. But the
number of which he was in search was not so easily found, for he found
the street meandered in a very perplexing way, so that at times he was
not quite sure whether he was still in it, or had wandered from his way.

At last he found the place. It was a large, solid-looking building, of
four stories in height. There were a number of boxes outside on the
sidewalk. Inside, there was a large apartment occupying the entire first
floor, with the exception of a room in the rear, which had been
partitioned off for a counting-room. The partition was of glass, and, as
he looked from the entrance, he could see a couple of high desks and a
table.

"Is this Godfrey & Lynn's?" he asked of a porter at the entrance.

"Yes," said the porter.

"I want to see Mr. Godfrey."

"I don't think he's in. You can go to the office and inquire."

Accordingly, Herbert passed down the length of the warehouse, and,
pausing a moment before the door, he opened it, and entered.

There were two persons in the office. One was a thin-faced man, who sat
on a high stool at one of the desks, making entries apparently in the
ledger. This was the bookkeeper, Mr. Pratt, a man with a melancholy
face, who looked as if he had lived to see the vanity of all things
earthly. He had a high forehead naturally--made still higher by the loss
of his front hair. Apparently, he was not a man to enjoy conviviality,
or to shine on any festive occasion.

Besides Mr. Pratt, there was a boy, if we may take the liberty of
calling him such, of about Herbert's age. He was fashionably dressed,
and his hair was arranged with exceeding care. In fact, as Herbert
entered, he was examining the set of his necktie in a little hand-glass,
which he had taken from his coat pocket. Not quite suiting him, he set
himself to rearranging it.

"Have you copied that bill, Thomas?" asked Mr. Pratt, looking up.

"Not yet, sir."

"You have been long enough about it. Put back that glass. You are quite
too much troubled about your appearance."

"Yes, sir.

"If I didn't look any better than some people," said Thomas, sotto voce,
"I shouldn't look in a glass very often."

Herbert naturally concluded that Mr. Pratt was the man to whom his
inquiries should be addressed.

"I would like to see Mr. Godfrey, sir." he said.

"He is out of the city."

"Out of the city!" repeated Herbert, disappointed. "When will he be
back?"

"Nor till day after to-morrow."

Herbert's countenance fell. In his reduced circumstances, he could
hardly afford to wait two days. At his present rate of expenditure, he
would be penniless by that time.

"Is Mr. Lynn likely to be in soon?" he asked, thinking that perhaps he
would do in Mr. Godfrey's absence.

"No; he is sick at home. He may not be here for a week. Perhaps, I can
attend to your business," he added. "What is it?"

"I think," said Herbert, "that I will wait till day after to-morrow, if
you think Mr. Godfrey will be back then. I have a letter for him."

"If it's a business letter, you had better leave it."

"It is a letter of introduction," said Herbert. "I would rather present
it in person."

"Very well," and Mr. Pratt went back to his ledger.

Thomas looked critically at the boy who had a letter of introduction to
Mr. Godfrey, and said to himself, "He got his clothes from a country
tailor, I'll bet a hat."




CHAPTER XXIV

FINDING A BOARDING PLACE


Herbert left the counting-room of Godfrey & Lynn, not a little depressed
in spirits. The two days which must elapse before he could see Mr.
Godfrey were to him a formidable delay. By that time his money would be
almost exhausted. Then, suppose, which was very probable, Mr. Godfrey
could do nothing for him immediately, but only hold out his promise of
future assistance, how was he to live in the meantime? After all, he
might have to realize his thought of the morning, and join the ranks of
the bootblacks. That was not a pleasant thought to a boy of his
education. All labor is honorable, to be sure, but, then, some
occupations are more congenial than others.

If Greenleaf had not robbed him so basely, he could have afforded to
wait. He felt sore and indignant about that. Nobody likes to own that he
has been victimized, but Herbert was obliged to confess to himself that
such was the case with him.

He walked about rather aimlessly, feeling miserable enough. But, all at
once, it occurred to him, "Would it not be cheaper for him to take board
by the week in some boarding-house?" Reckoning up, he found that his
hotel bill would be three dollars and a half a week, while his meals,
even if he were quite abstemious, would make as much more; in all, seven
dollars. Surely, he could be boarded somewhere for less than that.

In the reading-room of the hotel he found a daily paper, and carefully
ran his eye down the advertisements for boarders and lodgers. The
following attracted his attention:

"BOARDERS WANTED.--A few mechanics may obtain comfortable rooms and
board at No. ---- Stanton Street, at three dollars per week."

This, be it remembered, was previous to the war, and before the price of
board had doubled.

"Three dollars a week!" repeated Herbert. "Less than half my present
rate of expense. I must go at once and secure it."

He found the way to Stanton Street, and found that No. ---- was a
shabby-looking house in a shabby neighborhood. But he could not afford
to be fastidious. He accordingly stepped up without hesitation, and rang
the bell, which emitted a shrill sound in reply.

A middle-aged woman, with a red handkerchief tied around her head, and a
broom in her hand, opened the door and looked inquiringly at our hero.

"What's wanted?" she said.

"I saw your advertisement for boarders," said Herbert.

"Yes; I advertised in the paper this morning."

"Will you let me see your rooms?"

"Who are you looking for?"

"Myself."

"I don't know as you'll be suited. My price is low, and I can't give
first-class accommodations for three dollars."

"No; I suppose not."

"Come up, if you would like to see what I've got."

The interior of the house was shabby like the outside, the oilcloth
carpet faded, and the wall paper torn off in places. The stairs, too,
were narrow and uncarpeted. All this Herbert observed, but he could not
afford to be critical.

On the third floor, his guide threw open the door of a dark, little hall
bedroom, meagerly furnished.

"I could give you this room by yourself," she said, "or a larger room
with someone else."

"I would rather be alone."

"That's the only single room I have. Will you take it?"

"I think so," said Herbert, though he did not anticipate much enjoyment
in such a poor place.

"When do you want to come?"

"To-morrow morning."

"Very well. I shall expect a deposit, so that I may be sure the room is
let."

"How much?"

"A dollar will do."

Herbert drew a dollar from his pocket, and handed it to Mrs. Morgan, for
such, she informed him, was her name.

Then he went downstairs and out into the air again.

"Well," he said to himself, "I'm sure of a home, such as it is, for a
week. In that time something must turn up."

Examining his pocketbook he found that he had two dollars and a half
left. Of that sum, two dollars must be reserved to pay the balance of
his week's board. Out of the remaining fifty cents he must pay for his
meals until the next morning, when he would take possession of his new
boarding place. He wished that he had proposed to come to breakfast, but
it was too late now.

With such a small sum in hand, he could not afford to dine on the same
magnificent scale as he had breakfasted, but he must be rigidly
economical. He decided that the cheapest food he could buy was a five-
cent loaf at some baker's. This would probably last him through the day,
and might prove sufficient for breakfast also, since he would take a
regular dinner, though he doubted, from what he had seen of the
establishment in Stanton Street, whether it would be a very inviting
repast. But it was the best he could afford, and that was all he need
consider.

Late in the afternoon, it occurred to Herbert to wonder where, in the
city, his Uncle Stanton lived. Not that he had any intention of applying
to him for assistance, even if matters came to a crisis, but he felt a
natural curiosity as to how his uncle was situated. He found the
directory readily, and, turning to the letter S, ran down the list of
names till he came to Stanton, Benjamin.

He learned that his uncle's store was in the lower part of Broadway,
while his house was in West Seventeenth Street, between Fifth and Sixth
Avenues.

"I should like to see what sort of a house Uncle Benjamin lives in,"
thought Herbert.

There was nothing to prevent his gratifying this wish, as he had plenty
of time on his hands. If he had had more money, he would have taken the
horse cars, but in his present circumstances this would be imprudent. He
decided, as it was only five o'clock, to take a leisurely walk up
Broadway, noticing his uncle's place of business on the way.

A few minutes brought him in front of the latter--an imposing-looking
building, with all the appearance of belonging to a prosperous merchant.
Appearances are deceitful, to be sure, and no doubt there are some
merchants, as outwardly prosperous, who might profitably change places
with their head clerks. But Herbert naturally judged from appearances,
and he could not help contrasting in his mind his own condition with
that of his uncle's. But he was too manly to be despondent on this
account, and thought rather, "I am young and ready to work, Some time,
if I am patient and work hard. I may be as well off as Uncle Benjamin."
The thought of applying to him for assistance was as far off as ever.

He pursued his way uptown, finding it a longer walk than he anticipated,
arriving at half-past five at Union Square. At the upper end he turned
off, and went down Seventeenth Street.

Carefully noting the numbers, he at length found his uncle's house. It
was a handsome, substantial city mansion, and seemed appropriate as the
residence of a rich New York merchant.

"So my uncle lives here," thought Herbert, and there rose involuntarily
in his mind the memory of the humble Western home where he and his
mother had struggled against poverty, while his uncle, who was evidently
so amply provided with the world's goods, coldly held aloof, and forbore
to offer the assistance which he could so well afford.

"If I had a sister, I could never treat her like that," thought Herbert,
indignantly. "He would not help my mother. I will starve before I ask
him to help me."

He paused a moment on the opposite side of the street to look at his
uncle's house. While he was standing there, a boy of about his own age,
apparently, came down the street whistling, and ascended the steps of
his uncle's house.

"I wonder if that is my cousin Tom," thought Herbert. He knew the names
of his cousins from his mother, though he had never seen them.

While he looked, he was struck by something familiar in the appearance
of this boy. Where had he seen him before?

All at once it flashed upon him. It was the same boy he had seen in the
counting-room of Godfrey He knew him by his dandified dress and his
face, which he had noticed at the time.

This was certainly a strange coincidence, that his cousin, for it was
doubtless he, should be the first boy he encountered after reaching New
York. It would be still stranger if Mr. Godfrey should offer him
employment, and he should find himself a clerk in the same office as the
son of his rich uncle. But it was by no means certain that he would be
lucky enough to obtain such employment. Therefore there was no need of
wondering whether, under such circumstances, Tom would recognize him as
a relation.

Herbert walked thoughtfully back, and on reaching his room ate the
remainder of the loaf which he had purchased at the baker's in the
morning. It was not a very luxurious repast, but his walk had given him
an appetite, and he had no difficulty in disposing of all that was left.




CHAPTER XXV

GETTING A SITUATION


The next morning Herbert reported himself at his new boarding place. He
found the fare very far from first-class, while his fellow-boarders
appeared at the table mostly in shirt-sleeves, and were evidently
workingmen. Our hero would have preferred a greater degree of neatness
both in the table and in the guests, but he felt that he would be lucky,
if he should find himself able to pay his expenses even here. He was not
to be daunted by little annoyances, but looked for compensation in the
future.

He waited impatiently for the next day, when Mr. Godfrey would return.
Upon the success of the interview with him much depended.

At length it came, and Herbert once more set out for the warehouse on
Pearl Street. He entered without question, and made his way to the
counting-room. Looking through the glass door, he saw his cousin--whom
he surveyed with new interest now that he knew the relationship--and the
bookkeeper. But, besides these, there was an elderly gentleman, rather
stout, with a pleasant face, the expression of which reassured him.

"Is Mr. Godfrey in?" he asked, on entering, with a look of inquiry at
the gentleman just described.

"That is my name. What can I do for you?" said Mr. Godfrey, turning
towards him.

"I have a letter for you, sir," said Herbert, producing it from his
pocket.

Mr. Godfrey held out his hand for it, and ran his eye rapidly over its
contents.

"So your name is Herbert Mason?" he said, raising his eyes after
finishing it.

"Yes, sir."

At the mention of this name, Tom Stanton, whose curiosity had led him to
listen to the conversation, wheeled rapidly round on his stool and
surveyed our hero with intense curiosity. He knew that Herbert Mason was
the name of his cousin. Could it be possible that this boy was the
cousin whom he had never seen? A little later, and he was convinced of
it.

"You have just come from Ohio, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir."

"My friend, Mr. Carroll, writes me that you were instrumental in saving
him from being robbed while acting as his escort to Philadelphia."

"It wasn't worth mentioning," said Herbert modestly.

Mr. Godfrey noticed his modest tone, and it pleased him--modesty not
being an unvarying characteristic of young America.

"My friend refers to it as an important service. I should like to know
the particulars. Mr. Carroll is a connection of mine, and I am naturally
interested in all that relates to him."

In reply Herbert gave a brief, but clear and intelligent account of the
attempted burglary, passing over his own achievement as lightly as
possible. But it was easy to infer, even from the little he said, that
he had acted with bravery and self-possession,

"You behaved in a very creditable manner," said Mr. Godfrey,
approvingly. "Many boys would have lost their self-possession. You have
come to New York in search of employment, Mr. Carroll writes me?"

"Yes, sir."

"I don't, of course, know how you were situated in Ohio," said the
merchant, "but as a general rule I think boys make a mistake in leaving
the country for the city. Here the competition for work is sharp, and
there is a surplus of laborers in every department of labor. Still," he
proceeded, scanning Herbert's earnest face, "you look like a boy capable
of making his way if an opportunity offers. You have but little money,
Mr. Carroll writes."

"I have lost nearly all I had," said Herbert, "so that now I have very
little left."

"You have met with a loss? Tell me about it. Indeed, I should be glad if
you would confide to me freely your situation and hopes, and then I
shall be better able to help you."

"I am almost ashamed to tell you how I was taken in," said our hero. "I
suppose I ought to have been more prudent."

He recounted the manner in which Greenleaf had robbed him. Mr. Godfrey
listened with interest, and so did Tom Stanton, who burst into a laugh
when the narrative was concluded.

"What are you laughing at, Thomas?" asked the merchant, rather sharply.

"I was thinking how neatly he was taken in," said Tom, a little abashed.

"I should apply a different word to it," said Mr. Godfrey. "It appears
to me the height, or rather the depth of meanness, to take advantage of
a boy's confidence, and defraud him so scandalously. How much money have
you left, Herbert?"

"Forty cents, sir."

"Only forty cents to begin life with in a great city!"

"Yes, sir; I have paid my board in advance for a week."

"Where do you board?"

"In Stanton Street."

Tom turned up his nose at the name of this street, which he knew was
very far from fashionable, but this demonstration our hero did not
observe.

"What board do you pay?"

"Three dollars a week, sir."

"A poor place, probably."

"Yes, sir, but I could afford no better."

"You are sensible to accommodate yourself to circumstances. Well, my
young friend, it appears that you can't wait long for employment. Mr.
Carroll has asked me to do something for you, and I am disposed to
oblige him, not wholly for his sake, but partly for your own, for you
seem to me a very modest and sensible boy. Mr. Pratt, do we need another
boy?"

"No, sir, I don't think we do."

"Well, business will be brisker by and by. I think you can find a little
for this young man to do in the meantime. He can go to the post office,
and I believe I have a little extra writing to be done. Pass him a pen,
and let him give us a specimen of his handwriting."

Fortunately, Herbert was a handsome writer, and this went a considerable
way in his favor.

"Very neat," said the merchant. "By the way, Herbert, I suppose, of
course, you know nothing of French?"

"Yes, sir, I can read it pretty well."

"Indeed!" said Mr. Godfrey, surprised. "Then you can be of service to
me, that is, if you know it well enough. I received, this morning, a
letter from a silk house at Lyons, a part of which I don't quite
understand. The fact is, my French is rather poor. Do you think you
could help me translate it?"

"If you will show me the letter, I will try, sir."

The merchant took a letter from the table before him and handed it to
Herbert.

Our hero ran his eye rapidly over it, and then rendered it into English
in a clear and grammatical way.

"Bless me, you're quite a scholar," said Mr. Godfrey. "I understand now.
You've made it all plain. Where did you learn so much French?"

"My father taught me, sir. He also taught me Latin."

"Indeed, I congratulate you on possessing so good an education. Latin,
however, isn't so much in my way. I haven't many Latin correspondents."

"I suppose not, sir," said Herbert, laughing.

"Still, it does no harm to know something of it."

Tom Stanton had listened with considerable surprise, mingled with
mortification, to what had passed. It appeared then, that his country
cousin, whom he had looked upon as a country boor, was his superior in
education, and, as Tom secretly knew, in courage. And now he was going
to be his fellow-clerk. He felt jealous and angry, fearing that Herbert,
who appeared to be high in favor already, would eclipse him in the
office.

"How much can you live upon economically?" asked the merchant.

"I know little of the city," said Herbert. "You can judge better than I,
sir."

"You pay three dollars a week board. You'll need double that amount. Mr.
Pratt, you may pay him six dollars a week. He will come to work to-
morrow morning, and you may pay him Saturday, as if it was a whole
week."

"Thank you, sir," said Herbert, gratefully. "You are very kind."

"Do your duty, my young friend, and I shall be satisfied."

Tom Stanton listened in indignant surprise. He only got four dollars a
week, and here was a country boy placed over his head. He was imprudent
enough to give expression to his feelings.

"Won't you give me six dollars a week, also?" he said.

"Why should I?"

"Don't I deserve as much as he?"

"Perhaps you do. But I don't give it to Herbert because he earns it, for
it is not likely that he will do so at present. But he has no other
resources. You have a comfortable home, and are not obliged to pay for
your board out of your wages."

"No, I hope not," said Tom.

"Therefore you do not need as much as he does. You are not entitled to
this explanation, but I give it, nevertheless, that you may know my
motives."

Tom did not reply, feeling that it would be imprudent to do so, but he
bent sullenly to his work, by no mans satisfied with the explanation. He
began to feel a dislike for his cousin, and determined to injure him, if
he could, in the estimation of the firm. It would have been satisfactory
if he could have looked down upon him as an inferior, but that was not
easy.

"I hope the fellow won't find out the relationship between us," he said
to himself. "He'd be calling me Cousin Tom all the time, and I don't
care about owning a cousin that lives in Stanton Street."

Tom need not have troubled himself. Herbert had no idea of claiming
relationship, though, as we know, he was fully aware of its existence.




CHAPTER XXVI

A FAMILY COUNCIL


As soon as he was released from business, Tom Stanton hurried home to
impart the unexpected intelligence that his cousin Herbert had arrived
in the city. As might be expected, the news gave no particular pleasure
in the Stanton homestead.

"Did you tell him who you were, Thomas?" asked his mother.

"Catch me doing it!" said Tom. "I ain't quite a fool. I don't care about
owning any pauper relations."

"He isn't a pauper," said Mr. Stanton, who, hard man of the world as he
was, could not forget that Herbert was the son of his sister.

"He's the next door to it," said Tom, carelessly.

"Thomas is right," said Mrs. Stanton. "You may depend upon it, Mr.
Stanton, that when this boy finds you out, he will apply to you for
assistance."

"Possibly he may."

"I hope you won't be such a fool as to encourage him in his
application."

"If he were in actual distress, my dear," said Mr. Stanton, "I should
feel that I ought to do something."

"Then you'd allow yourself to be imposed upon, that's all I've got to
say. There is no need of his being in distress. He is a stout boy, and
capable of earning his own living."

"He might get sick," suggested Mr. Stanton, who was not so hard-hearted
as his wife.

"Then let him go to the hospital. It's provided for such cases."

"Is Herbert good-looking?" asked Maria, with interest.

"He won't get a prize for his beauty," said Tom, disparagingly.

"Is he homely?"

"No," said Tom, reluctantly. "I suppose he'll pass; but he's
countrified. He hasn't got any style," and he glanced complacently at
his own reflection in a mirror, for Tom was vain of his personal
appearance, though by no means as good-looking as Herbert. In fact, he
was compelled secretly to confess this to himself, and for this reason
was more than ever disposed to view his cousin with prejudice.

"I should like to see Herbert," said Maria, who had her share of female
curiosity, and thought it would be pleasant to have a cousin to escort
her round.

"Perhaps I'd better invite him round to dinner tomorrow," said Thomas,
sarcastically.

"I wish you would."

"Thomas will do no such thing!" said Mrs. Stanton, decidedly. "It's my
opinion that the less notice we take of him the better. Your father is
in good circumstances, to be sure, but whatever he is able to do, ought,
of right, to go to his own family. We don't want any poor relations
coming here to get their living out of us."

"Just my sentiments, mother," said Tom Stanton, approvingly.

"It doesn't seem quite right," said Mr. Stanton, uncomfortably, "to
neglect my sister's child."

"Don't make yourself ridiculous with your scruples, Mr. Stanton," said
his wife. "It's the boy's duty to take care of himself. It would only do
him harm, and lead to false expectations, if we allowed him the run of
the house."

"Besides," said Tom, "I shouldn't want to have Tom Paget and Percy
Mortimer, and other fellows that I associate with, ask me who he is, and
have to tell them that he is my cousin."

This argument had considerable weight with Mr. Stanton, who was anxious
to elevate himself in society, and looked with complacency upon the
school acquaintances Tom had formed with the scions of distinguished
families.

"Well," said he, rising from the table, "let it be as you will. We won't
go out of our way to invite the boy here, but if he presents himself, as
he doubtless will, we must take a little notice of him."

"I don't see why he couldn't have stayed in the country," said Mrs.
Stanton. "It was the best place for him."

"Of course, it was," said Tom.

"He could have had no other object than to seek us out, and see what he
could get out of us. For my part, I would advise you to recommend him to
go back."

"He has secured a place, it seems, and would not be likely to give it
up."

"It's a great pity he should have got into the same counting-room with
Tom. He will presume on the relationship as soon as he finds it out."

Mrs. Stanton need not have been alarmed, for Herbert was too high-
spirited to seek an intimacy where he had reason to think it would be
disagreeable. But his aunt knew nothing of him, and judged him by
herself.

"He's there, and it can't be helped," said Mr. Stanton.

"At any rate, if he does stay in the city," persisted Mrs. Stanton, "I
hope you'll give him to understand that he needn't call here more than
once in three months. That is as much as he can expect."

"After all, he is my sister's son," said Mr. Stanton. "I can't feel that
this would be quite kind in us."

"Leave it to me, then. If you're too soft-hearted, Mr. Stanton, I will
take all the responsibility, and the blame, if there is any."

"Well, I think you've said enough on the subject," said her husband.
"Tom, run upstairs and bring me a cigar. You know where I keep the cigar
box."

"You'd better send a servant, father," said Tom, coolly.

"It appears to me you are getting lazy, Thomas," said his father.

"Thomas is right," said Mrs. Stanton. "What do we keep servants for but
to run errands?"

"Still, Tom might have obliged me in such a little matter."

"You shouldn't have asked him, Mr. Stanton. You seem to forget that we
are not living in the style of half a dozen years ago. You should adapt
yourself to circumstances."

Mr. Stanton said no more, but sent a servant in Tom's place. But he
could not help thinking that the outward prosperity for which he was
striving was not without its drawbacks, since it compelled him to look
to servants for the most ordinary services.

The next morning Tom went to the counting-room, fully expecting that
Herbert would claim relationship as soon as he discovered his name.
While he would be compelled to admit it, he determined to treat Herbert
with such a degree of coolness that he would take the hint, and keep his
distance.

When he arrived at the counting-room, Herbert was already there, and Mr.
Pratt also.

"Good-morning," said Herbert.

"Morning," muttered Tom.

"This is Thomas Stanton, your fellow-clerk," said Mr. Pratt, the
bookkeeper. "I believe you have not been introduced."

"Now for it," thought Tom.

But rather to his surprise, Herbert made no demonstration, but merely
bowed slightly.

"What does it mean?" thought Tom, a little perplexed. "Is it possible
that he is not my cousin, after all?"

"I think you came from Ohio?" inquired Tom, impelled by his curiosity to
ask the question.

"Yes," said Herbert.

"Why didn't you stay there? Couldn't you make a living there?" asked
Tom, not over-politely.

"Probably I might," said Herbert, quietly.

"Then I think you should have stayed there."

"Which do you like best, the city or the country?" asked our hero.

"The city."

"So do I."

"But there's a difference. I have always lived in the city."

"I suppose boys often do come from the country to the city," said
Herbert. "Was your father born in the city?"

"No," said Tom, glancing keenly at Herbert, to see if he meant anything
by the question.

"Then it seems he must have preferred the city to the country."

Tom had his share of curiosity. He knew that it would be better not to
pursue this subject further if he wished his cousin to remain ignorant
of the relationship between them. Still, he was anxious to know what
Herbert's actual knowledge was, and whether he would be likely to avail
himself of it. He was therefore tempted to say, "I suppose you have no
relations in the city?"

"What makes you think I haven't?" asked Herbert, looking at Tom rather
peculiarly.

"I don't think anything about it. I only asked," said Tom, a. little
confused.

"Yes, I have an uncle in the city," said Herbert, quietly.

"Oh, indeed," said Tom.

He said nothing more, for he felt that he might betray his knowledge of
the relationship unintentionally. Herbert's manner left him as much in
the dark as ever.

Mr. Pratt set Herbert to work on some writing, and Tom, also, was soon
busy. After a while Mr. Godfrey came in.

"Good-morning, Herbert," he said, pleasantly, offering his hand. "So Mr.
Pratt has set you to work, has he?"

"Yes, sir."

"I think we shall find enough for him to do, eh, Mr. Pratt?"

"Yes, sir, I think so," said the bookkeeper, who perceived that Herbert
was in favor, and it was as well to fall in with his employer.

"That's well. How do you like your boarding place, Herbert?"

"It isn't a very nice one, sir, but it is as good a one as I have a
right to expect for the money I pay."

"Come round and dine with us to-night," said the merchant. "Mrs. Godfrey
will be glad to see you. I'll give you my street and number."

"Thank you, sir," said Herbert. "I shall be glad to accept your kind
invitation."

Tom listened to this invitation with envy. Mr. Godfrey occupied a high
social position. Moreover, he had a pretty daughter, whom he, Tom, had
met at dancing school, and he would have been very glad to receive the
invitation which had been extended to "that beggar, Herbert," as he
mentally styled him.




CHAPTER XXVII

AT THE CONCERT


Herbert felt a little diffident about accepting his employer's
invitation to dinner. Brought up in the country in comparative poverty,
he felt afraid that he should show, in some way, his want of
acquaintance with the etiquette of the dining table. But he had a better
than ordinary education, and, having read diligently whatever books he
could get hold of, possessed a fund of general information which enabled
him to converse intelligently. Then his modest self-possession was of
value to him, and enabled him to acquit himself very creditably.

Julia Godfrey, the merchant's only daughter, was a lively and animated
girl, a year or two younger than Herbert. She had been the belle of the
dancing school, and Tom Stanton, among other boys, had always been proud
to have her for a partner. She, however, had taken no particular fancy
to Tom, whose evident satisfaction with himself naturally provoked
criticisms on the part of others. Of this, however, Tom was unconscious,
and flattered himself that his personal appearance was strikingly
attractive, and was quite convinced that his elaborate and gorgeous
neckties must attract admiration.

Julia awaited the advent of her father's young guest with interest, and
her verdict was favorable. He was, to be sure, very plainly dressed, but
his frank and open face and pleasant expression did not need fine
clothes to set them off. Julia at once commenced an animated
conversation with our hero.

"Weren't you frightened when you saw the robber?" she asked, for her
father had told her of Herbert's adventure with the burglar.

"No," said Herbert, "I did not feel afraid."

"How brave you must be?" said Julia, with evident admiration.

"There was no need of my being frightened," said Herbert, modestly. "I
was expecting him."

"I know I should have been frightened to death," said Julia, decidedly.

"You are a girl, you know," said Herbert. "I suppose it is natural for
girls to be timid."

"I don't know but it is, but I am sure it is not natural to all boys to
be brave."

Herbert smiled.

"I was out in the country, one day, walking with Frank Percy," proceeded
Julia, "when a big, ugly-looking dog met us. Frank, instead of standing
by, and defending me, ran away as fast as his feet could carry him. I
laughed at him so much about it that he doesn't like to come near me
since that."

"How did you escape?" asked Herbert, with interest.

"I saw there was no use in running away, so I patted him on the head,
and called him 'Poor dog,' though I expected every minute he was going
to bite me. That calmed him down, and he went off without doing any
harm."

Herbert found Mrs. Godfrey to be a pleasant, motherly-looking lady, who
received him kindly. He felt that he should like it very much if she was
his aunt, instead of Mrs. Stanton, whom he had never seen, and did not
think he should care about meeting.

"What do you think of Tom Stanton?" asked Julia, "Of course, you know
him--the other boy in pa's counting-room."

"I am not very well acquainted with him yet," said Herbert, evasively,
for he did not care to say anything unfavorable of Tom. "Do you know
him?"

"Yes, he used to go to the same dancing school with me last winter."

"Then you know him better than I do."

"I don't like him much," said Julia. "He's always thinking of himself
and his neckties. He always came to dancing school in a different
necktie; to let us know how many he had, I suppose. Didn't you notice
his necktie?"

"It was pretty large, I thought," said Herbert, smiling.

"Yes, he's fond of wearing large ones."

"I am afraid you are talking uncharitably, Julia," said her mother,
mildly. "Girls, you know, are sometimes fond of dress."

So the conversation drifted on to other topics. Julia, at first,
addressed our hero as Mr. Mason, until he requested her to call him
Herbert, a request which she readily complied with. They were soon on
excellent terms, and appeared to be mutually pleased.

"Young people," said Mr. Godfrey, after dinner, "there is to be an
attractive concert at the Academy of Music this evening. I secured seats
this morning for four. Suppose we all go?"

"I shall be delighted, for one, papa," said Julia. "You will like to go,
Herbert, won't you?"

"Very much," said our hero.

"Then you can escort me, while papa and mamma walk together."

Herbert felt that this arrangement would be very agreeable, so far as he
was concerned. It was, in fact, adopted, and the four paired off
together, as Julia had suggested, Julia amusing Herbert by her lively
remarks.

Entering the hall, they followed the usher to their seats, which were
eligibly located only a few rows back from the stage.

Just behind them sat a party, among whom the new arrivals produced quite
a sensation. Not to keep the reader in suspense, that party consisted of
Mr. and Mrs. Stanton, Tom and Maria. There was but slight acquaintance
between the two families, as Mr. Godfrey's stood higher, socially, than
Mr. Stanton's. The gentlemen, however, had a bowing acquaintance, and
the young people had met at dancing school.

"Why, there's Mr. Godfrey and his family, Tom," said Maria, turning
towards her brother. "Who's that boy with them? Julia hasn't got any
brother, has she?"

Tom had watched the entrance of the party with lively dissatisfaction.
That his beggarly cousin should appear in public on such intimate terms
with Julia Godfrey, to whom he himself had paid attention, but without
any special encouragement, struck him as particularly mortifying.

"Mr. Godfrey's son!" he said, disdainfully. "That boy is Herbert Mason."

"Our cousin?" asked Maria, with interest. "Ma, did you hear?" she
whispered, eagerly. "That boy in front of us is Cousin Herbert."

"That boy with the Godfreys?" said Mrs. Stanton, in surprise.

"Yes, he's talking with Julia now."

"Are you sure? Who told you?"

"Tom."

"Is it true, Tom?"

"Yes," said Tom, frowning.

"What could have induced the Godfreys to bring him along?" said Mrs.
Stanton, who was no better pleased than Tom at the social success of the
poor relation.

"He's quite good-looking," said Maria.

"Nonsense," said her mother, sharply. "He has a very countrified look."

The news was communicated to Mr. Stanton, who looked with interest at
his sister's son, whom he had not seen since he was a very young child.
He fervently wished him back again in Ohio, where he might conveniently
forget his existence. Here in New York, especially since an unlucky
chance, as he considered it, had brought him into the same counting-room
as his son, it would be difficult to avoid taking some notice of him.
But, so far as pecuniary assistance was concerned, Mr. Stanton
determined that he would give none, unless it was forced upon him. Had
he known our hero better, he would have been less alarmed.

With all his prejudices, Mr. Stanton could not help confessing that
Herbert was a boy of whom any uncle might be proud. Though plainly
dressed, he did not seem out of place at a fashionable concert,
surrounded by well-dressed people.

It must not be supposed that Herbert was left in ignorance of the
vicinity of the only relations he had in the city.

"There's Tom Stanton, just behind you, with his father and mother and
sister," whispered Julia.

Herbert turned his head slightly. He was desirous of seeing what his
uncle and aunt were like. His uncle met his gaze, and turned
uncomfortably away, appearing not to know him, yet conscious that in his
affected ignorance he was acting shabbily. Mrs. Stanton did not flinch,
but bent a cold gaze of scrutiny upon the unwelcome nephew. Tom looked
supercilious, and elevated his pug nose a trifle. Maria, only, looked as
if she would like to know her cousin.

It was only a hasty glance on Herbert's part, but it brought him to a
rapid conclusion that he would not claim relationship. If any advances
were made, they must come from the other side.

Tom fidgeted in his seat, watching with ill-concealed vexation the
confidential conversation which appeared to be going on between Julia
and his cousin.

"What she can see in that boor, I can't imagine," he said to himself.

Moreover, though Julia had looked around, she had not deigned any
recognition of himself, and this hurt his pride. He finally determined
to overlook the neglect, and address her, which he could readily do, as
he sat almost directly behind her.

"Good-evening, Miss Julia," he said, familiarly, bending forward.

"Oh, good-evening, Mr. Stanton," said Julia, coldly, just turning
slightly. "Herbert, isn't that a beautiful song?"

"She calls him Herbert," said Tom, in scornful disgust. "I wonder if she
knows he is nothing but a beggar?"

"How are you enjoying the concert, Miss Julia?" he continued, resolved
not to take the rebuff.

"Very well," said Julia. "By the way," she continued, with a sudden
thought, "I believe you are acquainted with Mr. Mason."

Herbert, upon this, bowed pleasantly, but Tom said, in rather a
disagreeable tone, "I know Mr. Mason slightly."

"Oh," said Julia, arching her eyebrows, "I thought you were both in
papa's counting-room."

"We shall know each other better by and by," said Herbert, smiling.

Tom did not appear to hear this, but tried to keep up the conversation
with Julia, desiring to have it appear that they were intimate friends;
but the young lady gave brief replies, and finally, turning away,
devoted herself once more to Herbert, much to Tom's disgust. In fact,
what he saw made Tom pass a very unpleasant evening, and when, on their
return home, Maria suggested that Julia had taken a fancy to Herbert, he
told her to mind her own business, which Maria justly considered a piece
of rudeness wholly uncalled for.




CHAPTER XXVIII

PETER GREENLEAF AGAIN


Notwithstanding he was receiving a salary larger than is usually paid
boys of his age, Herbert felt cramped for the want of money. Six dollars
a week would have paid his expenses comfortably, if he had been well
provided to begin with. But all the clothing he had, besides what he
wore, he had brought with him in a small bundle, the greatest part
having been left in his trunk at the house of Abner Holden. He often
wished that he could have them with him, but, of course, this wish was
vain. Indeed, Mr. Holden, when the conviction was forced upon him that
there was no chance of recovering his bound boy, quietly confiscated the
trunk and its contents; and this, to some extent, consoled him for the
departure of the owner.

Herbert found himself sadly in need of underclothing; and, of course,
his only suit, from constant wear, was likely to deteriorate rapidly. He
saved all the money he could from his weekly wages toward purchasing a
new one, but his savings were inconsiderable. Besides, he needed a
trunk, or would need one, when he had anything to put in it.

"If I only had that money Greenleaf stole from me, I should be all
right," he said to himself, after long and anxious thought on the great
question of ways and means. "I don't see how I can save up more than two
dollars a week out of my wages, and it will take a long time for that to
amount to much."

There certainly did not appear to be much chance of saving more. His
boarding place was as cheap as he could obtain, or, if there were
cheaper anywhere, they would probably be also poorer, and our hero felt
that Mrs. Morgan's was as poor as he should be able to endure.

He was rather mortified, too, at the poverty of his wardrobe. Mrs.
Morgan asked him one day, "When is your trunk coming?" and Herbert was
obliged to own, with some shame, that he had none. The landlady looked
surprised, but he had no explanation to offer.

"I suppose I shall have to wait till my wages are raised," thought
Herbert, with a little sigh. This, he reflected, would not be very soon,
as he had started with a salary greater than he was likely to earn, as
Mr. Godfrey had said.

But relief was nearer than he anticipated.

One day, as he was walking up the Bowery, he saw, at a little distance
in front of him, a figure which he well remembered. The careless, jaunty
step and well-satisfied air were familiar to him. In short, it was Peter
Greenleaf, who had played so mean a trick upon him at the hotel.

Herbert's heart beat quick with excitement, mingled with pleasure. He
felt a natural indignation against this young man, who had cheated him
so remorselessly, and left him, indifferent to his fate, alone and
almost penniless in a strange city.

What should he do?

Close behind him was a policeman slowly pacing his regular round.
Herbert went up to him, and, pointing to Greenleaf, rapidly recounted
his grievances.

"It was a mean trick," said the policeman, who was a favorable specimen
of his class. "Is this the first time you have seen him?"

"Yes."

"Tell me what you want to do."

"I want to get my money back."

"Probably he has spent it. How long since he robbed you?"

"Three weeks."

"Not much chance, then. Probably his pocket's empty, unless he's fleeced
somebody else in the meantime. However, it's as well to see what can be
done. Now, I'll tell you how to act. Go up to him boldly, and demand
your money. If he bluffs you off, call me."

"All right," said Herbert.

He hastened his step, and, advancing, tapped Greenleaf on the shoulder.

Greenleaf turned. When he recognized Herbert, he looked surprised and
disconcerted. But he had plenty of assurance, and quickly determined
upon his course. Assuming a stolid look, he said: "Well, my lad, who are
you; and what do you want?"

"You know who I am, well enough," said Herbert, angrily.

"Do I? Then I'm uncommonly forgetful. I haven't any recollection of your
interesting countenance," he said, with a sneer.

"I suppose you don't want to remember me, Mr. Greenleaf," said Herbert.

"Greenleaf! You are thinking of somebody else. My name's Thompson."

"Your name was Greenleaf when you stopped with me at French's Hotel,"
said Herbert, sturdily.

"You're crazy, I fancy," said Greenleaf, shrugging his shoulders. "I
never stopped at the hotel you mention, in my life."

"Where's the money you took from me?" demanded Herbert, who felt
convinced of Greenleaf's identity, in spite of his denial.

"What are you talking about?" said Greenleaf, assuming a look of
surprise.

"You went off before I was awake, with more than fifty dollars of mine."

"Do you mean to insult me?" said Greenleaf, drawing himself up. "I've a
great mind to knock you over!"

"Mr. Greenleaf," said Herbert, firmly, "either return my money, or as
much as you have got left, or I will call a policeman."

"Just what I shall do, myself, unless you stop this nonsense," said
Greenleaf, angrily; but not without a sensation of uneasiness, as it
struck his mind that Herbert might really intend to do what he had said.

"Once more, will you give up that money?" said Herbert, firmly.

"Stand out of the way," said Greenleaf, "if you know what is best for
yourself!"

He was about to push by, thrusting Herbert roughly out of the way, when
our hero turned, and his look summoned the policeman, who hastened to
the spot.

"Give this boy his money," he said, authoritatively. "I know all about
your little game. It's up now. Unless you hand over your plunder, you
must go with me."

Greenleaf changed color, and was evidently alarmed.

"I've got nobody's money, except my own," he said.

"Come along, then," said the officer, taking him by the arm.

"Stop a minute," said he, hurriedly, finding that matters had come to a
crisis. "If I give up what I have, will you let me go?"

"Well, that depends on how much you have."

"I've got twenty dollars."

Herbert was about to say that this would do, but the policeman shook his
head.

"Won't do," said he. "Come along."

After a little haggling, Greenleaf produced forty dollars, which Herbert
pocketed, with much satisfaction.

"Now go along, and mind you don't try any more such games."

Greenleaf needed no second permission to be gone. He feared that the
officer might change his mind, and he might, after all, be consigned to
the station house.

"Thank you," said Herbert, gratefully. "I needed the money badly. I
shouldn't have recovered it but for you."

"Take better care of it next time," said the officer, not unkindly.
"Take care not to trust a stranger too easily. Better take my advice,
and put it in a savings bank." "I shall be obliged to use most of it,"
said Herbert. "What I don't need, I will put in the bank."

The recovery of so much of his lost money seemed to Herbert quite a
lucky windfall. He went at once to a trunk store, and, for five dollars,
purchased a good, durable trunk, which he ordered sent home to his
lodgings. Fifteen dollars more he invested in necessary underclothing,
and this left him one-half of the money for future use. Besides this he
had six dollars, which, in three weeks, he had saved from his wages.
With this sum, and the articles he had purchased, he felt quite rich,
and returned to the counting-room--this happened during the hour given
him for dinner--in unusually good spirits. He had other reasons for
encouragement. He was getting accustomed to his duties at the counting-
room. Mr. Godfrey always treated him kindly, and had called upon him
again that very morning to assist him in translating a French letter,
complimenting him, at the same time, upon his scholarship.

"I'll do my best," thought Herbert. "'Try and Trust,' that's my motto. I
think it will bring me success."

But even while he spoke, an unforeseen danger menaced him.




CHAPTER XXIX

SPARRING


After the concert, Tom Stanton took even a greater dislike to his cousin
than before. To say that he was in love with Julia Godfrey would be
rather ridiculous, considering his youth. Even if he had been older, Tom
cared too much about himself to fall in love with another. But Julia had
been a belle among the children of her own age at the dancing school,
and there was considerable rivalry among the boys--or, I should,
perhaps, say young gentlemen--for the honor of her notice. Tom desired
it, because it would give him a kind of distinction among his fellows.
So, though he was not in love with Julia, he was jealous when she showed
favor to anyone else. But this feeling was mild compared with that he
experienced when Julia bestowed her notice upon his penniless cousin.
That Herbert should be preferred to himself, he thought, not only showed
great lack of taste on the part of the young heiress, but was a grievous
wrong to himself.

"I can't understand how girls can be such fools," thought Tom, as that
evening, after returning from the concert, he surveyed his rather
perturbed face in the mirror surmounting his bureau. "I wouldn't have
believed Julia Godfrey would stoop to notice such a pauper."

Then a cheerful thought came to him. Perhaps she was only trying to
rouse his jealousy. He had heard of such things. But, if so, why should
she choose such a beggar as Herbert to practice her arts upon?

Certainly, to an unprejudiced observer, such a thought would never have
suggested itself. The cool indifference with which Julia had treated Tom
did not appear to argue any such feeling as would lead to the attempt to
rouse his jealousy. But, then, Tom was not an unprejudiced observer, and
considered his personal attractions such that any girl might appreciate
them.

When he arrived at the counting-room the next morning, he found Herbert
already there. Indeed, our hero was very particular to be punctual in
his attendance, while Tom was generally at least a quarter of an hour
behind time.

"I saw you at the concert last evening, Mason," said Tom, who wanted to
get a chance to say something disagreeable.

"Yes, I was there," said Herbert. "You sat in the row just behind us."

"Yes. I suppose you were never at a concert before."

"Not in New York."

"Mr. Godfrey was very kind to take you."

That was what Herbert thought himself. But as Tom expressed it, there
was something in his tone which implied a conviction of Herbert's social
inferiority, which our hero did not like.

"I have found Mr. Godfrey very kind," he said, briefly.

There are not many employers who would invite a boy in your position to
a concert with his family," said Tom.

"I believe my position is the same as yours," said Herbert, nettled.

"I don't see it," said Tom, haughtily. "Will you explain yourself?"

"I believe we are both in Mr. Godfrey's employ," said Herbert.

"Oh, yes, so far as that goes. But I am the son of a rich man," said
Tom, pompously.

Herbert might have replied that he was the nephew of a rich man, but he
had no disposition to boast of his relationship to his cousin's family.

"I don't see that that makes any difference," said Herbert.

"Don't you? Well, I do."

"We are both boys in Mr. Godfrey's employ."

"That's true, but then, he took you out of pity, you know."

Tom's tone as he said this was very aggravating, and Herbert's face
flushed.

"I don't know anything of the sort," he retorted.

"No, I suppose you don't consider it in that light," said Tom,
carelessly; "but, of course, it is clear enough to others. Where would
you have been, if Mr. Godfrey hadn't given you a place? Blacking boots,
probably, among the street ragamuffins."

"Perhaps I might," said Herbert, quietly, "if I couldn't have got
anything better to do."

"It's a very genteel occupation," sneered Tom.

"I don't think it is," said Herbert, "but it's an honest one."

"You may have to take it yet."

"Perhaps so. So may you."

"Do you mean to insult me?" demanded Tom, haughtily, his face flushing.

"I only said to you the same thing you said to me. If it's an insult on
one side, it is on the other."

"You seem to forget that our circumstances are very different," said
Tom.

"They are just now, so far as money goes. I get a larger salary than
you."

Tom was very much incensed at this remark, being aggrieved by the fact
that Herbert received more than he.

"I didn't mean that," said he. "Of course, if Mr. Godfrey chooses to
give away money in charity, it is none of my business. I don't need any
charity"

"Mr. Godfrey pays me for my services," said Herbert. "If he pays me too
liberally now, I hope to make it up to him afterward."

"You seemed to be very intimate with Julia Godfrey last evening," said
Tom, unpleasantly.

"I found her very pleasant."

"Yes; she is very kind to take notice of you."

"I suppose the notice you have taken of me this morning is meant in
kindness," said Herbert, thinking his cousin very disagreeable.

"Yes, of course, being in the same counting-room, I think it right to
take some notice of you," said Tom, condescendingly.

"I am very much obliged to you," said Herbert, sarcastically.

"But there's one piece of advice I should like to give you," proceeded
Tom.

"What is that?" inquired Herbert, looking his cousin in the face.

"Don't feel too much set up by Julia Godfrey's notice. She only took
notice of you out of pity, and to encourage you. If you had been in her
own position in society--"

"Like you, for instance!"

"Yes, like me," said Tom, complacently, "she would have been more
ceremonious. I thought I would just mention it to you, Mason, or you
might not understand it."

It was only natural that Herbert should be provoked by this elaborate
humiliation suggested by Tom, and his cousin's offensive assumption of
superiority. This led him to a retort in kind.

"I suppose that is the reason she took so little notice of you," he
said.

Tom was nettled at this statement of a fact, but he answered in an off-
hand manner, "Oh, Julia and I are old friends. I've danced with her
frequently at dancing school."

Herbert happened to remember what Julia had said of his cousin, and was
rather amused at this assumption of intimacy.

"I am much obliged to you for your information," said Herbert, "though I
am rather surprised that you should take so great an interest in my
affairs."

"Oh, you're new in the city, and I know all the ropes," said Tom. "I
thought I might as well give you a friendly hint."

"I am lucky in having such a friend," said Herbert, "and will take the
advice as it was given."

Here the bookkeeper entered, and, soon after, Mr. Godfrey made his
appearance.

"I hope you had a pleasant evening, Herbert," he said, kindly.

"Very pleasant, sir; thank you," said Herbert, in a very different tone
from the one he had used in addressing Tom.

"I believe I saw you, also, at the concert, Thomas," said Mr. Godfrey.

"Yes, sir," said Tom. "I am very fond of music, and attend all the
first-class musical entertainments"

"Indeed?" said Mr. Godfrey, but this was all the reply he made.

"My daughter insists that I shall invite you to the house again soon,"
said Mr. Godfrey, again addressing Herbert.

"I am very much obliged to her, and to you, sir," said Herbert,
modestly. "I shall be very glad to come."

Tom's face darkened, as he heard this. He would have given considerable
to receive such an invitation himself, but the prospect did not seem
very promising.

"Mr. Godfrey must he infatuated," he said to himself, impatiently, "to
invite such a beggar to his house. Mason ought to have good sense enough
to feel that he is out of place in such a house. I wouldn't accept any
invitation given out of pity."

"I wonder why Tom dislikes me so much?" thought Herbert. "He certainly
takes pains enough to show his feeling. Would it be different, I wonder,
if he knew that I was his cousin?"

Herbert thought of mentioning to Mr. Godfrey that he had recovered
three-quarters of the money of which he had been robbed. It would have
been well if he had done so, but Mr. Godfrey seemed particularly
engaged, and he thought it best not to interrupt him.




CHAPTER XXX

AN UNEXPECTED BLOW


Herbert felt happier than usual. He had recovered the greater part of
his money, and thus was relieved from various inconveniences which had
resulted from his straitened circumstances, He was the more elated at
this, as it had seemed extremely improbable that the lost money would
ever have found its way back to the pocket of its rightful owner. Then,
he had a good place, and a salary sufficient to defray his modest
expenses, and the prospect of promotion, if he should be faithful to the
interests of his employer, as he firmly intended to be. It was
agreeable, also, to reflect that he was in favor with Mr. Godfrey, who
had thus far treated him with as much kindness as if he had been his own
son.

There was, to be sure, the drawback of Tom's enmity, but, as there was
no good reason for this, he would not allow it to trouble him much,
though, of course, it would have been more agreeable if all in the
office had been his friends. He determined to take an early opportunity
to write to his good friend, Dr. Kent, an account of his present
position. He would have done so before, but had hesitated from the fear
that in some way the intelligence would reach Abner Holden, whom he
preferred to leave in ignorance of all that concerned him.

These thoughts passed through Herbert's mind as he went about his daily
work. Meanwhile, a painful experience awaited him, for which he was not
in the least prepared.

About one o'clock a gentleman entered the counting-room hastily, and
said, "Mr. Godfrey, I wonder whether I happened to leave my pocketbook
anywhere about your office when I was here an hour ago?"

"I don't think so. When did you miss it?"

"A few minutes since. I went to a restaurant to get a lunch, and, on
finishing it, felt for my pocketbook, and found it gone."

"Was there much in it?"

"No sum of any consequence. Between twenty and thirty dollars, I
believe. There were, however, some papers of value, which I shall be
sorry to lose."

"I hardly think you could have left it here. However, I will inquire.
Mr. Pratt, have you seen anything of Mr. Walton's pocketbook?"

"No, sir," said the bookkeeper, promptly.

"Herbert, have you seen it?"

"No, sir," said our hero.

"Thomas?"

Tom Stanton was assailed by a sudden and dangerous temptation. His
dislike to Herbert had been increased in various ways, and especially
had been rendered more intense by the independent tone assumed by our
hero in the conversation which had taken place between them that very
morning. Now, here was an opportunity of getting him into disgrace, and
probably cause him to lose his situation. True, he would have to tell a
falsehood, but Tom had never been a scrupulous lover of truth, and would
violate it for a less object without any particular compunction.

He hesitated when the question was asked him, and thus, as he expected,
fixed Mr. Godfrey's attention.

"Why don't you answer, Thomas?" he said, in surprise.

"I don't like to," said Tom, artfully.

"Why not?" demanded his employer, suspiciously.

"Because I don't want to get anybody into trouble."

"Speak out what you mean."

"If you insist upon it," said Tom, with pretended reluctance, "I suppose
I must obey you."

"Of course, if any wrong has been done, it is your duty to expose it."

"Then, sir," said Tom. "I saw Mason pick up a wallet from the floor, and
put it in his pocket just after the gentleman went out. He did it so
quickly that no one probably observed it but myself."

Herbert listened to this accusation as if stunned. It was utterly beyond
his conception how anyone could be guilty of such a deliberate falsehood
as he had just listened to. So he remained silent, and this operated
against him.

"Herbert," said Mr. Godfrey, mildly, for he was unwilling to believe our
hero guilty of intentional dishonesty, "you should have mentioned having
found the pocketbook."

"So I would, sir," said Herbert, having found his voice at last, "if I
had found one."

"Do you mean to say that you have not?" demanded Mr. Godfrey, with a
searching look.

"Yes, sir," said Herbert, firmly.

"What, then, does Thomas mean when he asserts that he saw you do so?"

"I don't know, sir. I think he means to injure me, as I have noticed
ever since I entered the office that he seems to dislike me."

"How is that, Thomas? Do you again declare that you saw Herbert pick up
the wallet?

"I do," said Tom, boldly. "Of course, I expected that he would deny it.
I leave it to you, sir, if he does not show his guilt in his face? Just
look at him!"

Now it, unfortunately for Herbert, happened that his indignation had
brought a flush to his face, and he certainly did look as a guilty
person is supposed to do. Mr. Godfrey observed this, and his heart sank
within him, for, unable to conceive of such wickedness as Tom's, he saw
no other way except to believe in Herbert's guilt.

"Have you nothing to say, Herbert?" he asked, more in sorrow than in
anger.

"No, sir," said Herbert, in a low voice; "nothing, except what I have
already said. Tom has uttered a wicked falsehood, and he knows it."

"Of course, I expected you would say that," said Tom, with effrontery.

"This is a serious charge, Herbert," proceeded Mr. Godfrey. "I shall
have to ask you to produce whatever you have in your pockets."

"Certainly, sir," said our hero, calmly.

But, as he spoke, it flashed upon him that he had in his pocket twenty-
six dollars, and the discovery of this sum would be likely to involve
him in suspicion. He could, indeed, explain where he got it; but would
his explanation be believed? Under present circumstances, he feared that
it would not. So it was with a sinking heart that he drew out the
contents of his pockets, and among them his own pocketbook.

"Is that yours?" asked Mr. Godfrey, turning to Mr. Walton.

"No, it is not; but he may have transferred my money to it."

Upon this hint, Mr. Godfrey opened the pocketbook, and drew out the
small roll of bills, which he proceeded to count.

"Twenty-six dollars," he said. "How much did you lose?"

"Between twenty and thirty dollars. I cannot be sure how much."

"Here are two tens and three twos."

"I had two tens. I don't remember the denomination of the other bills."

Even Tom was struck with astonishment at this discovery. He knew that
his charge was groundless, yet here it was substantiated in a very
remarkable manner. Was it possible that he had, after all, struck upon
the truth of the matter? He did not know what to think.

"Herbert," said his employer, sorrowfully, "this discovery gives me more
pain than I can express. I had a very high idea of you. I could not have
believed you capable of so mean a thing as deliberate dishonesty."

"I am not guilty," said Herbert, proudly.

"How can you say this in the face of all this evidence? Do you mean to
say that this money is yours?"

"I do," said Herbert, firmly.

"Where could you have got it?" said his employer, incredulously. "Did
you not tell me when you entered my employ that you were almost
penniless? You have been with me three weeks only, and half your wages
have been paid for board."

"Yes, sir; you are right."

"What explanation, then, can you offer? Your case looks bad."

"The six dollars I saved from my wages, at the rate of two dollars a
week. The twenty dollars is a part of the money I was robbed of. I
succeeded in recovering forty dollars of it yesterday."

Here, Herbert related the circumstances already known to the reader.

"A likely story," said Tom, scornfully.

"Be silent, Thomas," said Mr. Godfrey. "Your story does not seem
probable," he proceeded, speaking to Herbert.

"It is true, sir," said our hero, firmly.

"What could he have done with your wallet, however?" said the merchant,
turning to Mr. Walton.

"He has been out to the post office since," said Tom. "He might have
thrown it away."

This unfortunately for Herbert, was true. He had been out, and, of
course, could have disposed of the wallet in the way mentioned.

"I don't know what to think, Mr. Walton," said Mr. Godfrey. "I'm afraid
the boy's guilty."

"I'm afraid so. I don't care so much for the money, if he will give me
back the papers."

"I can't do it, sir," said Herbert, "for I never had them."

"What shall we do?"

"The other boy declares that he saw this one take the wallet from the
floor, where I probably dropped it. It seems to me that settles the
matter."

"I am afraid it does."

"Once more, Herbert, will you confess?" asked Mr. Godfrey.

"I can only say, sir, that I am innocent."

"Mr. Walton, what shall we do?"

"Let the boy go. I will leave it to his honor to return me the papers,
and he may keep the money. I think he will make up his mind to do so by
tomorrow."

"You hear, Herbert," said Mr. Godfrey. "While this matter remains in
doubt, you cannot retain your situation."

"Thank you, Mr. Walton, for your indulgence," said Herbert; "but I am
sorry you think me guilty. The truth will some time appear. I shall TRY
to do my duty, and TRUST to God to clear me."

He took his hat and left the counting-room with a heavy heart, feeling
himself in disgrace.

"I had great confidence in that boy, Walton," said Mr. Godfrey. "Even
now, I can hardly believe him guilty."




CHAPTER XXXI

MR. STANTON IS SURPRISED


While the events recorded in the last chapter were taking place in Mr.
Godfrey's counting-room another and a different scene took place at the
office of Mr. Stanton.

He had just finished reading the morning paper, and, as it slipped from
his hand, his thoughts turned, transiently, to the nephew whose
persistent failure to claim relationship puzzled him not a little. He
was glad not to be called upon for money, of course; still, he felt a
little annoyed at Herbert's reticence, especially as it left him unable
to decide whether our hero knew of the tie which connected them. It was
scarcely possible to suppose that he did not. But in that case, why did
he not make some sign? The truth did suggest itself to Mr. Stanton's
mind that the boy resented his cold and indifferent letter, and this
thought made him feel a little uncomfortable.

While he was thinking over this subject, one of his clerks entered the
office.

"A gentleman to see you, Mr. Stanton," he said, briefly.

Mr. Stanton raised his head, and his glance rested on a tall, vigorous
man of perhaps thirty-five years of age, who closely followed the clerk.
The stranger's face was brown from exposure, and there was a certain
appearance of unconventionality about his movements which seemed to
indicate that he was not a dweller in cities or a frequenter of drawing-
rooms, but accustomed to make his home in the wilder haunts of nature.

In brief, for there is no occasion for mystery, Mr. Stanton's visitor
was Ralph the Ranger, who had assisted Herbert from the clutches of
Abner Holden.

Mr. Stanton gazed at the stranger with some curiosity, but was unable to
recognize him.

"Have you any business with me?" he asked.

"Yes," said the visitor, in a voice whose depth carried with it an
assurance of strength.

"State it, then, as briefly as possible," said the merchant, with a
little asperity, for there was not as much deference in the manner of
the other as he thought there should have been. Like most new men, he
was jealous of his position, and solicitous lest he should not be
treated with due respect.

"I will do so," said the stranger, "but as it cannot be summed up in a
sentence, I will take the liberty of seating myself."

As he spoke he sat down in an office chair, which was placed not far
from that in which Mr. Stanton was sitting.

"My time is valuable," said the merchant, coldly. "I cannot listen to a
long story."

As the visitor was plainly, if not roughly, dressed, he suspected that
he desired pecuniary assistance on some pretext or other, and that his
story was one of misfortune, intended to appeal to his sympathies. Had
such been the case, there was very little prospect of help from Mr.
Stanton, and that gentleman already enjoyed in anticipation the pleasure
of refusing him.

"Don't you know me?" demanded Ralph, abruptly.

Mr. Stanton did not anticipate such a commencement. It had never
occurred to him to suppose that his rough visitor was one whom he had
ever before met.

"No," he said, "I never saw you before."

Ralph smiled a little bitterly.

"So I have passed entirely out of your remembrance, have I?" he said.
"Well, it is twelve years since we met."

"Twelve years," repeated Mr. Stanton. He scanned the stranger's face
with curiosity, but not a glimmer of recollection came to him.

"I dare say I met many persons at that distance of time, whom I cannot
remember in the least now, even by name."

"I think you will remember my name," said Ralph, quietly. "Your memory
of Ralph Pendleton cannot be wholly obliterated."

Mr. Stanton started, and it was evident from the expression of his face
that the memory was not a welcome one.

"Are you Ralph Pendleton?" he asked, in an undecided voice.

"Yes, but not the Ralph Pendleton you once knew. Then I was an
inexperienced boy; now I am a man."

"Yes, you have changed considerably," said Mr. Stanton, uncomfortably,
"Where have you kept yourself all these years? Why have you not made
yourself known before?"

"Before I answer these questions, I must refer to some circumstances
well known to both of us. I hope I shall not be tiresome; I will, at
least, be brief. You were my father's friend. At least, he so considered
you."

"I was so."

"When he died, as I had not yet attained my majority, he left you my
guardian."

"Yes."

"I was in rather an idle frame, and being possessed, as I supposed, of
fifty thousand dollars, I felt no necessity impelling me to work. You
gave me no advice, but rather encouraged me in my idle propensities.
When I was of age, I took a fancy to travel, and left my property in
your hands, with full power to manage it for me. This trust you
accepted."

"Well, this is an old story."

"An old one, but it shall not be a long one. My income being sufficient
to defray my expenses abroad, I traveled leisurely, with no thought for
the future. In your integrity I had the utmost confidence. Imagine,
then, my dismay when, while resident in Paris, I received a letter from
you stating that, owing to a series of unlucky investments, nearly all
my money had been sunk, and in place of fifty thousand dollars, my
property was reduced to a few hundreds.'

"It was unlucky, I admit," said Mr. Stanton, moving uneasily in his
chair. "My investments were unlucky, as it turned out, but the best and
most judicious cannot always foresee how an investment will turn out.
Besides, I lost largely, myself."

"So you wrote me," said Ralph, quietly. "However, that did not make it
any the easier for me to bear."

"Perhaps not, but it shows, at any rate, that I took the same risk for
my own money that I did for others."

Ralph proceeded without noticing this remark. "What made matters worse
for me was that I had fallen in love with a young American lady who,
with her parents, was then traveling in Europe. My circumstances, as I
supposed them to be, justified me in proposing marriage. I was accepted
by the young lady, and my choice was approved by the parents. When,
however, I learned of my loss of fortune, I at once made it known, and
that approval was withdrawn. The father told me that, under the altered
circumstances, the engagement must be considered broken. Still, he held
out the prospect that, should I ever again obtain a property as large as
that I had lost, I might marry his daughter. She, on her part, promised
to wait for me."

"Well?"

"I came to New York, received from you the remnant of my lost fortune,
and sailed the next week for California, then just open to American
enterprise. The most glowing stories were told of fortunes won in an
incredibly short time, Having no regular occupation, and having a strong
motive for acquiring money, it is not surprising that I should have been
dazzled with the rest, and persuaded to make the journey to the land of
gold."

"A Quixotic scheme, as I thought at the time," said Mr. Stanton, coldly.
"For one that succeeded, there were fifty who failed. You had better
have taken the clerkship I offered you."

"You are wrong," said Ralph, composedly. "There were many who were
disappointed, but I was not among the number."

"Did you succeed?" asked Mr. Stanton, surprised.

"So well," answered the other, "that at the end of two years' residence,
I found myself as rich as I had ever been."

"Had you made fifty thousand dollars?" demanded the merchant, in
amazement.

"I had."

"What did you do? Why did you not let me know of your success?"

"When I once more found myself possessed of a fortune, I took the next
vessel home with my money. I had but one thought, and that was to claim
the hand of my promised bride, who had promised to wait for me ten
years, if necessary."

"Well?"

"I found her married," said Ralph, bitterly. "She had forgotten her
promise, or had been over-persuaded by her parents--I do not know which
--and had proved false to me."

"That was unfortunate. But do you still possess the money?"

"I do."

"Indeed! I congratulate you," said Mr. Stanton, with suavity, and he
held out his hand, which Ralph did not appear to see. Ralph Pendleton
rich was a very different person from Ralph Pendleton poor, and it
occurred to him that he might so far ingratiate himself into the favor
of his former ward as to obtain the charge of his second fortune. He saw
that it would be safe, as well as politic, to exchange his coldness for
a warm and cordial welcome.

"Proceed with your story," he said; "I am quite interested in it."




CHAPTER XXXII

RISEN FROM THE DEAD


Ralph Pendleton proceeded.

"This blow overwhelmed me. All that I had been laboring for seemed
suddenly snatched from me."

"You had your money," suggested Mr. Stanton.

"Yes, I had my money; but for money itself I cared little."

Mr. Stanton shrugged his shoulders a little contemptuously. He could not
understand how anyone could think slightingly of money, and he decided
in his own mind that Ralph was an unpractical enthusiast.

"I valued money only as a means to an end, and that end was to make
Margaret Lindsay my wife. She failed me, and my money lost its charm."

"There were plenty who could have consoled you in her place."

"No doubt, I might have been successful in other quarters, but I did not
care to try. I left New York in disgust, and, going West, I buried
myself in the forest, where I built a rude cabin, and there I have lived
since, an unsocial, solitary life. Years have passed since I visited New
York."

"What did you do with your money all this while?"

"I left it in the hands of men whom I could trust. It has been
accumulating all these years, and I find that the fifty thousand dollars
have swelled to ninety thousand."

"Indeed!" ejaculated Mr. Stanton, his respect for Ralph considerably
raised. "And now you have come here to enjoy it, I suppose?"

"A different motive has led to my coming--a motive connected with you,"
said Ralph, fixing his eyes steadily upon Mr. Stanton.

"Connected with me!" repeated the merchant, uneasily.

"Yes."

"May I ask in what manner?"

"I expected the question, and am come to answer it. When I returned from
Europe impoverished, you gave me a brief statement of the manner in
which you had invested my fortune, and showed me how it had melted away
like snow before the sun."

"You remember rightly. I bought, on your account, shares in Lake
Superior Mining Company, which promised excellently, and bade fair to
make handsome returns. But it proved to be under the management of
knaves, and ran quickly down from par to two per cent., at which price I
thought best to sell out, considering that a little saved from the wreck
was better than nothing."

"This is according to the statement you made me," said Ralph, quietly.

"I am sure," said Mr. Stanton, "that no one regretted more than I do the
disastrous result. Indeed, I had reason to do so, for I was myself
involved, and suffered considerable loss."

"I am aware now that you were concerned in the matter," said Ralph,
significantly.

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Stanton, quickly, detecting something
peculiar in his tone.

"I will tell you. You were right in denouncing the management as knavish.
The company was got up by knaves, on a basis of fraud, and was from the
first intended as a trap for the unwary. But there is one important
circumstance which you have neglected to mention."

"What is that?" asked Mr. Stanton, in a voice which strove to be
composed.

"I mean this," said Ralph, firmly, "that you yourself were the prime
originator of the company--that you engineered it through to the end--
that you invested my money with the express intention of converting it
to your own profit. I charge you with this, that all, or nearly all the
property I lost, went into your pocket."

The color came and went in Mr. Stanton's face. He seemed staggered by
this sudden and unexpected accusation, and did not at first make reply.

Feeling forced to speak at last, he said: "This is very strange
language, Mr. Pendleton."

"It is unexpected, no doubt, for after all these years you probably
thought it would remain forever unknown; but in what respect is it
strange? I have given you a statement of facts as directly as I could."

"They are not facts. Your charge is wholly false," said the merchant,
but his tone was not that of a man. who speaks the truth boldly.

"I wish I could believe it," said Ralph. "I wish I could believe that I
was not deliberately swindled by one who professed to be my father's
friend."

"On what authority do you bring this monstrous charge?" demanded Mr.
Stanton, more boldly. "How happens it that you have not made it before?"

"For the simple reason that I myself did not suspect any fraud. I
presumed that it was as you stated to me, and that your only fault was
your injudicious investment."

"Well, I admit that, as it turned out, the investment was injudicious.
Everything else I deny."

"Your denial is vain."

"You cannot prove the truth of what you say."

"So you fall back on that? But you are mistaken. I can prove the truth
of what I say," said Ralph firmly.

"How?"

"Do you remember a man named David Marston?"

"He is dead," said Mr. Stanton, hastily.

"So you have supposed," said Ralph; "but you were deceived. He is not
dead. I only encountered him a week since, quite by accident, in my
Western home. He was your confidential clerk, you remember, and fully
acquainted with all your business transactions at the time of which I am
speaking. From him I learned how basely I had been deceived, and with
what deliberate cruelty you conspired to rob the son of your dead
friend."

"I don't believe David Marston is alive," said Mr. Stanton, hoarsely,
with a certain terror in his face. "Indeed, I have proof that he is
dead."

"I know the character of your proof. A paper was forwarded to you from
Australia, whither you had sent him, containing the record of his
death."

"Yes? What have you to say against this?"

"That the publication was a mistake. He was dangerously sick, and it was
falsely announced that he was dead. That notice was sent to you, and you
believed it to be true."

"I believe it now," said Mr. Stanton, doggedly. "Why should I not?"

"If you wish to be convinced, proof is at hand. Wait a moment."

Ralph Pendleton rose from his seat and left the counting-room. Two
minutes had not passed when he returned with an elderly man, thin of
face and wasted in figure, looking twenty years older than Mr. Stanton,
though really of about the same age.

"This is David Marston," said Ralph--"the living proof that I have told
you the truth."

Mr. Stanton gazed at him wildly, for to him it was as the face of one
risen from the dead.

"How do you do, Mr. Stanton?" said David Marston, humbly. "It is many,
many years since we met, sir."

"Are you really David Marston?" demanded Mr. Stanton, never taking his
eyes off the shrunken figure of his old clerk.

"I am, sir; greatly changed indeed, but still the David Marston who was
formerly in your employ. Time hasn't treated me as well as it has you,
sir. I've been unlucky, and aged fast."

"I am afraid your mind is also affected. You have been telling strange
stories to Mr. Pendleton here."

"True stories, sir," said David, firmly.

"Come, come, how much is he going to give you for this evidence of
yours?"

"Stop, Mr. Stanton! You insult us both," said Ralph Pendleton, sternly.
"I am not the man to buy false evidence, nor is David Marston the man to
perjure himself for pay. David, I want you, in Mr. Stanton's presence,
to make a clear statement of his connection with the mining company by
which I lost my fortune."

David Marston obeyed, and in a few words as possible unfolded the story.
It is not necessary to repeat it here. Enough that it fully
substantiated the charge which Ralph had brought against his early
guardian,

When he had finished, Ralph said, "You can judge what weight Marston's
testimony would have before a court of justice, and whether it would
help your commercial standing to have his story made public."

"What is it you want of me?" said Mr. Stanton, sullenly.

"I want restitution, dollar for dollar, of my lost money. I will waive
interest, though I might justly claim it. But, were it all paid,
interest and principal, the wrong would not be redressed. You cannot
restore the bride who would have been mine but for your villainy."

How much time will you give me to pay this money?" asked the merchant,
moodily.

"Ten days."

"It is a short time."

"It must suffice. Do you agree?"

"I must."

"Bind yourself to that, and for ten days I leave you free."

Satisfactory security was given that the engagement would be met, and
Ralph Pendleton left the counting-room. But his countenance was scarcely
more cheerful than that of the man he had conquered.

"I am rich," he said to himself; "but of what avail is it? Whom can I
benefit with my wealth?"

This thought had scarcely crossed his mind when he came face to face
with Herbert, walking with a sad and downcast face in the opposite
direction.




CHAPTER XXXIII

A FRIEND IN NEED


Herbert left Mr. Godfrey's counting-room very much depressed in spirits.
But an hour before he had rejoiced in his excellent prospects, and,
depending on the favor of his employer and his own fidelity, had looked
forward to a bright future. Now all was changed. He was dismissed from
his situation in disgrace, suspected of a mean theft. He had, to be
sure, the consciousness of innocence, and that was a great deal. He was
not weighed down by the feeling of guilt, at least. Still his prospects
were dark. Suppose the matter should not be cleared up, and he should
still remain under suspicion? How could he hope to obtain another place
without a recommendation from his late employer? No; he must resign all
hope of a position and adopt some street occupation, such as selling
papers or vending small articles in a basket, as he had seen boys of his
own age doing. He did not doubt but that in some way he could get a
living, but still he would be under suspicion, and that was hard to
bear.

While these things were passing through his mind he walked down
Broadway, with his eyes fixed upon the sidewalk. All at once he started
to hear his name called, and, looking up, to his unbounded astonishment
he saw before him Ralph the Ranger, whom he had supposed a thousand
miles away in his cabin in the Ohio woods.

The sight of a friendly face was most welcome to him at such a time, and
Ralph's face was friendly.

"Ralph!" he exclaimed, seizing the Ranger's hand. "How did you come
here? When did you arrive? You are the last person I expected to see."

"And you are the one I most wanted to see," said Ralph, his tone
unconsciously softened by his friendly interest in the boy before him.

"I can say the same, Ralph," said Herbert, soberly, "for I am in
trouble."

"In trouble, boy? I am sorry for that. Is it money? I can get you out of
that trouble."

"It is not that exactly, Ralph. If you will come into the City Hall Park
and sit down on a bench with me I will tell you all about it."

"Instead of that, let us go into the Astor House," said Ralph. "It is
where I am stopping."

"You are stopping at the Astor House?" said Herbert, in momentary
surprise. "Perhaps you do not know that there are cheaper hotels. Shall
I direct you to one?"

"No, Herbert, I am not poor, as you perhaps think. I suppose I should be
called rich; but that I can explain afterwards. For the present your
affairs require attention. Come in."

They went up the steps of the Astor House, and Ralph led the way to his
room, an apartment of good size and handsomely furnished.

"Now, Herbert, take a chair and tell me all," he said.

To repeat Herbert's story here is unnecessary. Ralph listened with
attention, and when it was concluded he said: "The main thing is to
account for the money in your possession. Do you think you should
remember the policeman who aided you in recovering your money?"

"I am sure I should."

"Did he know how much money you recovered?"

"Yes, for he saw me count the bills."

"Then we must seek him out and induce him to go with us to Mr. Godfrey's
counting-room and give his testimony."

"I never thought of that," said Herbert, his face brightening. "When
shall we go?"

"Now. I have nothing else to occupy me, and the sooner you are righted
the better."

They went out together, and made their way at once to the spot where
Herbert had encountered Greenleaf. They had to wait but a brief time
when the policeman came up.

"Do you remember me?" asked Herbert, going up to him.

"Yes," he replied; "you are the boy that overhauled a thief the other
day, and got back his money."

"You see, he remembers," said Herbert, with satisfaction.

"My friend," said Ralph, "when will you be off duty?"

"In half an hour," said the policeman, in surprise.

"In half an hour, then, I want you to go with me to this boys employer
and repeat your story. The possession of the money has caused him to be
suspected, and your evidence, confirming his own, will clear him of
having obtained it improperly."

"I will go," said the officer, "and shall be glad to get him out of a
scrape. It was all fair and above-board, and I'll say so cheerfully."

At the end of the half hour the three made their way to Mr. Godfrey's
place of business and entered together.

Mr. Godfrey marked their entrance with surprise, and looked inquiringly
at Herbert.

"Mr. Godfrey," said Herbert, respectfully, "I have come to prove to you
that the money I have in my pocketbook is my own."

"I shall be very glad if you can do so," said Mr. Godfrey; and it was
evident from his manner that he spoke sincerely.

"This officer knows all the circumstances, and will tell you what he
knows."

The policeman made his statement, partly in answer to questions from Mr.
Godfrey.

"The explanation is satisfactory," said Mr. Godfrey, "and convinces me.
It does not, however, absolutely clear you, since between the time of
the money being lost and your being searched you went out to the post
office, and you might have disposed of the pocketbook and its contents
on the way."

Herbert's countenance fell, but Mr. Godfrey hastened to add. "Although
your vindication is not complete, I will say that I believe you fully,
and will receive you back into my employ."

"You have forgotten one thing, sir," said Herbert. "Thomas declares that
he saw me pick up the wallet and put it in my pocket."

"So I did," said Tom, boldly.

Mr. Godfrey looked perplexed, and was hesitating what to say when Mr.
Walton, the owner of the lost pocketbook, hurriedly entered.

"Mr. Godfrey," he said, "I have to beg your pardon, and, most of all,
the pardon of this boy," indicating Herbert. "I have found my
pocketbook. I didn't lose it here, but my pocket was picked in the
street. The pickpocket was arrested, and the wallet has been returned to
me. This boy is innocent."

"I am very glad to hear it," said Mr. Godfrey, with emphasis. "Herbert,
I will try to make amends to you for my transient suspicions of your
honesty. As for you," he continued, turning to Thomas and speaking
sternly, "I despise you for your mean attempt to injure your fellow-
clerk. You must leave my employment to-day. I shall write to your father
the reasons for dismissing you."

"I can get along without your paltry four dollars a week," said Tom,
with bravado. "I am not a beggar."

"You may be something worse, if you do not amend, "said Mr. Godfrey."
Mr. Pratt, you may pay him for the entire week, and he can go at once."

Although Tom professed so much disdain for the four dollars a week, he
did not decline the week's pay directed to be paid to him, but placed
the money in his vest pocket and went out with assumed nonchalance,
though, in reality, deeply mortified at the unexpected discovery of his
meanness.

"As for you, Herbert," said Mr. Godfrey, "you can come back at once, and
I will raise your pay to eight dollars a week. I owe you some reparation
for the injury you came so near suffering. I will never again doubt your
integrity."

"Thank you, sir," said Herbert; "I shall be glad to come back."

"Before this matter is decided," said Ralph, "I have a proposition to
make to Herbert. I am rich, and have no one to share or inherit my
wealth. I propose to adopt him--to give him an opportunity to complete
his education in Europe, whither I propose going, and if some years
hence you shall be willing to receive him, he can then enter your
counting-room to learn business. The amount of compensation will be
unimportant, as I shall provide for him amply."

Herbert stared at Ralph in amazement. He could hardly realize that the
offer was indeed a genuine one.

"Do you mean that I am to go to Europe with you, Ralph?" he said.

"Yes, if you like."

"I shall like it VERY MUCH," said Herbert, enthusiastically. "How can I
thank you for so much generous kindness!"

"Your companionship will cheer me, and give me something to live for,
Herbert," said Ralph. "Through you I hope some day to enjoy life again."

Herbert's clasped the Ranger's hand in impulsive gratitude, while his
face beamed with pleasure.

"I congratulate you, Herbert," said Mr. Godfrey, kindly, "though I am
sorry to lose you. Whenever your guardian is ready to have you enter on
a business career, a place in my counting-room shall be open to you."

"Ralph," said Herbert, seriously, as they went from the counting-room in
company, "all that has happened seems so wonderful that I am a little
afraid I shall wake up to find it all a dream."

"It is a change to me also," said Ralph, "to have a new interest in
life. The past is a sealed book. Let us look forward to a bright and
pleasant future. Whatever pleasures and advantages money can obtain for
you shall be yours."

"Thank you," said Herbert, gratefully.




CHAPTER XXXIV

CONCLUSION


"Where are you boarding, Herbert?" asked Ralph.

"In Stanton Street."

"I shall wish you at once to remove to the Astor House, in order that we
may be together until we sail for Europe."

To this pleasant arrangement Herbert made no opposition. He found it a
great change from the dirty and slipshod boarding-house to the elegant
arrangements of a first-class hotel. It is needless to say that he
enjoyed that change not a little. He often had the feeling, of which he
had spoken to Ralph, that it was a dream from which he would some time
awake. But the dream was destined to be a pretty long one.

Within a week, much against his will, Mr. Stanton paid over to Ralph
Pendleton the fifty thousand dollars of which he had years ago defrauded
him, and thus the Ranger found himself master of a fortune of nearly one
hundred and fifty thousand dollars. He settled without delay a
comfortable annuity on David Marston, the old clerk, through whose
evidence he had been able to ferret out the treachery of Mr. Stanton.
Marston needed it, for his health was broken down and he was an invalid,
prematurely old. He is now settled in a comfortable boarding-house in
Clinton Street, and usually spends his mornings at the Mercantile
Library Reading-Room, in Astor Place, reading the morning papers.
Sometimes he ventures downtown, and takes a slow walk through the
streets, crowded with busy, bustling men, and recalls the years when he,
too, was one of them.

Before sailing for Europe, Herbert expressed a desire to repay his uncle
the sum of ten dollars, which the latter had sent to him. Ralph was
surprised when he learned that this uncle, of whom Herbert spoke, was
the same man who had been his former guardian. He approved our hero's
determination, and one morning Herbert entered for the first time his
uncle's place of business.

"Is Mr. Stanton in?" he asked of a clerk.

The clerk, in reply, pointed to the office.

Herbert entered.

His uncle looked up, but although he had seen our hero at a concert at
the Academy of Music, he did not recognize him in the new and
fashionable suit which Ralph had purchased for him.

"Mr. Stanton, I suppose?" said Herbert, with quiet self-possession.

"Yes. Do you wish to speak with me?"

"I must introduce myself," said Herbert. "I am Herbert Mason, your
nephew."

"Indeed!" said Mr. Stanton, surprised. "When did you come to the city?"

"Some weeks since."

"What brought you here?"

"I had my living to make. I preferred to make it in the city."

"The city is crowded. You had better have remained in the country."

"I do not think so," said Herbert.

"You could have got a place on a farm, and in time perhaps might have
bought a little land for yourself."

Herbert smiled.

"I did get a place on a farm," he said; "but I did not like it."

"What are you doing in the city? Have you got a place?"

"Not at present."

"So I supposed," said his uncle, frowning. "I told you the city was
overcrowded. You should not have come here. I suppose you relied on me
to help you to something. But I have my own family to take care of, and
my first duty is to them, as you must be aware."

"I don't think you quite understand my object in calling," said Herbert,
quietly. "I have not come for assistance of any kind."

"Indeed!" returned Mr. Stanton, appearing to be puzzled.

"You sent me ten dollars in a letter to Dr. Kent some months since?"

"Yes. I felt that it was best for you to depend on yourself, and that
more would only encourage you to idleness."

"I have come to thank you for the LOAN," said Herbert, emphasizing the
last word, "and to return the money."

"What!" exclaimed Mr. Stanton, now thoroughly amazed.

Herbert repeated his former words.

"But I don't understand this. You are out of a place; yet you do not
need this money."

"No, I do not need it."

This was certainly astonishing, and Mr. Stanton gazed at his nephew as
if he did not know what to make of it.

"What are your plans?" he asked. "What are you going to do?"

"I sail for Europe next week," said Herbert, enjoying his uncle's
surprise.

"Sail for Europe!" ejaculated Mr. Stanton, scarcely believing his ears.

"Yes, I am to go to school there, and shall probably remain three or
four years."

"You are trifling with me," said his uncle, irritably. "How can you go
to Europe without money?"

Herbert felt that the time had come for an explanation.

"A friend," he said, "kindly undertakes to pay all my expenses. I go
with him."

"Who is your friend?"

"Mr. Ralph Pendleton. I believe you know him."

"Ralph Pendleton!" repeated Mr. Stanton, in renewed surprise. "How did
you become acquainted with him?"

"The farmer with whom I was placed in Ohio ill-treated me. Ralph lived
near by, and helped me to run away."

Mr. Stanton made no comment. Indeed, his surprise was such that he knew
not what to say. His friendless and penniless nephew, as he had regarded
him, was about to share advantages which he would gladly have obtained
for his own son. When, that evening, at home, he told his family of
Herbert's good fortune, Tom was filled with bitter envy. If it had been
any other boy he would have cared less, but for "that begger Herbert" to
go to Europe in charge of a man of wealth was very mortifying to his
pride.

Mr. Stanton made a faint protest against receiving the ten dollars
tendered by his nephew, but Herbert was determined to repay it. He
placed it on the desk and eventually Mr. Stanton placed it in his
pocketbook.

After some reflection, finding his nephew very differently situated from
what he had supposed, Mr. Stanton, with the concurrence of his wife,
whose opinion also had been changed, sent an invitation to Ralph and
Herbert to dine with them previous to their sailing for Europe. Herbert,
by his new guardian's direction, returned a polite reply, to the effect
that they were too busy in making preparations for their departure to
accept the invitation. Ralph did not feel like sitting as the guest of a
man who had cruelly defrauded him, and had only done him justice when he
was actually compelled to do so.

In due time our hero sailed for Europe with Mr. Ralph Pendleton. They
divided their time between Paris and Berlin, Herbert studying at both
places. With his natural good abilities, he made rapid progress, and at
the end of four years was an accomplished scholar, able to speak both
French and German with facility. In watching his progress, Ralph
Pendleton found a new and fresh interest in life. He recovered from his
old, morbid feeling, and became cheerful and happy. On returning to New
York, Herbert, who felt that he should enjoy a life of business better
than a professional career, entered the counting-room of Mr. Godfrey. At
twenty-one, the junior partner retiring, he was received as partner in
his place, his guardian, Ralph Pendleton, purchasing an interest for him
at a cost of fifty thousand dollars. He developed good business
abilities, and bid fair to swell this sum, in time, to a large fortune.
There is a prospect that he will, in time, sustain a closer relation to
his senior partner, as it is rumored that Julia Godfrey, now a brilliant
young belle, prefers her father's young partner to any of the crowd of
young men who pay her court.

The other characters in our story demand a few closing words. First, for
Mr. Stanton. It might have been the sudden withdrawal of the fifty
thousand dollars from his business that embarrassed him. At any rate,
from that time nothing prospered with him. He met with loss after loss,
until, in a time of financial panic he failed. He saved but a little
from the wreck of his fortune, That little started him in a modest
business, yielding him, perhaps, one-tenth his former income. The
brownstone house was sold. He moved into a shabby house in an obscure
street, where Mrs. Stanton spends her time mostly in bewailing the loss
of her former splendor.

Tom developed habits of extravagance, and seemed indisposed to work
steadily. Finally, when his reverses came, his father was compelled to
refuse further assistance, and now Tom, in an inferior clerkship, on a
small salary, gazes with envy at his once-despised cousin, with whom he
has completely changed places. How he will come out eventually is
doubtful. Unless he changes considerably, it is not likely that his
circumstances will ever be much better than at present.

Abner Holden died suddenly last year in a fit of delirium tremens. His
habits of intemperance grew upon him until they led to this sad result.
His death did not excite any very prolonged grief in the community, as
his temper and uncertain honesty had made him very far from popular. To
the housekeeper who had been kind to him, Herbert sent a valuable silk
dress, of the richest fabric, of which Mrs. Bickford is very proud. She
only wears it on great occasions, and then is particular to mention that
it was presented to her by Herbert Mason, of the great New York firm of
Godfrey & Mason, who was once Abner Holden's bound boy.

Nor was Herbert forgetful of his good friends, the Kents. He paid off
the mortgage on the doctor's place, and insisted on putting the house in
thorough repair, and newly furnishing it, so that now the town of
Waverley does not contain a handsomer house, inside and out, than that
of Dr. Kent.

So we bid farewell to our young hero, fairly launched on a prosperous
career, trusting that his life-path may be bright to the end, and that
he may leave behind him, at the end of his career, the reputation of a
noble and honorable merchant, and a life filled with good deeds.

THE END







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Try and Trust, by Horatio Alger





This eBook was prepared by Les Bowler, St. Ives, Dorset.




Travels in West Africa (Congo Francais, Corisco and Cameroons)
by Mary H. Kingsley.




To my brother, C. G. Kingsley this book is dedicated.




CONTENTS

PREFACE.
PREFACE TO THE ABRIDGED EDITION OF TRAVELS IN WEST AFRICA.
INTRODUCTION.
CHAPTER I.     LIVERPOOL TO SIERRA LEONE AND THE GOLD COAST.
CHAPTER II.    FERNANDO PO AND THE BUBIS.
CHAPTER III.   VOYAGE DOWN COAST.
CHAPTER IV.    THE OGOWE.
CHAPTER V.     THE RAPIDS OF THE OGOWE.
CHAPTER VI.    LEMBARENE.
CHAPTER VII.   ON THE WAY FROM KANGWE TO LAKE NCOVI.
CHAPTER VIII.  FROM NCOVI TO ESOON.
CHAPTER IX.    FROM ESOON TO AGONJO.
CHAPTER X.     BUSH TRADE AND FAN CUSTOMS.
CHAPTER XI.    DOWN THE REMBWE.
CHAPTER XII.   FETISH.
CHAPTER XIII.  FETISH--(Continued).
CHAPTER XIV.   FETISH--(Continued).
CHAPTER XV.    FETISH--(Continued).
CHAPTER XVI.   FETISH--(Concluded).
CHAPTER XVII.  ASCENT OF THE GREAT PEAK OF CAMEROONS.
CHAPTER XVIII. THE GREAT PEAK OF CAMEROONS--(Continued).
CHAPTER XIX.   THE GREAT PEAK OF CAMEROONS--(Continued).
CHAPTER XX.    THE GREAT PEAK OF CAMEROONS--(Concluded).
CHAPTER XXI.   TRADE AND LABOUR IN WEST AFRICA.
CHAPTER XXII.  DISEASE IN WEST AFRICA.
APPENDIX.      THE INVENTION OF THE CLOTH LOOM.



PREFACE



TO THE READER.--What this book wants is not a simple Preface but an
apology, and a very brilliant and convincing one at that.
Recognising this fully, and feeling quite incompetent to write such
a masterpiece, I have asked several literary friends to write one
for me, but they have kindly but firmly declined, stating that it is
impossible satisfactorily to apologise for my liberties with Lindley
Murray and the Queen's English.  I am therefore left to make a
feeble apology for this book myself, and all I can personally say is
that it would have been much worse than it is had it not been for
Dr. Henry Guillemard, who has not edited it, or of course the whole
affair would have been better, but who has most kindly gone through
the proof sheets, lassoing prepositions which were straying outside
their sentence stockade, taking my eye off the water cask and fixing
it on the scenery where I meant it to be, saying firmly in pencil on
margins "No you don't," when I was committing some more than usually
heinous literary crime, and so on.  In cases where his activities in
these things may seem to the reader to have been wanting, I beg to
state that they really were not.  It is I who have declined to
ascend to a higher level of lucidity and correctness of diction than
I am fitted for.  I cannot forbear from mentioning my gratitude to
Mr. George Macmillan for his patience and kindness with me,--a mere
jungle of information on West Africa.  Whether you my reader will
share my gratitude is, I fear, doubtful, for if it had not been for
him I should never have attempted to write a book at all, and in
order to excuse his having induced me to try I beg to state that I
have written only on things that I know from personal experience and
very careful observation.  I have never accepted an explanation of a
native custom from one person alone, nor have I set down things as
being prevalent customs from having seen a single instance.  I have
endeavoured to give you an honest account of the general state and
manner of life in Lower Guinea and some description of the various
types of country there.  In reading this section you must make
allowances for my love of this sort of country, with its great
forests and rivers and its animistic-minded inhabitants, and for my
ability to be more comfortable there than in England.  Your superior
culture-instincts may militate against your enjoying West Africa,
but if you go there you will find things as I have said.

January, 1897.



PREFACE TO THE ABRIDGED EDITION OF TRAVELS IN WEST AFRICA.



When on my return to England from my second sojourn in West Africa,
I discovered, to my alarm, that I was, by a freak of fate, the sea-
serpent of the season, I published, in order to escape from this
reputation, a very condensed, much abridged version of my
experiences in Lower Guinea; and I thought that I need never explain
about myself or Lower Guinea again.  This was one of my errors.  I
have been explaining ever since; and, though not reconciled to so
doing, I am more or less resigned to it, because it gives me
pleasure to see that English people can take an interest in that
land they have neglected.  Nevertheless, it was a shock to me when
the publishers said more explanation was required.  I am thankful to
say the explanation they required was merely on what plan the
abridgment of my first account had been made.  I can manage that
explanation easily.  It has been done by removing from it certain
sections whole, and leaving the rest very much as it first stood.
Of course it would have been better if I had totally reformed and
rewritten the book in pellucid English; but that is beyond me, and I
feel at any rate this book must be better than it was, for there is
less of it; and I dimly hope critics will now see that there is a
saving grace in disconnectedness, for owing to that disconnectedness
whole chapters have come out without leaving holes.

As for the part that is left in, I have already apologised for its
form, and I cannot help it, for Lower Guinea is like what I have
said it is.  No one who knows it has sent home contradictions of my
description of it, or its natives, or their manners or customs, and
they have had by now ample time and opportunity.  The only
complaints I have had regarding my account from my fellow West
Coasters have been that I might have said more.  I trust my
forbearance will send a thrill of gratitude through readers of the
736-page edition.

There is, however, one section that I reprint, regarding which I
must say a few words.  It is that on the trade and labour problem in
West Africa, particularly the opinion therein expressed regarding
the liquor traffic.  This part has brought down on me much criticism
from the Missionary Societies and their friends; and I beg
gratefully to acknowledge the honourable fairness with which the
controversy has been carried on by the great Wesleyan Methodist
Mission to the Gold Coast and the Baptist Mission to the Congo.  It
has not ended in our agreement on this point, but it has raised my
esteem of Missionary Societies considerably; and anyone interested
in this matter I beg to refer to the Baptist Magazine for October,
1897.  Therein will be found my answer, and the comments on it by a
competent missionary authority; for the rest of this matter I beg
all readers of this book to bear in mind that I confine myself to
speaking only of the bit of Africa I know--West Africa.  During this
past summer I attended a meeting at which Sir George Taubman Goldie
spoke, and was much struck with the truth of what he said on the
difference of different African regions.  He divided Africa into
three zones:  firstly, that region where white races could colonise
in the true sense of the word, and form a great native-born white
population, namely, the region of the Cape; secondly, a region where
the white race could colonise, but to a less extent--an extent
analogous to that in India--namely, the highlands of Central East
Africa and parts of Northern Africa; thirdly, a region where the
white races cannot colonise in a true sense of the word, namely, the
West African region, and in those regions he pointed out one of the
main elements of prosperity and advance is the native African
population.  I am quoting his words from memory, possibly
imperfectly; but there is very little reliable printed matter to go
on when dealing with Sir George Taubman Goldie, which is regrettable
because he himself is an experienced and reliable authority.  I am
however quite convinced that these aforesaid distinct regions are
regions that the practical politician dealing with Africa must
recognise, and keep constantly in mind when attempting to solve the
many difficulties that that great continent presents, and sincerely
hope every reader of this work will remember that I am speaking of
that last zone, the zone wherein white races cannot colonise in a
true sense of the word, but which is nevertheless a vitally
important region to a great manufacturing country like England, for
therein are vast undeveloped markets wherein she can sell her
manufactured goods and purchase raw material for her manufactures at
a reasonable rate.

Having a rooted, natural, feminine hatred for politics I have no
inclination to become diffuse on them, as I have on the errors of
other people's cooking or ideas on decoration.  I know I am held to
be too partial to France in West Africa; too fond of pointing out
her brilliant achievements there, too fond of saying the native is
as happy, and possibly happier, under her rule than under ours; and
also that I am given to a great admiration for Germans; but this is
just like any common-sense Englishwoman.  Of course I am devoted to
my own John; but still Monsieur is brave, bright, and fascinating;
Mein Herr is possessed of courage and commercial ability in the
highest degree, and, besides, he takes such a lot of trouble to know
the real truth about things, and tells them to you so calmly and
carefully--and our own John--well, of course, he is everything
that's good and great, but he makes a shocking fool of himself at
times, particularly in West Africa.

I should enjoy holding what one of my justly irritated expurgators
used to call one of my little thanksgiving services here, but I will
not; for, after all, it would be impossible for me to satisfactorily
thank those people who, since my publication of this book, have
given me help and information on the subject of West Africa.  Chief
amongst them have been Mr. A. L. Jones, Sir. R. B. N. Walker, Mr.
Irvine, and Mr. John Holt.  I have not added to this book any
information I have received since I wrote it, as it does not seem to
me fair to do so.  My only regret regarding it is that I have not
dwelt sufficiently on the charm of West Africa; it is so difficult
to explain such things; but I am sure there are amongst my readers
people who know by experience the charm some countries exercise over
men--countries very different from each other and from West Africa.
The charm of West Africa is a painful one:  it gives you pleasure
when you are out there, but when you are back here it gives you pain
by calling you.  It sends up before your eyes a vision of a wall of
dancing white, rainbow-gemmed surf playing on a shore of yellow sand
before an audience of stately coco palms; or of a great mangrove-
watered bronze river; or of a vast aisle in some forest cathedral:
and you hear, nearer to you than the voices of the people round,
nearer than the roar of the city traffic, the sound of the surf that
is breaking on the shore down there, and the sound of the wind
talking on the hard palm leaves and the thump of the natives' tom-
toms; or the cry of the parrots passing over the mangrove swamps in
the evening time; or the sweet, long, mellow whistle of the plantain
warblers calling up the dawn; and everything that is round you grows
poor and thin in the face of the vision, and you want to go back to
the Coast that is calling you, saying, as the African says to the
departing soul of his dying friend, "Come back, come back, this is
your home."

                                     M. H. KINGSLEY.
October, 1897.



[NOTE.--The following chapters of the first edition are not included
in this edition: --Chap. ii., The Gold Coast; Chap. iv., Lagos Bar;
Chap. v., Voyage down Coast; Chap. vi., Libreville and Glass; Chap.
viii., Talagouga; Chap. xvi., Congo Francais; Chap. xvii., The Log
of the Lafayette; Chap. xviii., From Corisco to Gaboon; Chap.
xxviii., The Islands in the Bay of Amboises; Appendix ii., Disease
in West Africa; Appendix iii., Dr. A. Gunther on Reptiles and
Fishes; Appendix iv., Orthoptera, Hymenoptera, and Hemiptera.]



INTRODUCTION.



Relateth the various causes which impelled the author to embark upon
the voyage.

It was in 1893 that, for the first time in my life, I found myself
in possession of five or six months which were not heavily
forestalled, and feeling like a boy with a new half-crown, I lay
about in my mind, as Mr. Bunyan would say, as to what to do with
them.  "Go and learn your tropics," said Science.  Where on earth am
I to go? I wondered, for tropics are tropics wherever found, so I
got down an atlas and saw that either South America or West Africa
must be my destination, for the Malayan region was too far off and
too expensive.  Then I got Wallace's Geographical Distribution and
after reading that master's article on the Ethiopian region I
hardened my heart and closed with West Africa.  I did this the more
readily because while I knew nothing of the practical condition of
it, I knew a good deal both by tradition and report of South East
America, and remembered that Yellow Jack was endemic, and that a
certain naturalist, my superior physically and mentally, had come
very near getting starved to death in the depressing society of an
expedition slowly perishing of want and miscellaneous fevers up the
Parana.

My ignorance regarding West Africa was soon removed.  And although
the vast cavity in my mind that it occupied is not even yet half
filled up, there is a great deal of very curious information in its
place.  I use the word curious advisedly, for I think many seemed to
translate my request for practical hints and advice into an
advertisement that "Rubbish may be shot here."  This same
information is in a state of great confusion still, although I have
made heroic efforts to codify it.  I find, however, that it can
almost all be got in under the following different headings, namely
and to wit:  -

The dangers of West Africa.
The disagreeables of West Africa.
The diseases of West Africa.
The things you must take to West Africa.
The things you find most handy in West Africa.
The worst possible things you can do in West Africa.

I inquired of all my friends as a beginning what they knew of West
Africa.  The majority knew nothing.  A percentage said, "Oh, you
can't possibly go there; that's where Sierra Leone is, the white
mans grave, you know."  If these were pressed further, one
occasionally found that they had had relations who had gone out
there after having been "sad trials," but, on consideration of their
having left not only West Africa, but this world, were now forgiven
and forgotten.

I next turned my attention to cross-examining the doctors.
"Deadliest spot on earth," they said cheerfully, and showed me maps
of the geographical distribution of disease.  Now I do not say that
a country looks inviting when it is coloured in Scheele's green or a
bilious yellow, but these colours may arise from lack of artistic
gift in the cartographer.  There is no mistaking what he means by
black, however, and black you'll find they colour West Africa from
above Sierra Leone to below the Congo.  "I wouldn't go there if I
were you," said my medical friends, "you'll catch something; but if
you must go, and you're as obstinate as a mule, just bring me--" and
then followed a list of commissions from here to New York, any one
of which--but I only found that out afterwards.

All my informants referred me to the missionaries.  "There were,"
they said, in an airy way, "lots of them down there, and had been
for many years."  So to missionary literature I addressed myself
with great ardour; alas! only to find that these good people wrote
their reports not to tell you how the country they resided in was,
but how it was getting on towards being what it ought to be, and how
necessary it was that their readers should subscribe more freely,
and not get any foolishness into their heads about obtaining an
inadequate supply of souls for their money.  I also found fearful
confirmation of my medical friends' statements about its
unhealthiness, and various details of the distribution of cotton
shirts over which I did not linger.

From the missionaries it was, however, that I got my first idea
about the social condition of West Africa.  I gathered that there
existed there, firstly the native human beings--the raw material, as
it were--and that these were led either to good or bad respectively
by the missionary and the trader.  There were also the Government
representatives, whose chief business it was to strengthen and
consolidate the missionary's work, a function they carried on but
indifferently well.  But as for those traders! well, I put them down
under the dangers of West Africa at once.  Subsequently I came
across the good old Coast yarn of how, when a trader from that
region went thence, it goes without saying where, the Fallen Angel
without a moment's hesitation vacated the infernal throne (Milton)
in his favour.  This, I beg to note, is the marine form of the
legend.  When it occurs terrestrially the trader becomes a Liverpool
mate.  But of course no one need believe it either way--it is not a
missionary's story.

Naturally, while my higher intelligence was taken up with attending
to these statements, my mind got set on going, and I had to go.
Fortunately I could number among my acquaintances one individual who
had lived on the Coast for seven years.  Not, it is true, on that
part of it which I was bound for.  Still his advice was pre-
eminently worth attention, because, in spite of his long residence
in the deadliest spot of the region, he was still in fair going
order.  I told him I intended going to West Africa, and he said,
"When you have made up your mind to go to West Africa the very best
thing you can do is to get it unmade again and go to Scotland
instead; but if your intelligence is not strong enough to do so,
abstain from exposing yourself to the direct rays of the sun, take 4
grains of quinine every day for a fortnight before you reach the
Rivers, and get some introductions to the Wesleyans; they are the
only people on the Coast who have got a hearse with feathers."

My attention was next turned to getting ready things to take with
me.  Having opened upon myself the sluice gates of advice, I rapidly
became distracted.  My friends and their friends alike seemed to
labour under the delusion that I intended to charter a steamer and
was a person of wealth beyond the dreams of avarice.  This not being
the case, the only thing to do was to gratefully listen and let
things drift.

Not only do the things you have got to take, but the things you have
got to take them in, present a fine series of problems to the young
traveller.  Crowds of witnesses testified to the forms of baggage
holders they had found invaluable, and these, it is unnecessary to
say, were all different in form and material.

With all this embarras de choix I was too distracted to buy anything
new in the way of baggage except a long waterproof sack neatly
closed at the top with a bar and handle.  Into this I put blankets,
boots, books, in fact anything that would not go into my portmanteau
or black bag.  From the first I was haunted by a conviction that its
bottom would come out, but it never did, and in spite of the fact
that it had ideas of its own about the arrangement of its contents,
it served me well throughout my voyage.

It was the beginning of August '93 when I first left England for
"the Coast."  Preparations of quinine with postage partially paid
arrived up to the last moment, and a friend hastily sent two
newspaper clippings, one entitled "A Week in a Palm-oil Tub," which
was supposed to describe the sort of accommodation, companions, and
fauna likely to be met with on a steamer going to West Africa, and
on which I was to spend seven to The Graphic contributor's one; the
other from The Daily Telegraph, reviewing a French book of "Phrases
in common use" in Dahomey.  The opening sentence in the latter was,
"Help, I am drowning."  Then came the inquiry, "If a man is not a
thief?" and then another cry, "The boat is upset."  "Get up, you
lazy scamps," is the next exclamation, followed almost immediately
by the question, "Why has not this man been buried?"  "It is fetish
that has killed him, and he must lie here exposed with nothing on
him until only the bones remain," is the cheerful answer.  This
sounded discouraging to a person whose occupation would necessitate
going about considerably in boats, and whose fixed desire was to
study fetish.  So with a feeling of foreboding gloom I left London
for Liverpool--none the more cheerful for the matter-of-fact manner
in which the steamboat agents had informed me that they did not
issue return tickets by the West African lines of steamers.  I will
not go into the details of that voyage here, much as I am given to
discursiveness.  They are more amusing than instructive, for on my
first voyage out I did not know the Coast, and the Coast did not
know me and we mutually terrified each other.  I fully expected to
get killed by the local nobility and gentry; they thought I was
connected with the World's Women's Temperance Association, and
collecting shocking details for subsequent magic-lantern lectures on
the liquor traffic; so fearful misunderstandings arose, but we
gradually educated each other, and I had the best of the affair; for
all I had got to teach them was that I was only a beetle and fetish
hunter, and so forth, while they had to teach me a new world, and a
very fascinating course of study I found it.  And whatever the Coast
may have to say against me--for my continual desire for hair-pins,
and other pins, my intolerable habit of getting into water, the
abominations full of ants, that I brought into their houses, or
things emitting at unexpectedly short notice vivid and awful
stenches--they cannot but say that I was a diligent pupil, who
honestly tried to learn the lessons they taught me so kindly, though
some of those lessons were hard to a person who had never previously
been even in a tame bit of tropics, and whose life for many years
had been an entirely domestic one in a University town.

One by one I took my old ideas derived from books and thoughts based
on imperfect knowledge and weighed them against the real life around
me, and found them either worthless or wanting.  The greatest
recantation I had to make I made humbly before I had been three
months on the Coast in 1893.  It was of my idea of the traders.
What I had expected to find them was a very different thing to what
I did find them; and of their kindness to me I can never
sufficiently speak, for on that voyage I was utterly out of touch
with the governmental circles, and utterly dependent on the traders,
and the most useful lesson of all the lessons I learnt on the West
Coast in 1893 was that I could trust them.  Had I not learnt this
very thoroughly I could never have gone out again and carried out
the voyage I give you a sketch of in this book.

Thanks to "the Agent," I have visited places I could never otherwise
have seen; and to the respect and affection in which he is held by
the native, I owe it that I have done so in safety.  When I have
arrived off his factory in a steamer or canoe unexpected,
unintroduced, or turned up equally unheralded out of the bush in a
dilapidated state, he has always received me with that gracious
hospitality which must have given him, under Coast conditions, very
real trouble and inconvenience--things he could have so readily
found logical excuses against entailing upon himself for the sake of
an individual whom he had never seen before--whom he most likely
would never see again--and whom it was no earthly profit to him to
see then.  He has bestowed himself--Allah only knows where--on his
small trading vessels so that I might have his one cabin.  He has
fished me out of sea and fresh water with boat-hooks; he has
continually given me good advice, which if I had only followed would
have enabled me to keep out of water and any other sort of
affliction; and although he holds the meanest opinion of my
intellect for going to such a place as West Africa for beetles,
fishes and fetish, he has given me the greatest assistance in my
work.  The value of that work I pray you withhold judgment on, until
I lay it before you in some ten volumes or so mostly in Latin.  All
I know that is true regarding West African facts, I owe to the
traders; the errors are my own.

To Dr. Gunther, of the British Museum, I am deeply grateful for the
kindness and interest he has always shown regarding all the
specimens of natural history that I have been able to lay before
him; the majority of which must have had very old tales to tell him.
Yet his courtesy and attention gave me the thing a worker in any
work most wants--the sense that the work was worth doing--and sent
me back to work again with the knowledge that if these things
interested a man like him, it was a more than sufficient reason for
me to go on collecting them.  To Mr. W. H. F. Kirby I am much
indebted for his working out my small collection of certain Orders
of insects; and to Mr. Thomas S. Forshaw, for the great help he has
afforded me in revising my notes.

It is impossible for me even to catalogue my debts of gratitude
still outstanding to the West Coast.  Chiefly am I indebted to Mr.
C. G. Hudson, whose kindness and influence enabled me to go up the
Ogowe and to see as much of Congo Francais as I have seen, and his
efforts to take care of me were most ably seconded by Mr. Fildes.
The French officials in "Congo Francais" never hindered me, and
always treated me with the greatest kindness.  You may say there was
no reason why they should not, for there is nothing in this fine
colony of France that they need be ashamed of any one seeing; but I
find it is customary for travellers to say the French officials
throw obstacles in the way of any one visiting their possessions, so
I merely beg to state this was decidedly not my experience; although
my deplorable ignorance of French prevented me from explaining my
humble intentions to them.

The Rev. Dr. Nassau and Mr. R. E. Dennett have enabled me, by
placing at my disposal the rich funds of their knowledge of native
life and idea, to amplify any deductions from my own observation.
Mr. Dennett's work I have not dealt with in this work because it
refers to tribes I was not amongst on this journey, but to a tribe I
made the acquaintance with in my '93 voyage--the Fjort.  Dr.
Nassau's observations I have referred to.  Herr von Lucke, Vice-
governor of Cameroon, I am indebted to for not only allowing me, but
for assisting me by every means in his power, to go up Cameroons
Peak, and to the Governor of Cameroon, Herr von Puttkamer, for his
constant help and kindness.  Indeed so great has been the
willingness to help me of all these gentlemen, that it is a wonder
to me, when I think of it, that their efforts did not project me
right across the continent and out at Zanzibar.  That this brilliant
affair did not come off is owing to my own lack of enterprise; for I
did not want to go across the continent, and I do not hanker after
Zanzibar, but only to go puddling about obscure districts in West
Africa after raw fetish and fresh-water fishes.

I owe my ability to have profited by the kindness of these gentlemen
on land, to a gentleman of the sea--Captain Murray.  He was captain
of the vessel I went out on in 1893, and he saw then that my mind
was full of errors that must be eradicated if I was going to deal
with the Coast successfully; and so he eradicated those errors and
replaced them with sound knowledge from his own stores collected
during an acquaintance with the West Coast of over thirty years.
The education he has given me has been of the greatest value to me,
and I sincerely hope to make many more voyages under him, for I well
know he has still much to teach and I to learn.

Last, but not least, I must chronicle my debts to the ladies.  First
to those two courteous Portuguese ladies, Donna Anna de Sousa
Coutinho e Chichorro and her sister Donna Maria de Sousa Coutinho,
who did so much for me in Kacongo in 1893, and have remained, I am
proud to say, my firm friends ever since.  Lady MacDonald and Miss
Mary Slessor I speak of in this book, but only faintly sketch the
pleasure and help they have afforded me; nor have I fully expressed
my gratitude for the kindness of Madame Jacot of Lembarene, or
Madame Forget of Talagouga.  Then there are a whole list of nuns
belonging to the Roman Catholic Missions on the South West Coast,
ever cheery and charming companions; and Frau Plehn, whom it was a
continual pleasure to see in Cameroons, and discourse with once
again on things that seemed so far off then--art, science, and
literature; and Mrs. H. Duggan, of Cameroons too, who used, whenever
I came into that port to rescue me from fearful states of starvation
for toilet necessaries, and lend a sympathetic and intelligent ear
to the "awful sufferings" I had gone through, until Cameroons became
to me a thing to look forward to.

When in the Canaries in 1892, I used to smile, I regretfully own, at
the conversation of a gentleman from the Gold Coast who was up there
recruiting after a bad fever.  His conversation consisted largely of
anecdotes of friends of his, and nine times in ten he used to say,
"He's dead now."  Alas! my own conversation may be smiled at now for
the same cause.  Many of my friends mentioned even in this very
recent account of the Coast "are dead now."  Most of those I learnt
to know in 1893; chief among these is my old friend Captain Boler,
of Bonny, from whom I first learnt a certain power of comprehending
the African and his form of thought.

I have great reason to be grateful to the Africans themselves--to
cultured men and women among them like Charles Owoo, Mbo, Sanga
Glass, Jane Harrington and her sister at Gaboon, and to the bush
natives; but of my experience with them I give further details, so I
need not dwell on them here.

I apologise to the general reader for giving so much detail on
matters that really only affect myself, and I know that the
indebtedness which all African travellers have to the white
residents in Africa is a matter usually very lightly touched on.  No
doubt my voyage would seem a grander thing if I omitted mention of
the help I received, but--well, there was a German gentleman once
who evolved a camel out of his inner consciousness.  It was a
wonderful thing; still, you know, it was not a good camel, only a
thing which people personally unacquainted with camels could believe
in.  Now I am ambitious to make a picture, if I make one at all,
that people who do know the original can believe in--even if they
criticise its points--and so I give you details a more showy artist
would omit.



CHAPTER I.  LIVERPOOL TO SIERRA LEONE AND THE GOLD COAST.



Setting forth how the voyager departs from England in a stout vessel
and in good company, and reaches in due course the Island of the
Grand Canary, and then the Port of Sierra Leone:  to which is added
some account of this latter place and the comeliness of its women.
Wherein also some description of Cape Coast and Accra is given, to
which are added divers observations on supplies to be obtained
there.

The West Coast of Africa is like the Arctic regions in one
particular, and that is that when you have once visited it you want
to go back there again; and, now I come to think of it, there is
another particular in which it is like them, and that is that the
chances you have of returning from it at all are small, for it is a
Belle Dame sans merci.

I succumbed to the charm of the Coast as soon as I left Sierra Leone
on my first voyage out, and I saw more than enough during that
voyage to make me recognise that there was any amount of work for me
worth doing down there.  So I warned the Coast I was coming back
again and the Coast did not believe me; and on my return to it a
second time displayed a genuine surprise, and formed an even higher
opinion of my folly than it had formed on our first acquaintance,
which is saying a good deal.

During this voyage in 1893, I had been to Old Calabar, and its
Governor, Sir Claude MacDonald, had heard me expatiating on the
absorbing interest of the Antarctic drift, and the importance of the
collection of fresh-water fishes and so on.  So when Lady MacDonald
heroically decided to go out to him in Calabar, they most kindly
asked me if I would join her, and make my time fit hers for starting
on my second journey.  This I most willingly did.  But I fear that
very sweet and gracious lady suffered a great deal of apprehension
at the prospect of spending a month on board ship with a person so
devoted to science as to go down the West Coast in its pursuit.
During the earlier days of our voyage she would attract my attention
to all sorts of marine objects overboard, so as to amuse me.  I used
to look at them, and think it would be the death of me if I had to
work like this, explaining meanwhile aloud that "they were very
interesting, but Haeckel had done them, and I was out after fresh-
water fishes from a river north of the Congo this time," fearing all
the while that she felt me unenthusiastic for not flying over into
the ocean to secure the specimens.

However, my scientific qualities, whatever they may amount to, did
not blind this lady long to the fact of my being after all a very
ordinary individual, and she told me so--not in these crude words,
indeed, but nicely and kindly--whereupon, in a burst of gratitude to
her for understanding me, I appointed myself her honorary aide-de-
camp on the spot, and her sincere admirer I shall remain for ever,
fully recognising that her courage in going to the Coast was far
greater than my own, for she had more to lose had fever claimed her,
and she was in those days by no means under the spell of Africa.
But this is anticipating.

It was on the 23rd of December, 1894, that we left Liverpool in the
Batanga, commanded by my old friend Captain Murray, under whose care
I had made my first voyage.  On the 30th we sighted the Peak of
Teneriffe early in the afternoon.  It displayed itself, as usual, as
an entirely celestial phenomenon.  A great many people miss seeing
it.  Suffering under the delusion that El Pico is a terrestrial
affair, they look in vain somewhere about the level of their own
eyes, which are striving to penetrate the dense masses of mist that
usually enshroud its slopes by day, and then a friend comes along,
and gaily points out to the newcomer the glittering white triangle
somewhere near the zenith.  On some days the Peak stands out clear
from ocean to summit, looking every inch and more of its 12,080 ft.;
and this is said by the Canary fishermen to be a certain sign of
rain, or fine weather, or a gale of wind; but whenever and however
it may be seen, soft and dream-like in the sunshine, or melodramatic
and bizarre in the moonlight, it is one of the most beautiful things
the eye of man may see.

Soon after sighting Teneriffe, Lancarote showed, and then the Grand
Canary.  Teneriffe is perhaps the most beautiful, but it is hard to
judge between it and Grand Canary as seen from the sea.  The superb
cone this afternoon stood out a deep purple against a serpent-green
sky, separated from the brilliant blue ocean by a girdle of pink and
gold cumulus, while Grand Canary and Lancarote looked as if they
were formed from fantastic-shaped sunset cloud-banks that by some
spell had been solidified.  The general colour of the mountains of
Grand Canary, which rise peak after peak until they culminate in the
Pico de las Nieves, some 6,000 feet high, is a yellowish red, and
the air which lies among their rocky crevices and swathes their
softer sides is a lovely lustrous blue.

Just before the sudden dark came down, and when the sun was taking a
curve out of the horizon of sea, all the clouds gathered round the
three islands, leaving the sky a pure amethyst pink, and as a good-
night to them the sun outlined them with rims of shining gold, and
made the snow-clad Peak of Teneriffe blaze with star-white light.
In a few minutes came the dusk, and as we neared Grand Canary, out
of its cloud-bank gleamed the red flash of the lighthouse on the
Isleta, and in a few more minutes, along the sea level, sparkled the
five miles of irregularly distributed lights of Puerto de la Luz and
the city of Las Palmas.

We reached Sierra Leone at 9 A.M. on the 7th of January, and as the
place is hardly so much in touch with the general public as the
Canaries are {14} I may perhaps venture to go more into details
regarding it.  The harbour is formed by the long low strip of land
to the north called the Bullam shore, and to the south by the
peninsula terminating in Cape Sierra Leone, a sandy promontory at
the end of which is situated a lighthouse of irregular habits.  Low
hills covered with tropical forest growth rise from the sandy shores
of the Cape, and along its face are three creeks or bays, deep
inlets showing through their narrow entrances smooth beaches of
yellow sand, fenced inland by the forest of cotton-woods and palms,
with here and there an elephantine baobab.

The first of these bays is called Pirate Bay, the next English Bay,
and the third Kru Bay.  The wooded hills of the Cape rise after
passing Kru Bay, and become spurs of the mountain, 2,500 feet in
height, which is the Sierra Leone itself.  There are, however,
several mountains here besides the Sierra Leone, the most
conspicuous of them being the peak known as Sugar Loaf, and when
seen from the sea they are very lovely, for their form is noble, and
a wealth of tropical vegetation covers them, which, unbroken in its
continuity, but endless in its variety, seems to sweep over their
sides down to the shore like a sea, breaking here and there into a
surf of flowers.

It is the general opinion, indeed, of those who ought to know that
Sierra Leone appears at its best when seen from the sea,
particularly when you are leaving the harbour homeward bound; and
that here its charms, artistic, moral, and residential, end.  But,
from the experience I have gained of it, I have no hesitation in
saying that it is one of the best places for getting luncheon in
that I have ever happened on, and that a more pleasant and varied
way of spending an afternoon than going about its capital, Free
Town, with a certain Irish purser, who is as well known as he is
respected among the leviathan old negro ladies, it would be hard to
find.  Still it must be admitted it IS rather hot.

Free Town its capital is situated on the northern base of the
mountain, and extends along the sea-front with most business-like
wharves, quays, and warehouses.  Viewed from the harbour, "The
Liverpool of West Africa," {15} as it is called, looks as if it were
built of gray stone, which it is not.  When you get ashore, you will
find that most of the stores and houses--the majority of which, it
may be remarked, are in a state of acute dilapidation--are of
painted wood, with corrugated iron roofs.  Here and there, though,
you will see a thatched house, its thatch covered with creeping
plants, and inhabited by colonies of creeping insects.

Some of the stores and churches are, it is true, built of stone, but
this does not look like stone at a distance, being red in colour--
unhewn blocks of the red stone of the locality.  In the crannies of
these buildings trailing plants covered with pretty mauve or yellow
flowers take root, and everywhere, along the tops of the walls, and
in the cracks of the houses, are ferns and flowering plants.  They
must get a good deal of their nourishment from the rich, thick air,
which seems composed of 85 per cent. of warm water, and the
remainder of the odours of Frangipani, orange flowers, magnolias,
oleanders, and roses, combined with others that demonstrate that the
inhabitants do not regard sanitary matters with the smallest degree
of interest.

There is one central street, and the others are neatly planned out
at right angles to it.  None of them are in any way paved or
metalled.  They are covered in much prettier fashion, and in a way
more suitable for naked feet, by green Bahama grass, save and except
those which are so nearly perpendicular that they have got every bit
of earth and grass cleared off them down to the red bed-rock, by the
heavy rain of the wet season.

In every direction natives are walking at a brisk pace, their naked
feet making no sound on the springy turf of the streets, carrying on
their heads huge burdens which are usually crowned by the hat of the
bearer, a large limpet-shaped affair made of palm leaves.  While
some carry these enormous bundles, others bear logs or planks of
wood, blocks of building stone, vessels containing palm-oil, baskets
of vegetables, or tin tea-trays on which are folded shawls.  As the
great majority of the native inhabitants of Sierra Leone pay no
attention whatever to where they are going, either in this world or
the next, the confusion and noise are out of all proportion to the
size of the town; and when, as frequently happens, a section of
actively perambulating burden-bearers charge recklessly into a
sedentary section, the members of which have dismounted their loads
and squatted themselves down beside them, right in the middle of the
fair way, to have a friendly yell with some acquaintances, the row
becomes terrific.

In among these crowds of country people walk stately Mohammedans,
Mandingoes, Akers, and Fulahs of the Arabised tribes of the Western
Soudan.  These are lithe, well-made men, and walk with a peculiarly
fine, elastic carriage.  Their graceful garb consists of a long
white loose-sleeved shirt, over which they wear either a long black
mohair or silk gown, or a deep bright blue affair, not altogether
unlike a University gown, only with more stuff in it and more folds.
They are undoubtedly the gentlemen of the Sierra Leone native
population, and they are becoming an increasing faction in the town,
by no means to the pleasure of the Christians.

But to the casual visitor at Sierra Leone the Mohammedan is a mere
passing sensation.  You neither feel a burning desire to laugh with,
or at him, as in the case of the country folks, nor do you wish to
punch his head, and split his coat up his back--things you yearn to
do to that perfect flower of Sierra Leone culture, who yells your
bald name across the street at you, condescendingly informs you that
you can go and get letters that are waiting for you, while he smokes
his cigar and lolls in the shade, or in some similar way displays
his second-hand rubbishy white culture--a culture far lower and less
dignified than that of either the stately Mandingo or the bush
chief.  I do not think that the Sierra Leone dandy really means half
as much insolence as he shows; but the truth is he feels too
insecure of his own real position, in spite of all the "side" he
puts on, and so he dare not be courteous like the Mandingo or the
bush Fan.

It is the costume of the people in Free Town and its harbour that
will first attract the attention of the newcomer, notwithstanding
the fact that the noise, the smell, and the heat are simultaneously
making desperate bids for that favour.  The ordinary man in the
street wears anything he may have been able to acquire, anyhow, and
he does not fasten it on securely.  I fancy it must be capillary
attraction, or some other partially-understood force, that takes
part in the matter.  It is certainly neither braces nor buttons.
There are, of course, some articles which from their very structure
are fairly secure, such as an umbrella with the stick and ribs
removed, or a shirt.  This last-mentioned treasure, which usually
becomes the property of the ordinary man from a female relative or
admirer taking in white men's washing, is always worn flowing free,
and has such a charm in itself that the happy possessor cares little
what he continues his costume with--trousers, loin cloth, red
flannel petticoat, or rice-bag drawers, being, as he would put it,
"all same for one" to him.

The ladies are divided into three classes; the young girl you
address as "tee-tee"; the young person as "seester"; the more mature
charmer as "mammy"; but I do not advise you to employ these terms
when you are on your first visit, because you might get
misunderstood.  For, you see, by addressing a mammy as seester, she
might think either that you were unconscious of her dignity as a
married lady--a matter she would soon put you right on--or that you
were flirting, which of course was totally foreign to your
intention, and would make you uncomfortable.  My advice is that you
rigidly stick to missus or mammy.  I have seen this done most
successfully.

The ladies are almost as varied in their costume as the gentlemen,
but always neater and cleaner; and mighty picturesque they are too,
and occasionally very pretty.  A market-woman with her jolly brown
face and laughing brown eyes--eyes all the softer for a touch of
antimony--her ample form clothed in a lively print overall, made
with a yoke at the shoulders, and a full long flounce which is
gathered on to the yoke under the arms and falls fully to the feet;
with her head done up in a yellow or red handkerchief, and her snowy
white teeth gleaming through her vast smiles, is a mighty pleasant
thing to see, and to talk to.  But, Allah! the circumference of
them!

The stone-built, white-washed market buildings of Free Town have a
creditably clean and tidy appearance considering the climate, and
the quantity and variety of things exposed for sale--things one
wants the pen of a Rabelais to catalogue.  Here are all manner of
fruits, some which are familiar to you in England; others that soon
become so to you in Africa.  You take them as a matter of course if
you are outward bound, but on your call homeward (if you make it)
you will look on them as a blessing and a curiosity.  For lower
down, particularly in "the Rivers," these things are rarely to be
had, and never in such perfection as here; and to see again
lettuces, yellow oranges, and tomatoes bigger than marbles is a
sensation and a joy.

One of the chief features of Free Town are the jack crows.  Some
writers say they are peculiar to Sierra Leone, others that they are
not, but both unite in calling them Picathartes gymnocephalus.  To
the white people who live in daily contact with them they are turkey
buzzards; to the natives, Yubu.  Anyhow they are evil-looking fowl,
and no ornament to the roof-ridges they choose to sit on.  The
native Christians ought to put a row of spikes along the top of
their cathedral to keep them off; the beauty of that edifice is very
far from great, and it cannot carry off the effect produced by the
row of these noisome birds as they sit along its summit, with their
wings arranged at all manner of different angles in an "all gone"
way.  One bird perhaps will have one straight out in front, and the
other casually disposed at right-angles, another both straight out
in front, and others again with both hanging hopelessly down, but
none with them neatly and tidily folded up, as decent birds' wings
should be.  They all give the impression of having been extremely
drunk the previous evening, and of having subsequently fallen into
some sticky abomination--into blood for choice.  Being the
scavengers of Free Town, however, they are respected by the local
authorities and preserved; and the natives tell me you never see
either a young or a dead one.  The latter is a thing you would not
expect, for half of them look as if they could not live through the
afternoon.  They also told me that when you got close to them, they
had a "'trong, 'trong 'niff; 'niff too much."  I did not try, but I
am quite willing to believe this statement.

The other animals most in evidence in the streets are, first and
foremost, goats and sheep.  I have to lump them together, for it is
exceedingly difficult to tell one from the other.  All along the
Coast the empirical rule is that sheep carry their tails down, and
goats carry their tails up; fortunately you need not worry much
anyway, for they both "taste rather like the nothing that the world
was made of," as Frau Buchholtz says, and own in addition a fibrous
texture, and a certain twang.  Small cinnamon-coloured cattle are to
be got here, but horses there are practically none.  Now and again
some one who does not see why a horse should not live here as well
as at Accra or Lagos imports one, but it always shortly dies.  Some
say it is because the natives who get their living by hammock-
carrying poison them, others say the tsetse fly finishes them off;
and others, and these I believe are right, say that entozoa are the
cause.  Small, lean, lank yellow dogs with very erect ears lead an
awful existence, afflicted by many things, but beyond all others by
the goats, who, rearing their families in the grassy streets, choose
to think the dogs intend attacking them.  Last, but not least, there
is the pig--a rich source of practice to the local lawyer.

Cape Coast Castle and then Accra were the next places of general
interest at which we stopped.  The former looks well from the
roadstead, and as if it had very recently been white-washed.  It is
surrounded by low, heavily-forested hills, which rise almost from
the seashore, and the fine mass of its old castle does not display
its dilapidation at a distance.  Moreover, the three stone forts of
Victoria, William, and Macarthy, situated on separate hills
commanding the town, add to the general appearance of permanent
substantialness so different from the usual ramshackledom of West
Coast settlements.  Even when you go ashore and have had time to
recover your senses, scattered by the surf experience, you find this
substantialness a true one, not a mere visual delusion produced by
painted wood as the seeming substantialness of Sierra Leone turns
out to be when you get to close quarters with it.  It causes one
some mental effort to grasp the fact that Cape Coast has been in
European hands for centuries, but it requires a most unmodern power
of credence to realise this of any other settlement on the whole
western seaboard until you have the pleasure of seeing the beautiful
city of San Paul de Loanda, far away down south, past the Congo.

My experience of Cape Coast on this occasion was one of the hottest,
but one of the pleasantest I have ever been through on the Gold
Coast.  The former attribute was due to the climate, the latter to
my kind friends, Mr. Batty, and Mr. and Mrs. Dennis Kemp.  I was
taken round the grand stone-built houses with their high stone-
walled yards and sculpture-decorated gateways, built by the
merchants of the last century and of the century before, and through
the great rambling stone castle with its water-tanks cut in the
solid rock beneath it, and its commodious accommodation for slaves
awaiting shipment, now almost as obsolete as the guns it mounts, but
not quite so, for these cool and roomy chambers serve to house the
native constabulary and their extensive families.

This being done, I was taken up an unmitigated hill, on whose summit
stands Fort William, a pepper-pot-like structure now used as a
lighthouse.  The view from the top was exceedingly lovely and
extensive.  Beneath, and between us and the sea, lay the town in the
blazing sun.  In among its solid stone buildings patches of native
mud-built huts huddled together as though they had been shaken down
out of a sack into the town to serve as dunnage.  Then came the
snow-white surf wall, and across it the blue sea with our steamer
rolling to and fro on the long, regular swell, impatiently waiting
until Sunday should be over and she could work cargo.  Round us on
all the other sides were wooded hills and valleys, and away in the
distance to the west showed the white town and castle of Elmina and
the nine-mile road thither, skirting the surf-bound seashore, only
broken on its level way by the mouth of the Sweet River.  Over all
was the brooding silence of the noonday heat, broken only by the
dulled thunder of the surf.

After seeing these things we started down stairs, and on reaching
ground descended yet lower into a sort of stone-walled dry moat, out
of which opened clean, cool, cellar-like chambers tunnelled into the
earth.  These, I was informed, had also been constructed to keep
slaves in when they were the staple export of the Gold Coast.  They
were so refreshingly cool that I lingered looking at them and their
massive doors, ere being marched up to ground level again, and down
the hill through some singularly awful stenches, mostly arising from
rubber, into the big Wesleyan church in the middle of the town.  It
is a building in the terrible Africo-Gothic style, but it compares
most favourably with the cathedral at Sierra Leone, particularly
internally, wherein, indeed, it far surpasses that structure.  And
then we returned to the Mission House and spent a very pleasant
evening, save for the knowledge (which amounted in me to remorse)
that, had it not been for my edification, not one of my friends
would have spent the day toiling about the town they know only too
well.  The Wesleyan Mission on the Gold Coast, of which Mr. Dennis
Kemp was at that time chairman, is the largest and most influential
Protestant mission on the West Coast of Africa, and it is now, I am
glad to say, adding a technical department to its scholastic and
religious one.  The Basel Mission has done a great deal of good work
in giving technical instruction to the natives, and practically
started this most important branch of their education.  There is
still an almost infinite amount of this work to be done, the African
being so strangely deficient in mechanical culture; infinitely more
so, indeed, in this than in any other particular.

After leaving Cape Coast our next port was Accra which is one of the
five West Coast towns that look well from the sea.  The others don't
look well from anywhere.  First in order of beauty comes San Paul de
Loanda; then Cape Coast with its satellite Elmina, then Gaboon, then
Accra with its satellite Christiansborg, and lastly, Sierra Leone.

What there is of beauty in Accra is oriental in type.  Seen from the
sea, Fort St. James on the left and Christiansborg Castle on the
right, both almost on shore level, give, with an outcrop of sandy
dwarf cliffs, a certain air of balance and strength to the town,
though but for these and the two old castles, Accra would be but a
poor place and a flimsy, for the rest of it is a mass of rubbishy
mud and palm-leaf huts, and corrugated iron dwellings for the
Europeans.

Corrugated iron is my abomination.  I quite understand it has
points, and I do not attack from an aesthetic standpoint.  It really
looks well enough when it is painted white.  There is, close to
Christiansborg Castle, a patch of bungalows and offices for
officialdom and wife that from a distance in the hard bright
sunshine looks like an encampment of snow-white tents among the coco
palms, and pretty enough withal.  I am also aware that the
corrugated-iron roof is an advantage in enabling you to collect and
store rain-water, which is the safest kind of water you can get on
the Coast, always supposing you have not painted the aforesaid roof
with red oxide an hour or two before so collecting, as a friend of
mine did once.  But the heat inside those iron houses is far greater
than inside mud-walled, brick, or wooden ones, and the alternations
of temperature more sudden:  mornings and evenings they are cold and
clammy; draughty they are always, thereby giving you chill which
means fever, and fever in West Africa means more than it does in
most places.

Going on shore at Accra with Lady MacDonald gave me opportunities
and advantages I should not otherwise have enjoyed, such as the
hospitality of the Governor, luxurious transport from the landing
place to Christiansborg Castle, a thorough inspection of the
cathedral in course of erection, and the strange and highly
interesting function of going to a tea-party at a police station to
meet a king,--a real reigning king,--who kindly attended with his
suite and displayed an intelligent interest in photographs.  Tackie
(that is His Majesty's name) is an old, spare man, with a subdued
manner.  His sovereign rights are acknowledged by the Government so
far as to hold him more or less responsible for any iniquity
committed by his people; and as the Government do not allow him to
execute or flagellate the said people, earthly pomp is rather a
hollow thing to Tackie.

On landing I was taken in charge by an Assistant Inspector of
Police, and after a scrimmage for my chief's baggage and my own,
which reminded me of a long ago landing on the distant island of
Guernsey, the inspector and I got into a 'rickshaw, locally called a
go-cart.  It was pulled in front by two government negroes and
pushed behind by another pair, all neatly attired in white jackets
and knee breeches, and crimson cummerbunds yards long, bound round
their middles.  Now it is an ingrained characteristic of the
uneducated negro, that he cannot keep on a neat and complete garment
of any kind.  It does not matter what that garment may be; so long
as it is whole, off it comes.  But as soon as that garment becomes a
series of holes, held together by filaments of rag, he keeps it upon
him in a manner that is marvellous, and you need have no further
anxiety on its behalf.  Therefore it was but natural that the
governmental cummerbunds, being new, should come off their wearers
several times in the course of our two mile trip, and as they wound
riskily round the legs of their running wearers, we had to make
halts while one end of the cummerbund was affixed to a tree-trunk
and the other end to the man, who rapidly wound himself up in it
again with a skill that spoke of constant practice.

The road to Christiansborg from Accra, which runs parallel to the
sea and is broad and well-kept, is in places pleasantly shaded with
pepper trees, eucalyptus, and palms.  The first part of it, which
forms the main street of Accra, is remarkable.  The untidy, poverty-
stricken native houses or huts are no credit to their owners, and a
constant source of anxiety to a conscientious sanitary inspector.
Almost every one of them is a shop, but this does not give rise to
the animated commercial life one might imagine, owing, I presume, to
the fact that every native inhabitant of Accra who has any money to
get rid of is able recklessly to spend it in his own emporium.  For
these shops are of the store nature, each after his kind, and seem
homogeneously stocked with tin pans, loud-patterned basins, iron
pots, a few rolls of cloth and bottles of American rum.  After
passing these there are the Haussa lines, a few European houses, and
the cathedral; and when nearly into Christiansborg, a cemetery on
either side of the road.  That to the right is the old cemetery, now
closed, and when I was there, in a disgracefully neglected state:  a
mere jungle of grass infested with snakes.  Opposite to it is the
cemetery now in use, and I remember well my first visit to it under
the guidance