"

Such precocity is less unusual, even in children of the Rich, than
most grown people imagine.  However, it was a new experience for the
Reverend Malloch Smith, and left him in a state of excitement.  He at
once wrote a note to Georgie's mother, describing the crime according
to his nephew's testimony; and the note reached Mrs. Minafer before
Georgie did.  When he got home she read it to him sorrowfully.

Dear Madam:
Your son has caused a painful distress in my household.  He made an
unprovoked attack upon a little nephew of mine who is visiting in my
household, insulted him by calling him vicious names and falsehoods,
stating that ladies of his family were in jail.  He then tried to make
his pony kick him, and when the child, who is only eleven years old,
while your son is much older and stronger, endeavoured to avoid his
indignities and withdraw quietly, he pursued him into the enclosure of
my property and brutally assaulted him.  When I appeared upon this
scene he deliberately called insulting words to me, concluding with
profanity, such as "go to hell," which was heard not only by myself
but by my wife and the lady who lives next door.  I trust such a state
of undisciplined behaviour may be remedied for the sake of the
reputation for propriety, if nothing higher, of the family to which
this unruly child belongs.


Georgie had muttered various interruptions, and as she concluded the
reading he said: "He's an ole liar!"

"Georgie, you mustn't say 'liar.'  Isn't this letter the truth?"

"Well," said Georgie, "how old am I?"

"Ten."

"Well, look how he says I'm older than a boy eleven years old."

"That's true," said Isabel.  "He does.  But isn't some of it true,
Georgie?"

Georgie felt himself to be in a difficulty here, and he was silent.

"Georgie, did you say what he says you did?

"Which one?"

"Did you tell him to--to--Did you say, 'Go to hell?"

Georgie looked worried for a moment longer; then he brightened.
"Listen here, mamma; grandpa wouldn't wipe his shoe on that ole story-
teller, would he?"

"Georgie, you mustn't--"

"I mean: none of the Ambersons wouldn't have anything to do with him,
would they?  He doesn't even know you, does he, mamma?"

"That hasn't anything to do with it."

"Yes, it has!  I mean: none of the Amberson family go to see him, and
they never have him come in their house; they wouldn't ask him to, and
they prob'ly wouldn't even let him."

"That isn't what we're talking about."

"I bet," said Georgie emphatically, "I bet if he wanted to see any of
'em, he'd haf to go around to the side door!"

"No, dear, they--"

"Yes, they would, mamma!  So what does it matter if I did say somep'm'
to him he didn't like?  That kind o' people, I don't see why you can't
say anything you want to, to 'em!"

"No, Georgie.  And you haven't answered me whether you said that
dreadful thing he says you did."

"Well--" said Georgie.  "Anyway, he said somep'm' to me that made me
mad."  And upon this point he offered no further details; he would not
explain to his mother that what had made him "mad" was Mr. Smith's
hasty condemnation of herself:  "Your mother ought to be ashamed,"
and, "A woman that lets a bad boy like you--" Georgie did not even
consider excusing himself by quoting these insolences.

Isabel stroked his head.  "They were terrible words for you to use,
dear.  From his letter he doesn't seem a very tactful person, but--"

"He's just riffraff," said Georgie.

"You mustn't say so," his mother gently agreed "Where did you learn
those bad words he speaks of?  Where did you hear any one use them?"

"Well, I've heard 'em several places.  I guess Uncle George Amberson
was the first I ever heard say 'em.  Uncle George Amberson said 'em to
papa once.  Papa didn't like it, but Uncle George was just laughin' at
papa, an' then he said 'em while he was laughin'."

"That was wrong of him," she said, but almost instinctively he
detected the lack of conviction in her tone.  It was Isabel's great
failing that whatever an Amberson did seemed right to her, especially
if the Amberson was either her brother George, or her son George.  She
knew that she should be more severe with the latter now, but severity
with him was beyond her power; and the Reverend Malloch Smith had
succeeded only in rousing her resentment against himself.  Georgie's
symmetrical face--altogether an Amberson face--had looked never more
beautiful to her.  It always looked unusually beautiful when she tried
to be severe with him.  "You must promise me," she said feebly, "never
to use those bad words again."

"I promise not to," he said promptly--and he whispered an immediate
codicil under his breath: "Unless I get mad at somebody !"  This
satisfied a code according to which, in his own sincere belief, he
never told lies.

"That's a good boy," she said, and he ran out to the yard, his
punishment over.  Some admiring friends were gathered there; they had
heard of his adventure, knew of the note, and were waiting to see what
was going to "happen" to him.  They hoped for an account of things,
and also that he would allow them to "take turns" riding his pony to
the end of the alley and back.

They were really his henchmen:  Georgie was a lord among boys.  In
fact, he was a personage among certain sorts of grown people, and was
often fawned upon; the alley negroes delighted in him, chuckled over
him, flattered him slavishly.  For that matter, he often heard well-
dressed people speaking of him admiringly: a group of ladies once
gathered about him on the pavement where he was spinning a top.  "I
know this is Georgie!" one exclaimed, and turned to the others with
the impressiveness of a showman. "Major Amberson's only grandchild!"
The others said, "It is?" and made clicking sounds with their mouths;
two of them loudly whispering, "So handsome!"

Georgie, annoyed because they kept standing upon the circle he had
chalked for his top, looked at them coldly and offered a suggestion:

"Oh, go hire a hall!"

As an Amberson, he was already a public character, and the story of
his adventure in the Reverend Malloch Smith's front yard became a town
topic.  Many people glanced at him with great distaste, thereafter,
when they chanced to encounter him, which meant nothing to Georgie,
because he innocently believed most grown people to be necessarily
cross-looking as a normal phenomenon resulting from the adult state;
and he failed to comprehend that the distasteful glances had any
personal bearing upon himself.  If he had perceived such a bearing, he
would have been affected only so far, probably, as to mutter,
"Riffraff!"  Possibly he would have shouted it; and, certainly, most
people believed a story that went round the town just after Mrs.
Amberson's funeral, when Georgie was eleven.  Georgie was reported to
have differed with the undertaker about the seating of the family; his
indignant voice had become audible: "Well, who is the most important
person at my own grandmother's funeral?"  And later he had projected
his head from the window of the foremost mourners' carriage, as the
undertaker happened to pass.

"Riffraff!"

There were people--grown people they were--who expressed themselves
longingly: they did hope to live to see the day, they said, when that
boy would get his come-upance! (They used that honest word, so much
better than "deserts," and not until many years later to be more
clumsily rendered as "what is coming to him.")  Something was bound to
take him down, some day, and they only wanted to be there!  But
Georgie heard nothing of this, and the yearners for his taking down
went unsatisfied, while their yearning grew the greater as the happy
day of fulfilment was longer and longer postponed.  His grandeur was
not diminished by the Malloch Smith story; the rather it was
increased, and among other children (especially among little girls)
there was added to the prestige of his gilded position that diabolical
glamour which must inevitably attend a boy who has told a minister to
go to hell.




Chapter III



Until he reached the age of twelve, Georgie's education was a domestic
process; tutors came to the house; and those citizens who yearned for
his taking down often said: "Just wait till he has to go to public
school; then he'll get it!"  But at twelve Georgie was sent to a
private school in the town, and there came from this small and
dependent institution no report, or even rumour, of Georgie's getting
anything that he was thought to deserve; therefore the yearning still
persisted, though growing gaunt with feeding upon itself.  For,
although Georgie's pomposities and impudence in the little school were
often almost unbearable, the teachers were fascinated by him.  They
did not like him--he was too arrogant for that--but he kept them in
such a state of emotion that they thought more about him than they did
about all of the other ten pupils.  The emotion he kept them in was
usually one resulting from injured self-respect, but sometimes it was
dazzled admiration.  So far as their conscientious observation went,
he "studied" his lessons sparingly; but sometimes, in class, he
flashed an admirable answer, with a comprehension not often shown by
the pupils they taught; and he passed his examinations easily.  In
all, without discernible effort, he acquired at this school some
rudiments of a liberal education and learned nothing whatever about
himself.

The yearners were still yearning when Georgie, at sixteen, was sent
away to a great "Prep School."  "Now," they said brightly, "he'll get
it!  He'll find himself among boys just as important in their home
towns as he is, and they'll knock the stuffing out of him when he puts
on his airs with them!  Oh, but that would he worth something to see!"
They were mistaken, it appeared, for when Georgie returned, a few
months later, he still seemed to have the same stuffing.  He had been
deported by the authorities, the offense being stated as "insolence
and profanity"; in fact, he had given the principal of the school
instructions almost identical with those formerly objected to by the
Reverend Malloch Smith.

But he had not got his come-upance, and those who counted upon it were
embittered by his appearance upon the down-town streets driving a dog-
cart at criminal speed, making pedestrians retreat from the crossings,
and behaving generally as if he "owned the earth."  A disgusted
hardware dealer of middle age, one of those who hungered for Georgie's
downfall, was thus driven back upon the sidewalk to avoid being run
over, and so far forgot himself as to make use of the pet street
insult of the year:  "Got 'ny sense!  See here, bub, does your mother
know you're out?"

Georgie, without even seeming to look at him, flicked the long lash of
his whip dexterously, and a little spurt of dust came from the
hardware man's trousers, not far below the waist.  He was not made of
hardware: he raved, looking for a missile; then, finding none,
commanded himself sufficiently to shout after the rapid dog-cart:
"Turn down your pants, you would-be dude!  Raining in dear ole Lunnon!
Git off the earth!"

Georgie gave him no encouragement to think that he was heard.  The
dog-cart turned the next corner, causing indignation there, likewise,
and, having proceeded some distance farther, halted in front of the
"Amberson Block"--an old-fashioned four-story brick warren of lawyers
offices, insurance and realestate offices, with a "drygoods store"
occupying the ground floor.  Georgie tied his lathered trotter to a
telegraph pole, and stood for a moment looking at the building
critically: it seemed shabby, and he thought his grandfather ought to
replace it with a fourteen-story skyscraper, or even a higher one,
such as he had lately seen in New York--when he stopped there for a
few days of recreation and rest on his way home from the bereaved
school.  About the entryway to the stairs were various tin signs,
announcing the occupation and location of upper-floor tenants, and
Georgie decided to take some of these with him if he should ever go to
college.  However, he did not stop to collect them at this time, but
climbed the worn stairs--there was no elevator--to the fourth floor,
went down a dark corridor, and rapped three times upon a door.  It was
a mysterious door, its upper half, of opaque glass, bearing no sign to
state the business or profession of the occupants within; but
overhead, upon the lintel, four letters had been smearingly inscribed,
partly with purple ink and partly with a soft lead pencil, "F. O. T.
A." and upon the plaster wall, above the lintel, there was a drawing
dear to male adolescence: a skull and crossbones.

Three raps, similar to Georgie's, sounded from within the room.
Georgie then rapped four times the rapper within the room rapped
twice, and Georgie rapped seven times.  This ended precautionary
measures; and a well-dressed boy of sixteen opened the door; whereupon
Georgie entered quickly, and the door was closed behind him.  Seven
boys of congenial age were seated in a semicircular row of damaged
office chairs, facing a platform whereon stood a solemn, red-haired
young personage with a table before him.  At one end of the room there
was a battered sideboard, and upon it were some empty beer bottles, a
tobacco can about two-thirds full, with a web of mold over the surface
of the tobacco, a dusty cabinet photograph (not inscribed) of Miss
Lillian Russell, several withered old pickles, a caseknife, and a
half-petrified section of icing-cake on a sooty plate.  At the other
end of the room were two rickety card-tables and a stand of
bookshelves where were displayed under dust four or five small volumes
of M. Guy de Maupassant's stories, "Robinson Crusoe," "Sappho," "Mr.
Barnes of New York," a work by Giovanni Boccaccio, a Bible, "The
Arabian Nights' Entertainment," "Studies of the Human Form Divine,"
"The Little Minister," and a clutter of monthly magazines and
illustrated weeklies of about that crispness one finds in such
articles upon a doctor's ante-room table.  Upon the wall, above the
sideboard, was an old framed lithograph of Miss Della Fox in "Wang";
over the bookshelves there was another lithograph purporting to
represent Mr. John L. Sullivan in a boxing costume, and beside it a
halftone reproduction of "A Reading From Horner."  The final
decoration consisted of damaged papiermache--a round shield with two
battle-axes and two cross-hilted swords, upon the wall over the little
platform where stood the red-haired presiding officer.  He addressed
Georgie in a serious voice:

"Welcome, Friend of the Ace."

"Welcome, Friend of the Ace," Georgie responded, and all of the other
boys repeated the words, "Welcome, Friend of the Ace."

"Take your seat in the secret semicircle," said the presiding officer.
"We will now proceed to--"

But Georgie was disposed to be informal.  He interrupted, turning to
the boy who had admitted him:  "Look here, Charlie Johnson, what's
Fred Kinney doing in the president's chair?  That's my place, isn't
it?  What you men been up to here, anyhow?  Didn't you all agree I was
to be president just the same, even if I was away at school?"

"Well--" said Charlie Johnson uneasily.  "Listen! I didn't have much
to do with it.  Some of the other members thought that long as you
weren't in town or anything, and Fred gave the sideboard, why--"

Mr. Kinney, presiding, held in his hand, in lieu of a gavel, and
considered much more impressive, a Civil War relic known as a "horse-
pistol."  He rapped loudly for order.  "All Friends of the Ace will
take their seats!" he said sharply.  "I'm president of the F. O. T. A.
now, George Minafer, and don't you forget it!  You and Charlie Johnson
sit down, because I was elected perfectly fair, and we're goin' to
hold a meeting here."

"Oh, you are, are you?" said George skeptically.

Charlie Johnson thought to mollify him.  "Well, didn't we call this
meeting just especially because you told us to?  You said yourself we
ought to have a kind of celebration because you've got back to town,
George, and that's what we're here for now, and everything.  What do
you care about being president?  All it amounts to is just calling the
roll and--"

The president de facto hammered the table.  "This meeting will now
proceed to--"

"No, it won't," said George, and he advanced to the desk, laughing
contemptuously.  "Get off that platform."

"This meeting will come to order!"  Mr. Kinney commanded fiercely.

"You put down that gavel," said George. "Whose is it, I'd like to
know?  It belongs to my grandfather, and you quit hammering it that
way or you'll break it, and I'll have to knock your head off."

"This meeting will come to order!  I was legally elected here, and I'm
not going to be bulldozed!"

"All right," said Georgie.  "You're president.  Now we'll hold another
election."

"We will not!" Fred Kinney shouted.  "We'll have our reg'lar meeting,
and then we'll play euchre & nickel a corner, what we're here for.
This meeting will now come to ord--"

Georgie addressed the members.  "I'd like to know who got up this
thing in the first place," he said.  "Who's the founder of the
F.O.T.A., if you please?  Who got this room rent free?  Who got the
janitor to let us have most of this furniture?  You suppose you could
keep this clubroom a minute if I told my grandfather I didn't want it
for a literary club any more?  I'd like to say a word on how you
members been acting, too!  When I went away I said I didn't care if
you had a vice-president or something while I was gone, but here I
hardly turned my back and you had to go and elect Fred Kinney
president!  Well, if that's what you want, you can have it.  I was
going to have a little celebration down here some night pretty soon,
and bring some port wine, like we drink at school in our crowd there,
and I was going to get my grandfather to give the club an extra room
across the hall, and prob'ly I could get my Uncle George to give us
his old billiard table, because he's got a new one, and the club could
put it in the other room.  Well, you got a new president now!"  Here
Georgie moved toward the door and his tone became plaintive, though
undeniably there was disdain beneath his sorrow.  "I guess all I
better do is--resign!"

And he opened the door, apparently intending to withdraw.

"All in favour of having a new election," Charlie Johnson shouted
hastily, "say, 'Aye'!"

"Aye" was said by everyone present except Mr. Kinney, who began a hot
protest, but it was immediately smothered.

"All in favour of me being president instead of Fred Kinney," shouted
Georgie, "say 'Aye.'  The 'Ayes' have it!"

 "I resign," said the red-headed boy, gulping as he descended from the
platform.  "I resign from the club!"

Hot-eyed, he found his hat and departed, jeers echoing after him as he
plunged down the corridor.  Georgie stepped upon the platform, and
took up the emblem of office.

"Ole red-head Fred'll be around next week," said the new chairman.
"He'll be around boot-lickin' to get us to take him back in again, but
I guess we don't want him: that fellow always was a trouble-maker.  We
will now proceed with our meeting.  Well, fellows, I suppose you want
to hear from your president.  I don't know that I have much to say, as
I have already seen most of you a few times since I got back.  I had a
good time at the old school, back East, but had a little trouble with
the faculty and came on home.  My family stood by me as well as I
could ask, and I expect to stay right here in the old town until
whenever I decide to enter college.  Now, I don't suppose there's any
more business before the meeting.  I guess we might as well play
cards.  Anybody that's game for a little quarter-limit poker or any
limit they say, why I'd like to have 'em sit at the president's card-
table."

When the diversions of the Friends of the Ace were concluded for that
afternoon, Georgie invited his chief supporter, Mr. Charlie Johnson,
to drive home with him to dinner, and as they jingled up National
Avenue in the dog-cart, Charlie asked:

"What sort of men did you run up against at that school, George?"

"Best crowd there: finest set of men I ever met."

"How'd you get in with 'em?"

Georgie laughed. "I let them get in with me, Charlie," he said in a
tone of gentle explanation.  "It's vulgar to do any other way.  Did I
tell you the nickname they gave me--'King'?  That was what they called
me at that school, 'King Minafer."

"How'd they happen to do that?" his friend asked innocently.

"Oh, different things," George answered lightly.  "Of course, any of
'em that came from anywhere out in this part the country knew about
the family and all that, and so I suppose it was a good deal on
account of--oh, on account of the family and the way I do things, most
likely."




CHAPTER IV


When Mr. George Amberson Minafer came home for the holidays at
Christmastide, in his sophomore year, probably no great change had
taken place inside him, but his exterior was visibly altered.  Nothing
about him encouraged any hope that he had received his come-upance; on
the contrary, the yearners for that stroke of justice must yearn even
more itchingly: the gilded youth's manner had become polite, but his
politeness was of a kind which democratic people found hard to bear.
In a word, M. le Due had returned from the gay life of the capital to
show himself for a week among the loyal peasants belonging to the old
chateau, and their quaint habits and costumes afforded him a mild
amusement.

Cards were out for a ball in his honour, and this pageant of the
tenantry was held in the ballroom of the Amberson Mansion the night
after his arrival.  It was, as Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster said of
Isabel's wedding, "a big Amberson-style thing," though that wise Mrs.
Henry Franklin Foster had long ago gone the way of all wisdom, having
stepped out of the Midland town, unquestionably into heaven--a long
step, but not beyond her powers.  She had successors, but no
successor; the town having grown too large to confess that it was
intellectually led and literarily authoritated by one person; and some
of these successors were not invited to the ball, for dimensions were
now so metropolitan that intellectual leaders and literary authorities
loomed in outlying regions unfamiliar to the Ambersons.  However, all
"old citizens" recognizable as gentry received cards, and of course so
did their dancing descendants.

The orchestra and the caterer were brought from away, in the Amberson
manner, though this was really a gesture--perhaps one more of habit
than of ostentation--for servitors of gaiety as proficient as these
importations were nowadays to be found in the town.  Even flowers and
plants and roped vines were brought from afar--not, however, until the
stock of the local florists proved insufficient to obliterate the
interior structure of the big house, in the Amberson way.  It was the
last of the great, long remembered dances that "everybody talked
about"--there were getting to be so many people in town that no later
than the next year there were too many for "everybody" to hear of even
such a ball as the Ambersons'.

George, white-gloved, with a gardenia in his buttonhole, stood with
his mother and the Major, embowered in the big red and gold drawing
room downstairs, to "receive" the guests; and, standing thus together,
the trio offered a picturesque example of good looks persistent
through three generations.  The Major, his daughter, and his grandson
were of a type all Amberson: tall, straight, and regular, with dark
eyes, short noses, good chins; and the grandfather's expression, no
less than the grandson's, was one of faintly amused condescension.
There was a difference, however.  The grandson's unlined young face
had nothing to offer except this condescension; the grandfather's had
other things to say.  It was a handsome, worldly old face, conscious
of its importance, but persuasive rather than arrogant, and not
without tokens of sufferings withstood.  The Major's short white hair
was parted in the middle, like his grandson's, and in all he stood as
briskly equipped to the fashion as exquisite young George.

Isabel, standing between her father and her son caused a vague
amazement in the mind of the latter.  Her age, just under forty, was
for George a thought of something as remote as the moons of Jupiter:
he could not possibly have conceived such an age ever coming to be
his own: five years was the limit of his thinking in time.  Five years
ago he had been a child not yet fourteen; and those five years were an
abyss.  Five years hence he would be almost twenty-four; what the
girls he knew called "one of the older men."  He could imagine himself
at twenty-four, but beyond that, his powers staggered and refused the
task.  He saw little essential difference between thirty-eight and
eighty-eight, and his mother was to him not a woman but wholly a
mother.  He had no perception of her other than as an adjunct to
himself, his mother; nor could he imagine her thinking or doing
anything--falling in love, walking with a friend, or reading a book--
as a woman, and not as his mother.  The woman, Isabel, was a stranger
to her son; as completely a stranger as if he had never in his life
seen her or heard her voice.  And it was to-night, while he stood with
her, "receiving," that he caught a disquieting glimpse of this
stranger whom he thus fleetingly encountered for the first time.

Youth cannot imagine romance apart from youth.  That is why the roles
of the heroes and heroines of plays are given by the managers to the
most youthful actors they can find among the competent.  Both middle-
aged people and young people enjoy a play about young lovers; but only
middle-aged people will tolerate a play about middle-aged lovers;
young people will not come to see such a play, because, for them,
middle-aged lovers are a joke--not a very funny one.  Therefore, to
bring both the middle-aged people and the young people into his house,
the manager makes his romance as young as he can.  Youth will indeed
be served, and its profound instinct is to be not only scornfully
amused but vaguely angered by middle-age romance.  So, standing beside
his mother, George was disturbed by a sudden impression, corning upon
him out of nowhere, so far as he could detect, that her eyes were
brilliant, that she was graceful and youthful--in a word, that she was
romantically lovely.

He had one of those curious moments that seem to have neither a cause
nor any connection with actual things.  While it lasted, he was
disquieted not by thoughts--for he had no definite thoughts--but by a
slight emotion like that caused in a dream by the presence of
something invisible soundless, and yet fantastic.  There was nothing
different or new about his mother, except her new black and silver
dress: she was standing there beside him, bending her head a little in
her greetings, smiling the same smile she had worn for the half-hour
that people had been passing the "receiving" group.  Her face was
flushed, but the room was warm; and shaking hands with so many people
easily accounted for the pretty glow that was upon her.  At any time
she could have "passed" for twenty-five or twenty-six--a man of fifty
would have honestly guessed her to be about thirty but possibly two or
three years younger--and though extraordinary in this, she had been
extraordinary in it for years.  There was nothing in either her looks
or her manner to explain George's uncomfortable feeling; and yet it
increased, becoming suddenly a vague resentment, as if she had done
something unmotherly to him.

The fantastic moment passed; and even while it lasted, he was doing
his duty, greeting two pretty girls with whom he had grown up, as
people say, and warmly assuring them that he remembered them very
well--an assurance which might have surprised them "in anybody but
Georgie Minafer!"  It seemed unnecessary, since he had spent many
hours with them no longer ago than the preceding August,  They had
with them their parents and an uncle from out of town; and George
negligently gave the parents the same assurance he had given the
daughters, but murmured another form of greeting to the out-of-town
uncle, whom he had never seen before.  This person George absently
took note of as a "queer-looking duck."  Undergraduates had not yet
adopted "bird."  It was a period previous to that in which a sophomore
would have thought of the Sharon girls' uncle as a "queer-looking
bird," or, perhaps a "funny-face bird."  In George's time, every human
male was to be defined, at pleasure, as a "duck"; but "duck" was not
spoken with admiring affection, as in its former feminine use to
signify a "dear"--on the contrary, "duck" implied the speaker's
personal detachment and humorous superiority.  An indifferent
amusement was what George felt when his mother, with a gentle
emphasis, interrupted his interchange of courtesies with the nieces to
present him to the queer-looking duck their uncle.  This emphasis of
Isabel's, though slight, enabled George to perceive that she
considered the queer-looking duck a person of some importance; but it
was far from enabling him to understand why.  The duck parted his
thick and longish black hair on the side; his tie was a forgetful
looking thing, and his coat, though it fitted a good enough middle-
aged figure, no product of this year, or of last year either.  One of
his eyebrows was noticeably higher than the other; and there were
whimsical lines between them, which gave him an apprehensive
expression; but his apprehensions were evidently more humorous than
profound, for his prevailing look was that of a genial man of affairs,
not much afraid of anything whatever  Nevertheless, observing only his
unfashionable hair, his eyebrows, his preoccupied tie and his old
coat, the olympic George set him down as a queer-looking duck, and
having thus completed his portrait, took no interest in him.

The Sharon girls passed on, taking the queer-looking duck with them,
and George became pink with mortification as his mother called his
attention to a white-bearded guest waiting to shake his hand.  This
was George's great-uncle, old John Minafer: it was old John's boast
that in spite of his connection by marriage with the Ambersons, he
never had worn and never would wear a swaller-tail coat. Members of
his family had exerted their influence uselessly--at eighty-nine
conservative people seldom form radical new habits, and old John wore
his "Sunday suit" of black broadcloth to the Amberson ball.  The coat
was square, with skirts to the knees; old John called it a "Prince
Albert" and was well enough pleased with it, but his great-nephew
considered it the next thing to an insult.  George's purpose had been
to ignore the man, but he had to take his hand for a moment; whereupon
old John began to tell George that he was looking well, though there
had been a time, during his fourth month, when he was so puny that
nobody thought he would live.  The great-nephew, in a fury of blushes,
dropped old John's hand with some vigour, and seized that of the next
person in the line.  "Member you v'ry well 'ndeed!" he said fiercely.

The large room had filled, and so had the broad hall and the rooms on
the other side of the hall, where there were tables for whist.  The
imported orchestra waited in the ballroom on the third floor, but a
local harp, 'cello, violin, and flute were playing airs from "The
Fencing Master" in the hall, and people were shouting over the music.
Old John Minafer's voice was louder and more penetrating than any
other, because he had been troubled with deafness for twenty-five
years, heard his own voice but faintly, and liked to hear it.  "Smell
o' flowers like this always puts me in mind o' funerals," he kept
telling his niece, Fanny Minafer, who was with him; and he seemed to
get a great deal of satisfaction out of this reminder.  His tremulous
yet strident voice cut through the voluminous sound that filled the
room, and he was heard everywhere: "Always got to think o' funerals
when I smell so many flowers!"  And, as the pressure of people forced
Fanny and himself against the white marble mantelpiece, he pursued
this train of cheery thought, shouting, "Right here's where the
Major's wife was laid out at her funeral.  They had her in a good
light from that big bow window."  He paused to chuckle mournfully.  "I
s'pose that's where they'll put the Major when his time comes."

Presently George's mortification was increased to hear this sawmill
droning harshly from the midst of the thickening crowd: "Ain't the
dancin' broke out yet, Fanny? Hoopla! Le's push through and go see the
young women-folks crack their heels!  Start the circus!  Hoopse-
daisy!"  Miss Fanny Minafer, in charge of the lively veteran, was
almost as distressed as her nephew George, but she did her duty and
managed to get old John through the press and out to the broad
stairway, which numbers of young people were now ascending to the
ballroom.  And here the sawmill voice still rose over all others:
"Solid black walnut every inch of it, balustrades and all.  Sixty
thousand dollars' worth o' carved woodwork in the house!  Like water!
Spent money like water!  Always did!  Still do!  Like water!  God
knows where it all comes from!"

He continued the ascent, barking and coughing among the gleaming young
heads, white shoulders, jewels, and chiffon, like an old dog slowly
swimming up the rapids of a sparkling river; while down below, in the
drawing room, George began to recover from the degradation into which
this relic of early settler days had dragged him.  What restored him
completely was a dark-eyed little beauty of nineteen, very knowing in
lustrous blue and jet; at sight of this dashing advent in the line of
guests before him, George was fully an Amberson again.

"Remember you very well indeed!" he said, his graciousness more
earnest than any he had heretofore displayed.  Isabel heard him and
laughed.

"But you don't, George!" she said.  "You don't remember her yet,
though of course you will!  Miss Morgan is from out of town, and I'm
afraid this is the first time you've ever seen her.  You might take
her up to the dancing; I think you've pretty well done your duty here."

"Be d'lighted," George responded formally, and offered his arm, not
with a flourish, certainly, but with an impressiveness inspired partly
by the appearance of the person to whom he offered it, partly by his
being the hero of this fete, and partly by his youthfulness--for when
manners are new they are apt to be elaborate.  The little beauty
entrusted her gloved fingers to his coat-sleeve, and they moved away
together.

Their progress was necessarily slow, and to George's mind it did not
lack stateliness.  How could it?  Musicians, hired especially for him,
were sitting in a grove of palms in the hall and now tenderly playing
"Oh, Promise Me" for his pleasuring; dozens and scores of flowers had
been brought to life and tended to this hour that they might sweeten
the air for him while they died; and the evanescent power that music
and floral scents hold over youth stirred his appreciation of strange,
beautiful qualities within his own bosom: he seemed to himself to be
mysteriously angelic, and about to do something which would overwhelm
the beautiful young stranger upon his arm.

Elderly people and middle-aged people moved away to let him pass with
his honoured fair beside him.  Worthy middle-class creatures, they
seemed, leading dull lives but appreciative of better things when they
saw them--and George's bosom was fleetingly touched with a pitying
kindness.  And since the primordial day when caste or heritage first
set one person, in his own esteem, above his fellow-beings, it is to
be doubted if anybody ever felt more illustrious, or more negligently
grand, than George Amberson Minafer felt at this party.

As he conducted Miss Morgan through the hall, toward the stairway,
they passed the open double doors of a card room, where some squadrons
of older people were preparing for action, and, leaning gracefully
upon the mantelpiece of this room, a tall man, handsome, high-
mannered, and sparklingly point-device, held laughing converse with
that queer-looking duck, the Sharon girls' uncle.  The tall gentleman
waved a gracious salutation to George, and Miss Morgan's curiosity was
stirred.  "Who is that?"

"I didn't catch his name when my mother presented him to me," said
George.  "You mean the queer-looking duck."

"I mean the aristocratic duck."

"That's my Uncle George  Honourable George Amberson.  I thought
everybody knew him."

"He looks as though everybody ought to know him," she said.  "It seems
to run in your family."

If she had any sly intention, it skipped over George harmlessly.
"Well, of course, I suppose most everybody does," he admitted--"out in
this part of the country especially.  Besides, Uncle George is in
Congress; the family like to have someone there."

"Why?"

"Well, it's sort of a good thing in one way.  For instance, my Uncle
Sydney Amberson and his wife, Aunt Amelia, they haven't got much of
anything to do with themselves--get bored to death around here, of
course.  Well, probably Uncle George'll have Uncle Sydney appointed
minister or ambassador, or something like that, to Russia or Italy or
somewhere, and that'll make it pleasant when any of the rest of the
family go travelling, or things like that.  I expect to do a good deal
of travelling myself when I get out of college."

On the stairway he pointed out this prospective ambassadorial couple,
Sydney and Amelia.  They were coming down, fronting the ascending
tide, and as conspicuous over it as a king and queen in a play.
Moreover, as the clear-eyed Miss Morgan remarked, the very least they
looked was ambassadorial.  Sydney was an Amberson exaggerated, more
pompous than gracious; too portly, flushed, starched to a shine, his
stately jowl furnished with an Edward the Seventh beard.  Amelia,
likewise full-bodied, showed glittering blond hair exuberantly
dressed; a pink, fat face cold under a white-hot tiara; a solid, cold
bosom under a white-hot necklace; great, cold, gloved arms, and the
rest of her beautifully upholstered.  Amelia was an Amberson born,
herself, Sydney's second-cousin: they had no children, and Sydney was
without a business or a profession; thus both found a great deal of
time to think about the appropriateness of their becoming
Excellencies.  And as George ascended the broad stairway, they were
precisely the aunt and uncle he was most pleased to point out, to a
girl from out of town, as his appurtenances in the way of relatives.
At sight of them the grandeur of the Amberson family was instantly
conspicuous as a permanent thing: it was impossible to doubt that the
Ambersons were entrenched, in their nobility and riches, behind
polished and glittering barriers which were as solid as they were
brilliant, and would last.




Chapter V



The hero of the fete, with the dark-eyed little beauty upon his arm,
reached the top of the second flight of stairs; and here, beyond a
spacious landing, where two proud-like darkies tended a crystalline
punch bowl, four wide archways in a rose-vine lattice framed gliding
silhouettes of waltzers, already smoothly at it to the castanets of
"La Paloma."  Old John Minafer, evidently surfeited, was in the act of
leaving these delights.  "D'want 'ny more o' that!" he barked.  "Just
slidin' around!  Call that dancin'?  Rather see a jig any day in the
world!  They ain't very modest, some of 'em.  I don't mind that,
though.  Not me!"

Miss Fanny Minafer was no longer in charge of him: he emerged from the
ballroom escorted by a middle-aged man of commonplace appearance.  The
escort had a dry, lined face upon which, not ornamentally but as a
matter of course, there grew a business man's short moustache; and his
thin neck showed an Adam's apple, but not conspicuously, for there was
nothing conspicuous about him.  Baldish, dim, quiet, he was an
unnoticeable part of this festival, and although there were a dozen or
more middle-aged men present, not casually to be distinguished from
him in general aspect, he was probably the last person in the big
house at whom a stranger would have glanced twice.  It did not enter
George's mind to mention to Miss Morgan that this was his father, or
to say anything whatever about him.

Mr. Minafer shook his son's hand unobtrusively in passing.

"I'll take Uncle John home," he said, in a low voice.  "Then I guess
I'll go on home myself--I'm not a great hand at parties, you know.
Good-night, George."

George murmured a friendly enough good-night without pausing.
Ordinarily he was not ashamed of the Minafers; he seldom thought about
them at all, for he belonged, as most American children do, to the
mother's family--but he was anxious not to linger with Miss Morgan in
the vicinity of old John, whom he felt to be a disgrace.

He pushed brusquely through the fringe of calculating youths who were
gathered in the arches, watching for chances to dance only with girls
who would soon be taken off their hands, and led his stranger lady out
upon the floor.  They caught the time instantly, and were away in the
waltz.

George danced well, and Miss Morgan seemed to float as part of the
music, the very dove itself of "La Paloma."  They said nothing as they
danced; her eyes were cast down all the while--the prettiest gesture
for a dancer--and there was left in the universe, for each, of them,
only their companionship in this waltz; while the faces of the other
dancers, swimming by, denoted not people but merely blurs of colour.
George became conscious of strange feelings within him: an exaltation
of soul, tender, but indefinite, and seemingly located in the upper
part of his diaphragm.

The stopping of the music came upon him like the waking to an alarm
clock; for instantly six or seven of the calculating persons about the
entry-ways bore down upon Miss Morgan to secure dances.  George had to
do with one already established as a belle, it seemed.

"Give me the next and the one after that," he said hurriedly,
recovering some presence of mind, just as the nearest applicant
reached them.  "And give me every third one the rest of the evening."

She laughed.  "Are you asking?"

"What do you mean, 'asking'?"

"It sounded as though you were just telling me to give you all those
dances."

"Well, I want 'em!"  George insisted.

"What about all the other girls it's your duty to dance with?"

"They'll have to go without," he said heartlessly; and then, with
surprising vehemence: "Here! I want to know: Are you going to give me
those--"

"Good gracious!" she laughed. "Yes!"

The applicants flocked round her, urging contracts for what remained,
but they did not dislodge George from her side, though he made it
evident that they succeeded in annoying him; and presently he
extricated her from an accumulating siege--she must have connived in
the extrication--and bore her off to sit beside him upon the stairway
that led to the musicians' gallery, where they were sufficiently
retired, yet had a view of the room.

"How'd all those ducks get to know you so quick?"  George inquired,
with little enthusiasm.

"Oh, I've been here a week."

"Looks as if you'd been pretty busy!" he said.  "Most of those ducks,
I don't know what my mother wanted to invite 'em here for."

"Oh, I used to see something of a few of 'em.  I was president of a
club we had here, and some of 'em belonged to it, but I don't care
much for that sort of thing any more.  I really don't see why my
mother invited 'em."

"Perhaps it was on account of their parents," Miss Morgan suggested
mildly.  "Maybe she didn't want to offend their fathers and mothers."

"Oh, hardly!  I don't think my mother need worry much about offending
anybody in this old town."

"It must be wonderful," said Miss Morgan.  "It must be wonderful, Mr.
Amberson--Mr. Minafer, I mean."

"What must be wonderful?"

"To be so important as that!"

"That isn't 'important," George assured her.  "Anybody that really is
anybody ought to be able to do about as they like in their own town, I
should think!"

She looked at him critically from under her shading lashes--but her
eyes grew gentler almost at once.  In truth, they became more
appreciative than critical.  George's imperious good looks were
altogether manly, yet approached actual beauty as closely as a boy's
good looks should dare; and dance-music and flowers have some effect
upon nineteen-year-old girls as well as upon eighteen-year-old boys.
Miss Morgan turned her eyes slowly from George, and pressed her face
among the lilies-of-the-valley and violets of the pretty bouquet she
carried, while, from the gallery above, the music of the next dance
carolled out merrily in a new two-step.  The musicians made the melody
gay for the Christmastime with chimes of sleighbells, and the entrance
to the shadowed stairway framed the passing flushed and lively
dancers, but neither George nor Miss Morgan suggested moving to join
the dance.

The stairway was draughty: the steps were narrow and uncomfortable; no
older person would have remained in such a place.  Moreover, these two
young people were strangers to each other; neither had said anything
in which the other had discovered the slightest intrinsic interest;
there had not arisen between them the beginnings of congeniality, or
even of friendliness--but stairways near ballrooms have more to answer
for than have moonlit lakes and mountain sunsets.  Some day the laws
of glamour must be discovered, because they are so important that the
world would be wiser now if Sir Isaac Newton had been hit on the head,
not by an apple, but by a young lady.

Age, confused by its own long accumulation of follies, is
everlastingly inquiring, "What does she see in him?" as if young love
came about through thinking--or through conduct.  Age wants to know:
"What on earth can they talk about?" as if talking had anything to do
with April rains!  At seventy, one gets up in the morning, finds the
air sweet under a bright sun, feels lively; thinks, "I am hearty,
today," and plans to go for a drive.  At eighteen, one goes to a
dance, sits with a stranger on a stairway, feels peculiar, thinks
nothing, and becomes incapable of any plan whatever.  Miss Morgan and
George stayed where they were.

They had agreed to this in silence and without knowing it; certainly
without exchanging glances of intelligence--they had exchanged no
glances at all.  Both sat staring vaguely out into the ballroom, and,
for a time, they did not speak.  Over their heads the music reached a
climax of vivacity: drums, cymbals, triangle, and sleighbells,
beating, clashing, tinkling.  Here and there were to be seen couples
so carried away that, ceasing to move at the decorous, even glide,
considered most knowing, they pranced and whirled through the throng,
from wall to wall, galloping bounteously in abandon.  George suffered
a shock of vague surprise when he perceived that his aunt, Fanny
Minafer, was the lady-half of one of these wild couples.

Fanny Minafer, who rouged a little, was like fruit which in some
climates dries with the bloom on.  Her features had remained prettily
childlike; so had her figure, and there were times when strangers,
seeing her across the street, took her to be about twenty; they were
other times when at the same distance they took her to be about sixty,
instead of forty, as she was.  She had old days and young days; old
hours and young hours; old minutes and young minutes; for the change
might be that quick.  An alteration in her expression, or a difference
in the attitude of her head, would cause astonishing indentations to
appear--and behold, Fanny was an old lady!  But she had been never
more childlike than she was tonight as she flew over the floor in the
capable arms of the queer-looking duck; for this person was her
partner.

The queer-looking duck had been a real dancer in his day, it appeared;
and evidently his day was not yet over.  In spite of the headlong, gay
rapidity with which he bore Miss Fanny about the big room, he danced
authoritatively, avoiding without effort the lightest collision with
other couples, maintaining sufficient grace throughout his wildest
moments, and all the while laughing and talking with his partner.
What was most remarkable to George, and a little irritating, this
stranger in the Amberson Mansion had no vestige of the air of
deference proper to a stranger in such a place: he seemed thoroughly
at home.  He seemed offensively so, indeed, when, passing the entrance
to the gallery stairway, he disengaged his hand from Miss Fanny's for
an instant, and not pausing in the dance, waved a laughing salutation
more than cordial, then capered lightly out of sight.

George gazed stonily at this manifestation, responding neither by word
nor sign.  "How's that for a bit of freshness?" he murmured.

"What was?"  Miss Morgan asked.

"That queer-looking duck waving his hand at me like that.  Except he's
the Sharon girls' uncle I don't know him from Adam."

"You don't need to," she said. "He wasn't waving his hand to you: he
meant me."

"Oh, he did?"  George was not mollified by the explanation.
"Everybody seems to mean you!  You certainly do seem to've been pretty
busy this week you've been here!"

She pressed her bouquet to her face again, and laughed into it, not
displeased.  She made no other comment, and for another period neither
spoke.  Meanwhile the music stopped; loud applause insisted upon its
renewal; an encore was danced; there was an interlude of voices; and
the changing of partners began.

"Well," said George finally, "I must say you don't seem to be much of
a prattler.  They say it's a great way to get a reputation for being
wise, never saying much.  Don't you ever talk any?"

"When people can understand," she answered.

He had been looking moodily out at the ballroom but he turned to her
quickly, at this, saw that her eyes were sunny and content, over the
top of her bouquet; and he consented to smile.

"Girls are usually pretty fresh!" he said.  "They ought to go to a
man's college about a year: they'd get taught a few things about
freshness!  What you got to do after two o'clock to-morrow afternoon?"

"A whole lot of things.  Every minute filled up."

"All right," said George.  "The snow's fine for sleighing: I'll come
for you in a cutter at ten minutes after two."

"I can't possibly go."

"If you don't," he said, "I'm going to sit in the cutter in front of
the gate, wherever you're visiting, all afternoon, and if you try to
go out with anybody else he's got to whip me before he gets you."  And
as she laughed--though she blushed a little, too--he continued,
seriously: "If you think I'm not in earnest you're at liberty to make
quite a big experiment!"

She laughed again. "I don't think I've often had so large a compliment
as that," she said, "especially on such short notice--and yet, I don't
think I'll go with you.

"You be ready at ten minutes after two."

"No, I won't."

"Yes, you will!"

"Yes," she said, "I will!"  And her partner for the next dance
arrived, breathless with searching.

"Don't forget I've got the third from now," George called after her.

"I won't."

"And every third one after that."

"I know!" she called, over her partner's shoulder, and her voice was
amused--but meek.

When "the third from now" came, George presented himself before her
without any greeting, like a brother, or a mannerless old friend.
Neither did she greet him, but moved away with him, concluding, as she
went, an exchange of badinage with the preceding partner: she had been
talkative enough with him, it appeared.  In fact, both George and Miss
Morgan talked much more to every one else that evening, than to each
other; and they said nothing at all at this time.  Both looked
preoccupied, as they began to dance, and preserved a gravity, of
expression to the end of the number.  And when "the third one after
that" came, they did not dance, but went back to the gallery stairway,
seeming to have reached an understanding without any verbal
consultation, that this suburb was again the place for them.

"Well," said George, coolly, when they were seated, "what did you say
your name was?"

"Morgan."

"Funny name!"

"Everybody else's name always is."

"I didn't mean it was really funny," George explained.  "That's just
one of my crowd's bits of horsing at college.  We always say 'funny
name' no matter what it is.  I guess we're pretty fresh sometimes; but
I knew your name was Morgan because my mother said so downstairs.  I
meant: what's the rest of it?"

"Lucy."

He was silent.

"Is 'Lucy' a funny name, too?" she inquired.

"No. Lucy's very much all right!" he said, and he went so far as to
smile.  Even his Aunt Fanny admitted that when George smiled "in a
certain way" he was charming.

"Thanks about letting my name be Lucy," she said.

"How old are you?" George asked.

"I don't really know, myself."

"What do you mean: you don't really know yourself?"

"I mean I only know what they tell me.  I believe them, of course, but
believing isn't really knowing.  You believe some certain day is your
birthday--at least, I suppose you do--but you don't really know it is
because you can't remember."

"Look here!" said George.  "Do you always talk like this?"

Miss Lucy Morgan laughed forgivingly, put her young head on one side,
like a bird, and responded cheerfully: "I'm willing to learn wisdom.
What are you studying in school?"

"College!"

"At the university!  Yes.  What are you studying there?"

George laughed.  "Lot o' useless guff!"

"Then why don't you study some useful guff?"

"What do you mean: 'useful'?"

"Something you'd use later, in your business or profession?"

George waved his hand impatiently.  "I don't expect to go into any
'business or profession."

"No?"

"Certainly not!"  George was emphatic, being sincerely annoyed by a
suggestion which showed how utterly she failed to comprehend the kind
of person he was.

"Why not?" she asked mildly.

"Just look at 'em!" he said, almost with bitterness, and he made a
gesture presumably intended to indicate the business and professional
men now dancing within range of vision.  "That's a fine career for a
man, isn't it!  Lawyers, bankers, politicians!  What do they get out
of life, I'd like to know!  What do they ever know about real things?
Where do they ever get?"

He was so earnest that she was surprised and impressed.  Evidently he
had deep-seated ambitions, for he seemed to speak with actual emotion
of these despised things which were so far beneath his planning for
the future.  She had a vague, momentary vision of Pitt, at twenty-one,
prime minister of England; and she spoke, involuntarily in a lowered
voice, with deference:

"What do you want to be?" she asked.

George answered promptly.

"A yachtsman," he said.




Chapter VI



Having thus, in a word, revealed his ambition for a career above
courts, marts, and polling booths, George breathed more deeply than
usual, and, turning his face from the lovely companion whom he had
just made his confidant, gazed out at the dancers with an expression
in which there was both sternness and a contempt for the squalid lives
of the unyachted Midlanders before him.  However, among them, he
marked his mother; and his sombre grandeur relaxed momentarily; a more
genial light came into his eyes.

Isabel was dancing with the queer-looking duck; and it was to be noted
that the lively gentleman's gait was more sedate than it had been with
Miss Fanny Minafer, but not less dexterous and authoritative.  He was
talking to Isabel as gaily as he had talked to Miss Fanny, though with
less laughter, and Isabel listened and answered eagerly: her colour
was high and her eyes had a look of delight.  She saw George and the
beautiful Lucy on the stairway, and nodded to them.  George waved his
hand vaguely: he had a momentary return of that inexplicable
uneasiness and resentment which had troubled him downstairs.

"How lovely your mother is!"  Lucy said

"I think she is," he agreed gently.

"She's the gracefulest woman in that ballroom.  She dances like a girl
of sixteen."

"Most girls of sixteen," said George, "are bum dancers.  Anyhow, I
wouldn't dance with one unless I had to."

"Well, you'd better dance with your mother!  I never saw anybody
lovelier.  How wonderfully they dance together!"

"Who?"

"Your mother and--and the queer-looking duck," said Lucy.  "I'm going
to dance with him pretty soon."

"I don't care--so long as you don't give him one of the numbers that
belong to me."

"I'll try to remember," she said, and thoughtfully lifted to her face
the bouquet of violets and lilies, a gesture which George noted
without approval.

"Look here!  Who sent you those flowers you keep makin' such a fuss
over?"

"He did."

"Who's 'he'?"

"The queer-looking duck."

George feared no such rival; he laughed loudly.  "I s'pose he's some
old widower!" he said, the object thus described seeming ignominious
enough to a person of eighteen, without additional characterization.
"Some old widower!"

Lucy became serious at once.  "Yes, he is a widower," she said.  "I
ought to have told you before; he's my father."

George stopped laughing abruptly.  "Well, that's a horse on me.  If
I'd known he was your father, of course I wouldn't have made fun of
him.  I'm sorry."

"Nobody could make fun of him," she said quietly.

"Why couldn't they?"

"It wouldn't make him funny: it would only make themselves silly."

Upon this, George had a gleam of intelligence.  "Well, I'm not going
to make myself silly any more, then; I don't want to take chances like
that with you.  But I thought he was the Sharon girls' uncle.  He came
with them--"

"Yes," she said, "I'm always late to everything: I wouldn't let them
wait for me.  We're visiting the Sharons."

"About time I knew that!  You forget my being so fresh about your
father, will you?  Of course he's a distinguished looking man, in a
way."

Lucy was still serious.  "In a way?'" she repeated.  "You mean, not in
your way, don't you?"

George was perplexed.  "How do you mean: not in my way?"

"People pretty often say 'in a way' and 'rather distinguished
looking,' or 'rather' so-and-so, or 'rather' anything, to show that
they're superior don't they?  In New York last month I overheard a
climber sort of woman speaking of me as 'little Miss Morgan,' but she
didn't mean my height; she meant that she was important.  Her husband
spoke of a friend of mine as 'little Mr. Pembroke' and 'little Mr.
Pembroke' is six-feet-three.  This husband and wife were really so
terribly unimportant that the only way they knew to pretend to be
important was calling people 'little' Miss or Mister so-and-so.  It's
a kind of snob slang, I think.  Of course people don't always say
'rather' or 'in a way' to be superior."

"I should say not!  I use both of 'em a great deal myself," said
George.  "One thing I don't see though: What's the use of a man being
six-feet-three? Men that size can't handle themselves as well as a man
about five-feet-eleven and a half can.  Those long, gangling men,
they're nearly always too kind of wormy to be any good in athletics,
and they're so awkward they keep falling over chairs or--"

"Mr. Pembroke is in the army," said Lucy primly.  "He's
extraordinarily graceful."

"In the army?  Oh, I suppose he's some old friend of your father's."

"They got on very well," she said, "after I introduced them."

George was a straightforward soul, at least.  "See here!" he said.
"Are you engaged to anybody?"

"No."

Not wholly mollified, he shrugged his shoulders.  "You seem to know a
good many people!  Do you live in New York?"

"No.  We don't live anywhere."

"What you mean: you don't live anywhere?"

"We've lived all over," she answered.  "Papa used to live here in this
town, but that was before I was born."

"What do you keep moving around so for?  Is he a promoter?"

"No.  He's an inventor."

"What's he invented?"

"Just lately," said Lucy, "he's been working on a new kind of
horseless carriage."

"Well, I'm sorry for him," George said, in no unkindly spirit.  "Those
things are never going to amount to anything.  People aren't going to
spend their lives lying on their backs in the road and letting grease
drip in their faces.  Horseless carriages are pretty much a failure,
and your father better not waste his time on 'em."

"Papa'd be so grateful," she returned, "if he could have your advice."

Instantly George's face became flushed.  "I don't know that I've done
anything to be insulted for!" he said.  "I don't see that what I said
was particularly fresh."

"No, indeed!"

"Then what do you--"

She laughed gaily.  "I don't!  And I don't mind your being such a
lofty person at all.  I think it's ever so interesting--but papa's a
great man!"

"Is he?"  George decided to be good-natured "Well, let us hope so. I
hope so, I'm sure."

Looking at him keenly, she saw that the magnificent youth was
incredibly sincere in this bit of graciousness.  He spoke as a
tolerant, elderly statesman might speak of a promising young
politician; and with her eyes still upon him, Lucy shook her head in
gentle wonder.  "I'm just beginning to understand," she said.

"Understand what?"

"What it means to be a real Amberson in this town.  Papa told me
something about it before we came, but I see he didn't say half
enough!"

George superbly took this all for tribute.  "Did your father say he
knew the family before he left here?"

"Yes. I believe he was particularly a friend of your Uncle George; and
he didn't say so, but I imagine he must have known your mother very
well, too.  He wasn't an inventor then; he was a young lawyer.  The
town was smaller in those days, and I believe he was quite well
known."

"I dare say.  I've no doubt the family are all very glad to see him
back, especially if they used to have him at the house a good deal, as
he told you."

"I don't think he meant to boast of it," she said: "He spoke of it
quite calmly."

George stared at her for a moment in perplexity, then perceiving that
her intention was satirical, "Girls really ought to go to a man's
college," he said--"just a month or two, anyhow; It'd take some of the
freshness out of 'em!"

"I can't believe it," she retorted, as her partner for the next dance
arrived.  "It would only make them a little politer on the surface--
they'd be really just as awful as ever, after you got to know them a
few minutes."

"What do you mean: 'after you got to know them a--'"

She was departing to the dance.  "Janie and Mary Sharon told me all
about what sort of a little boy you were," she said, over her
shoulder.  "You must think it out!"  She took wing away on the breeze
of the waltz, and George, having stared gloomily after her for a few
moments, postponed filling an engagement, and strolled round the
fluctuating outskirts of the dance to where his uncle, George
Amberson, stood smilingly watching, under one of the rose-vine arches
at the entrance to the room.

"Hello, young namesake," said the uncle.  "Why lingers the laggard
heel of the dancer?  Haven't you got a partner?"

"She's sitting around waiting for me somewhere," said George.  "See
here: Who is this fellow Morgan that Aunt Fanny Minafer was dancing
with a while?"

Amberson laughed.  "He's a man with a pretty daughter, Georgie.
Meseemed you've been spending the evening noticing something of that
sort--or do I err?"

"Never mind!  What sort is he?"

"I think we'll have to give him a character, Georgie.  He's an old
friend; used to practice law here--perhaps be had more debts than
cases, but he paid 'em all up before he left town.  Your question is
purely mercenary, I take it:  you want to know his true worth before
proceeding further with the daughter.  I cannot inform you, though I
notice signs of considerable prosperity in that becoming dress of
hers.  However, you never can tell, it is an age when every sacrifice
is made for the young, and how your own poor mother managed to provide
those genuine pearl studs for you out of her allowance from father, I
can't--"

"Oh, dry up!" said the nephew. "I understand this Morgan--"

"Mr. Eugene Morgan," his uncle suggested.  "Politeness requires that
the young should--"

"I guess the 'young' didn't know much about politeness in your day,"
George interrupted.  "I understand that Mr. Eugene Morgan used to be a
great friend of the family."

"Oh, the Minafers?" the uncle inquired, with apparent innocence.  "No,
I seem to recall that he and your father were not--"

"I mean the Ambersons," George said impatiently.  "I understand he was
a good deal around the house here."

"What is your objection to that, George?"

"What do you mean: my objection?"

"You seemed to speak with a certain crossness."

"Well," said George, "I meant he seems to feel awfully at home here.
The way he was dancing with Aunt Fanny--"

Amberson laughed.  "I'm afraid your Aunt Fanny's heart was stirred by
ancient recollections, Georgie."

"You mean she used to be silly about him?"

"She wasn't considered singular," said the uncle "He was--he was
popular.  Could you bear a question?"

"What do you mean: could I bear--"

"I only wanted to ask: Do you take this same passionate interest in
the parents of every girl you dance with?  Perhaps it's a new fashion
we old bachelors ought to take up.  Is it the thing this year to--"

"Oh, go on!" said George, moving away. "I only wanted to know--" He
left the sentence unfinished, and crossed the room to where a girl sat
waiting for his nobility to find time to fulfil his contract with her
for this dance.

"Pardon f' keep' wait," he muttered, as she rose brightly to meet him;
and she seemed pleased that he came at all--but George was used to
girls' looking radiant when he danced with them, and she had little
effect upon him.  He danced with her perfunctorily, thinking the while
of Mr. Eugene Morgan and his daughter.  Strangely enough, his thoughts
dwelt more upon the father than the daughter, though George could not
possibly have given a reason--even to himself--for this disturbing
preponderance.

By a coincidence, though not an odd one, the thoughts and conversation
of Mr. Eugene Morgan at this very time were concerned with George
Amberson Minafer, rather casually, it is true.  Mr. Morgan had retired
to a room set apart for smoking, on the second floor, and had found a
grizzled gentleman lounging in solitary possession.

"'Gene Morgan!" this person exclaimed, rising with great heartiness.
"I'd heard you were in town--I don't believe you know me!"

"Yes, I do, Fred Kinney!"  Mr. Morgan returned with equal
friendliness.  "Your real face-the one I used to know--it's just
underneath the one you're masquerading in to-night.  You ought to have
changed it more if you wanted a disguise."

"Twenty years!" said Mr. Kinney.  "It makes some difference in faces,
but more in behaviour!"

"It does sot" his friend agreed with explosive emphasis.  "My own
behaviour began to be different about that long ago--quite suddenly."

"I remember," said Mr. Kinney sympathetically, Well, life's odd enough
as we look back."

"Probably it's going to be odder still--if we could look forward."

"Probably."

They sat and smoked.

"However," Mr. Morgan remarked presently, "I still dance like an
Indian.  Don't you?"

"No.  I leave that to my boy Fred.  He does the dancing for the
family."

"I suppose he's upstairs hard at it?"

"No, he's not here."  Mr. Kinney glanced toward the open door and
lowered his voice. "He wouldn't come.  It seems that a couple of years
or so ago he had a row with young Georgie Minafer.  Fred was president
of a literary club they had, and he said this young Georgie got
himself elected instead, in an overbearing sort of way.  Fred's red-
headed, you know--I suppose you remember his mother?  You were at the
wedding--"

"I remember the wedding," said Mr. Morgan. 'And I remember your
bachelor dinner--most of it, that is."

"Well, my boy Fred's as red-headed now," Mr. Kinney went on, "as his
mother was then, and he's very bitter about his row with Georgie
Minafer.  He says he'd rather burn his foot off than set it inside any
Amberson house or any place else where young Georgie is.  Fact is, the
boy seemed to have so much feeling over it I had my doubts about
coming myself, but my wife said it was all nonsense; we mustn't
humour Fred in a grudge over such a little thing, and while she
despised that Georgie Minafer, herself, as much as any one else did,
she wasn't going to miss a big Amberson show just on account of a
boys' rumpus, and so on and so on; and so we came."

"Do people dislike young Minafer generally?"

"I don't know about 'generally.' I guess he gets plenty of toadying;
but there's certainly a lot of people that are glad to express their
opinions about him."

"What's the matter with him?"

"Too much Amberson, I suppose, for one thing.  And for another, his
mother just fell down and worshipped him from the day he was born
That's what beats me!  I don't have to tell you what Isabel Amberson
is, Eugene Morgan.  She's got a touch of the Amberson high stuff about
her, but you can't get anybody that ever knew her to deny that she's
just about the finest woman in the world."

"No," said Eugene Morgan.  "You can't get anybody to deny that."

"Then I can't see how she doesn't see the truth about that boy.  He
thinks he's a little tin god on wheels--and honestly, it makes some
people weak and sick just to think about him!  Yet that high-spirited,
intelligent woman, Isabel Amberson, actually sits and worships him!
You can hear it in her voice when she speaks to him or speaks of him.
You can see it in her eyes when she looks at him.  My Lord!  What does
she see when she looks at him?"

Morgan's odd expression of genial apprehension deepened whimsically,
though it denoted no actual apprehension whatever, and cleared away
from his face altogether when he smiled; he became surprisingly
winning and persuasive when he smiled.  He smiled now, after a moment,
at this question of his old friend.  "She sees something that we don't
see," he said.

"What does she see?"

"An angel."

Kinney laughed aloud.  "Well, if she sees an angel when she looks at
Georgie Minafer, she's a funnier woman than I thought she was!"

"Perhaps she is," said Morgan.  "But that's what she sees."

"My Lord!  It's easy to see you've only known him an hour or so.  In
that time have you looked at Georgie and seen an angel?"

"No.  All I saw was a remarkably good-looking fool-boy with the pride
of Satan and a set of nice new drawing-room manners that he probably
couldn't use more than half an hour at a time without busting."

"Then what--"

"Mothers are right," said Morgan.  "Do you think this young George is
the same sort of creature when he's with his mother that he is when
he's bulldozing your boy Fred?  Mothers see the angel in us because
the angel is there.  If it's shown to the mother, the son has got an
angel to show, hasn't he?  When a son cuts somebody's throat the
mother only sees it's possible for a misguided angel to act like a
devil--and she's entirely right about that!"

Kinney laughed, and put his hand on his friend's shoulder.  "I
remember what a fellow you always were to argue," he said.  "You mean
Georgie Minafer is as much of an angel as any murderer is, and that
Georgie's mother is always right."

"I'm afraid she always has been," Morgan said lightly.

The friendly hand remained upon his shoulder.  "She was wrong once,
old fellow.  At least, so it seemed to me."

"No," said Morgan, a little awkwardly.  "No--"

Kinney relieved the slight embarrassment that had come upon both of
them: he laughed again.  "Wait till you know young Georgie a little
better," he said.  "Something tells me you're going to change your
mind about his having an angel to show, if you see anything of him!"

"You mean beauty's in the eye of the beholder, and the angel is all in
the eye of the mother.  If you were a painter, Fred, you'd paint
mothers with angels' eyes holding imps in their laps.  Me.  I'll stick
to the Old Masters and the cherubs."

Mr. Kinney looked at him musingly.  "Somebody's eyes must have been
pretty angelic," he said, "if they've been persuading you that Georgie
Minnafer is a cherub!"

"They are," said Morgan heartily.  "They're more angelic than ever."
And as a new flourish of music sounded overhead he threw away his
cigarette, and jumped up briskly.  "Good-bye, I've got this dance with
her."

"With whom?"

"With Isabel!"

The grizzled Mr. Kinney affected to rub his eyes.  "It startles me,
your jumping up like that to go and dance with Isabel Amberson!
Twenty years seem to have passed--but have they?  Tell me, have you
danced with poor old Fanny, too, this evening?"

"Twice!"

"My Lord!" Kinney groaned, half in earnest.  "Old times starting all
over again!  My Lord!"

"Old times?"  Morgan laughed gaily from the doorway.  "Not a bit!
There aren't any old times.  When times are gone they're not old,
they're dead!  There aren't any times but new times!"

And he vanished in such a manner that he seemed already to have begun
dancing.




Chapter VII



The appearance of Miss Lucy Morgan the next day, as she sat in
George's fast cutter, proved so charming that her escort was stricken
to soft words instantly, and failed to control a poetic impulse.  Her
rich little hat was trimmed with black fur; her hair was almost as
dark as the fur; a great boa of black fur was about her shoulders; her
hands were vanished into a black muff; and George's laprobe was black.
"You look like--" he said.  "Your face looks like--it looks like a
snowflake on a lump of coal. I mean a--a snowflake that would be a
rose-leaf, too!"

"Perhaps you'd better look at the reins," she returned.  "We almost
upset just then."

George declined to heed this advice.  "Because there's too much pink
in your cheeks for a snowflake," he continued.  "What's that fairy
story about snow-white and rose-red--"

"We're going pretty fast, Mr. Minafer!"

"Well, you see, I'm only here for two weeks."

"I mean the sleigh!" she explained.  "We're not the only people on the
street, you know."

"Oh, they'll keep out of the way."

"That's very patrician charioteering, but it seems to me a horse like
this needs guidance.  I'm sure he's going almost twenty miles an
hour."

"That's nothing," said George; but he consented to look forward again.
"He can trot under three minutes, all right."  He laughed.  "I suppose
your father thinks he can build a horseless carriage to go that fast!"

"They go that fast already, sometimes."

"Yes," said George; "they do--for about a hundred feet!  Then they
give a yell and burn up."

Evidently she decided not to defend her father's faith in horseless
carriages, for she laughed, and said nothing.  The cold air was polka-
dotted with snowflakes, and trembled to the loud, continuous jingling
of sleighbells.  Boys and girls, all aglow and panting jets of vapour,
darted at the passing sleighs to ride on the runners, or sought to
rope their sleds to any vehicle whatever, but the fleetest no more
than just touched the flying cutter, though a hundred soggy mittens
grasped for it, then reeled and whirled till sometimes the wearers of
those daring mittens plunged flat in the snow and lay a-sprawl,
reflecting.  For this was the holiday time, and all the boys and girls
in town were out, most of them on National Avenue.

But there came panting and chugging up that flat thoroughfare a thing
which some day was to spoil all their sleigh-time merriment--save for
the rashest and most disobedient.  It was vaguely like a topless
surry, but cumbrous with unwholesome excrescences fore and aft, while
underneath were spinning leather belts and something that whirred and
howled and seemed to stagger.  The ride-stealers made no attempt to
fasten their sleds to a contrivance so nonsensical and yet so
fearsome.  Instead, they gave over their sport and concentrated all
their energies in their lungs, so that up and down the street the one
cry shrilled increasingly: "Git a hoss!  Git a hoss!  Git a hoss!
Mister, why don't you git a hoss?"  But the mahout in charge, sitting
solitary on the front seat, was unconcerned--he laughed, and now and
then ducked a snowball without losing any of his good-nature.  It was
Mr. Eugene Morgan who exhibited so cheerful a countenance between the
forward visor of a deer-stalker cap and the collar of a fuzzy gray
ulster.  "Git a hoss!" the children shrieked, and gruffer voices
joined them.  "Git a hoss!  Git a hoss!  Git a hoss!"

George Minafer was correct thus far: the twelve miles an hour of such
a machine would never over-take George's trotter.  The cutter was
already scurrying between the stone pillars at the entrance to
Amberson Addition.

"That's my grandfather's," said George, nodding toward the Amberson
Mansion.

"I ought to know that!"  Lucy exclaimed.  "We stayed there late enough
last night: papa and I were almost the last to go.  He and your mother
and Miss Fanny Minafer got the musicians to play another waltz when
everybody else had gone downstairs and the fiddles were being put away
in their cases.  Papa danced part of it with Miss Minafer and the rest
with your mother.  Miss Minafer's your aunt, isn't she?"

"Yes; she lives with us.  I tease her a good deal."

"What about?"

"Oh, anything handy--whatever's easy to tease an old maid about."

"Doesn't she mind?"

"She usually has sort of a grouch on me," laughed George.  "Nothing
much.  That's our house just beyond grandfather's."  He waved a
sealskin gaunt let to indicate the house Major Amberson had built for
Isabel as a wedding gift.  "It's almost the same as grandfather's,
only not as large and hasn't got a regular ballroom.  We gave the
dance, last night, at grandfather's on account of the ballroom, and
because I'm the only grandchild, you know.  Of course, some day
that'll be my house, though I expect my mother will most likely go on
living where she does now, with father and Aunt Fanny.  I suppose I'll
probably build a country house, too--somewhere East, I guess."  He
stopped speaking, and frowned as they passed a closed carriage and
pair.  The body of this comfortable vehicle sagged slightly to one
side; the paint was old and seamed with hundreds of minute cracks like
little rivers on a black map; the coachman, a fat and elderly darky,
seemed to drowse upon the box; but the open window afforded the
occupants of the cutter a glimpse of a tired, fine old face, a silk
hat, a pearl tie, and an astrachan collar, evidently out to take the
air.

"There's your grandfather now," said Lucy.  "Isn't it?"

George's frown was not relaxed.  "Yes, it is; and he ought to give
that rat-trap away and sell those old horses.  They're a disgrace, all
shaggy--not even clipped.  I suppose he doesn't notice it--people get
awful funny when they get old; they seem to lose their self-respect,
sort of."

"He seemed a real Brummell to me," she said.

"Oh, he keeps up about what he wears, well enough, but--well, look at
that!"  He pointed to a statue of Minerva, one of the cast-iron
sculptures Major Amberson had set up in opening the Addition years
before.  Minerva was intact, but a blackish streak descended
unpleasantly from her forehead to the point of her straight nose, and
a few other streaks were sketched in a repellent dinge upon the folds
of her drapery.

"That must be from soot," said Lucy.  "There are so many houses around
here."

"Anyhow, somebody ought to see that these statues are kept clean.  My
grandfather owns a good many of these houses, I guess, for renting.
Of course, he sold most of the lots--there aren't any vacant ones, and
there used to be heaps of 'em when I was a boy.  Another thing I don't
think he ought to allow a good many of these people bought big lots
and they built houses on 'em; then the price of the land kept getting
higher, and they'd sell part of their yards and let the people that
bought it build houses on it to live in, till they haven't hardly any
of 'em got big, open yards any more, and it's getting all too much
built up.  The way it used to be, it was like a gentleman's country
estate, and that's the way my grandfather ought to keep it.  He lets
these people take too many liberties: they do anything they want to."

"But how could he stop them?" Lucy asked, surely with reason.  "If he
sold them the land, it's theirs, isn't it?"

George remained serene in the face of this apparently difficult
question.  "He ought to have all the trades-people boycott the
families that sell part of their yards that way.  All he'd have to do
would be to tell the trades-people they wouldn't get any more orders
from the family if they didn't do it."

"From 'the family'?  What family?"

"Our family," said George, unperturbed.  "The Ambersons."

"I see!" she murmured, and evidently she did see something that he did
not, for, as she lifted her muff to her face, he asked:

"What are you laughing at now?"

"Why?"

"You always seem to have some little secret of your own to get happy
over!"

"Always!" she exclaimed.  "What a big word when we only met last
night!"

"That's another case of it," he said, with obvious sincerity.  "One of
the reasons I don't like you--much!--is you've got that way of seeming
quietly superior to everybody else."

"I!" she cried.  "I have?"

"Oh, you think you keep it sort of confidential to yourself, but it's
plain enough!  I don't believe in that kind of thing."

"You don't?"

"No," said George emphatically . "Not with me!  I think the world's
like this: there's a few people that their birth and position, and so
on, puts them at the top, and they ought to treat each other entirely
as equals."  His voice betrayed a little emotion as he added, "I
wouldn't speak like this to everybody."

"You mean you're confiding your deepest creed--or code, whatever it
is--to me?"

"Go on, make fun of it, then!"  George said bitterly.  "You do think
you're terribly clever!  It makes me tired!"

"Well, as you don't like my seeming 'quietly superior,' after this
I'll be noisily superior," she returned cheerfully.  "We aim to
please!"

"I had a notion before I came for you today that we were going to
quarrel," he said.

"No, we won't; it takes two!"  She laughed and waved her muff toward a
new house, not quite completed, standing in a field upon their right.
They had passed beyond Amberson Addition, and were leaving the
northern fringes of the town for the open country.  "Isn't that a
beautiful house!" she exclaimed.  "Papa and I call it our Beautiful
House."

George was not pleased.  "Does it belong to you?"

"Of course not!  Papa brought me out here the other day, driving in
his machine, and we both loved it.  It's so spacious and dignified and
plain."

"Yes, it's plain enough!"  George grunted.

"Yet it's lovely; the gray-green roof and shutters give just enough
colour, with the trees, for the long white walls.  It seems to me the
finest house I've seen in this part of the country."

George was outraged by an enthusiasm so ignorant--not ten minutes ago
they had passed the Amberson Mansion.  "Is that a sample of your taste
in architecture?" he asked.

"Yes.  Why?"

"Because it strikes me you better go somewhere and study the subject a
little!"

Lucy looked puzzled.  "What makes you have so much feeling about it?
Have I offended you?"

"Offended' nothing!"  George returned brusquely.  "Girls usually think
they know it all as soon as they've learned to dance and dress and
flirt a little.  They never know anything about things like
architecture, for instance.  That house is about as bum a house as any
house I ever saw!"

"Why?"

"Why?"  George repeated. "Did you ask me why?"

"Yes."

"Well, for one thing--" he paused--"for one thing--well, just look at
it!  I shouldn't think you'd have to do any more than look at it if
you'd ever given any attention to architecture."

"What is the matter with its architecture, Mr. Minafer?"

"Well, it's this way," said George.  "It's like this.  Well, for
instance, that house--well, it was built like a town house."  He spoke
of it in the past tense, because they had now left it far behind them
--a human habit of curious significance.  "It was like a house meant
for a street in the city.  What kind of a house was that for people of
any taste to build out here in the country?"

"But papa says it's built that way on purpose.  There are a lot of
other houses being built in this direction, and papa says the city's
coming out this way; and in a year or two that house will be right in
town."

"It was a bum house, anyhow," said George crossly.  "I don't even know
the people that are building it.  They say a lot of riffraff come to
town every year nowadays and there's other riffraff that have always
lived here, and have made a little money, and act as if they owned the
place.  Uncle Sydney was talking about it yesterday: he says he and
some of his friends are organizing a country club, and already some of
these riffraff are worming into it--people he never heard of at all!
Anyhow, I guess it's pretty clear you don't know a great deal about
architecture."

She demonstrated the completeness of her amiability by laughing.
"I'll know something about the North Pole before long," she said, "if
we keep going much farther in this direction!"

At this he was remorseful.  "All right, we'll turn, and drive south
awhile till you get warmed up again.  I expect we have been going
against the wind about long enough.  Indeed, I'm sorry!"

He said, "Indeed, I'm sorry," in a nice way, and looked very
strikingly handsome when he said it, she thought.  No doubt it is true
that there is more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner repented than
over all the saints who consistently remain holy, and the rare, sudden
gentlenesses of arrogant people have infinitely more effect than the
continual gentleness of gentle people.  Arrogance turned gentle melts
the heart; and Lucy gave her companion a little sidelong, sunny nod of
acknowledgment.  George was dazzled by the quick glow of her eyes, and
found himself at a loss for something to say.

Having turned about, he kept his horse to a walk, and at this gait the
sleighbells tinkled but intermittently.  Gleaming wanly through the
whitish vapour that kept rising from the trotter's body and flanks,
they were like tiny fog-bells, and made the only sounds in a great
winter silence.  The white road ran between lonesome rail fences; and
frozen barnyards beyond the fences showed sometimes a harrow left to
rust, with its iron seat half filled with stiffened snow, and
sometimes an old dead buggy, it's  wheels forever set, it seemed, in
the solid ice of deep ruts.  Chickens scratched the metallic earth
with an air of protest, and a masterless ragged colt looked up in
sudden horror at the mild tinkle of the passing bells, then blew
fierce clouds of steam at the sleigh.  The snow no longer fell, and
far ahead, in a grayish cloud that lay upon the land, was the town.

Lucy looked at this distant thickening reflection.  "When we get this
far out we can see there must be quite a little smoke hanging over the
town," she said.  "I suppose that's because it's growing.  As it grows
bigger it seems to get ashamed of itself, so it makes this cloud and
hides in it.  Papa says it used to be a bit nicer when he lived here:
he always speaks of it differently--he always has a gentle look, a
particular tone of voice, I've noticed.  He must have been very fond
of it.  It must have been a lovely place: everybody must have been so
jolly.  From the way he talks, you'd think life here then was just one
long midsummer serenade.  He declares it was always sunshine, that the
air wasn't like the air anywhere else--that, as he remembers it, there
always seemed to be gold-dust in the air.  I doubt it!  I think it
doesn't seem to be duller air to him now just on account of having a
little soot in it sometimes, but probably because he was twenty years
younger then.  It seems to me the gold-dust he thinks was here is just
his being young that he remembers.  I think it was just youth.  It is
pretty pleasant to be young, isn't it?"  She laughed absently, then
appeared to become wistful.  "I wonder if we really do enjoy it as
much as we'll look back and think we did!  I don't suppose so.
Anyhow, for my part I feel as if I must be missing something about it,
somehow, because I don't ever seem to be thinking about what's
happening at the present moment; I'm always looking forward to
something--thinking about things that will happen when I'm older."

"You're a funny girl," George said gently.  "But your voice sounds
pretty nice when you think and talk along together like that!"

The horse shook himself all over, and the impatient sleighbells made
his wish audible.  Accordingly, George tightened the reins, and the
cutter was off again at a three-minute trot, no despicable rate of
speed.  It was not long before they were again passing Lucy's
Beautiful House, and here George thought fit to put an appendix to his
remark.  "You're a funny girl, and you know a lot--but I don't believe
you know much about architecture!"

Coming toward them, black against the snowy road, was a strange
silhouette.  It approached moderately and without visible means of
progression, so the matter seemed from a distance; but as the cutter
shortened the distance, the silhouette was revealed to be Mr. Morgan's
horseless carriage, conveying four people atop: Mr. Morgan with
George's mother beside him, and, in the rear seat, Miss Fanny Minafer
and the Honorable George Amberson.  All four seemed to be in the
liveliest humour, like high-spirited people upon a new adventure; and
Isabel waved her handkerchief dashingly as the cutter flashed by them.

"For the Lord's sake!"  George gasped.

"Your mother's a dear," said Lucy.  "And she does wear the most
bewitching things!  She looked like a Russian princess, though I doubt
if they're that handsome."

George said nothing; he drove on till they had crossed Amberson
Addition and reached the stone pillars at the head of National Avenue.
There he turned.

"Let's go back and take another look at that old sewing-machine," he
said.  "It certainly is the weirdest, craziest--"

He left the sentence unfinished, and presently they were again in
sight of the old sewing-machine.  George shouted mockingly.

Alas! three figures stood in the road, and a pair of legs, with the
toes turned up, indicated that a fourth figure lay upon its back in
the snow, beneath a horseless carriage that had decided to need a
horse.

George became vociferous with laughter, and coming up at his trotter's
best gait, snow spraying from runners and every hoof, swerved to the
side of the road and shot by, shouting, "Git a hoss! Git a hoss! Git a
hoss!"

Three hundred yards away he turned and came back, racing; leaning out
as he passed, to wave jeeringly at the group about the disabled
machine: "Git a hoss! Git a hoss! Git a--"

The trotter had broken into a gallop, and Lucy cried a warning: "Be
careful!" she said.  "Look where you're driving!  There's a ditch on
that side.  Look--"

George turned too late; the cutter's right runner went into the ditch
and snapped off; the little sleigh upset, and, after dragging its
occupants some fifteen yards, left them lying together in a bank of
snow.  Then the vigorous young horse kicked himself free of all
annoyances, and disappeared down the road, galloping cheerfully.




Chapter VIII



When George regained some measure of his presence of mind, Miss Lucy
Morgan's cheek, snowy and cold, was pressing his nose slightly to one
side; his right arm was firmly about her neck; and a monstrous amount
of her fur boa seemed to mingle with an equally unplausible quantity
of snow in his mouth.  He was confused, but conscious of no objection
to any of these juxtapositions.  She was apparently uninjured, for she
sat up, hatless, her hair down, and said mildly:

"Good heavens!"

Though her father had been under his machine when they passed, he was
the first to reach them.  He threw himself on his knees beside his
daughter, but found her already laughing, and was reassured.  "They're
all right," he called to Isabel, who was running toward them, ahead of
her brother and Fanny Minafer.  "This snowbank's a feather bed--
nothing the matter with them at all.  Don't look so pale!"

"Georgie!" she gasped.  "Georgie!"

Georgie was on his feet, snow all over him.

"Don't make a fuss, mother!  Nothing's the matter.  That darned silly
horse--"

Sudden tears stood in Isabel's eyes.  "To see you down underneath--
dragging--oh--"  Then with shaking hands she began to brush the snow
from him.

"Let me alone," he protested.  "You'll ruin your gloves.  You're
getting snow all over you, and--"

"No, no!" she cried.  "You'll catch cold; you mustn't catch cold!"
And she continued to brush him.

Amberson had brought Lucy's hat; Miss Fanny acted as lady's-maid; and
both victims of the accident were presently restored to about their
usual appearance and condition of apparel.  In fact, encouraged by the
two older gentlemen, the entire party, with one exception, decided
that the episode was after all a merry one, and began to laugh about
it.  But George was glummer than the December twilight now swiftly
closing in.

"That darned horse!" he said.

"I wouldn't bother about Pendennis, Georgie," said his uncle.  "You
can send a man out for what's left of the cutter tomorrow, and
Pendennis will gallop straight home to his stable: he'll be there a
long while before we will, because all we've got to depend on to get
us home is Gene Morgan's broken-down chafing-dish yonder."

They were approaching the machine as he spoke, and his friend, again
underneath it, heard him.  He emerged, smiling.  "She'll go," he said.

"What!"

"All aboard!"

He offered his hand to Isabel.  She was smiling but still pale, and
her eyes, in spite of the smile, kept upon George in a shocked
anxiety.  Miss Fanny had already mounted to the rear seat, and George,
after helping Lucy Morgan to climb up beside his aunt, was following.
Isabel saw that his shoes were light things of patent leather, and
that snow was clinging to them.  She made a little rush toward him,
and, as one of his feet rested on the iron step of the machine, in
mounting, she began to clean the snow from his shoe with her almost
aerial lace handkerchief.  "You mustn't catch cold!" she cried.

"Stop that!"  George shouted, and furiously withdrew his foot.

"Then stamp the snow off," she begged.  "You mustn't ride with wet
feet."

"They're not!" George roared, thoroughly outraged.  "For heaven's
sake get in!  You're standing in the snow yourself.  Get in!"

Isabel consented, turning to Morgan, whose habitual expression of
apprehensiveness was somewhat accentuated.  He climbed up after her,
George Amberson having gone to the other side.  "You're the same
Isabel I used to know!" he said in a low voice.  "You're a divinely
ridiculous woman."

"Am I, Eugene?" she said, not displeased.  "'Divinely' and 'ridiculous'
just counterbalance each other, don't they?  Plus one and minus one
equal nothing; so you mean I'm nothing in particular?"

"No," he answered, tugging at a lever.  "That doesn't seem to be
precisely what I meant.  There!"  This exclamation referred to the
subterranean machinery, for dismaying sounds came from beneath the
floor, and the vehicle plunged, then rolled noisily forward.

"Behold!"  George Amberson exclaimed.  "She does move!  It must be
another accident."

"Accident?" Morgan shouted over the din.  "No!  She breathes, she
stirs; she seems to feel a thrill of life along her keel!"  And he
began to sing "The Star Spangled Banner."

Amberson joined him lustily, and sang on when Morgan stopped.  The
twilight sky cleared, discovering a round moon already risen; and the
musical congressman hailed this bright presence with the complete text
and melody of "The Danube River."

His nephew, behind, was gloomy.  He had overheard his mother's
conversation with the inventor: it seemed curious to him that this
Morgan, of whom be had never heard until last night, should be using
the name "Isabel" so easily; and George felt that it was not just the
thing for his mother to call Morgan "Eugene;" the resentment of the
previous night came upon George again.  Meanwhile, his mother and
Morgan continued their talk; but he could no longer hear what they
said; the noise of the car and his uncle's songful mood prevented.  He
marked how animated Isabel seemed; it was not strange to see his
mother so gay, but it was strange that a man not of the family should
be the cause of her gaiety.  And George sat frowning.

Fanny Minafer had begun to talk to Lucy.  "Your father wanted to prove
that his horseless carriage would run, even in the snow," she said.
"It really does, too."

"Of course!"

"It's so interesting!  He's been telling us how he's going to change
it.  He says he's going to have wheels all made of rubber and blown up
with air.  I don't understand what he means at all; I should think
they'd explode--but Eugene seems to be very confident.  He always was
confident, though.  It seems so like old times to hear him talk!"

She became thoughtful, and Lucy turned to George.  "You tried to swing
underneath me and break the fall for me when we went over," she said.
"I knew you were doing that, and--it was nice of you."

"Wasn't any fall to speak of," he returned brusquely.  "Couldn't have
hurt either of us."

"Still it was friendly of you--and awfully quick, too.  I'll not--I'll
not forget it!"

Her voice had a sound of genuineness, very pleasant; and George began
to forget his annoyance with her father.  This annoyance of his had
not been alleviated by the circumstance that neither of the seats of
the old sewing-machine was designed for three people, but when his
neighbour spoke thus gratefully, he no longer minded the crowding--in
fact, it pleased him so much that he began to wish the old sewing-
machine would go even slower.  And she had spoken no word of blame for
his letting that darned horse get the cutter into the ditch.  George
presently addressed her hurriedly, almost tremulously, speaking close
to her ear:

"I forgot to tell you something: you're pretty nice!  I thought so the
first second I saw you last night.  I'll come for you tonight and take
you to the Assembly at the Amberson Hotel.  You're going, aren't you?"

"Yes, but I'm going with papa and the Sharons I'll see you there."

"Looks to me as if you were awfully conventional," George grumbled;
and his disappointment was deeper than he was willing to let her see--
though she probably did see.  "Well, we'll dance the cotillion
together, anyhow."

"I'm afraid not. I promised Mr. Kinney."

"What!"  George's tone was shocked, as at incredible news.  "Well, you
could break that engagement, I guess, if you wanted to!  Girls always
can get out of things when they want to.  Won't you?"

"I don't think so."

"Why not?"

"Because I promised him.  Several days ago."

George gulped, and lowered his pride, "I don't--oh, look here!  I only
want to go to that thing tonight to get to see something of you; and
if you don't dance the cotillion with me, how can I?  I'll only be
here two weeks, and the others have got all the rest of your visit to
see you.  Won't you do it, please?"

"I couldn't."

"See here!" said the stricken George.  "If you're going to decline to
dance that cotillion with me simply because you've promised a--a--a
miserable red-headed outsider like Fred Kinney, why we might as well
quit!"

"Quit what?"

"You know perfectly well what I mean," he said huskily.

"I don't."

"Well, you ought to!"

"But I don't at all!"

George, thoroughly hurt, and not a little embittered, expressed
himself in a short outburst of laughter: "Well, I ought to have seen
it!"

"Seen what?"

"That you might turn out to be a girl who'd like a fellow of the red-
headed Kinney sort.  I ought to have seen it from the first!"

Lucy bore her disgrace lightly.  "Oh, dancing a cotillion with a
person doesn't mean that you like him--but I don't see anything in
particular the matter with Mr. Kinney.  What is?"

"If you don't see anything the matter with him for yourself," George
responded, icily, "I don't think pointing it out would help you.  You
probably wouldn't understand."

"You might try," she suggested.  "Of course I'm a stranger here, and
if people have done anything wrong or have something unpleasant about
them, I wouldn't have any way of knowing it, just at first.  If poor
Mr. Kinney--"

"I prefer not to discuss it," said George curtly.  "He's an enemy of
mine."

"Why?"

"I prefer not to discuss it."

"Well, but--"

"I prefer not to discuss it!"

"Very well."  She began to hum the air of the song which Mr. George
Amberson was now discoursing, "O moon of my delight that knows no
wane"--and there was no further conversation on the back seat.

They had entered Amberson Addition, and the moon of Mr. Amberson's
delight was overlaid by a slender Gothic filagree; the branches that
sprang from the shade trees lining the street.  Through the windows of
many of the houses rosy lights were flickering; and silver tinsel and
evergreen wreaths and brilliant little glass globes of silver and wine
colour could be seen, and glimpses were caught of Christmas trees,
with people decking them by firelight--reminders that this was
Christmas Eve.  The ride-stealers had disappeared from the highway,
though now and then, over the gasping and howling of the horseless
carriage, there came a shrill jeer from some young passer-by upon the
sidewalk:

"Mister, fer heaven's sake go an' git a hoss!  Git a hoss!  Git a
hoss!"

The contrivance stopped with a heart-shaking jerk before Isabel's
house.  The gentlemen jumped down, helping Isabel and Fanny to
descend; there were friendly leavetakings--and one that was not
precisely friendly.

"It's 'au revoir,' till to-night, isn't it?"  Lucy asked, laughing.

"Good afternoon!" said George, and he did not wait, as his relatives
did, to see the old sewing machine start briskly down the street,
toward the Sharons'; its lighter load consisting now of only Mr.
Morgan and his daughter.  George went into the house at once.

He found his father reading the evening paper in the library.  "Where
are your mother and your Aunt Fanny?"  Mr. Minafer inquired, not
looking up.

"They're coming," said his son; and, casting himself heavily into a
chair, stared at the fire.

His prediction was verified a few moments later; the two ladies came
in cheerfully, unfastening their fur cloaks.  "It's all right,
Georgie," said Isabel.  "Your Uncle George called to us that Pendennis
got home safely.  Put your shoes close to the fire, dear, or else go
and change them."  She went to her husband and patted him lightly on
the shoulder, an action which George watched with sombre moodiness.
"You might dress before long," she suggested.  "We're all going to the
Assembly, after dinner, aren't we?  Brother George said he'd go with
us."

"Look here," said George abruptly.  "How about this man Morgan and his
old sewing-machine?  Doesn't he want to get grandfather to put money
into it?  Isn't he trying to work Uncle George for that?  Isn't that
what he's up to?"

It was Miss Fanny who responded.  "You little silly!" she cried, with
surprising sharpness.  "What on earth are you talking about?  Eugene
Morgan's perfectly able to finance his own inventions these days."

"I'll bet he borrows money of Uncle George," the nephew insisted.

Isabel looked at him in grave perplexity.  "Why do you say such a
thing, George?" she asked.

"He strikes me as that sort of man," he answered doggedly.  "Isn't he,
father?"

Minafer set down his paper for the moment.  "He was a fairly wild
young fellow twenty years ago," he said, glancing at his wife
absently.  "He was like you in one thing, Georgie; he spent too much
money--only he didn't have any mother to get money out of a
grandfather for him, so he was usually in debt.  But I believe I've
heard he's done fairly well of late years.  No, I can't say I think
he's a swindler, and I doubt if he needs anybody else's money to back
his horseless carriage."

"Well, what's he brought the old thing here for, then?  People that
own elephants don't take them elephants around with 'em when they go
visiting.  What's he got it here for?"

"I'm sure I don't know," said Mr. Minafer, resuming his paper.  "You
might ask him."

Isabel laughed, and patted her husband's shoulder again.  "Aren't you
going to dress?  Aren't we all going to the dance?"

He groaned faintly.  "Aren't your brother and Georgie escorts enough
for you and Fanny?"

"Wouldn't you enjoy it at all?"

"You know I don't."

Isabel let her hand remain upon his shoulder a moment longer; she
stood behind him, looking into the fire, and George, watching her
broodingly, thought there was more colour in her face than the
reflection of the flames accounted for.  "Well, then," she said
indulgently, "stay at home and be happy.  We won't urge you if you'd
really rather not."

"I really wouldn't," he said contentedly.

Half an hour later, George was passing through the upper hall, in a
bath-robe stage of preparation for the evening's' gaieties, when he
encountered his Aunt Fanny.  He stopped her.  "Look here!" he said.

"What in the world is the matter with you?" she demanded, regarding
him with little amiability.  "You look as if you were rehearsing for a
villain in a play.  Do change your expression!"

His expression gave no sign of yielding to the request; on the
contrary, its somberness deepened.  "I suppose you don't know why
father doesn't want to go tonight," he said solemnly.  "You're his
only sister, and yet you don't know!"

"He never wants to go anywhere that I ever heard of," said Fanny.
"What is the matter with you?"

"He doesn't want to go because he doesn't like this man Morgan."

"Good gracious!" Fanny cried impatiently.  "Eugene Morgan isn't in
your father's thoughts at all, one way or the other.  Why should he
be?"

George hesitated. "Well--it strikes me--Look here, what makes you and
--and everybody--so excited over him?"

"Excited!" she jeered.  "Can't people be glad to see an old friend
without silly children like you having to make a to-do about it?  I've
just been in your mother's room suggesting that she might give a
little dinner for them--"

"For who?"

"For whom, Georgie!  For Mr. Morgan and his daughter."

"Look here!" George said quickly.  "Don't do that!  Mother mustn't do
that.  It wouldn't look well."

"Wouldn't look well!"  Fanny mocked him; and her suppressed vehemence
betrayed a surprising acerbity.  "See here, Georgie Minafer, I suggest
that you just march straight on into your room and finish your
dressing!  Sometimes you say things that show you have a pretty mean
little mind!"

George was so astounded by this outburst that his indignation was
delayed by his curiosity.  "Why, what upsets you this way?" he
inquired.

"I know what you mean," she said, her voice still lowered, but not
decreasing in sharpness.  "You're trying to insinuate that I'd get
your mother to invite Eugene Morgan here on my account because he's a
widower!"

"I am?"  George gasped, nonplussed.  "I'm trying to insinuate that
you're setting your cap at him and getting mother to help you?  Is
that what you mean?"

Beyond a doubt that was what Miss Fanny meant.  She gave him a white-
hot look.  "You attend to your own affairs!" she whispered fiercely,
and swept away.

George, dumfounded, returned to his room for meditation.

He had lived for years in the same house with his Aunt Fanny, and it
now appeared that during all those years he had been thus intimately
associating with a total stranger.  Never before had he met the
passionate lady with whom he had just held a conversation in the hall.
So she wanted to get married!  And wanted George's mother to help her
with this horseless-carriage widower!

"Well, I will be shot!" he muttered aloud.  "I will--I certainly will
be shot!"  And he began' to laugh. "Lord 'lmighty!"

But presently, at the thought of the horseless-carriage widower's
daughter, his grimness returned, and he resolved upon a line of
conduct for the evening.  He would nod to her carelessly when he
first saw her; and, after that, he would notice her no more: he would
not dance with her; he would not favour her in the cotillion--he would
not go near her!

He descended to dinner upon the third urgent summons of a coloured
butler, having spent two hours dressing--and rehearsing.




Chapter IX


The Honourable George Amberson was a congressman who led cotillions--
the sort of congressman an Amberson would be.  He did it negligently,
tonight, yet with infallible dexterity, now and then glancing
humorously at the spectators, people of his own age.  They were seated
in a tropical grove at one end of the room whither they had retired at
the beginning of the cotillion, which they surrendered entirely to the
twenties and the late 'teens.  And here, grouped with that stately
pair, Sydney and Amelia Amberson, sat Isabel with Fanny, while Eugene
Morgan appeared to bestow an amiable devotion impartially upon the
three sisters-in-law.  Fanny watched his face eagerly, laughing at
everything he said; Amelia smiled blandly, but rather because of
graciousness than because of interest; while Isabel, looking out at
the dancers, rhythmically moved a great fan of blue ostrich feathers,
listened to Eugene thoughtfully, yet all the while kept her shining
eyes on Georgie.

Georgie had carried out his rehearsed projects with precision, he had
given Miss Morgan a nod studied into perfection during his lengthy
toilet before dinner.  "Oh, yes, I do seem to remember that curious
little outsider!" this nod seemed to say.  Thereafter, all cognizance
of her evaporated: the curious little outsider was permitted no
further existence worth the struggle.  Nevertheless, she flashed in
the corner of his eye too often.  He was aware of her dancing
demurely, and of her viciously flirtatious habit of never looking up
at her partner, but keeping her eyes concealed beneath downcast
lashes; and he had over-sufficient consciousness of her between the
dances, though it was not possible to see her at these times, even if
he had cared to look frankly in her direction--she was invisible in a
thicket of young dresscoats.  The black thicket moved as she moved and
her location was hatefully apparent, even if he had not heard her
voice laughing from the thicket.  It was annoying how her voice,
though never loud, pursued him.  No matter how vociferous were other
voices, all about, he seemed unable to prevent himself from constantly
recognizing hers.  It had a quaver in it, not pathetic--rather
humorous than pathetic--a quality which annoyed him to the point of
rage, because it was so difficult to get away from.  She seemed to be
having a "wonderful time!"

An unbearable soreness accumulated in his chest: his dislike of the
girl and her conduct increased until he thought of leaving this
sickening Assembly and going home to bed.  That would show her!  But
just then he heard her laughing, and decided that it wouldn't show
her.  So he remained.

When the young couples seated themselves in chairs against the walls,
round three sides of the room, for the cotillion, George joined a
brazen-faced group clustering about the doorway--youths with no
partners, yet eligible to be "called out" and favoured.  He marked
that his uncle placed the infernal Kinney and Miss Morgan, as the
leading couple, in the first chairs at the head of the line upon the
leader's right; and this disloyalty on the part of Uncle George was
inexcusable, for in the family circle the nephew had often expressed
his opinion of Fred Kinney.  In his bitterness, George uttered a
significant monosyllable.

The music flourished; whereupon Mr. Kinney, Miss Morgan, and six of
their neighbours rose and waltzed knowingly.  Mr. Amberson's whistle
blew;' then the eight young people went to the favour-table and were
given toys and trinkets wherewith to delight the new partners it was
now their privilege to select.  Around the walls, the seated non-
participants in this ceremony looked rather conscious; some chattered,
endeavouring not to appear expectant; some tried not to look wistful;
and others were frankly solemn.  It was a trying moment; and whoever
secured a favour, this very first shot, might consider the portents
happy for a successful evening.

Holding their twinkling gewgaws in their hands, those about to bestow
honour came toward the seated lines, where expressions became
feverish.  Two of the approaching girls seemed to wander, not finding
a predetermined object in sight; and these two were Janie Sharon, and
her cousin, Lucy.  At this, George Amberson Minafer, conceiving that
he had little to anticipate from either, turned a proud back upon the
room and affected to converse with his friend, Mr. Charlie Johnson.

The next moment a quick little figure intervened between the two.  It
was Lucy, gaily offering a silver sleighbell decked with white ribbon.

"I almost couldn't find you!" she cried.

George stared, took her hand, led her forth in silence, danced with
her.  She seemed content not to talk; but as the whistle blew,
signalling that this episode was concluded, and he conducted her to
her seat, she lifted the little bell toward him.  "You haven't taken
your favour.  You're supposed to pin it on your coat," she said.
"Don't you want it?"

"If you insist!" said George stiffly.  And he bowed her into her
chair; then turned and walked away, dropping the sleighbell haughtily
into his trousers' pocket.

The figure proceeded to its conclusion, and George was given other
sleighbells, which he easily consented to wear upon his lapel; but, as
the next figure 'began, he strolled with a bored air to the tropical
grove, where sat his elders, and seated himself beside his Uncle
Sydney.  His mother leaned across Miss Fanny, raising her voice over
the music to speak to him.

"Georgie, nobody will be able to see you here.  You'll not be
favoured.  You ought to be where you can dance."

"Don't care to," he returned.  "Bore!

"But you ought--"  She stopped and laughed, waving her fan to direct
his attention behind him.  "Look!  Over your shoulder!"

He turned, and discovered Miss Lucy Morgan in the act of offering him
a purple toy balloon.

"I found you!" she laughed.

George was startled. "Well--" he said.

"Would you rather 'sit it out?'"  Lucy asked quickly, as he did not
move.  "I don't care to dance if you--"

"No," he said, rising.  "It would be better to dance."  His tone was
solemn, and solemnly he departed with her from the grove.  Solemnly he
danced with her.

Four times, with not the slightest encouragement, she brought him a
favour: 'four times in succession.  When the fourth came, "Look here!"
said George huskily.  "You going to keep this up all' night?  What do
you mean by it?"

For an instant she seemed confused.  "That's what cotillions are for,
aren't they?" she murmured.

"What do you mean: what they're for?"

"So that a girl can dance with a person she wants to?"

George's huskiness increased.  "Well, do you mean you--you want to
dance with me all the time--all evening?"

"Well, this much of it--evidently!" she laughed.

"Is it because you thought I tried to keep you from getting hurt this
afternoon when we upset?"

She shook her head.

"Was it because you want to even things up for making me angry--I
mean, for hurting my feelings on the way home?"

With her eyes averted--for girls of nineteen can be as shy as boys,
sometimes--she said, "Well--you only got angry because I couldn't
dance the cotillion with you.  I--I didn't feel terribly hurt with you
for getting angry about that!"

"Was there any other reason?  Did my telling you I liked you have
anything to do with it?"

She looked up gently, and, as George met her eyes, something
exquisitely touching, yet queerly delightful, gave him a catch in the
throat.  She looked instantly away, and, turning, ran out from the
palm grove, where they stood, to the dancing-floor.

"Come on!" she cried.  "Let's dance!"

He followed her.

"See here--I--I--" he stammered.  "You mean--Do you--"

"No, no!" she laughed.  "Let's dance!"

He put his arm about her almost tremulously, and they began to waltz.
It was a happy dance for both of them.

Christmas day is the children's, but the holidays are youth's dancing-
time.  The holidays belong to the early twenties and the 'teens, home
from school and college.  These years possess the holidays for a
little while, then possess them only in smiling, wistful memories of
holly and twinkling lights and dance-music, and charming faces all
aglow.  It is the liveliest time in life, the happiest of the
irresponsible times in life.  Mothers echo its happiness--nothing is
like a mother who has a son home from college, except another mother
with a son home from college.  Bloom does actually come upon these
mothers; it is a visible thing; and they run like girls, walk like
athletes, laugh like sycophants.  Yet they give up their sons to the
daughters of other mothers, and find it proud rapture enough to be
allowed to sit and watch.

Thus Isabel watched George and Lucy dancing, as together they danced
away the holidays of that year into the past.

"They seem to get along better than they did at first, those two
children," Fanny Minafer said sitting beside her at the Sharons'
dance, a week after the Assembly.  "They seemed to be always having
little quarrels of some sort, at first.  At least George did: he
seemed to be continually pecking at that lovely, dainty, little Lucy,
and being cross with her over nothing."

"Pecking?" Isabel laughed.  "What a word to use about Georgie!  I
think I never knew a more angelically amiable disposition in my life!"

Miss Fanny echoed her sister-in-law's laugh, but it was a rueful echo,
and not sweet.  "He's amiable to you!" she said.  "That's all the side
of him you ever happen to see.  And why wouldn't he be amiable to
anybody that simply fell down and worshipped him every minute of her
life?  Most of us would!"

"Isn't he worth worshipping?  Just look at him!  Isn't he charming
with Lucy!  See how hard he ran to get it when she dropped her
handkerchief back there."

"Oh, I'm not going to argue with you about George!" said Miss Fanny.
"I'm fond enough of him, for that matter.  He can be charming, and
he's certainly stunning looking, if only--"

"Let the 'if only' go, dear," Isabel suggested good-naturedly.  "Let's
talk about that dinner you thought I should--"

"I?"  Miss Fanny interrupted quickly.  "Didn't you want to give it
yourself?"

"Indeed, I did, my dear!" said Isabel heartily.  "I only meant that
unless you had proposed it, perhaps I wouldn't--"

But here Eugene came for her to dance, and she left the sentence
uncompleted.  Holiday dances can be happy for youth renewed as well as
for youth in bud--and yet it was not with the air of a rival that Miss
Fanny watched her brother's wife dancing with the widower.  Miss
Fanny's eyes narrowed a little, but only as if her mind engaged in a
hopeful calculation.  She looked pleased.




Chapter X



A few days after George's return to the university it became evident
that not quite everybody had gazed with complete benevolence upon the
various young collegians at their holiday sports.  The Sunday edition
of the principal morning paper even expressed some bitterness under
the heading, "Gilded Youths of the Fin-de-Siecle"--this was considered
the knowing phrase of the time, especially for Sunday supplements--and
there is no doubt that from certain references in this bit of writing
some people drew the conclusion that Mr. George Amberson Minafer had
not yet got his comeupance, a postponement still irritating.
Undeniably, Fanny Minafer was one of the people who drew this
conclusion, for she cut the article out and enclosed it in a letter to
her nephew, having written on the border of the clipping, "I wonder
whom it can mean!"

George read part of it.

We debate sometimes what is to be the future of this nation when we
think that in a few years public affairs may be in the hands of the
fin-de-siecle gilded youths we see about us during the Christmas
holidays.  Such foppery, such luxury, such insolence, was surely never
practised by the scented, overbearing patricians of the Palatine, even
in Rome's most decadent epoch.  In all the wild orgy of wastefulness
and luxury with which the nineteenth century reaches its close, the
gilded youth has been surely the worst symptom.  With his airs of
young milord, his fast horses, his gold and silver cigarette-cases,
his clothes from a New York tailor, his recklessness of money showered
upon him by indulgent mothers or doting grandfathers, he respects
nothing and nobody.  He is blase if you please.  Watch him at a social
function how condescendingly he deigns to select a partner for the
popular waltz or two step how carelessly he shoulders older people out
of his way, with what a blank stare he returns the salutation of some
old acquaintance whom he may choose in his royal whim to forget!  The
unpleasant part of all this is that the young women he so
condescendingly selects as partners for the dance greet him with
seeming rapture, though in their hearts they must feel humiliated by
his languid hauteur, and many older people beam upon him almost
fawningly if he unbends so far as to throw them a careless, disdainful
word!

One wonders what has come over the new generation.  Of such as these
the Republic was not made.  Let us pray that the future of our country
is not in the hands of these fin-de-siecle gilded youths, but rather
in the calloused palms of young men yet unknown, labouring upon the
farms of the land.  When we compare the young manhood of Abraham
Lincoln with the specimens we are now producing, we see too well that
it bodes ill for the twentieth century--

George yawned, and tossed the clipping into his waste-basket,
wondering why his aunt thought such dull nonsense worth the sending.
As for her insinuation, pencilled upon the border, he supposed she
meant to joke--a supposition which neither surprised him nor altered
his lifelong opinion of her wit.

He read her letter with more interest:

The dinner your mother gave for the Morgans was a lovely affair.  It
was last Monday evening, just ten days after you left.  It was
peculiarly appropriate that your mother should give this dinner,
because her brother George, your uncle, was Mr. Morgan's most intimate
friend before he left here a number of years ago, and it was a
pleasant occasion for the formal announcement of some news which you
heard from Lucy Morgan before you returned to college.  At least she
told me she had told you the night before you left that her father had
decided to return here to live.  It was appropriate that your mother,
herself an old friend, should assemble a representative selection of
Mr. Morgan's old friends around him at such a time.  He was in great
spirits and most entertaining.  As your time was so charmingly taken
up during your visit home with a younger member of his family, you
probably overlooked opportunities of hearing him talk, and do not know
what an interesting man he can be.

He will soon begin to build his factory here for the manufacture of
automobiles, which he says is a term he prefers to "horseless
carriages."  Your Uncle George told me he would like to invest in this
factory, as George thinks there is a future for automobiles; perhaps
not for general use, but as an interesting novelty, which people with
sufficient means would like to own for their amusement and the sake of
variety.  However, he said Mr. Morgan laughingly declined his offer,
as Mr. M. was fully able to finance this venture, though not starting
in a very large way.  Your uncle said other people are manufacturing
automobiles in different parts of the country with success.  Your
father is not very well, though he is not actually ill, and the doctor
tells him he ought not to be so much at his office, as the long years
of application indoors with no exercise are beginning to affect him
unfavourably, but I believe your father would die if he had to give up
his work, which is all that has ever interested him outside of his
family.  I never could understand it.  Mr. Morgan took your mother and
me with Lucy to see Modjeska in "Twelfth Night" yesterday evening, and
Lucy said she thought the Duke looked rather like you, only much more
democratic in his manner.  I suppose you will think I have written a
great deal about the Morgans in this letter, but thought you would be
interested because of your interest in a younger member of his family.
Hoping that you are finding college still as attractive as ever,
             Affectionately,
                        Aunt Fanny.

George read one sentence in this letter several times.  Then he
dropped the missive in his wastebasket to join the clipping, and
strolled down the corridor of his dormitory to borrow a copy of
"Twelfth Night."  Having secured one, he returned to his study and
refreshed his memory of the play--but received no enlightenment that
enabled him to comprehend Lucy's strange remark.  However, he found
himself impelled in the direction of correspondence, and presently
wrote a letter--not a reply to his Aunt Fanny.

Dear Lucy:
No doubt you will be surprised at hearing from me so soon again,
especially as this makes two in answer to the one received from you
since getting back to the old place.  I hear you have been making
comments about me at the theatre, that some actor was more democratic
in his manners than I am, which I do not understand.  You know my
theory of life because I explained it to you on our first drive
together, when I told you I would not talk to everybody about things I
feel like the way I spoke to you of my theory of life.  I believe
those who are able should have a true theory of life, and I developed
my theory of life long, long ago.

Well, here I sit smoking my faithful briar pipe, indulging in the
fragrance of my tobacco as I look out on the campus from my many-paned
window, and things are different with me from the way they were way
back in Freshman year.  I can see now how boyish in many ways I was
then.  I believe what has changed me as much as anything was my visit
home at the time I met you.  So I sit here with my faithful briar and
dream the old dreams over as it were, dreaming of the waltzes we
waltzed together and of that last night before we parted, and you told
me the good news you were going to live there, and I would find my
friend waiting for me, when I get home next summer.

I will be glad my friend will be waiting for me.  I am not capable of
friendship except for the very few, and, looking back over my life, I
remember there were times when I doubted if I could feel a great
friendship for anybody--especially girls.  I do not take a great
interest in many people, as you know, for I find most of them shallow.
Here in the old place I do not believe in being hail-fellow-well-met
with every Tom, Dick, and Harry just because he happens to be a
classmate, any more than I do at home, where I have always been
careful who I was seen with, largely on account of the family, but
also because my disposition ever since my boyhood has been to
encourage real intimacy from but the few.

What are you reading now?  I have finished both "Henry Esmond" and
"The Virginians."  I like Thackeray because he is not trashy, and
because he writes principally of nice people.  My theory of literature
is an author who does not indulge in trashiness--writes about people
you could introduce into your own home.  I agree with my Uncle Sydney,
as I once heard him say he did not care to read a book or go to a play
about people he would not care to meet at his own dinner table.  I
believe we should live by certain standards and ideals, as you know
from my telling you my theory of life.

Well, a letter is no place for deep discussions, so I will not go into
the subject.  From several letters from my mother, and one from Aunt
Fanny, I hear you are seeing a good deal of the family since I left.
I hope sometimes you think of the member who is absent.  I got a
silver frame for your photograph in New York, and I keep it on my
desk.  It is the only girl's photograph I ever took the trouble to
have framed, though, as I told you frankly, I have had any number of
other girls' photographs, yet all were only passing fancies, and
oftentimes I have questioned in years past if I was capable of much
friendship toward the feminine sex, which I usually found shallow
until our own friendship began.  When I look at your photograph, I say
to myself, "At last, at last here is one that will not prove shallow."

My faithful briar has gone out. I will have to rise and fill it, then
once more in the fragrance of My Lady Nicotine, I will sit and dream
the old dreams over, and think, too, of the true friend at home
awaiting my return in June for the summer vacation.
             Friend, this is from your friend,
                                            G.A.M.


George's anticipations were not disappointed.  When he came home in
June his friend was awaiting him; at least, she was so pleased to see
him again that for a few minutes after their first encounter she was a
little breathless, and a great deal glowing, and quiet withal.  Their
sentimental friendship continued, though sometimes he was irritated by
her making it less sentimental than be did, and sometimes by what he
called her "air of superiority."  Her air was usually, in truth, that
of a fond but amused older sister; and George did not believe such an
attitude was warranted by her eight months of seniority.

Lucy and her father were living at the Amberson Hotel, while Morgan
got his small machine-shops built in a western outskirt of the town;
and George grumbled about the shabbiness and the old-fashioned look of
the hotel, though it was "still the best in the place, of course."  He
remonstrated with his grandfather, declaring that the whole Amberson
Estate would be getting "run-down and out-at-heel, if things weren't
taken in hand pretty soon."  He urged the general need of rebuilding,
renovating, varnishing, and lawsuits.  But the Major, declining to
hear him out, interrupted querulously, saying that he had enough to
bother him without any advice from George; and retired to his library,
going so far as to lock the door audibly.

"Second childhood!"  George muttered, shaking his head; and he thought
sadly that the Major had not long to live.  However, this surmise
depressed him for only a moment or so.  Of course, people couldn't be
expected to live forever, and it would be a good thing to have someone
in charge of the Estate who wouldn't let it get to looking so rusty
that riffraff dared to make fun of it.  For George had lately
undergone the annoyance of calling upon the Morgans, in the rather
stuffy red velours and gilt parlour of their apartment at the hotel,
one evening when Mr. Frederick Kinney also was a caller, and Mr.
Kinney had not been tactful.  In fact, though he adopted a humorous
tone of voice, in expressing his, sympathy for people who, through the
city's poverty in hotels, were obliged to stay at the Amberson, Mr.
Kinney's intention was interpreted by the other visitor as not at all
humorous, but, on the contrary, personal and offensive.

George rose abruptly, his face the colour of wrath.  "Good-night, Miss
Morgan. Good-night, Mr. Morgan," he said.  "I shall take pleasure in
calling at some other time when a more courteous sort of people may be
present."

"Look here!" the hot-headed Fred burst out.  "Don't you try to make me
out a boor, George Minafer!  I wasn't hinting anything at you; I
simply forgot all about your grandfather owning this old building.
Don't you try to put me in the light of a boor!  I won't--"

But George walked out in the very course of this vehement protest, and
it was necessarily left unfinished.

Mr. Kinney remained only a few moments after George's departure; and
as the door closed upon him, the distressed Lucy turned to her father.
She was plaintively surprised to find him in a condition of immoderate
laughter.

"I didn't--I didn't think I could hold out!" he gasped, and, after
choking until tears came to his eyes, felt blindly for the chair from
which be had risen to wish Mr. Kinney an indistinct good-night.  His
hand found the arm of the chair; he collapsed feebly, and sat uttering
incoherent sounds.

"Papa!"

"It brings things back so!" he managed to explain, "This very Fred
Kinney's father and young George's father, Wilbur Minafer, used to do
just such things when they were at that age--and, for that matter, so
did George Amberson and I, and all the rest of us!"  And, in spite of
his exhaustion, he began to imitate: "Don't you try to put me in the
light of a boor!"  "I shall take pleasure in calling at some time when
a more courteous sort of people--"  He was unable to go on.

There is a mirth for every age, and Lucy failed to comprehend her
father's, but tolerated it a little ruefully.

"Papa, I think they were shocking.  Weren't they awful!"

"Just--just boys!" he moaned, wiping his eyes.  But Lucy could not
smile at all; she was beginning to look indignant.  "I can forgive
that poor Fred Kinney," she said.  "He's just blundering--but George--
oh, George behaved outrageously!"

"It's a difficult age," her father observed, his calmness somewhat
restored.  "Girls don't seem to have to pass through it quite as boys
do, or their savoir faire is instinctive--or something!"  And he gave
away to a return of his convulsion.

She came and sat upon the arm of his chair.  "Papa, why should George
behave like that?"

"He's sensitive."

"Rather!  But why is he?  He does anything he likes to, without any
regard for what people think.  Then why should he mind so furiously
when the least little thing reflects upon him, or on anything or
anybody connected with him?"

Eugene patted her hand.  "That's one of the greatest puzzles of human
vanity, dear; and I don't pretend to know the answer.  In all my life,
the most arrogant people that I've known have been the most sensitive.
The, people who have done the most in contempt of other people's
opinion, and who consider themselves the highest above it, have been
the most furious if it went against them.  Arrogant and domineering
people can't stand the least, lightest, faintest breath of criticism.
It just kills them."

"Papa, do you think George is arrogant and domineering?"

"Oh, he's still only a boy," said Eugene consolingly.  "There's plenty
of fine stuff in him--can't help but be, because he's Isabel
Amberson's son."

Lucy stroked his hair, which was still almost as dark as her own.
"You liked her pretty well once, I guess, papa."

"I do still," he said quietly.

"She's lovely--lovely!  Papa--" she paused, then continued--"I wonder
sometimes--"

"What?"

"I wonder just how she happened to marry Mr. Minafer."

"Oh, Minafer's all right," said Eugene.  "He's a quiet sort of man,
but he's a good man and a kind man.  He always was, and those things
count."

"But in a way--well, I've heard people say there wasn't anything to
him at all except business and saving money.  Miss Fanny Minafer
herself told me that everything George and his mother have of their
own--that is, just to spend as they like--she says it has always come
from Major Amberson."

"Thrift, Horatio!" said Eugene lightly.  "Thrift's an inheritance, and
a common enough one here.  The people who settled the country had to
save, so making and saving were taught as virtues, and the people, to
the third generation, haven't found out that making and saving are
only means to an end.  Minafer doesn't believe in money being spent.
He believes God made it to be invested and saved."

"But George isn't saving.  He's reckless, and even if he is arrogant
and conceited and bad-tempered, he's awfully generous."

"Oh, he's an Amberson," said her father.  "The Ambersons aren't
saving.  They're too much the other way, most of them."

"I don't think I should have called George bad-tempered," Lucy said
thoughtfully.  "No. I don't think he is."

"Only when he's cross about something?"  Morgan suggested, with a
semblance of sympathetic gravity.

"Yes," she said brightly, not perceiving that his intention was
humorous.  "All the rest of the time he's really very amiable.  Of
course, he's much more a perfect child, the whole time, than he
realizes!  He certainly behaved awfully to-night."  She jumped up, her
indignation returning.  "He did, indeed, and it won't do to encourage
him in it.  I think he'll find me pretty cool--for a week or so!"

Whereupon her father suffered a renewal of his attack of uproarious
laughter.




Chapter XI



In the matter of coolness, George met Lucy upon her own predetermined
ground; in fact, he was there first, and, at their next encounter,
proved loftier and more formal than she did.  Their estrangement
lasted three weeks, and then disappeared without any preliminary
treaty: it had worn itself out, and they forgot it.

At times, however, George found other disturbances to the friendship.
Lucy was "too much the village belle," he complained; and took a
satiric attitude toward his competitors, referring to them as her
"local swains and bumpkins," sulking for an afternoon when she
reminded him that he, too, was at least "local."  She was a belle with
older people as well; Isabel and Fanny were continually taking her
driving, bringing her home with them to lunch or dinner, and making a
hundred little engagements with her, and the Major had taken a great
fancy to her, insisting upon her presence and her father's at the
Amberson family dinner at the Mansion every Sunday evening.  She knew
how to flirt with old people, he said, as she sat next him at the
table on one of these Sunday occasions; and he had always liked her
father, even when Eugene was a "terror" long ago.  "Oh, yes, he was!"
the Major laughed, when she remonstrated.  "He came up here with my
son George and some others for a serenade one night, and Eugene
stepped into a bass fiddle, and the poor musicians just gave up!  I
had a pretty half-hour getting my son George upstairs. I remember!  It
was the last time Eugene ever touched a drop--but he'd touched plenty
before that, young lady, and he daren't deny it!  Well, well; there's
another thing that's changed: hardly anybody drinks nowadays.  Perhaps
it's just as well, but things used to be livelier.  That serenade was
just before Isabel was married--and don't you fret, Miss Lucy: your
father remembers it well enough!"  The old gentleman burst into
laughter, and shook his finger at Eugene across the table.  "The fact
is," the Major went on hilariously, "I believe if Eugene hadn't broken
that bass fiddle and given himself away, Isabel would never have taken
Wilbur!  I shouldn't be surprised if that was about all the reason
that Wilbur got her!  What do you think. Wilbur?

"I shouldn't be surprised," said Wilbur placidly.  "If your notion is
right, I'm glad 'Gene broke the fiddle.  He was giving me a hard run!"

The Major always drank three glasses of champagne at his Sunday
dinner, and he was finishing the third.  "What do you say about it,
Isabel?  By Jove!" he cried, pounding the table.  "She's blushing!"

Isabel did blush, but she laughed.  "Who wouldn't blush!" she cried,
and her sister-in-law came to her assistance.

"The important thing," said Fanny jovially, "is that Wilbur did get
her, and not only got her, but kept her!"

Eugene was as pink as Isabel, but he laughed without any sign of
embarrassment other than his heightened colour.  "There's another
important thing--that is, for me," he said.  "It's the only thing that
makes me forgive that bass viol for getting in my way."

"What is it?" the Major asked.

"Lucy," said Morgan gently.

Isabel gave him a quick glance, all warm approval, and there was a
murmur of friendliness round the table.

George was not one of those who joined in this applause.  He
considered his grandfather's nonsense indelicate, even for second
childhood, and he thought that the sooner the subject was dropped the
better.  However, he had only a slight recurrence of the resentment
which had assailed him during the winter at every sign of his mother's
interest in Morgan; though he was still ashamed of his aunt sometimes,
when it seemed to him that Fanny was almost publicly throwing herself
at the widower's head.  Fanny and he had one or two arguments in which
her fierceness again astonished and amused him.

"You drop your criticisms of your relatives," she bade him, hotly, one
day, "and begin thinking a little about your own behaviour!  You say
people will 'talk' about my--about my merely being pleasant to an old
friend!  What do I care how they talk?  I guess if people are talking
about anybody in this family they're talking about the impertinent
little snippet that hasn't any respect for anything, and doesn't even
know enough to attend to his own affairs!"

"Snippet,' Aunt Fanny!" George laughed.  "How elegant!  And 'little
snippet'--when I'm over five-feet-eleven?"

"I said it!" she snapped, departing.  "I don't see how Lucy can stand
you!"

"You'd make an amiable stepmother-in-law!" he called after her.  "I'll
be careful about proposing to Lucy!"

These were but roughish spots in a summer that glided by evenly and
quickly enough, for the most part, and, at the end, seemed to fly.  On
the last night before George went back to be a Junior, his mother
asked him confidently if it had not been a happy summer.

He hadn't thought about it, he answered.  "Oh,' I suppose so.  Why?"

"I just thought it would be: nice to hear you say so," she said,
smiling.  "I mean, it's pleasant for people of my age to know that
people of your age realize that they're happy."

"People of your age!" he repeated.  "You know you don't look precisely
like an old woman, mother.  Not precisely!"

"No," she said.  "And I suppose I feel about as young as you do,
inside, but it won't be many years before I must begin to look old.
It does come!"  She sighed, still smiling.  "It's seemed to me that,
it must have been a happy summer for you--a real 'summer of roses and
wine'--without the wine, perhaps.  'Gather ye roses while ye may'--or
was it primroses?  Time does really fly, or perhaps it's more like the
sky--and smoke--"

George was puzzled.  "What do you mean: time being like the sky and
smoke?"

"I mean the things that we have and that we think are so solid--
they're like smoke, and time is like the sky that the smoke disappears
into.  You know how wreath of smoke goes up from a chimney, and seems
all thick and black and busy against the sky, as if it were going to
do such important things and last forever, and you see it getting
thinner and thinner--and then, in such a little while, it isn't there
at all; nothing is left but the sky, and the sky keeps on being just
the same forever."

"It strikes me you're getting mixed up," said George cheerfully.  "I
don't see much resemblance between time and the sky, or between things
and smoke-wreaths; but I do see one reason you like 'Lucy Morgan so
much.  She talks that same kind of wistful, moony way sometimes--I
don't mean to say I mind it in either of you, because I rather like to
listen to it, and you've got a very good voice, mother.  It's nice to
listen to, no matter how much smoke and sky, and so on, you talk.
So's Lucy's for that matter; and I see why you're congenial.  She
talks that way to her father, too; and he's right there with the same
kind of guff.  Well, it's all right with me!"  He laughed, teasingly,
and allowed her to retain his hand, which she had fondly seized.
"I've got plenty to think about when people drool along!"

She pressed his hand to her cheek, and a tear made a tiny warm streak
across one of his knuckles.

"For heaven's sake!" he said.  "What's the matter? Isn't everything
all right?"

"You're going away!"

"Well, I'm coming back, don't you suppose?  Is that all that worries
you?"

She cheered up, and smiled again, but shook her head.  "I never can
bear to see you go--that's the most of it.  I'm a little bothered
about your father, too."

"Why?"

It seems to me he looks so badly.  Everybody thinks so."

"What nonsense!"  George laughed. "He's been looking that way all
summer.  He isn't much different from the way he's looked all his
life, that I can see.  What's the matter with him?"

"He never talks much about his business to me but I think he's been
worrying about some investments he made last year.  I think his worry
has affected his health."

"What investments?" George demanded.  "He hasn't gone into Mr.
Morgan's automobile concern, has he?"

"No," Isabel smiled.  "The 'automobile concern' is all Eugene's, and
it's so small I understand it's taken hardly anything.  No; your
father has always prided himself on making only the most absolutely
safe investments, but two or three years ago he and your Uncle George
both put a great deal--pretty much everything they could get together,
I think--into the stock of rolling-mills some friends of theirs owned,
and I'm afraid the mills haven't been doing well."

"What of that?  Father needn't worry.  You and I could take care of
him the rest of his life on what grandfather--"

"Of course," she agreed.  "But your father's always lived so for his
business and taken such pride in his sound investments; it's a passion
with him.  I--"

"Pshaw! He needn't worry!  You tell him we'll look after him: we'll
build him a little stone bank in the backyard, if he busts up, and he
can go and put his pennies in it every morning.  That'll keep him just
as happy as he ever was!"  He kissed her.  "Good-night, I'm going to
tell Lucy good-bye.  Don't sit up for me."

She walked to the front gate with him, still holding his hand, and he
told her again not to "sit up" for him.

"Yes, I will," she laughed.  "You won't be very late."

"Well--it's my last night."

"But I know Lucy, and she knows I want to see you, too, your last
night.  You'll see: she'll send you home promptly at eleven!"

But she was mistaken: Lucy sent him home promptly at ten.




Chapter XII



Isabel's uneasiness about her husbands health--sometimes reflected in
her letters to George during the winter that followed--had not been
alleviated when the accredited Senior returned for his next summer
vacation, and she confided to him in his room, soon after his arrival,
that "something" the doctor had said to her lately had made her more
uneasy than ever.

"Still worrying over his rolling-mills investments? George asked, not
seriously impressed.

"I'm afraid it's past that stage from what Dr Rainey says.  His
worries only aggravate his condition now.  Dr. Rainey says we ought to
get him away."

"Well, let's do it, then."

"He won't go."

"He's a man awfully set in his ways; that's true," said George.  "I
don't think there's anything much the matter with him, though, and he
looks just the same to me.  Have you seen Lucy lately?  How is she?"

"Hasn't she written you?"

"Oh, about once a month," he answered carelessly.  "Never says much
about herself.  How's she look?"

"She looks--pretty!" said Isabel.  "I suppose she wrote you they've
moved?"

"Yes; I've got her address.  She said they were building."

"They did. It's all finished, and they've been in it a month.  Lucy is
so capable; she keeps house exquisitely.  It's small, but oh, such a
pretty little house!"

"Well, that's fortunate," George said.  "One thing I've always felt
they didn't know a great deal about is architecture."

"Don't they?" asked Isabel, surprised.  "Anyhow, their house is
charming.  It's way out beyond the end of Amberson Boulevard; it's
quite near that big white house with a gray-green roof somebody built
out there a year or so ago.  There are any number of houses going up,
out that way; and the trolley-line runs within a block of them now, on
the next street, and the traction people are laying tracks more than
three miles beyond.  I suppose you'll be driving out to see Lucy to-
morrow."

"I thought--" George hesitated.  "I thought perhaps I'd go after dinner
this evening."

At this his mother laughed, not astonished.  "It was only my feeble
joke about 'to-morrow,' Georgie!  I was pretty sure you couldn't wait
that long.  Did Lucy write you about the factory?"

"No.  What factory?"

"The automobile shops.  They had rather a dubious time at first, I'm
afraid, and some of Eugene's experiments turned out badly, but this
spring they've finished eight automobiles and sold them all, and
they've got twelve more almost finished, and they're sold already!
Eugene's so gay over it!"

"What do his old sewing-machines look like?  Like that first one he
had when they came here?"

"No, indeed!  These have rubber tires blown up with air--pneumatic!
And they aren't so high; they're very easy to get into, and the
engine's in front--Eugene thinks that's a great improvement.  They're
very interesting to look at; behind the driver's seat there's a sort
of box where four people can sit, with a step and a little door in the
rear, and--"

"I know all about it," said George. "I've seen any number like that,
East.  You can see all you want of 'em, if you stand on Fifth Avenue
half an hour, any afternoon.  I've seen half-a-dozen go by almost at
the same time--within a few minutes, anyhow; and of course electric
hansoms are a common sight there any day.  I hired one, myself, the
last time I was there.  How fast do Mr. Morgan's machines go?"

"Much too fast!  It's very exhilarating--but rather frightening; and
they do make a fearful uproar.  He says, though, he thinks he sees a
way to get around the noisiness in time."

"I don't mind the noise," said George.  "Give me a horse, for mine,
though, any day.  I must get up a race with one of these things:
Pendennis'll leave it one mile behind in a two-mile run.  How's
grandfather?"

"He looks well, but he complains sometimes of his heart: I suppose
that's natural at his age--and it's an Amberson trouble."  Having
mentioned this, she looked anxious instantly.  "Did you ever feel any
weakness there, Georgie?"

"No!" he laughed.

"Are you sure, dear?"

"No!"  And he laughed again.  "Did you?"

"Oh, I think not--at least, the doctor told me he thought my heart was
about all right.  He said I needn't be alarmed."

"I should think not!  Women do seem to be always talking about health:
I suppose they haven't got enough else to think of!"

"That must be it," she said gayly.  "We're an idle lot!"

George had taken off his coat.  "I don't like to hint to a lady," he
said, "but I do want to dress before dinner."

"Don't be long; I've got to do a lot of looking at you, dear!"  She
kissed him and ran away singing.

But his Aunt Fanny was not so fond; and at the dinner-table there came
a spark of liveliness into her eye when George patronizingly asked her
what was the news in her own "particular line of sport."

"What do you mean, Georgie?" she asked quietly.

"Oh I mean:  What's the news in the fast set generally?  You been
causing any divorces lately?"

"No," said Fanny, the spark in her eye getting brighter.  "I haven't
been causing anything."

"Well, what's the gossip?  You usually hear pretty much everything
that goes on around the nooks and crannies in this town, I hear.
What's the last from the gossips' corner, auntie?"

Fanny dropped her eyes, and the spark was concealed, but a movement of
her lower lip betokened a tendency to laugh, as she replied.  "There
hasn't been much gossip lately, except the report that Lucy Morgan and
Fred Kinney are engaged--and that's quite old, by this time."

Undeniably, this bit of mischief was entirely successful, for there
was a clatter upon George's plate.  "What--what do you think you're
talking about?" he gasped.

Miss Fanny looked up innocently.  "About the report of Lucy Morgan's
engagement to Fred Kinney."

George turned dumbly to his mother, and Isabel shook her head
reassuringly.  "People are always starting rumours," she said.  "I
haven't paid any attention to this one."

"But you--you've heard it?" he stammered.

"Oh, one hears all sorts of nonsense, dear.  I haven't the slightest
idea that it's true."

"Then you have heard it!"

"I wouldn't let it take my appetite," his father suggested drily.
"There are plenty of girls in the world!"

George turned pale.

"Eat your dinner, Georgie," his aunt said sweetly.  "Food will do you
good. I didn't say I knew this rumour was true. I only said I'd heard
it."

"When?  When did you hear it!"

"Oh, months ago!"  And Fanny found any further postponement of
laughter impossible.

"Fanny, you're a hard-hearted creature," Isabel said gently.  "You
really are.  Don't pay any attention to her, George.  Fred Kinney's
only a clerk in his uncle's hardware place: he couldn't marry for
ages--even if anybody would accept him!"

George breathed tumultuously.  "I don't care anything about 'ages'!
What's that got to do with it?" he said, his thoughts appearing to be
somewhat disconnected.  "Ages,' don't mean anything!  I only want to
know--I want to know--I want--"  He stopped.

"What do you want?" his father asked crossly.

"Why don't you say it?  Don't make such a fuss."

"I'm not--not at all," George declared, pushing his chair back from
the table.

"You must finish your dinner, dear," his mother urged.  "Don't--"

"I have finished.  I've eaten all I want.  I don't want any more than
I wanted.  I don't want--I--"  He rose, still incoherent.  "I prefer--
I want--Please excuse me!"

He left the room, and a moment later the screens outside the open
front door were heard to slam:

"Fanny! You shouldn't--"

"Isabel, don't reproach me, he did have plenty of dinner, and I only
told the truth: everybody has been saying--"

"But there isn't any truth in it."

"We don't actually know there isn't," Miss Fanny insisted, giggling.
"We've never asked Lucy."

"I wouldn't ask her anything so absurd!"

"George would," George's father remarked.  "That's what he's gone to
do."

Mr. Minafer was not mistaken: that was what his son had gone to do.
Lucy and her father were just rising from their dinner table when the
stirred youth arrived at the front door of the new house.  It was a
cottage, however, rather than a house; and Lucy had taken a free hand
with the architect, achieving results in white and green, outside, and
white and blue, inside, to such effect of youth and daintiness that
her father complained of "too much spring-time!"  The whole place,
including his own bedroom, was a young damsel's boudoir, he said, so
that nowhere could he smoke a cigar without feeling like a ruffian.
However, he was smoking when George arrived, and he encouraged George
to join him in the pastime, but the caller, whose air was both tense
and preoccupied, declined with something like agitation.

"I never smoke--that is, I'm seldom--I mean, no thanks," he said.  "I
mean not at all.  I'd rather not."

"Aren't you well, George?"  Eugene asked, looking at him in
perplexity.  "Have you been overworking at college?  You do look rather
pa--"

"I don't work," said George.  "I mean I don't work.  I think, but I
don't work.  I only work at the end of the term.  There isn't much to
do."

Eugene's perplexity was little decreased, and a tinkle of the door-
bell afforded him obvious relief.  "It's my foreman," he said, looking
at his watch.  "I'll take him out in the yard to talk.  This is no
place for a foreman."  And he departed, leaving the "living room" to
Lucy and George.  It was a pretty room, white panelled and blue
curtained--and no place for a foreman, as Eugene said.  There was a
grand piano, and Lucy stood leaning back against it, looking intently
at George, while her fingers, behind her, absently struck a chord or
two.  And her dress was the dress for that room, being of blue and
white, too; and the high colour in her cheeks was far from interfering
with the general harmony of things--George saw with dismay that she
was prettier than ever, and naturally he missed the reassurance he
might have felt had he been able to guess that Lucy, on her part, was
finding him better looking than ever.  For, however unusual the scope
of George's pride, vanity of beauty was not included; he did not think
about his looks.

"What's wrong, George?" she asked softly.

"What do you mean: 'What's wrong?"

"You're awfully upset about something.  Didn't you get though your
examination all right?"

"Certainly I did.  What makes you think anything's 'wrong' with me?"

"You do look pale, as papa said, and it seemed to me that the way you
talked sounded--well, a little confused."

"Confused'! I said I didn't care to smoke.  What in the world is
confused about that?"

"Nothing.  But--"

"See here!"  George stepped close to her.  "Are you glad to see me?"

"You needn't be so fierce about it!"  Lucy protested, laughing at his
dramatic intensity.  "Of course I am!  How long have I been looking
forward to it?"

"I don't know," he said sharply, abating nothing of his fierceness.
"How long have you?"

"Why--ever since you went away!"

"Is that true?  Lucy, is that true?"

"You are funny!" she said.  "Of course it's true.  Do tell me what's
the matter with you, George!"

"I will!" he exclaimed.  "I was a boy when I saw you last.  I see that
now, though I didn't then.  Well, I'm not a boy any longer.  I'm a
man, and a man has a right to demand a totally different treatment."

"Why has he?"

"What?"

"I don't seem to be able to understand you at all, George.  Why
shouldn't a boy be treated just as well as a man?"

George seemed to find himself at a loss.  "Why shouldn't--Well, he
shouldn't, because a man has a right to certain explanations."

"What explanations?"

"Whether he's been made a toy of!"  George almost shouted.  "That's
what I want to know!"

Lucy shook her head despairingly.  "You are the queerest person!  You
say you're a man now, but you talk more like a boy than ever.  What
does make you so excited?"

"'Excited!'" he stormed.  "Do you dare to stand there and call me
'excited'?  I tell you, I never have been more calm or calmer in my
life!  I don't know that a person needs to be called 'excited' because
he demands explanations that are his simple due!"

"What in the world do you want me to explain?"

"Your conduct with Fred Kinney!" George shouted.

Lucy uttered a sudden cry of laughter; she was delighted.  "It's been
awful!" she said.  "I don't know that I ever heard of worse
misbehaviour!  Papa and I have been twice to dinner with his family,
and I've been three times to church with Fred--and once to the circus!
I don't know when they'll be here to arrest me!"

"Stop that!" George commanded fiercely.  "I want to know just one
thing, and I mean to know it, too!"

"Whether I enjoyed the circus?"

"I want to know if you're engaged to him!"

"No!" she cried and lifting her face close to his for the shortest
instant possible, she gave him a look half merry, half defiant, but
all fond.  It was an adorable look.

"Lucy!" he said huskily.

But she turned quickly from him, and ran to the other end of the room.
He followed awkwardly, stammering:

"Lucy, I want--I want to ask you.  Will you--will you--will you be
engaged to me?"

She stood at a window, seeming to look out into the summer darkness,
her back to him.

"Will you, Lucy?"

"No," she murmured, just audibly.

"Why not?"

"I'm older than you."

"Eight months!"

"You're too young."

"Is that--" he said, gulping--"is that the only reason you won't?"

She did not answer.

As she stood, persistently staring out of the window, with her back to
him, she did not see how humble his attitude had become; but his voice
was low, and it shook so that she could have no doubt of his emotion.
"Lucy, please forgive me for making such a row," he said, thus gently.
"I've been--I've been terribly upset--terribly!  You know how I feel
about you, and always have felt about you.  I've shown it in every
single thing I've done since the first time I met you, and I know you
know it.  Don't you?"

Still she did not move or speak.

"Is the only reason you won't be engaged to me you think I'm too
young, Lucy?"

"It's--it's reason enough," she said faintly.

At that he caught one of her hands, and she turned to him: there were
tears in her eyes, tears which he did not understand at all.

"Lucy, you little dear!" he cried.  "I knew you--"

"No, no!" she said, and she pushed him away, withdrawing her hand.
"George, let's not talk of solemn things."

"Solemn things!' Like what?"

"Like--being engaged."

But George had become altogether jubilant, and he laughed
triumphantly.  "Good gracious, that isn't solemn!"

"It is, too!" she said, wiping her eyes.  "It's too solemn for us."

"No, it isn't! I--"

"Let's sit down and be sensible, dear," she said.  "You sit over
there--"

"I will if you'll call me, 'dear' again."

"No," she said.  "I'll only call you that once again this summer--the
night before you go away."

"That will have to do, then," he laughed, 'so long as I know we're
engaged."

"But we're not!" she protested.  "And we never will be, if you don't
promise not to speak of it again until--until I tell you to!"

"I won't promise that," said the happy George.  "I'll only promise not
to speak of it till the next time you call me 'dear'; and you've
promised to call me that the night before I leave for my senior year."

"Oh, but I didn't!" she said earnestly, then hesitated.  "Did I?"

"Didn't you?"

"I don't think I meant it," she murmured, her wet lashes flickering
above troubled eyes.

"I know one thing about you," he said gayly, his triumph increasing.
"You never went back on anything you said, yet, and I'm not afraid of
this being the first time!"

"But we mustn't let--" she faltered; then went on tremulously,
"George, we've got on so well together, we won't let this make a
difference between us, will we?  And she joined in his laughter.

"It will all depend on what you tell me the night before I go away.
You agree we're going to settle things then, don't you, Lucy?"

"I don't promise."

"Yes, you do!  Don't you?"

"Well--"




Chapter  XIII



Tonight George began a jubilant warfare upon his Aunt Fanny, opening
the campaign upon his return home at about eleven o'clock.  Fanny had
retired, and was presumably asleep, but George, on the way to his own
room, paused before her door, and serenaded her in a full baritone:

     As I walk along the Boy de Balong
     With my independent air,
     The people all declare,
     'He must be a millionaire!'
     Oh, you hear them sigh, and wish to die,
     And see them wink the other eye.
     At the man that broke the bank at Monte Carlo!"

Isabel came from George's room, where she had been reading, waiting
for him.  "I'm afraid you'll disturb your father, dear. I wish you'd
sing more, though--in the daytime!  You have a splendid voice."

"Good-night, old lady!"

"I thought perhaps I--Didn't you want me to come in with you and
talk a little?"

"Not to-night.  You go to bed.  Good-night, old lady!"

He kissed her hilariously, entered his room with a skip, closed his
door noisily; and then he could be heard tossing things about, loudly
humming "The Man that Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo."

Smiling, his mother knelt outside his door to pray; then, with her
"Amen," pressed her lips to the bronze door-knob; and went silently to
her own apartment.

After breakfasting in bed, George spent the next morning at his
grandfather's and did not encounter his Aunt Fanny until lunch, when
she seemed to be ready for him.

"Thank you so much for the serenade, George!" she said.  "Your poor
father tells me he'd just got to sleep for the first time in two
nights, but after your kind attentions he lay awake the rest of last
night."

"Perfectly true," Mr. Minafer said grimly.

"Of course, I didn't know, sir," George hastened to assure him.  "I'm
awfully sorry.  But Aunt Fanny was so gloomy and excited before I went
out, last evening, I thought she needed cheering up."

"I!"  Fanny jeered.  "I was gloomy?  I was excited?  You mean about
that engagement?"

"Yes.  Weren't you?  I thought I heard you worrying over somebody's
being engaged.  Didn't I hear you say you'd heard Mr. Eugene Morgan
was engaged to marry some pretty little seventeen-year-old girl?"

Fanny was stung, but she made a brave effort.  "Did you ask Lucy?" she
said, her voice almost refusing the teasing laugh she tried to make it
utter.  "Did you ask her when Fred Kinney and she--"

"Yes.  That story wasn't true.  But the other one--"  Here he stared at
Fanny, and then affected dismay.  "Why, what's the matter with your
face, Aunt Fanny?  It seems agitated!"

"Agitated!"  Fanny said disdainfully, but her voice undeniably lacked
steadiness.  "Agitated!"

"Oh, come!"  Mr. Minafer interposed.  "Let's have a little peace!"

"I'm willing," said George.  "I don't want to see poor Aunt Fanny all
stirred up over a rumour I just this minute invented myself.  She's so
excitable--about certain subjects--it's hard to control her."  He
turned to his mother.  "What's the matter with grandfather?"

"Didn't you see him this morning?" Isabel asked.

"Yes.  He was glad to see me, and all that, but he seemed pretty
fidgety.  Has he been having trouble with his heart again?"

"Not lately.  No."

"Well, he's not himself.  I tried to talk to him about the estate; it's
disgraceful--it really is--the way things are looking.  He wouldn't
listen, and he seemed upset.  What's he upset over?"

Isabel looked serious; however, it was her husband who suggested
gloomily, "I suppose the Major's bothered about this Sydney and Amelia
business, most likely."

"What Sydney and Amelia business?" George asked.

"Your mother can tell you, if she wants to," Minafer said.  "It's not
my side of the family, so I keep off."

"It's rather disagreeable for all of us, Georgie," Isabel began.  "You
see, your Uncle Sydney wanted a diplomatic position, and he thought
brother George, being in Congress, could arrange it.  George did get
him the offer of a South American ministry, but Sydney wanted a
European ambassadorship, and he got quite indignant with poor George
for thinking he'd take anything smaller--and he believes George didn't
work hard enough for him.  George had done his best, of course, and
now he's out of Congress, and won't run again--so there's Sydney's
idea of a big diplomatic position gone for good.  Well, Sydney and
your Aunt Amelia are terribly disappointed, and they say they've been
thinking for years that this town isn't really fit to live in--'for a
gentleman,' Sydney says--and it is getting rather big and dirty.  So
they've sold their house and decided to go abroad to live permanently;
there's a villa near Florence they've often talked of buying. And they
want father to let them have their share of the estate now, instead of
waiting for him to leave it to them in his will."

"Well, I suppose that's fair enough," George said.  "That is, in case
he intended to leave them a certain amount in his will."

"Of course that's understood, Georgie.  Father explained his will to
us long ago; a third to them, and a third to brother George, and a
third to us."

Her son made a simple calculation in his mind. Uncle George was a
bachelor, and probably would never marry; Sydney and Amelia were
childless.  The Major's only grandchild appeared to remain the
eventual heir of the entire property, no matter if the Major did turn
over to Sydney a third of it now.  And George had a fragmentary vision
of himself, in mourning, arriving to take possession of a historic
Florentine villa--he saw himself walking up a cypress-bordered path,
with ancient carven stone balustrades in the distance, and servants in
mourning livery greeting the new signore.  "Well, I suppose it's
grandfather's own affair.  He can do it or not, just as he likes.  I
don't see why he'd mind much."

"He seemed rather confused and pained about it," Isabel said.  "I
think they oughtn't to urge it.  George says that the estate won't
stand taking out the third that Sydney wants, and that Sydney and
Amelia are behaving like a couple of pigs."  She laughed, continuing,
"Of course I don't know whether they are or not: I never have
understood any more about business myself than a little pig would!
But I'm on George's side, whether he's right or wrong; I always was
from the time we were children: and Sydney and Amelia are hurt with me
about it, I'm afraid.  They've stopped speaking to George entirely.
Poor father Family rows at his time of life."

George became thoughtful.  If Sydney and Amelia were behaving like
pigs, things might not be so simple as at first they seemed to be.
Uncle Sydney and Aunt Amelia might live an awful long while, he
thought; and besides, people didn't always leave their fortunes to
relatives.  Sydney might die first, leaving everything to his widow,
and some curly-haired Italian adventurer might get round her, over
there in Florence; she might be fool enough to marry again--or even
adopt somebody!

He became more and more thoughtful, forgetting entirely a plan he had
formed for the continued teasing of his Aunt Fanny; and, an hour after
lunch, he strolled over to his grandfather's, intending to apply for
further information, as a party rightfully interested.

He did not carry out this intention, however.  Going into the big
house by a side entrance, he was informed that the Major was upstairs
in his bedroom, that his sons Sydney and George were both with him,
and that a serious argument was in progress.  "You kin stan' right in
de middle dat big, sta'y-way," said Old Sam, the ancient negro, who
was his informant, "an' you kin heah all you a-mind to wivout goin' on
up no fudda.  Mist' Sydney an' Mist' Jawge talkin' louduh'n I evuh
heah nobody ca'y on in nish heah house! Quollin', honey, big
quollin'!"

"All right," said George shortly.  "You go on back to your own part of
the house, and don't make any talk.  Hear me?"

"Yessuh, yessuh," Sam chuckled, as he shuffled away.  "Plenty talkin'
wivout Sam!  Yessuh!"

George went to the foot of the great stairway.  He could hear angry
voices overhead--those of his two uncles--and a plaintive murmur, as
if the Major. tried to keep the peace.  Such sounds were far from
encouraging to callers, and George decided not to go upstairs until
this interview was over.  His decision was the result of no timidity,
nor of a too sensitive delicacy.  What he felt was, that if he
interrupted the scene in his grandfather's room, just at this time,
one of the three gentlemen engaging in it might speak to him in a
peremptory manner (in the heat of the moment) and George saw no reason
for exposing his dignity to such mischances.  Therefore he turned from
the stairway, and going quietly into the library, picked up a
magazine--but he did not open it, for his attention was instantly
arrested by his Aunt Amelia's voice, speaking in the next room.  The
door was open and George heard her distinctly.

"Isabel does?  Isabel!" she exclaimed, her tone high and shrewish.
"You needn't tell me anything about Isabel Minafer, I guess, my dear
old Frank Bronson!  I know her a little better than you do, don't you
think?"

George heard the voice of Mr. Bronson replying--a voice familiar to
him as that of his grandfather's attorney-in-chief and chief intimate
as well.  He was a contemporary of the Major's, being over seventy,
and they had been through three years of the War in the same regiment.
Amelia addressed him now, with an effect of angry mockery, as "my dear
old Frank Bronson"; but that (without the mockery) was how the
Amberson family almost always spoke of him: "dear old Frank Bronson."
He was a hale, thin old man, six feet three inches tall, and without a
stoop.

"I doubt your knowing Isabel," he said stiffly.  "You speak of her as
you do because she sides with her brother George, instead of with you
and Sydney."

"Pooh!"  Aunt Amelia was evidently in a passion.  "You know what's
been going on over there, well enough, Frank Bronson!"

"I don't even know what you're talking about."

"Oh, you don't?  You don't know that Isabel takes George's side simply
because he's Eugene Morgan's best friend?"

"It seems to me you're talking pure nonsense," said Bronson sharply.
"Not impure nonsense, I hope!"

Amelia became shrill.  "I thought you were a man of the world: don't
tell me you're blind!  For nearly two years Isabel's been pretending
to chaperone Fanny Minafer with Eugene, and all the time she's been
dragging that poor fool Fanny around to chaperone her and Eugene!
Under the circumstances, she knows people will get to thinking Fanny's
a pretty slim kind of chaperone, and Isabel wants to please George
because she thinks there'll be less talk if she can keep her own
brother around, seeming to approve.  'Talk!'  She'd better look out!
The whole town will be talking, the first thing she knows!  She--"

Amelia stopped, and stared at the doorway in a panic, for her nephew
stood there.

She kept her eyes upon his white face for a few strained moments,
then, regaining her nerve, looked away and shrugged her shoulders.

 "You weren't intended to hear what I've been saying, George," she
said quietly.  "But since you seem to--"

"Yes, I did."

"So!" She shrugged her shoulders again.  "After all, I don't know but
it's just as well, in the long run."

He walked up to where she sat.  "You--you--" he said thickly.  "It
seems--it seems to me you're--you're pretty common!"

Amelia tried to give the impression of an unconcerned person laughing
with complete indifference, but the sounds she produced were
disjointed and uneasy.  She fanned herself, looking out of the open
window near her.  "Of course, if you want to make more trouble in the
family than we've already got, George, with your eavesdropping, you
can go and repeat--"

Old Bronson had risen from his chair in great distress.  "Your aunt
was talking nonsense because she's piqued over a business matter,
George," he said.  "She doesn't mean what she said, and neither she
nor any one else gives the slightest credit to such foolishness--no
one in the world!"

George gulped, and wet lines shone suddenly along his lower eyelids.
"They--they'd better not!" he said, then stalked out of the room, and
out of the house.  He stamped fiercely across the stone slabs of the
front porch, descended the steps, and halted abruptly, blinking in the
strong sunshine.

In front of his own gate, beyond the Major's broad lawn, his mother
was just getting into her victoria, where sat already his Aunt Fanny
and Lucy Morgan.  It was a summer fashion-picture: the three ladies
charmingly dressed, delicate parasols aloft; the lines of the victoria
graceful as those of a violin; the trim pair of bays in glistening
harness picked out with silver, and the serious black driver whom
Isabel, being an Amberson, dared even in that town to put into a black
livery coat, boots, white breeches, and cockaded hat.  They jingled
smartly away, and, seeing George standing on the Major's lawn, Lucy
waved, and Isabel threw him a kiss.

But George shuddered, pretending not to see them, and stooped as if
searching for something lost in the grass, protracting that posture
until the victoria was out of hearing.  And ten minutes later, George
Amberson, somewhat in the semblance of an angry person plunging out of
the Mansion, found a pale nephew waiting to accost him.

"I haven't time to talk, Georgie."

"Yes, you have. You'd better!"

"What's the matter, then?"

His namesake drew him away from the vicinity of the house.  "I want to
tell you something I just heard Aunt Amelia say, in there."

"I don't want to hear it," said Amberson.  "I've been hearing entirely
too much of what 'Aunt Amelia, says, lately."

"She says my mother's on your side about this division of the property
because you're Eugene Morgan's best friend."

"What in the name of heaven has that got to do with your mother's
being on my side?"

"She said--" George paused to swallow.  "She said--"  He faltered.

"You look sick," said his uncle; and laughed shortly.  "If it's
because of anything Amelia's been saying, I don't blame you!  What
else did she say?"

George swallowed again, as with nausea, but under his uncle's
encouragement he was able to be explicit.  "She said my mother wanted
you to be friendly to her about Eugene Morgan.  She said my mother had
been using Aunt Fanny as a chaperone."

Amberson emitted a laugh of disgust.  "It's wonderful what tommy-rot a
woman in a state of spite can think of!  I suppose you don't doubt
that Amelia Amberson created this specimen of tommy-rot herself?"

"I know she did."

"Then what's the matter?"

"She said--"  George faltered again.  "She said--she implied people
were--were talking about it."

"Of all the damn nonsense!" his uncle exclaimed.  George looked at him
haggardly.  "You're sure they're not?"

"Rubbish!  Your mother's on my side about this division because she
knows Sydney's a pig and always has been a pig, and so has his
spiteful wife.  I'm trying to keep them from getting the better of
your mother as well as from getting the better of me, don't you
suppose?  Well, they're in a rage because Sydney always could do what
he liked with father unless your mother interfered, and they know I
got Isabel to ask him not to do what they wanted.  They're keeping up
the fight and they're sore--and Amelia's a woman who always says any
damn thing that comes into her head!  That's all there is to it."

"But she said," George persisted wretchedly; "she said there was talk.
She said--"

"Look here, young fellow!"  Amberson laughed good-naturedly.  "There
probably is some harmless talk about the way your Aunt Fanny goes
after poor Eugene, and I've no doubt I've abetted it myself.  People
can't help being amused by a thing like that.  Fanny was always
languishing at him, twenty-odd years ago, before he left here.  Well,
we can't blame the poor thing if she's got her hopes up again, and I
don't know that I blame her, myself, for using your mother the way she
does."

"How do you mean?"

Amberson put his hand on George's shoulder.  "You like to tease
Fanny," he said, "but I wouldn't tease her about this, if I were you.
Fanny hasn't got much in her life.  You know, Georgie, just being an
aunt isn't really the great career it may sometimes appear to you!  In
fact, I don't know of anything much that Fanny has got, except her
feeling about Eugene.  She's always had it--and what's funny to us is
pretty much life-and-death to her, I suspect.  Now, I'll not deny that
Eugene Morgan is attracted to your mother.  He is; and that's another
case of 'always was'; but I know him, and he's a knight, George--a
crazy one, perhaps, if you've read 'Don Quixote.'  And I think your
mother likes him better than she likes any man outside her own family,
and that he interests her more than anybody else--and 'always has.'
And that's all there is to it, except--"

"Except what?"  George asked quickly, as he paused.

"Except that I suspect--" Amberson chuckled, and began over: "I'll
tell you in confidence. I think Fanny's a fairly tricky customer, for
such an innocent old girl!  There isn't any real harm in her, but
she's a great diplomatist--lots of cards up her lace sleeves, Georgie!
By the way, did you ever notice how proud she is of her arms?  Always
flashing 'em at poor Eugene!"  And he stopped to laugh again.

"I don't see anything confidential about that," George complained.  "I
thought--"

"Wait a minute!  My idea is--don't forget it's a confidential one, but
I'm devilish right about it, young Georgie!--it's this: Fanny uses
your mother for a decoy duck.  She does everything in the world she
can to keep your mother's friendship with Eugene going, because she
thinks that's what keeps Eugene about the place, so to speak.  Fanny's
always with your mother, you see; and whenever he sees Isabel he sees
Fanny.  Fanny thinks he'll get used to the idea of her being around,
and some day her chance may come!  You see, she's probably afraid--
perhaps she even knows, poor thing!--that she wouldn't get to see much
of Eugene if it weren't for Isabel's being such a friend of his.
There!  D'you see?"

"Well--I suppose so."  George's brow was still dark, however.  "If
you're sure whatever talk there is, is about Aunt Fanny.  If that's
so--"

"Don't be an ass," his uncle advised him lightly, moving away.  "I'm
off for a week's fishing to forget that woman in there, and her pig of
a husband."  (His gesture toward the Mansion indicated Mr. and Mrs.
Sydney Amberson.)  "I recommend a like course to you, if you're silly
enough to pay any attention to such rubbishings!  Good-bye!"

George was partially reassured, but still troubled: a word haunted
him like the recollection of a nightmare.  "Talk!"

He stood looking at the houses across the street from the Mansion; and
though the sunshine was bright upon them, they seemed mysteriously
threatening.  He had always despised them, except the largest of them,
which was the home of his henchman, Charlie Johnson.  The Johnsons had
originally owned a lot three hundred feet wide, but they had sold all
of it except the meager frontage before the house itself, and five
houses were now crowded into the space where one used to squire it so
spaciously.  Up and down the street, the same transformation bad taken
place: every big, comfortable old brick house now had two or three
smaller frame neighbours crowding up to it on each side, cheap-looking
neighbours, most of them needing paint and not clean--and yet, though
they were cheap looking, they had cost as much to build as the big
brick houses, whose former ample yards they occupied.  Only where
George stood was there left a sward as of yore; the great, level,
green lawn that served for both the Major's house and his daughter's.
This serene domain--unbroken, except for the two gravelled carriage-
drives--alone remained as it had been during the early glories of the
Amberson Addition.

George stared at the ugly houses opposite, and hated them more than
ever; but he shivered.  Perhaps the riffraff living in those houses
sat at the windows to watch their betters; perhaps they dared to
gossip--

He uttered an exclamation, and walked rapidly toward his own front
gate.  The victoria had re turned with Miss Fanny alone; she jumped
out briskly and the victoria waited.

"Where's mother?"  George asked sharply, as he met her.

"At Lucy's.  I only came back to get some embroidery, because we found
the sun too hot for driving.  I'm in a hurry."

But, going into the house with her, he detained her when she would
have hastened upstairs.

"I haven't time to talk now, Georgie; I'm going right back.  I
promised your mother--"

"You listen!" said George.

"What on earth--"

He repeated what Amelia had said.  This time, however, he spoke
coldly, and without the emotion he had exhibited during the recital to
his uncle: Fanny was the one who showed agitation during this
interview, for she grew fiery red, and her eyes dilated.  "What on
earth do you want to bring such trash to me for?" she demanded,
breathing fast.

"I merely wished to know two things: whether it is your duty or mine
to speak to father of what Aunt Amelia--"

Fanny stamped her foot.  "You little fool!" she cried.  "You awful
little fool!"

"I decline--"

"Decline, my hat!  Your father's a sick man, and you--"

"He doesn't seem so to me."

"Well, he does to me!  And you want to go troubling him with an
Amberson family row!  It's just what that cat would love you to do!"

"Well, I--"

"Tell your father if you like!  It will only make him a little sicker
to think he's got a son silly enough to listen to such craziness!"

"Then you're sure there isn't any talk?"  Fanny disdained a reply in
words.  She made a hissing sound of utter contempt and snapped her
fingers.  Then she asked scornfully: "What's the other thing you
wanted to know?"

George's pallor increased.  "Whether it mightn't be better, under the
circumstances," he said, "if this family were not so intimate with the
Morgan family--at least for a time.  It might be better--"

Fanny stared at him incredulously.  "You mean you'd quit seeing Lucy?"

"I hadn't thought of that side of it, but if such a thing were
necessary on account of talk about my mother, I--I--"  He hesitated
unhappily.  "I suggested that if all of us--for a time--perhaps only
for a time--it might be better if--"

"See here," she interrupted.  "We'll settle this nonsense right now.
If Eugene Morgan comes to this house, for instance, to see me, your
mother can't get up and leave the place the minute he gets here, can
she?  What do you want her to do: insult him?  Or perhaps you'd prefer
she'd insult Lucy?  That would do just as well.  What is it you're up
to, anyhow?  Do you really love your Aunt Amelia so much that you want
to please her?  Or do you really hate your Aunt Fanny so much that you
want to--that you want to--"

She choked and sought for her handkerchief; suddenly she began to cry.

"Oh, see here," George said.  "I don't hate you," Aunt Fanny.  That's
silly.  I don't--"

"You do!  You do!   You want to--you want to destroy the only thing--
that I--that I ever--"  And, unable to continue, she became inaudible
in her handkerchief.

George felt remorseful, and his own troubles were lightened: all at
once it became clear to him that he had been worrying about nothing.
He perceived that his Aunt Amelia was indeed an old cat, and that to
give her scandalous meanderings another thought would be the height of
folly.  By no means unsusceptible to such pathos as that now exposed
before him, he did not lack pity for Fanny, whose almost spoken
confession was lamentable; and he was granted the vision to understand
that his mother also pitied Fanny infinitely more than he did.  This
seemed to explain everything.

He patted the unhappy lady awkwardly upon her shoulder.  "There,
there!" he said.  "I didn't mean anything.  Of course the only thing
to do about Aunt Amelia is to pay no attention to her.  It's all
right, Aunt Fanny.  Don't cry.  I feel a lot better now, myself.  Come
on; I'll drive back there with you.  It's all over, and nothing's the
matter.  Can't you cheer up?"

Fanny cheered up; and presently the customarily hostile aunt and
nephew were driving out Amberson Boulevard amiably together in the hot
sunshine.




Chapter XIV



"Almost" was Lucy's last word on the last night of George's vacation--
that vital evening which she had half consented to agree upon for
"settling things" between them.  "Almost engaged," she meant.  And
George, discontented with the "almost," but contented that she seemed
glad to wear a sapphire locket with a tiny photograph of George
Amberson Minafer inside it, found himself wonderful in a new world at
the final instant of their parting.  For, after declining to let him
kiss her "good-bye," as if his desire for such a ceremony were the
most preposterous absurdity in the world, she had leaned suddenly
close to him and left upon his cheek the veriest feather from a
fairy's wing.

She wrote him a month later:

No.  It must keep on being almost.

Isn't almost pretty pleasant?  You know well enough that I care for
you.  I did from the first minute I saw you, and I'm pretty sure you
knew it--I'm afraid you did.  I'm afraid you always knew it.  I'm not
conventional and cautious about being engaged, as you say I am, dear.
(I always read over the "dears" in your letters a time or two, as you
say you do in mine--only I read all of your letters a time or two!)
But it's such a solemn thing it scares me.  It means a good deal to a
lot of people besides you and me, and that scares me, too.  You write
that I take your feeling for me "too lightly" and that I "take the
whole affair too lightly."  Isn't that odd!  Because to myself I seem
to take it as something so much more solemn than you do.  I shouldn't
be a bit surprised to find myself an old lady, some day, still
thinking of you--while you'd be away and away with somebody else
perhaps, and me forgotten ages ago!  "Lucy Morgan," you'd say, when
you saw my obituary.  "Lucy Morgan? Let me see: I seem to remember the
name.  Didn't I know some Lucy Morgan or other, once upon a time?"
Then you'd shake your big white head and stroke your long white beard
--you'd have such a distinguished long white beard! and you'd say,
'No. I don't seem to remember any Lucy Morgan; I wonder what made me
think I did?'  And poor me!  I'd be deep in the ground, wondering if
you'd heard about it and what you were saying!  Good-bye for to-day.
Don't work too hard--dear!

George immediately seized pen and paper, plaintively but vigorously
requesting Lucy not to imagine him with a beard, distinguished or
otherwise, even in the extremities of age.  Then, after inscribing his
protest in the matter of this visioned beard, he concluded his missive
in a tone mollified to tenderness, and proceeded to read a letter from
his mother which had reached him simultaneously with Lucy's.  Isabel
wrote from Asheville, where she had just arrived with her husband.

I think your father looks better already, darling, though we've been
here only a few hours  It may be we've found just the place to build
him up.  The doctors said they hoped it would prove to be, and if it
is, it would be worth the long struggle we had with him to get him to
give up and come.  Poor dear man, he was so blue, not about his health
but about giving up the worries down at his office and forgetting them
for a time--if he only will forget them!  It took the pressure of the
family and all his best friends, to get him to come--but father and
brother George and Fanny and Eugene Morgan all kept at him so
constantly that he just had to give in.  I'm afraid that in my anxiety
to get him to do what the doctors wanted him to, I wasn't able to back
up brother George as I should in his difficulty with Sydney and
Amelia.  I'm so sorry!  George is more upset than I've ever seen him--
they've got what they wanted, and they're sailing before long,  I
hear, to live in Florence.  Father said he couldn't stand the constant
persuading--I'm afraid the word he used was "nagging."  I can't
understand people behaving like that.  George says they may be
Ambersons, but they're vulgar!  I'm afraid I almost agree with him.
At least, I think they were inconsiderate.  But I don't see why I'm
unburdening myself of all this to you, poor darling!  We'll have
forgotten all about it long before you come home for the holidays, and
it should mean little or nothing to you, anyway.  Forget that I've
been so foolish!

Your father is waiting for me to take a walk with him--that's a
splendid sign, because he hasn't felt he could walk much, at home,
lately. I mustn't keep him waiting.  Be careful to wear your
mackintosh and rubbers in rainy weather, and, as soon as it begins to
get colder, your ulster.  Wish you could see your father now. Looks so
much better!  We plan to stay six weeks if the place agrees with him.
It does really seem to already!  He's just called in the door to say
he's waiting.  Don't smoke too much, darling boy.

Devotedly, your mother
Isabel.

But she did not keep her husband there for the six weeks she
anticipated.  She did not keep him anywhere that long.  Three weeks
after writing this letter, she telegraphed suddenly to George that
they were leaving for home at once; and four days later, when he and a
friend came whistling into his study, from lunch at the club, he found
another telegram upon his desk.

He read it twice before he comprehended its import.

Papa left us at ten this morning, dearest.
Mother.

The friend saw the change in his face.  "Not bad news?"

George lifted utterly dumfounded eyes from the yellow paper.

"My father," he said weakly.  "She says--she says he's dead.  I've got
to go home."

His Uncle George and the Major met him at the station when he arrived
--the first time the Major had ever come to meet his grandson.  The old
gentleman sat in his closed carriage (which still needed paint) at the
entrance to the station, but he got out and advanced to grasp George's
hand tremulously, when the latter appeared.  "Poor fellow!" he said,
and patted him repeatedly upon the shoulder.  "Poor fellow!  Poor
Georgie!"

George had not yet come to a full realization of his loss: so far, his
condition was merely dazed; and as the Major continued to pat him,
murmuring "Poor fellow!" over and over, George was seized by an almost
irresistible impulse to tell his grandfather that he was not a poodle.
But he said "Thanks," in a low voice, and got into the carriage, his
two relatives following with deferential sympathy.  He noticed that
the Major's tremulousness did not disappear, as they drove up the
street, and that he seemed much feebler than during the summer.
Principally, however, George was concerned with his own emotion, or
rather, with his lack of emotion; and the anxious sympathy of his
grandfather and his uncle made him feel hypocritical.  He was not
grief-stricken; but he felt that he ought to be, and, with a secret
shame, concealed his callousness beneath an affectation of solemnity.

But when he was taken into the room where lay what was left of Wilbur
Minafer, George had no longer to pretend; his grief was sufficient.
It needed only the sight of that forever inert semblance of the quiet
man who had been always so quiet a part of his son's life--so quiet a
part that George had seldom been consciously aware that his father was
indeed a. part of his life.  As the figure lay there, its very
quietness was what was most lifelike; and suddenly it struck George
hard.  And in that unexpected, racking grief of his son, Wilbur
Minafer became more vividly George's father than he had ever been in
life.

When George left the room, his arm was about his black-robed mother,
his shoulders were still shaken with sobs.  He leaned upon his mother;
she gently comforted him; and presently he recovered his composure and
became self-conscious enough to wonder if he had not been making an
unmanly display of himself.  "I'm all right again, mother," he said
awkwardly.  "Don't worry about me: you'd better go lie down, or
something; you look pretty pale."

Isabel did look pretty pale, but not ghastly pale, as Fanny did.
Fanny's grief was overwhelming; she stayed in her room, and George did
not see her until the next day, a few minutes before the funeral, when
her haggard face appalled him.  But by this time he was quite himself
again, and during the short service in the cemetery his thoughts even
wandered so far as to permit him a feeling of regret not directly
connected with his father.  Beyond the open flower-walled grave was a
mound where new grass grew; and here lay his great-uncle, old John
Minafer, who had died the previous autumn; and beyond this were the
graves of George's grandfather and grandmother Minafer, and of his
grandfather Minafer's second wife, and her three sons, George's half-
uncles, who had been drowned together in a canoe accident when George
was a child--Fanny was the last of the family.  Next beyond was the
Amberson family lot, where lay the Major's wife and their sons Henry
and Milton, uncles whom George dimly remembered; and beside them lay
Isabel's older sister, his Aunt Estelle, who had died, in her
girlhood, long before George was born.  The Minafer monument was a
granite block, with the name chiseled upon its one polished side, and
the Amberson monument was a white marble shaft taller than any other
in that neighbourhood.  But farther on there was a newer section of
the cemetery, an addition which had been thrown open to occupancy only
a few years before, after dexterous modern treatment by a landscape
specialist.  There were some large new mausoleums here, and shafts
taller than the Ambersons', as well as a number of monuments of some
sculptural pretentiousness; and altogether the new section appeared to
be a more fashionable and important quarter than that older one which
contained the Amberson and Minafer lots.  This was what caused
George's regret, during the moment or two when his mind strayed from
his father and the reading of the service.

On the train, going back to college, ten days later, this regret
(though it was as much an annoyance as a regret) recurred to his mind,
and a feeling developed within him that the new quarter of the
cemetery was in bad taste--not architecturally or sculpturally
perhaps, but in presumption: it seemed to flaunt a kind of parvenu
ignorance, as if it were actually pleased to be unaware that all the
aristocratic and really important families were buried in the old
section.

The annoyance gave way before a recollection of the sweet mournfulness
of his mother's face, as she had said good-bye to him at the station,
and of how lovely she looked in her mourning.  He thought of Lucy,
whom he had seen only twice, and he could not help feeling that in
these quiet interviews he had appeared to her as tinged with heroism--
she had shown, rather than said, how brave she thought him in his
sorrow.  But what came most vividly to George's mind, during these
retrospections, was the despairing face of his Aunt Fanny.  Again and
again he thought of it; he could not avoid its haunting.  And for
days, after he got back to college, the stricken likeness of Fanny
would appear before him unexpectedly, and without a cause that he
could trace in his immediately previous thoughts.  Her grief had been
so silent, yet it had so amazed him.

George felt more and more compassion for this ancient antagonist of
his, and he wrote to his mother about her:

I'm afraid poor Aunt Fanny might think now father's gone we won't want
her to live with us any longer and because I always teased her so much
she might think I'd be for turning her out.  I don't know where on
earth she'd go or what she could live on if we did do something like
this, and of course we never would do such a thing, but I'm pretty
sure she had something of the kind on her mind.  She didn't say
anything, but the way she looked is what makes me think so.  Honestly,
to me she looked just scared sick.  You tell her there isn't any
danger in the world of my treating her like that.  Tell her everything
is to go on just as it always has.  Tell her to cheer up!




Chapter XV



Isabel did more for Fanny than telling her to cheer up. Everything
that Fanny inherited from her father, old Aleck Minafer, had been
invested in Wilbur's business; and Wilbur's business, after a period
of illness corresponding in dates to the illness of Wilbur's body, had
died just before Wilbur did.  George Amberson and Fanny were both
"wiped out to a miracle of precision," as Amberson said.  They "owned
not a penny and owed not a penny," he continued, explaining his
phrase.  "It's like the moment just before drowning: you're not under
water and you're not out of it.  All you know is that you're not dead
yet."

He spoke philosophically, having his "prospects" from his father to
fall back upon; but Fanny had neither "prospects" nor philosophy.
However, a legal survey of Wilbur's estate revealed the fact that his
life insurance was left clear of the wreck; and Isabel, with the
cheerful consent of her son, promptly turned this salvage over to her
sister-in-law.  Invested, it would yield something better than nine
hundred dollars a year, and thus she was assured of becoming neither a
pauper nor a dependent, but proved to be, as Amberson said, adding his
efforts to the cheering up of Fanny, "an heiress, after all, in spite
of rolling mills and the devil."  She was unable to smile, and he
continued his humane gayeties.  "See what a wond