e sun
went down, I thought: "God! how beautiful are Thy natural creations,
and how hideous are Thy human creatures!" We men, I mean--for
I except neither myself nor you, Monsieur. This cursed race truly
belongs to the Iron Age as described by Hesiod. And we are asked to
believe that they are created after God's image! After the image of
the Devil, I would rather say! Rousseau is right when he believes in
a past Golden Age.'

"What do you say to that, Monsieur l'Abbe?"

"It is what the Church teaches regarding the lost Paradise and the
Fall, and also agrees with the Greek legend of Prometheus, who ate
of the tree of knowledge, and thereby brought misfortune on men."

"Good heavens! Have you too become a freethinker? Shoemaker, stick
to your last! If you are a priest, then be a priest, but don't try
to make a botch of my work. And don't think you need to flatter me
for an increase of wages. But let us return to Frederick:"

"'History rolls on like an avalanche; the race improves, the
conditions of life become easier, but men are still the same
--faithless, unthankful, criminal; and he just as well as the unjust
go to hell. I do not dare to put down on paper the conclusions to be
drawn from this observation, for that would be to acquit Lazarus,
and to crucify Christ.... Great men have little weaknesses or
rather great weaknesses. We, Monsieur, have been no angels, but
Providence has used us for great objects. Is it a matter of
indifference to Providence whom it takes in hand, or how we live in
the flesh, provided we keep the spirit uppermost? _Sursum corda!_'"

"What do you say to that, Abbe?"

"The Law cannot be fulfilled, says St. Paul, but the Law rouses the
sense of guilt, and therefore it is only imposed in order to drive
us to grace."

"That was not such a stupid remark of Paul's. But I should like to
add,--in the prison of the flesh grows the longing for liberation:
'Who shall deliver me, wretched man, from this body of sin?' Yes,
Abbe, _Vanitas vanitatum! Vanitas!_ You are young, but you must not
despise the old man when he turns round and spits behind him all the
unpleasantness of his past life. Might but a generation be born
which knew at once the value of life, as long as a mud-bath is not
part of the treatment!"

Just then a dark lean man came tortuously along the garden path.

"See! there is my Jesuit!" said Voltaire.

The old man kept on friendly terms with a Jesuit, partly because
the Pope had expelled them, partly because Frederick the Great had
patronised them; but his chief object was to have someone to dispute
with. Perhaps also he wished to show his freedom from prejudice, for
he did not like the uncongenial man.

"Now, you child of Satan!" was the old man's greeting, "what
mischief have you got in your mind? You look so maliciously
pleased!"

"I come from Geneva," answered the Jesuit with an evil smile.

"What are they doing there?"

"I saw the executioner burn Rousseau's _Emile_."

"They may do that, as far as I am concerned, and throw the fool
himself into the fire."

"Monsieur Voltaire!"

"Yes: one cannot tolerate lunatics: there are limits!"

"Where?"

"Imposed by a sound intelligence."

"Yes, and saw them burn the new edition of Monsieur Voltaire's
_Candide_."

"For shame! But it is merely a mob in Geneva."

"A Protestant mob, with your permission."

"Don't trouble yourself; I hate Protestants equally with Catholics!
This terrible Calvin burnt his friend Servetus in Geneva, because he
did not believe in the Trinity. And had Jean Calas in Toulouse been
a Catholic, and his son a Protestant, I would still have attacked
the judges, although I am nothing. I am nothing; only, what I write
is something."

"Then some day we will raise a monument to Monsieur Voltaire's
writings--not to Voltaire."

"You have no need; I have already raised my monument myself in the
hundred volumes of my collected works. The world has nothing to do
with how the old ass looked; there is nothing to see in that. We
know my weaknesses; I have lied, I have stolen, I have been
ungrateful; something of a scoundrel, something of a brute! That is
the dirty part of me, and I bequeath it to Jesuits, pettifoggers,
hair-splitters and collectors of anecdotes;--but my spirit to
God who gave it, and to men an honest purpose to understand their
Monsieur Voltaire."

He rose, for the sun had descended.

"Good-night, Mont Blanc; you have a white head like myself, and
stand with your feet in cold water, as I do! Now I go and lie down!
Tomorrow I travel to Paris, where I will die."




DAYS OF JUDGMENT


In the northern tower of the Church of Notre Dame de Paris was
the tower-watchman's chamber. But it had been arranged like a
bookbinder's workshop, for the watchman's day-duty was not
particularly heavy, and the hours of the night passed with sleep or
without sleep, no one troubling themselves to oversee this now
superfluous church servant.

Nobody entered the church, which had been damaged in various ways,
and no one ascended the northern tower, for the bells hung in the
southern one. There the watchman's duty was regarded more seriously,
for on all extraordinary occasions the alarm-bell had to sound.

The watchman kept up a sort of telegraphic communication with the
bellringer in the southern tower. In calm weather they could chat
with each other, but when it was windy, they had to use speaking
trumpets.

The workshop had, in the course of years, developed into a very
comfortable room. Its southern side was occupied by a single large
bookcase. There the first edition of the _Encyclopedie_ in five and
thirty volumes, shone resplendent in red morocco with gilt letters.
There stood Voltaire, Rousseau, Montesquieu, Locke, Hume--all the
authors who ought to have been present. There were also periodicals,
the _Moniteur_, Pere Duchesne and Marat's _L'Ami du Peuple_. This
last was bound in somewhat greasy leather, which resembled
pig's-skin, and had curled up at the corners.

Another wall was covered with engravings, some coloured and some
plain. They hung in chronological order from left to right, from top
to bottom, so that one could read the whole history of the
Revolution pictorially. The Oath in the ball-room on June 20, 1789,
with Mirabeau's portrait; the burning of the Bastille, and the head
of the commandant; the Jacobite Club, with Marat, Saint-Just,
Couthon, Robespierre; the Feast of Brotherhood on the Champ du
Mars; the King's Flight to Varennes; Lafayette; the Girondists; the
execution of the King and Queen; the Committee of Public Welfare,
with Danton and the newly hatched Robespierre; the Reign of Terror;
Charlotte Corday stabbing Marat in the bath; Robespierre again;
Feast of the Supreme Being; Voltaire's Funeral; Robespierre again,
this time on the 9th Thermidor. Then came Buonaparte and the
Directory, mixed with Pyramids and Alps.

In the middle of the room stood a very large table. At the one end
were the bookbinder's tools; at the other, writing materials. The
inkstand was a skull; the ruler was a fore-arm; the paper-weight was
a guillotine, and the penholder a rib.

The bookbinder himself, a centenarian, with an apostolic beard, sat
and wrote under a lantern which hung from the roof. He was the only
person visible in the room. Outside it was stormy, and the
roof-plates rattled from time to time; it was cool in the room, but
not cold, for a stove was lit in a corner, where lay the watchman's
belongings--a great wolfskin fur-coat, a speaking trumpet, some
flags, and a lantern with variously coloured glass sides.
The old man pushed his glasses up his forehead, looked up, and
spoke, though the person with whom he talked could not be seen.

"Are you hungry?"

A voice behind the bookcase answered: "Fairly so."

"Are you cold?"

"No, not yet."

"Wait a little; I must just go outside and make an observation."

"What are you writing?"

"My reminiscences."

"Is it quiet in the town?"

"Yes, but they have gone out to Saint Cloud."

"Then it will soon come to shooting."

"It won't come to shooting, but we may expect a proclamation. Be
quiet now; I must step out, and send a message. Then you will get
some food and drink; perhaps a pipe of tobacco also."

There was silence behind the bookcase, and the old man put on his
fur-coat, lit his many-coloured lamp, took up a speaking-trumpet,
and stepped out on the balcony.

It was very dark, but the old man was familiar with his menagerie
out there on the parapet; he loved his stone monsters--the owl, the
griffin, the gorgon, and stroked them every time that he passed
them. But the creature with a man's body, goat's feet and horns,
inspired him with a certain awe, as it stood there leaning on its
hands like a priest, and bending forward as if to preach to the
godless city or to hurl anathemas at it. He took his stand near it,
and began to signal with the lantern. But the wind was so violent
that the old man swayed, and had to put his arm round the creature's
body, in order to support himself.

After he had stood for a time signalling with the lantern, and
gazing out into the darkness, he suddenly raised himself upright,
put down the lantern, and raised the speaking-trumpet to his mouth.
Holding on to the stone balustrade, he turned to the southern tower,
and cried "Hullo! Francis! Hallo!"

After a while a reply came through the darkness.

"Qui vive?"

"Mont-joie--Saint-Denis."

"Sacre!" answered the other. "Ring the great bell! Ring, for
heaven's sake!"

The watchman remained standing for a while looking at the coloured
lights on the church tower of St. Cloud. In order to be quite
certain, he repeated his signal, and received for answer: "Right
understood."

The old man sighed "Thy will be done, O Lord!" He was on the point
of returning to the turret-chamber, when the wind blew so violently,
that he had to seize the arm of the horned monster in order to stand
fast. But the figure had got loose; it yielded, and moved a little.

"He too!" muttered the old man to himself. "Nothing stands fast,
everything slips; nothing remains on which to support oneself." He
crouched down in order not to be blown away, and so stooping, as he
walked, reached the door of the turret-chamber, which he flung open.

"The Revolution is over," he called out to the bookcase.

"What do you say?"

"The Revolution is over! Come out, sire."

He laid hold of the bookcase, and opened it like a door on its
hinges. It concealed a neat little room furnished in the style of
Louis XV. Out of it stepped a man of about thirty, with pale
delicate features and a melancholy aspect.

"Sire," said the bookbinder in a humble voice, "now your time is
come, and mine runs out. I do not exactly know what has happened on
this eighteenth of Brumaire in Saint Cloud, but one thing I know:
Buonaparte has taken the helm."

"Jaques," answered the nobleman, "I do not wish to hurt your
feelings, but I cannot conceal my joy."

"Don't conceal it, sire! You have saved me from the scaffold, and I
have saved you; let us thank each other, and be quits."

"To think that this bloody drama is ended--that this madness...."

"Sire, don't speak so."

His eyes began to sparkle, but he quickly changed his tone. "Let us
eat our last meal together, but in love like fellow-men; let us talk
of the past, and then part in peace. This evening we are still
brothers, but to-morrow you are the lord and I am the servant."

"You are right. To-day I am an emigrant, tomorrow I am a count."

The old man brought out a cold fowl, a cheese, and a bottle of wine,
and both took their places at the table.

"This wine, sire, was bottled in '89. It has a history, and
therefore...."

"Have you no white wine? I do not like red."

"Is it the colour you dislike?"

"Yes, it looks like blood! You have lost a wife and four sons."

"Why should I weep for them? They fell on the field of honour."

"The scaffold!"

"I call the scaffold the field of honour! But you want white wine!
Good! You shall have it. You prefer the colour of tears; I prefer
that of blood!"

He opened a bottle of white wine: "_Suum cuique!_ Tastes differ.
We can now breathe again, and sleep quietly at night. That was the
hardest thing to bear during this last decade--the loss of sleep at
night. The fear of death was worse than death itself."

"The worst for us--pardon the expression--was to see the State and
society turned topsyturvy, and brutality enthroned."

"Wait a little! Louis XIV paid two gentlemen of the chamber twenty
thousand livres yearly to examine and carry away his night stool
every morning. The Sansculottes could not be coarser than that.
Marie Antoinette used to go and spend the night drinking with her
boon-companions, so that she returned home about eleven o'clock the
next morning exhausted; that was coarse conduct for such a fine
lady."

"You may draw the long bow to-night, Jaques; but to-morrow take care
of your head! You ought not to speak so of these high personages who
have suffered a martyr's death."

"Stop! stop! The King was what they call 'a fine fellow,' but the
Queen was a wretch. But both were justly condemned to death--both!
Look you! if Turgot could have remained at his post, the Revolution
would not have broken out. All the reforms in the State, Church, and
Society, which we--pardon the expression--have carried through could
have been carried through then, if Turgot had been allowed to put
his plans into operation. The Queen would not endure the Minister's
retrenchment of her revenue, and plotted for his removal, and the
King supported her. That was a great crime. The second was the
overthrow of Necker. Then the Queen and her Court minxes ruled. Both
King and Queen sought to stir up foreign countries against their own;
their correspondence relating to this was discovered, and then the
betrayers of their country were condemned to death. Don't talk of
Martyrs, or I shall be angry. For I am angry when I hear lies, and
cannot control myself."

The Count laid his hand on his sword.

"Put your sword in its sheath, young man, or otherwise...."

They sat down on opposite sides of the table, and darted angry
glances at each other.

"The ultimate causes," continued the old man, "may be sought in
heaven, but we have here only to do with secondary causes, and those
we know. The Revolution was a Last Judgment which had to come, just
as it came in England exactly a hundred years before, in 1689."

"But Cromwell's republic did not last."

"Nor does this; but it comes again! But let us rather talk of
something cheerful on this last evening. I have been present at
everything; I have a strong memory, and can forget nothing. But what
shines most brightly through all the dark days is the recollection
of the day on the Champs du Mars, the Feast of Brotherhood of July
14, '90. Twenty thousand workmen were employed to clear it, but, as
they could not finish the work by the appointed day, all Paris went
out. There I saw bishops, court marshals, generals, monks, nuns,
society ladies, workmen, sailors, dustmen, and street-girls
levelling the ground with hoes and spades. Finally the King himself
made up his mind to join in the work. That was the greatest feat of
equalisation which mankind have carried out; the hills were made
low, and the valleys filled. At last the great theatre of liberty
was ready. At the altar of the Fatherland a fire of perfumed wood
was kindled, and Talleyrand, Bishop of Autun, with a retinue of four
hundred white-robed priests consecrated the flags. The King in civil
dress and the Queen sat on the platform, and, as the 'first citizens
of the State,' took the constitutional oath. All was forgotten; all
was forgiven. Half a million people, collected in one place,
animated by one spirit, felt themselves that day to be brothers
and sisters. We wept, we fell in each other's arms, we kissed each
other. We wept to think what wretches we had been, and how good and
amiable we were now. We wept perhaps, also, because we guessed how
fragile all this was.

"And afterwards, in the evening, when Paris turned out in the
streets and market-places. Families ate their mid-day meal on the
pavement; the old and sick were carried into the open air; food and
wine were distributed at the public expense. That was the Feast of
Tabernacles, the recollection of the Exodus from Egyptian bondage;
it was the Saturnalia, the return of the Golden Age! And then...."

"Then came Marat, Danton, and Robespierre."

"Yes! Robespierre, the most hated of all, was not worse than Louis
XI and Henry VIII."

"A murderer."

"The judge is not a murderer, nor is the executioner."

"But the Golden Age passed--as it came."

"Yet it comes again."

"Not with Buonaparte!"

"No, not with him, but through him."
"Who is he?"

"A Corsican, born in the same year in which France annexed his
country. He will avenge it, and, since he can never feel himself a
Frenchman, he will exploit our country only for his own purposes.
But nevertheless, in spite of his unparalleled selfishness, his
wickedness and crimes, he will serve humanity--for everything
serves."

"And afterwards?"

"Who can say? Probably things will go on as they have done hitherto;
sometimes advancing, then a halt; then again advance."

"And then the obsolete turns up again."

"Yes, like a drowning man. Three times he comes to the surface to
breathe, but the fourth time he remains below. Or, like an animal
chewing the cud; for some time there are small eructations,
re-mastications, and then everything is ejected through the gullet,
after going through the circle."

"Do you believe in the return of the Golden Age?"

"Yes I believe like Thomas, when I have seen. And I have seen. At
the moment, which I now recall, on the Champs du Mars,--then I saw!
We had a forefeeling of the future, we were sure that we had had a
vision of some new order of things, but were uncertain when it would
be established."

"How long are we to wait?"

"We should not sit still and wait, but work! That makes the time
pass. The learned say that it took a million years for the Hill of
Montmartre to be deposited from the water. Now history is only three
thousand years old; for three thousand years more, men can reflect
over their past, and perhaps in six thousand an improvement may be
noticeable! We are too proud and impatient, sire. And yet things
move quickly. America was discovered only three hundred years ago,
and now it is an European republic. Africa, India, China, Japan
are opened, and soon the whole world will belong to Europe. Do you
see the promise to Abraham, 'In thy seed shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed,' is on the way to fulfilment--on the way, I
say."

"The promise to Abraham?"

"Yes! Have not Christians, Jews, and Muhammedans a share in the
promise?"

"Christians of Abraham's seed?"

"Through Christ, who was of Judah, we are spiritually Abraham's
seed. One faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all!"

"I have listened to you, and must say that your faith is great, and
has delivered you."

"As it will deliver mankind."

The conversation now ceased, for the alarm-bell began to ring in the
south tower. The sound of it overpowered the din of the storm, and
filled the room with its vibrations, made the table and chairs
shake, and both men tremble. The old man tried to speak, but his
guest heard nothing, and only saw his lips move. Then the old man
rose and pointed to one of the many engravings.

It represented Anacharsis Clootz, the philanthropist and philosopher,
in a convent, with a crowd of people from all corners of the
earth--black, yellow, white, copper-coloured--seeking to have them
admitted as citizens into the world-republic. The Count smiled
in answer half-distrustfully, half-tolerantly. The old man tried to
speak, but could not be heard. The boom of the bell seemed to come
from the depths of ages, ringing out the past century and ringing in
the new, which would commence in a few weeks--the nineteenth century
since the birth of the Redeemer, who has promised to return, and
perhaps will do so in one way or another.

The Count sat there fingering the letter-weight in the shape of a
guillotine. Suddenly he seized it, and looked questioningly at the
old man, who nodded in the affirmative. The letter-weight was thrown
into the paper-basket.

The great bell ceased ringing, the room was quiet, and the old man,
his arms folded over his breast, spoke as though with a sigh of
gratitude.

"The Revolution is over."

"_This_ Revolution!"

"'Tribulation worketh patience; patience, experience; experience,
hope; and hope maketh not ashamed!'"




STRINDBERG'S DEATH-BED


(From the _Aftonbladet_, Stockholm, May 15, 1912)
The last time that Strindberg was in full possession of his senses
was late on Monday afternoon (May 13th). He recognised his daughter
Greta, who sat by his bed, and her husband, Dr. Philp. He was fully
aware that the end was near. He made a sign that he wished to have
his Bible, which lay on the table by the bed. They gave it him; he
took it in his hand and said: "All that is personal is now
obliterated. I have done with life and closed the account. This is
the only truth."

He kissed his daughter, but only said, "Dear Greta." Then he said to
Dr. Philp, "Are you still here, Henry?" After talking a little more,
his last utterance was, "Now I have said my last word. Now I talk no
more." He kept his Bible so closely clasped to his breast as though
that were the only thing he had to hold fast before the end.

    So Stromboli retreated in the gloom,
      Flinging red flame and molten lava high,
      A flaring portent: We, who passed it by,
      Carry that lurid memory to the tomb;
      Yet round its crater living flowers bloom,
      The vine, fig, olive grow and fructify,
      Over it laughs the blue Sicilian sky,
      A paradise upon the verge of doom.
      As fiery as that red volcanic blast,
      Through years he wrestled with his unseen Foe,
      Wailing in pain "I will not let Thee go
      Unless Thou bless me who have held Thee fast,"--
      And thus, like Jacob, from his overthrow,
      He rose a cripple, but a prince at last_.





End of Project Gutenberg's Historical Miniatures, by August Strindberg





Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Dave Maddock, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.






[Illustration: SIR ISAAC NEWTON (From the bust by Roubiliac In Trinity
College, Cambridge.)]

HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY

BY

GEORGE FORBES,
M.A., F.R.S., M. INST. C. E.,

(FORMERLY PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, ANDERSON'S COLLEGE, GLASGOW)

AUTHOR OF "THE TRANSIT OF VENUS," RENDU'S "THEORY OF THE GLACIERS OF
SAVOY," ETC., ETC.




CONTENTS

  PREFACE

  BOOK I. THE GEOMETRICAL PERIOD

     1. PRIMITIVE ASTRONOMY AND ASTROLOGY

     2. ANCIENT ASTRONOMY--CHINESE AND CHALDAEANS

     3. ANCIENT GREEK ASTRONOMY

     4. THE REIGN OF EPICYCLES--FROM PTOLEMY TO COPERNICUS

  BOOK II. THE DYNAMICAL PERIOD

     5. DISCOVERY OF THE TRUE SOLAR SYSTEM--TYCHO BRAHE--KEPLER

     6. GALILEO AND THE TELESCOPE--NOTIONS OF GRAVITY BY HORROCKS, ETC.

     7. SIR ISAAC NEWTON--LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION

     8. NEWTON'S SUCCESSORS--HALLEY, EULER, LAGRANGE, LAPLACE, ETC.

     9. DISCOVERY OF NEW PLANETS--HERSCHEL, PIAZZI, ADAMS, AND LE
        VERRIER

  BOOK III. OBSERVATION


    10. INSTRUMENTS OF PRECISION--SIZE OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM

    11. HISTORY OF THE TELESCOPE--SPECTROSCOPE

  BOOK IV. THE PHYSICAL PERIOD

    12. THE SUN

    13. THE MOON AND PLANETS

    14. COMETS AND METEORS

    15. THE STARS AND NEBULAE

  INDEX



PREFACE


An attempt has been made in these pages to trace the evolution of
intellectual thought in the progress of astronomical discovery, and,
by recognising the different points of view of the different ages, to
give due credit even to the ancients. No one can expect, in a history
of astronomy of limited size, to find a treatise on "practical" or on
"theoretical astronomy," nor a complete "descriptive astronomy," and
still less a book on "speculative astronomy." Something of each of
these is essential, however, for tracing the progress of thought and
knowledge which it is the object of this History to describe.

The progress of human knowledge is measured by the increased habit of
looking at facts from new points of view, as much as by the
accumulation of facts. The mental capacity of one age does not seem to
differ from that of other ages; but it is the imagination of new
points of view that gives a wider scope to that capacity. And this is
cumulative, and therefore progressive. Aristotle viewed the solar
system as a geometrical problem; Kepler and Newton converted the point
of view into a dynamical one. Aristotle's mental capacity to
understand the meaning of facts or to criticise a train of reasoning
may have been equal to that of Kepler or Newton, but the point of view
was different.

Then, again, new points of view are provided by the invention of new
methods in that system of logic which we call mathematics. All that
mathematics can do is to assure us that a statement A is equivalent to
statements B, C, D, or is one of the facts expressed by the statements
B, C, D; so that we may know, if B, C, and D are true, then A is true.
To many people our inability to understand all that is contained in
statements B, C, and D, without the cumbrous process of a mathematical
demonstration, proves the feebleness of the human mind as a logical
machine. For it required the new point of view imagined by Newton's
analysis to enable people to see that, so far as planetary orbits are
concerned, Kepler's three laws (B, C, D) were identical with Newton's
law of gravitation (A). No one recognises more than the mathematical
astronomer this feebleness of the human intellect, and no one is more
conscious of the limitations of the logical process called
mathematics, which even now has not solved directly the problem of
only three bodies.

These reflections, arising from the writing of this History, go to
explain the invariable humility of the great mathematical astronomers.
Newton's comparison of himself to the child on the seashore applies to
them all. As each new discovery opens up, it may be, boundless oceans
for investigation, for wonder, and for admiration, the great
astronomers, refusing to accept mere hypotheses as true, have founded
upon these discoveries a science as exact in its observation of facts
as in theories. So it is that these men, who have built up the most
sure and most solid of all the sciences, refuse to invite others to
join them in vain speculation. The writer has, therefore, in this
short History, tried to follow that great master, Airy, whose pupil he
was, and the key to whose character was exactness and accuracy; and he
recognises that Science is impotent except in her own limited sphere.

It has been necessary to curtail many parts of the History in the
attempt--perhaps a hopeless one--to lay before the reader in a limited
space enough about each age to illustrate its tone and spirit, the
ideals of the workers, the gradual addition of new points of view and
of new means of investigation.

It would, indeed, be a pleasure to entertain the hope that these pages
might, among new recruits, arouse an interest in the greatest of all
the sciences, or that those who have handled the theoretical or
practical side might be led by them to read in the original some of
the classics of astronomy. Many students have much compassion for the
schoolboy of to-day, who is not allowed the luxury of learning the art
of reasoning from him who still remains pre-eminently its greatest
exponent, Euclid. These students pity also the man of to-morrow, who
is not to be allowed to read, in the original Latin of the brilliant
Kepler, how he was able--by observations taken from a moving platform,
the earth, of the directions of a moving object, Mars--to deduce the
exact shape of the path of each of these planets, and their actual
positions on these paths at any time. Kepler's masterpiece is one of
the most interesting books that was ever written, combining wit,
imagination, ingenuity, and certainty.

Lastly, it must be noted that, as a History of England cannot deal
with the present Parliament, so also the unfinished researches and
untested hypotheses of many well-known astronomers of to-day cannot be
included among the records of the History of Astronomy. The writer
regrets the necessity that thus arises of leaving without mention the
names of many who are now making history in astronomical work.

G. F.
_August 1st, 1909._




BOOK I. THE GEOMETRICAL PERIOD



1. PRIMITIVE ASTRONOMY AND ASTROLOGY.


The growth of intelligence in the human race has its counterpart in
that of the individual, especially in the earliest stages.
Intellectual activity and the development of reasoning powers are in
both cases based upon the accumulation of experiences, and on the
comparison, classification, arrangement, and nomenclature of these
experiences. During the infancy of each the succession of events can
be watched, but there can be no _a priori_ anticipations.
Experience alone, in both cases, leads to the idea of cause and effect
as a principle that seems to dominate our present universe, as a rule
for predicting the course of events, and as a guide to the choice of a
course of action. This idea of cause and effect is the most potent
factor in developing the history of the human race, as of the
individual.

In no realm of nature is the principle of cause and effect more
conspicuous than in astronomy; and we fall into the habit of thinking
of its laws as not only being unchangeable in our universe, but
necessary to the conception of any universe that might have been
substituted in its place. The first inhabitants of the world were
compelled to accommodate their acts to the daily and annual
alternations of light and darkness and of heat and cold, as much as to
the irregular changes of weather, attacks of disease, and the fortune
of war. They soon came to regard the influence of the sun, in
connection with light and heat, as a cause. This led to a search for
other signs in the heavens. If the appearance of a comet was sometimes
noted simultaneously with the death of a great ruler, or an eclipse
with a scourge of plague, these might well be looked upon as causes in
the same sense that the veering or backing of the wind is regarded as
a cause of fine or foul weather.

For these reasons we find that the earnest men of all ages have
recorded the occurrence of comets, eclipses, new stars, meteor
showers, and remarkable conjunctions of the planets, as well as
plagues and famines, floods and droughts, wars and the deaths of great
rulers. Sometimes they thought they could trace connections which
might lead them to say that a comet presaged famine, or an eclipse
war.

Even if these men were sometimes led to evolve laws of cause and
effect which now seem to us absurd, let us be tolerant, and gratefully
acknowledge that these astrologers, when they suggested such "working
hypotheses," were laying the foundations of observation and deduction.

If the ancient Chaldaeans gave to the planetary conjunctions an
influence over terrestrial events, let us remember that in our own
time people have searched for connection between terrestrial
conditions and periods of unusual prevalence of sun spots; while De la
Rue, Loewy, and Balfour Stewart[1] thought they found a connection
between sun-spot displays and the planetary positions. Thus we find
scientific men, even in our own time, responsible for the belief that
storms in the Indian Ocean, the fertility of German vines, famines in
India, and high or low Nile-floods in Egypt follow the planetary
positions.

And, again, the desire to foretell the weather is so laudable that we
cannot blame the ancient Greeks for announcing the influence of the
moon with as much confidence as it is affirmed in Lord Wolseley's
_Soldier's Pocket Book_.

Even if the scientific spirit of observation and deduction (astronomy)
has sometimes led to erroneous systems for predicting terrestrial
events (astrology), we owe to the old astronomer and astrologer alike
the deepest gratitude for their diligence in recording astronomical
events. For, out of the scanty records which have survived the
destructive acts of fire and flood, of monarchs and mobs, we have
found much that has helped to a fuller knowledge of the heavenly
motions than was possible without these records.

So Hipparchus, about 150 B.C., and Ptolemy a little later, were able
to use the observations of Chaldaean astrologers, as well as those of
Alexandrian astronomers, and to make some discoveries which have
helped the progress of astronomy in all ages. So, also, Mr. Cowell[2]
has examined the marks made on the baked bricks used by the Chaldaeans
for recording the eclipses of 1062 B.C. and 762 B.C.; and has thereby
been enabled, in the last few years, to correct the lunar tables of
Hansen, and to find a more accurate value for the secular acceleration
of the moon's longitude and the node of her orbit than any that could
be obtained from modern observations made with instruments of the
highest precision.

So again, Mr. Hind [3] was enabled to trace back the period during
which Halley's comet has been a member of the solar system, and to
identify it in the Chinese observations of comets as far back as 12
B.C. Cowell and Cromellin extended the date to 240 B.C. In the same
way the comet 1861.i. has been traced back in the Chinese records to
617 A.D. [4]

The theoretical views founded on Newton's great law of universal
gravitation led to the conclusion that the inclination of the earth's
equator to the plane of her orbit (the obliquity of the ecliptic) has
been diminishing slowly since prehistoric times; and this fact has
been confirmed by Egyptian and Chinese observations on the length of
the shadow of a vertical pillar, made thousands of years before the
Christian era, in summer and winter.

There are other reasons why we must be tolerant of the crude notions
of the ancients. The historian, wishing to give credit wherever it may
be due, is met by two difficulties. Firstly, only a few records of
very ancient astronomy are extant, and the authenticity of many of
these is open to doubt. Secondly, it is very difficult to divest
ourselves of present knowledge, and to appreciate the originality of
thought required to make the first beginnings.

With regard to the first point, we are generally dependent upon
histories written long after the events. The astronomy of Egyptians,
Babylonians, and Assyrians is known to us mainly through the Greek
historians, and for information about the Chinese we rely upon the
researches of travellers and missionaries in comparatively recent
times. The testimony of the Greek writers has fortunately been
confirmed, and we now have in addition a mass of facts translated from
the original sculptures, papyri, and inscribed bricks, dating back
thousands of years.

In attempting to appraise the efforts of the beginners we must
remember that it was natural to look upon the earth (as all the first
astronomers did) as a circular plane, surrounded and bounded by the
heaven, which was a solid vault, or hemisphere, with its concavity
turned downwards. The stars seemed to be fixed on this vault; the
moon, and later the planets, were seen to crawl over it. It was a
great step to look on the vault as a hollow sphere carrying the sun
too. It must have been difficult to believe that at midday the stars
are shining as brightly in the blue sky as they do at night. It must
have been difficult to explain how the sun, having set in the west,
could get back to rise in the east without being seen _if_ it was
always the same sun. It was a great step to suppose the earth to be
spherical, and to ascribe the diurnal motions to its rotation.
Probably the greatest step ever made in astronomical theory was the
placing of the sun, moon, and planets at different distances from the
earth instead of having them stuck on the vault of heaven. It was a
transition from "flatland" to a space of three dimensions.

Great progress was made when systematic observations began, such as
following the motion of the moon and planets among the stars, and the
inferred motion of the sun among the stars, by observing their
_heliacal risings_--i.e., the times of year when a star
would first be seen to rise at sunrise, and when it could last be seen
to rise at sunset. The grouping of the stars into constellations and
recording their places was a useful observation. The theoretical
prediction of eclipses of the sun and moon, and of the motions of the
planets among the stars, became later the highest goal in astronomy.

To not one of the above important steps in the progress of astronomy
can we assign the author with certainty. Probably many of them were
independently taken by Chinese, Indian, Persian, Tartar, Egyptian,
Babylonian, Assyrian, Phoenician, and Greek astronomers. And we have
not a particle of information about the discoveries, which may have
been great, by other peoples--by the Druids, the Mexicans, and the
Peruvians, for example.

We do know this, that all nations required to have a calendar. The
solar year, the lunar month, and the day were the units, and it is
owing to their incommensurability that we find so many calendars
proposed and in use at different times. The only object to be attained
by comparing the chronologies of ancient races is to fix the actual
dates of observations recorded, and this is not a part of a history of
astronomy.

In conclusion, let us bear in mind the limited point of view of the
ancients when we try to estimate their merit. Let us remember that the
first astronomy was of two dimensions; the second astronomy was of
three dimensions, but still purely geometrical. Since Kepler's day we
have had a dynamical astronomy.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Trans. R. S. E., xxiii. 1864, p. 499, _On Sun Spots_, etc., by
B. Stewart. Also Trans. R. S. 1860-70. Also Prof. Ernest Brown, in
_R. A. S. Monthly Notices_, 1900.

[2] _R. A. S. Monthly Notices_, Sup.; 1905.

[Illustration: CHALDAEAN BAKED BRICK OR TABLET, _Obverse and reverse
sides_, Containing record of solar eclipse, 1062 B.C., used lately by
Cowell for rendering the lunar theory more accurate than was possible
by finest modern observations. (British Museum collection,
No. 35908.)]

[3] _R. A. S. Monthly Notices_, vol. x., p. 65.

[4] R. S. E. Proc., vol. x., 1880.



2. ANCIENT ASTRONOMY--THE CHINESE AND CHALDAEANS.


The last section must have made clear the difficulties the way of
assigning to the ancient nations their proper place in the development
of primitive notions about astronomy. The fact that some alleged
observations date back to a period before the Chinese had invented the
art of writing leads immediately to the question how far tradition can
be trusted.

Our first detailed knowledge was gathered in the far East by
travellers, and by the Jesuit priests, and was published in the
eighteenth century. The Asiatic Society of Bengal contributed
translations of Brahmin literature. The two principal sources of
knowledge about Chinese astronomy were supplied, first by Father
Souciet, who in 1729 published _Observations Astronomical,
Geographical, Chronological, and Physical_, drawn from ancient
Chinese books; and later by Father Moyriac-de-Mailla, who in 1777-1785
published _Annals of the Chinese Empire, translated from
Tong-Kien-Kang-Mou_.

Bailly, in his _Astronomie Ancienne_ (1781), drew, from these and
other sources, the conclusion that all we know of the astronomical
learning of the Chinese, Indians, Chaldaeans, Assyrians, and Egyptians
is but the remnant of a far more complete astronomy of which no trace
can be found.

Delambre, in his _Histoire de l'Astronomie Ancienne_ (1817),
ridicules the opinion of Bailly, and considers that the progress made
by all of these nations is insignificant.

It will be well now to give an idea of some of the astronomy of the
ancients not yet entirely discredited. China and Babylon may be taken
as typical examples.

_China_.--It would appear that Fohi, the first emperor, reigned
about 2952 B.C., and shortly afterwards Yu-Chi made a sphere to
represent the motions of the celestial bodies. It is also mentioned,
in the book called Chu-King, supposed to have been written in 2205
B.C., that a similar sphere was made in the time of Yao (2357
B.C.).[1] It is said that the Emperor Chueni (2513 B.C.) saw five
planets in conjunction the same day that the sun and moon were in
conjunction. This is discussed by Father Martin (MSS. of De Lisle);
also by M. Desvignolles (Mem. Acad. Berlin, vol. iii., p. 193), and by
M. Kirsch (ditto, vol. v., p. 19), who both found that Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn, and Mercury were all between the eleventh and eighteenth
degrees of Pisces, all visible together in the evening on February
28th 2446 B.C., while on the same day the sun and moon were in
conjunction at 9 a.m., and that on March 1st the moon was in
conjunction with the other four planets. But this needs confirmation.

Yao, referred to above, gave instructions to his astronomers to
determine the positions of the solstices and equinoxes, and they
reported the names of the stars in the places occupied by the sun at
these seasons, and in 2285 B.C. he gave them further orders. If this
account be true, it shows a knowledge that the vault of heaven is a
complete sphere, and that stars are shining at mid-day, although
eclipsed by the sun's brightness.

It is also asserted, in the book called _Chu-King_, that in the
time of Yao the year was known to have 365-1/4 days, and that he
adopted 365 days and added an intercalary day every four years (as in
the Julian Calendar). This may be true or not, but the ancient Chinese
certainly seem to have divided the circle into 365 degrees. To learn
the length of the year needed only patient observation--a
characteristic of the Chinese; but many younger nations got into a
terrible mess with their calendar from ignorance of the year's length.

It is stated that in 2159 B.C. the royal astronomers Hi and Ho failed
to predict an eclipse. It probably created great terror, for they were
executed in punishment for their neglect. If this account be true, it
means that in the twenty-second century B.C. some rule for calculating
eclipses was in use. Here, again, patient observation would easily
lead to the detection of the eighteen-year cycle known to the
Chaldeans as the _Saros_. It consists of 235 lunations, and in
that time the pole of the moon's orbit revolves just once round the
pole of the ecliptic, and for this reason the eclipses in one cycle
are repeated with very slight modification in the next cycle, and so
on for many centuries.

It may be that the neglect of their duties by Hi and Ho, and their
punishment, influenced Chinese astronomy; or that the succeeding
records have not been available to later scholars; but the fact
remains that--although at long intervals observations were made of
eclipses, comets, and falling stars, and of the position of the
solstices, and of the obliquity of the ecliptic--records become rare,
until 776 B.C., when eclipses began to be recorded once more with some
approach to continuity. Shortly afterwards notices of comets were
added. Biot gave a list of these, and Mr. John Williams, in 1871,
published _Observations of Comets from 611 B.C. to 1640 A.D.,
Extracted from the Chinese Annals_.

With regard to those centuries concerning which we have no
astronomical Chinese records, it is fair to state that it is recorded
that some centuries before the Christian era, in the reign of
Tsin-Chi-Hoang, all the classical and scientific books that could be
found were ordered to be destroyed. If true, our loss therefrom is as
great as from the burning of the Alexandrian library by the Caliph
Omar. He burnt all the books because he held that they must be either
consistent or inconsistent with the Koran, and in the one case they
were superfluous, in the other case objectionable.

_Chaldaeans_.--Until the last half century historians were
accustomed to look back upon the Greeks, who led the world from the
fifth to the third century B.C., as the pioneers of art, literature,
and science. But the excavations and researches of later years make us
more ready to grant that in science as in art the Greeks only
developed what they derived from the Egyptians, Babylonians, and
Assyrians. The Greek historians said as much, in fact; and modern
commentators used to attribute the assertion to undue modesty. Since,
however, the records of the libraries have been unearthed it has been
recognised that the Babylonians were in no way inferior in the matter
of original scientific investigation to other races of the same era.

The Chaldaeans, being the most ancient Babylonians, held the same
station and dignity in the State as did the priests in Egypt, and
spent all their time in the study of philosophy and astronomy, and the
arts of divination and astrology. They held that the world of which we
have a conception is an eternal world without any beginning or ending,
in which all things are ordered by rules supported by a divine
providence, and that the heavenly bodies do not move by chance, nor by
their own will, but by the determinate will and appointment of the
gods. They recorded these movements, but mainly in the hope of tracing
the will of the gods in mundane affairs. Ptolemy (about 130 A.D.)
made use of Babylonian eclipses in the eighth century B.C. for
improving his solar and lunar tables.

Fragments of a library at Agade have been preserved at Nineveh, from
which we learn that the star-charts were even then divided into
constellations, which were known by the names which they bear to this
day, and that the signs of the zodiac were used for determining the
courses of the sun, moon, and of the five planets Mercury, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.

We have records of observations carried on under Asshurbanapal, who
sent astronomers to different parts to study celestial phenomena. Here
is one:--

To the Director of Observations,--My Lord, his humble servant
Nabushum-iddin, Great Astronomer of Nineveh, writes thus: "May Nabu
and Marduk be propitious to the Director of these Observations, my
Lord. The fifteenth day we observed the Node of the moon, and the moon
was eclipsed."

The Phoenicians are supposed to have used the stars for navigation,
but there are no records. The Egyptian priests tried to keep such
astronomical knowledge as they possessed to themselves. It is probable
that they had arbitrary rules for predicting eclipses. All that was
known to the Greeks about Egyptian science is to be found in the
writings of Diodorus Siculus. But confirmatory and more authentic
facts have been derived from late explorations. Thus we learn from
E. B. Knobel[2] about the Jewish calendar dates, on records of land
sales in Aramaic papyri at Assuan, translated by Professor A. H. Sayce
and A. E. Cowley, (1) that the lunar cycle of nineteen years was used
by the Jews in the fifth century B.C. [the present reformed Jewish
calendar dating from the fourth century A.D.], a date a "little more
than a century after the grandfathers and great-grandfathers of those
whose business is recorded had fled into Egypt with Jeremiah" (Sayce);
and (2) that the order of intercalation at that time was not
dissimilar to that in use at the present day.

Then again, Knobel reminds us of "the most interesting discovery a few
years ago by Father Strassmeier of a Babylonian tablet recording a
partial lunar eclipse at Babylon in the seventh year of Cambyses, on
the fourteenth day of the Jewish month Tammuz." Ptolemy, in the
Almagest (Suntaxis), says it occurred in the seventh year of Cambyses,
on the night of the seventeenth and eighteenth of the Egyptian month
Phamenoth. Pingre and Oppolzer fix the date July 16th, 533 B.C. Thus
are the relations of the chronologies of Jews and Egyptians
established by these explorations.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] These ancient dates are uncertain.

[2] _R. A. S. Monthly Notices_, vol. lxviii., No. 5, March, 1908.



3. ANCIENT GREEK ASTRONOMY.


We have our information about the earliest Greek astronomy from
Herodotus (born 480 B.C.). He put the traditions into writing. Thales
(639-546 B.C.) is said to have predicted an eclipse, which caused much
alarm, and ended the battle between the Medes and Lydians. Airy fixed
the date May 28th, 585 B.C. But other modern astronomers give
different dates. Thales went to Egypt to study science, and learnt
from its priests the length of the year (which was kept a profound
secret!), and the signs of the zodiac, and the positions of the
solstices. He held that the sun, moon, and stars are not mere spots on
the heavenly vault, but solids; that the moon derives her light from
the sun, and that this fact explains her phases; that an eclipse of
the moon happens when the earth cuts off the sun's light from her. He
supposed the earth to be flat, and to float upon water. He determined
the ratio of the sun's diameter to its orbit, and apparently made out
the diameter correctly as half a degree. He left nothing in writing.

His successors, Anaximander (610-547 B.C.) and Anaximenes (550-475
B.C.), held absurd notions about the sun, moon, and stars, while
Heraclitus (540-500 B.C.) supposed that the stars were lighted each
night like lamps, and the sun each morning. Parmenides supposed the
earth to be a sphere.

Pythagoras (569-470 B.C.) visited Egypt to study science. He deduced
his system, in which the earth revolves in an orbit, from fantastic
first principles, of which the following are examples: "The circular
motion is the most perfect motion," "Fire is more worthy than earth,"
"Ten is the perfect number." He wrote nothing, but is supposed to have
said that the earth, moon, five planets, and fixed stars all revolve
round the sun, which itself revolves round an imaginary central fire
called the Antichthon. Copernicus in the sixteenth century claimed
Pythagoras as the founder of the system which he, Copernicus, revived.

Anaxagoras (born 499 B.C.) studied astronomy in Egypt. He explained
the return of the sun to the east each morning by its going under the
flat earth in the night. He held that in a solar eclipse the moon
hides the sun, and in a lunar eclipse the moon enters the earth's
shadow--both excellent opinions. But he entertained absurd ideas of
the vortical motion of the heavens whisking stones into the sky, there
to be ignited by the fiery firmament to form stars. He was prosecuted
for this unsettling opinion, and for maintaining that the moon is an
inhabited earth. He was defended by Pericles (432 B.C.).

Solon dabbled, like many others, in reforms of the calendar. The
common year of the Greeks originally had 360 days--twelve months of
thirty days. Solon's year was 354 days. It is obvious that these
erroneous years would, before long, remove the summer to January and
the winter to July. To prevent this it was customary at regular
intervals to intercalate days or months. Meton (432 B.C.) introduced a
reform based on the nineteen-year cycle. This is not the same as the
Egyptian and Chaldean eclipse cycle called _Saros_ of 223
lunations, or a little over eighteen years. The Metonic cycle is 235
lunations or nineteen years, after which period the sun and moon
occupy the same position relative to the stars. It is still used for
fixing the date of Easter, the number of the year in Melon's cycle
being the golden number of our prayer-books. Melon's system divided
the 235 lunations into months of thirty days and omitted every
sixty-third day. Of the nineteen years, twelve had twelve months and
seven had thirteen months.

Callippus (330 B.C.) used a cycle four times as long, 940 lunations,
but one day short of Melon's seventy-six years. This was more correct.

Eudoxus (406-350 B.C.) is said to have travelled with Plato in
Egypt. He made astronomical observations in Asia Minor, Sicily, and
Italy, and described the starry heavens divided into constellations.
His name is connected with a planetary theory which as generally
stated sounds most fanciful. He imagined the fixed stars to be on a
vault of heaven; and the sun, moon, and planets to be upon similar
vaults or spheres, twenty-six revolving spheres in all, the motion of
each planet being resolved into its components, and a separate sphere
being assigned for each component motion. Callippus (330 B.C.)
increased the number to thirty-three. It is now generally accepted
that the real existence of these spheres was not suggested, but the
idea was only a mathematical conception to facilitate the construction
of tables for predicting the places of the heavenly bodies.

Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) summed up the state of astronomical knowledge
in his time, and held the earth to be fixed in the centre of the
world.

Nicetas, Heraclides, and Ecphantes supposed the earth to revolve on
its axis, but to have no orbital motion.

The short epitome so far given illustrates the extraordinary deductive
methods adopted by the ancient Greeks. But they went much farther in
the same direction. They seem to have been in great difficulty to
explain how the earth is supported, just as were those who invented
the myth of Atlas, or the Indians with the tortoise. Thales thought
that the flat earth floated on water. Anaxagoras thought that, being
flat, it would be buoyed up and supported on the air like a kite.
Democritus thought it remained fixed, like the donkey between two
bundles of hay, because it was equidistant from all parts of the
containing sphere, and there was no reason why it should incline one
way rather than another. Empedocles attributed its state of rest to
centrifugal force by the rapid circular movement of the heavens, as
water is stationary in a pail when whirled round by a string.
Democritus further supposed that the inclination of the flat earth to
the ecliptic was due to the greater weight of the southern parts owing
to the exuberant vegetation.

For further references to similar efforts of imagination the reader is
referred to Sir George Cornwall Lewis's _Historical Survey of the
Astronomy of the Ancients_; London, 1862. His list of authorities
is very complete, but some of his conclusions are doubtful. At p. 113
of that work he records the real opinions of Socrates as set forth by
Xenophon; and the reader will, perhaps, sympathise with Socrates in
his views on contemporary astronomy:--

With regard to astronomy he [Socrates] considered a knowledge of it
desirable to the extent of determining the day of the year or month,
and the hour of the night, ... but as to learning the courses of the
stars, to be occupied with the planets, and to inquire about their
distances from the earth, and their orbits, and the causes of their
motions, he strongly objected to such a waste of valuable time. He
dwelt on the contradictions and conflicting opinions of the physical
philosophers, ... and, in fine, he held that the speculators on the
universe and on the laws of the heavenly bodies were no better than
madmen (_Xen. Mem_, i. 1, 11-15).

Plato (born 429 B.C.), the pupil of Socrates, the fellow-student of
Euclid, and a follower of Pythagoras, studied science in his travels
in Egypt and elsewhere. He was held in so great reverence by all
learned men that a problem which he set to the astronomers was the
keynote to all astronomical investigation from this date till the time
of Kepler in the sixteenth century. He proposed to astronomers _the
problem of representing the courses of the planets by circular and
uniform motions_.

Systematic observation among the Greeks began with the rise of the
Alexandrian school. Aristillus and Timocharis set up instruments and
fixed the positions of the zodiacal stars, near to which all the
planets in their orbits pass, thus facilitating the determination of
planetary motions. Aristarchus (320-250 B.C.) showed that the sun must
be at least nineteen times as far off as the moon, which is far short
of the mark. He also found the sun's diameter, correctly, to be half a
degree. Eratosthenes (276-196 B.C.) measured the inclination to the
equator of the sun's apparent path in the heavens--i.e., he measured
the obliquity of the ecliptic, making it 23 degrees 51', confirming
our knowledge of its continuous diminution during historical times. He
measured an arc of meridian, from Alexandria to Syene (Assuan), and
found the difference of latitude by the length of a shadow at noon,
summer solstice. He deduced the diameter of the earth, 250,000
stadia. Unfortunately, we do not know the length of the stadium he
used.

Hipparchus (190-120 B.C.) may be regarded as the founder of
observational astronomy. He measured the obliquity of the ecliptic,
and agreed with Eratosthenes. He altered the length of the tropical
year from 365 days, 6 hours to 365 days, 5 hours, 53 minutes--still
four minutes too much. He measured the equation of time and the
irregular motion of the sun; and allowed for this in his calculations
by supposing that the centre, about which the sun moves uniformly, is
situated a little distance from the fixed earth. He called this point
the _excentric_. The line from the earth to the "excentric" was
called the _line of apses_. A circle having this centre was
called the _equant_, and he supposed that a radius drawn to the
sun from the excentric passes over equal arcs on the equant in equal
times. He then computed tables for predicting the place of the sun.

He proceeded in the same way to compute Lunar tables. Making use of
Chaldaean eclipses, he was able to get an accurate value of the moon's
mean motion. [Halley, in 1693, compared this value with his own
measurements, and so discovered the acceleration of the moon's mean
motion. This was conclusively established, but could not be explained
by the Newtonian theory for quite a long time.] He determined the
plane of the moon's orbit and its inclination to the ecliptic. The
motion of this plane round the pole of the ecliptic once in eighteen
years complicated the problem. He located the moon's excentric as he
had done the sun's. He also discovered some of the minor
irregularities of the moon's motion, due, as Newton's theory proves,
to the disturbing action of the sun's attraction.

In the year 134 B.C. Hipparchus observed a new star. This upset every
notion about the permanence of the fixed stars. He then set to work to
catalogue all the principal stars so as to know if any others appeared
or disappeared. Here his experiences resembled those of several later
astronomers, who, when in search of some special object, have been
rewarded by a discovery in a totally different direction. On comparing
his star positions with those of Timocharis and Aristillus he found no
stars that had appeared or disappeared in the interval of 150 years;
but he found that all the stars seemed to have changed their places
with reference to that point in the heavens where the ecliptic is 90
degrees from the poles of the earth--i.e., the equinox. He found that
this could be explained by a motion of the equinox in the direction of
the apparent diurnal motion of the stars. This discovery of
_precession of the equinoxes_, which takes place at the rate of 52".1
every year, was necessary for the progress of accurate astronomical
observations. It is due to a steady revolution of the earth's pole
round the pole of the ecliptic once in 26,000 years in the opposite
direction to the planetary revolutions.

Hipparchus was also the inventor of trigonometry, both plane and
spherical. He explained the method of using eclipses for determining
the longitude.

In connection with Hipparchus' great discovery it may be mentioned
that modern astronomers have often attempted to fix dates in history
by the effects of precession of the equinoxes. (1) At about the date
when the Great Pyramid may have been built gamma Draconis was near to
the pole, and must have been used as the pole-star. In the north face
of the Great Pyramid is the entrance to an inclined passage, and six
of the nine pyramids at Gizeh possess the same feature; all the
passages being inclined at an angle between 26 degrees and 27 degrees
to the horizon and in the plane of the meridian. It also appears that
4,000 years ago--i.e., about 2100 B.C.--an observer at the lower end
of the passage would be able to see gamma Draconis, the then
pole-star, at its lower culmination.[1] It has been suggested that the
passage was made for this purpose. On other grounds the date assigned
to the Great Pyramid is 2123 B.C.

(2) The Chaldaeans gave names to constellations now invisible from
Babylon which would have been visible in 2000 B.C., at which date it
is claimed that these people were studying astronomy.

(3) In the Odyssey, Calypso directs Odysseus, in accordance with
Phoenician rules for navigating the Mediterranean, to keep the Great
Bear "ever on the left as he traversed the deep" when sailing from the
pillars of Hercules (Gibraltar) to Corfu. Yet such a course taken now
would land the traveller in Africa. Odysseus is said in his voyage in
springtime to have seen the Pleiades and Arcturus setting late, which
seemed to early commentators a proof of Homer's inaccuracy. Likewise
Homer, both in the _Odyssey_ [2] (v. 272-5) and in the _Iliad_
(xviii. 489), asserts that the Great Bear never set in those
latitudes. Now it has been found that the precession of the equinoxes
explains all these puzzles; shows that in springtime on the
Mediterranean the Bear was just above the horizon, near the sea but
not touching it, between 750 B.C. and 1000 B.C.; and fixes the date of
the poems, thus confirming other evidence, and establishing Homer's
character for accuracy. [3]

(4) The orientation of Egyptian temples and Druidical stones is such
that possibly they were so placed as to assist in the observation of
the heliacal risings [4] of certain stars. If the star were known,
this would give an approximate date. Up to the present the results of
these investigations are far from being conclusive.

Ptolemy (130 A.D.) wrote the Suntaxis, or Almagest, which includes a
cyclopedia of astronomy, containing a summary of knowledge at that
date. We have no evidence beyond his own statement that he was a
practical observer. He theorised on the planetary motions, and held
that the earth is fixed in the centre of the universe. He adopted the
excentric and equant of Hipparchus to explain the unequal motions of
the sun and moon. He adopted the epicycles and deferents which had
been used by Apollonius and others to explain the retrograde motions
of the planets. We, who know that the earth revolves round the sun
once in a year, can understand that the apparent motion of a planet is
only its motion relative to the earth. If, then, we suppose the earth
fixed and the sun to revolve round it once a year, and the planets
each in its own period, it is only necessary to impose upon each of
these an additional _annual_ motion to enable us to represent truly
the apparent motions. This way of looking at the apparent motions
shows why each planet, when nearest to the earth, seems to move for a
time in a retrograde direction. The attempts of Ptolemy and others of
his time to explain the retrograde motion in this way were only
approximate. Let us suppose each planet to have a bar with one end
centred at the earth. If at the other end of the bar one end of a
shorter bar is pivotted, having the planet at its other end, then the
planet is given an annual motion in the secondary circle (the
epicycle), whose centre revolves round the earth on the primary circle
(the _deferent_), at a uniform rate round the excentric. Ptolemy
supposed the centres of the epicycles of Mercury and Venus to be on a
bar passing through the sun, and to be between the earth and the
sun. The centres of the epicycles of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn were
supposed to be further away than the sun. Mercury and Venus were
supposed to revolve in their epicycles in their own periodic times and
in the deferent round the earth in a year. The major planets were
supposed to revolve in the deferent round the earth in their own
periodic times, and in their epicycles once in a year.

It did not occur to Ptolemy to place the centres of the epicycles of
Mercury and Venus at the sun, and to extend the same system to the
major planets. Something of this sort had been proposed by the
Egyptians (we are told by Cicero and others), and was accepted by
Tycho Brahe; and was as true a representation of the relative motions
in the solar system as when we suppose the sun to be fixed and the
earth to revolve.

The cumbrous system advocated by Ptolemy answered its purpose,
enabling him to predict astronomical events approximately. He improved
the lunar theory considerably, and discovered minor inequalities which
could be allowed for by the addition of new epicycles. We may look
upon these epicycles of Apollonius, and the excentric of Hipparchus,
as the responses of these astronomers to the demand of Plato for
uniform circular motions. Their use became more and more confirmed,
until the seventeenth century, when the accurate observations of Tycho
Brahe enabled Kepler to abolish these purely geometrical makeshifts,
and to substitute a system in which the sun became physically its
controller.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Phil. Mag_., vol. xxiv., pp. 481-4.

[2]

Plaeiadas t' esoronte kai ophe duonta bootaen
'Arkton th' aen kai amaxan epiklaesin kaleousin,
'Ae t' autou strephetai kai t' Oriona dokeuei,
Oin d'ammoros esti loetron Okeanoio.

"The Pleiades and Bootes that setteth late, and the Bear,
which they likewise call the Wain, which turneth ever in one
place, and keepeth watch upon Orion, and alone hath no part in
the baths of the ocean."

[3] See Pearson in the Camb. Phil. Soc. Proc., vol. iv., pt. ii., p.
93, on whose authority the above statements are made.

[4] See p. 6 for definition.



4. THE REIGN OF EPICYCLES--FROM PTOLEMY TO COPERNICUS.


After Ptolemy had published his book there seemed to be nothing more
to do for the solar system except to go on observing and finding more
and more accurate values for the constants involved--viz., the periods
of revolution, the diameter of the deferent,[1] and its ratio to that
of the epicycle,[2] the distance of the excentric[3] from the centre
of the deferent, and the position of the line of apses,[4] besides the
inclination and position of the plane of the planet's orbit. The only
object ever aimed at in those days was to prepare tables for
predicting the places of the planets. It was not a mechanical problem;
there was no notion of a governing law of forces.

From this time onwards all interest in astronomy seemed, in Europe at
least, to sink to a low ebb. When the Caliph Omar, in the middle of
the seventh century, burnt the library of Alexandria, which had been
the centre of intellectual progress, that centre migrated to Baghdad,
and the Arabs became the leaders of science and philosophy. In
astronomy they made careful observations. In the middle of the ninth
century Albategnius, a Syrian prince, improved the value of
excentricity of the sun's orbit, observed the motion of the moon's
apse, and thought he detected a smaller progression of the sun's
apse. His tables were much more accurate than Ptolemy's. Abul Wefa, in
the tenth century, seems to have discovered the moon's "variation."
Meanwhile the Moors were leaders of science in the west, and Arzachel
of Toledo improved the solar tables very much. Ulugh Begh, grandson of
the great Tamerlane the Tartar, built a fine observatory at Samarcand
in the fifteenth century, and made a great catalogue of stars, the
first since the time of Hipparchus.

At the close of the fifteenth century King Alphonso of Spain employed
computers to produce the Alphonsine Tables (1488 A.D.), Purbach
translated Ptolemy's book, and observations were carried out in
Germany by Muller, known as Regiomontanus, and Waltherus.

Nicolai Copernicus, a Sclav, was born in 1473 at Thorn, in Polish
Prussia. He studied at Cracow and in Italy. He was a priest, and
settled at Frauenberg. He did not undertake continuous observations,
but devoted himself to simplifying the planetary systems and devising
means for more accurately predicting the positions of the sun, moon,
and planets. He had no idea of framing a solar system on a dynamical
basis. His great object was to increase the accuracy of the
calculations and the tables. The results of his cogitations were
printed just before his death in an interesting book, _De
Revolutionibus Orbium Celestium_. It is only by careful reading of
this book that the true position of Copernicus can be realised. He
noticed that Nicetas and others had ascribed the apparent diurnal
rotation of the heavens to a real daily rotation of the earth about
its axis, in the opposite direction to the apparent motion of the
stars. Also in the writings of Martianus Capella he learnt that the
Egyptians had supposed Mercury and Venus to revolve round the sun, and
to be carried with him in his annual motion round the earth. He
noticed that the same supposition, if extended to Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn, would explain easily why they, and especially Mars, seem so
much brighter in opposition. For Mars would then be a great deal
nearer to the earth than at other times. It would also explain the
retrograde motion of planets when in opposition.

We must here notice that at this stage Copernicus was actually
confronted with the system accepted later by Tycho Brahe, with the
earth fixed. But he now recalled and accepted the views of Pythagoras
and others, according to which the sun is fixed and the earth
revolves; and it must be noted that, geometrically, there is no
difference of any sort between the Egyptian or Tychonic system and
that of Pythagoras as revived by Copernicus, except that on the latter
theory the stars ought to seem to move when the earth changes its
position--a test which failed completely with the rough means of
observation then available. The radical defect of all solar systems
previous to the time of Kepler (1609 A.D.) was the slavish yielding to
Plato's dictum demanding uniform circular motion for the planets, and
the consequent evolution of the epicycle, which was fatal to any
conception of a dynamical theory.

Copernicus could not sever himself from this obnoxious tradition.[5]
It is true that neither the Pythagorean nor the Egypto-Tychonic system
required epicycles for explaining retrograde motion, as the Ptolemaic
theory did. Furthermore, either system could use the excentric of
Hipparchus to explain the irregular motion known as the equation of
the centre. But Copernicus remarked that he could also use an
epicycle for this purpose, or that he could use both an excentric and
an epicycle for each planet, and so bring theory still closer into
accord with observation. And this he proceeded to do.[6] Moreover,
observers had found irregularities in the moon's motion, due, as we
now know, to the disturbing attraction of the sun. To correct for
these irregularities Copernicus introduced epicycle on epicycle in the
lunar orbit.

This is in its main features the system propounded by Copernicus. But
attention must, to state the case fully, be drawn to two points to be
found in his first and sixth books respectively. The first point
relates to the seasons, and it shows a strange ignorance of the laws
of rotating bodies. To use the words of Delambre,[7] in drawing
attention to the strange conception,

  he imagined that the earth, revolving round the sun, ought always to
  show to it the same face; the contrary phenomena surprised him: to
  explain them he invented a third motion, and added it to the two
  real motions (rotation and orbital revolution). By this third motion
  the earth, he held, made a revolution on itself and on the poles of
  the ecliptic once a year.... Copernicus did not know that motion in
  a straight line is the natural motion, and that motion in a curve is
  the resultant of several movements. He believed, with Aristotle,
  that circular motion was the natural one.

Copernicus made this rotation of the earth's axis about the pole of
the ecliptic retrograde (i.e., opposite to the orbital revolution),
and by making it perform more than one complete revolution in a year,
the added part being 1/26000 of the whole, he was able to include the
precession of the equinoxes in his explanation of the seasons. His
explanation of the seasons is given on leaf 10 of his book (the pages
of this book are not all numbered, only alternate pages, or leaves).

In his sixth book he discusses the inclination of the planetary orbits
to the ecliptic. In regard to this the theory of Copernicus is unique;
and it will be best to explain this in the words of Grant in his great
work.[8] He says:--

  Copernicus, as we have already remarked, did not attack the
  principle of the epicyclical theory: he merely sought to make it
  more simple by placing the centre of the earth's orbit in the centre
  of the universe. This was the point to which the motions of the
  planets were referred, for the planes of their orbits were made to
  pass through it, and their points of least and greatest velocities
  were also determined with reference to it.  By this arrangement the
  sun was situate mathematically near the centre of the planetary
  system, but he did not appear to have any physical connexion with
  the planets as the centre of their motions.

According to Copernicus' sixth book, the planes of the planetary
orbits do not pass through the sun, and the lines of apses do not pass
through to the sun.

Such was the theory advanced by Copernicus: The earth moves in an
epicycle, on a deferent whose centre is a little distance from the
sun. The planets move in a similar way on epicycles, but their
deferents have no geometrical or physical relation to the sun. The
moon moves on an epicycle centred on a second epicycle, itself centred
on a deferent, excentric to the earth. The earth's axis rotates about
the pole of the ecliptic, making one revolution and a twenty-six
thousandth part of a revolution in the sidereal year, in the opposite
direction to its orbital motion.

In view of this fanciful structure it must be noted, in fairness to
Copernicus, that he repeatedly states that the reader is not obliged
to accept his system as showing the real motions; that it does not
matter whether they be true, even approximately, or not, so long as
they enable us to compute tables from which the places of the planets
among the stars can be predicted.[9] He says that whoever is not
satisfied with this explanation must be contented by being told that
"mathematics are for mathematicians" (Mathematicis mathematica
scribuntur).

At the same time he expresses his conviction over and over again that
the earth is in motion. It is with him a pious belief, just as it was
with Pythagoras and his school and with Aristarchus. "But" (as Dreyer
says in his most interesting book, _Tycho Brahe_) "proofs of the
physical truth of his system Copernicus had given none, and could give
none," any more than Pythagoras or Aristarchus.

There was nothing so startlingly simple in his system as to lead the
cautious astronomer to accept it, as there was in the later Keplerian
system; and the absence of parallax in the stars seemed to condemn his
system, which had no physical basis to recommend it, and no
simplification at all over the Egypto-Tychonic system, to which
Copernicus himself drew attention. It has been necessary to devote
perhaps undue space to the interesting work of Copernicus, because by
a curious chance his name has become so widely known. He has been
spoken of very generally as the founder of the solar system that is
now accepted. This seems unfair, and on reading over what has been
written about him at different times it will be noticed that the
astronomers--those who have evidently read his great book--are very
cautious in the words with which they eulogise him, and refrain from
attributing to him the foundation of our solar system, which is
entirely due to Kepler. It is only the more popular writers who give
the idea that a revolution had been effected when Pythagoras' system
was revived, and when Copernicus supported his view that the earth
moves and is not fixed.

It may be easy to explain the association of the name of Copernicus
with the Keplerian system. But the time has long passed when the
historian can support in any way this popular error, which was started
not by astronomers acquainted with Kepler's work, but by those who
desired to put the Church in the wrong by extolling Copernicus.

Copernicus dreaded much the abuse he expected to receive from
philosophers for opposing the authority of Aristotle, who had declared
that the earth was fixed. So he sought and obtained the support of
the Church, dedicating his great work to Pope Paul III. in a lengthy
explanatory epistle. The Bishop of Cracow set up a memorial tablet in
his honour.

Copernicus was the most refined exponent, and almost the last
representative, of the Epicyclical School. As has been already
stated, his successor, Tycho Brahe, supported the same use of
epicycles and excentrics as Copernicus, though he held the earth to be
fixed. But Tycho Brahe was eminently a practical observer, and took
little part in theory; and his observations formed so essential a
portion of the system of Kepler that it is only fair to include his
name among these who laid the foundations of the solar system which we
accept to-day.

In now taking leave of the system of epicycles let it be remarked that
it has been held up to ridicule more than it deserves. On reading
Airy's account of epicycles, in the beautifully clear language of his
_Six Lectures on Astronomy_, the impression is made that the
jointed bars there spoken of for describing the circles were supposed
to be real. This is no more the case than that the spheres of Eudoxus
and Callippus were supposed to be real. Both were introduced only to
illustrate the mathematical conception upon which the solar,
planetary, and lunar tables were constructed. The epicycles
represented nothing more nor less than the first terms in the Fourier
series, which in the last century has become a basis of such
calculations, both in astronomy and physics generally.

[Illustration: "QUADRANS MURALIS SIVE TICHONICUS." With portrait of
Tycho Brahe, instruments, etc., painted on the wall; showing
assistants using the sight, watching the clock, and recording. (From
the author's copy of the _Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica._)]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] For definition see p. 22.

[2] _Ibid_.

[3] For definition see p. 18.

[4] For definition see p. 18.

[5] In his great book Copernicus says: "The movement of the heavenly
bodies is uniform, circular, perpetual, or else composed of circular
movements." In this he proclaimed himself a follower of Pythagoras
(see p. 14), as also when he says: "The world is spherical because the
sphere is, of all figures, the most perfect" (Delambre,
_Ast. Mod. Hist_., pp. 86, 87).

[6] Kepler tells us that Tycho Brahe was pleased with this
device, and adapted it to his own system.

[7] _Hist. Ast._, vol. i., p. 354.

[8] _Hist. of Phys. Ast._, p. vii.

[9] "Est enim Astronomi proprium, historiam motuum coelestium
diligenti et artificiosa observatione colligere. Deinde causas
earundem, seu hypotheses, cum veras assequi nulla ratione possit
... Neque enim necesse est, eas hypotheses esse veras, imo ne
verisimiles quidem, sed sufficit hoc usum, si calculum observationibus
congruentem exhibeant."




BOOK II. THE DYNAMICAL PERIOD



5. DISCOVERY OF THE TRUE SOLAR SYSTEM--TYCHO BRAHE--KEPLER.


During the period of the intellectual and aesthetic revival, at the
beginning of the sixteenth century, the "spirit of the age" was
fostered by the invention of printing, by the downfall of the
Byzantine Empire, and the scattering of Greek fugitives, carrying the
treasures of literature through Western Europe, by the works of
Raphael and Michael Angelo, by the Reformation, and by the extension
of the known world through the voyages of Spaniards and Portuguese.
During that period there came to the front the founder of accurate
observational astronomy. Tycho Brahe, a Dane, born in 1546 of noble
parents, was the most distinguished, diligent, and accurate observer
of the heavens since the days of Hipparchus, 1,700 years before.

Tycho was devoted entirely to his science from childhood, and the
opposition of his parents only stimulated him in his efforts to
overcome difficulties. He soon grasped the hopelessness of the old
deductive methods of reasoning, and decided that no theories ought to
be indulged in until preparations had been made by the accumulation of
accurate observations. We may claim for him the title of founder of
the inductive method.

For a complete life of this great man the reader is referred to
Dreyer's _Tycho Brahe_, Edinburgh, 1890, containing a complete
bibliography. The present notice must be limited to noting the work
done, and the qualities of character which enabled him to attain his
scientific aims, and which have been conspicuous in many of his
successors.

He studied in Germany, but King Frederick of Denmark, appreciating his
great talents, invited him to carry out his life's work in that
country. He granted to him the island of Hveen, gave him a pension,
and made him a canon of the Cathedral of Roskilde. On that island
Tycho Brahe built the splendid observatory which he called Uraniborg,
and, later, a second one for his assistants and students, called
Stjerneborg. These he fitted up with the most perfect instruments, and
never lost a chance of adding to his stock of careful observations.[1]

The account of all these instruments and observations, printed at his
own press on the island, was published by Tycho Brahe himself, and the
admirable and numerous engravings bear witness to the excellence of
design and the stability of his instruments.

His mechanical skill was very great, and in his workmanship he was
satisfied with nothing but the best. He recognised the importance of
rigidity in the instruments, and, whereas these had generally been
made of wood, he designed them in metal. His instruments included
armillae like those which had been used in Alexandria, and other
armillae designed by himself--sextants, mural quadrants, large
celestial globes and various instruments for special purposes. He
lived before the days of telescopes and accurate clocks. He invented
the method of sub-dividing the degrees on the arc of an instrument by
transversals somewhat in the way that Pedro Nunez had proposed.

He originated the true system of observation and reduction of
observations, recognising the fact that the best instrument in the
world is not perfect; and with each of his instruments he set to work
to find out the errors of graduation and the errors of mounting, the
necessary correction being applied to each observation.

When he wanted to point his instrument exactly to a star he was
confronted with precisely the same difficulty as is met in gunnery and
rifle-shooting. The sights and the object aimed at cannot be in focus
together, and a great deal depends on the form of sight. Tycho Brahe
invented, and applied to the pointers of his instruments, an
aperture-sight of variable area, like the iris diaphragm used now in
photography. This enabled him to get the best result with stars of
different brightness. The telescope not having been invented, he
could not use a telescopic-sight as we now do in gunnery. This not
only removes the difficulty of focussing, but makes the minimum
visible angle smaller. Helmholtz has defined the minimum angle
measurable with the naked eye as being one minute of arc. In view of
this it is simply marvellous that, when the positions of Tycho's
standard stars are compared with the best modern catalogues, his
probable error in right ascension is only +/- 24", 1, and in declination
only +/- 25", 9.

Clocks of a sort had been made, but Tycho Brahe found them so
unreliable that he seldom used them, and many of his position-measurements
were made by measuring the angular distances from known stars.

Taking into consideration the absence of either a telescope or a
clock, and reading his account of the labour he bestowed upon each
observation, we must all agree that Kepler, who inherited these
observations in MS., was justified, under the conditions then
existing, in declaring that there was no hope of anyone ever improving
upon them.

In the year 1572, on November 11th, Tycho discovered in Cassiopeia a
new star of great brilliance, and continued to observe it until the
end of January, 1573. So incredible to him was such an event that he
refused to believe his own eyes until he got others to confirm what he
saw. He made accurate observations of its distance from the nine
principal stars in Casseiopeia, and proved that it had no measurable
parallax. Later he employed the same method with the comets of 1577,
1580, 1582, 1585, 1590, 1593, and 1596, and proved that they too had
no measurable parallax and must be very distant.

The startling discovery that stars are not necessarily permanent, that
new stars may appear, and possibly that old ones may disappear, had
upon him exactly the same effect that a similar occurrence had upon
Hipparchus 1,700 years before. He felt it his duty to catalogue all
the principal stars, so that there should be no mistake in the
future. During the construction of his catalogue of 1,000 stars he
prepared and used accurate tables of refraction deduced from his own
observations. Thus he eliminated (so far as naked eye observations
required) the effect of atmospheric refraction which makes the
altitude of a star seem greater than it really is.

Tycho Brahe was able to correct the lunar theory by his observations.
Copernicus had introduced two epicycles on the lunar orbit in the hope
of obtaining a better accordance between theory and observation; and
he was not too ambitious, as his desire was to get the tables accurate
to ten minutes. Tycho Brahe found that the tables of Copernicus were
in error as much as two degrees. He re-discovered the inequality
called "variation" by observing the moon in all phases--a thing which
had not been attended to. [It is remarkable that in the nineteenth
century Sir George Airy established an altazimuth at Greenwich
Observatory with this special object, to get observations of the moon
in all phases.] He also discovered other lunar equalities, and wanted
to add another epicycle to the moon's orbit, but he feared that these
would soon become unmanageable if further observations showed more new
inequalities.

But, as it turned out, the most fruitful work of Tycho Brahe was on
the motions of the planets, and especially of the planet Mars, for it
was by an examination of these results that Kepler was led to the
discovery of his immortal laws.

After the death of King Frederick the observatories of Tycho Brahe
were not supported. The gigantic power and industry displayed by this
determined man were accompanied, as often happens, by an overbearing
manner, intolerant of obstacles. This led to friction, and eventually
the observatories were dismantled, and Tycho Brahe was received by the
Emperor Rudolph II., who placed a house in Prague at his disposal.
Here he worked for a few years, with Kepler as one of his assistants,
and he died in the year 1601.

It is an interesting fact that Tycho Brahe had a firm conviction that
mundane events could be predicted by astrology, and that this belief
was supported by his own predictions.

It has already been stated that Tycho Brahe maintained that
observation must precede theory. He did not accept the Copernican
theory that the earth moves, but for a working hypothesis he used a
modification of an old Egyptian theory, mathematically identical with
that of Copernicus, but not involving a stellar parallax. He says
(_De Mundi_, etc.) that

  the Ptolemean system was too complicated, and the new one which that
  great man Copernicus had proposed, following in the footsteps of
  Aristarchus of Samos, though there was nothing in it contrary to
  mathematical principles, was in opposition to those of physics, as
  the heavy and sluggish earth is unfit to move, and the system is
  even opposed to the authority of Scripture. The absence of annual
  parallax further involves an incredible distance between the
  outermost planet and the fixed stars.

We are bound to admit that in the circumstances of the case, so long
as there was no question of dynamical forces connecting the members of
the solar system, his reasoning, as we should expect from such a man,
is practical and sound. It is not surprising, then, that astronomers
generally did not readily accept the views of Copernicus, that Luther
(Luther's _Tischreden_, pp.  22, 60) derided him in his usual pithy
manner, that Melancthon (_Initia doctrinae physicae_) said that
Scripture, and also science, are against the earth's motion; and that
the men of science whose opinion was asked for by the cardinals (who
wished to know whether Galileo was right or wrong) looked upon
Copernicus as a weaver of fanciful theories.

Johann Kepler is the name of the man whose place, as is generally
agreed, would have been the most difficult to fill among all those who
have contributed to the advance of astronomical knowledge. He was born
at Wiel, in the Duchy of Wurtemberg, in 1571. He held an appointment
at Gratz, in Styria, and went to join Tycho Brahe in Prague, and to
assist in reducing his observations. These came into his possession
when Tycho Brahe died, the Emperor Rudolph entrusting to him the
preparation of new tables (called the Rudolphine tables) founded on
the new and accurate observations. He had the most profound respect
for the knowledge, skill, determination, and perseverance of the man
who had reaped such a harvest of most accurate data; and though Tycho
hardly recognised the transcendent genius of the man who was working
as his assistant, and although there were disagreements between them,
Kepler held to his post, sustained by the conviction that, with these
observations to test any theory, he would be in a position to settle
for ever the problem of the solar system.

[Illustration: PORTRAIT OF JOHANNES KEPLER.  By F. Wanderer, from
Reitlinger's "Johannes Kepler" (original in Strassburg).]

It has seemed to many that Plato's demand for uniform circular motion
(linear or angular) was responsible for a loss to astronomy of good
work during fifteen hundred years, for a hundred ill-considered
speculative cosmogonies, for dissatisfaction, amounting to disgust,
with these _a priori_ guesses, and for the relegation of the
science to less intellectual races than Greeks and other Europeans.
Nobody seemed to dare to depart from this fetish of uniform angular
motion and circular orbits until the insight, boldness, and
independence of Johann Kepler opened up a new world of thought and of
intellectual delight.

While at work on the Rudolphine tables he used the old epicycles and
deferents and excentrics, but he could not make theory agree with
observation. His instincts told him that these apologists for uniform
motion were a fraud; and he proved it to himself by trying every
possible variation of the elements and finding them fail.  The number
of hypotheses which he examined and rejected was almost incredible
(for example, that the planets turn round centres at a little distance
from the sun, that the epicycles have centres at a little distance
from the deferent, and so on). He says that, after using all these
devices to make theory agree with Tycho's observations, he still found
errors amounting to eight minutes of a degree. Then he said boldly
that it was impossible that so good an observer as Tycho could have
made a mistake of eight minutes, and added: "Out of these eight
minutes we will construct a new theory that will explain the motions
of all the planets." And he did it, with elliptic orbits having the
sun in a focus of each.[2]

It is often difficult to define the boundaries between fancies,
imagination, hypothesis, and sound theory.  This extraordinary genius
was a master in all these modes of attacking a problem. His analogy
between the spaces occupied by the five regular solids and the
distances of the planets from the sun, which filled him with so much
delight, was a display of pure fancy. His demonstration of the three
fundamental laws of planetary motion was the most strict and complete
theory that had ever been attempted.

It has been often suggested that the revival by Copernicus of the
notion of a moving earth was a help to Kepler. No one who reads
Kepler's great book could hold such an opinion for a moment. In fact,
the excellence of Copernicus's book helped to prolong the life of the
epicyclical theories in opposition to Kepler's teaching.

All of the best theories were compared by him with observation. These
were the Ptolemaic, the Copernican, and the Tychonic. The two latter
placed all of the planetary orbits concentric with one another, the
sun being placed a little away from their common centre, and having no
apparent relation to them, and being actually outside the planes in
which they move.  Kepler's first great discovery was that the planes
of all the orbits pass through the sun; his second was that the line
of apses of each planet passes through the sun; both were
contradictory to the Copernican theory.

He proceeds cautiously with his propositions until he arrives at his
great laws, and he concludes his book by comparing observations of
Mars, of all dates, with his theory.

His first law states that the planets describe ellipses with the sun
at a focus of each ellipse.

His second law (a far more difficult one to prove) states that a line
drawn from a planet to the sun sweeps over equal areas in equal
times. These two laws were published in his great work, _Astronomia
Nova, sen.  Physica Coelestis tradita commentariis de Motibus Stelloe;
Martis_, Prague, 1609.

It took him nine years more[3] to discover his third law, that the
squares of the periodic times are proportional to the cubes of the
mean distances from the sun.

These three laws contain implicitly the law of universal
gravitation. They are simply an alternative way of expressing that law
in dealing with planets, not particles. Only, the power of the
greatest human intellect is so utterly feeble that the meaning of the
words in Kepler's three laws could not be understood until expounded
by the logic of Newton's dynamics.

The joy with which Kepler contemplated the final demonstration of
these laws, the evolution of which had occupied twenty years, can
hardly be imagined by us.  He has given some idea of it in a passage
in his work on _Harmonics_, which is not now quoted, only lest
someone might say it was egotistical--a term which is simply grotesque
when applied to such a man with such a life's work accomplished.

The whole book, _Astronomia Nova_, is a pleasure to read; the
mass of observations that are used, and the ingenuity of the
propositions, contrast strongly with the loose and imperfectly
supported explanations of all his predecessors; and the indulgent
reader will excuse the devotion of a few lines to an example of the
ingenuity and beauty of his methods.

It may seem a hopeless task to find out the true paths of Mars and the
earth (at that time when their shape even was not known) from the
observations giving only the relative direction from night to
night. Now, Kepler had twenty years of observations of Mars to deal
with. This enabled him to use a new method, to find the earth's
orbit. Observe the date at any time when Mars is in opposition. The
earth's position E at that date gives the longitude of Mars M. His
period is 687 days. Now choose dates before and after the principal
date at intervals of 687 days and its multiples.  Mars is in each case
in the same position. Now for any date when Mars is at M and the earth
at E3 the date of the year gives the angle E3SM. And the
observation of Tycho gives the direction of Mars compared with the
sun, SE3M. So all the angles of the triangle SEM in any of these
positions of E are known, and also the ratios of SE1, SE2, SE3,
SE4 to SM and to each other.

For the orbit of Mars observations were chosen at intervals of a year,
when the earth was always in the same place.

[Illustration]

But Kepler saw much farther than the geometrical facts. He realised
that the orbits are followed owing to a force directed to the sun; and
he guessed that this is the same force as the gravity that makes a
stone fall. He saw the difficulty of gravitation acting through the
void space.  He compared universal gravitation to magnetism, and
speaks of the work of Gilbert of Colchester.  (Gilbert's book, _De
Mundo Nostro Sublunari, Philosophia Nova_, Amstelodami, 1651,
containing similar views, was published forty-eight years after
Gilbert's death, and forty-two years after Kepler's book and
reference.  His book _De Magnete_ was published in 1600.)

A few of Kepler's views on gravitation, extracted from the
Introduction to his _Astronomia Nova_, may now be mentioned:--

1. Every body at rest remains at rest if outside the attractive power
of other bodies.

2. Gravity is a property of masses mutually attracting in such manner
that the earth attracts a stone much more than a stone attracts the
earth.

3. Bodies are attracted to the earth's centre, not because it is the
centre of the universe, but because it is the centre of the attracting
particles of the earth.

4. If the earth be not round (but spheroidal?), then bodies at
different latitudes will not be attracted to its centre, but to
different points in the neighbourhood of that centre.

5. If the earth and moon were not retained in their orbits by vital
force (_aut alia aligua aequipollenti_), the earth and moon would come
together.

6. If the earth were to cease to attract its waters, the oceans would
all rise and flow to the moon.

7. He attributes the tides to lunar attraction.  Kepler had been
appointed Imperial Astronomer with a handsome salary (on paper), a
fraction of which was doled out to him very irregularly. He was led to
miserable makeshifts to earn enough to keep his family from
starvation; and proceeded to Ratisbon in 1630 to represent his claims
to the Diet. He arrived worn out and debilitated; he failed in his
appeal, and died from fever, contracted under, and fed upon,
disappointment and exhaustion. Those were not the days when men could
adopt as a profession the "research of endowment."

Before taking leave of Kepler, who was by no means a man of one idea,
it ought to be here recorded that he was the first to suggest that a
telescope made with both lenses convex (not a Galilean telescope) can
have cross wires in the focus, for use as a pointer to fix accurately
the positions of stars. An Englishman, Gascoigne, was the first to use
this in practice.

From the all too brief epitome here given of Kepler's greatest book,
it must be obvious that he had at that time some inkling of the
meaning of his laws--universal gravitation. From that moment the idea
of universal gravitation was in the air, and hints and guesses were
thrown out by many; and in time the law of gravitation would doubtless
have been discovered, though probably not by the work of one man, even
if Newton had not lived. But, if Kepler had not lived, who else could
have discovered his laws?


FOOTNOTES:

[1] When the writer visited M. D'Arrest, the astronomer, at
Copenhagen, in 1872, he was presented by D'Arrest with one of several
bricks collected from the ruins of Uraniborg. This was one of his most
cherished possessions until, on returning home after a prolonged
absence on astronomical work, he found that his treasure had been
tidied away from his study.

[2] An ellipse is one of the plane, sections of a cone. It is an oval
curve, which may be drawn by fixing two pins in a sheet of paper at S
and H, fastening a string, SPH, to the two pins, and stretching it
with a pencil point at P, and moving the pencil point, while the
string is kept taut, to trace the oval ellipse, APB. S and H are the
_foci_. Kepler found the sun to be in one focus, say S. AB is the
_major axis_. DE is the _minor axis_. C is the _centre_. The direction
of AB is the _line of apses_. The ratio of CS to CA is the
_excentricity_. The position of the planet at A is the _perihelion_
(nearest to the sun). The position of the planet at B is the
_aphelion_ (farthest from the sun). The angle ASP is the _anomaly_
when the planet is at P. CA or a line drawn from S to D is the _mean
distance_ of the planet from the sun.

[Illustration]

[3] The ruled logarithmic paper we now use was not then to be had by
going into a stationer's shop. Else he would have accomplished this in
five minutes.



6. GALILEO AND THE TELESCOPE--NOTIONS OF GRAVITY BY HORROCKS, ETC.


It is now necessary to leave the subject of dynamical astronomy for a
short time in order to give some account of work in a different
direction originated by a contemporary of Kepler's, his senior in fact
by seven years. Galileo Galilei was born at Pisa in 1564. The most
scientific part of his work dealt with terrestrial dynamics; but one
of those fortunate chances which happen only to really great men put
him in the way of originating a new branch of astronomy.

The laws of motion had not been correctly defined.  The only man of
Galileo's time who seems to have worked successfully in the same
direction as himself was that Admirable Crichton of the Italians,
Leonardo da Vinci. Galileo cleared the ground. It had always been
noticed that things tend to come to rest; a ball rolled on the ground,
a boat moved on the water, a shot fired in the air. Galileo realised
that in all of these cases a resisting force acts to stop the motion,
and he was the first to arrive at the not very obvious law that the
motion of a body will never stop, nor vary its speed, nor change its
direction, except by the action of some force.

It is not very obvious that a light body and a heavy one fall at the
same speed (except for the resistance of the air). Galileo proved this
on paper, but to convince the world he had to experiment from the
leaning tower of Pisa.

At an early age he discovered the principle of isochronism of the
pendulum, which, in the hands of Huyghens in the middle of the
seventeenth century, led to the invention of the pendulum clock,
perhaps the most valuable astronomical instrument ever produced.

These and other discoveries in dynamics may seem very obvious now; but
it is often the most every-day matters which have been found to elude
the inquiries of ordinary minds, and it required a high order of
intellect to unravel the truth and discard the stupid maxims scattered
through the works of Aristotle and accepted on his authority. A blind
worship of scientific authorities has often delayed the progress of
human knowledge, just as too much "instruction" of a youth often ruins
his "education." Grant, in his history of Physical Astronomy, has well
said that "the sagacity and skill which Galileo displays in resolving
the phenomena of motion into their constituent elements, and hence
deriving the original principles involved in them, will ever assure to
him a distinguished place among those who have extended the domains of
science."

But it was work of a different kind that established Galileo's popular
reputation. In 1609 Galileo heard that a Dutch spectacle-maker had
combined a pair of lenses so as to magnify distant objects. Working on
this hint, he solved the same problem, first on paper and then in
practice. So he came to make one of the first telescopes ever used in
astronomy. No sooner had he turned it on the heavenly bodies than he
was rewarded by such a shower of startling discoveries as forthwith
made his name the best known in Europe.  He found curious irregular
black spots on the sun, revolving round it in twenty-seven days; hills
and valleys on the moon; the planets showing discs of sensible size,
not points like the fixed stars; Venus showing phases according to her
position in relation to the sun; Jupiter accompanied by four moons;
Saturn with appendages that he could not explain, but unlike the other
planets; the Milky Way composed of a multitude of separate stars.

His fame flew over Europe like magic, and his discoveries were much
discussed--and there were many who refused to believe. Cosmo de Medici
induced him to migrate to Florence to carry on his observations.  He
was received by Paul V., the Pope, at Rome, to whom he explained his
discoveries.

He thought that these discoveries proved the truth of the Copernican
theory of the Earth's motion; and he urged this view on friends and
foes alike.  Although in frequent correspondence with Kepler, he never
alluded to the New Astronomy, and wrote to him extolling the virtue of
epicycles. He loved to argue, never shirked an encounter with any
number of disputants, and laughed as he broke down their arguments.

Through some strange course of events, not easy to follow, the
Copernican theory, whose birth was welcomed by the Church, had now
been taken up by certain anti-clerical agitators, and was opposed by
the cardinals as well as by the dignitaries of the Reformed
Church. Galileo--a good Catholic--got mixed up in these discussions,
although on excellent terms with the Pope and his entourage. At last
it came about that Galileo was summoned to appear at Rome, where he
was charged with holding and teaching heretical opinions about the
movement of the earth; and he then solemnly abjured these
opinions. There has been much exaggeration and misstatement about his
trial and punishment, and for a long time there was a great deal of
bitterness shown on both sides. But the general verdict of the present
day seems to be that, although Galileo himself was treated with
consideration, the hostility of the Church to the views of Copernicus
placed it in opposition also to the true Keplerian system, and this
led to unprofitable controversies.  From the time of Galileo onwards,
for some time, opponents of religion included the theory of the
Earth's motion in their disputations, not so much for the love, or
knowledge, of astronomy, as for the pleasure of putting the Church in
the wrong. This created a great deal of bitterness and intolerance on
both sides. Among the sufferers was Giordano Bruno, a learned
speculative philosopher, who was condemned to be burnt at the stake.

Galileo died on Christmas Day, 1642--the day of Newton's birth. The
further consideration of the grand field of discovery opened out by
Galileo with his telescopes must be now postponed, to avoid
discontinuity in the history of the intellectual development of this
period, which lay in the direction of dynamical, or physical,
astronomy.

Until the time of Kepler no one seems to have conceived the idea of
universal physical forces controlling terrestrial phenomena, and
equally applicable to the heavenly bodies. The grand discovery by
Kepler of the true relationship of the Sun to the Planets, and the
telescopic discoveries of Galileo and of those who followed him,
spread a spirit of inquiry and philosophic thought throughout Europe,
and once more did astronomy rise in estimation; and the irresistible
logic of its mathematical process of reasoning soon placed it in the
position it has ever since occupied as the foremost of the exact
sciences.

The practical application of this process of reasoning was enormously
facilitated by the invention of logarithms by Napier. He was born at
Merchistoun, near Edinburgh, in 1550, and died in 1617. By this system
the tedious arithmetical operations necessary in astronomical
calculations, especially those dealing with the trigonometrical
functions of angles, were so much simplified that Laplace declared
that by this invention the life-work of an astronomer was doubled.

Jeremiah Horrocks (born 1619, died 1641) was an ardent admirer of
Tycho Brahe and Kepler, and was able to improve the Rudolphine tables
so much that he foretold a transit of Venus, in 1639, which these
tables failed to indicate, and was the only observer of it. His life
was short, but he accomplished a great deal, and rightly ascribed the
lunar inequality called _evection_ to variations in the value of
the eccentricity and in the direction of the line of apses, at the
same time correctly assigning _the disturbing force of the Sun_
as the cause. He discovered the errors in Jupiter's calculated place,
due to what we now know as the long inequality of Jupiter and Saturn,
and measured with considerable accuracy the acceleration at that date
of Jupiter's mean motion, and indicated the retardation of Saturn's
mean motion.

Horrocks' investigations, so far as they could be collected, were
published posthumously in 1672, and seldom, if ever, has a man who
lived only twenty-two years originated so much scientific knowledge.

At this period British science received a lasting impetus by the wise
initiation of a much-abused man, Charles II., who founded the Royal
Society of London, and also the Royal Observatory of Greeenwich, where
he established Flamsteed as first Astronomer Royal, especially for
lunar and stellar observations likely to be useful for navigation. At
the same time the French Academy and the Paris Observatory were
founded. All this within fourteen years, 1662-1675.

Meanwhile gravitation in general terms was being discussed by Hooke,
Wren, Halley, and many others.  All of these men felt a repugnance to
accept the idea of a force acting across the empty void of space.
Descartes (1596-1650) proposed an ethereal medium whirling round the
sun with the planets, and having local whirls revolving with the
satellites. As Delambre and Grant have said, this fiction only
retarded the progress of pure science. It had no sort of relation to
the more modern, but equally misleading, "nebular hypothesis." While
many were talking and guessing, a giant mind was needed at this stage
to make things clear.



7. SIR ISAAC NEWTON--LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION.


We now reach the period which is the culminating point of interest in
the history of dynamical astronomy.  Isaac Newton was born in
1642. Pemberton states that Newton, having quitted Cambridge to avoid
the plague, was residing at Wolsthorpe, in Lincolnshire, where he had
been born; that he was sitting one day in the garden, reflecting upon
the force which prevents a planet from flying off at a tangent and
which draws it to the sun, and upon the force which draws the moon to
the earth; and that he saw in the case of the planets that the sun's
force must clearly be unequal at different distances, for the pull out
of the tangential line in a minute is less for Jupiter than for
Mars. He then saw that the pull of the earth on the moon would be less
than for a nearer object. It is said that while thus meditating he saw
an apple fall from a tree to the ground, and that this fact suggested
the questions: Is the force that pulled that apple from the tree the
same as the force which draws the moon to the earth?  Does the
attraction for both of them follow the same law as to distance as is
given by the planetary motions round the sun? It has been stated that
in this way the first conception of universal gravitation arose.[1]

Quite the most important event in the whole history of physical
astronomy was the publication, in 1687, of Newton's _Principia
(Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica)_. In this great work
Newton started from the beginning of things, the laws of motion, and
carried his argument, step by step, into every branch of physical
astronomy; giving the physical meaning of Kepler's three laws, and
explaining, or indicating the explanation of, all the known heavenly
motions and their irregularities; showing that all of these were
included in his simple statement about the law of universal
gravitation; and proceeding to deduce from that law new irregularities
in the motions of the moon which had never been noticed, and to
discover the oblate figure of the earth and the cause of the
tides. These investigations occupied the best part of his life; but he
wrote the whole of his great book in fifteen months.

Having developed and enunciated the true laws of motion, he was able
to show that Kepler's second law (that equal areas are described by
the line from the planet to the sun in equal times) was only another
way of saying that the centripetal force on a planet is always
directed to the sun. Also that Kepler's first law (elliptic orbits
with the sun in one focus) was only another way of saying that the
force urging a planet to the sun varies inversely as the square of the
distance. Also (if these two be granted) it follows that Kepler's
third law is only another way of saying that the sun's force on
different planets (besides depending as above on distance) is
proportional to their masses.

Having further proved the, for that day, wonderful proposition that,
with the law of inverse squares, the attraction by the separate
particles of a sphere of uniform density (or one composed of
concentric spherical shells, each of uniform density) acts as if the
whole mass were collected at the centre, he was able to express the
meaning of Kepler's laws in propositions which have been summarised as
follows:--

The law of universal gravitation.--_Every particle of matter in the
universe attracts every other particle with a force varying inversely
as the square of the distance between them, and directly as the
product of the masses of the two particles_.[2]

But Newton did not commit himself to the law until he had answered
that question about the apple; and the above proposition now enabled
him to deal with the Moon and the apple. Gravity makes a stone fall
16.1 feet in a second. The moon is 60 times farther from the earth's
centre than the stone, so it ought to be drawn out of a straight
course through 16.1 feet in a minute. Newton found the distance
through which she is actually drawn as a fraction of the earth's
diameter.  But when he first examined this matter he proceeded to use
a wrong diameter for the earth, and he found a serious discrepancy.
This, for a time, seemed to condemn his theory, and regretfully he
laid that part of his work aside. Fortunately, before Newton wrote the
_Principia_ the French astronomer Picard made a new and correct
measure of an arc of the meridian, from which he obtained an accurate
value of the earth's diameter. Newton applied this value, and found,
to his great joy, that when the distance of the moon is 60 times the
radius of the earth she is attracted out of the straight course 16.1
feet per minute, and that the force acting on a stone or an apple
follows the same law as the force acting upon the heavenly bodies.[3]

The universality claimed for the law--if not by Newton, at least by
his commentators--was bold, and warranted only by the large number of
cases in which Newton had found it to apply. Its universality has been
under test ever since, and so far it has stood the test. There has
often been a suspicion of a doubt, when some inequality of motion in
the heavenly bodies has, for a time, foiled the astronomers in their
attempts to explain it. But improved mathematical methods have always
succeeded in the end, and so the seeming doubt has been converted into
a surer conviction of the universality of the law.

Having once established the law, Newton proceeded to trace some of its
consequences. He saw that the figure of the earth depends partly on
the mutual gravitation of its parts, and partly on the centrifugal
tendency due to the earth's rotation, and that these should cause a
flattening of the poles. He invented a mathematical method which he
used for computing the ratio of the polar to the equatorial diameter.

He then noticed that the consequent bulging of matter at the equator
would be attracted by the moon unequally, the nearest parts being most
attracted; and so the moon would tend to tilt the earth when in some
parts of her orbit; and the sun would do this to a less extent,
because of its great distance. Then he proved that the effect ought to
be a rotation of the earth's axis over a conical surface in space,
exactly as the axis of a top describes a cone, if the top has a sharp
point, and is set spinning and displaced from the vertical. He
actually calculated the amount; and so he explained the cause of the
precession of the equinoxes discovered by Hipparchus about 150 B.C.

One of his grandest discoveries was a method of weighing the heavenly
bodies by their action on each other. By means of this principle he
was able to compare the mass of the sun with the masses of those
planets that have moons, and also to compare the mass of our moon with
the mass of the earth.

Thus Newton, after having established his great principle, devoted his
splendid intellect to the calculation of its consequences. He proved
that if a body be projected with any velocity in free space, subject
only to a central force, varying inversely as the square of the
distance, the body must revolve in a curve which may be any one of the
sections of a cone--a circle, ellipse, parabola, or hyperbola; and he
found that those comets of which he had observations move in parabolae
round the Sun, and are thus subject to the universal law.

Newton realised that, while planets and satellites are chiefly
controlled by the central body about which they revolve, the new law
must involve irregularities, due to their mutual action--such, in
fact, as Horrocks had indicated. He determined to put this to a test
in the case of the moon, and to calculate the sun's effect, from its
mass compared with that of the earth, and from its distance. He proved
that the average effect upon the plane of the orbit would be to cause
the line in which it cuts the plane of the ecliptic (i.e., the line of
nodes) to revolve in the ecliptic once in about nineteen years. This
had been a known fact from the earliest ages. He also concluded that
the line of apses would revolve in the plane of the lunar orbit also
in about nineteen years; but the observed period is only ten
years. For a long time this was the one weak point in the Newtonian
theory. It was not till 1747 that Clairaut reconciled this with the
theory, and showed why Newton's calculation was not exact.

Newton proceeded to explain the other inequalities recognised by Tycho
Brahe and older observers, and to calculate their maximum amounts as
indicated by his theory. He further discovered from his calculations
two new inequalities, one of the apogee, the other of the nodes, and
assigned the maximum value. Grant has shown the values of some of
these as given by observation in the tables of Meyer and more modern
tables, and has compared them with the values assigned by Newton from
his theory; and the comparison is very remarkable.

                                     Newton.      Modern Tables.
                                degrees '  "   degrees ' "
Mean monthly motion of Apses         1.31.28         3.4.0
Mean annual motion of nodes         19.18.1,23     19.21.22,50
Mean value of "variation"              36.10          35.47
Annual equation                        11.51          11.14
Inequality of mean motion of apogee    19.43          22.17
Inequality of mean motion of nodes      9.24           9.0

The only serious discrepancy is the first, which has been already
mentioned. Considering that some of these perturbations had never been
discovered, that the cause of none of them had ever been known, and
that he exhibited his results, if he did not also make the
discoveries, by the synthetic methods of geometry, it is simply
marvellous that he reached to such a degree of accuracy. He invented
the infinitesimal calculus which is more suited for such calculations,
but had he expressed his results in that language he would have been
unintelligible to many.

Newton's method of calculating the precession of the equinoxes,
already referred to, is as beautiful as anything in the _Principia_.
He had already proved the regression of the nodes of a satellite
moving in an orbit inclined to the ecliptic. He now said that the
nodes of a ring of satellites revolving round the earth's equator
would consequently all regress. And if joined into a solid ring its
node would regress; and it would do so, only more slowly, if
encumbered by the spherical part of the earth's mass. Therefore the
axis of the equatorial belt of the earth must revolve round the pole
of the ecliptic. Then he set to work and found the amount due to the
moon and that due to the sun, and so he solved the mystery of 2,000
years.

When Newton applied his law of gravitation to an explanation of the
tides he started a new field for the application of mathematics to
physical problems; and there can be little doubt that, if he could
have been furnished with complete tidal observations from different
parts of the world, his extraordinary powers of analysis would have
enabled him to reach a satisfactory theory. He certainly opened up
many mines full of intellectual gems; and his successors have never
ceased in their explorations. This has led to improved mathematical
methods, which, combined with the greater accuracy of observation,
have rendered physical astronomy of to-day the most exact of the
sciences.

Laplace only expressed the universal opinion of posterity when he said
that to the _Principia_ is assured "a pre-eminence above all the
other productions of the human intellect."

The name of Flamsteed, First Astronomer Royal, must here be mentioned
as having supplied Newton with the accurate data required for
completing the theory.

The name of Edmund Halley, Second Astronomer Royal, must ever be held
in repute, not only for his own discoveries, but for the part he
played in urging Newton to commit to writing, and present to the Royal
Society, the results of his investigations. But for his friendly
insistence it is possible that the _Principia_ would never have
been written; and but for his generosity in supplying the means the
Royal Society could not have published the book.

[Illustration: DEATH MASK OF SIR ISAAC NEWTON.
Photographed specially for this work from the original, by kind
permission of the Royal Society, London.]

Sir Isaac Newton died in 1727, at the age of eighty-five. His body
lay in state in the Jerusalem Chamber, and was buried in Westminster
Abbey.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The writer inherited from his father (Professor J. D. Forbes) a
small box containing a bit of wood and a slip of paper, which had been
presented to him by Sir David Brewster. On the paper Sir David had
written these words: "If there be any truth in the story that Newton
was led to the theory of gravitation by the fall of an apple, this bit
of wood is probably a piece of the apple tree from which Newton saw
the apple fall. When I was on a pilgrimage to the house in which
Newton was born, I cut it off an ancient apple tree growing in his
garden." When lecturing in Glasgow, about 1875, the writer showed it
to his audience. The next morning, when removing his property from the
lecture table, he found that his precious relic had been stolen. It
would be interesting to know who has got it now!

[2] It must be noted that these words, in which the laws of
gravitation are always summarised in histories and text-books, do not
appear in the _Principia_; but, though they must have been composed by
some early commentator, it does not appear that their origin has been
traced. Nor does it appear that Newton ever extended the law beyond
the Solar System, and probably his caution would have led him to avoid
any statement of the kind until it should be proved.

With this exception the above statement of the law of universal
gravitation contains nothing that is not to be found in the
_Principia_; and the nearest approach to that statement occurs in the
Seventh Proposition of Book III.:--

Prop.: That gravitation occurs in all bodies, and that it is
proportional to the quantity of matter in each.

Cor. I.: The total attraction of gravitation on a planet arises, and
is composed, out of the attraction on the separate parts.

Cor. II.: The attraction on separate equal particles of a body is
reciprocally as the square of the distance from the particles.

[3] It is said that, when working out this final result, the
probability of its confirming that part of his theory which he had
reluctantly abandoned years before excited him so keenly that he was
forced to hand over his calculations to a friend, to be completed by
him.



8. NEWTON'S SUCCESSORS--HALLEY, EULER, LAGRANGE, LAPLACE, ETC.


Edmund Halley succeeded Flamsteed as Second Astronomer Royal in
1721. Although he did not contribute directly to the mathematical
proofs of Newton's theory, yet his name is closely associated with
some of its greatest successes.

He was the first to detect the acceleration of the moon's mean
motion. Hipparchus, having compared his own observations with those of
more ancient astronomers, supplied an accurate value of the moon's
mean motion in his time. Halley similarly deduced a value for modern
times, and found it sensibly greater. He announced this in 1693, but
it was not until 1749 that Dunthorne used modern lunar tables to
compute a lunar eclipse observed in Babylon 721 B.C., another at
Alexandria 201 B.C., a solar eclipse observed by Theon 360 A.D., and
two later ones up to the tenth century. He found that to explain
these eclipses Halley's suggestion must be adopted, the acceleration
being 10" in one century. In 1757 Lalande again fixed it at 10."

The Paris Academy, in 1770, offered their prize for an investigation
to see if this could be explained by the theory of gravitation. Euler
won the prize, but failed to explain the effect, and said: "It appears
to be established by indisputable evidence that the secular inequality
of the moon's mean motion cannot be produced by the forces of
gravitation."

The same subject was again proposed for a prize which was shared by
Lagrange [1] and Euler, neither finding a solution, while the latter
asserted the existence of a resisting medium in space.

Again, in 1774, the Academy submitted the same subject, a third time,
for the prize; and again Lagrange failed to detect a cause in
gravitation.

Laplace [2] now took the matter in hand. He tried the effect of a
non-instantaneous action of gravity, to no purpose. But in 1787 he
gave the true explanation. The principal effect of the sun on the
moon's orbit is to diminish the earth's influence, thus lengthening
the period to a new value generally taken as constant. But Laplace's
calculations showed the new value to depend upon the excentricity of
the earth's orbit, which, according; to theory, has a periodical
variation of enormous period, and has been continually diminishing for
thousands of years. Thus the solar influence has been diminishing, and
the moon's mean motion increased. Laplace computed the amount at 10"
in one century, agreeing with observation. (Later on Adams showed that
Laplace's calculation was wrong, and that the value he found was too
large; so, part of the acceleration is now attributed by some
astronomers to a lengthening of the day by tidal friction.)

Another contribution by Halley to the verification of Newton's law was
made when he went to St. Helena to catalogue the southern stars. He
measured the change in length of the second's pendulum in different
latitudes due to the changes in gravity foretold by Newton.

Furthermore, he discovered the long inequality of Jupiter and Saturn,
whose period is 929 years. For an investigation of this also the
Academy of Sciences offered their prize. This led Euler to write a
valuable essay disclosing a new method of computing perturbations,
called the instantaneous ellipse with variable elements. The method
was much developed by Lagrange.

But again it was Laplace who solved the problem of the inequalities of
Jupiter and Saturn by the theory of gravitation, reducing the errors
of the tables from 20' down to 12", thus abolishing the use of
empirical corrections to the planetary tables, and providing another
glorious triumph for the law of gravitation. As Laplace justly said:
"These inequalities appeared formerly to be inexplicable by the law of
gravitation--they now form one of its most striking proofs."

Let us take one more discovery of Halley, furnishing directly a new
triumph for the theory. He noticed that Newton ascribed parabolic
orbits to the comets which he studied, so that they come from
infinity, sweep round the sun, and go off to infinity for ever, after
having been visible a few weeks or months. He collected all the
reliable observations of comets he could find, to the number of
twenty-four, and computed their parabolic orbits by the rules laid
down by Newton. His object was to find out if any of them really
travelled in elongated ellipses, practically undistinguishable, in the
visible part of their paths, from parabolae, in which case they would
be seen more than once. He found two old comets whose orbits, in shape
and position, resembled the orbit of a comet observed by himself in
1682. Apian observed one in 1531; Kepler the other in 1607. The
intervals between these appearances is seventy-five or seventy-six
years. He then examined and found old records of similar appearance in
1456, 1380, and 1305. It is true, he noticed, that the intervals
varied by a year and a-half, and the inclination of the orbit to the
ecliptic diminished with successive apparitions. But he knew from
previous calculations that this might easily be due to planetary
perturbations. Finally, he arrived at the conclusion that all of these
comets were identical, travelling in an ellipse so elongated that the
part where the comet was seen seemed to be part of a parabolic
orbit. He then predicted its return at the end of 1758 or beginning of
1759, when he should be dead; but, as he said, "if it should return,
according to our prediction, about the year 1758, impartial posterity
will not refuse to acknowledge that this was first discovered by an
Englishman."[3] [_Synopsis Astronomiae Cometicae_, 1749.]

Once again Halley's suggestion became an inspiration for the
mathematical astronomer. Clairaut, assisted by Lalande, found that
Saturn would retard the comet 100 days, Jupiter 518 days, and
predicted its return to perihelion on April 13th, 1759. In his
communication to the French Academy, he said that a comet travelling
into such distant regions might be exposed to the influence of forces
totally unknown, and "even of some planet too far removed from the sun
to be ever perceived."

The excitement of astronomers towards the end of 1758 became intense;
and the honour of first catching sight of the traveller fell to an
amateur in Saxony, George Palitsch, on Christmas Day, 1758. It reached
perihelion on March 13th, 1759.

This fact was a startling confirmation of the Newtonian theory,
because it was a new kind of calculation of perturbations, and also it
added a new member to the solar system, and gave a prospect of adding
many more.

When Halley's comet reappeared in 1835, Pontecoulant's computations
for the date of perihelion passage were very exact, and afterwards he
showed that, with more exact values of the masses of Jupiter and
Saturn, his prediction was correct within two days, after an invisible
voyage of seventy-five years!

Hind afterwards searched out many old appearances of this comet, going
back to 11 B.C., and most of these have been identified as being
really Halley's comet by the calculations of Cowell and Cromellin[4]
(of Greenwich Observatory), who have also predicted its next
perihelion passage for April 8th to 16th, 1910, and have traced back
its history still farther, to 240 B.C.

Already, in November, 1907, the Astronomer Royal was trying to catch
it by the aid of photography.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Born 1736; died 1813.

[2] Born 1749; died 1827.

[3] This sentence does not appear in the original memoir communicated
to the Royal Society, but was first published in a posthumous reprint.

[4] _R. A. S. Monthly Notices_, 1907-8.



9. DISCOVERY OF NEW PLANETS--HERSCHEL, PIAZZI, ADAMS, AND LE VERRIER.


It would be very interesting, but quite impossible in these pages, to
discuss all the exquisite researches of the mathematical astronomers,
and to inspire a reverence for the names connected with these
researches, which for two hundred years have been establishing the
universality of Newton's law. The lunar and planetary theories, the
beautiful theory of Jupiter's satellites, the figure of the earth, and
the tides, were mathematically treated by Maclaurin, D'Alembert,
Legendre, Clairaut, Euler, Lagrange, Laplace, Walmsley, Bailly,
Lalande, Delambre, Mayer, Hansen, Burchardt, Binet, Damoiseau, Plana,
Poisson, Gauss, Bessel, Bouvard, Airy, Ivory, Delaunay, Le Verrier,
Adams, and others of later date.

By passing over these important developments it is possible to trace
some of the steps in the crowning triumph of the Newtonian theory, by
which the planet Neptune was added to the known members of the solar
system by the independent researches of Professor J.C. Adams and of
M. Le Verrier, in 1846.

It will be best to introduce this subject by relating how the
eighteenth century increased the number of known planets, which was
then only six, including the earth.

On March 13th, 1781, Sir William Herschel was, as usual, engaged on
examining some small stars, and, noticing that one of them appeared to
be larger than the fixed stars, suspected that it might be a comet.
To test this he increased his magnifying power from 227 to 460 and
932, finding that, unlike the fixed stars near it, its definition was
impaired and its size increased. This convinced him that the object
was a comet, and he was not surprised to find on succeeding nights
that the position was changed, the motion being in the ecliptic. He
gave the observations of five weeks to the Royal Society without a
suspicion that the object was a new planet.

For a long time people could not compute a satisfactory orbit for the
supposed comet, because it seemed to be near the perihelion, and no
comet had ever been observed with a perihelion distance from the sun
greater than four times the earth's distance. Lexell was the first to
suspect that this was a new planet eighteen times as far from the sun
as the earth is. In January, 1783, Laplace published the elliptic
elements. The discoverer of a planet has a right to name it, so
Herschel called it Georgium Sidus, after the king. But Lalande urged
the adoption of the name Herschel. Bode suggested Uranus, and this
was adopted. The new planet was found to rank in size next to Jupiter
and Saturn, being 4.3 times the diameter of the earth.

In 1787 Herschel discovered two satellites, both revolving in nearly
the same plane, inclined 80 degrees to the ecliptic, and the motion of both
was retrograde.

In 1772, before Herschel's discovery, Bode[1] had discovered a curious
arbitrary law of planetary distances. Opposite each planet's name
write the figure 4; and, in succession, add the numbers 0, 3, 6, 12,
24, 48, 96, etc., to the 4, always doubling the last numbers. You
then get the planetary distances.

  Mercury, dist.-- 4  4 +   0 =   4
  Venus      "     7  4 +   3 =   7
  Earth      "    10  4 +   6 =  10
  Mars       "    15  4 +  12 =  16
   --                 4 +  24 =  28
  Jupiter  dist.  52  4 +  48 =  52
  Saturn     "    95  4 +  96 = 100
  (Uranus)   "   192  4 + 192 = 196
   --                 4 + 384 = 388

All the five planets, and the earth, fitted this rule, except that
there was a blank between Mars and Jupiter. When Uranus was
discovered, also fitting the rule, the conclusion was irresistible
that there is probably a planet between Mars and Jupiter. An
association of twenty-four astronomers was now formed in Germany to
search for the planet. Almost immediately afterwards the planet was
discovered, not by any member of the association, but by Piazzi, when
engaged upon his great catalogue of stars. On January 1st, 1801, he
observed a star which had changed its place the next night. Its motion
was retrograde till January 11th, direct after the 13th. Piazzi fell
ill before he had enough observations for computing the orbit with
certainty, and the planet disappeared in the sun's rays. Gauss
published an approximate ephemeris of probable positions when the
planet should emerge from the sun's light. There was an exciting hunt,
and on December 31st (the day before its birthday) De Zach captured
the truant, and Piazzi christened it Ceres.


The mean distance from the sun was found to be 2.767, agreeing with
the 2.8 given by Bode's law. Its orbit was found to be inclined over
10 degrees to the ecliptic, and its diameter was only 161 miles.

On March 28th, 1802, Olbers discovered a new seventh magnitude star,
which turned out to be a planet resembling Ceres. It was called
Pallas. Gauss found its orbit to be inclined 35 degrees to the
ecliptic, and to cut the orbit of Ceres; whence Olbers considered that
these might be fragments of a broken-up planet. He then commenced a
search for other fragments. In 1804 Harding discovered Juno, and in
1807 Olbers found Vesta. The next one was not discovered until 1845,
from which date asteroids, or minor planets (as these small planets
are called), have been found almost every year. They now number about
700.

It is impossible to give any idea of the interest with which the first
additions since prehistoric times to the planetary system were
received. All of those who showered congratulations upon the
discoverers regarded these discoveries in the light of rewards for
patient and continuous labours, the very highest rewards that could be
desired. And yet there remained still the most brilliant triumph of
all, the addition of another planet like Uranus, before it had ever
been seen, when the analysis of Adams and Le Verrier gave a final
proof of the powers of Newton's great law to explain any planetary
irregularity.

After Sir William Herschel discovered Uranus, in 1781, it was found
that astronomers had observed it on many previous occasions, mistaking
it for a fixed star of the sixth or seventh magnitude. Altogether,
nineteen observations of Uranus's position, from the time of
Flamsteed, in 1690, had been recorded.

In 1790 Delambre, using all these observations, prepared tables for
computing its position. These worked well enough for a time, but at
last the differences between the calculated and observed longitudes of
the planet became serious. In 1821 Bouvard undertook a revision of the
tables, but found it impossible to reconcile all the observations of
130 years (the period of revolution of Uranus is eighty-four years).
So he deliberately rejected the old ones, expressing the opinion that
the discrepancies might depend upon "some foreign and unperceived
cause which may have been acting upon the planet." In a few years the
errors even of these tables became intolerable. In 1835 the error of
longitude was 30"; in 1838, 50"; in 1841, 70"; and, by comparing the
errors derived from observations made before and after opposition, a
serious error of the distance (radius vector) became apparent.

In 1843 John Couch Adams came out Senior Wrangler at Cambridge, and
was free to undertake the research which as an undergraduate he had
set himself--to see whether the disturbances of Uranus could be
explained by assuming a certain orbit, and position in that orbit, of
a hypothetical planet even more distant than Uranus. Such an
explanation had been suggested, but until 1843 no one had the boldness
to attack the problem. Bessel had intended to try, but a fatal
illness overtook him.

Adams first recalculated all known causes of disturbance, using the
latest determinations of the planetary masses. Still the errors were
nearly as great as ever. He could now, however, use these errors as
being actually due to the perturbations produced by the unknown
planet.

In 1844, assuming a circular orbit, and a mean distance agreeing with
Bode's law, he obtained a first approximation to the position of the
supposed planet. He then asked Professor Challis, of Cambridge, to
procure the latest observations of Uranus from Greenwich, which Airy
immediately supplied. Then the whole work was recalculated from the
beginning, with more exactness, and assuming a smaller mean distance.

In September, 1845, he handed to Challis the elements of the
hypothetical planet, its mass, and its apparent position for September
30th, 1845. On September 22nd Challis wrote to Airy explaining the
matter, and declaring his belief in Adams's capabilities. When Adams
called on him Airy was away from home, but at the end of October,
1845, he called again, and left a paper with full particulars of his
results, which had, for the most part, reduced the discrepancies to
about 1". As a matter of fact, it has since been found that the
heliocentric place of the new planet then given was correct within
about 2 degrees.

Airy wrote expressing his interest, and asked for particulars about
the radius vector. Adams did not then reply, as the answer to this
question could be seen to be satisfactory by looking at the data
already supplied. He was a most unassuming man, and would not push
himself forward. He may have felt, after all the work he had done,
that Airy's very natural inquiry showed no proportionate desire to
search for the planet. Anyway, the matter lay in embryo for nine
months.

Meanwhile, one of the ablest French astronomers, Le Verrier,
experienced in computing perturbations, was independently at work,
knowing nothing about Adams. He applied to his calculations every
possible refinement, and, considering the novelty of the problem, his
calculation was one of the most brilliant in the records of
astronomy. In criticism it has been said that these were exhibitions
of skill rather than helps to a solution of the particular problem,
and that, in claiming to find the elements of the orbit within certain
limits, he was claiming what was, under the circumstances, impossible,
as the result proved.

In June, 1846, Le Verrier announced, in the _Comptes Rendus de
l'Academie des Sciences_, that the longitude of the disturbing planet,
for January 1st, 1847, was 325, and that the probable error did not
exceed 10 degrees.

This result agreed so well with Adams's (within 1 degrees) that Airy urged
Challis to apply the splendid Northumberland equatoreal, at Cambridge,
to the search. Challis, however, had already prepared an exhaustive
plan of attack which must in time settle the point. His first work
was to observe, and make a catalogue, or chart, of all stars near
Adams's position.

On August 31st, 1846, Le Verrier published the concluding
part of his labours.

On September 18th, 1846, Le Verrier communicated his results to the
Astronomers at Berlin, and asked them to assist in searching for the
planet. By good luck Dr. Bremiker had just completed a star-chart of
the very part of the heavens including Le Verrier's position; thus
eliminating all of Challis's preliminary work. The letter was received
in Berlin on September 23rd; and the same evening Galle found the new
planet, of the eighth magnitude, the size of its disc agreeing with Le
Verrier's prediction, and the heliocentric longitude agreeing within
57'. By this time Challis had recorded, without reduction, the
observations of 3,150 stars, as a commencement for his search. On
reducing these, he found a star, observed on August 12th, which was
not in the same place on July 30th. This was the planet, and he had
also observed it on August 4th.

The feeling of wonder, admiration, and enthusiasm aroused by this
intellectual triumph was overwhelming. In the world of astronomy
reminders are met every day of the terrible limitations of human
reasoning powers; and every success that enables the mind's eye to see
a little more clearly the meaning of things has always been heartily
welcomed by those who have themselves been engaged in like
researches. But, since the publication of the _Principia_, in 1687,
there is probably no analytical success which has raised among
astronomers such a feeling of admiration and gratitude as when Adams
and Le Verrier showed the inequalities in Uranus's motion to mean that
an unknown planet was in a certain place in the heavens, where it was
found.

At the time there was an unpleasant display of international jealousy.
The British people thought that the earlier date of Adams's work, and
of the observation by Challis, entitled him to at least an equal share
of credit with Le Verrier. The French, on the other hand, who, on the
announcement of the discovery by Galle, glowed with pride in the new
proof of the great powers of their astronomer, Le Verrier, whose life
had a long record of successes in calculation, were incredulous on
being told that it had all been already done by a young man whom they
had never heard of.

These displays of jealousy have long since passed away, and there is
now universally an _entente cordiale_ that to each of these great men
belongs equally the merit of having so thoroughly calculated this
inverse problem of perturbations as to lead to the immediate discovery
of the unknown planet, since called Neptune.

It was soon found that the planet had been observed, and its position
recorded as a fixed star by Lalande, on May 8th and 10th, 1795.

Mr. Lassel, in the same year, 1846, with his two-feet reflector,
discovered a satellite, with retrograde motion, which gave the mass of
the planet about a twentieth of that of Jupiter.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Bode's law, or something like it, had already been fore-shadowed
by Kepler and others, especially Titius (see _Monatliche
Correspondenz_, vol. vii., p. 72).




BOOK III. OBSERVATION



10. INSTRUMENTS OF PRECISION--STATE OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM.


Having now traced the progress of physical astronomy up to the time
when very striking proofs of the universality of the law of
gravitation convinced the most sceptical, it must still be borne in
mind that, while gravitation is certainly the principal force
governing the motions of the heavenly bodies, there may yet be a
resisting medium in space, and there may be electric and magnetic
forces to deal with. There may, further, be cases where the effects of
luminous radiative repulsion become apparent, and also Crookes'
vacuum-effects described as "radiant matter." Nor is it quite certain
that Laplace's proofs of the instantaneous propagation of gravity are
final.

And in the future, as in the past, Tycho Brahe's dictum must be
maintained, that all theory shall be preceded by accurate
observations. It is the pride of astronomers that their science stands
above all others in the accuracy of the facts observed, as well as in
the rigid logic of the mathematics used for interpreting these facts.

It is interesting to trace historically the invention of those
instruments of precision which have led to this result, and, without
entering on the details required in a practical handbook, to note the
guiding principles of construction in different ages.

It is very probable that the Chaldeans may have made spheres, like the
armillary sphere, for representing the poles of the heavens; and with
rings to show the ecliptic and zodiac, as well as the equinoctial and
solstitial colures; but we have no record. We only know that the tower
of Belus, on an eminence, was their observatory. We have, however,
distinct records of two such spheres used by the Chinese about 2500
B.C. Gnomons, or some kind of sundial, were used by the Egyptians and
others; and many of the ancient nations measured the obliquity of the
ecliptic by the shadows of a vertical column in summer and winter. The
natural horizon was the only instrument of precision used by those who
determined star positions by the directions of their risings and
settings; while in those days the clepsydra, or waterclock, was the
best instrument for comparing their times of rising and setting.

About 300 B.C. an observatory fitted with circular instruments for
star positions was set up at Alexandria, the then centre of
civilisation. We know almost nothing about the instruments used by
Hipparchus in preparing his star catalogues and his lunar and solar
tables; but the invention of the astrolabe is attributed to him.[1]

In more modern times Nuremberg became a centre of astronomical
culture. Waltherus, of that town, made really accurate observations of
star altitudes, and of the distances between stars; and in 1484
A.D. he used a kind of clock. Tycho Brahe tried these, but discarded
them as being inaccurate.

Tycho Brahe (1546-1601 A.D.) made great improvements in armillary
spheres, quadrants, sextants, and large celestial globes. With these
he measured the positions of stars, or the distance of a comet from
several known stars. He has left us full descriptions of them,
illustrated by excellent engravings. Previous to his time such
instruments were made of wood. Tycho always used metal. He paid the
greatest attention to the stability of mounting, to the orientation of
his instruments, to the graduation of the arcs by the then new method
of transversals, and to the aperture sight used upon his
pointer. There were no telescopes in his day, and no pendulum
clocks. He recognised the fact that there must be instrumental
errors. He made these as small as was possible, measured their amount,
and corrected his observations. His table of refractions enabled him
to abolish the error due to our atmosphere so far as it could affect
naked-eye observations. The azimuth circle of Tycho's largest quadrant
had a diameter of nine feet, and the quadrant a radius of six feet. He
introduced the mural quadrant for meridian observations.[2]

[Illustration: ANCIENT CHINESE INSTRUMENTS, Including quadrant, celestial
globe, and two armillae, in the Observatory at Peking. Photographed in
Peking by the author in 1875, and stolen by the Germans when the
Embassies were relieved by the allies in 1900.]

The French Jesuits at Peking, in the seventeenth century, helped the
Chinese in their astronomy. In 1875 the writer saw and photographed,
on that part of the wall of Peking used by the Mandarins as an
observatory, the six instruments handsomely designed by Father
Verbiest, copied from the instruments of Tycho Brahe, and embellished
with Chinese dragons and emblems cast on the supports. He also saw
there two old instruments (which he was told were Arabic) of date
1279, by Ko Show-King, astronomer to Koblai Khan, the grandson of
Chenghis Khan. One of these last is nearly identical with the armillae
of Tycho; and the other with his "armillae aequatoriae maximae," with
which he observed the comet of 1585, besides fixed stars and
planets.[3]

The discovery by Galileo of the isochronism of the pendulum, followed
by Huyghens's adaptation of that principle to clocks, has been one of
the greatest aids to accurate observation. About the same time an
equally beneficial step was the employment of the telescope as a
pointer; not the Galilean with concave eye-piece, but with a
magnifying glass to examine the focal image, at which also a fixed
mark could be placed. Kepler was the first to suggest this. Gascoigne
was the first to use it. Huyghens used a metal strip of variable width
in the focus, as a micrometer to cover a planetary disc, and so to
measure the width covered by the planet. The Marquis Malvasia, in
1662, described the network of fine silver threads at right angles,
which he used in the focus, much as we do now.

In the hands of such a skilful man as Tycho Brahe, the old open
sights, even without clocks, served their purpose sufficiently well to
enable Kepler to discover the true theory of the solar system. But
telescopic sights and clocks were required for proving some of
Newton's theories of planetary perturbations. Picard's observations at
Paris from 1667 onwards seem to embody the first use of the telescope
as a pointer. He was also the first to introduce the use of Huyghens's
clocks for observing the right ascension of stars. Olaus Romer was
born at Copenhagen in 1644. In 1675, by careful study of the times of
eclipses of Jupiter's satellites, he discovered that light took time
to traverse space. Its velocity is 186,000 miles per second. In 1681
he took up his duties as astronomer at Copenhagen, and built the first
transit circle on a window-sill of his house. The iron axis was five
feet long and one and a-half inches thick, and the telescope was fixed
near one end with a counterpoise. The telescope-tube was a double
cone, to prevent flexure. Three horizontal and three vertical wires
were used in the focus. These were illuminated by a speculum, near the
object-glass, reflecting the light from a lantern placed over the
axis, the upper part of the telescope-tube being partly cut away to
admit the light. A divided circle, with pointer and reading
microscope, was provided for reading the declination. He realised the
superiority of a circle with graduations over a much larger
quadrant. The collimation error was found by reversing the instrument
and using a terrestrial mark, the azimuth error by star observations.
The time was expressed in fractions of a second. He also constructed a
telescope with equatoreal mounting, to follow a star by one axial
motion. In 1728 his instruments and observation records were destroyed
by fire.

Hevelius had introduced the vernier and tangent screw in his
measurement of arc graduations. His observatory and records were burnt
to the ground in 1679. Though an old man, he started afresh, and left
behind him a catalogue of 1,500 stars.

Flamsteed began his duties at Greenwich Observatory, as first
Astronomer Royal, in 1676, with very poor instruments. In 1683 he put
up a mural arc of 140 degrees, and in 1689 a better one, seventy-nine
inches radius. He conducted his measurements with great skill, and
introduced new methods to attain accuracy, using certain stars for
determining the errors of his instruments; and he always reduced his
observations to a form in which they could be readily used. He
introduced new methods for determining the position of the equinox and
the right ascension of a fundamental star. He produced a catalogue of
2,935 stars. He supplied Sir Isaac Newton with results of observation
required in his theoretical calculations. He died in 1719.

Halley succeeded Flamsteed to find that the whole place had been
gutted by the latter's executors. In 1721 he got a transit instrument,
and in 1726 a mural quadrant by Graham. His successor in 1742,
Bradley, replaced this by a fine brass quadrant, eight feet radius, by
Bird; and Bradley's zenith sector was purchased for the observatory.
An instrument like this, specially designed for zenith stars, is
capable of greater rigidity than a more universal instrument; and
there is no trouble with refraction in the zenith. For these reasons
Bradley had set up this instrument at Kew, to attempt the proof of the
earth's motion by observing the annual parallax of stars. He certainly
found an annual variation of zenith distance, but not at the times of
year required by the parallax. This led him to the discovery of the
"aberration" of light and of nutation. Bradley has been described as
the founder of the modern system of accurate observation. He died in
1762, leaving behind him thirteen folio volumes of valuable but
unreduced observations. Those relating to the stars were reduced by
Bessel and published in 1818, at Konigsberg, in his well-known
standard work, _Fundamenta Astronomiae_. In it are results showing the
laws of refraction, with tables of its amount, the maximum value of
aberration, and other constants.

Bradley was succeeded by Bliss, and he by Maskelyne (1765), who
carried on excellent work, and laid the foundations of the Nautical
Almanac (1767). Just before his death he induced the Government to
replace Bird's quadrant by a fine new mural _circle_, six feet in
diameter, by Troughton, the divisions being read off by microscopes
fixed on piers opposite to the divided circle. In this instrument the
micrometer screw, with a divided circle for turning it, was applied
for bringing the micrometer wire actually in line with a division on
the circle--a plan which is still always adopted.

Pond succeeded Maskelyne in 1811, and was the first to use this
instrument. From now onwards the places of stars were referred to the
pole, not to the zenith; the zero being obtained from measures on
circumpolar stars. Standard stars were used for giving the clock
error. In 1816 a new transit instrument, by Troughton, was added, and
from this date the Greenwich star places have maintained the very
highest accuracy.

George Biddell Airy, Seventh Astronomer Royal,[4] commenced his
Greenwich labours in 1835. His first and greatest reformation in the
work of the observatory was one he had already established at
Cambridge, and is now universally adopted. He held that an observation
is not completed until it has been reduced to a useful form; and in
the case of the sun, moon, and planets these results were, in every
case, compared with the tables, and the tabular error printed.

Airy was firmly impressed with the object for which Charles II. had
wisely founded the observatory in connection with navigation, and for
observations of the moon. Whenever a meridian transit of the moon
could be observed this was done. But, even so, there are periods in
the month when the moon is too near the sun for a transit to be well
observed. Also weather interferes with many meridian observations. To
render the lunar observations more continuous, Airy employed
Troughton's successor, James Simms, in conjunction with the engineers,
Ransome and May, to construct an altazimuth with three-foot circles,
and a five-foot telescope, in 1847. The result was that the number of
lunar observations was immediately increased threefold, many of them
being in a part of the moon's orbit which had previously been bare of
observations. From that date the Greenwich lunar observations have
been a model and a standard for the whole world.

Airy also undertook to superintend the reduction of all Greenwich
lunar observations from 1750 to 1830. The value of this laborious
work, which was completed in 1848, cannot be over-estimated.

The demands of astronomy, especially in regard to small minor planets,
required a transit instrument and mural circle with a more powerful
telescope. Airy combined the functions of both, and employed the same
constructors as before to make a _transit-circle_ with a telescope of
eleven and a-half feet focus and a circle of six-feet diameter, the
object-glass being eight inches in diameter.

Airy, like Bradley, was impressed with the advantage of employing
stars in the zenith for determining the fundamental constants of
astronomy. He devised a _reflex zenith tube_, in which the zenith
point was determined by reflection from a surface of mercury. The
design was so simple, and seemed so perfect, that great expectations
were entertained. But unaccountable variations comparable with those
of the transit circle appeared, and the instrument was put out of use
until 1903, when the present Astronomer Royal noticed that the
irregularities could be allowed for, being due to that remarkable
variation in the position of the earth's axis included in circles of
about six yards diameter at the north and south poles, discovered at
the end of the nineteenth century. The instrument is now being used
for investigating these variations; and in the year 1907 as many as
1,545 observations of stars were made with the reflex zenith tube.

In connection with zenith telescopes it must be stated that Respighi,
at the Capitol Observatory at Rome, made use of a deep well with a
level mercury surface at the bottom and a telescope at the top
pointing downwards, which the writer saw in 1871. The reflection of
the micrometer wires and of a star very near the zenith (but not quite
in the zenith) can be observed together. His mercury trough was a
circular plane surface with a shallow edge to retain the mercury. The
surface quickly came to rest after disturbance by street traffic.

Sir W. M. H. Christie, Eighth Astronomer Royal, took up his duties in
that capacity in 1881. Besides a larger altazimuth that he erected in
1898, he has widened the field of operations at Greenwich by the
extensive use of photography and the establishment of large
equatoreals. From the point of view of instruments of precision, one
of the most important new features is the astrographic equatoreal, set
up in 1892 and used for the Greenwich section of the great
astrographic chart just completed. Photography has come to be of use,
not only for depicting the sun and moon, comets and nebulae, but also
to obtain accurate relative positions of neighbouring stars; to pick
up objects that are invisible in any telescope; and, most of all
perhaps, in fixing the positions of faint satellites. Thus Saturn's
distant satellite, Phoebe, and the sixth and seventh satellites of
Jupiter, have been followed regularly in their courses at Greenwich
ever since their discovery with the thirty-inch reflector (erected in
1897); and while doing so Mr. Melotte made, in 1908, the splendid
discovery on some of the photographic plates of an eighth satellite of
Jupiter, at an enormous distance from the planet. From observations in
the early part of 1908, over a limited arc of its orbit, before
Jupiter approached the sun, Mr. Cowell computed a retrograde orbit and
calculated the future positions of this satellite, which enabled
Mr. Melotte to find it again in the autumn--a great triumph both of
calculation and of photographic observation. This satellite has never
been seen, and has been photographed only at Greenwich, Heidelberg,
and the Lick Observatory.

Greenwich Observatory has been here selected for tracing the progress
of accurate measurement. But there is one instrument of great value,
the heliometer, which is not used at Greenwich. This serves the
purpose of a double image micrometer, and is made by dividing the
object-glass of a telescope along a diameter. Each half is mounted so
as to slide a distance of several inches each way on an arc whose
centre is the focus. The amount of the movement can be accurately
read. Thus two fields of view overlap, and the adjustment is made to
bring an image of one star over that of another star, and then to do
the same by a displacement in the opposite direction. The total
movement of the half-object glass is double the distance between the
star images in the focal plane. Such an instrument has long been
established at Oxford, and German astronomers have made great use of
it. But in the hands of Sir David Gill (late His Majesty's Astronomer
at the Cape of Good Hope), and especially in his great researches on
Solar and on Stellar parallax, it has been recognised as an instrument
of the very highest accuracy, measuring the distance between stars
correctly to less than a tenth of a second of arc.

The superiority of the heliometer over all other devices (except
photography) for measuring small angles has been specially brought
into prominence by Sir David Gill's researches on the distance of the
sun--_i.e.,_ the scale of the solar system. A measurement of the
distance of any planet fixes the scale, and, as Venus approaches the
earth most nearly of all the planets, it used to be supposed that a
Transit of Venus offered the best opportunity for such measurement,
especially as it was thought that, as Venus entered on the solar disc,
the sweep of light round the dark disc of Venus would enable a very
precise observation to be made. The Transit of Venus in 1874, in
which the present writer assisted, overthrew this delusion.

In 1877 Sir David Gill used Lord Crawford's heliometer at the Island
of Ascension to measure the parallax of Mars in opposition, and found
the sun's distance 93,080,000 miles. He considered that, while the
superiority of the heliometer had been proved, the results would be
still better with the points of light shown by minor planets rather
than with the disc of Mars.

In 1888-9, at the Cape, he observed the minor planets Iris, Victoria,
and Sappho, and secured the co-operation of four other heliometers.
His final result was 92,870,000 miles, the parallax being 8",802
(_Cape Obs_., Vol. VI.).

So delicate were these measures that Gill detected a minute periodic
error of theory of twenty-seven days, owing to a periodically
erroneous position of the centre of gravity of the earth and moon to
which the position of the observer was referred. This led him to
correct the mass of the moon, and to fix its ratio to the earth's mass
= 0.012240.

Another method of getting the distance from the sun is to measure the
velocity of the earth's orbital motion, giving the circumference
traversed in a year, and so the radius of the orbit. This has been
done by comparing observation and experiment. The aberration of light
is an angle 20" 48, giving the ratio of the earth's velocity to the
velocity of light. The velocity of light is 186,000 miles a second;
whence the distance to the sun is 92,780,000 miles. There seems,
however, to be some uncertainty about the true value of the
aberration, any determination of which is subject to irregularities
due to the "seasonal errors." The velocity of light was experimentally
found, in 1862, by Fizeau and Foucault, each using an independent
method. These methods have been developed, and new values found, by
Cornu, Michaelson, Newcomb, and the present writer.

Quite lately Halm, at the Cape of Good Hope, measured
spectroscopically the velocity of the earth to and from a star by
observations taken six months apart. Thence he obtained an accurate
value of the sun's distance.[5]

But the remarkably erratic minor planet, Eros, discovered by Witte in
1898, approaches the earth within 15,000,000 miles at rare intervals,
and, with the aid of photography, will certainly give us the best
result. A large number of observatories combined to observe the
opposition of 1900. Their results are not yet completely reduced, but
the best value deduced so far for the parallax[6] is 8".807 +/-
0".0028.[7]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] In 1480 Martin Behaim, of Nuremberg, produced his _astrolabe_ for
measuring the latitude, by observation of the sun, at sea. It
consisted of a graduated metal circle, suspended by a ring which was
passed over the thumb, and hung vertically. A pointer was fixed to a
pin at the centre. This arm, called the _alhidada_, worked round the
graduated circle, and was pointed to the sun. The altitude of the sun
was thus determined, and, by help of solar tables, the latitude could
be found from observations made at apparent noon.

[2] See illustration on p. 76.

[3] See Dreyer's article on these instruments in _Copernicus_,
Vol. I. They were stolen by the Germans after the relief of the
Embassies, in 1900. The best description of these instruments is
probably that contained in an interesting volume, which may be seen in
the library of the R. A. S., entitled _Chinese Researches_, by
Alexander Wyllie (Shanghai, 1897).

[4] Sir George Airy was very jealous of this honourable title. He
rightly held that there is only one Astronomer Royal at a time, as
there is only one Mikado, one Dalai Lama. He said that His Majesty's
Astronomer at the Cape of Good Hope, His Majesty's Astronomer for
Scotland, and His Majesty's Astronomer for Ireland are not called
Astronomers Royal.

[5] _Annals of the Cape Observatory_, vol. x., part 3.

[6] The parallax of the sun is the angle subtended by the earth's
radius at the sun's distance.

[7] A. R. Hinks, R.A.S.; _Monthly Notices_, June, 1909.



11. HISTORY OF THE TELESCOPE


Accounts of wonderful optical experiments by Roger Bacon (who died in
1292), and in the sixteenth century by Digges, Baptista Porta, and
Antonio de Dominis (Grant, _Hist. Ph. Ast_.), have led some to
suppose that they invented the telescope. The writer considers that it
is more likely that these notes refer to a kind of _camera
obscura_, in which a lens throws an inverted image of a landscape
on the wall.

The first telescopes were made in Holland, the originator being either
Henry Lipperhey,[1] Zacharias Jansen, or James Metius, and the date
1608 or earlier.

In 1609 Galileo, being in Venice, heard of the invention, went home
and worked out the theory, and made a similar telescope. These
telescopes were all made with a convex object-glass and a concave
eye-lens, and this type is spoken of as the Galilean telescope. Its
defects are that it has no real focus where cross-wires can be placed,
and that the field of view is very small. Kepler suggested the convex
eye-lens in 1611, and Scheiner claimed to have used one in 1617. But
it was Huyghens who really introduced them. In the seventeenth century
telescopes were made of great length, going up to 300 feet. Huyghens
also invented the compound eye-piece that bears his name, made of two
convex lenses to diminish spherical aberration.

But the defects of colour remained, although their cause was unknown
until Newton carried out his experiments on dispersion and the solar
spectrum. To overcome the spherical aberration James Gregory,[2] of
Aberdeen and Edinburgh, in 1663, in his _Optica Promota_,
proposed a reflecting speculum of parabolic form. But it was Newton,
about 1666, who first made a reflecting telescope; and he did it with
the object of avoiding colour dispersion.

Some time elapsed before reflectors were much used. Pound and Bradley
used one presented to the Royal Society by Hadley in 1723. Hawksbee,
Bradley, and Molyneaux made some. But James Short, of Edinburgh, made
many excellent Gregorian reflectors from 1732 till his death in 1768.

Newton's trouble with refractors, chromatic aberration, remained
insurmountable until John Dollond (born 1706, died 1761), after many
experiments, found out how to make an achromatic lens out of two
lenses--one of crown glass, the other of flint glass--to destroy the
colour, in a way originally suggested by Euler. He soon acquired a
great reputation for his telescopes of moderate size; but there was a
difficulty in making flint-glass lenses of large size. The first
actual inventor and constructor of an achromatic telescope was Chester
Moor Hall, who was not in trade, and did not patent it. Towards the
close of the eighteenth century a Swiss named Guinand at last
succeeded in producing larger flint-glass discs free from
striae. Frauenhofer, of Munich, took him up in 1805, and soon
produced, among others, Struve's Dorpat refractor of 9.9 inches
diameter and 13.5 feet focal length, and another, of 12 inches
diameter and 18 feet focal length, for Lamont, of Munich.

In the nineteenth century gigantic _reflectors_ have been
made. Lassel's 2-foot reflector, made by himself, did much good work,
and discovered four new satellites. But Lord Rosse's 6-foot
reflector, 54 feet focal length, constructed in 1845, is still the
largest ever made. The imperfections of our atmosphere are against
the use of such large apertures, unless it be on high mountains.
During the last half century excellent specula have been made of
silvered glass, and Dr. Common's 5-foot speculum (removed, since his
death, to Harvard) has done excellent work. Then there are the 5-foot
Yerkes reflector at Chicago, and the 4-foot by Grubb at Melbourne.

Passing now from these large reflectors to refractors, further
improvements have been made in the manufacture of glass by Chance, of
Birmingham, Feil and Mantois, of Paris, and Schott, of Jena; while
specialists in grinding lenses, like Alvan Clark, of the U.S.A., and
others, have produced many large refractors.

Cooke, of York, made an object-glass, 25-inch diameter, for Newall, of
Gateshead, which has done splendid work at Cambridge. We have the
Washington 26-inch by Clark, the Vienna 27-inch by Grubb, the Nice
29-1/2-inch by Gautier, the Pulkowa 30-inch by Clark. Then there was
the sensation of Clark's 36-inch for the Lick Observatory in
California, and finally his _tour de force_, the Yerkes 40-inch
refractor, for Chicago.

At Greenwich there is the 28-inch photographic refractor, and the
Thompson equatoreal by Grubb, carrying both the 26-inch photographic
refractor and the 30-inch reflector. At the Cape of Good Hope we find
Mr. Frank McClean's 24-inch refractor, with an object-glass prism for
spectroscopic work.

It would be out of place to describe here the practical adjuncts of a
modern equatoreal--the adjustments for pointing it, the clock for
driving it, the position-micrometer and various eye-pieces, the
photographic and spectroscopic attachments, the revolving domes,
observing seats, and rising floors and different forms of mounting,
the siderostats and coelostats, and other convenient adjuncts, besides
the registering chronograph and numerous facilities for aiding
observation. On each of these a chapter might be written; but the
most important part of the whole outfit is the man behind the
telescope, and it is with him that a history is more especially
concerned.


SPECTROSCOPE.

Since the invention of the telescope no discovery has given so great
an impetus to astronomical physics as the spectroscope; and in giving
us information about the systems of stars and their proper motions it
rivals the telescope.

Frauenhofer, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, while
applying Dollond's discovery to make large achromatic telescopes,
studied the dispersion of light by a prism. Admitting the light of the
sun through a narrow slit in a window-shutter, an inverted image of
the slit can be thrown, by a lens of suitable focal length, on the
wall opposite. If a wedge or prism of glass be interposed, the image
is deflected to one side; but, as Newton had shown, the images formed
by the different colours of which white light is composed are
deflected to different extents--the violet most, the red least. The
number of colours forming images is so numerous as to form a
continuous spectrum on the wall with all the colours--red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet. But Frauenhofer found with a
narrow slit, well focussed by the lens, that some colours were missing
in the white light of the sun, and these were shown by dark lines
across the spectrum. These are the Frauenhofer lines, some of which
he named by the letters of the alphabet. The D line is a very marked
one in the yellow. These dark lines in the solar spectrum had already
been observed by Wollaston. [3]

On examining artificial lights it was found that incandescent solids
and liquids (including the carbon glowing in a white gas flame) give
continuous spectra; gases, except under enormous pressure, give bright
lines. If sodium or common salt be thrown on the colourless flame of a
spirit lamp, it gives it a yellow colour, and its spectrum is a bright
yellow line agreeing in position with line D of the solar spectrum.

In 1832 Sir David Brewster found some of the solar black lines
increased in strength towards sunset, and attributed them to
absorption in the earth's atmosphere. He suggested that the others
were due to absorption in the sun's atmosphere. Thereupon Professor
J. D. Forbes pointed out that during a nearly total eclipse the lines
ought to be strengthened in the same way; as that part of the sun's
light, coming from its edge, passes through a great distance in the
sun's atmosphere. He tried this with the annular eclipse of 1836,
with a negative result which has never been accounted for, and which
seemed to condemn Brewster's view.

In 1859 Kirchoff, on repeating Frauenhofer's experiment, found that,
if a spirit lamp with salt in the flame were placed in the path of the
light, the black D line is intensified. He also found that, if he used
a limelight instead of the sunlight and passed it through the flame
with salt, the spectrum showed the D line black; or the vapour of
sodium absorbs the same light that it radiates. This proved to him the
existence of sodium in the sun's atmosphere.[4] Iron, calcium, and
other elements were soon detected in the same way.

Extensive laboratory researches (still incomplete) have been carried
out to catalogue (according to their wave-length on the undulatory
theory of light) all the lines of each chemical element, under all
conditions of temperature and pressure. At the same time, all the
lines have been catalogued in the light of the sun and the brighter of
the stars.

Another method of obtaining spectra had long been known, by
transmission through, or reflection from, a grating of equidistant
lines ruled upon glass or metal. H. A. Rowland developed the art of
constructing these gratings, which requires great technical skill, and
for this astronomers owe him a debt of gratitude.

In 1842 Doppler[5] proved that the colour of a luminous body, like the
pitch or note of a sounding body, must be changed by velocity of
approach or recession. Everyone has noticed on a railway that, on
meeting a locomotive whistling, the note is lowered after the engine
has passed. The pitch of a sound or the colour of a light depends on
the number of waves striking the ear or eye in a second. This number
is increased by approach and lowered by recession.

Thus, by comparing the spectrum of a star alongside a spectrum of
hydrogen, we may see all the lines, and be sure that there is hydrogen
in the star; yet the lines in the star-spectrum may be all slightly
displaced to one side of the lines of the comparison spectrum. If
towards the violet end, it means mutual approach of the star and
earth; if to the red end, it means recession. The displacement of
lines does not tell us whether the motion is in the star, the earth,
or both. The displacement of the lines being measured, we can
calculate the rate of approach or recession in miles per second.

In 1868 Huggins[6] succeeded in thus measuring the velocities of stars
in the direction of the line of sight.

In 1873 Vogel[7] compared the spectra of the sun's East (approaching)
limb and West (receding) limb, and the displacement of lines endorsed
the theory. This last observation was suggested by Zollner.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] In the _Encyclopaedia Britannica_, article "Telescope," and in
Grant's _Physical Astronomy_, good reasons are given for awarding the
honour to Lipperhey.

[2] Will the indulgent reader excuse an anecdote which may encourage
some workers who may have found their mathematics defective through
want of use? James Gregory's nephew David had a heap of MS. notes by
Newton. These descended to a Miss Gregory, of Edinburgh, who handed
them to the present writer, when an undergraduate at Cambridge, to
examine. After perusal, he lent them to his kindest of friends,
J. C. Adams (the discoverer of Neptune), for his opinion. Adams's
final verdict was: "I fear they are of no value. It is pretty evident
that, when he wrote these notes, _Newton's mathematics were a little
rusty_."

[3] _R. S. Phil. Trans_.

[4] The experiment had been made before by one who did not understand
its meaning;. But Sir George G. Stokes had already given verbally the
true explanation of Frauenhofer lines.

[5] _Abh. d. Kon. Bohm. d. Wiss_., Bd. ii., 1841-42, p. 467. See
also Fizeau in the _Ann. de Chem. et de Phys_., 1870, p. 211.

[6] _R. S. Phil. Trans_., 1868.

[7] _Ast. Nach_., No. 1, 864.




BOOK IV. THE PHYSICAL PERIOD


We have seen how the theory of the solar system was slowly developed
by the constant efforts of the human mind to find out what are the
rules of cause and effect by which our conception of the present
universe and its development seems to be bound. In the primitive ages
a mere record of events in the heavens and on the earth gave the only
hope of detecting those uniform sequences from which to derive rules
or laws of cause and effect upon which to rely. Then came the
geometrical age, in which rules were sought by which to predict the
movements of heavenly bodies. Later, when the relation of the sun to
the courses of the planets was established, the sun came to be looked
upon as a cause; and finally, early in the seventeenth century, for
the first time in history, it began to be recognised that the laws of
dynamics, exactly as they had been established for our own terrestrial
world, hold good, with the same rigid invariability, at least as far
as the limits of the solar system.

Throughout this evolution of thought and conjecture there were two
types of astronomers--those who supplied the facts, and those who
supplied the interpretation through the logic of mathematics. So
Ptolemy was dependent upon Hipparchus, Kepler on Tycho Brahe, and
Newton in much of his work upon Flamsteed.

When Galileo directed his telescope to the heavens, when Secchi and
Huggins studied the chemistry of the stars by means of the
spectroscope, and when Warren De la Rue set up a photoheliograph at
Kew, we see that a progress in the same direction as before, in the
evolution of our conception of the universe, was being made. Without
definite expression at any particular date, it came to be an accepted
fact that not only do earthly dynamics apply to the heavenly bodies,
but that the laws we find established here, in geology, in chemistry,
and in the laws of heat, may be extended with confidence to the
heavenly bodies. Hence arose the branch of astronomy called
astronomical physics, a science which claims a large portion of the
work of the telescope, spectroscope, and photography. In this new
development it is more than ever essential to follow the dictum of
Tycho Brahe--not to make theories until all the necessary facts are
obtained. The great astronomers of to-day still hold to Sir Isaac
Newton's declaration, "Hypotheses non fingo." Each one may have his
suspicions of a theory to guide him in a course of observation, and
may call it a working hypothesis. But the cautious astronomer does
not proclaim these to the world; and the historian is certainly not
justified in including in his record those vague speculations founded
on incomplete data which may be demolished to-morrow, and which,
however attractive they may be, often do more harm than good to the
progress of true science. Meanwhile the accumulation of facts has
been prodigious, and the revelations of the telescope and spectroscope
entrancing.



12. THE SUN.


One of Galileo's most striking discoveries, when he pointed his
telescope to the heavenly bodies, was that of the irregularly shaped
spots on the sun, with the dark central _umbra_ and the less
dark, but more extensive, _penumbra_ surrounding it, sometimes
with several umbrae in one penumbra. He has left us many drawings of
these spots, and he fixed their period of rotation as a lunar month.

[Illustration: SOLAR SURFACE, As Photographed at the Royal
Observatory, Greenwich, showing sun-spots with umbrae, penumbrae, and
faculae.]

It is not certain whether Galileo, Fabricius, or Schemer was the first
to see the spots. They all did good work. The spots were found to be
ever varying in size and shape. Sometimes, when a spot disappears at
the western limb of the sun, it is never seen again. In other cases,
after a fortnight, it reappears at the eastern limb. The faculae, or
bright areas, which are seen all over the sun's surface, but specially
in the neighbourhood of spots, and most distinctly near the sun's
edge, were discovered by Galileo. A high telescopic power resolves
their structure into an appearance like willow-leaves, or rice-grains,
fairly uniform in size, and more marked than on other parts of the
sun's surface.

Speculations as to the cause of sun-spots have never ceased from
Galileo's time to ours. He supposed them to be clouds. Scheiner[1]
said they were the indications of tumultuous movements occasionally
agitating the ocean of liquid fire of which he supposed the sun to be
composed.

A. Wilson, of Glasgow, in 1769,[2] noticed a movement of the umbra
relative to the penumbra in the transit of the spot over the sun's
surface; exactly as if the spot were a hollow, with a black base and
grey shelving sides. This was generally accepted, but later
investigations have contradicted its universality. Regarding the cause
of these hollows, Wilson said:--

  Whether their first production and subsequent numberless changes
  depend upon the eructation of elastic vapours from below, or upon
  eddies or whirlpools commencing at the surface, or upon the
  dissolving of the luminous matter in the solar atmosphere, as clouds
  are melted and again given out by our air; or, if the reader
  pleases, upon the annihilation and reproduction of parts of this
  resplendent covering, is left for theory to guess at.[3]

Ever since that date theory has been guessing at it. The solar
astronomer is still applying all the instruments of modern research to
find out which of these suppositions, or what modification of any of
them, is nearest the truth. The obstacle--one that is perhaps fatal to
a real theory--lies in the impossibility of reproducing comparative
experiments in our laboratories or in our atmosphere.

Sir William Herschel propounded an explanation of Wilson's observation
which received much notice, but which, out of respect for his memory,
is not now described, as it violated the elementary laws of heat.

Sir John Herschel noticed that the spots are mostly confined to two
zones extending to about 35 degrees on each side of the equator, and that a
zone of equatoreal calms is free from spots. But it was
R. C. Carrington[4] who, by his continuous observations at Redhill, in
Surrey, established the remarkable fact that, while the rotation
period in the highest latitudes, 50 degrees, where spots are seen, is
twenty-seven-and-a-half days, near the equator the period is only
twenty-five days. His splendid volume of observations of the sun led
to much new information about the average distribution of spots at
different epochs.

Schwabe, of Dessau, began in 1826 to study the solar surface, and,
after many years of work, arrived at a law of frequency which has been
more fruitful of results than any discovery in solar physics.[5] In
1843 he announced a decennial period of maxima and minima of sun-spot
displays. In 1851 it was generally accepted, and, although a period of
eleven years has been found to be more exact, all later observations,
besides the earlier ones which have been hunted up for the purpose, go
to establish a true periodicity in the number of sun-spots. But quite
lately Schuster[6] has given reasons for admitting a number of
co-existent periods, of which the eleven-year period was predominant
in the nineteenth century.

In 1851 Lament, a Scotchman at Munich, found a decennial period in the
daily range of magnetic declination. In 1852 Sir Edward Sabine
announced a similar period in the number of "magnetic storms"
affecting all of the three magnetic elements--declination, dip, and
intensity. Australian and Canadian observations both showed the
decennial period in all three elements. Wolf, of Zurich, and Gauthier,
of Geneva, each independently arrived at the same conclusion.

It took many years before this coincidence was accepted as certainly
more than an accident by the old-fashioned astronomers, who want rigid
proof for every new theory. But the last doubts have long vanished,
and a connection has been further traced between violent outbursts of
solar activity and simultaneous magnetic storms.

The frequency of the Aurora Borealis was found by Wolf to follow the
same period. In fact, it is closely allied in its cause to terrestrial
magnetism. Wolf also collected old observations tracing the
periodicity of sun-spots back to about 1700 A.D.

Spoerer deduced a law of dependence of the average latitude of
sun-spots on the phase of the sun-spot period.

All modern total solar eclipse observations seem to show that the
shape of the luminous corona surrounding the moon at the moment of
totality has a special distinct character during the time of a
sun-spot maximum, and another, totally different, during a sun-spot
minimum.

A suspicion is entertained that the total quantity of heat received by
the earth from the sun is subject to the same period. This would have
far-reaching effects on storms, harvests, vintages, floods, and
droughts; but it is not safe to draw conclusions of this kind except
from a very long period of observations.

Solar photography has deprived astronomers of the type of Carrington
of the delight in devoting a life's work to collecting data. It has
now become part of the routine work of an observatory.

In 1845 Foucault and Fizeau took a daguerreotype photograph of the
sun. In 1850 Bond produced one of the moon of great beauty, Draper
having made some attempts at an even earlier date. But astronomical
photography really owes its beginning to De la Rue, who used the
collodion process for the moon in 1853, and constructed the Kew
photoheliograph in 1857, from which date these instruments have been
multiplied, and have given us an accurate record of the sun's surface.
Gelatine dry plates were first used by Huggins in 1876.

It is noteworthy that from the outset De la Rue recognised the value
of stereoscopic vision, which is now known to be of supreme
accuracy. In 1853 he combined pairs of photographs of the moon in the
same phase, but under different conditions regarding libration,
showing the moon from slightly different points of view. These in the
stereoscope exhibited all the relief resulting from binocular vision,
and looked like a solid globe. In 1860 he used successive photographs
of the total solar eclipse stereoscopically, to prove that the red
prominences belong to the sun, and not to the moon. In 1861 he
similarly combined two photographs of a sun-spot, the perspective
effect showing the umbra like a floor at the bottom of a hollow
penumbra; and in one case the faculae were discovered to be sailing
over a spot apparently at some considerable height. These appearances
may be partly due to a proper motion; but, so far as it went, this was
a beautiful confirmation of Wilson's discovery. Hewlett, however, in
1894, after thirty years of work, showed that the spots are not always
depressions, being very subject to disturbance.

The Kew photographs [7] contributed a vast amount of information about
sun-spots, and they showed that the faculae generally follow the spots
in their rotation round the sun.

The constitution of the sun's photosphere, the layer which is the
principal light-source on the sun, has always been a subject of great
interest; and much was done by men with exceptionally keen eyesight,
like Mr. Dawes. But it was a difficult subject, owing to the rapidity
of the changes in appearance of the so-called rice-grains, about 1" in
diameter. The rapid transformations and circulations of these
rice-grains, if thoroughly studied, might lead to a much better
knowledge of solar physics. This seemed almost hopeless, as it was
found impossible to identify any "rice-grain" in the turmoil after a
few minutes. But M. Hansky, of Pulkowa (whose recent death is
deplored), introduced successfully a scheme of photography, which
might almost be called a solar cinematograph. He took photographs of
the sun at intervals of fifteen or thirty seconds, and then enlarged
selected portions of these two hundred times, giving a picture
corresponding to a solar disc of six metres diameter. In these
enlarged pictures he was able to trace the movements, and changes of
shape and brightness, of individual rice-grains. Some granules become
larger or smaller. Some seem to rise out of a mist, as it were, and to
become clearer. Others grow feebler. Some are split in two. Some are
rotated through a right angle in a minute or less, although each of
the grains may be the size of Great Britain. Generally they move
together in groups of very various velocities, up to forty kilometres
a second. These movements seem to have definite relation to any
sun-spots in the neighbourhood. From the results already obtained it
seems certain that, if this method of observation be continued, it
cannot fail to supply facts of the greatest importance.

It is quite impossible to do justice here to the work of all those who
are engaged on astronomical physics. The utmost that can be attempted
is to give a fair idea of the directions of human thought and
endeavour. During the last half-century America has made splendid
progress, and an entirely new process of studying the photosphere has
been independently perfected by Professor Hale at Chicago, and
Deslandres at Paris.[8] They have succeeded in photographing the sun's
surface in monochromatic light, such as the light given off as one of
the bright lines of hydrogen or of calcium, by means of the
"Spectroheliograph." The spectroscope is placed with its slit in the
focus of an equatoreal telescope, pointed to the sun, so that the
circular image of the sun falls on the slit. At the other end of the
spectroscope is the photographic plate. Just in front of this plate
there is another slit parallel to the first, in the position where the
image of the first slit formed by the K line of calcium falls. Thus is
obtained a photograph of the section of the sun, made by the first
slit, only in K light. As the image of the sun passes over the first
slit the photographic plate is moved at the same rate and in the same
direction behind the second slit; and as successive sections of the
sun's image in the equatoreal enter the apparatus, so are these
sections successively thrown in their proper place on the photographic
plate, always in K light. By using a high dispersion the faculae which
give off K light can be correctly photographed, not only at the sun's
edge, but all over his surface. The actual mechanical method of
carrying out the observation is not quite so simple as what is here
described.

By choosing another line of the spectrum instead of calcium K--for
example, the hydrogen line H(3)--we obtain two photographs, one
showing the appearance of the calcium floculi, and the other of the
hydrogen floculi, on the same part of the solar surface; and nothing
is more astonishing than to note the total want of resemblance in the
forms shown on the two. This mode of research promises to afford many
new and useful data.

The spectroscope has revealed the fact that, broadly speaking, the sun
is composed of the same materials as the earth. Angstrom was the first
to map out all of the lines to be found in the solar spectrum. But
Rowland, of Baltimore, after having perfected the art of making true
gratings with equidistant lines ruled on metal for producing spectra,
then proceeded to make a map of the solar spectrum on a large scale.

In 1866 Lockyer[9] threw an image of the sun upon the slit of a
spectroscope, and was thus enabled to compare the spectrum of a spot
with that of the general solar surface. The observation proved the
darkness of a spot to be caused by increased absorption of light, not
only in the dark lines, which are widened, but over the entire
spectrum. In 1883 Young resolved this continuous obscurity into an
infinite number of fine lines, which have all been traced in a shadowy
way on to the general solar surface. Lockyer also detected
displacements of the spectrum lines in the spots, such as would be
produced by a rapid motion in the line of sight. It has been found
that both uprushes and downrushes occur, but there is no marked
predominance of either in a sun-spot. The velocity of motion thus
indicated in the line of sight sometimes appears to amount to 320
miles a second. But it must be remembered that pressure of a gas has
some effect in displacing the spectral lines. So we must go on,
collecting data, until a time comes when the meaning of all the facts
can be made clear.

_Total Solar Eclipses_.--During total solar eclipses the time is so
short, and the circumstances so impressive, that drawings of the
appearance could not always be trusted. The red prominences of jagged
form that are seen round the moon's edge, and the corona with its
streamers radiating or interlacing, have much detail that can hardly
be recorded in a sketch. By the aid of photography a number of records
can be taken during the progress of totality. From a study of these
the extent of the corona is demonstrated in one case to extend to at
least six diameters of the moon, though the eye has traced it
farther. This corona is still one of the wonders of astronomy, and
leads to many questions. What is its consistency, if it extends many
million miles from the sun's surface? How is it that it opposed no
resistance to the motion of comets which have almost grazed the sun's
surface? Is this the origin of the zodiacal light? The character of
the corona in photographic records has been shown to depend upon the
phase of the sun-spot period. During the sun-spot maximum the corona
seems most developed over the spot-zones--i.e., neither at the
equator nor the poles. The four great sheaves of light give it a
square appearance, and are made up of rays or plumes, delicate like
the petals of a flower. During a minimum the nebulous ring seems to
be made of tufts of fine hairs with aigrettes or radiations from both
poles, and streamers from the equator.

[Illustration: SOLAR ECLIPSE, 1882. From drawing by W. H. Wesley,
Secretary R.A.S.; showing the prominences, the corona, and an unknown
comet.]


On September 19th, 1868, eclipse spectroscopy began with the Indian
eclipse, in which all observers found that the red prominences showed
a bright line spectrum, indicating the presence of hydrogen and other
gases. So bright was it that Jansen exclaimed: "_Je verrai ces
lignes-la en dehors des eclipses_." And the next day he observed the
lines at the edge of the uneclipsed sun. Huggins had suggested this
observation in February, 1868, his idea being to use prisms of such
great dispersive power that the continuous spectrum reflected by our
atmosphere should be greatly weakened, while a bright line would
suffer no diminution by the high dispersion. On October 20th
Lockyer,[10] having news of the eclipse, but not of Jansen's
observations the day after, was able to see these lines. This was a
splendid performance, for it enabled the prominences to be observed,
not only during eclipses, but every day. Moreover, the next year
Huggins was able, by using a wide slit, to see the whole of a
prominence and note its shape. Prominences are classified, according
to their form, into "flame" and "cloud" prominences, the spectrum of
the latter showing calcium, hydrogen, and helium; that of the former
including a number of metals.

The D line of sodium is a double line, and in the same eclipse (1868)
an orange line was noticed which was afterwards found to lie close to
the two components of the D line. It did not correspond with any known
terrestrial element, and the unknown element was called "helium." It
was not until 1895 that Sir William Ramsay found this element as a gas
in the mineral cleavite.

The spectrum of the corona is partly continuous, indicating light
reflected from the sun's body. But it also shows a green line
corresponding with no known terrestrial element, and the name
"coronium" has been given to the substance causing it.

A vast number of facts have been added to our knowledge about the sun
by photography and the spectroscope. Speculations and hypotheses in
plenty have been offered, but it may be long before we have a complete
theory evolved to explain all the phenomena of the storm-swept
metallic atmosphere of the sun.

The proceedings of scientific societies teem with such facts and
"working hypotheses," and the b