elical colonist meetings, is well
known. The religious sense of the Russian, brooding for centuries over
empty forms, combined with the equally repressed longing for spiritual
life,--these quickly seized upon the power of a simple and practical
living religious doctrine, and the 'Stundist' movement spread rapidly
over the whole south of the Empire. Wherever a Bible in the Russian
language is to be found in the village, there a circle rapidly forms
around its learned owner; he is listened to eagerly, and the Word has
its effect. . .

"Pashkov, a colonel of the Guards, who died in Paris at the beginning
of 1902, started in the 'eighties' a movement in St. Petersburg, which
was essentially evangelical, with a methodistical tinge, and which
soon seized upon all the strata of the population in the capital.
Substantially it was a religious revival from the dry-as-dust Greek
church similar to that which in the sixteenth century turned against
the Romish church in Germany and in Switzerland. The Gospel was to
Pashkov himself new, good tidings, and as such he carried it into the
distinguished circles which he assembled at his palace on the Neva,
and as such he brought it amongst the crowds of cabmen, labourers,
laundresses, etc., whom he called from the streets to hear the news.
Pashkov's name was known by the last crossing-sweeper, and many
thousands blessed him, some because they had been moved by the
religious spirit which glowed in him, others because they knew of the
many charitable institutions which he had founded with his own means
and with the help of rich men and women friends. I myself shall never
forget the few hours which I spent in conversation with this man,
simple in spirit as in education, but so rich in religious feeling and
in true humility. To me he could offer nothing new, for all that to
him was new I, the son of Lutheran parents, had known from my
childhood days. But what was new to me was the phenomenon of a man who
had belonged for fifty years to a Christian Church and had only now
discovered as something new what is familiar to every member of an
evangelical community as the sum and substance of Christian teaching.
To him the Gospel itself was something new, a revelation.

"This has been the case of many thousands in the Russian Empire when
they opened the Bible for the first time. The spark flew from village
to village and took fire, because the people were thirsting for a
spiritual, religious life, because it brought comfort in their
material misery, and food for their minds. Holy Vladimir, with his
Byzantine priests, brought no living Christianity into the land, and
the common Russian had not been brought into contact with it during
the nine hundred years which have elapsed since. Wherever it
penetrates to-day with the Bible, there its effect is apparent. It is
such as the best Government could not accomplish by worldly means
alone. But it is diametrically opposed to the State Church; it leads
to secession from orthodoxy, and the State has entered upon a crusade
against it."*

*"Russia of To-day," by Baron E. von der Bruggen. Translated by M.
Sandwith, London, 1904. Pages 165-167.

In "The Power of Darkness, "Ivan Ilyich," and the "Kreuzer Sonata."
Tolstoi has shown the way of Death. In "Resurrection" he has shown the
way of Life. The most sensational of all his books is the "Kreuzer
Sonata;" it was generally misunderstood, and from that time some of
his friends walked no more with him. By a curious freak of the powers
of this world, it was for a time taboo in the United States, and its
passage by post was forbidden; then the matter was taken to the
courts, and a certain upright judge declared that so far from the book
being vicious, it condemned vice and immorality on every page. He not
only removed the ban, but recommended its wider circulation. The
circumstances that gave rise to its composition are described in an
exceedingly interesting article in the New York "Sun" for 10 October
1909, "A Visit to Count Leo Tolstoi in 1887," by Madame Nadine Helbig.
The whole article should be read for the charming picture it gives of
the patriarchal happiness at Yasnaya Polyana, and while she saw
clearly the real comfort enjoyed by Tolstoi, which aroused the fierce
wrath of Merezhkovski, she proved also how much good was accomplished
by the old novelist in the course of a single average day.

"Never shall I forget the evening when the young Polish violinist,
whom I have already mentioned, asked me to play with him Beethoven's
sonata for piano and violin, dedicated to Kreuzer, his favourite
piece, which he had long been unable to play for want of a good piano
player.

"Tolstoi listened with growing attention. He had the first movement
played again, and after the last note of the sonata he went out
quietly without saying, as usual, good night to his family and guests.

"That night was created the 'Kreuzer Sonata' in all its wild force.
Shortly afterward he sent me in Rome the manuscript of it. Tolstoi was
the best listener whom I have ever had the luck to play to. He forgot
himself and his surroundings. His expression changed with the music.
Tears ran down his cheeks at some beautiful adagio, and he would say,
'Tania, just give me a fresh handkerchief; I must have got a cold
to-day.' I had to play generally Beethoven and Schumann to him. He did
not approve of Bach, and on the other hand you could make him raving
mad with Liszt, and still more with Wagner."

Many hundreds of amateur players have struggled through the music of
the "Kreuzer Sonata," trying vainly to see in it what Tolstoi declared
it means. Of course the significance attached to it by Tolstoi existed
only in his vivid imagination, Beethoven being the healthiest of all
great composers. If the novelist had really wished to describe sensual
music, he would have made a much more felicitous choice of "Tristan
und Isolde."

Although his own married life was until the last years happy as man
could wish, Tolstoi introduced into the "Kreuzer Sonata" passages from
his own existence. When Posdnichev is engaged, he gives his fiancee
his memoirs, containing a truthful account of his various liaisons.
She is in utter despair, and for a time thinks of breaking off the
engagement. All this was literally true of the author himself. When a
boy, the hero was led to a house of ill-fame by a friend of his
brother, "a very gay student, one of those who are called good
fellows." This reminds us of a precisely similar attempt described by
Tolstoi in "Youth." Furthermore, Posdnichev's self-righteousness in
the fact that although he had been dissipated, he determined to be
faithful to his wife, was literally and psychologically true in
Tolstoi's own life.

The "Kreuzer Sonata" shows no diminution of Tolstoi's realistic power:
the opening scenes on the train, the analysis of the hero's mind
during the early years of his married life, and especially the murder,
all betray the familiar power of simplicity and fidelity to detail.
The passage of the blade through the corset and then into something
soft has that sensual realism so characteristic of all Tolstoi's
descriptions of bodily sensations. The book is a work of art, and
contains many reflections and bitter accusations against society that
are founded on the truth.

The moral significance of the story is perfectly clear--that men who
are constantly immoral before marriage need not expect happiness in
married life. It is a great pity that Tolstoi did not let the powerful
little novel speak for itself, and that he allowed himself to be
goaded into an explanatory and defensive commentary by the thousands
of enquiring letters from foolish readers. Much of the commentary
contains sound advice, but it leads off into that reductio ad absurdum
so characteristic of Russian thought.

Many of the tracts and parables that Tolstoi wrote are true works of
art, with a Biblical directness and simplicity of style. Their effect
outside of Russia is caused fully as much by their literary style as
by their teaching. I remember an undergraduate, who, reading "Where
Love is there God is Also," said that he was tremendously excited when
the old shoemaker lost his spectacles, and had no peace of mind till
he found them again. This is unconscious testimony to Tolstoi's power
of making trivial events seem real.

The long novel, "Resurrection," is, as Mr. Maude, the English
translator, shows, not merely a story, but a general summary of all
the final conclusions about life reached by its author. The English
volume actually has an "Index to Social Questions, Types," etc.,
giving the pages where the author's views on all such topics are
expressed in the book. Apart from the great transformation wrought in
the character of the hero, which is the motive of the work, there are
countless passages which show the genius of the author, still burning
brightly in his old age. The difference between the Easter kiss and
the kiss of lust is one of the most powerful instances of analysis,
and may be taken as a symbol of the whole work. And the depiction of
the sportsman's feelings when he brings down a wounded bird, half
shame and half rage, will startle and impress every man who has
carried a gun.

"Resurrection" teaches directly what Tolstoi always taught--what he
taught less directly, but with even greater art, in "Anna Karenina."

In reading this work of his old age, we cannot help thinking of what
Carlyle said of the octogenarian Goethe: "See how in that great mind,
beaming in mildest mellow splendour, beaming, if also trembling, like
a great sun on the verge of the horizon, near now to its long
farewell, all these things were illuminated and illustrated."





VI

GORKI




Gorki went up like the sky-rocket, and seems to have had the
traditional descent. From 1900 to 1906 everybody was talking about
him; since 1906 one scarcely hears mention of his name. He was
ridiculously overpraised, but he ought not to be forgotten. As an
artist, he will not bear a moment's comparison with Andreev; but some
of his short stories and his play, "The Night Asylum," have the
genuine Russian note of reality, and a rude strength  much too great
for its owner's control. He has never written a successful long novel,
and his plays have no coherence; but, after all, the man has the real
thing--vitality.

Just at the moment when Chekhov appeared to stand at the head of young
Russian writers, Gorki appeared, and his fame swept from one end of
the world to the other. In Russia, his public was second in numbers
only to Tolstoi's; Kuprin and Andreev both dedicated books to him; in
Germany, France, England, and America, he became literally a household
word. It is probable that there were a thousand foreigners who knew
his name, to one who had heard of Chekhov. Compared with Chekhov, he
had more matter and less art.

His true name, which comparatively few have ever heard, is Alexei
Maximovich Peshkov. "This name," said M. de Vogue, "will remain
forever buried in the parish register." He chose to write under the
name Gorki, which means "bitter," a happy appellation for this modern
Ishmaelite. He was born in 1869, at Nizhni Novgorod, in a dyer's shop.
He lost both father and mother when he was a child, but his real
mother was the river Volga, on whose banks he was born, and on whose
broad breast he has found the only repose he understands. The little
boy was apprenticed to a shoemaker, but ran away, as he did from a
subsequent employer. By a curious irony of fate, this atheist learned
to read out of a prayer-book, and this iconoclast was for a time
engaged in the manufacture of ikons, holy images. As the aristocrat
Turgenev learned Russian from a house servant, Gorki obtained his love
for literature from a cook. This happened on a steamer on the great
river, where Gorki was employed as an assistant in the galley. The
cook was a rough giant, who spent all his spare moments reading,
having an old trunk full of books. It was a miscellaneous assortment,
containing Lives of Saints, stories by Dumas pere, and fortunately
some works by Gogol. This literature gave him a thirst for learning,
and when he was sixteen he went to Kazan, a town on the Volga, where
Tolstoi had studied at the University. He had the notion that
literature and learning were there distributed free to the famished,
like bread in times of famine. He was quickly undeceived; and instead
of receiving intellectual food, he was forced to work in a baker's
shop, for a miserable pittance. These were the darkest days of his
life, and in one of his most powerful stories he has reflected the
wretched daily and nightly toil in a bakery.

Then he went on the road, and became a tramp, doing all kinds of odd
jobs, from peddling to hard manual labour on wharves and railways. At
the age of nineteen, weary of life, he shot himself, but recovered.
Then he followed the Volga to the Black Sea, unconsciously collecting
the material that in a very few years he was to give to the world. In
1892, when twenty-three years old, he succeeded in getting some of his
sketches printed in newspapers. The next year he had the good fortune
to meet at Nizhni Novgorod the famous Russian author Korolenko.
Korolenko was greatly impressed by the young vagabond, believed in his
powers, and gave timely and valuable help. With the older man's
influence, Gorki succeeded in obtaining the entree to the St.
Petersburg magazines; and while the Russian critics were at a loss how
to regard the new genius, the public went wild. He visited the capital
in 1899, and there was intense curiosity to see and to hear him. A
great hall was engaged, and when he mounted the platform to read, the
young people in the audience went into a frenzy.

Gorki has been repeatedly imprisoned for his revolutionary ideas and
efforts; in 1906, at the very apex of his fame, he came to the United
States to collect funds for the cause. The whole country was eager to
receive and to give, and his advent in New York was a notable
occasion. He insisted that he came, not as an anarchist, but as a
socialist, that his mission in the world was not to destroy, but to
fulfil. At first, he was full of enthusiasm about America and New
York, and American writers; he was tremendously impressed by the
sky-scrapers, by the intense activity of the people, and by the Hudson
River, which, as he regarded from his hotel windows, reminded him of
the Volga. He said America would be the first nation to give mankind a
true government, and that its citizens were the incarnation of
progress. He declared that Mark Twain was even more popular in Russia
than in America, that it was "a part of the national Russian
education" to read him, and that he himself had read every translation
of his books.

Incidentally he spoke of his favourite world-authors. Shakespeare he
put first of all, saying he was "staggering," an opinion quite
different from that of Tolstoi. Schopenhauer and Nietzsche were the
philosophers he liked the best. Byron and Heine he read in preference
to most other poets, for there is an invincible strain of lyric
romanticism in this Russian tramp, as there was in his master Gogol.
Flaubert, Goethe, and Dumas pere he read with delight.

A literary dinner was arranged in honour of the distinguished guest,
and inasmuch as all present were ignorant of the next day's
catastrophe, the account given of this love-feast in the New York
"Sun" is worth quoting. "Mark Twain and Gorki recognised each other
before they were introduced, but neither being able to understand the
language of the other, they simply grasped hands and held on more than
a minute. . . . Gorki said he had read Mark Twain's stories when he
was a boy, and that he had gotten much delight from them. Mark
declared that he also had been a reader and admirer of Gorki. The
smile of Gorki was broader and not so dry as the smile of Mark, but
both smiles were distinctly those of fellow-humorists who understood
each other. Gorki made a little speech which was translated by a
Russian who knew English. Gorki said he was glad to meet Mark Twain,
'world famous and in Russia the best known of American writers, a man
of tremendous force and convictions, who, when he hit, hit hard. I
have come to America to get acquainted with the American people and
ask their aid for my suffering countrymen who are fighting for
liberty. The despotism must be overthrown now, and what is needed is
money, money, money!' Mark said he was glad to meet Gorki, adding, 'If
we can help to create the Russian republic, let us start in right away
and do it. The fighting may have to be postponed awhile, but meanwhile
we can keep our hearts on the matter and we can assist the Russians in
being free.'"

A committee was formed to raise funds, and then came the explosion,
striking evidence of the enormous difference between the American and
the Continental point of view in morals. With characteristic Russian
impracticability, Gorki had come to America with a woman whom he
introduced as his wife; but it appeared that his legal wife was in
Russia, and that his attractive and accomplished companion was
somebody else. This fact, which honestly seemed to Gorki an incident
of no importance, took on a prodigious shape. This single mistake cost
the Russian revolutionary cause an enormous sum of money, and may have
altered history. Gorki was expelled from his hotel, and refused
admittance to others; unkindest cut of all, Mark Twain, whose absence
of religious belief had made Gorki believe him to be altogether
emancipated from prejudices, positively refused to have anything more
to do with him. As Gorki had said, "When Mark Twain hit, he hit hard."
Turn whither he would, every door was slammed in his face. I do not
think he has ever recovered from the blank amazement caused by the
American change of front. His golden opportunity was gone, and he
departed for Italy, shaking the dust of America off his feet, and
roundly cursing the nation that he had just declared to be the
incarnation of progress. The affair unquestionably has its ludicrous
side, but it was a terrible blow to the revolutionists. Many of them
believed that the trap was sprung by the government party.

Gorki's full-length novels are far from successful works of art. They
have all the incoherence and slipshod workmanship of Dostoevski,
without the latter's glow of brotherly love. His first real novel,
"Foma Gordeev," an epic of the Volga, has many beautiful descriptive
passages, really lyric and idyllic in tone, mingled with an incredible
amount of drivel. The character who plays the title-role is a typical
Russian windbag, irresolute and incapable, like so many Russian
heroes; but whether drunk or sober, he is destitute of charm. He is
both dreary and dirty. The opening chapters are written with great
spirit, and the reader is full of happy expectation. One goes farther
and fares worse. After the first hundred pages, the book is a
prolonged anti-climax, desperately dull. Altogether the best passage
in the story is the description of the river in spring, impressive not
merely for its beauty and accuracy of language, but because the Volga
is interpreted as a symbol of the spirit of the Russian people, with
vast but unawakened possibilities.

"Between them, in a magnificent sweep, flowed the broad-breasted
Volga; triumphantly, without haste, flow her waters, conscious of
their unconquerable power; the hill-shore was reflected in them like a
dark shadow, but on the left side she was adorned with gold and
emerald velvet by the sandy borders of the reefs, and the broad
meadows. Now here, now there, on the hills, and in the meadows,
appeared villages, the sun sparkled in the window-panes of the
cottages, and upon the roofs of yellow straw; the crosses of the
churches gleamed through the foliage of the trees, the gray wings of
the mills rotated lazily through the air, the smoke from the chimneys
of a factory curled skyward in thick black wreaths. . . . On all sides
was the gleaming water, on all sides were space and freedom,
cheerfully green meadows, and graciously clear blue sky; in the quiet
motion of the water, restrained power could be felt; in the heaven
above it shone the beautiful sun, the air was saturated with the
fragrance of evergreen trees, and the fresh scent of foliage. The
shores advanced in greeting, soothing the eye and the soul with their
beauty, and new pictures were constantly unfolded upon them.

"On everything round about rested the stamp of a certain sluggishness:
everything--nature and people--lived awkwardly, lazily; but in this
laziness there was a certain peculiar grace, and it would seem that
behind the laziness was concealed a huge force, an unconquerable
force, as yet unconscious of itself, not having, as yet, created for
itself clear desires and aims. And the absence of consciousness in
this half-somnolent existence cast upon its whole beautiful expanse a
shade of melancholy. Submissive patience, the silent expectation of
something new and more active was audible even in the call of the
cuckoo, as it flew with the wind from the shore, over the river."*

*Isabel Hapgood's translation.

The novel Varenka Olessova is a tedious book of no importance. The
hero is, of course, the eternal Russian type, a man of good education
and no backbone: he lacks resolution, energy, will-power, and will
never accomplish anything. He has not even force enough to continue
his studies. Contrasted with him is the girl Varenka, a simple child
of nature, who prefers silly romances to Russian novels, and whose
virgin naivete is a constant puzzle to the conceited ass who does not
know whether he is in love with her or not. Indeed, he asks himself if
he is capable of love for any one. The only interesting pages in this
stupid story are concerned with a discussion on reading, between
Varenka and the young man, where her denunciation of Russian fiction
is, of course, meant to proclaim its true superiority. In response to
the question whether she reads Russian authors, the girl answers with
conviction: "Oh, yes! But I don't like them! They are so tiresome, so
tiresome! They always write about what I know already myself, and know
just as well as they do. They can't create anything interesting; with
them almost everything is true. . . . Now with the French, their
heroes are real heroes, they talk and act unlike men in actual life.
They are always brave, amorous, vivacious, while our heroes are simple
little men, without any warm feelings, without any beauty, pitiable,
just like ordinary men in real life. . . In Russian books, one cannot
understand at all why the men continue to live. What's the use of
writing books if the author has nothing remarkable to say?"

The long novel "Mother" is a good picture of life among the
working-people in a Russian factory, that is, life as seen through
Gorki's eyes; all cheerfulness and laughter are, of course, absent,
and we have presented a dull monotone of misery. The factory itself is
the villain of the story, and resembles some grotesque wild beast,
that daily devours the blood, bone, and marrow of the throng of
victims that enter its black jaws. The men, women, and children are
represented as utterly brutalised by toil; in their rare moments of
leisure, they fight and beat each other unmercifully, and even the
little children get dead drunk. Socialist and revolutionary propaganda
are secretly circulated among these stupefied folk, and much of the
narrative is taken up with the difficulties of accomplishing this
distribution; for the whole book itself is nothing but a revolutionary
tract. The characters, including the pitiful Mother herself, are not
vividly drawn, they are not alive, and one forgets them speedily; as
for plot, there is none, and the book closes with the brutal murder of
the old woman. It is a tedious, inartistic novel, with none of the
relief that would exist in actual life. Turgenev's poorest novel,
"Virgin Soil," which also gives us a picture of a factory, is
immensely superior from every point of view.

But if "Mother" is a dull book, "The Spy" is impossible. It is full of
meaningless and unutterably dreary jargon; its characters are sodden
with alcohol and bestial lusts. One abominable woman's fat body
spreads out on an arm-chair "like sour dough." And indeed, this novel
bears about the same relation to a finished work of art that sour
dough bears to a good loaf of bread. The characters are poorly
conceived, and the story is totally without movement. Not only is it
very badly written, it lacks even good material. The wretched boy,
whose idiotic states of mind are described one after the other, and
whose eventual suicide is clear from the start, is a disgusting whelp,
without any human interest. One longs for his death with murderous
intensity, and when, on the last page, he throws himself under the
train, the reader experiences a calm and sweet relief.

Much of Gorki's work is like Swift's poetry, powerful not because of
its cerebration or spiritual force, but powerful only from the
physical point of view, from its capacity to disgust. It appeals to
the nose and the stomach rather than to the mind and the heart. From
the medicinal standpoint, it may have a certain value. Swift sent a
lady one of his poems, and immediately after reading it, she was taken
violently sick. Not every poet has sufficient force to produce so
sudden an effect.

One man, invariably before reading the works of a famous French
author, put on his overshoes.

A distinguished American novelist has said that in Gorki "seems the
body without the soul of Russian fiction, and sodden with despair. The
soul of Russian fiction is the great thing." This is, indeed, the main
difference between his work and that of the giant Dostoevski. In the
latter's darkest scenes the spiritual flame is never extinct.

Gorki lacks either the patient industry or else the knowledge
necessary to make a good novel. He is seen at his best in short
stories, for his power comes in flashes. In "Twenty-six Men and a
Girl," the hideous tale that gave him his reputation in America, one
is conscious of the streak of genius that he undoubtedly possesses.
The helpless, impotent rage felt by the wretched men as they witness
the debauching of a girl's body and the damnation of her soul, is
clearly echoed in the reader's mind. Gorki's notes are always the most
thrilling when played below the range of the conventional instrument
of style. This is not low life, it is sub-life.

He is, after all, a student of sensational effect; and the short story
is peculiarly adapted to his natural talent. He cannot develop
characters, he cannot manage a large group, or handle a progressive
series of events. But in a lurid picture of the pit, in a flash-light
photograph of an underground den, in a sudden vision of a heap of
garbage with unspeakable creatures crawling over it, he is impressive.

I shall never forget the performance of "The Night Asylum, Nachtasyl,"
which I saw acted in Munich by one of the best stock companies in the
world, a combination of players from the "Neues" and "Kleines"
theaters in Berlin. In reading this utterly formless and incoherent
drama, I had been only slightly affected; but when it was presented on
the stage by actors who intelligently incarnated every single
character, the thing took on a terrible intensity. The persons are
all, except old Luka, who talks like a man in one of Tolstoi's recent
parables, dehumanised. The woman dying of consumption before our eyes,
the Baron in an advanced stage of paresis who continually rolls
imaginary cigarettes between his weak fingers, and the alcoholic actor
who has lost his memory are impossible to forget. I can hear that
actor now, as with stupid fascination he continually repeats the
diagnosis a physician once made of his case: "Mein Organismus ist
durch und durch mit Alcool vergiftet!"

Gorki, in spite of his zeal for the revolutionary cause, has no remedy
for the disease he calls Life. He is eaten up with rage at the world
in general, and tries to make us all share his disgust with it. But he
teaches us nothing; he has little to say that we can transmute into
anything valuable. This is perhaps the reason why the world has
temporarily, at any rate, lost interest in him. He was a new
sensation, he shocked us, and gave us strange thrills, after the
manner of new and unexpected sensations. Gorki came up on the literary
horizon like an evil storm, darkening the sky, casting an awful shadow
across the world's mirth and laughter, and making us shudder in the
cold and gloom..

Gorki completely satisfied that strange but almost universal desire of
well-fed and comfortable people to go slumming. In his books men and
women in fortunate circumstances had their curiosity satisfied--all
the world went slumming, with no discomfort, no expense, and no fear
of contagion. With no trouble at all, no personal inconvenience, we
learned the worst of all possible worsts on this puzzling and
interesting planet.

But we soon had enough of it, and our experienced and professional
guide failed to perceive the fact. He showed us more of the same
thing, and then some more. Such sights and sounds--authentic visions
and echoes of hell--merely repeated, began to lose their uncanny
fascination. The man who excited us became a bore. For the worst thing
about Gorki is his dull monotony, and vice is even more monotonous
than virtue, perhaps because it is more common. Open the pages of
almost any of his tales, it is always the same thing, the same
criminals, the same horrors, the same broken ejaculations and brutish
rage. Gorki has shown no capacity for development, no power of variety
and complexity. His passion for mere effect has reacted unfavourably
on himself.*

*His play "Die Letzten" was put on at the "Deutsches Theater," Berlin,
6 September 1910. The press despatch says, "The father is a police
inspector, drunkard, gambler, briber, bribe-taker, adulterer, and
robber."

Is it possible that success robbed him of something? He became a
popular author in conventional environment, surrounded by books and
modern luxuries, living in the pleasant climate of Italy, with no
anxiety about his meals and bed. Is it possible that wealth, comfort,
independence, and leisure have extinguished his original force? Has he
lost something of the picturesque attitude of Gorki the penniless
tramp? He is happily still a young man, and perhaps he may yet achieve
the masterpiece that ten years ago we so confidently expected from his
hands.

He is certainly not a great teacher, but he has the power to ask
awkward questions so characteristic of Andreev, Artsybashev, and
indeed of all Russian novelists. We cannot answer him with a shrug of
the shoulders or a sceptical smile. He shakes the foundations of our
fancied security by boldly questioning what we had come to regard as
axioms. As the late M. de Vogue remarked, when little children sit on
our knee and pelt us with questions that go to the roots of our
philosophy, we get rid of the bother of it by telling the children to
go away and play; but when a Tolstoi puts such questions, we cannot
get rid of him so easily. Russian novelists are a thorn in the side of
complacent optimism.

And yet surely, if life is not so good, as it conceivably might be, it
is not so darkly bitter as the Bitter One would have us believe. In a
short article that he wrote about one of the playgrounds of America,
he betrayed his own incurable jaundice. In the New York "Independent"
for 8 August 1907, Gorki published a brilliant impressionistic sketch
of Coney Island, and called it "Boredom." Gorki at Coney Island is
like Dante at a country fair. Thomas Carlyle was invited out to a
social dinner-party once upon a time, and when he came home he wrote
savagely in his diary of the flippant, light-hearted conversation
among the men and women about the festive board, saying, "to me
through those thin cobwebs Death and Eternity sat glaring." What a
charming guest he must have been on that particular occasion!

Gorki speaks poetically in his article of the "fantastic city all of
fire" that one sees at night. But as he mingles with the throng,
disgust fills his lonely heart.

"The public looks at them silently. It breathes in the moist air, and
feeds its soul with dismal ennui, which extinguishes thought as a wet,
dirty cloth extinguishes the fire of a smouldering coal."

Describing the sensations of the crowd before the tiger's cage, he
says:--

"The man runs about the cage, shoots his pistol and cracks his whip,
and shouts like a madman. His shouts are intended to hide his painful
dread of the animals. The crowd regards the capers of the man, and
waits in suspense for the fatal attack. They wait; unconsciously the
primitive instinct is awakened in them. They crave fight, they want to
feel the delicious shiver produced by the sight of two bodies
intertwining, the splutter of blood and pieces of torn, steaming human
flesh flying through the cage and falling on the floor. They want to
hear the roar, the cries, the shrieks of agony. . . . Then the crowd
breaks into dark pieces, and disperses over the slimy marsh of
boredom.

". . . You long to see a drunken man with a jovial face, who would
push and sing and bawl, happy because he is drunk, and sincerely
wishing all good people the same. . .

"In the glittering gossamer of its fantastic buildings, tens of
thousands of grey people, like patches on the ragged clothes of a
beggar, creep along with weary faces and colourless eyes. . . .

"But the precaution has been taken to blind the people, and they drink
in the vile poison with silent rapture. The poison contaminates their
souls. Boredom whirls about in an idle dance, expiring in the agony of
its inanition.

"One thing alone is good in the garish city: you can drink in hatred
to your soul's content, hatred sufficient to last throughout life,
hatred of the power of stupidity!"

This sketch is valuable not merely because of the impression of a
distinguished foreign writer of one of the sights of America, but
because it raises in our minds an obstinate doubt of his capacity to
tell the truth about life in general. Suppose a person who had never
seen Coney Island should read Gorki's vivid description of it, would
he really know anything about Coney Island? Of course not. The crowds
at Coney Island are as different from Gorki's description of them as
anything could well be. Now then, we who know the dregs of Russian
life only through Gorki's pictures, can we be certain that his
representations are accurate? Are they reliable history of fact, or
are they the revelations of a heart that knoweth its own bitterness?





VII

CHEKHOV




Anton Pavlovich Chekhov, like Pushkin, Lermontov, Bielinski, and
Garshin, died young, and although he wrote a goodly number of plays
and stories which gave him a high reputation in Russia, he did not
live to enjoy international fame. This is partly owing to the nature
of his work, but more perhaps to the total eclipse of other
contemporary writers by Gorki. There are signs now that his delicate
and unpretentious art will outlast the sensational flare of the
other's reputation. Gorki himself has generously tried to help in the
perpetuation of Chekhov's name, by publishing a volume of personal
reminiscences of his dead friend.

Like Gogol and Artsybashev, Chekhov was a man of the South, being born
at Taganrog, a seaport on a gulf of the Black Sea, near the mouth of
the river Don. The date of his birth is the 17 January 1860. His
father was a clever serf, who, by good business foresight, bought his
freedom early in life. Although the father never had much education
himself, he gave his four children every possible advantage. Anton
studied in the Greek school, in his native city, and then entered the
Faculty of Medicine at the University of Moscow. "I don't well
remember why I chose the medical faculty," he remarked later, "but I
never regretted that choice." He took his degree, but entered upon no
regular practice. For a year he worked in a hospital in a small town
near Moscow, and in 1892 he freely offered his medical services during
an epidemic of cholera. His professional experiences were of immense
service to him in analysing the characters of various patients whom he
treated, and his scientific training he always believed helped him
greatly in the writing of his stories and plays, which are all
psychological studies.

He knew that he had not very long to live, for before he had really
begun his literary career signs of tuberculosis had plainly become
manifest. He died in Germany, the 2 July 1904, and his funeral at
Moscow was a national event.

Chekhov was a fine conversationalist, and fond of society; despite the
terrible gloom of his stories, he had distinct gifts as a wit, and was
a great favourite at dinner-parties and social gatherings. He joked
freely on his death-bed. He was warm-hearted and generous, and gave
money gladly to poor students and overworked school-teachers. His
innate modesty and lack of self-assertion made him very slow at
personal advertisement, and his dislike of Tolstoi's views prevented
at first an acquaintance with the old sage. Later, however, Tolstoi,
being deeply interested in him, sought him out, and the two writers
became friends. At this time many Russians believed that Chekhov was
the legitimate heir to Tolstoi's fame.

In 1879, while still in the University of Moscow, Chekhov began to
write short stories, of a more or less humorous nature, which were
published in reviews. His first book appeared in 1887. Some critics
sounded a note of warning, which he heeded. They said "it was too bad
that such a talented young man should spend all his time making people
laugh." This indirect advice, coupled with maturity of years and
incipient disease, changed the writer's point of view, and his best
known work is typically Russian in its tragic intensity.

In Russia he enjoyed an enormous vogue. Kropotkin says that his works
ran through ten to fourteen editions, and that his publications,
appearing as a supplement to a weekly magazine, had a circulation of
two hundred thousand copies in one year. Toward the end of his life
his stories captivated Germany, and one of the Berlin journalists
cried out, as the Germans have so often of Oscar Wilde, "Chekhov und
kein Ende!"

Chekhov, like Gorki and Andreev, was a dramatist as well as a
novelist, though his plays are only beginning to be known outside of
his native land. They resemble the dramatic work of Gorki, Andreev,
and for that matter of practically all Russian playwrights, in being
formless and having no true movement; but they contain some of his
best Russian portraits, and some of his most subtle interpretations of
Russian national life. Russian drama does not compare for an instant
with Russian fiction: I have never read a single well-constructed
Russian play except "Revizor." Most of them are dull to a foreign
reader, and leave him cold and weary. Mr. Baring, in his book
"Landmarks in Russian Literature," has an excellent chapter on the
plays of Chekhov, which partially explains the difficulties an
outsider has in studying Russian drama. But this chapter, like the
other parts of his book, is marred by exaggeration. He says,
"Chekhov's plays are as interesting to read as the work of any
first-rate novelist." And a few sentences farther in the same
paragraph, he adds, "Chekhov's plays are a thousand times more
interesting to see on the stage than they are to read." Any one who
believes Mr. Baring's statement, and starts to read Chekhov's dramas
with the faith that they are as interesting as "Anna Karenina," will
be sadly disappointed. And if on the stage they are a thousand times
more interesting to see than "Anna Karenina" is to read, they must
indeed be thrilling. It is, however, perfectly true that a foreigner
cannot judge the real value of Russian plays by reading them. We ought
to hear them performed by a Russian company. That wonderful actress,
Madame Komisarzhevskaya, who was lately followed to her grave by an
immense concourse of weeping Russians, gave a performance of "The
Cherry Garden" which stirred the whole nation. Madame Nazimova has
said that Chekhov is her favourite writer, but that his plays could
not possibly succeed in America, unless every part, even the minor
ones, could be interpreted by a brilliant actor.

Chekhov is durch und durch echt russisch: no one but a Russian would
ever have conceived such characters, or reported such conversations.
We often wonder that physical exercise and bodily recreation are so
conspicuously absent from Russian books. But we should remember that a
Russian conversation is one of the most violent forms of physical
exercise, as it is among the French and Italians. Although Chekhov
belongs to our day, and represents contemporary Russia, he stands in
the middle of the highway of Russian fiction, and in his method of art
harks back to the great masters. He perhaps resembles Turgenev more
than any other of his predecessors, but he is only a faint echo. He is
like Turgenev in the delicacy and in the aloofness of his art. He has
at times that combination of the absolutely real with the absolutely
fantastic that is so characteristic of Gogol: one of his best stories,
"The Black Monk," might have been written by the author of "The Cloak"
and "The Portrait." He is like Dostoevski in his uncompromising
depiction of utter degradation; but he has little of Dostoevski's
glowing sympathy and heartpower. He resembles Tolstoi least of all.
The two chief features of Tolstoi's work--self-revelation and moral
teaching--must have been abhorrent to Chekhov, for his stories tell us
almost nothing about himself and his own opinions, and they teach
nothing. His art is impersonal, and he is content with mere diagnosis.
His only point of contact with Tolstoi is his grim fidelity to detail,
the peculiar Russian realism common to every Russian novelist. Tolstoi
said that Chekhov resembled Guy de Maupassant. This is entirely wide
of the mark. He resembles Guy de Maupassant merely in the fact that,
like the Frenchman, he wrote short stories.

Among recent writers Chekhov is at the farthest remove from his friend
Gorki, and most akin to Andreev. It is probable that Andreev learned
something from him. Unlike Turgenev, both Chekhov and Andreev study
mental disease. Their best characters are abnormal; they have some
fatal taint in the mind which turns this goodly frame, the earth, into
a sterile promontory; this majestical roof fretted with golden fire,
into a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. Neither Chekhov nor
Andreev have attempted to lift that black pall of despair that hangs
over Russian fiction.

Just as the austere, intellectual beauty of Greek drama forms striking
evidence of the extraordinarily high average of culture in Athenian
life, so the success of an author like Chekhov is abundant proof of
the immense number of readers of truly cultivated taste that are
scattered over Holy Russia. For Chekhov's stories are exclusively
intellectual and subtle. They appeal only to the mind, not to the
passions nor to any love of sensation. In many of them he deliberately
avoids climaxes and all varieties of artificial effect. He would be
simply incomprehensible to the millions of Americans who delight in
musical comedy and in pseudo-historical romance. He wrote only for the
elect, for those who have behind them years of culture and habits of
consecutive thought. That such a man should have a vogue in Russia
such as a cheap romancer enjoys in America, is in itself a significant
and painful fact.

Chekhov's position in the main line of Russian literature and his
likeness to Turgenev are both evident when we study his analysis of
the Russian temperament. His verdict is exactly the same as that given
by Turgenev and Sienkiewicz--slave improductivite. A majority of his
chief characters are Rudins. They suffer from internal injuries,
caused by a diseased will. In his story called "On the Way" the hero
remarks, "Nature has set in every Russian an enquiring mind, a
tendency to speculation, and extraordinary capacity for belief; but
all these are broken into dust against our improvidence, indolence,
and fantastic triviality."*

*The citations from Chekhov are from the translations by Long.

The novelist who wrote that sentence was a physician as well as a man
of letters. It is a professional diagnosis of the national sickness of
mind, which produces sickness of heart.

It is absurd to join in the chorus that calls Turgenev old-fashioned,
when we find his words accurately, if faintly, echoed by a Russian who
died in 1904! Hope springs eternal in the human breast, and wishes
have always been the legitimate fathers of thoughts. My friend and
colleague, Mr. Mandell, the translator of "The Cherry Garden,"* says
that the play indicates that the useless people are dying away, "and
thus making room for the regenerated young generation which is full of
hope and strength to make a fruitful cherry garden of Russia for the
Russian people . . . the prospects of realisation are now bright. But
how soon will this become a practical reality? Let us hope in the near
future!" Yes, let us hope, as Russians hoped in 1870 and in 1900.
Kropotkin says that Chekhov gave an "impressive parting word" to the
old generation, and that we are now on the eve of the "new types which
already are budding in life." Gorki has violently protested against
the irresolute Slav, and Artsybashev has given us in Jurii the Russian
as he is (1903) and in Sanin the Russian as he ought to be. But a
disease obstinately remains a disease until it is cured, and it cannot
be cured by hope or by protest.

*Published at Yale University by the "Yale Courant."

Chekhov was a physician and an invalid; he saw sickness without and
sickness within. Small wonder that his stories deal with the unhealthy
and the doomed. For just as Artsybashev's tuberculosis has made him
create the modern Tamburlaine as a mental enjoyment of physical
activity, so the less turbulent nature of Chekhov has made him
reproduce in his creatures of the imagination his own sufferings and
fears. I think he was afraid of mental as well as physical decay, for
he has studied insanity with the same assiduity as that displayed by
Andreev in his nerve-wrecking story "A Dilemma."

In "Ward No. 6," which no one should read late at night, Chekhov has
given us a picture of an insane asylum, which, if the conditions there
depicted are true to life, would indicate that some parts of Russia
have not advanced one step since Gogol wrote "Revizor." The patients
are beaten and hammered into insensibility by a brutal keeper; they
live amidst intolerable filth. The attending physician is a typical
Russian, who sees clearly the horror and abomination of the place, but
has not sufficient will-power to make a change. He is fascinated by
one of the patients, with whom he talks for hours. His fondness for
this man leads his friends to believe that he is insane, and they
begin to treat him with that humouring condescension and pity which
would be sufficient in itself to drive a man out of his mind. He is
finally invited by his younger colleague to visit the asylum to
examine a strange case; when he reaches the building, he himself is
shoved into Ward No. 6, and realises that the doors are shut upon him
forever. He is obliged to occupy a bed in the same filthy den where he
has so often visited the other patients, and his night-gown has a
slimy smell of dried fish. In about twenty-four hours he dies, but in
those hours he goes through a hell of physical and mental torment.

The fear of death, which to an intensely intellectual people like the
Russians, is an obsession of terror, and shadows all their literature,
--it appears all through Tolstoi's diary and novels,--is analysed in
many forms by Chekhov. In "Ward No. 6" Chekhov pays his respects to
Tolstoi's creed of self-denial, through the lips of the doctor's
favourite madman. "A creed which teaches indifference to wealth,
indifference to the conveniences of life, and contempt for suffering
is quite incomprehensible to the great majority who never knew either
wealth or the conveniences of life, and to whom contempt for suffering
would mean contempt for their own lives, which are made up of feelings
of hunger, cold, loss, insult, and a Hamlet-like terror of death. All
life lies in these feelings, and life may be hated or wearied of, but
never despised. Yes, I repeat it, the teachings of the Stoics can
never have a future; from the beginning of time, life has consisted in
sensibility to pain and response to irritation."

No better indictment has ever been made against those to whom
self-denial and renunciation are merely a luxurious attitude of the
mind.

Chekhov's sympathy with Imagination and his hatred for commonplace
folk who stupidly try to repress its manifestations are shown again
and again in his tales. He loves especially the imagination of
children; and he shows them as infinitely wiser than their practical
parents. In the short sketch "An Event" the children are wild with
delight over the advent of three kittens, and cannot understand their
father's disgust for the little beasts, and his cruel indifference to
their welfare. The cat is their mother, that they know; but who is the
father? The kittens must have a father, so the children drag out the
wooden rocking-horse, and place him beside his wife and offspring.

In the story "At Home" the father's bewilderment at the creative
imagination and the curious caprices of his little boy's mind is
tenderly and beautifully described. The father knows he is not
bringing him up wisely, but is utterly at a loss how to go at the
problem, having none of the intuitive sympathy of a woman. The boy is
busy with his pencil, and represents sounds by shapes, letters by
colours. For example, "the sound of an orchestra he drew as a round,
smoky spot; whistling as a spiral thread." In making letters, he
always painted L yellow, M red, and A black. He draws a picture of a
house with a soldier standing in front of it. The father rebukes him
for bad perspective, and tells him that the soldier in his picture is
taller than the house. But the boy replies, "If you drew the soldier
smaller, you wouldn't be able to see his eyes."

One of Chekhov's favourite pastimes was gardening. This, perhaps,
accounts for his location of the scene in his comedy "The Cherry
Garden," where a business-like man, who had once been a serf, just
like the dramatist's own father, has prospered sufficiently to buy the
orchard from the improvident and highly educated owners; and for all
the details about fruit-gardening given in the powerful story "The
Black Monk." This story infallibly reminds one of Gogol. A man has
repeatedly a vision of a black monk, who visits him through the air,
with whom he carries on long conversations, and who inspires him with
great thoughts and ideals. His wife and friends of course think he is
crazy, and instead of allowing him to continue his intercourse with
the familiar spirit, they persuade him he is ill, and make him take
medicine. The result is wholesale tragedy. His life is ruined, his
wife is separated from him; at last he dies. The idea seems to be that
he should not have been disobedient unto the heavenly vision.
Imagination and inspiration are necessary to life; they are what
separate man from the beasts that perish. The monk asks him, "How do
you know that the men of genius whom all the world trusts have not
also seen visions?"

Chekhov is eternally at war with the practical, with the
narrow-minded, with the commonplace. Where there is no vision, the
people perish.

Professor Bruckner has well said that Chekhov was by profession a
physician, but an artist by the grace of God. He was indeed an
exquisite artist, and if his place in Russian literature is not large,
it seems permanent. He does not rank among the greatest. He lacks the
tremendous force of Tolstoi, the flawless perfection of Turgenev, and
the mighty world-embracing sympathy of Great-heart Dostoevski. But he
is a faithful interpreter of Russian life, and although his art was
objective, one cannot help feeling the essential goodness of the man
behind his work, and loving him for it.





VIII

ARTSYBASHEV




Not the greatest, but the most sensational, novel published in Russia
during the last five years is "Sanin," by Artsybashev. It is not
sensational in the incidents, though two men commit suicide, and two
girls are ruined; it is sensational in its ideas. To make a sensation
in contemporary Russian literature is an achievement, where pathology
is now rampant. But Artsybashev accomplished it, and his novel made a
tremendous noise, the echoes of which quickly were heard all over
curious and eclectic Germany, and have even stirred Paris. Since the
failure of the Revolution, there has been a marked revolt in Russia
against three great ideas that have at different times dominated
Russian literature: the quiet pessimism of Turgenev, the Christian
non-resistance religion of Tolstoi, and the familiar Russian type of
will-less philosophy. Even before the Revolution Gorki had expressed
the spirit of revolt; but his position, extreme as it appears to an
Anglo-Saxon, has been left far behind by Artsybashev, who, with the
genuine Russian love of the reductio ad absurdum, has reached the
farthest limits of moral anarchy in the creation of his hero Sanin.

In an admirable article in the "Westminster Gazette," for 14 May 1910,
by the accomplished scholar and critic, Mr. R. C. Long, called "The
Literature of Self-assertion," we obtain a strong smell of the
hell-broth now boiling in Russian literature. "In the Spring of 1909,
an exhibition was held in the Russian ministry of the Interior of
specimen copies of all books and brochures issued in 1908, to the
number of 70,841,000. How many different books were exhibited the
writer does not know, but he lately came upon an essay by the critic
Ismailoff, in which it was said that there were on exhibition a
thousand different sensational novels, classed as 'Nat Pinkerton and
Sherlock Holmes literature,' with such expressive titles as 'The
Hanged,' 'The Chokers,' 'The Corpse Disinterred,' and 'The
Expropriators.' Ismailoff comments on this as sign and portent. Russia
always had her literature of adventure, and Russian novels of manners
and of psychology became known to Westerners merely because they were
the best, and by no means because they were the only books that
appeared. The popular taste was formerly met with naive and outrageous
'lubotchniya'-books. The new craze for 'Nat Pinkerton and Sherlock
Holmes' stories is something quite different. It foreshadows a
complete change in the psychosis of the Russian reader, the decay of
the literature of passivity, and the rise of a new literature of
action and physical revolt. The literature of passivity reached its
height with the (sic) Chekhov. The best representative of the
transition from Chekhov to the new literature of self-assertion is
Maxim Gorki's friend, Leonid Andreev. . . .

"These have got clear away from the humble, ineffectual individual,
'crushed by life.' Full of learned philosophies from Max Stirner and
Nietzsche, they preach, in Stirner's words, 'the absolute independence
of the individual, master of himself, and of all things.' 'The death
of "Everyday-ism,"' the 'resurrection of myth,' 'orgiasm,' 'Mystical
Anarchism,' and 'universalist individualism' are some of the
shibboleths of these new writers, who are mostly very young, very
clever, and profoundly convinced that they are even cleverer than they
are.

"Anarchism, posing as self-assertion, is the note in most recent
Russian literature, as, indeed, it is in Russian life."

The most powerful among this school of writers, and the only one who
can perhaps be called a man of genius, is Michael Artsybashev. He came
honestly by his hot, impulsive temperament, being, like Gogol, a man
of the South. He was born in 1878. He says of himself: "I am Tartar in
name and in origin, but not a pure-blooded one. In my veins runs
Russian, French, Georgian, and Polish blood. I am glad to name as one
of my ancestors the famous Pole, Kosciusko, who was my maternal
great-grandfather. My father, a retired officer, was a landed
proprietor with very little income. I was only three years old when my
mother died. As a legacy, she bequeathed to me tuberculosis. . . . I
am now living in the Crimea and trying to get well, but with little
faith in my recovery."

"Sanin" appeared at the psychological moment, late in the year 1907.
The Revolution was a failure, and it being impossible to fight the
government or to obtain political liberty, people in Russia of all
classes were ready for a revolt against moral law, the religion of
self-denial, and all the conventions established by society,
education, and the church. At this moment of general desperation and
smouldering rage, appeared a work written with great power and great
art, deifying the natural instincts of man, incarnating the spirit of
liberty in a hero who despises all so-called morality as absurd
tyranny. It was a bold attempt to marshal the animal instincts of
humanity, terrifically strong as they are even in the best citizens,
against every moral and prudential restraint. The effect of the book
will probably not last very long,--already it has been called an
ephemeral sensation,--but it was immediate and tremendous. It was
especially powerful among university students and high school boys and
girls--the "Sanin-morals" of undergraduates were alluded to in a
speech in the Duma.

But although the book was published at the psychological moment, it
was written with no reference to any post-revolution spirit. For
Artsybashev composed his novel in 1903, when he was twenty-four years
old. He tried in vain to induce publishers to print it, and
fortunately for him, was obliged to wait until 1907, when the time
happened to be exactly ripe.

The novel has been allowed to circulate in Russia, because it shows
absolutely no sympathy with the Revolution or with the spirit of
political liberty. Men who waste their time in the discussion of
political rights or in the endeavour to obtain them are ridiculed by
Sanin. The summum bonum is personal, individual happiness, the
complete gratification of desire. Thus, those who are working for the
enfranchisement of the Russian people, for relief from the
bureaucracy, and for more political independence, not only have no
sympathy with the book--they hate it, because it treats their efforts
with contempt. Some of them have gone so far as to express the belief
that the author is in a conspiracy with the government to bring
ridicule on their cause, and to defeat their ever living hopes of
better days. However this may be, Sanin is not in the least a
politically revolutionary book, and critics of that school see no real
talent or literary power in its pages.

But, sinister and damnable as its tendency is, the novel is written
with extraordinary skill, and Artsybashev is a man to be reckoned
with. The style has that simplicity and directness so characteristic
of Russian realism, and the characters are by no means sign-posts of
various opinions; they are living and breathing human beings. I am
sorry that such a book as Sanin has ever been written; but it cannot
be black-balled from the republic of letters.

It is possible that it is a florescence not merely of the author's
genius, but of his sickness. The glorification of Sanin's bodily
strength, of Karsavina's female voluptuousness, and the loud call to
physical joy which rings through the work may be an emanation of
tuberculosis as well as that of healthy mental conviction. Shut out
from active happiness, Artsybashev may have taken this method of
vicarious delight.

The bitterness of his own enforced resignation of active happiness and
the terror inspired by his own disease are incarnated in a decidedly
interesting character, Semionov, who, although still able to walk
about when we first see him, is dying of consumption. He has none of
the hopefulness and cheerfulness so often symptomatic of that malady;
he is peevish, irritable, and at times enraged by contact with his
healthy friends. After a frightful attack of coughing, he says: "I
often think that soon I shall be lying in complete darkness. You
understand, with my nose fallen in and my limbs decayed. And above me,
where you are on the earth, everything will go on, exactly as it does
now, while I still am permitted to see it. You will be living then,
you will look at this very moon, you will breathe, you will pass over
my grave; perhaps you will stop there a moment and despatch some
necessity. And I shall lie and become rotten."

His death at the hospital in the night, with his friends looking on,
is powerfully and minutely described. The fat, stupid priest goes
through the last ceremonies, and is dully amazed at the contempt he
receives from Sanin.

Sanin's beautiful sister Lyda is ruined by a worthless but entirely
conventional officer. Her remorse on finding that she is with child is
perfectly natural, but is ridiculed by her brother, who saves her from
suicide. He is not in the least ashamed of her conduct, and tells her
she has no reason for loss of pride; indeed, he does not think of
blaming the officer. He is ready to commit incest with his sister,
whose physical charm appeals to him; but she is not sufficiently
emancipated for that, so he advises her to get married with a friend
who loves her, before the child is born. This is finally
satisfactorily arranged. Later, Sanin, not because he disapproves of
the libertine officer's affair with his sister, but because he regards
the officer as a blockhead, treats him with scant courtesy; and the
officer, hidebound by convention, sees no way out but a challenge to a
duel. The scene when the two brother officers bring the formal
challenge to Sanin is the only scene in the novel marked by. genuine
humour, and is also the only scene where we are in complete sympathy
with the hero. One of the delegates has all the stiff courtesy and
ridiculous formality which he regards as entirely consistent with his
errand; the other is a big, blundering fellow, who has previously
announced himself as a disciple of Tolstoi. To Sanin's philosophy of
life, duelling is as absurd as religion, morality, or any other stupid
conventionality; and his cold, ruthless logic makes short work of the
polite phrases of the two ambassadors. Both are amazed at his positive
refusal to fight, and hardly know which way to turn; the disciple of
Tolstoi splutters with rage because Sanin shows up his inconsistency
with his creed; both try to treat him like an outcast, but make very
little progress. Sanin informs them that he will not fight a duel,
because he does not wish to take the officer's life, and because he
does not care to risk his own; but that if the officer attempts any
physical attack upon him in the street, he will thrash him on the
spot. Enraged and bewildered by Sanin's unconventional method of
dealing with the difficulty, the discomfited emissaries withdraw.
Later, the challenger meets Sanin in the street, and goaded to frenzy
by his calm and contemptuous stare, strikes him with a whip; he
immediately receives in the face a terrible blow from his adversary's
fist, delivered with all his colossal strength. A friend carries him
to his lodgings, and there he commits suicide. From the conventional
point of view, this was the only course left to him.

In direct contrast to most Russian novels, the man here is endowed
with limitless power of will, and the women characterised by weakness.
The four women in the story, Sanin's sister Lyda, the pretty
school-teacher Karsavina, Jurii's sister, engaged to a young
scientist, who during the engagement cordially invites her brother to
accompany him to a house of ill-fame, and the mother of Sanin, are all
thoroughly conventional, and are meant to be. They are living under
what Sanin regards as the tyranny of social convention. He treats his
mother's shocked amazement with brutal scorn; he ridicules Lyda's
shame at being enceinte; he seduces Karsavina, at the very time when
she is in love with Jurii, and reasons with cold patience against her
subsequent remorse. It is clear that Artsybashev believes that for
some time to come women will not accept the gospel of uncompromising
egoism.

The most interesting character in the book, apart from the hero, is
Jurii, who might easily have been a protagonist in one of Turgenev's
tragedies. He is the typical Russian, the highly educated young man
with a diseased will. He is characterised by that indecision which has
been the bane of so many Russians. All through the book he seeks in
vain for some philosophy of life, some guiding principle. He has
abandoned faith in religion, his former enthusiasm for political
freedom has cooled, but he simply cannot live without some leading
Idea. He is an acute sufferer from that mental sickness diagnosed by
nearly all writers of Russia. He envies and at the same time despises
Sanin for his cheerful energy. Finally, unable to escape from the
perplexities of his own thinking, he commits suicide. His friends
stand about his grave at the funeral, and one of them foolishly asks
Sanin to make some appropriate remarks. Sanin, who always says exactly
what he thinks, and abhors all forms of hypocrisy, delivers the
following funeral oration--heartily endorsed by the reader--in one
sentence: "The world has now one blockhead the less." The
horror-stricken consternation of his friends fills Sanin with such
scorn that he leaves the town, and we last see him in an open field in
the country, giving a glad shout of recognition to the dawn.

The motto that Artsybashev has placed at the beginning of the novel is
taken from Ecclesiastes vii. 29: "God hath made man upright: but they
have sought out many inventions." This same text was used by Kipling
as the title of one of his books, but used naturally in a quite
different way. The Devil has here cited Scripture for his purpose. The
hero of the novel is an absolutely sincere, frank, and courageous
Advocatus Diabou. He is invariably calm and collected; he never loses
his temper in an argument; he questions the most fundamental beliefs
and principles with remorseless logic. Two of his friends are arguing
about Christianity; "at least," says one, "you will not deny that its
influence has been good." "I don't deny that," says the other. Then
Sanin remarks quietly, "But I deny it!" and he adds, with a calmness
provoking to the two disputants, "Christianity has played an
abominable role in history, and the name of Jesus Christ will for some
time yet oppress humanity like a curse."

Sanin insists that it is not necessary to have any theory of life, or
to be guided by any principle; that God may exist or He may not; He
does not at any rate bother about us. The real rational life of man
should be exactly like a bird. He should be controlled wholly by the
desire of the moment. The bird wishes to alight on a branch, and so he
alights; then he wishes to fly, so he flies. That is rational,
declares Sanin; that is the way men and women should live, without
principles, without plans, and without regrets. Drunkenness and
adultery are nothing to be ashamed of, nor in any sense to be called
degrading. Nothing that gives pleasure can ever be degrading. The love
of strong drink and the lust for woman are not sins; in fact, there is
no such thing as sin. These passions are manly and natural, and what
is natural cannot be wrong. There is in Sanin's doctrine something of
Nietzsche and more of Rousseau.

Sanin himself is not at all a contemptible character. He is not
argumentative except when dragged into an argument; he does not
attempt to convert others to his views. He has the inner light which
we more often associate with Christian faith. In the midst of his
troubled and self-tortured comrades, Sanin stands like a pillar, calm,
unshakable. He has found absolute peace, absolute harmony with life.
He thinks, talks, and acts exactly as he chooses, without any regard
whatever to the convenience or happiness of any one else. There is
something refreshing about this perfectly healthy, clear-eyed, quiet,
composed, resolute man--whose way of life is utterly unaffected by
public opinion, who simply does not care a straw for anything or
anybody but himself. Thus he recognises his natural foe in
Christianity, in the person of Jesus Christ, and in His Russian
interpreter, Leo Tolstoi. For if Christianity teaches anything, it
teaches that man must live contrary to his natural instincts. The
endeavour of all so-called "new religions" is rootless, because it is
an attempt to adapt Christianity to modern human convenience. Much
better is Sanin's way: he sees clearly that no adaptation is possible,
and logically fights Christianity as the implacable enemy of the
natural man.

There are many indications that one of the great battle-grounds of
Christianity in the near future is to be the modern novel. For many
years there have been plenty of attacks on the supernatural side of
Christianity, and on Christianity as a religion; nearly all its
opponents, however, have treated its ethics, its practical teachings,
with respect. The novel "Sanin" is perhaps the boldest, but it is only
one of many attacks that are now being made on Christianity as a
system of morals; as was the case with the Greeks and Romans,
scepticism in morals follows hard on scepticism in religion. Those who
believe in Christianity ought to rejoice in this open and fair fight;
they ought to welcome it as a complete unmasking of the foe. If the
life according to "Sanin" is really practicable, if it is a good
substitute for the life according to the Christian Gospel, it is
desirable that it should be clearly set forth, and its working
capacity demonstrated. For the real test of Christianity, and the only
one given by its Founder, is its practical value as a way of life. It
can never be successfully attacked by historical research or by
destructive criticism--all such attacks leave it precisely as they
found it. Those who are determined to destroy Christianity, and among
its relentless foes have always been numbered men of great courage and
great ability, must prove that its promises of peace and rest to those
who really follow it are false, and that its influence on society and
on the individual is bad.





IX

ANDREEV




Leonid Andreev is at this moment regarded by many Russians as the
foremost literary artist among the younger school of writers. He was
born at Orel, the birthplace of Turgenev, in 1871, and is thus only
two years younger than Gorki. He began life as a lawyer at Moscow, but
according to his own statement, he had only one case, and lost that.
He very soon abandoned law for literature, as so many writers have
done, and his rise has been exceedingly rapid. He was appointed
police-court reporter on the Moscow "Courier," where he went through
the daily drudgery without attracting any attention. But when he
published in this newspaper a short story, Gorki sent a telegram to
the office, demanding to know the real name of the writer who signed
himself Leonid Andreev. He was informed that the signature was no
pseudonym. This notice from Gorki gave the young man immediate
prominence. Not long after, he published another story in the Russian
periodical "Life;" into the editor's rooms dashed the famous critic
Merezhkovski, who enquired whether it was Chekhov or Gorki that had
selected this assumed name.

Andreev himself says that he has learned much from Tolstoi, the great
Tolstoi of the sixties and seventies, also from Nietzsche, whom he
reads with enthusiasm, and whose most characteristic book, "Also
Sprach Zarathustra," he translated into Russian. He has read Poe with
profit, but he testifies that his greatest teacher in composition is
the Bible. In a letter to a young admirer, he wrote: "I thank you for
your kind dedication. . . . I note that in one place you write about
the Bible. Yes, that is the best teacher of all--the Bible."*

*Most of the biographical information in this paragraph I have taken
from an interesting article in "The Independent" for 29 July 1909, by
Ivan Lavretski.

Andreev has the gift of admiration, and loves to render homage where
homage is due, having dedicated his first book to Gorki, and his story
of "The Seven Who Were Hanged" to Tolstoi. His style, while marked by
the typical yet always startling Russian simplicity, is nevertheless
entirely his own, and all his tales and plays are stamped by powerful
individuality. He is fast becoming an international celebrity. His
terrible picture of war, "The Red Laugh," has been translated into
German, French, and English, two of his dramas, "Anathema" and "To the
Stars," have been published in America, and other of his short stories
are known everywhere in Germany.

The higher the scale in human intelligence, the more horrible and the
more ridiculous does war appear. That men engaged in peaceful and
intellectual pursuits should leave their families, their congenial
work, their pleasant associations, and go out to torture and murder
men of similar tastes and activities, and become themselves
transformed into hideous wild beasts, has a combination of horror and
absurdity that peculiarly impresses a people so highly sensitive, so
thoroughly intellectual, and so kind-hearted as the Russians. All
Russian war-literature, and there is much of it, points back to
Tolstoi's "Sevastopol," where the great novelist stripped warfare of
all its sentiment and patriotic glitter, and revealed its dull, sordid
misery as well as its hellish tragedies. What Tolstoi did for the
Crimean War, Garshin did for the war with Turkey in the seventies. I
have not seen it mentioned, but I suspect that Andreev owes much to
the reading of this brilliant author. Garshin was an unquestionable
genius; if he had lived, I think he might have become the real
successor to Tolstoi, a title that has been bestowed upon Chekhov,
Gorki, and Andreev, and has not yet been earned by any man. But like
nearly all Russian authors, he suffered from intense melancholia, and
in 1888 committed suicide at the age of thirty-three. His short story
"Four Days on the Field of Slaughter" first brought him into public
notice. One cannot read Andreev's "Red Laugh" to-day without thinking
of it.

"On the edge of the wood there was visible something red, floating
here and there. Sidorov fell suddenly to the ground and stared at me
in silence with great, terrified eyes. Out of his mouth poured a
stream of blood. Yes, I remember it very well." This is the "red
laugh" of Andreev, though until the appearance of his book it lacked
the appropriate name. Garshin describes how a Russian soldier stabs a
Fellah to death with his bayonet, and then, too badly injured to move,
lies for four days and nights, in shivering cold and fearful heat,
beside the putrefying corpse of his dead antagonist. "I did that. I
had no wish to do it. I wished no one evil, as I left home for the
war. The thought that I should kill a man did not enter my head. I
thought only of my own danger. And I went to him and did this. Well,
and what happened? O fool, O idiot! This unfortunate Egyptian is still
less guilty. Before they packed them on a steamer like herrings in a
box, and brought them to Constantinople, he had never heard of Russia,
or of Bulgaria. They told him to go and he went."

In the "Diary of Private lvanov," Garshin gave more pictures of the
hideous suffering of war, with a wonderful portrait of the commander
of the company, who is so harshly tyrannical that his men hate him,
and resolve to slay him in the battle. But he survives both open and
secret foes, and at the end of the conflict they find him lying
prostrate, his whole body shaken with sobs, and saying brokenly,
"Fifty-two! Fifty-two!" Fifty-two of his company had been killed, and
despite his cruelty to them, he had loved them all like children.

Garshin wrote other tales, among them a poetically beautiful story of
a tree, "Attalea Princeps," that reminds one somewhat of Bjornson. But
his chief significance is as a truthful witness to the meaningless
maiming and murder of war, and his attitude is precisely similar to
that of Andreev, and both follow Tolstoi.

Andreev's "Red Laugh" ought to be read in America as a contrast to our
numerous war stories, where war is pictured as a delightful and
exciting tournament. This book has not a single touch of patriotic
sentiment, not a suggestion of "Hurrah for our side!" The soldiers are
on the field because they were sent there, and the uninjured are too
utterly tired, too tormented with lack of sleep, too hungry and
thirsty to let out a single whoop. The first sight of the "Red Laugh"
reminds us of the picturesque story of Napoleon's soldier that
Browning has immortalised in the "Incident of the French Camp."
Tolstoi mentions the same event in "Sevastopol," and his version of it
would have pleased Owen Wister's Virginian more than Browning's. In
Andreev there is no graceful gesture, no French pose, no "smiling
joy"; but there is the nerve-shattering red laugh. The officer who
tells the story in the first half of the book narrates how a young
volunteer came up to him and saluted. The appearance of his face was
so tensely white that the officer enquires, "Are you afraid?" Suddenly
a stream of blood bursts from the young man's body, and his deadly
pale face turns into something unspeakable, a toothless laugh--the red
laugh.

In this gruesome tale of the realities of war, Andreev has given
shocking physical details of torn and bleeding bodies, but true to the
theme that animates all his books, he has concentrated the main
interest on the Mind. Soldiers suffer in the flesh, but infinitely
more in the mind. War points chiefly not to the grave, nor to the
hospital, but to the madhouse. All forms of insanity are bred by the
horror and fatigue of the marches and battles: many shoot themselves,
many become raging maniacs, many become gibbering idiots. Every man
who has studied warfare knows that the least of all perils is the
bullet of the enemy, for only a small proportion are released by that.
The innumerable and subtle forms of disease, bred by exposure and
privation, constitute the real danger. Andreev is the first to show
that the most common and awful form of disease among Russian soldiers
is the disease of the brain. The camp becomes a vast madhouse, with
the peculiar feature that the madmen are at large. The hero of the
story loses both his legs, and apparently completely recovered in
health otherwise, returns home to his family, and gazes wistfully at
his bicycle. A sudden desire animates him to write out the story of
the Japanese war; in the process he becomes insane and dies. His
brother then attempts to complete the narrative from the scattered,
confused notes, but to his horror, whenever he approaches the desk,
the phantom of the dead man is ever there, busily writing: he can hear
the pen squeak on the paper.

No more terrible protest against war has ever been written than
Andreev's "Red Laugh." It shows not merely the inexpressible horror of
the battlefield and the dull, weary wretchedness of the men on the
march, but it follows out the farthest ramifications flowing from the
central cause: the constant tragedies in the families, the letters
received after the telegraph has announced the death of the writer,
the insane wretches who return to the homes they left in normal
health, the whole accumulation of woe.

The first two words of the book are "Madness and Horror!" and they
might serve as a text for Andreev's complete works. There seems to be
some taint in his mind which forces him to dwell forever on the
abnormal and diseased. He is not exactly decadent, but he is decidedly
pathological. Professor Bruckner has said of Andreev's stories, "I do
not recall a single one which would not get fearfully on a man's
nerves." He has deepened the universal gloom of Russian fiction, not
by descending into the slums with Gorki, but by depicting life as seen
through the strange light of a decaying mind. He has often been
compared, especially among the Germans, with Edgar Allan Poe. But he
is really not in the least like Poe. Poe's horrors are nearly all
unreal fantasies, that vaguely haunt our minds like the shadow of a
dream. Andreev is a realist, like his predecessors and contemporaries.
His style is always concrete and definite, always filled with the
sense of fact. There is almost something scientific in his collection
of incurables.

The most cheerful thing he has written is perhaps "The Seven Who Were
Hanged." This is horrible enough to bring out a cold sweat; but it is
redeemed, as the work of Dostoevski is, by a vast pity and sympathy
for the condemned wretches. This is the book he dedicated to Tolstoi,
in recognition of the constant efforts of the old writer to have
capital punishment abolished. No sentimental sympathy with murderers
is shown here; he carries no flowers to the cells where each of the
seven in solitude awaits his fate. Nor are the murderers in the least
degree depicted as heroes--they are all different men and women, but
none of them resembles the Hero-Murderer of romance.

The motive underlying this story is shown plainly by the author in an
interesting letter which he wrote to the American translator, and
which is published at the beginning of the book. "The misfortune of us
all is that we know so little, even nothing, about one another--neither
about the soul, nor the life, the sufferings, the habits, the inclinations,
the aspirations, of one another. Literature, which I have the honour to
serve, is dear to me just because the noblest task it sets before itself
is that of wiping out boundaries and distances." That is, the aim of
Andreev, like that of all prominent Russian novelists, is to study the
secret of secrets, the human heart. And like all specialists in humanity,
like Browning, for example, he feels the impossibility of success.

"About what's under lock and key,
Man's soul!"

Farther on in his letter, we read: "My task was to point out the
horror and the iniquity of capital punishment under any circumstances.
The horror of capital punishment is great when it falls to the lot of
courageous and honest people whose only guilt is their excess of love
and the sense of righteousness--in such instances, conscience revolts.
But the rope is still more horrible when it forms the noose around the
necks of weak and ignorant people. And however strange it may appear,
I look with a lesser grief and suffering upon the execution of the
revolutionists, such as Werner and Musya, than upon the strangling of
ignorant murderers, miserable in mind and heart, like Yanson and
Tsiganok." Spoken like Dostoevski!

These seven are an extraordinary group, ranging from calm, courageous,
enlightened individuals to creatures of such dull stupidity that one
wonders if they ever once were men. Each spends the intervening days
in his cell in a different manner. One goes through daily exercises of
physical culture. One receives a visit from his father and mother,
another from his old mother alone. There is not a false touch in the
sentiment in these painful scenes. The midnight journey to the place
of execution is vividly portrayed, and the different sensations of
each of the seven are strikingly indicated. At the last, Musya, who is
a typical Russian heroine in her splendid resolution and boundless
tenderness, becomes the soul of the whole party, and tries to help
them all by her gentle conduct and her words of love. The whole spirit
of this book is profoundly Christian. One feels as if he were taken
back in history, and were present at the execution of a group of early
Christian martyrs. There are thousands of women in Russia like Musya,
and they are now, as they were in the days of Turgenev, the one hope
of the country.

In Merezhkovski's interesting work "Tolstoi as Man and Artist," the
author says: "We are accustomed to think that the more abstract
thought is, the more cold and dispassionate it is. It is not so; or at
least it is not so with us. From the heroes of Dostoevski we may see
how abstract thought may be passionate, how metaphysical theories and
deductions are rooted, not only in cold reason, but in the heart,
emotions, and will. There are thoughts which pour oil on the fire of
the passions and inflame man's flesh and blood more powerfully than
the most unrestrained license. There is a logic of the passions, but
there are also passions in logic. And these are essentially OUR new
passions, peculiar to us and alien to the men of former civilisations.
. . . They feel deeply because they think deeply; they suffer
endlessly because they are endlessly deliberate; they dare to will
because they have dared to think. And the farther, apparently, it is
from life--the more abstract, the more fiery is their thought, the
deeper it enters into their lives. O strange young Russia!"

Merezhkovski is talking of the heroes of Dostoevski; but his remark is
applicable to the work of nearly all Russian novelists, and especially
to Chekhov and Andreev. It is a profound criticism that, if once
grasped by the foreign reader, will enable him to understand much in
Russian fiction that otherwise would be a sealed book. Every one must
have noticed how Russians are hag-ridden by an idea; but no one except
Merezhkovski has observed the PASSION of abstract thought. In some
characters, such as those Dostoevski has given us, it leads to deeds
of wild absurdity; in Andreev, it usually leads to madness.

One of Andreev's books is indeed a whole commentary on the remark of
Merezhkovski quoted above. The English title of the translation is "A
Dilemma," but as the translator has explained, the name of the story
in the original is "Thought (Mysl)." The chief character is a
physician, Kerzhentsev, who reminds one constantly of Dostoevski's
Raskolnikov, but whose states of mind are even more subtly analysed.
No one should read this story unless his nerves are firm, for the
outcome of the tale is such as to make almost any reader for a time
doubt his own sanity. It is a curious study of the border-line between
reason and madness. The physician, who rejoices in his splendid
health, bodily vigour, and absolute equilibrium of mind, quietly
determines to murder his best friend--to murder him openly and
violently, and to go about it in such a way that he himself will
escape punishment. He means to commit the murder to punish the man's
wife because she had rejected him and married his friend, whom she
loves with all the strength of her powerful nature. His problem,
therefore, is threefold: he must murder the man, the man's wife must
know that he is the murderer, and he must escape punishment. He
therefore begins by feigning madness, and acting so well that his
madness comes upon him only at long intervals; at a dinner-party he
has a violent fit; but he waits a whole month before having another
attack. Everything is beautifully planned; he smashes a plate with his
fist, but no one observes that he has taken care previously to cover
the plate with his napkin, so that his hand will not be cut. His
friends are all too sorry for him to have any suspicion of a sinister
intention; and his friend Alexis is fatuously secure. Not so the wife;
she has an instinctive fear of the coming murder. One evening, when
all three are together, the doctor picks up a heavy iron paper-weight,
and Alexis says that with such an instrument a murderer might break a
man's head. This is interesting. "It was precisely the head, and
precisely with that thing that I had planned to crush it, and now that
same head was telling how it would all end." Therefore he leads Alexis
into a dispute by insisting that the paper-weight is too light. Alexis
becomes angry, and actually makes the doctor take the object in his
hand, and they rehearse his own murder. They are stopped by the wife,
who, terror-stricken, says that she never likes such jokes. Both men
burst into hearty laughter.

A short time after, the doctor crushes the skull of Alexis in the
presence of his wife. In the midst of the horror and confusion of the
household, the murderer slips out, goes home, and is resting calmly,
thinking with intense delight of the splendid success of the plan, and
of the extraordinary skill he had shown in its conception and
execution; when, just as he was dropping off to sleep in delicious
drowsiness, there "languidly" entered into his head this thought: it
speaks to his mind in the third person, as though somebody else had
actually said it: It is very possible that Dr. Kerzhentsev is really
insane. He thought that he simulated, but he is really insane--insane
at this very instant.

After this poison has entered his soul, his condition can be easily
imagined. A terrible debate begins in his own mind, for he is fighting
against himself for his own reason. Every argument that he can think
of to persuade himself of his sanity he marshals; but there are plenty
of arguments on the other side. The story is an excellent example of
what Merezhkovski must mean by the passion of thought.

Another illustration of Andreev's uncanny power is seen in the short
story "Silence." A father does not understand his daughter's silence,
and treats her nervous suffering with harsh practicality. She commits
suicide; the mother is stricken with paralysis; silence reigns in the
house. Silence. The father beseeches his wife to speak to him; there
is no speculation in her wide-open eyes. He cries aloud to his dead
daughter. Silence. Nothing but silence, and the steady approach of
madness.

Andreev is an unflinching realist, with all the Russian power of the
concrete phrase. He would never say, in describing a battle, that the
Russians "suffered a severe loss." He would turn a magnifying glass on
each man. But, although he is a realist and above all a psychologist,
he is also a poet. In the sketch "Silence" there is the very spirit of
poetry. The most recent bit of writing by him that I have seen is
called a Fantasy*--"Life is so Beautiful to the Resurrected." This is
a meditation in a graveyard, written in the manner of one of
Turgenev's "Poems in Prose," though lacking something of that master's
exquisite beauty of style. It is, however, not sentimentally
conventional, but original. The poetic quality in Andreev animates all
his dramas, particularly "To the Stars."

*Translated in "Current Literature," New York, for September 1910.





X

KUPRIN'S PICTURE OF GARRISON LIFE




As Tolstoi, Garshin, and Andreev have shown the horrors of war, so
Kuprin* has shown the utter degradation and sordid misery of garrison
life. If Russian army posts in time of peace bear even a remote
resemblance to the picture given in Kuprin's powerful novel "In
Honour's Name,"** one would think that the soldiers there entombed
would heartily rejoice at the outbreak of war--would indeed welcome
any catastrophe, provided it released them from such an Inferno. It is
interesting to compare stories of American garrisons, or such clever
novels as Mrs. Diver's trilogy of British army posts in India, with
the awful revelations made by Kuprin. Among these Russian officers and
soldiers there is not one gleam of patriotism to glorify the drudgery;
there is positively no ideal, even dim-descried. The officers are a
collection of hideously selfish, brutal, drunken, licentious beasts;
their mental horizon is almost inconceivably narrow, far narrower than
that of mediaeval monks in a monastery. The soldiers are in worse
plight than prisoners, being absolutely at the mercy of the alcoholic
caprices of their superiors. A favourite device of the officer is to
jam the trumpet against the trumpeter's mouth, when he is trying to
obey orders by sounding the call; then they laugh at him derisively as
he spits out blood and broken teeth. The common soldiers are beaten
and hammered unmercifully in the daily drill, so that they are all
bewildered, being in such a state of terror that it is impossible for
them to perform correctly even the simplest manoeuvres. The only
officer in this story who treats his men with any consideration is a
libertine, who seduces the peasants' daughters in the neighbourhood,
and sends them back to their parents with cash payments for their
services.

*Kuprin was born in 1870, and was for a time an officer in the Russian
army.

**Translated by W. F. Harvey: the French translation is called "Une
Petite Garnison Russe;" the German, "Das Duell," after the original
title.

If Kuprin's story be true, one does not need to look far for the utter
failure of the Russian troops in the Japanese war; the soldiers are
here represented as densely ignorant, drilling in abject terror of
their officers' fists and boots, and knowing nothing whatever of true
formations in attack or defence. As for the officers, they are much
worse than the soldiers: their mess is nothing but an indescribably
foul alcoholic den, where sodden drunkenness and filthy talk are the
steady routine. They are all gamblers and debauchees; as soon as a sum
of money can be raised among them, they visit the brothel. The
explanation of the beastly habits of these representatives of the Tsar
is given in the novel in this wise: "Yes, they are all alike, even the
best and most tender-hearted among them. At home they are splendid
fathers of families and excellent husbands; but as soon as they
approach the barracks they become low-minded, cowardly, and idiotic
barbarians. You ask me why this is, and I answer: Because nobody can
find a grain of sense in what is called military service. You know how
all children like to play at war. Well, the human race has had its
childhood--a time of incessant and bloody war; but war was not then
one of the scourges of mankind, but a continued, savage, exultant
national feast to which daring bands of youths marched forth, meeting
victory or death with joy and pleasure. . . . Mankind, however, grew
in age and wisdom; people got weary of the former rowdy, bloody games,
and became more serious, thoughtful, and cautious. The old Vikings of
song and saga were designated and treated as pirates. The soldier no
longer regarded war as a bloody but enjoyable occupation, and had
often to be dragged to the enemy with a noose round his neck. The
former terrifying, ruthless, adored atamens* have been changed into
cowardly, cautious tschinovnih,** who get along painfully enough on
never adequate pay. Their courage is of a new and quite moist kind,
for it is invariably derived from the glass. Military discipline still
exists, but it is based on threats and dread, and undermined by a
dull, mutual hatred. . . . And all this abomination is carefully
hidden under a close veil of tinsel and finery, and foolish, empty
ceremonies, in all ages the charlatan's conditio sine qua non. Is not
this comparison of mine between the priesthood and the military caste
interesting and logical? Here the riassa and the censer; there the
gold-laced uniform and the clank of arms. Here bigotry, hypocritical
humility, sighs and sugary, sanctimonious, unmeaning phrases; there
the same odious grimaces, although its method and means are of another
kind--swaggering manners, bold and scornful looks--'God help the man
who dares to insult me!'--padded shoulders, cock-a-hoop defiance. Both
the former and the latter class live like parasites on society, and
are profoundly conscious of that fact, but fear--especially for their
bellies' sake--to publish it. And both remind one of certain little
blood-sucking animals which eat their way most obstinately into the
surface of a foreign body in proportion as it is slippery and steep."

*Officers.

**Officials.

Apart from the terrible indictment of army life and military
organisation that Kuprin has given, the novel "In Honour's Name" is an
interesting story with living characters. There is not a single good
woman in the book: the officers' wives are licentious, unprincipled,
and eaten up with social ambition. The chief female character is a
subtle, clever, heartless, diabolical person, who plays on her lover's
devotion in the most sinister manner, and eventually brings him to the
grave by a device that startles the reader by its cold-blooded,
calculating cruelty. Surely no novelists outside of Russia have drawn
such evil women. The hero, Romashov, is once more the typical Russian
whom we have met in every Russian novelist, a talker, a dreamer, with
high ideals, harmlessly sympathetic, and without one grain of
resolution or will-power. He spends all his time in aspirations,
sighs, and tears--and never by any chance accomplishes anything. The
author's mouthpiece in the story is the drunkard Nasanski, who
prophesies of the good time of the brotherhood of man far in the
future. This is to be brought about, not by the teachings of Tolstoi,
which he ridicules, but by self-assertion. This self-assertion points
the way to Artsybashev's "Sanin," although in Kuprin it does not take
on the form of absolute selfishness. One of Nasanski's alcoholic
speeches seems to contain the doctrine of the whole book: "Yes, a new,
glorious, and wonderful time is at hand. I venture to say this, for I
myself have lived a good deal in the world, read, seen, experienced,
and suffered much. When I was a schoolboy, the old crows and jackdaws
croaked into our ears: 'Love your neighbour as yourself, and know that
gentleness, obedience, and the fear of God are man's fairest
adornments.' Then came certain strong, honest, fanatical men who said:
'Come and join us, and we'll throw ourselves into the abyss so that
the coming race shall live in light and freedom.' But I never
understood a word of this. Who do you suppose is going to show me, in
a convincing way, in what manner I am linked to this 'neighbour' of
mine--damn him! who, you know, may be a miserable slave, a Hottentot,
a leper, or an idiot? . . . Can any reasonable being tell me why I
should crush my head so that the generation in the year 3200 may
attain a higher standard of happiness? . . . Love of humanity is burnt
out and has vanished from the heart of man. In its stead shall come a
new creed, a new view of life that shall last to the world's end; and
this view of life consists in the individual's love for himself, for
his own powerful intelligence, and the infinite riches of his feelings
and perceptions. . . Ah, a time will come when the fixed belief in
one's own Ego will cast its blessed beams over mankind as did once the
fiery tongues of the Holy Ghost over the Apostles' heads. Then there
shall be no longer slaves and masters; no maimed or cripples; no
malice, no vices, no pity, no hate. Men shall be gods. How shall I
dare to deceive, insult, or ill-treat another man, in whom I see and
feel my fellow, who, like myself, is a god? Then, and then only, shall
life be rich and beautiful.... Our daily life shall be a pleasurable
toil, an enfranchised science, a wonderful music, an everlasting
merrymaking. Love, free and sovereign, shall become the world's
religion."

In considering Russian novelists of to-day, and the promise for the
future, Andreev seems to be the man best worth watching--he is the
most gifted artist of them all. But it is clear that no new writer has
appeared in Russia since the death of Dostoevski in 1881 who can
compare for an instant with the author of "Anna Karenina," and that
the great names in Russian fiction are now, as they were forty years
ago, Gogol, Turgenev, Tolstoi, and Dostoevski. Very few long novels
have been published in Russia since "Resurrection" that, so far as we
can judge, have permanent value. Gorki's novels are worthless; his
power, like that of Chekhov and Andreev, is seen to best advantage in
the short story. Perhaps the younger school have made a mistake in
studying so exclusively the abnormal.








This eBook was produced by Carel Lyn Miske, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.



[Illustration: "Well Chile, Wot You Wants Ter Say?"]

The Works of E. P. Roe


_VOLUME FIFTEEN_


THE EARTH TREMBLED


ILLUSTRATED




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I
  MARY WALLINGFORD
CHAPTER II
  LOVE'S AGONY
CHAPTER III
  UNCLE SHEBA'S EXPERIENCE
CHAPTER IV
  MARA
CHAPTER V
  PAST AND FUTURE
CHAPTER VI
  "PAHNASHIP"
CHAPTER VII
  MARA'S PURPOSE
CHAPTER VIII
  NEVER FORGET; NEVER FORGIVE
CHAPTER IX
  A NEW SOLACE
CHAPTER X
  MISS AINSLEY
CHAPTER XI
  TWO QUESTIONS
CHAPTER XII
  A "FABULATION"
CHAPTER XIII
  CAPTAIN BODINE
CHAPTER XIV
  "ALL GIRLS TOGETHER"
CHAPTER XV
  TWO LITTLE BAKERS
CHAPTER XVI
  HONEST FOES
CHAPTER XVII
  FIRESIDE DRAMAS
CHAPTER XVIII
  A FAIR DUELLIST
CHAPTER XIX
  A CHIVALROUS SURPRISE
CHAPTER XX
  THE STRANGER EXPLAINS
CHAPTER XXI
  UNCLE SHEBA SAT UPON
CHAPTER XXII
  YOUNG HOUGHTON IS DISCUSSED
CHAPTER XXIII
  THE WARNING
CHAPTER XXIV
  "THE IDEA!"
CHAPTER XXV
  FEMININE FRIENDS
CHAPTER XXVI
  ELLA'S CRUMB OF COMFORT
CHAPTER XXVII
  RECOGNIZED AS LOVER
CHAPTER XXVIII
  "HEAVEN SPEED YOU THEN"
CHAPTER XXIX
  CONSTERNATION
CHAPTER XXX
  TEMPESTS
CHAPTER XXXI
  "I ABSOLVE YOU"
CHAPTER XXXII
  FALSE SELF-SACRIFICE
CHAPTER XXXIII
  A SURE TEST
CHAPTER XXXIV
  "BITTERNESS MUST BE CHERISHED"
CHAPTER XXXV
  NOBLE REVENGE
CHAPTER XXXVI
  A FATHER'S FRENZY
CHAPTER XXXVII
  CLOUDS LIFTING
CHAPTER XXXVIII
  "YES, VILET"
CHAPTER XXXIX
  THE EARTHQUAKE
CHAPTER XL
  "GOD"
CHAPTER XLI
  SCENES NEVER TO BE FORGOTTEN
CHAPTER XLII
  A HOMELESS CITY
CHAPTER XLIII
  "THE TERROR BY NIGHT"
CHAPTER XLIV
  HOPE TURNED INTO DREAD
CHAPTER XLV
  A CITY ENCAMPING
CHAPTER XLVI
  "ON JORDAN'S BANKS WE STAN'"
CHAPTER XLVII
  LIGHTS AND SHADOWS OF A NIGHT
CHAPTER XLVIII
  GOOD BROUGHT OUT OF EVIL




THE EARTH TREMBLED




THE EARTH TREMBLED


CHAPTER I

MARY WALLINGFORD


At the beginning of the Civil War there was a fine old residence on
Meeting Street in Charleston, South Carolina, inhabited by a family almost
as old as the State. Its inheritor and owner, Orville Burgoyne, was a
widower. He had been much saddened in temperament since the death of the
wife, and had withdrawn as far as possible from public affairs. His
library and the past had secured a stronger hold upon his interest and his
thoughts than anything in the present, with one exception, his idolized
and only child, Mary, named for her deceased mother. Any book would be
laid aside when she entered; all gloom banished from his eyes when she
coaxed and caressed him.

She was in truth one to be loved because so capable of love herself. She
conquered and ruled every one not through wilfulness or imperiousness, but
by a gentle charm, all her own, which disarmed opposition.

At first Mr. Burgoyne had paid little heed to the mutterings which
preceded the Civil War, believing them to be but Chinese thunder, produced
by ambitious politicians, North and South. He was preoccupied by the study
of an old system of philosophy which he fancied possessed more truth than
many a more plausible and modern one. Mary, with some fancy work in her
hands, often watched his deep abstraction in wondering awe, and
occasionally questioned him in regard to his thoughts and studies; but as
his explanations were almost unintelligible, she settled down to the
complacent belief that her father was one of the most learned men in the
world.

At last swiftly culminating events aroused Mr. Burgoyne from his
abstraction and drove him from his retirement. He accepted what he
believed to be duty in profound sorrow and regret. His own early
associations and those of his ancestors had been with the old flag and its
fortunes; his relations to the political leaders of the South were too
slight to produce any share in the alienation and misunderstandings which
had been growing between the two great sections of his country, and he
certainly had not the slightest sympathy with those who had fomented the
ill-will for personal ends. Finally, however, he had found himself face to
face with the momentous certainty of a separation of his State from the
Union. For a time he was bewildered and disturbed beyond measure; for he
was not a prompt man of affairs, living keenly in the present, but one who
had been suddenly and rudely summoned from the academic groves of the old
philosophers to meet the burning imperative questions of the
day--questions put with the passionate earnestness of a people excited
beyond measure.

It was this very element of popular feeling which finally turned the scale
in his decision. Apparently the entire Southern people were unanimous in
their determination "to be free" and to separate themselves from their old
political relations. His pastor with all other friends of his own rank
confirmed this impression, and, as it was known that he wavered, the best
and strongest men of his acquaintance argued the question with him. His
daughter was early carried away by the enthusiasm of her young companions,
nevertheless she watched the conflict in her father's mind with the
deepest interest. She often saw him walk the floor with unwonted tears in
his eyes and almost agony on his brow; and when at last, he decided in
accordance with the prevailing sentiment of his State, the Act of
Secession and all that it involved became sacred in her thoughts.

She trembled and shrank when the phase of negotiation passed away, and war
was seen to be the one alternative to submission. She never doubted or
hesitated, however; neither did her father after his mind was once made
up. Every day the torrent of bitter feeling deepened and broadened between
them and the North, of which, practically, they knew very little. Even
such knowledge as they possessed had come through distorted mediums, and
now everything was colored by the blackest prejudice. They were led to
believe and made to feel that not only their possessions but their life
and honor were at stake. In early years Mr. Burgoyne had served with
distinction in the war with Mexico, and he therefore promptly received a
commission.

The effect of her father's decision and action had been deepened a
hundred-fold by an event which occurred soon afterward. Among the
thousands who thronged to Charleston when Fort Sumter was attacked, was
the son of a wealthy planter residing in the interior of the State. This
young soldier's enthusiasm and devotion were much bruited in the city,
because, waiving wealth and rank, he had served as a private. His
fearlessness at Fort Moultrie enhanced his reputation, and when the small
garrison of heroes, commanded by Major Anderson, succumbed, Sidney
Wallingford found that he had been voted a hero himself, especially by his
fair compatriots with whom he had formerly danced when visiting the town.

The young fellow's head was not easily turned, however, for when, at an
evening gathering, a group was lauding the great achievement he said
disdainfully, "What! thousands against seventy? Despise the Yankees as we
may, the odds were too great. The only thing we can plume ourselves upon
is that we would have fought just the same had the seventy been seven
thousand. I think the fellows did splendidly, if they were Yankees, yet
what else could we expect since their commander was a Southern man? Oh no!
we must wait till the conditions are more even before we can exult over
our victories. I reckon we'll have them all the same though."

Murmurs of approbation followed these remarks, but he saw only the
eloquent eyes of Mary Burgoyne, and, offering her his arm, led her away.

The spring night was as warm as a June evening at the North, and they
joined the groups that were strolling under the moonlight in the garden.

Sidney felt the young girl's hand tremble on his arm, and he drew it
closer to his side. She soon asked falteringly, "Mr. Wallingford, do you
think--will the conditions become more even, as you suggested? Can it be
that the North will be so carried away by this abolition fanaticism as to
send armies and ships in the vain effort to subjugate us?"

"Thank you, Miss Mary, for saying that it will be a 'vain effort.'"

"Of course it will be, with such men as my father and"--she suddenly
hesitated.

"And who else?" he gently asked, trying to look into her averted face.

"Oh--well," she stammered with a forced little laugh, "thousands of brave
fellows like you. You do not answer my question. Are we to have anything
like a general war? Surely, there ought to be enough good, wise men on
both sides to settle the matter."

"The matter might be settled easily enough," he replied lightly. "We know
our rights, and shall firmly assert them. If the Yankees yield, all well;
if not, we'll make 'em."

"But making them may mean a great war?"

"Oh, yes, some serious scrimmages I reckon. We're prepared however, and
will soon bring the North to its senses."

"If anything should happen to my father!" she sighed.

He had led her beneath the shadow of a palmetto, and now breathed into her
ear, "Mary, dear Mary, how much I'd give to hear you say in the same tone,
'If anything should happen to Sidney'!" She did not withdraw her hand from
his arm, and he again felt it tremble more than before. "Mary," he
continued earnestly, "I have asked your father if I might speak to you,
and he did not deny me the privilege. Oh, Mary, you must have seen my love
in my eyes and heard it in my tones long since. Mary," he concluded
impetuously, "let me but feel that I am defending you as well as my State,
and I can and will be a soldier in very truth."

She suddenly turned and sobbed on his shoulder, "That's what I fear,--I
can hide my secret from you no longer--that's what I fear. Those I love
will be exposed to sudden and terrible death. I am not brave at all."

"Shall I go home and plant cotton?" he asked, half jestingly.

"No, no, a thousand times no," she cried passionately. "Have I not seen
the deep solemnity with which my father accepted duty so foreign to his
tastes and habits? Can you think I would wish you to shrink or fail--you
who are so strong and brave? No, no, in very truth. Self must mean only
self-sacrifice until our sacred cause is won. Yet think twice, Sidney,
before you bind yourself to me. I fear I am not so brave as other women
appear to be in these times. My heart shrinks unspeakably from war and
bloodshed. Although I shall not falter, I shall suffer agonies of dread. I
cannot let you go to danger with stern words and dry eyes. I fear you'll
find me too weak to be a soldier's wife."

He led her into deeper and shadier seclusion as he asked, "Do you think
I'll hesitate because you have a heart in your bosom instead of a stone?
No, my darling. We must keep a brave aspect to the world, but my heart is
as tender toward you as yours toward me. What else in God's universe could
I dread more than harm to you? But there is little cause to fear. The
whole South will soon be with us, foreign nations will recognize us as an
independent people, and then we will dictate our own terms of peace; then
you shall be my bride in this, our proud city by the sea."

He kissed away her tears, and they strolled through the shadowy walks
until each had regained the composure essential in the bright
drawing-rooms.

A commission with the rank of captain was speedily offered young
Wallingford. He accepted it, but said he would return home and raise his
own company. This action was also applauded by his friends and the
authorities. Mary saw her father smile approvingly and proudly upon her
choice, and he became her ideal hero as well as lover.

He fulfilled his promises, and before many weeks passed, re-entered
Charleston with a hundred brave fellows, devoted to him. The company was
incorporated into one of the many regiments forming, and Mr. Burgoyne
assured his daughter that the young captain was sure of promotion, and
would certainly make a thorough soldier.

Even in those early and lurid days a few things were growing clear, and
among them was the fact that the North would not recognize the doctrine of
State Rights, nor peaceably accept the Act of Secession. Soldiers would be
needed,--how long no one knew, for the supreme question of the day had
passed from the hands of statesmen to those of the soldier. The lack of
mutual knowledge, the misapprehension and the gross prejudices existing
between the two sections, would have been ludicrous had they not been
fraught with such long-continued woes. Southern papers published such
stuff as this: "The Northern soldiers are men who prefer enlisting to
starvation; scurvy fellows from the back slums of cities, with whom
Falstaff would not have marched through Coventry. Let them come South, and
we will put our negroes at the dirty work of killing them. But they will
not come South. Not a wretch of them will live on this side of the border
longer than it will take us to reach the ground and drive them off." The
Northern press responded in kind: "No man of sense," it was declared,
"could for a moment doubt that this much-ado-about-nothing would end in a
month. The Northern people are simply invincible. The rebels, a mere band
of ragamuffins, will fly like chaff before the wind on our approach." Thus
the wretched farces of bluster continued on either side until in blood,
agony, and heartbreak, Americans learned to know Americans.

President Lincoln, however, had called out seventy-five thousand troops,
and these men were not long in learning that they could not walk over the
South in three months. The South also discovered that these same men could
not be terrified into abandoning the attempt. There were thoughtful men on
both sides who early began to recognize the magnitude of the struggle upon
which they had entered. Among these was Major Burgoyne, and the
presentiment grew upon him that he would not see the end of the conflict.
When, therefore, impetuous young Wallingford urged that he might call Mary
his wife before he marched to distant battlefields, the father yielded,
feeling that it might be well for her to have another protector besides
himself. The union was solemnized in old St. Michael's Church, where
Mary's mother and grandmother had been married before her; a day or two of
quiet and happiness was vouchsafed, and then came the tidings of the first
great battle of the war. Charleston responded with acclamations of
triumph; bells sent out their merriest peals; cannon thundered from every
fort on the harbor, but Mary wept on her husband's breast. Among the
telegrams of victory had come an order for his regiment to go North
immediately. Not even a brief honeymoon was permitted to her.




CHAPTER II

LOVE'S AGONY


As the exaggerated reports of a magnificent Confederate victory at Bull
Run continued to pour in, Major Burgoyne shared for a time in the general
elation, believing that independence, recognition abroad, and peace had
been virtually secured. All the rant about Northern cowardice appeared to
be confirmed, and he eagerly waited for the announcement that Washington
had been captured by Johnston's victorious army.

Instead, came the dismal tidings from his only sister that her husband,
Captain Hunter, had been killed in the battle over which he had been
rejoicing. Then for some mysterious reason the Southern army did not
follow the Federals, who had left the field in such utter rout and panic.
It soon appeared that the contending forces were occupying much the same
positions as before. News of the second great uprising of the North
followed closely, and presaged anything but a speedy termination of the
conflict. Major Burgoyne was not a Hotspur, and he grew thoughtful and
depressed in spirit, although he sedulously concealed the fact from his
associates. The shadow of coming events began to fall upon him, and his
daughter gradually divined his lack of hopefulness. The days were already
sad and full of anxiety, for her husband was absent. He had scouted the
idea of the Yankees standing up before the impetuous onset of the Southern
soldiers, and his words had apparently proved true, yet even those
Northern cowards had killed one closely allied to her before they fled.
Remembering, therefore, her husband's headlong courage, what assurance of
his safety could she have although victory followed victory?

Major Burgoyne urged his widowed sister to leave her plantation in the
charge of an overseer and make her home with him. "You are too near the
probable theatre of military operations to be safe," he wrote, "and my
mind cannot rest till you are with us in this city which we are rapidly
making impregnable." The result was that she eventually became a member of
his family. Her stern, sad face added to the young wife's depression, for
the stricken woman had been rendered intensely bitter by her loss. Mary
was too gentle in nature to hate readily, yet wrathful gleams would be
emitted at times even from her blue eyes, as her aunt inveighed in her
hard monotone against the "monstrous wrong of the North." They saw their
side with such downright sincerity and vividness that the offenders
appeared to be beyond the pale of humanity. Few men, even though the
frosts of many winters had cooled their blood and ripened their judgment,
could reason dispassionately in those days, much less women, whose hearts
were kept on the rack of torture by the loss of dear ones or the dread of
such loss.

It is my purpose to dwell upon the war, its harrowing scenes and intense
animosities, only so far as may be essential to account for my characters
and to explain subsequent events. The roots of personality strike deep,
and the taproot, heredity, runs back into the being of those who lived and
suffered before we were born.

Gentle Mary Burgoyne should have been part of a happier day and
generation. The bright hopes of a speedily conquered peace were dying
away; the foolish bluster on both sides at the beginning of the war had
ceased, and the truth so absurdly ignored at first, that Americans, North
and South, would fight with equal courage, was made clearer by every
battle. The heavy blows received by the South, however, did not change her
views as to the wisdom and righteousness of her cause, and she continued
to return blows at which the armies of the North reeled, stunned and
bleeding. Mary was not permitted to exult very long, however, for the
terrible pressure was quickly renewed with an unwavering pertinacity which
created misgivings in the stoutest hearts. The Federals had made a strong
lodgment on the coast of her own State, and were creeping nearer and
nearer, often repulsed yet still advancing as if impelled by the
remorseless principle of fate.

At last, in the afternoon of a day early in April, events occurred never
to be forgotten by those who witnessed them. Admiral Dupont with his
armored ships attempted to reduce Fort Sumter and capture the city.
Thousands of spectators watched the awful conflict; Mary Wallingford and
her aunt, Mrs. Hunter, among them. The combined roar of the guns exceeded
all the thunder they had ever heard. About three hundred Confederate
cannon were concentrated on the turreted monitors, and some of the
commanders said that "shot struck the vessels as fast as the ticking of a
watch." It would seem that the ships which appeared so diminutive in the
distance must be annihilated, yet Mary with her powerful glass saw them
creep nearer and nearer. It was their shots, not those of her friends,
that she watched with agonized absorption, for every tremendous bolt was
directed against the fort in which was her father.

The conflict was too unequal; the bottom of the harbor was known to be
paved with torpedoes, and in less than an hour Dupont withdrew his
squadron in order to save it from destruction.

In strong reaction from intense excitement, Mary's knees gave way, and she
sank upon them in thankfulness to God. Her aunt supported her to her room,
gave restoratives, and the daughter in deep anxiety waited for tidings
from her father. He did not come to her; he was brought, and there settled
down upon her young life a night of grief and horror which no words can
describe. While he was sighting a gun, it had been struck by a shell from
the fleet, and when the smoke of the explosion cleared away he was seen
among the debris, a mangled and unconscious form. He was tenderly taken
up, and after the conflict ended, conveyed to his home. On the way thither
he partially revived, but reason was gone. His eyes were scorched and
blinded, his hearing destroyed by the concussion, and but one lingering
thought survived in the wreck of his mind. In a plaintive and almost
childlike tone he continually uttered the words, "I was only trying to
defend my city and my home."

Hour after hour he repeated this sentence, deaf to his child's entreaties
for recognition and a farewell word. His voice grew more and more feeble
until he could only whisper the sad refrain; at last his lips moved but
there was no sound; then he was still.

For a time it seemed as if Mary would soon follow him, but her aunt, her
white face tearless and stern, bade her live for her husband and her
unborn child. These sacred motives eventually enabled her to rally, but
her heart now centred its love on her husband with an intensity which made
her friends tremble for her future. His visits had been few and brief, and
she lived upon his letters. When they were delayed, her eyes had a hunted,
agonized look which even her stoical aunt could not endure.

One day about midsummer she found the stricken wife, unconscious upon the
floor with the daily paper in her clenched hand. When at last the
physician had brought back feeble consciousness and again banished it by
the essential opiate, Mrs. Hunter read the paragraph which, like a bolt,
had struck down her niece. It was from an account of a battle in which the
Confederates had been worsted and were being driven from a certain vantage
point. "At this critical moment," ran the report, "Colonel Wallingford,
with his thinned regiment, burst through the crowd of fugitives rushing
down the road, and struck the pursuing enemy such a stinging blow as to
check its advance. If the heroic colonel and his little band could only
have been supported at this instant the position might have been regained.
As it was, they were simply overwhelmed as a slight obstacle is swept away
by a torrent. But few escaped; some were captured, while the colonel and
the majority were struck down, trampled upon and fairly obliterated as the
Northern horde of infantry and artillery swept forward all the more
impetuously. The check was of very great advantage, however, for it gave
our vastly outnumbered troops more time to rally in a stronger position."

This brief paragraph contained the substance of all that was ever learned
of the young husband, and his mangled remains filled an unknown grave. His
wife had received the blow direct, and she never rallied. Week after week
she moaned and wept upon her bed when the physician permitted
consciousness. Even in the deep sleep produced by opiates, she would
shudder at the sound of Gilmore's guns as they thundered against Forts
Sumter and Wagner. A faithful colored woman who had been a slave in the
family from infancy watched unweariedly beside her, giving place only to
the stern-visaged aunt, whose touch and words were gentle, but who had
lost the power to disguise the bitterness of her heart. She tried to
awaken maternal instincts in the wife, but in vain, for there are wounds
of the spirit, like those of the body, which are fatal. All efforts to
induce the widow to leave the city, already within reach of the Federal
guns, were unavailing, and she was the more readily permitted to have her
own way, because, in the physician's opinion, the attempt would prove
fatal.

Meanwhile her time was drawing near. One August night she was dozing, and
moaning in her sleep, when suddenly there was a strange, demoniac shriek
through the air followed by an explosion which in the still night was
terrifically loud. The invalid started up and looked wildly at her sable
nurse, who was trembling like a leaf.

"O Lawd hab mercy, Missus," she exclaimed. "Dem Yankees shellin' de town."

Mrs. Hunter was instantly at the bedside. The faithful doctor came
hurriedly of his own accord, and employed all his skill.

A few hours later Mrs. Hunter tried to say cheerily, "Come, Mary, here is
a fine little girl for you to love and live for."

"Aunty," said the mother calmly, "I am dying. Let me see my child and kiss
her. Then put her next my heart till it is cold."

Mrs. Hunter lifted her startled eyes to the physician, who sadly nodded
his head in acquiescence. In a few moments more the broken heart found
healing far beyond all human passion and strife.

With hot, yet tearless eyes, and a face that appeared to be chiselled from
marble in its whiteness and rigidity, the aunt took up the child. Her tone
revealed the indescribable intensity of her feelings as she said, "Thy
name is Mara--bitterness."




CHAPTER III

UNCLE SHEBA'S EXPERIENCE


Many years have elapsed since the events narrated in the last chapter
occurred, and the thread of story is taken up again in the winter of 1886.
In a small dwelling, scarcely more than a cabin, and facing on an obscure
alley in Charleston, a rotund colored woman of uncertain age is sitting by
the fire with her husband. She is a well-known character in the city, for
she earns her bread by selling cakes, fruits, and other light articles
which may be vended in the street with chances of profit. Although "Aun'
Sheba," as she was familiarly called, had received no training for
mercantile pursuits, yet her native shrewdness had enabled her to hit upon
the principles of success, as may be discovered by the reader as the story
progresses. She had always been so emphatically the master of the house
and the head of the family, that her husband went by the name of "Uncle
Sheba." It must be admitted that the wife shared in the popular opinion of
her husband.

When in an amiable mood, which, happily, was her usual condition of mind,
she addressed him as "Unc.;" when some of his many short-comings exhausted
her good-nature--for Aun' Sheba had more good-nature than patience--he was
severely characterized as "Mr. Buggone." Since they had been brought up in
Major Burgoyne's family, they felt entitled to his surname, and by
evolution it had become "Buggone." Uncle Sheba's heart failed him when his
wife addressed him by this title, for he knew he was beyond the dead line
of safety. They dwelt alone in the cabin, their several children, with one
exception, having been scattered they knew not where. Adjacent was another
cabin, owned by a son-in-law, named Kern Watson, who had married their
youngest daughter years before, and he was the pride of Aun' Sheba's
heart. Uncle Sheba felt that he was not appreciated, or perhaps
appreciated too well, by his son-in-law, and their intercourse was rather
formal.

On the evening in question, supper was over, but the table had not yet
been cleared. Uncle Sheba was a good deal of an epicure, and, having left
not a scrap of what his wife had vouchsafed to him, was now enjoying his
corn-cob pipe. Aun' Sheba also liked a good square meal as much as any
one, and she had the additional satisfaction that she had earned it. At
this hour of the day she was usually very tired, and was accustomed to
take an hour's rest before putting her living-room in order for the night.
Although the twilight often fell before she returned from her mercantile
pursuits, she never intrusted Uncle Sheba with the task of getting supper,
and no housekeeper in the city kept her provisions under lock and key more
rigorously than did Aun' Sheba. After repeated trials, she had come to a
decision. "Mr. Buggone," she had said in her sternest tones, "you's wuss
dan poah white trash when you gets a chance at de cubbard. Sence I can't
trus' you nohow, I'se gwine to gib you a 'lowance. You a high ole
Crischun, askin' for you'se daily bread, an' den eatin' up 'nuff fer a
week."

Uncle Sheba often complained that he was "skimped," but his appearance did
not indicate any meagreness in his "'lowance," and he had accepted his lot
in this instance, as in others, rather than lose the complacent
consciousness that he was provided for without much effort on his part.

Supper was Aun' Sheba's principal meal, and she practically dined at the
fashionable hour of six. What she termed her dinner was a very uncertain
affair. Sometimes she swallowed it hastily at "Ole Tobe's rasteran," as
she termed the eating-room kept by a white-woolled negro; again she would
"happen in" on a church sister, when, in passing, the odor of some cookery
was appetizing. She always left, however, some compensation from her
basket, and so was not unwelcome. Not seldom, also, a lady or a citizen
who knew her well and the family to which she had once belonged, would
tell her to go to the kitchen. On such days Aun' Sheba's appetite flagged
at supper, a fact over which her husband secretly rejoiced, since his
allowance was almost double.

She was now resting after the fatigues of the day, and the effort to get
and dispose of a very substantial supper, and was puffing at her pipe in a
meditative aspect. Evidently something unusual was on her mind, and she at
last ejaculated, "I know dey'se poah."

"Who's?" languidly queried Uncle Sheba.

"Oh, you'd neber fin' out. Dey'd starve long o' you."

"I dunno who dey is. What 'casion I got to pervide for dey?"

"Ha, ha, ha, Unc.! You'se a great pervider. Somehow or oder I'se got de
notion dat you'se a 'sumer."

"I bress de Lawd my appetite am' failin' in spite ob de rheumatiz."

"If you rheumatiz was only in you jints, dere'd be a comfort in keerin'
fer you, Unc., but it's in you min'."

"You'll cotch it some day, an' den you know what 'tis. But who's dey dat
you got on you min'?"

"Why, de young Missy and de ole Missus to be sho'."

"I don't see how dey can be poah. Dey mus' hab kep' someting out all dey
had."

"So dey did, but it wan't much, an' I jus' b'lebe it's clar dun gone!"

"What! de plantation in Virginny all gone?"

"How often I tole you, Unc., dat I heard ole Missus say herself dat
plantation was all trompl'd in de groun' an' what was lef' was took fer
taxes."

"I forgits," remarked Uncle Sheba, his eyes growing heavy in his lack of
interest; "but ole Marse Wallingford mus' hab lef' de widder ob his son
someting."

"Now look heah, Unc., you'se haf asleep. You'se 'lowance too hebby dis
ebenin'. How you forgit when I tell you ober an' ober? You doan keer.
Dat's de foot de shoe's on. You know ole Marse Wallingford's plantation
was trompl'd in de groun' too--not a stick or stone lef' by Sherman's
sogers."

"Well, dey sole dere fine house on Meetin' Street, an' dat mus' a brought
a heap," protested Uncle Sheba, rousing himself a little.

"Mighty little arter de mor'giges an' taxes was paid. Didn't I help dem
pack up what dey tink dey could sabe, and see poah Missy Mara wrung her
han's as she gib up dis ting an' dat ting till at las' she cry right out,
'Mought as well gib up eberyting. Why don't dey kill us too, like dey did
all our folks?' You used to be so hot fer dat ole Guv'ner Moses and say he
was like de Moses in de Bible--dat he was raised up fer ter lead de culled
people to de promise' lan'. You vote fer him, an' hurrah fer him, an'
whar's yer promise' lan'? Little you know 'bout Scripter when you say he
secon' Moses. Don' want no more sich Moseses in dis town. Dey wouldn't
lebe a brick heah ef dey could take dem off. He'n his tribe got away wid
'bout all ole Missus' and young Missus' prop'ty in my 'pinion. Anyhow I
feels it in my bones dey's poah, an' I mus' try an' fin' out. Dey's so
proud dey'd starbe fore dey'd let on."

"'Spose you does fin' out, what kin you do? You gwine ter buy back de big
house fer dem?"

"I'se not de one ter talk big 'bout what I'se gwine ter do," replied Aun'
Sheba, nodding her head portentously as she knocked the ashes from her
pipe, and prepared for the remaining tasks of the evening.

Her husband's self-interest took alarm at once, and he began to hitch
uneasily on his chair. At last he broke out: "Now look heah, Aun' Sheba,
you'se got suffin on you' min' 'bout dem white folks--"

"Dem white folks! Who you talkin' 'bout?"

"Well, dey ain't none o' our flesh an' blood, and de Bible say shuah dat
dey dat don' pervide fer dere own flesh an' blood am wuss dan a inferdel."

"Den I reckon you'se an inferdel, Mister Buggone," retorted Aun' Sheba,
severely.

"I'se not," retorted her husband, assuming much solemnity, "I'se a 'umble
an' 'flicted sarbent ob de Lawd, an' it's my duty to 'monstrate wid you. I
know what's on you' min'. You'se gwine ter do fer dem white folks when you
got all you kin do now."

"Mister Buggone, don' you call Miss Mara white folks no mo'."

"Well, ain't she white folks? Didn't I slabe fer her granpar yeahs an'
yeahs, an' wat I got ter show fer 't?"

"You got no stripes on you back, an' you'd had plenty ter show ef you'd
wuked fer any oder man. I 'member all about you slabin' an' how de good
major use' to let you off. You know, too, dat he war so took up wid his
book dat you could do foolishness right under his nose. An' dar was my
poah young Missy Mary, who hadn't de heart to hurt a skeeter. You s'pose I
watch ober dat broken-hearted lam' an' her little chile an' den heah 'em
called white folks, as if dey'se no 'count ter me? How ofen dat poah dyin'
lam' turn to me in de middle ob de night an' say ter me, Sheba, you will
took keer on my chile ef it libe, an' I say to her 'fore de Lawd dat I
would. An' I did too. Dat po' little moderless and faderless chile lay on
my bosom till I lubed it fer hersef, and Missy Mara neber gwine to hab
trubble when I ain't dar."

Aun' Sheba's voice had been reaching a higher and higher key under the
influence of reminiscence and indignation. Although her husband was in
dire trepidation he felt that this point was too serious to be yielded
without a desperate effort. He had been put on short allowance once before
when his wife had gone to help take care of Mara in a severe illness, and
now he had a presentiment that Aun' Sheba would try to help support the
girl and her great-aunt as well as himself. Such an attempt threatened
privations which were harrowing even to contemplate, and in a sort of
desperation he resolved once more to assert his marital position. "Aun'
Sheba," he began with much dignity, "I'se been bery easy an' bendin' like
ter you. I'se gib you you'se own head dead agin de principles ob Scripter
which say dat de husban' am de head ob de wife--"

"Mister Buggone," interrupted Aun' Sheba in a passion which was bursting
all restraint, "you'se wrestin' Scripter to you'se own 'struction. Ef you
am de head ob dis fam'ly, I'se gwine ter sit down an fole my hans, an you
can jes' git out an earn my libin' an' yours too. Git up dar now, an'
bring in de wood an' de kinlin' fer de mawnin', an' when mawnin' come, you
make de fiah. Arter breakfas' you start right off ter work, and I'se sit
on de do' step and talk to de neighbos. You shall hab all de headin ob de
house you wants, but you can't hab de 'sition widout de 'sponsibilities.
I'se gwine now to take a res' an' be 'sported," and the irate wife filled
her pipe, sat down and smoked furiously.

Uncle Sheba was appalled at the result of his Scriptural argument. He
would like to be king by divine right without any responsibilities. His
one thought now was to escape until the storm blew over and his wife's
tolerant good-nature resumed its wonted sway. Shuffling cautiously around
to the door he remarked meekly as he held it ajar, "I reckon I'll drap in
at de prar-meetin', fer I tole brudder Simpkins I'd gib dem a lif' dis
ebenin'."

His heart misgave him as he heard his wife bound up and bolt the door
after him, but he was a philosopher who knew the value of time in
remedying many of the ills of life. It must be admitted that he could not
get into the spirit of the meeting, and Brother Simpkins remarked rather
severely at its close, "Mister Buggone, I'se feared you'se zeal am
languishin'."

Uncle Sheba's forebodings increased as he saw that his house was dark, and
he fell into something like panic when he found that the door was still
bolted. He knocked gently at first, then louder and louder, adding to the
uproar by calls and expostulations. A light appeared in the adjacent
cottage, and Kern Watson, his son-in-law, came out. "Wat de matter now,
Uncle Sheba?" he asked. "Does yer wan' ter bring de perlice? You'se been
takin' a drap too much again, I reckon."

"No, I'se only been to prar-meetin', and Aun' Sheba jes' dun gone and bolt
me out."

"Well, you'se been cuttin' up some shine, an' dat's a fac'. Come in an'
stop you noise. You can sleep on de lounge. We don' want to pay ten
dollahs in de mawnin to get you out ob de caboose."

Uncle Sheba was glad to avail himself of this rather equivocal
hospitality, and eagerly sought to win Kern's sympathy by relating his
grievance. His son-in-law leaned against the chimney-side that he might,
in his half-dressed condition, enjoy the warmth of the coals covered with
ashes on the hearth, and listened. He was a tall, straight negro of
powerful build, and although his features were African, they were not
gross in character. The candle on the mantel near him brought out his
profile in fine silhouette, while his quiet steady eyes indicated a nature
not stirred by trifles.

"You'se a 'publican, Kern, an' you knows dat we culled people got ter take
keer ob ourselves."

"Yes, I'se a Republican," said Kern, "but wat dat got ter do wid dis
matter? Is Aun' Sheba gwine ter take any ob your money? Ef she set her
heart on helpin' her ole Missus an' young Missy an' arn de money herself,
whose business is it but hers? I'se a Republican because I belebe in
people bein' free, wedder dey is white or black, but I ain't one ob dem
kin' ob Republicans dat look on white folks as inemies. Wot we do widout
dem, an' wat dey do widout us? All talk ob one side agin de toder is fool
talk. Ef dere's any prosperity in dis lan' we got ter pull tergedder.
You'se free, Uncle Sheba, an' dere ain't a man in Charleston dat kin
hender you from goin' to work termorrow."

"I reckon I'se try ter git a wink ob slepe, Kern," responded Uncle Sheba
plaintively. "My narbes been so shook up dat my rheumatiz will be po'ful
bad for a spell."

Kern knew the futility of further words, and also betook himself to rest.

With Aun' Sheba, policy had taken the place of passion. Through a
knot-hole in her cabin she had seen her husband admitted to her
son-in-law's dwelling, and so her mind was at rest. "Unc," she muttered,
"forgits his 'sper'ence at de prar-meetin's bery easy, but he mus' have a
'sper'ence to-night dat he won't forgit. I neber so riled in my bawn days.
Ef he tinks I can sit heah and see him go'mandizin' when my honey lam'
Mara hungry, he'll fin' out."

Before the dawn on the following day, Uncle Sheba had had time for many
second thoughts, and when his wife opened the door he brought in plenty of
kindlings and wood. Aun' Sheba accepted these marks of submission in grim
silence, resolving that peace and serenity should come about gradually.
She relented so far, however, as to give him an extra slice of bacon for
breakfast, at which token of returning toleration Uncle Sheba took heart
again. Having curtly told him to clear the table, Aun' Sheba proceeded to
make from the finest of flour the delicate cakes which she always sold
fresh and almost warm from her stove, and before starting out on her
vending tour of the streets, the store-room was locked against the one
burglar she feared.




CHAPTER IV

MARA


On the same evening which witnessed Uncle Sheba's false step and its
temporarily disastrous results, Owen Clancy sat brooding over his fire in
his bachelor apartment. If his sitting-room did not suggest wealth, it
certainly indicated refined and intellectual tastes and a fair degree of
prosperity. A few fine pictures were on the walls, an unusually
well-selected library, although a small one, was in a bookcase, while upon
the table lay several of the best magazines and reviews of the period.
Above the mantel was suspended a cavalry sabre, its scabbard so dented as
to suggest that it had seen much and severe service. Young Clancy's eyes
were fixed upon it, and his revery was so deep that a book fell from his
hand to the floor without his notice. His thoughts, however, were dwelling
upon a young girl. Strange that a deadly weapon should be allied to her in
association. Yet so it was. He never could look upon that sabre which his
father had used effectively throughout the Civil War, without thinking of
Mara Wallingford. Neither this object nor any other was required to
produce thoughts of her, for he passed few waking hours in which she was
not present to his fancy. He loved her sincerely, and felt that she knew
it, and he also hoped that she concealed a deeper regard for him than she
would admit even to herself. Indeed he almost believed that if he could
share fully with her all the ideas and antipathies symbolized by the
battered scabbard before him, his course of love would run smoothly. It
was just at this point that the trouble between them arose. She was
looking back; he, forward. He could not enter into her sad and bitter
retrospection, feeling that this was morbid and worse than useless.
Remembering how cruelly she and her kindred had suffered, he made great
allowances for her, and had often tried to soften the bitterness in her
heart by reminding her that he, too, had lost kindred and property. By
delicate efforts he had sought to show the futility of clinging to a dead
past, and a cause lost beyond hope, but Mara would only become grave and
silent when such matters were touched upon.

Clancy had been North repeatedly on business, and had never discovered a
particle of hostility toward him or his section in the men with whom he
dealt and associated. They invited him to their homes; he met the women of
their families, from whom he often received rather more than courtesy, for
his fine appearance and a certain courtliness of manner, inherited from
his aristocratic father, had won a thinly veiled admiration of which he
had been agreeably conscious. Since these people had no controversy with
him, how could he continue to cherish enmity and prejudice against them?
His warm Southern nature revolted at receiving hearty good-will and not
returning it in kind. There was nothing of a "we-forgive-you" in the
bearing of his Northern acquaintances, nor was there any effusiveness in
cordiality with an evident design of reassuring him. He was made to feel
that he was guilty of an anachronism in brooding over the war, that it had
been forgotten except as history, and that the present with its
opportunities, and the future with its promise, were the themes of
thought. The elements of life, energy, hopefulness with which he came in
contact had appealed to him powerfully, for they were in harmony with his
youth, ambition, yes, and his patriotism. "The South can never grow rich
and strong by sulking," he had often assured himself, "and since the old
dream is impossible, and we are to be one people, why shouldn't we accept
the fact and unite in mutual helpfulness?"

Reason, ambition, and policy prompted him to the divergence of view and
action which was alienating Mara. "Imitation of her example and spirit
would be political and financial suicide on our part," he broke out. "I
love her; and if she loved in the same degree, I would be more to her than
bitter memories. She would help me achieve a happy future for us both. As
it is, I am so pulled in different ways that I'm half insane," and with
contracted brow he sprang up and paced the floor.

But he could not hold to this mood long, and soon his face softened into
an expression of anxiety and commiseration. Resuming his chair his
thoughts ran on, "She isn't happy either. For some cause I reckon she
suffers more than I do. She looked pale to-day when I met her, and her
face was full of anxiety until she saw me, and then it masked all feeling.
She has worn that same cloak now for three winters. Great Heaven! if she
should be in want, and I not know it! Yet what could I do if she were? Why
will she be so proud and obdurate? I believe that gaunt, white-haired aunt
has more to do with her course than her own heart. Well, I can't sit here
and think about it any longer. If I see her something may become clearer,
and I must see her before I go North again."

Mara Wallingford's troubles and anxieties had indeed been culminating of
late. Almost her sole inheritance had been sadness, trouble and enmity.
Not only had her unhappy mother's history been kept fresh in her memory by
her great-aunt, Mrs. Hunter, but the very blood that coursed in her veins
and the soul that looked out from her dark, melancholy eyes had received
from that mother characteristics which it is of the province of this story
to reveal. To poor Mary Wallingford, the death of her father and of her
husband had been the unspeakable tragedy and wrong which had destroyed her
life; and the long agony of the mother had deprived her offspring of the
natural and joyous impulses of childhood and youth. If Mara had been left
to the care of a judicious guardian--one who had sought by all wholesome
means to counteract inherited tendencies, a most cheerful and hopeful life
would have been developed, but in this respect the girl had been most
unfortunate. The mind grows by what it feeds upon, and Mrs. Hunter's
spirit had become so imbittered by dwelling upon her woes and losses that
she was incapable of thinking or speaking of much else. She had never been
a woman of warm, quick sympathies. She had seen little of the world, and,
in a measure, was incapable of seeing it, whatever advantages she might
have had. This would have been true of her, no matter where her lot had
been cast, for she was a born conservative. What she had been brought up
to believe would always be true; what she had been made familiar with by
early custom would always be right, and anything different would be viewed
with disapproval or intoleration. Too little allowance is often made for
characters of this kind. We may regret rigidity and narrowness all we
please, but there should be some respect for downright sincerity and the
inability to see both sides of a question.

It often happens that if natures are narrow they are correspondingly
intense; and this was true of Mrs. Hunter. She idolized her husband dead,
more perhaps than if he had been living. Her brother and nephew were
household martyrs, and little Mara had been taught to revere their
memories as a devout Catholic pays homage to a patron saint. Between the
widow and all that savored of the North, the author of her woes, there was
a great gulf, and the changes wrought by the passing years had made no
impression, for she would not change. She simply shut her eyes and closed
her ears to whatever was not in accord with her own implacable spirit. She
grew cold toward those who yielded to the kindly influences of peace and
the healing balm of time; she had bitter scorn for such as were led by
their interests to fraternize with the North and Northern people. In her
indiscrimination and prejudice they were all typified by the unscrupulous
adventurers who had made a farce of government and legally robbed the
South when prostrate and bleeding after the War. She and her niece had
been taxed out of their home to sustain a rule they loathed. Not a few
women in Boston, in like circumstances, would be equally bitter and
equally incapable of taking the broad views of an historian.

The influence of such a concentrated mind warped almost to the point of
monomania, upon a child like Mara, predisposed from birth to share in a
similar spirit, can be readily estimated. Peace and time, moreover, had
not brought the ameliorating tendencies of prosperity, but rather a
continuous and hopeless pressure of poverty.

Mrs. Hunter had been incapable of doing more than save what she could out
of the wreck of their fortunes. There were no near relations, and those
remaining, with most of their friends and acquaintances who had not been
alienated, were struggling like themselves in straitened circumstances.
Yet out of this poverty, many open, generous hands would have been
stretched to the widow and her ward had they permitted their want to be
known. But they felt that they would rather starve than do this, for they
belonged to that class which suffers in proud silence. Although they had
practiced an economy that was so severe as to be detrimental to both
health and character, their principal had melted away, and their jewelry
and plate, with the exception of heirlooms that could not be sold without
a sense of sacrilege, had been quietly disposed of. The end of their
resources was near, and they knew not what to do. Mara had tried to eke
out their means by fancy-work, but she had no great aptitude for such
tasks, and her education was too defective and old-fashioned for the
equipment of a modern teacher. She was well read, especially in the
classics, yet during the troubled years of her brief life she had not been
given the opportunity to acquire the solid, practical knowledge which
would enable her to instruct others. The exclusiveness and seclusion, so
congenial to her aunt, had been against her, and now reticence and a
disposition to shrink from the world had become a characteristic of her
own.

She felt, however, that her heart, if not her will, was weak toward Owen
Clancy. In him had once centred the hope of her life, and from him she now
feared a wound that could never heal.

She underrated his affection as he did hers. He felt that she should throw
off the incubus of the past for his sake; she believed that any depth of
love on his part should render impossible all intercourse with the North
beyond what was strictly necessary for the transaction of business. In
order to soften her prejudices, he had told her of his social experiences
in New York, and, as a result, had seen her face hardened against him....
She had no words of bitter scorn such as her aunt had indulged in when
learning of the fact. She had only thought in sorrow that since he was
"capable of accepting hospitality from the people who had murdered her
kindred and blighted the South, there was an impassable gulf between
them."

Now, however, the imperative questions of bread and shelter were
uppermost. She believed that Clancy could and would solve these questions
at once if permitted, and it was characteristic of her pride and what she
regarded as her loyalty, that she never once allowed herself to think of
this alternative. Yet what could she and her aunt do? They were in the
pathetic position of gentlewomen compelled to face the world with
unskilled hands. This is bad enough at best, but far worse when hands are
half paralyzed by pride and timidity as well as ignorance. The desperate
truth, however, stared them in the face. Do something they must, and that
speedily.

They were contemplating the future in a hopeless sort of dread and
perplexity on the evening when Aunt Sheba and young Clancy's thoughts were
drawn toward them in such deep solicitude. This fact involves no mystery.
The warm-hearted colored woman had seen and heard little things which
suggested the truth, and the sympathetic lover had seen the face of the
young girl when she was off her guard. Its expression had haunted him, and
impelled him to see her at once, although she had chilled his hopes of
late.

When compelled to leave the old home, Mrs. Hunter had taken the second
floor of a small brick house located on a side street. In spite of herself
Mara's heart fluttered wildly for a moment when the woman who occupied the
first story brought up Clancy's card.

"You can't see him to-night," said her aunt, frowning.

Mara hesitated a moment, and then said firmly, "Yes, I will see him.
Please ask him to come up." When they were alone, she added in a low
voice, "I shall see him once more, probably for the last time socially. We
cannot know what changes are in store for us."

"Well, I won't see him," said Mrs. Hunter, frigidly; and she left the
room.




CHAPTER V

PAST AND FUTURE


Under the impulses of his solicitude and affection Clancy entered quickly,
and took Mara's hand in such a strong, warm grasp that the color would
come into her pale face. In spite of her peculiarities and seeming
coldness, she was a girl who could easily awaken a passionate love in a
warm, generous-hearted man like the one who looked into her eyes with
something like entreaty in his own. She had a beauty peculiar to herself,
and now a strange loveliness which touched his very soul. The quick flush
upon her cheeks inspired hope, and a deep emotion, which she could not
wholly suppress, found momentary expression. Even in that brief instant
she was transfigured, for the woman within her was revealed. As if
conscious of a weakness which seemed to her almost criminal, her face
became rigid, and she said formally, "Please be seated, Mr. Clancy."

"You must not speak to me in that way and in that tone," he began
impetuously, and then paused, for he was chilled by her cold, questioning
gaze. Her will was so strong, and found such powerful expression in her
dark, sad eyes, that for a moment he was dumb and embarrassed. Then his
own high spirit rallied, and a purpose grew strong that she should hear
him, and hear the truth also. His gray eyes, that had wavered for a
moment, grew steady in their encounter with hers.

Seating himself on the opposite side of the table, he said quietly, "You
think I have no right to speak to you in such a way."

"I fear we think differently on many subjects, Mr. Clancy."

"Admitting that, would you like a man to be a weak echo of yourself?"

"A man should not be weak in any respect. I do not think it necessary,
however, to raise the question of my likes or dislikes."

"I must differ with you, Mara," he replied gravely.

"I agree with you now, fully, Mr. Clancy. We differ. Had we not better
change the subject?"

"No, not unless you would be unfair. I am at a disadvantage. I am in your
home. You are a lady, and therefore can compel me to leave unsaid what I
am bent on saying. We have been friends, have we not?"

She bowed her acquiescence.

"Well," he continued a little bitterly, "I have one Southern trait
left--frankness. You know I would speak in a different character if
permitted, if I received one particle of encouragement." Then, with a
sudden flush, he said firmly, "I will speak as I feel. I only pay homage
in telling you what you must already know. I love you, and would make you
my wife."

Her face became very pale as she averted it, and replied briefly, "You are
mistaken, Mr. Clancy."

"Mara, I am not mistaken. Will you be fair enough to listen to me? We
agree that we differ. Can we not also agree that we differ
conscientiously? You cannot think me false, even though you say I am
mistaken. Hitherto you have opposed to me a dead wall of silence. Though
you will not listen to me as a lover, you might both listen and speak to
me as a friend. That word would be hollow indeed if estrangment could
result from honest differences of opinion."

"It is far more than a difference of opinion."

"Let the difference be what it may, Mara," he answered gently, resolving
not to be baffled, "if you are so sure you are right, you should at least
be willing to accord to one whom you once regarded as a friend the
privilege of pleading his cause. Truth and right do not intrench
themselves in repelling silence. That is the refuge of prejudice. If you
will hear my side of the question, I will listen with the deepest interest
to yours, and believe me you have a powerful ally in my heart."

"Your head has gained such ascendency over your heart, Mr. Clancy, that
you cannot understand me. In some women the strongest reasons for or
against a thing proceed from the latter organ."

"Is yours, then, so cold toward me?" he asked sadly.

"It is not cold toward the memory of my murdered parents," she replied
with an ominous flash in her eyes.

Clancy looked at her in momentary surprise, then said firmly, "My father
eventually died from injuries received in the war, but he was not
murdered. He was wounded in fair battle in which he struck as well as
received blows."

Again there was a quick flush upon her pale face, but now it was one of
indignation as she said bitterly, "Fair battle! So you call it fair battle
when men are overpowered in defending their homes. If armed robbers broke
into your house, and you gave blows as well as received them, would you
not be murdered if it so happened that you were killed? Why should we
speak of these subjects further?" And there was a trace of scorn in her
tone.

His pride was touched, and he was all the more determined that he would be
heard. "I can give you good reason why we should speak further," he
answered resolutely yet quietly. "However strong your feeling may be, I
have too much respect for your intelligence and too much confidence in
your courage to believe that you will weakly shrink from hearing one who
is as conscientious as yourself. I cannot accept your illustration, and do
not think the instance you give is parallel. In the differences between
the North and the South, an appeal was made to the sword. If I had been
old enough I would have fought at my father's side. But the question is
now settled. No matter how we feel about it, the North and the South must
live together, and it is not my nature to live in hate. Suppose I
could--suppose it were possible for all Southern men to feel as you do and
act in accordance with such bitter enmity, what would be the result? It
would be suicide. Our land would become a desert. Capital and commerce
would leave our cities because there would be no security among a people
implacably hostile. Such a course would be more destructive than invading
armies. My business, the business of the city, is largely with the North.
If native Southern men tried to transact it in a cold, relentless spirit,
we should lose the chance to live, much less to do anything for our land.
We have suffered too much from this course already, and have allowed
strangers, who care nothing for us, to take much that might have been
ours. I love the South too well to advocate a course which would prove so
fatal. What is more, I cannot think it would be right. The North of your
imagination does not exist. I cannot hate people who have no hate for me,
but on the contrary abound in honest, kindly feeling."

She had listened quietly with her face turned from him, and now met his
eyes with an inscrutable expression in hers. "Have I not listened?" she
asked.

"But you have not answered," he urged, "you have not even tried to show me
wherein I am wrong."

The eyes whose sombre blackness had been like a veil now flamed with the
anger she had long repressed. "How little you understand me," she said
passionately, "when you think I can argue questions like these. You are
virtually asking what to me is sacrilege. I have listened to you
patiently, at what cost to my feelings you are incapable of knowing. Do
you think that I can forget that my grandfather was mangled to death, and
that his last words were, 'I was only trying to defend my home'? Do you
think I can forget that my father was trampled into the very earth by your
Northern friends with whom you must fraternize as well as trade? I will
not speak of my martyred mother. Her name and agony are too sacred to be
named in a political argument," and she uttered these last words with
intense bitterness. Then rising to end the interview, she continued coldly
in biting sarcasm, "Mr. Clancy, I have no relations with the North. I do
not deal in cotton, and none of its fibre has found its way into my
nature."

At these words he flushed hotly, sprang up, but by an evident and powerful
effort controlled himself, and sat down again.

"How could you even imagine," she added, "that words, arguments, political
and financial considerations would tempt me to be disloyal to the memory
of my dead kindred?"

"You _are_ disloyal to them," he said firmly.

"What!"

"Mara, I am indeed proving myself a friend because I am such and more, and
because you so greatly need a friend. Your kindred had hearts in their
breasts. Would they doom you to the life upon which you are entering? Can
you not see that you are passing deeper and deeper into the shadow of the
past? What good can it do them? Could they speak would they say, 'We wish
our sorrows to blight your life'? You are not happy, you cannot be happy.
It is contrary to the law of God, it is impossible to human nature, that
happiness and bitter, unrelenting enmity should exist in the same heart.
You are not only unhappy, but you are in deep trouble of some kind. I saw
that from your face to-day before you saw me and could mask from a friend
its expression of deep anxiety. You shall hear the truth from me which I
fear you hear from no other, and your harsh words shall not deter me from
my resolute purpose to be kind, to rescue you virtually from a condition
of mind that is so morbid, so unhealthful, that it will blight your life.
I cannot so wrong your father and mother as even to imagine that it could
be their wish to see your beautiful young life grow more and more
shadowed, to see you struggling under burdens which strong, loving hands
would lift from you. Can you believe that they, happy in heaven, can wish
you no happiness on earth?"

There was a grave, convincing earnestness in his tone, and a truth in his
words hard to resist. What she considered loyalty to her kindred had been
like her religion, and he had charged her with disloyalty, yes, and while
he spoke the thought would assert itself that her course might be a
wretched mistake. Although intrenched in prejudice, and fortified against
his words by the thought and feeling of her life, she had been made to
doubt her position and feel that she might be a self-elected martyr. The
assertion that she was doing what would be contrary to the wishes of her
dead kindred pierced the very citadel of her opposition, and tended to
remove the one belief which had been the sustaining rock beneath her feet.
She knew she had been severe with him, and she was touched by his
forbearance, his resolute purpose to befriend her. She remembered her
poverty, the almost desperate extremity in which she was, and her heart
upbraided her for refusing the hand held out so loyally and persistently
to her help. She became confused, torn, and overwhelmed by conflicting
emotions; her lip quivered, and, bowing her head in her hands, she sobbed,
"You are breaking my heart."

In an instant he was on one knee at her side. "Mara," he began gently, "if
I wound it is only that I may heal. Truly no girl in this city needs a
friend as you do. For some reason I feel this to be true in my very soul.
Who in God's universe would forbid you a loyal friend?" and he tried to
take her hand.

"I forbid you to be her friend," said a stern voice.

Springing up, Clancy encountered the gaze of a gaunt, white-haired woman,
with implacable enmity stamped upon her thin visage. The young man's eyes
darkened as they steadily met those of Mrs. Hunter, and it was evident
that the forbearance he had manifested toward the girl he loved would not
be extended to her guardian. Still he controlled himself, and waited till
she should speak again.

"Mr. Clancy," she resumed after a moment, "Miss Wallingford is my ward; I
received her from her dying mother, and so have rights which you must
respect. I forbid you seeing her or speaking to her again."

"Mrs. Hunter," he replied, "permit me to tell you with the utmost courtesy
that I shall not obey you. Only Mara herself can forbid me from seeing her
or speaking to her."

"What right have you, sir--"

"The best of rights, Mrs. Hunter, I love the girl; you do not. As
remorselessly as a graven image you would sacrifice her on the altar of
your hate."

"Mr. Clancy, you must not speak to my aunt in that way. She has been
devoted to me from my infancy."

"On the contrary, she has devoted you from infancy to sadness, gloom, and
bitter memories. She is developing within you the very qualities most
foreign to a woman's heart. Instead of teaching you to enshrine the memory
of your kindred in tender, loving remembrance, she is forging that memory
into a chain to restrain you from all that is natural to your years. She
is teaching you to wreck your life in fruitless opposition to the healing
influences that have followed peace. Madam, answer me--the question is
plain and fair--what can you hope to accomplish by your enmity to me and
to the principles of hope and progress which, in this instance, I
represent, but the blighting of this girl whom I love?"

"You are insolent, sir," cried Mrs. Hunter, trembling with rage.

"No, madam, I am honest, and be the result to me what it may, you shall
both hear the truth to-night."

"This is our home," was the harsh response, "and you are not a gentleman
if you do not leave it instantly."

"I shall certainly do so. Mara, am I to see you and speak to you no more?"

She had sunk into a chair, and again buried her face in her hands.

He waited a moment, but she gave no sign. Then with his eyes fixed on her
he sadly and slowly left the apartment.

At last she sprang up with the faint cry, "Owen," but her aunt stood
between her and the door, and he was gone.




CHAPTER VI

"PAHNASHIP"


When Mara realized that her lover had indeed gone, that in fact he had
been driven forth, and that she had said not one word to pave the way for
a future meeting, a sense of desolation she had never known before
overwhelmed her. Hitherto she had been sustained by an unfaltering belief
that no other course than the one which her aunt had inculcated was
possible; that, cost what it might, and end as it might, it was her
heritage. All now was confused and in doubt. She had heard her lofty,
self-sacrificing purpose virtually characterized as vain and wrong. She
had idolized the memory of her father and mother, and yet had been told
that her course was the very one of which they would not approve. The
worst of it all was that it now seemed true, for she could not believe
that they would wish her to be so utterly unhappy. In spite of her
unworldliness and lack of practical training, the strong common-sense of
Clancy's question would recur, "What good will it do?" She was not
sacrificing her heart to sustain or further any cause, and her heart now
cried out against the wrong it was receiving. These miserable thoughts
rushed through her mind and pressed so heavily upon all hope that she
leaned her arms upon the table, and, burying her face, sobbed aloud.

"Mara," said her aunt, severely, "I did not think you could be so weak."

Until the storm of passionate grief passed, the young girl gave no heed to
Mrs. Hunter's reproaches or expostulations. At last she became quiet, as
much from exhaustion as from self-control, and said wearily, "You need
worry no further about Mr. Clancy. He will not come again. If he has a
spark of pride or manhood left, he will never look at me again," and a
quick, heart-broken sob would rise at the thought.

"I should hope you would not look at him again after his insolence to me."

Mara did not reply. For the first time her confidence in her aunt had been
shaken, for she could not but feel that Mrs. Hunter, in her judgment of
Clancy, saw but one side of the question. She did not approve of his stern
arraignment of her aunt, but she at least remembered his great
provocation, and that he had been impelled to his harsh words by loyalty
to her.

At last she said, "Aunty, I'm too worn out to think or speak any more
tonight. There is a limit to endurance, and I've reached it."

"That's just where the trouble is," Mrs. Hunter tried to say reassuringly.
"In the morning you will be your own true, brave self again."

"What's the use of being brave; what can I be brave for?" thought Mara in
the solitude of her room.

Although her sleep was brief and troubled, she had time to grow calm and
collect her thoughts. While she would not admit it to herself, Clancy's
repeated assertions of his love had a subtle and sustaining power. She
could see no light in the future, but her woman's heart would revert to
this truth as to a secret treasure.

In the morning after sitting for a time almost in silence over their
meagre breakfast, her aunt began: "Mara, I wish you to realize the truth
in regard to Mr. Clancy. It is one of those things which must be nipped in
the bud. There is only one ending to his path, and that is full acceptance
of Northern rule and Northern people. What is more, after his words to me,
I will never abide under the same roof with him again."

"Aunty," said Mara sadly, "we have much else to think about besides Mr.
Clancy. How are we going to keep a roof over our own heads?"

Compelled to face their dire need, Mrs. Hunter broke out into bitter
invective against those whom she regarded as the cause of their poverty.

"Aunty," protested Mara, almost irritably, for her nerves were sadly worn,
"what good can such words do? We must live, I suppose, and you must advise
me."

"Mara, I am almost tempted to believe that you regret--"

"Aunty, you must fix your mind on the only question to be considered. What
are we to do? You know our money is almost gone."

Mrs. Hunter's only response was to stare blankly at her niece. She could
economize and be content with very little as long as her habitual trains
of thought were not interrupted and she could maintain her proud
seclusion. Accustomed to remote plantation life, she knew little of the
ways of the modern world, and much less of the methods by which a woman
could obtain a livelihood from it. To the very degree that she had lived
in the memories and traditions of the past, she had unfitted herself to
understand the conditions of present life or to cope with its
requirements. Now she was practically helpless. "We can't go and reveal
our situation to our friends," she began hesitatingly.

"Certainly not," said Mara, "for most of them have all they can do to
sustain themselves, and I would rather starve than live on the charity of
those on whom we have no claim."

"We might take less expensive rooms."

"What good would that do, Aunty? If we can't earn anything, five dollars
will be as hard to raise as ten."

"Oh, to think that people of the very best blood in the State, who once
had scores of slaves to work for them, should be so wronged, robbed and
reduced!"

Mara heaved a long, weary sigh, and Clancy's words would repeat themselves
again and again. She saw how utterly incapable her aunt was to render any
assistance in their desperate straits. Even the stress of their present
emergency could not prevent her mind from vainly reverting to a past that
was gone forever. Again her confidence was more severely shaken as she was
compelled to doubt the wisdom of their habits of seclusion and reticence,
of living on from year to year engrossed by memories, instead of adapting
themselves to a new order of things which they were powerless to prevent.
"Truly," she thought, "my father and mother never could have wished me to
be in this situation out of love for them. It is true I could never go to
the length that he does without great hypocrisy, and I do not see the need
of it. I can never forget the immense wrong done to me and mine, but Aunty
should have taught me something more than indignation and hostility,
however just the causes for them may be."

While such was the tenor of her thoughts, she only said a little bitterly:
"Oh, that I knew how to do something! My old nurse, Aun' Sheba, is better
off than we are."

"She belongs to us yet," said Mrs. Hunter, almost fiercely.

"You could never make her or any one else think so," was the weary reply.
"Well, now that I have thought of her, I believe I could advise with her
better than any one else."

"Advise with a slave? Oh, Mara!--"

"Whom shall I advise with then?" And there was a sharp ring in the girl's
tone.

"Oh, any one, so that it be not Mr. Clancy," replied her aunt irritably.
"Were it not that you so needed a protector, I could wish that I were
dead."

"Aunt," said Mara, gently yet firmly, "we must give up this hopeless,
bitter kind of talk. I, at least, must do something to earn honest bread,
and I am too depressed and sad at heart to carry any useless burdens. Mr.
Clancy said much that was wrong last night, and there are matters about
which he and I can never agree, but surely he was right in saying that my
father and mother would not wish to see me crushed body and soul. If I am
to live, I must find a way to live and yet keep my self-respect. I suppose
the natural way would be to go to those who knew my father and
grandfather; but they would ask me what I could do. What could I tell
them? It would seem almost like asking charity."

"Of course it would," assented her aunt.

Then silence fell between them.

Before Mara could finish her morning duties and prepare for the street, a
heavy step was heard on the stairs, then a knock at the door. Opening it,
the young girl saw the very object of her thoughts, for Aun' Sheba's ample
form and her great basket filled all the space.

"Oh, Aun' Sheba," cried the girl, a gleam of hope lighting up her eyes,
"I'm so glad to see you. I was just starting for your cabin."

"Bress your heart, honey, Aun' Sheba'll allus be proud to hab you come. My
spec's, Missus," and she dropped her basket and a courtesy before Mrs.
Hunter.

"Aun' Sheba," said Mara, giving the kindly vender a chair, "you are so
much better off than we are. I was saying just that to aunty this
morning."

"Why, honey, I'se only a po' culled body, and you'se a beauty like you
moder, bress her po' deah heart."

"Yes, Aun' Sheba, you were a blessing to her," said Mara with moist eyes.
"How you watched over her and helped to take care of me! Perhaps you can
help take care of me again. For some reason, I can speak to you and tell
you our troubles easier than to any one else in the world."

"Dat's right, honey lam', dat's right. Who else you tell your troubles to
but Aun' Sheba? Didn't I comfort you on dis bery bres time an' time agin
when you was a little mite? Now you'se bigger and hab bigger troubles,
I'se bigger too," and Aunt Sheba shook with laughter like a great form of
jelly as she wiped her eyes with sympathy.

"Aun' Sheba," said Mara in a voice full of unconscious pathos, "I don't
know what to do, yet I must do something. It seems to me that I could be
almost happy if I were as sure of earning my bread as you are."

"Now, doggone dat ar lazy husban' o' mine. But he got his 'serts an'll git
mo' ob dem eff he ain't keerful. I jes' felt it in my bones las' night how
'twas wid you, an I 'lowed how I'd see you dis mawnin', an' den he began
to go on as ef you was nothin' but white folks stid ob my deah honey lam'
dat I nussed till you was like my own chile. But he won' do so no mo'."

"Oh, Aun' Sheba, believe me, I don't wish to interfere with any of your
duties to him," began Mara earnestly.

"Duty to him," exclaimed the colored woman with a snort of indignation.
"He mout tink a little 'bout his duty to me. Doan you trubble 'bout him,
for he's boun' to git mo' dan his shar anyhow. Now I know de good Lawd put
it in my min' to come heah dis mawnin' case you was on my min' las' night.
You needn't tink you kin go hungry while Aun' Sheba hab a crus'."

"I know what a big heart you've got, but that won't do, Aun' Sheba. Can
you think I would live idly on your hard-earned money?"

"Well, 'tis my money, an' I make mo dan you tink, an' a heap mo' dan I let
Unc. know about. He'd be fer settin' up his kerrige ef he knew," and she
again laughed in hearty self-complacency. "Why, honey, I can 'sport you
an' Missus widout pinchin', an' who gwine to know 'bout it?"

"I'd know about it," said Mara, rising and putting her hand caressingly on
the woman's shoulder, "yet I feel your kindness in the very depths of my
heart. Come, I have a thought. Let me see what's in your basket."

"Ony cakes dis mawnin', honey. Help you's sef."

"Oh, how delicious they are," said Mara eating one, and thoughtfully
regarding her sable friend. "You beat me making cakes, Aun' Sheba, and I
thought I was good at it."

"So you am, Missy, so you am, fer I taught you mysef."

"Aun' Sheba, suppose we go into partnership."

"Pahnaship!" ejaculated Aun' Sheba in bewilderment.

"Oh, Mara!" Mrs. Hunter expostulated indignantly.

"Well, I suppose it would be a very one-sided affair," admitted the girl,
blushing in a sort of honest shame. "You are doing well without any help
from me, and don't need any. I'm very much like a man who wants to share
in a good business which has already been built up, but I don't know how
to do anything else, and could at least learn better every day,
and--and--I thought--I must do something--I thought, perhaps, if I made
the cakes and some other things, and you sold them, Aun' Sheba, you
wouldn't have to work so hard, and--well, there might be enough profit for
us both."

"Now de Lawd bress you heart, honey, dar ain't no need ob you blisterin'
you'se pretty face ober a fiah, bakin' cakes an' sich. I kin--"

"No, no, Aun' Sheba, you can't, for I won't let you."

"Mara," protested Mrs. Hunter, severely, "do you realize what you are
saying? Suppose it became known that you were in--in--" but the lady could
not bring herself to complete the humiliating sentence.

"Yis, honey, Missus am right. De idee! Sech quality as you in pahnaship
wid ole Aun' Sheba!" and she laughed at the preposterous relationship.

"Perhaps it needn't be known," said Mara, daunted for a moment. Then the
necessities in the case drove her forward, and, remembering that her aunt
was unable to suggest or even contemplate anything practicable, she said
resolutely, "Let it be known. Others of our social rank are supporting
themselves, and I'm too proud to be ashamed to do it myself even in this
humble way. What troubles me most is that I'm making such a one-sided
offer to Aun' Sheba. She don't need my help at all, and I need hers so
much."

"Now see heah, honey, is your heart set on dis ting?"

"Yes, it is," replied Mara, earnestly. "My heart was like lead till you
came, and it would be almost as light as one of these cakes if I knew I
could surely earn my living. Oh, Aun' Sheba, you've had troubles, and you
know what sore troubles my poor mother had, but neither you nor she ever
knew the fear, the sickening dread which comes over one when you don't
know where your bread is to come from or how you are to keep a roof over
your head. Aunty, do listen to reason. Making cake and other things for
Aun' Sheba to sell would not be half so humiliating as going to people of
my own station and revealing my ignorance, or trying to do what I don't
know how to do, knowing all the time that I was only tolerated. My plan
leaves me in seclusion, and if any one thinks less of me they can leave me
alone. I don't want to make my way among strangers; I don't feel that I
can. This plan enables us to stay together, Aunty, and you must know now
that we can't drift any longer."

While Mara was speaking Aun' Sheba's thrifty thoughts had been busy. Her
native shrewdness gave her a keen insight into Mrs. Hunter's character,
and she knew that the widow's mind was so warped that she was practically
as helpless as a child. While, in her generous love for Mara and from a
certain loyalty to her old master's family, she was willing temporarily to
assume what would be a very heavy burden, she was inwardly glad, as she
grew accustomed to the idea, that Mara was willing to do her share. Indeed
it would be a great relief if her basket could be filled for her, and she
said, heartily, "Takes some time, honey, you know, fer an idee to git into
my tick head, but when it gits dar it stick. Now you'se sensible, an'
Missus'll see it soon. You'se on de right track. Ob cose, I'd be proud ob
pahnaship, an' it'll be a great eas'n up to me. Makes a mighty long day,
Missy, to git up in de mawnin' an' do my bakin' an' den tromp, tromp,
tromp. I could put in an hour or two extra sleep, an' dat counts in a
woman ob my age an' heft. But, law sakes! look at dat clock dar. I mus' be
gitten along. Set you deah little heart at res', honey. I'se comin' back
dis ebenin', an' we'se start in kin' ob easy like so you hab a chance to
larn and not get 'scouraged."

"I can't approve of this plan at all," said Mrs. Hunter, loftily, "I wash
my hands of it."

"Now, now, Missus, you do jes' dat--wash you hans ob it, but don' you
'fere wid Missy, kase it'll set her heart at res' and keep a home fer you
bof. We's gwine to make a pile, honey, an' den de roses come back in you
cheeks," and nodding encouragingly, she departed, leaving more hope and
cheer behind her than Mara had known for many a month.

To escape the complaining of her aunt, Mara shut herself in her room and
thought long and deeply. The conclusion was, "The gulf between us has
grown wider and deeper. When Mr. Clancy learns how I have sought
independence without his aid--" but she only finished the sentence by a
sad, bitter smile.




CHAPTER VII

MARA'S PURPOSE


"Neber had sech luck in all my bawn days," soliloquized Aun' Sheba as she
saw the bottom of her basket early in the day. "All my cus'mers kin' o'
smilin' like de sunshine. Only Marse Clancy grumpy. He go by me like a
brack cloud. I'se got a big grudge against dat ar young man. He use to be
bery sweet on Missy. He mus' be taken wid some Norvern gal, and dat's
'nuff fer me. Ef he lebe my honey lam' now she so po', dar's a bad streak
in his blood and he don' 'long to us any mo'. I wouldn't be s'prised ef
dey hadn't had a squar meal fer a fortnight. I can make blebe dat I wants
to take my dinner 'long o' dem to sabe time, an' den dey'll hab a dinner
wat'll make Missy real peart 'fore she gin to work," and full of her
kindly intentions she bought a juicy steak, some vegetables, a quantity of
the finest flour, sugar, coffee, and some spices.

Mara had slipped out and invested the greater part of her diminished hoard
in the materials essential to her new undertaking. Not the least among
them, as she regarded it, was an account book. When, therefore, Aun' Sheba
bustled in between one and two o'clock, she found some bulky bundles on
the kitchen table over which Mrs. Hunter had already groaned aloud.

"Law sakes, honey, what all dese?" the colored aunty asked.

"They are my start in trade," replied Mara, smiling.

"Den you's gwine to hab a mighty big start, fer I got lots o' tings in dis
basket."

"Why, Aun' Sheba! Did you think I was going to let you furnish the
materials?"

"Ef you furnish de makin' up ob de 'terials what mo' you oughter do, I'd
like ter know?"

"Aun' Sheba, I could cheat you out af your two black eyes."

"Dey see mo' dan you tink, Missy," she replied, nodding sagaciously.

"Yes, I reckon they do, but my eyes must look after your interests as well
as my own. I am going to be an honest partner. Do you see this book?"

"What dat ar got to do wid de pahnaship?"

"You will see. It will prevent you from ever losing a penny that belongs
to you."

"Penny, indeed! As if I'se gwine to stand on a penny!"

"Well, I am. Little as I know about business, I am sure it will be more
satisfactory if careful accounts are kept, and you must promise to tell me
the whole truth about things. That's the way partners do, you know, and
everything is put down in black and white."

"Oh, go 'long wid you, honey, an' hab you own way. All in my pahnaship go
down in black, I s'pose, an' you'se in white. How funny it all am!" and
the old woman sat back in her chair and laughed in her joyous content.

"It is all a very humiliating farce to me," said Mrs. Hunter, looking
severely at the former property.

"Yas'm," said Aun' Sheba, suddenly becoming stolid as a graven image.

"Aunty," said Mara firmly but gently, "the time has come when I must act,
for your sake as well as my own. Nothing will prevent me from carrying out
this plan, except its failure to provide for Aun' Sheba as well as for
ourselves."

"Well, I wash my hands of it, and, if your course becomes generally known,
I shall have it understood that you acted without my approval." And she
rose and left the kitchen with great dignity.

When the door closed upon her, Aun' Sheba again shook in vast and silent
mirth.

"Doan you trubble long o' Missus, honey," she said, nodding encouragingly
at Mara. "She jes' like one dat lib in de dark an' can't see notin'
right." Then in sudden revulsion of feeling she added, "You po' honey
lam', doan you see you'se got to take keer ob her jes' as ef she was a
chile?"

"Yes," said Mara, sadly, "I've been compelled to see it at last."

"Now doan you be 'scouraged. 'Tween us we take keer ob her, an' she be a
heap betteh off eben ef she doan know it. You hab no dinner yit?"

"We were just going to get it as you came."

"Well now, honey, I habn't had a bite nudder, an' I'se gwine to take
dinneh heah ef you'se willin'."

"Why, surely, Aun' Sheba. It's little we have, you but know I'd share my
last crust with you."

Again the guest was bubbling over with good-natured merriment. "We ain't
got to de las' crus' yit, an' I couldn't make my dinneh on a crus' nohow.
Dar's one ting I'se jes' got to 'sist on in de pahnaship. I don't keer
notin' 'bout 'count books and sich, but ef we'se gwine to make a fort'n
you got to hab a heap o' po'er in you'se arms. You got to hab a strong
back and feel peart all ober. Dis de ony ting I 'sist on. Now how you
gwine to be plump and strong?"

"Oh, I'm pretty strong, and I'll get stronger now that I have hope, and
see my way a little."

"Hope am bery good fer 'sert, honey, but we want somep'n solider to start
in on. You jes' set de table in de oder room, an' I'll be de brack raben
dat'll pervide. Now you must min' kase I'se doing 'cording to Scripter,
an' we neber hab no luck 'tall if we go agin Scripter."

"Very well," said Mara, laughing, "you shall have your own way. I see
through all your talk, but I know you'll feel bad if you can't carry out
your purpose. You'll have a better dinner, too."

"Yeh, yeh, she knows a heap moah'n me," thought Aun' Sheba when alone,
"but I know some tings too, bress her heart. I kin see dat her cheeks am
pale and thin an' dat her eyes am gettin' so big and brack dat her purty
face am like a little house wid big winders. She got quality blood in her
vein, shuah, but habn't got neah 'nuff. Heah's de 'terial wat gibs hope
sometimes better'n preachin," and she whipped out the steak and prepared
it for the broiler. Then she clapped some potatoes into the oven, threw
together the constituents of light biscuit, and put the coffee over the
fire. A natural born cook, she was deft and quick, and had a substantial
repast ready in an amazingly short time. Soon it was smoking on the table,
and then she said with a significant little nod at Mara, "Now I'se gwine
to wait on Missus like ole times."

Mara understood her and did not protest, for she felt the necessity of
humoring her aunt, who quite thawed out at the semblance of her former
state. While the poor lady enlarged on the thought that such should be the
normal condition of affairs, and would be if the world were not wholly out
of joint, she nevertheless dined so heartily as to prove that she could
still enjoy the good things of life if they were provided without personal
compromise on her part. Mara made a silent note of this, and felt more
strongly than ever that her aunt's needs and not her words must control
her actions. After dinner she said, "Come, aunty, you have had much to try
your nerves of late, and there must be much more not in harmony with your
feelings. It can't be helped, but I absolve you of all responsibility, and
I know very well if you had what was once your own, I would not have to
raise my hand. You see I am not seeking relief in the way that is so
utterly distasteful to you, and, when you come to think this plan all
over, you will admit that it is the one that would attract the least
attention, and involve the least change. Now lie down and take a good rest
this afternoon."

"Well," said Mrs. Hunter, with the air of one yielding a great deal, "I
will submit, even though I can not approve, on the one condition that you
have nothing more to say to Mr. Clancy."

A painful flush overspread Mara's features, and she replied in a
constrained voice, "You will have no occasion to worry about Mr. Clancy.
After--" then remembering that Aunt Sheba was within ear-shot, she
concluded, "Mr. Clancy will have nothing to say to me when he knows what
is taking place. When you have thought it over you will see that my plan
makes me independent of every one."

"That is, if you succeed," remarked Mrs. Hunter, "and it will be about the
only thing to be said in its favor."

This degree of toleration obtained, Mara prepared to join Aunt Sheba in
the kitchen, with the purpose of giving her whole thought and energy to
the securing of an independence, now coveted more than ever. In spite of
the influences and misapprehensions of her life which had tended to
separate her from Clancy, when she fully learned that he was affiliating
with those who dwelt as aliens in her thoughts, she had been overborne by
his words and the promptings of her own heart. She was glad, indeed, that
she had not revealed what she now regarded as her weakness, feeling that
it would have complicated matters most seriously. While she had been
compelled to see the folly of seclusion and inaction, the natural result
of a morbid pride which blinds as well as paralyzes, she was by no means
ready to accept his views or go to his lengths. She would have shared
poverty with him gladly if he would continue to be "a true Southerner," in
other words, one who submitted in cold and unrelenting protest to the new
order of things. In accepting this new order, and in availing himself of
it to advance his fortunes and those of his State as he also claimed, he
alienated her in spite of all his arguments, and his avowed love. She felt
that he should take the ground with her that they had suffered too deeply,
and had been wronged too greatly, to ignore the past. They were a
conquered people, but so were the Poles and Alsatians. Were those subject
races ready to take the hands that had struck them and still held them in
thraldom? Their indignant enmity was patriotism, not hate. Now that the
habitual thoughts of her life had been given time to resume their control,
she felt all the more bitterly what seemed a hopeless separation. The
North had not only robbed her of kindred and property, but was now taking
her lover. She knew she loved him, yet not for the sake of her love would
she be false to her deep-rooted feelings and convictions. If he had seen
how nearly she yielded to _him_, not to his views, the previous evening,
it would have been doubly hard to show him in the end that she could never
share in his life, unless he adopted her attitude of passive submission to
what could not be helped.

Others might do as they pleased, but their dignity and personal memories
required this position, and, as she had said to him, she could take no
other course without hypocrisy, revolting alike to her feelings and sense
of honor. His strong words, however, combining with the circumstances of
her lot, had broken the spell of her aunt's influence, and had planted in
her mind the thought that any useless suffering on her part was not
loyalty to the memory of her father and mother. Her new impulse was to
make the most and best of her life as far as she could conscientiously:
and the hope would assert itself that if she were firm he would eventually
be won over to her position. "If he loves as I do," she thought, "he will
be. He, no doubt, is sincere, but he has been beguiled into seeing things
in the light of his immediate interests. Love to me, if it is genuine, and
loyalty to the cause for which his father gave his life, should lead him
to the dignified submission of the conquered and away from all association
with the conquerors that can be avoided. I'll prove to him," was her
mental conclusion, accompanied with a flash of her dark eyes, "that a girl
ignorant of the world and its ways, and with the help only of a former
slave, can earn her bread, and thus show him how needless are his Northern
allies."

Thoughts like these had been swiftly coursing through her mind while
dining, and therefore, when she joined Aun' Sheba in the kitchen, she was
ready to employ every faculty, sharpened to the utmost, in the tasks
before her.

In that humble arena, and by the prosaic method contemplated, she would
assert her unsubdued spirit, and maintain a consistency which should not
be marred, even at the bidding of love, by an insincere acceptance of his
views and associations.




CHAPTER VIII

NEVER FORGET; NEVER FORGIVE


While Ann' Sheba finished her dinner Mara began to open and put in their
places the slender materials which she had purchased as her first step
toward self-support. The generous meal, and especially the coffee
combining with the strong incentive of her purpose, gave elasticity to her
step and flushed her face slightly with color. The old aunty watched her
curiously and sympathetically as she thought, "Bress her heart how purty
she am, bendin' heah an' dar like a willow an' lookin' de lady ebery inch
while she doin' kitchen work! Quar pahner fer sech an ole woman as me ter
hab, but I dun declar dat her han's, ef dey am little, seem po'ful smart.
Dey takes hole on tings jes' as if dey'd coax 'em right along whar she
wants dem!" Then she broke out, "Wot a fool dat Owen Clancy am!"

Mara started and was suddenly busy in a distant part of the room. "I
reckon you are the only one that thinks so, Aun' Sheba," she remarked
quietly.

"Ef he could see you now he'd tink so hisself."

"Very likely," and there was a little bitterness in Mara's accent.

"De mo' fool he be den," said Aun' Sheba with an indignant toss of her
head. "Whar ud his eyes be ef he could see you and not go down on his
marrow-bones, I'd like to know? Habn't I seen all de quality ob dis town?
and dat fer de new quality," with a snap of her fingers, "an you take de
shine off'n dem all eben in de kitchen. Law sakes, what kin' ob blood dat
man Clancy hab to lebe you kase you po'? Pears ter me de ole cun'l, his
fader, ud be orful figety in his coffin."

"Mr. Clancy has not left me because I am poor, Aun' Sheba," said Mara
gravely. "You do him great injustice. We are not so good friends as we
were simply because we cannot agree on certain subjects. But I would
rather you would not talk about him to me or to any one else. Come now,
you must give me some lessons in your mystery of making cakes that melt in
one's mouth. Otherwise people will say you are growing old and losing your
high art."

"Dey better not tell me no sech lies. Law, Missy, you is gwine ter beat me
all holler wen onst you gits de hang ob de work. You little white han's
gib fancy teches dat ain't in my big black han'. Arter all, tain't de
han's; it's de min'. Dere's my darter Mis Watson. Neber could larn her
much mo'n plain cookin'. Dere's a knack at dese tings dat's bawn in one.
It's wot you granpa used ter call genus, an' you allus hab it, eben when
you was a chile an' want ter muss in de kitchen."

Thus full of reminiscence and philosophy eminently satisfactory to her own
mind, Aun' Sheba taught her apt and eager pupil the secrets of her craft.
Mara was up with the dawn on the following day, and achieved fair success.
Other lessons followed, and it was not very long before the girl passed
beyond the imitative stage and began to reason upon the principles
involved in her work and then to experiment.

One day an old customer said to Aun' Sheba: "There's a new hand at the
bellows."

"Dunno not'n 'bout bellus. Ain't de cakes right?"

"Well, then, you've got some new receipts."

"Like a'nuff I hab," said the vender warily. "De pint am, howsumeber,
isn't de cakes good?"

"Yes, they seem better every day, but they are not the same every day. I
reckon some one's coaching you."

"Law sakes, Massa, wo't you mean by coachin' me?"

"Do you make the cakes?" was asked pointblank.

"Now, Massa, you's gittin' too cur'us. Wot de Scripter say? Ask no
questions fer conscience' sake."

"Come, come, Aun' Sheba; if you begin to wrest Scripture, I'll take pains
to find you out."

She shuffled away in some trepidation and shook her head over the problem
of keeping her relations with Mara secret. "Missy puttin' her min' in de
cakes an' I didn't hab much min' to put in an' folks know de dif'ence,"
she soliloquized. Later on she was down among the cotton warehouses, and
finding herself weary and warm, stopped to rest in the shade of a
building. Suddenly Owen Clancy turned the corner. His brow was contracted
as if in deep and not agreeable thought.

Aun' Sheba's lowered at him, for he seemed about to pass her without
noticing her. The moment he became aware of her presence, however, he
stopped and fixed upon her his penetrating gray eyes. His gaze was so
persistent and stern that she was disconcerted, but she spoke with her
accustomed assurance: "You ain't gwine ter call de perlice, is you, Mars'
Clancy?" and she placed her arms akimbo on her hips.

This reference was shrewd, for it reminded him that his grievance was
purely personal and one that he could not resent in her case, yet his
heart was so sore with the suspicion that Mara was looking to this negress
for help instead of to himself, that for the time being he detested the
woman. Love is not a judicial quality, and rarely has patience with those
who interfere with its success. He had hoped that eventually the pressure
of poverty would turn Mara's thoughts to him, especially as he had
revealed so emphatically his wish to help her disinterestedly as a friend
even; but if his present fears were well grounded, he would have to admit
that her heart had grown utterly cold toward him.

"Why should you think of the police, Aun' Sheba, unless you have something
on your mind?" he asked, coolly removing the cover of the basket and
helping himself. "You didn't make these cakes. Did you steal them?"

"Marse Clancy, what you take me fer?"

"That depends on how honest your answers are."'

"I ain't 'bliged ter answer 'tall."

"Oh, you're afraid then."

"No, I ain't afeerd. Ef dey is stolen, you'se a 'ceivin ob stolen goods,
fum de way dem cakes dis'pearin'."

"You're pert, Aun'Sheba."

"Oh co'se I'se peart. Hab to be spry to arn a libin' in dese yer times,
but I can do it fum dem dat's fren'ly and not fum dem dat glower at me."

"Will you tell me if Miss Wallingford--"

"Marse Clancy, hab Miss Wallingford sent you word dat she want you to know
'bout her 'fairs?"

"I understand," he said almost savagely, and throwing a quarter into the
basket he passed on.

There had been a tacit understanding at first that Mara's part in Aun'
Sheba's traffic should not be revealed. The girl had not wholly shaken off
the influence of her aunt's opposition, and she shrank with almost morbid
dread from being the subject of remark even among those of her own class.
The chief and controlling motive for secrecy, however, had been distrust,
the fear that the undertaking would not be successful. As the days had
passed this fear had been removed. Aun' Sheba did not come 