t about as we figured before you went to New Orleans;
but we found one letter from Decherd to Delphine that uncovered his
hand completely, and it was this, to my notion, that made Delphine so
desperate."

"Let me have that letter, Cal."

"All right, I'll get it for you after a while, along with all the
other papers. It gives the whole thing away. He just told her he was
through with her, and with Mrs. Ellison, too. Told her he wouldn't
send her no more money, and turned her loose to take care of herself
the best she could. He allowed that she, and Mrs. Ellison, too, could
do what they wanted to. That was when he told Delphine that if she
made him any trouble he'd come out and charge her with the train
wreck. He was the planner of that wreck. He knew right where that
log-pile was at. He wanted another accident on that railroad, and he
wanted Delphine mixed up in it, so he could control her after that.
She was willing enough, because by that time I reckon she just about
hated all the world. And Decherd came down on that very train, and
got off at our station just before the smash. There was a little
danger in that, but at the same time it was the best way in the world
to rid himself of all suspicion. After the wreck he just mixed with
the crowd, and nobody thought of him one way or the other. Pretty
smooth, wasn't it?

"Oh, he had nerve, too, that fellow did. He wasn't scared, at least
not of these two women, although I'm right sure Mrs. Ellison and he
might have had reason to be scared of the law in some of their
carryings-on before now. It is easy enough to see that Mrs. Ellison
never was Miss Lady's mother."

"No," said Eddring, "that couldn't have been. Some day we'll know all
about that. A good lawyer might get at the truth, even yet."

"Good lawyer?" said Blount. "How about you?"

Eddring shook his head.

"What do you mean?" asked Blount.

"Well," said Eddring, bitterly, "I told you I'd bring Miss Lady
through, and I did. But that ends it. I am neither lawyer nor friend
for any young woman who thinks I'm a thief."

"What are you talking about?"

"Well, she told me to my own face that I stole that list of judgment
claims from my own railroad. She told me that I was dishonest. She
forbade me ever to see her again."

"Seems like you _did_ see her again," said Blount, philosophically.
"Well now, you just think over both sides of that. You want to forget
some of the things women say."

"I'll forget nothing," replied Eddring, "I don't need any advice in
such matters as that. No man, and no woman, can accuse me in that way
and ever make it right without coming to me voluntarily and making
apology and explanation. I say voluntarily, meaning for a woman. If
it were a man, I'd take the first steps myself."

"Oh, well, get your feathers up, if you want to," said Blount. "I
suppose every fellow is entitled to his own kind of damned
foolishness. First thing, let's go on through with this Delphine
business. Now, was that girl crazy, or was she just a natural devil?
Folks mostly have reasons for doing things."

"I should think this letter you mention would explain everything for
Delphine," said Eddring. "She was born a good hater, and she was
surely misled and deceived for years--finally thrown over and
taunted."

"But where did they first hook up together, and what made 'em?"

"No doubt she and Decherd knew each other before either came to your
place. Decherd's main motive was money. Delphine was no doubt his
mistress, even here; but he was looking after the legal side of
matters all the time. What he promised Delphine no one knows. It
looks as though he and Mrs. Ellison were hunting in couple, too. Now,
Mrs. Ellison had brains, and she was an attractive woman, too--full
of sex, full of love and hate, and full of unscrupulousness as well.
Rather a dangerous proposition, I should say, to have right here in
your own house. Now, here was Decherd mixed up with two, or perhaps
all three of these women at the same time! That took nerve."

"I should say it did," said Blount. "It was the same sort of nerve a
fellow has to have when he starts on across a trembling bog. He just
keeps on a-running."

"Well, he had to keep running, sure as you're born. A fine situation,
all around, wasn't it?"

"Yes," said Blount, tersely. "If I had known all that was going on
here, I wouldn't maybe have felt altogether easy about it."

"Well, Miss Lady's going away helped Decherd. By this time he had to
lighten cargo somewhere. We don't know about his first relations with
Mrs. Ellison, and we don't know just how he got rid of her. Perhaps
he didn't quite want to dispense with Mrs. Ellison, since he might
need her in legal matters later on. He wanted to get rid of Delphine,
but he couldn't kill her outright, and illegally, so he resolved to
get her killed legally if he could! I have no doubt in the world,
Cal, that Decherd planned the train wreck. Maybe he thought it meant
more damage suits; but I think as you do, his main reason was to get
rid of Delphine. He probably hid the handkerchief under the log-pile.
He probably was glad to see the dogs run the trail right to your
door. But Delphine had a nerve of her own. I have no doubt it was she
who turned your pack loose, and wiped out the sheriff's trail right
there."

"By jinks!" said Blount, rubbing his chin thoughtfully. "Things were
happening, right around here."

"They were happening, and they are not done happening yet. Now, I've
brought you Miss Lady. You take care of her. Better keep that
Frenchwoman here, too, if you can. Decherd may turn up again
sometime, or maybe Mrs. Ellison, though I think Decherd's teeth are
pretty well pulled, I can't act as Miss Lady's lawyer, but I'll
promise to act as your friend."

"And hers?"

"Yes, and hers," said Eddring, hesitatingly. "We are hardly through
with all this yet."

"It's been pretty bad down here," said the old planter.

"Yes, and we know now how it happened and who was at the head of the
trouble, and what cat's-paws were used in it all. Decherd fails in
his first attempt to get rid of Delphine legally, so he stirs her up
to still worse acts; tells her there is no profit in law and order,
but only in destruction. He tells her how to incite these ignorant
niggers; how to bring up all the old talk of their day of
deliverance, the time when they won't have to work, the time when
they will be not only the equals, but the superiors of the whites. He
tells Delphine that she is the naturally appointed Queen of these
people. She is savage enough to fit in with all their savagery. She
does rule it as a queen. In her soul there are thoughts, wild
thoughts which you and I can never understand, because we are white,
and all white. Delphine is neither white nor black, neither red, nor
white, nor black. She is a product of race amalgamation, a
monstrosity, a horror, the germ of a national destruction. She is a
queen--a queen of annihilation!

"And so this thing went on," resumed Eddring, after a time, "this
plotting which meant war and destruction, not for this household
alone, nor this district, nor this state, but for this nation! What
prevented it? I'll tell you. It was our Miss Lady. It was the White
Woman, the white woman of America. Whatever happens, whatever stands
or falls, whatever is the law or is not the law, that is the thing to
be cherished always and to be protected at any cost or any risk. This
house is no better than the women in it, nor is any home, nor is any
nation. Lawless, American men may be, but not so the women; and in
them we reverence the law. When the women go, the nation goes. They
are the salvation of this nation--the stronghold of its purity. In
the commercialization and the corruption of a people the women are
the last to go. In the South we have taken care of them always. I'm
not preaching. I only say, it was our Miss Lady who, by the
Providence of God, acted here as the spirit of all that means
progress, all that means development and civilization.

"Cal, you think I'm a visionary, that I'm a dreamer. Perhaps I am.
But I think on my honor that the angel of our salvation here was one
girl who had no conception of the part she played. I have told you,
she is _our_ Miss Lady. There's nothing in this for me
personally, but at least you and I can take off our hats to her.
Maybe sometime the picture will blur and merge, so that, for us two
old fellows, Miss Lady will just mean Woman. I reckon all of us old
fellows, and all the young ones, can take care of Her."

The two sat looking at each other a moment. Ere their silence was
broken there came the sound of a quick step down the hall, and a
light tap at the door. There appeared, framed in the doorway, the
figure of Miss Lady herself; but not Miss Lady the dancer of New
Orleans, nor yet Miss Lady as recently garbed for her voyage through
the wilderness. In her rummaging about the once familiar recesses of
the Big House, she had come across a simple gown of lawn, which she
had worn long ago, when scarce more than a child. Now, albeit
rounder, firmer and fuller of figure than when she had departed in
search of that bigger world beyond the rim of the hedging forest, it
was the same Miss Lady of the Big House once more. She had come back
to her old friends, and to a world which now seemed strangely sweet
and strangely dear. Her sleeves were rolled up; her hair was tumbled
about her brow, and her eyes were dancing with new merriment.

"Please, gentlemen," said she, with a dainty courtesy, "and would you
come out to dinner? You really should see what Madame Delchasse has
done with her new sauce-pan."

Blount and Eddring both arose; there was gravity in the gaze of
either, though the heart of either might have leaped.

"So it is you, child," said Colonel Blount; "it is you again! Just as
you went. You're Miss Lady, come back to us again." Impulsively
forgetting everything but the one thought, he sprang to her and flung
his arm about her shoulders. And Miss Lady could not find it in her
heart to shrink from such a welcome.

"Oh, I'm glad to see you--glad to see you," repeated Calvin Blount.
"Mr. Eddring, here, was just saying how good it is to have you back
again."

Mute, she turned her eyes toward Eddring. The short upper lip
trembled; in her eyes there was more than half a suspicion of
moisture.

"Yes, we are very glad," said John Eddring, simply. With no word she
put out her hand to each, and drew them out into the hall.




CHAPTER XVI

THE NEW SHERIFF


As Eddring and Blount sat engaged in conversation after dinner that
same evening, they were interrupted by a sudden disturbance in the
hall. "Stan' aside, you-all," cried a pompous voice. "You wanteh
hindeh a officah o' de law?"

Hurrying footfalls followed, and presently the face of old Bill,
Colonel Blount's faithful bear-hunter, appeared at the door, "Hit's
dat fool new sheriff, Mas' Cunnel," he explained, "Mose Taylor. Why,
he says he got a wah'nt fo' you. I tol' him like enough you was
busy."

"Let him come in, Bill, let him come right along in," said Calvin
Blount, suavely. "Mose Taylor, eh? That's our new sheriff," said he
to Eddring. "He's our joke. Hell of a joke, ain't it?"

Presently there came to the door the form of the new sheriff, large,
portly and pompous. Taylor was a mulatto who long had entertained
political ambitions. The realization of one of his ambitions seemed
for this present moment to give him no especial happiness. On his
face stood beads of sudden perspiration. His office had never before
seemed to him quite so serious as it did at this moment. At his waist
he wore a belt supporting a pair of heavy revolvers with highly
ornamented handles--a present from certain admirers to one who was
looked upon as fit to do much for the elevation of his race. The new
sheriff did not at that moment seem to think of these revolvers. As
Mose Taylor entered the door he cast his glance backward, over his
shoulder. It did not encourage him to see his cowardly posse of black
followers gathered in a huddle at the edge of the overflowed lawn,
beside their boat. They were waiting to see what would happen to
their leader; and their leader now heartily wished that he had
remained with them.

"Come on in, Mose," said Blount, with honey-like sweetness. "Come in
and take a chair." The man sidled in. "Sit down," said Blount,
"_sit down!_ Sit down on it good; that chair ain't hot;" and the
sheriff suddenly obeyed. "I always like to see the sheriff of
Tullahoma County feeling easy-like in my house. Now, tell me, damn
you, what you want around here?"

"Cunnel Blount, sah--well, I got a papah, a wah'nt from co'te, f-fo'
you, sah. I--I--I--didn't think you was quite so well, sah."

"Uh-huh! So that's why you came, eh? I reckon you'd be mighty glad if
I was a heap sicker, wouldn't you?"

"I dunno, sah."

"What's your warrant for, Mose?" said Calvin Blount, still quietly.
"Stealing hogs this time, or killing somebody's cows, maybe? Out with
it. Now, damn you, can't you read your own warrant?"

"Well, sah, you-all know there wuz some killin'--my wah'nt--"

"Yes, we-all _do_ know there was some killing, a little of it, the
_beginning_ of it, a _part_ of it. Now, tell me, have you the
nerve--are you _fool_ enough to come down here and try to arrest any
of us white gentlemen for what we did a few days ago? Now talk. Tell
me!" Blount's face took on its red fighting-hue.

"Wait!" cried Eddring, speaking to Blount, "this is an officer of the
law. This is the law." He rose and stepped between the two, even as
the sheriff fumbled in his pocket for the paper which had lately been
the bolster of his courage, the warrant which in grim jest had been
issued by the court of that county to its duly instituted executive
officer.

Blount's face was an evil thing to see. At a grasp he caught from a
belt which hung at the head board of the bed a well-worn revolver
whitened where long friction on the scabbard had worn away the
bluing. "Out of the way, Eddring," he cried. "Get your head out of
the way, man!" His pistol sight followed steadily here and there,
searching for a clean opening at its victim, now partly protected by
Eddring as the latter sprang between them. Blount sat on the edge of
the bed, his crippled arm fast at his side, his unshaven face aflame,
his red eye burning in an unspeakable rage as it shone down the
pistol-barrel, grimly hunting for a vital spot on the body of the man
beyond him.

"Get out, quick," cried Eddring, and pushed the man through the door.
He sprang to Blount and pushed him in turn back upon the bed.

"It's the law!" he reiterated.

"The law be damned!" cried Calvin Blount. "Let me up! Let me at him!
_Him_--to come around here to arrest _me_-that damned nigger! You,
Bill!" he called out, raising his voice. "Throw him off my place. Kill
him!" He struggled furiously with Eddring in his effort to gain the
door.

The new sheriff of Tullahoma County was ashen in color when he
emerged into the hall; and then it was only to look into the muzzle
of a rifle, held steadily by old Bill. There ambled up to Bill's
side, also, Jack, and between them they laid hold of the sheriff of
the county and pushed him out of the house and across the lawn,
administering meanwhile to his body repeated deliberate and energetic
kicks, and thus enthusiastically propelling him into the very
presence of his waiting posse, who raised never a hand to resent
these indignities to one who had been their chosen representative for
the advancement of their race.

"I'll see 'bout dis yer, I will!" cried the sheriff, as at last he
got clear and took refuge in the boat which lay waiting at the edge
of the lawn. "I'll have you-all up for 'sistin' a officah, dat's whut
I will."

"'Sistin' a officah! Who! _You?"_ said Bill. The scorn in his voice
was infinite. "Say, you low-down scoun'rel, you say very much mo' an'
I'll blow yoh head off. You're on our _lan'_, does you know dat? Now
you git _off_, right soon."

The officer of the law retreated as far as he could into the boat.
"You thought Cunnel Blount was all 'lone in bed, too weak to move,
didn't you?" resumed Bill. "Why, blame you, you couldn't 'rest
Colonel Calvin Blount, not if he was _daid!_ Go 'long dah, now!"

Mose Taylor, the grim jest, the sardonic answer of the whites of
Tullahoma County to those who deal fluently with questions of which
they know but little, was fain to take Bill's sincere advice. Behind
the shelter of the first clump of trees, he folded his arms into a
posture as near resembling that of Napoleon as he could assume. He
frowned heavily. "Huh!" said he savagely, looking from one to another
of the crew who made his "posse." "Huh!" he said again, and yet
again, "Huh!" A cloud sat on his soul. It seemed to him that persons
like himself, earnestly engaged in settling the race problem, ought
not to have such difficulties cast in their way.

Meantime, in the house, Eddring still confronted the rage of Colonel
Blount.

"You," panted Blount. "You! I thought you were one of us."

"I am, I am!" cried Eddring. "I was with you in what you did. I tried
to get to you. It had to be done. But somewhere, Cal, we must stop.
We've got to pull up. We can't fight lawlessness with worse
lawlessness. We must begin with the law."

A bitter smile was his answer. "Is that sort of sheriff the
foundation that you lay?" said Calvin Blount, panting, as at length
he threw his six-shooter upon the bed. "Let me tell you, then, the
law is never going to stand. That's no law for the Delta."

Eddring sunk his face between his hands. "Cal," he said, "we've got
to begin. This country is being ruined, and perhaps it is partly our
own fault. Now, I am guilty as you. are; but I say, we have got to
give ourselves up to the law."

"Give myself up? Why, of _course_ I will. I was going up directly,
soon as I got well, to talk it over with the judge, and arrange for a
trial. All this has got to be squared up legally, of course. But
that's a heap different from sending a nigger sheriff down here to
arrest Cal Blount in his own house. Why, I'm one of the oldest
citizens in these here bottoms. I've carried my end of the log for
fifty years, with black and white. Why, if I should go in with
that fellow, where'd be my reputation? I'd have a heap of show of
living down here after that, wouldn't I? Why, my neighbors'd kill me,
and do me a kindness at that."

"But we must begin," said Eddring, insistently, once more. "There
must be some law. We'll go in and surrender. I'll take your case."

"You mean you'll be my lawyer at the trial?"

"Yes, I'll defend you. But as for you and me, we're for the state,
after all. We've got to prosecute this entire system which prevails
down here to-day. We're growing more and more lawless all over the
South, all over America. Now, we don't want that. We don't believe in
it. Then what can we do? How can we get to the bottom of this thing?
Cal, I reckon you and I are brave enough to begin."

Even as they were speaking, they heard a knock at the door, and Miss
Lady once more stood looking in hesitatingly upon these stern-faced
men. Upon her own face there was horror, terror.

"I don't know what to do!" she cried, her hands at her temples. "I
don't know where to go. You tell me this is my home, and I have
nowhere else to go, but this is a _terrible_ place. Why, I have
just heard about what happened--about Delphine and those others. Why,
sir,"--this to Eddring,--"you knew it all the time. You saw. You
knew!"

"Yes," said Eddring, "that is why I would not let you walk down that
little path on the island. I didn't want you to know--we didn't want
you ever to know."

"Yes, Miss Lady," affirmed Blount, "we knew. We didn't want you to
know."

"But is there no law?" she cried. "Why do you do these things? The
punishment is for the officers, for the courts, and not for you. Why,
how can I _look_ at you without shivering?"

"What shall we do, Miss Lady?" asked Blount, coldly. "What's the
right thing to do? Listen. We've done this thing for _you_. You're a
white girl. The white women of this country--if we _didn't_ do these
things, what chance would you and your like have in this country? Now,
we've done it for you, and we'll finish the way you say. You're to
decide. Shall we go in and surrender? Shall we be tried? Remember, it
is our own lives at stake, then."

"We will go in, and we will meet our trial," said John Eddring,
rising and interrupting, even as Miss Lady buried her face in her
hands. "We will begin, right here."





CHAPTER XVII

THE LAW OF THE LAND


One morning in the early fall, the little town of Clarksville,
county-seat of Tullahoma County, was thronged with people from all
the country round about. There was in progress the trial of certain
white citizens under indictment for murder, among these some of the
most respected men of that region. The case of Colonel Calvin Blount
had been chosen as the first of many.

The court-room in the square brick court house was packed with masses
of silent men. The halls were crowded. The yard of the court house
was full, and the streets were alive with grim-faced men. The
hitching racks were lined with saddle horses, and other horses and
countless mules were hitched to fences and trees even beyond the
outskirts of the town. The hotels had long since abandoned system,
and every dwelling house was open and full to overflowing.

Outside of the town, or mingling in the fringes of the crowd at its
edges, there huddled even greater numbers of those of the colored
race. Some of these were armed. The white men in the streets were
armed. None showed hurry or agitation; none shouted or gesticulated;
yet the clerk of the court had a pistol in his pocket; each juryman
was likewise equipped; the judge on the bench knew there was a pistol
in the drawer of the desk before him. This gathering of the people
was thoughtfully prepared. It was a crisis, and was so recognized.

The silent audience was packed close up to the rail back of which was
stationed the judge's stand and jury-box. Within the railing there
was scanty room; every member of the local bar was there, and many
lawyers from counties round about.

Erect in the grave-faced assemblage, there stood one man, pale of
face but with burning eyes. It was John Eddring, attorney for the
defense in the case of the state against Calvin Blount, charged with
murder. His voice, clean-cut, eager, incisive, reached every corner
of the room. His gestures were few and downright. He was swept
forward by his own convictions of the truth.

Eddring was approaching the conclusion of the argument which he had
begun the previous day. The testimony in these cases, known generally
as the "lynching cases," had long been in and had passed through
examination, cross-examination, rebuttal and surrebuttal.

Eddring knew that he would be followed by an able man, a district
attorney conscientious in the discharge of his duty, however
unpleasant it might be. He had therefore with the greatest care
analyzed the evidence of the state as offered, and had demonstrated
the technical impossibility of a conviction. Yet this, he knew, would
not upon this occasion suffice. He went on toward the heart of the
real case which he felt was then on trial before this jury of the
people.

"Your Honor and gentlemen of the jury," he continued, "we all know
that we are, in effect, trying today not one man, not one district,
not one state, but an entire system. We are trying the South. The
life and the liberty of the South are at stake. To prove this, these
men have come in and given themselves up as an atonement, as a blood
offering like to that of old; seeking to prove that what they
continually have coveted is not lawlessness, but the law.

"Now I say this, and I say, also, let each of us have a care lest he
lose touch with the eternal pillar of the truth. There it is. It
rises before you, gentlemen, that silent, somber shaft. It finds its
summit in the sky. I pray God to keep my own hand in touch thereto,
and my eyes turned not aside. And my life, with that of these others,
is offered freely in proof that we covet not lawlessness, but the
law! We are white men, and where the white man has gone, there has he
builded ever, first of all, his temple of the law. Upon whatever land
the Anglo-Saxon sets his foot, of that land he is the master, or
there he finds his grave. First he lays his hearthstone, and upon
that foundation he builds his temple of the law. A race which has no
hearthstone knows no law.

"Inasmuch as God has made all manner of things diverse, setting no
fence even between species and species, creating all blades of grass
alike, yet not one the duplicate of another; then neither should we,
being human, essay a wisdom greater than that of the eternal
compromise of life. No human document, no sum of human wisdom, not
even the Deity of all life can or does guarantee a success which
means individual equality in the result of effort. The chance, the
opportunity--that is the law, and that is all the law. Beyond that
did not go the intent of that Divinity which decreed the scheme under
which this earth must endure. To war and conflict each creature is
foreordained, for so runs the decree of life. But never, in the
divine wisdom, was it established that the mouth of the stream should
be its source; that inequality should be equality; that failure
should be success; that unfitness should mean survival.

"In reading the pages of the great and beloved Constitution of
America there have been those who have juggled the import of the word
'success' with the meaning of the _chance to succeed_.

"There was such juggling in those war amendments to that
Constitution, which to-day represent the folly of a part of America--
not of all of America. Those amendments, if they be not of themselves
war measures, were at least consequences of war measures. This
Constitution which we call supreme can, of itself, be amended--can,
indeed, itself be set aside by its own servants, as was proved in
that very war whose memory is still in our minds. The Supreme Court,
in the Legal Tender case, admittedly set aside the Constitution. It
did so of necessity, and as a measure demanded by the times of war.
The supreme letter of the law has not always been respected by this
people, nor by its wisest men, by its most august servants.

"It is not the law, gentlemen, vainly to call two blades of grass
identical, vainly to call the hare and tiger alike and equal; vainly
to call, if you like, black the same as white. The law is that if it
be possible for the hare to approach its neighbor in ways desirable,
it be given its _chance_ to do so. If the black man can grow like to
the white in all human attainments, if he can grow and succeed, then
let him have the _chance_ to do so.

"But that same chance of betterment and advancement, that same
selfish chance to prevail and to survive, that chance to succeed
given under the divine intent, must be accorded also to that creature
known as the white man. If he, the white man, can prevail, can
survive, can succeed, he, too, must have his chance. That is the law!
But the chance of either white or black man is his own and is not
negotiable. That is the law! Not without fitness can there be
ultimate success. Not until the fullness of the years can there be
attainment for any creature of this earth. That is the law! There is
no tree growing in the center of this ordained universe wherefrom the
full fruit of survival and of success may be plucked and eaten
without effort and without earning. No individual has done it. No one
can do it. Bounty and gift do not make success. It must be _won!_

"Is this doctrine difficult? If so, we can not change it. It is the
great law, irrevocable and unamendable, and it is no more kind and no
more cruel than life itself is kind or cruel. It is the law. That is
the law!

"The makers of the Constitution, the amenders of the Constitution--
that document subject to change, subject to being ignored, as has
been the case--could never, under the enduring law, guarantee success
plucked as an apple for each and every man who had not earned it.
Gentlemen, talk not to me of the broad charity of this nation, or of
its general justice to humanity. Call not this piece-work
Constitution of ours, amended and subject to amendment, an approach
to divine charity or wisdom. No; for in some of its effects it has
proved to be the most cruel and unjust measure ever known in all
human laws.

"It was cruel and unjust to whom? To us? To the white man? No, no. It
was cruel in that it presented a title to success, to fitness and to
survival unto eager, ignorant hands, and then by its own limitations
snatched that title away from them again. It sought to do that which
can not be done--to establish growth instead of the chance to grow.
It was cruel. It was unjust. In the wisdom of a later day its
patchwork form must once more be changed. It must be changed as a
protection, no more against the former slaves of the South than
against the future slaves of the North.

"Gentlemen, if that change could be effected to-morrow by the
offering up of this life--of these lives now in your hands--I say
these lives would be laid down gladly. Take them if you will. They
are our pledge that we covet not lawlessness, but the law; our pledge
that, having no law, we have been eager to act lawfully as we might.
The reign of lawlessness and terror must end in this country. We must
contrive some machinery of the law which shall command respect. We
must not continually drag the name of the South--the name of America--
in the mire of lawlessness. To do that is to smirch the flag--the
one flag of America. But we denounce and will always denounce that
false decree which says that black is white; that inequality is
equality; that lack of manhood is manhood itself; that the absence of
a hearthstone can mean a home; that the absence of the home can mean
a permanent society.

"In the future the North, packed and crowded beyond endurance, with
imported and herded white slaves who in time will demand the position
of masters--as the blacks may legally demand that position here to-
day--will pay her price for the right to make this plea. The South
has already paid a thousand times for her right to make it to-day.
With treasure she has paid for it; with roof-tree and hearth-tree she
has paid it dear, and with the sacred tears of women. With the
sacrifice of her own future she has paid for that right. But the
South and the North belong together, not held apart by politics, but
held together in brotherhood. In the name of all justice, let us hope
that the South shall not be asked to pay the bitterest of all prices,
the misunderstanding and the alienation of those whom she loves and
would embrace as her brothers. Let us hope, in the name of mercy, if
not of justice, that the South shall be understood as a region having
a problem, a problem which is national, and not sectional, and _not
political_. Let us in all fairness hope that our northern brothers
will understand that the South is honest in her attempt to deal with
that problem in her time, which is the time of to-day.

"Your Honor, I do not depart from my argument. I am not here for wild
talk regarding the relations of the two races. It is the ages alone
which will decide that problem. But I am here to stand for the law
and not for lawlessness. I am here to say that our flag, the American
flag, is for all men, and for America; not for Africa alone, or for
Europe alone, but for America. It is the flag of progress, not the
flag of anarchy. It is the banner of civilization and not of
savagery. That, and not the banner of Africa or of Europe, must be
our ensign to-day.

"Your Honor, and gentlemen, we are not here today to conclude that
God set the white man over the black. We are to conclude simply that
He set him _apart_ from the black man. The divine right of slavery was
an impiety, and, worst of all, an absurdity. The South made that
mistake, and bitter has been the price of her folly. Yet the South,
having sinned, paid the price of her sinning in all ways exacted of
her. She accepted the ruling of the North, and, as a distinguished
orator once said, surrendered 'bravely and frankly.' But she did not
admit, and please God, never will admit, that those fresh from
savagery should govern the white men, that they should institute the
machinery of the law whereunder the white man must live.

"Gentlemen, you see before you, sardonically done, the fruits of the
Black Justice. Is that the Law? If it be, then send us to our graves;
for as that Black Justice formally exists to-day, Calvin Blount, and
I, and these others, must go back to our fields or to our graves. Do
you wish to send us to the latter? If you do, you send these other
white men just as lawfully back to take up the hoe of labor, to bend
their necks under the black yoke of African ignorance and savagery.
Is that the Law? In my heart, gentlemen, I believe that those who say
this is the law have not read the history of this country, do not
understand the theory of this country, and can not speak for it
unselfishly or honestly.

"Yet, gentlemen, that is the dilemma into which our brothers of the
North would continually thrust us. Suppose that, casting about for
some possible measure to free us from one point or the other of that
dilemma, we should seek some legal compromise which would free us
from the letter of this oppressive law of our national Constitution.
Suppose there should be proposed some general and stern limitation of
the franchise? Such an onerous qualification must needs apply to
black and white alike. Who would be first to object to it? It would
be the politicians of the North, who could not afford to exact even a
prepaid poll-tax as a test for a vote. In time the North will need to
free her white slaves, already turbulent and rebellious. In time she
will have to pay for them, as we of the South have paid. After that
great civil war which is yet to come, the men of the North may
perhaps understand more fully the meaning of that phrase 'the manhood
suffrage' and know that manhood means survival, that good manhood
means the product of a good environment, a survival slowly and fitly
won. By that time, North and South, perhaps, will know that the
franchise should be as the bulwark of the law, not the destroyer of
the law. Until that time, we of the South must continue to pay our
part of the price of the national lawlessness; and we must continue,
each commonwealth for itself as best it may, to enact laws which
shall in part lessen the intolerable weight of that which we have set
up as the idol of our national laws--that Constitution, which is
impossible and not practicable, which is merciless instead of just,
which is cruel instead of being kind, and most cruel to those whom it
is thought to shelter. Meantime the South feels still the intolerable
weight of that Constitution, the intolerable sting of the demand of
her northern brothers, that she shall be asked to endure, in the name
of this incubus, this body of the law, the continuous burglarizing of
her honor and her prosperity--the burglarizing of the house of her
society.

"We know that it is the chiefest of cruelty and unkindness, the
chiefest of madness, to incite these poor and ignorant people--ever
ready to follow the voice of sophistry or selfishness--to believe
that their burglary of the house of success is right and reasonable;
because it is certain that such burglary will be met in the South by
the law, by the White Justice, and that, if need be, until either
white or black man shall exist no more in this portion of America.
Gentlemen, North and South owe it to America, America owes it to the
world, that there be held aloft for our worship an image of the Law
more honorable than this. Until that time of a more honorable image
for our worship, there must perhaps go on the enormous folly of one
portion of this nation asking another portion to destroy itself for
the sake of an unworthy race. This demand, gentlemen, I take to be an
actual treason to the law and to this country.

"The white man has won his rights--why? Because he was able to do so.
He accords to any other race the same privilege. That is the law of
survival; it is greater than any law of politics, greater than any
statute law.

"But, your Honor, these men can not be acquitted under any plea
dealing with generalizations alone. The law of the land must be
observed in so far as that law exists.

"Now I ask whether at the time of the acts charged against Calvin
Blount there existed any adequate machinery of the law. I have
pointed out to you the precedent of the great case handled by Mr.
Webster in the city of New York, in which case the statutes were set
aside by the greater law of an immediate and overpowering necessity.
I submit to you that necessity, the greatest of all laws, and in
precedent respected by our courts as such, would have overridden even
the regular machinery of our laws had it been in operation. I submit
further to you that no law existed in this country at that time; that
the service of the law to its citizens had ceased. If the greatest
court of the country still tolerates the burglary of the house of
society by this so-called manhood suffrage, which should rather be
called the per capita suffrage, then at least the lesser courts,
wiser than the greater, recognize the fact that some crimes require
no warrant for arrest; that sometimes the citizen is court and
executive in one and at once.

"As the greatest authorities of the law have written, in the
organization of society the individual never surrenders all of his
rights. He retains for ever and inalienably, after all his
delegations to society and the law, a residuum of power for his own.
He retains under the great and supreme law of all life, that sweet,
that divine privilege, his _chance_ to succeed, his _chance_ to
survive! No tyranny, no oppression, can overcome that sweetest and
strongest of all the Anglo-Saxon's coveted rights. Instead, he has
ever risen against the law, when that law has demanded of him this
last, this ultimate and inalienable right, this principle under which
he has builded the civilization of the world.

"In defiance of statute laws grown weak and impotent, the barons at
Runnymede wrested Magna Charta from King John; in defiance of statute
laws grown weak and impotent, the free men of England wrested their
Habeas Corpus Act from King Charles; in defiance of statute laws
grown weak and impotent, the colonists of America wrested a virgin
empire from King George.

"And, please God, in defiance of statute laws grown weak and
impotent, the white man will wrest from whatsoever hand may hold it,
the right to protect the integrity of his race, the safety of his
women, the sanctity of his two-fold temple of the law!

"I therefore submit to you that a sacred exigency demanded the action
of this prisoner, of these prisoners; and I submit that this prisoner
at the bar is innocent before the law. But beyond that I add my plea,
with that of this honorable court, and of these gentlemen, that one
day we may have given to us an image of the Law which we may venerate
in letter and in spirit, and a law capable of its own enforcement.

"As I stand before you, gentlemen, this prisoner, this cause, its
feeble advocate, seem small and inconsiderable. But at my side I see
arising the eternal pillars of the temple of the White Justice. Do
you not see them, rising solemn and stately before you, those
pillars, their heads taking hold upon the heavens? If that temple has
been defiled, if it has been cast down, then let us hope that South
and North will restore it again in its full majesty. And when,
finally, aided, as we hope, by our brothers of the North, we, as
citizens of an ofttimes mistaken, yet eventually to be united
America, shall have builded this renewed temple of the law, then the
lives of the white men of this state will be--like ours joined in
this trial before you--free pledge that the men of this country, so
long charged with lawlessness, shall come and bow in that temple in
reverence of that law which they have always coveted and which they
covet here to-day. Your Honor, and gentlemen of the jury, in the face
of that statement, I say that not Calvin Blount--nor any one of these
prisoners--has violated the law. And so I close with the words of the
ancient form of pleading: Of this we do indeed put ourselves upon the
country."

In the silence which fell upon the room as Eddring closed, the
district attorney arose to present the case of the state. He began
slowly, gravely, logically. He presented the printed page of the
statutes, called attention to the formal accuracy of the proceedings,
the overwhelming nature of the evidence; he explained that without
law, nothing remained but anarchy. He pointed out to the jury that
here was the law, plain and unmistakable; here were the facts,
obvious and uncontroverted, the convicting facts. He spoke of the
infamy which had been cast upon the name of the South by reason of
just such deeds as these. He urged the necessity for an absolute and
unyielding observance of the letter of the law, those statutes from
which they dared not depart. They were statutes which could not be
overswept by any glittering speciousness, or set aside by fine spun
theories as to what might or might not be a more desirable order of
affairs. He reminded them of their oath, their sworn promise to
enforce the law--_this_ law, the law of the printed page.

[Illustration: "OF THIS WE DO INDEED PUT OURSELVES UPON THE COUNTRY."
p. 358]

He spoke for two hours, and he did his duty; but he addressed himself
to men of stone, and he knew it even as he spoke. Not to be moved by
his words were these set and solemn faces. Concluding with a
passionate appeal that they should protect the fair name of their
country from the stigma of lawlessness, he resumed his seat, knowing
then the verdict which would follow.

The judge, an old man with silvery hair, turned to the jury.

"Retire, gentlemen, to consider of your verdict."

The door to the jury-room closed behind them, and left a thousand
eyes fixed anxiously upon it.

They had scarcely disappeared when the knock of the foreman was heard
at the door.

"Bring in the jury, Mr. Sheriff," the judge ordered.

The foreman of the jury, an unknown man, tall and stooped, with
scraggly hair and beard, handed a folded paper to the clerk.

"Mr. Clerk, read the verdict," the judge ordered; and the clerk read:
"We, the jury, find the defendant not guilty."

The words were received in utter silence.

Presently all, jury and bar and spectators, filed from the court-
room, quietly, not with oaths or threats of violence for those others
who at the outskirts of the town were waiting for their answer. And
they, the waiting ones, found their answer in this silence, and so
now slipped out into the forest. The crowds of white men in the town
also quietly melted away.

That night at the hotel the judge and certain citizens were engaged
in quiet conversation.

"I think," said the judge, "that this young gentleman, Mr. Eddring,
belongs somewhere in a position of trust. I believe that he can be
depended upon to think, and not merely to play politics for the sake
of office holding. We have had too much politics in the South, and
too much in America. It's time now we did a little thinking."

"You're right about that, Judge," broke in the voice of Calvin
Blount. "But it's just as he says, we've got to begin. We've got to
have some kind of law to begin under."

The judge sighed. "It is humiliating to have to resort to any sort of
subterfuge," said he. "Of course, in law, the rule must apply to
black and white alike. I see that one of our sister states has passed
a law allowing no one to vote who can not read, or who can not write
on dictation any section of the Constitution; or who has not paid
state and county taxes for two preceding years. This test is not
applied to any one who was entitled to vote in any one of the states
of the Union on January first, 1867, or at some time prior thereto.
It does not apply to any legitimate lineal descendant of persons
entitled to vote prior to that time. That is an evasion. Yet, as this
young gentleman said, we can not submit to the burglarizing of the
house of our society. Until we may legally repel, we must legally
evade."

"Why, see here, men," broke in Blount, again, "if you'll let me say
so, Judge, there ain't no law higher than the law of poker. Now we've
let Mr. Nigger into the game with us; or, anyhow, he's here, and
somebody gives him a few chips. He don't buy 'em for himself, and he
don't know the value of 'em. His chips ought to be good as far as
they last. The trouble with Mr. Nigger is, he's wanting to get into
every jack-pot with less'n a pair of deuces, and wanting to play on
the ground that his white chips are as good as the other fellow's
blue ones. Now, that ain't _poker!_"

"It Shirley ain't," said the tall foreman, wagging a scraggly beard.

The judge smiled softly and gravely. "No," said he. "There should be
justice to the white man as well as the black. You will notice the
order in which I place those terms."

Calvin Blount hitched his chair closer up to the table. "But now you
were saying, Judge, that we ought to do something for this young
fellow, Eddring. I have known him a long time, from the time he was
claim agent on the railroad. I want to say he's a man and a
gentleman, not afraid of anything, and he wants to do what's right. I
don't think he puts money ahead of everything else in the world. For
my part, if he was my representative in the Legislature, or in
Congress either, I'd feel right sure he'd represent me strictly
according to the legitimate rules of _poker;_ and that's a blamed
sight more than a whole lot of politicians are doing to-day, _North_
or South."

"It Shirley is!" again said the foreman, wagging his scraggly beard.





CHAPTER XVIII

MISS LADY AT THE BIG HOUSE

The days wore on not ungentle at the Big House, until the mild
southern winter had taken the place of mellow fall, and until
presently all the land was again full of the warm, sweet smell of
spring. Softness and gentleness rested on all the world, and upon
every side were tokens that calm had come again to a land late
distraught. Slowly the signs of wreck and ruin disappeared about the
plantation. The track of the receding waters was covered with a swift
verdure. The cabins, late half-submerged and deserted, again found,
at least in part, a tenantry. Songs were heard once more as the
plowmen resumed their labors in the fields. Green and white and pink
colors appeared, and gracious odors, and kindly sights filled now all
the horizon. Peace, and content, and hope seemed now at hand once
more. The master of the Big House saw about him his accustomed
kingdom, and once more his subjects felt the hand of a master, if as
firm, perhaps more kindly than ever before.

As for Miss Lady, she dropped back into the life of the place as
though she had been gone but for a day. Care and responsibility sat
upon the brow of Madame Delchasse, but Miss Lady, not less useful in
the household economy, went about her employment as if she had never
been away. Of those who welcomed her back to the Big House there was
none more thankful and adoring than the old bear-dog, Hec. At the
first sight of his divinity, not forgotten in all these long months,
Hec, himself grown very old and gray, well-nigh wriggled his
rheumatic frame apart, and lifted up his voice in a very wail of
thanksgiving. From that time on he rarely allowed Miss Lady out of
his sight, but pursued her about the place, hobbling and whimpering
when her feet grew too swift; nor did his homage know any change save
when Miss Lady deserted him to bestow her attentions elsewhere,
whether upon little yellow chickens, or upon some of the toddling
puppies which filled the yard about the Big House.

Of all little helpless things, Miss Lady could not find too many for
her attention. Upon one certain morning in the spring, some time
after the late trial at the Clarksville court, Miss Lady was sitting
out on the board-pile beneath the evergreen trees in the front yard
of the Big House. Her wide hat, confined loosely by its strings, had
fallen back on her shoulders, so that the sun and the warm wind had
their way of the brown hair, and the cheeks now flushed with tender
solicitude for the three puppies she held in her lap. Yet other
puppies scrambled at a pan of milk close by her feet, while at a
distance old Hec, too dignified to engage in such procedures, lay in
the shade and gazed at her with reproachful eyes. Calvin Blount,
coming about the corner of the house, stood for a while and gazed at
this picture in silence before he approached and interrupted.

"Miss Lady," said he, "you never did know how glad I am to have you
back here again. Why, a while ago I didn't care what became of me, or
of anything else. I wasn't even half-training my pack of dogs. Now I
have got more'n fifty of the best hounds that ever run a trail, and
with you to take care of the cripples and the puppies, it certainly
looks like the old pack is going to last a while yet. Yes, you surely
are right useful on the place."

"You are not any gladder than I am," said Miss Lady. "I've every
reason in the world to be glad."

"Well," said Blount, seating himself apart on the end of the board-
pile, "I've got a few, myself. This here is a heap better than being
in jail, or maybe getting hung."

"Don't talk about it," said Miss Lady, shuddering.

"I don't want to think--"

"Well, it was Jack Eddring got us out of it all, I reckon," said
Blount, breaking off a splinter from the board. "Did you ever stop to
think, Miss Lady, that he's a powerful fine young man?"

"Why do you always talk about him?" said Miss Lady, turning, to the
sudden discomfort of one of the puppies. "Every time anything comes
up--"

"Now, hold on," said Blount, "you don't say a word against that young
man while I'm around. I want to tell you that fellow has showed me a
heap. He's a square, hard-working man, as honest as the day is long,
straight as a string, square as they make 'em, and not afraid of
nothing on earth. I ask him to come down here and go b'ah hunting. He
always says he has to work--works harder than any nigger I ever had
on the place. Now that's what he done showed me. I reckon he'd be a
good sort of model for this whole southern country to-day. He's proof
enough to my mind that a man can work, and do his own work, and still
be a gentleman. I've been right lazy in my time, I reckon, b'ah
hunting and that sort of thing, but now I come to think it all over,
I don't know but what Jack Eddring is as near right as anybody I know
of. He allows he's got something to _do_ in this world, and he's
starting out to do it. He sort of showed me that maybe that's about
the best thing a man can do with himself--just work.

"Besides, Miss Lady,"--and here Blount turned upon her suddenly,
"that man's done a heap for you."

"Oh, well--" began Miss Lady.

"And he thinks a heap of you. That is,"--and here Blount undertook to
save himself from what he swiftly fancied might be indiscretion--
"he's like all of us people down in here, you know. Now they tell me
that up North, in the big cities where I've never been at, there's so
many women that folks think they're right common. I don't believe
that, nohow, for it don't stand to reason. Now we-all know that a
woman is something a good ways off, and high up and hard to reach.
That's the way we-all feel. But now even if we allow it that way, I
want to say that Jack Eddring has done a heap for you, Miss Lady,
that maybe you don't know about. He didn't have to do it, either."

"I never asked him to do anything--I never told him."

"No, you didn't," said Cal Blount, gravely. "You sort of allowed that
he was a meddling sneak-thief, Miss Lady. I want to say right here
that I allow a lot different from that. Now, if I know that man at
all, he ain't going to come around you and make any sort of talk.
You'll have to go to _him_."

"I'll not!" said Miss Lady, again eliciting a yelp from one of the
puppies in her lap.

"There, there, now," said Blount, gently. "Just you hold on a minute.
Don't say you will or you won't. I just want to ask you one thing,
Miss Lady. Who do you reckon you are? _I_ know you're Miss Lady, and
that's all I want to know. But who do _you_ think you are?"

The kindness of the keen gray eye disarmed Miss Lady. In the sheer
instinct of youth and vitality she spread out her arms wide, her face
turned up halfway toward the sky, her lips half-parted: "Oh, don't
ask me, Colonel Cal," said she. "I'm alive, and it's spring. I danced
in the big room this morning, Colonel Cal! Isn't it enough, just to
be alive?" Thus she evaded that question, which she had so long
shunned as impossible of answer.

"Yes, it's enough, Miss Lady," said the old planter, gravely. "It's
enough for you. But now, we men who are your friends have got to take
_care_ of you. We've got to do the thinking. Now, I'm saying that Jack
Eddring has done a heap of thinking for you that you don't know
anything about."

"Oh, I know he sort of took charge of things down there at New
Orleans. He told me a lot. And then--about Mr. Decherd--"

"Yes, about Mr. Decherd. I've never talked much to you about that,
because the time hadn't come. Now I want to say that Jack Eddring had
more right to throw that man Decherd off the boat than ever you
understood. I'd have done it the same way, only maybe rougher. We're
friends of yours. You're ours, you know. You haven't got any mother.
Thank God, you haven't got any husband. You haven't got any father.
Now tell me, Miss Lady, who do you reckon Henry Decherd is, and what
do you think he wanted to do?"

Miss Lady, suddenly sober, turned toward him a face grave and
thoughtful. A certain portion of the old morbidness returned to her.
"It's not kind of you, Colonel Cal," said she, "to remind me that I'm
nobody. I'm worse than an orphan. I'm worse than a foundling. How I
endure staying here is more than I can tell. Shall I go away again?"

"There, there, none of that," said Blount, sharply. "I'll have none
of that; and you'll understand that right away. You're here, and you
belong here. You don't go out beyond the edge of this yard and get
tangled up with any more Henry Decherds, I'll tell you _that_.
Now, there's certain things people are fitted for. There's Mrs.
Delchasse, a-stewing and a-kicking all the time because she wants to
go back to New Orleans. I tell her she can't go, because she's got to
stay here and take care of you. Now I'm fit to hunt b'ah. I can tell
by looking at a b'ah's track which way he's going to run. Same way
with Mrs. Delchasse. She can just look at a cook stove and tell what
it's going to do. You can run the rest of this house, and do it easy.
We're all right, just the way we are. Now it's going to be that way
for a while, and no other way, and I don't want no orphan talk from
you. For the time being I'm your daddy--and nothing else.

"But now," he went on, presently, "Jack Eddring is fit to do other
things. He's been digging around, like he maybe told you part way,
for all I know, and he's found out a heap of things about you that
you didn't know, and I didn't know. Miss Lady, as far as I know, you
may be richer than I am before long. If you think I've missed the
corn-bread you've done eat at my place, why, maybe some day we can
negotiate for you to pay for it. Now I ask you once more, _who_
are you? and you can't tell. How ought you to feel toward the man who
_can_ tell you what you are, and who you are? And him a man who
can do that, not for pay, but just because you are Miss Lady. How
ought you to feel in a case like that?"

Miss Lady said nothing. She only looked anxious and ill at ease.

"Now listen. I'm going to tell you what we know about you, or think
we know.

"We think your real name is Louise Loisson, just the name you picked
out for yourself. We think that was the name of your mother, and of
your grandmother, too, for that matter. If all that is so, then
you're rich, if you can prove your title; and we think you can. Tell
me, what do you know about Mrs. Ellison? And what do you know about
Henry Decherd? Were they ever married?"

A deep flush of shame sprang to Miss Lady's face as she turned about
at this. "Colonel Cal," she began, and her voice trembled; "you hurt.
All this hurts me so."

"Now hold on, child," said Blount, quickly. "None of that, either.
This is strictly business. I know you are not the child of Mrs.
Ellison. You are somebody else's daughter. You were in her company or
her possession for a long time; just why, we can't prove yet a while.
But there was something right mysterious between that fellow Decherd
and Mrs. Ellison. Did you ever see them much together, as long as you
were living with Mrs. Ellison?"

"No," said Miss Lady, "never, except as they met occasionally here or
there. Mrs. Ellison traveled a great deal from time to time, when I
was little, before we went to New Orleans, where I went to school
with the Sisters. She, my mother--that is, Mrs. Ellison--had money
from somewhere, not always very much. Mr. Decherd told me often that
he simply was an old friend of hers. I always thought he was a lawyer
somewhere in this state. Sometimes he went to St. Louis. We went to
New Orleans; and that was the last I saw of him for some years until
we came here to the Big House."

"That's all you know?" asked Blount. "You don't remember any mother
of your own?"

"Not in the least." Tears welled from her eyes, and this time Blount
did not protest.

"Miss Lady," said he, "there are some things we can't clear up yet.
We can't prove just yet who was your own mother, but I want to tell
you, you were born as far above that sort of life as that there sun
is above the earth. No matter how much Decherd loved you, or how much
right he had to love you, he couldn't do you anything but wrong and
harm, and injury, and shame. As near as we can find out, he was about
as bad, and about as sharp a man as ever struck this country. We
couldn't hardly believe at first how smooth he was. Miss Lady, we
can't tell just what his relations to Mrs. Ellison were. We know they
had some kind of an understanding. We know that he was mixed up with
Delphine down here on some sort of a basis. We know that he was
robbing the railroad here with a list of judgment claims against the
road, which he stole in some way. We know he was underneath a heap of
this trouble with the niggers down here, and that he used Delphine as
a cat's-paw in that. It was his scheme to have other people stir up
all the trouble they could, so he could carry on his own devilment
behind the smoke. Now we know he was mixed up with those two women
somehow. I won't ask you any questions, and won't try to understand
why you could have been so blind as not to know your own friends.--
No, Miss Lady, come back here, and sit right down. You've got to take
your own medicine, and some day you've got to know your own friends.
Now sit down, and hold on till I tell you what I know about this."

And so, to a Miss Lady alternately shocked and ashamed, he went on to
tell in his own fashion, and to the best of his knowledge, the facts
of the strange story which had been canvassed between himself and
Eddring long before. The sun was still farther up in the heavens when
he had concluded, and when finally he rose to his feet and stood
erect before her.

"So there you are, Miss Lady," said he. "You couldn't be any better
than we knew you were all along. I don't think any more of you now
than I ever did; and I don't believe Jack Eddring does either. Now,
we don't know where this man Decherd will turn up again. You've got
to stay here until we find out about that. But this thing can't run
along this way, and it's got to be settled on a business basis. We've
got to find Mrs. Ellison and make her tell what she knows. As to
Decherd, his own rope'll hang him before long. Now, I'm going to be
your agent, your attorney-in-fact. That's what we'd call a 'next
friend' in law, maybe, though you don't need any guardian now. If
you've got any better friend, you name him, but I know you haven't.
Then we'll start suit to get possession of that property, which is
yours. Jack Eddring will be your attorney. I'll appoint him myself,
right now. He's just a little too good for you, Miss Lady, for you
didn't think he was honest; but he'll handle this case. The only
promise I want of you is this: if you get plumb rich and independent,
and able to go where you like, and marry anybody you want to, you
won't get up and go right away at once and leave us all. You won't
do that right away, now will you, Miss Lady?"

Tears still stood in Miss Lady's eyes, as she put both her hands in
the big one extended to her. "Colonel Cal," said she, "it's a wonder
that I can know my friends, or tell the truth, or do anything that's
right. It's been deceit, and treachery, and wrong about me all the
time. I have hardly heard a true word, it seems to me, except when I
was with the Sisters. But I think that she, Mrs. Ellison, told me one
true thing, although she didn't mean it that way. She said, 'There's
nothing in the world for a woman except the men.' That's the truth.
It's been the truth for me. They're not all bad; I know now I've met
two good ones, at least."

"You said two?" asked Blount.

Miss Lady hesitated. "Yes--two," she said, "I'm so sorry."

Blount caught the penitence of her tone and the meaning of her
unfinished speech, and was content to leave his friend's case as it
was. "Miss Lady," said he, sternly, "what do you mean idling around
here all the morning? Can't you hear my dogs hollering? Them puppies
will just naturally starve to death, and here you are a-visiting
around in the shade, not tending to business."

It was a sober and thoughtful young woman who looked up at him. "All
my life, Colonel Cal," said she, "there has been a sort of cloud
before my eyes. I could not see clearly. Tell me, do you think I'll
ever understand, and see everything clearly, and be my real self?"

"Yes, girl," said Calvin Blount, "you'll see it all clear, some day;
and I hope it won't be long. Now, I said, go feed them puppies. And
look at old Hec, there, wanting to talk to you."




CHAPTER XIX

THREE LADIES LOUISE


In the city, as well as in the country, spring came with a sensible
charm. John Eddring, as he gazed out of his office one morning at the
slow life of the southern city and felt the breath of the warm wind
at the casement, abandoned himself for the time to the relaxation of
the season. Peace and content seemed to abide here also, and Eddring,
looking out of his window, sighed not altogether in sadness that his
world was proving so endurable; that it might even, in time, prove
comforting. With a man's exultation, he found happiness in the
certainty that he could do his work, and that there was work for him
to do--work perhaps in some sort higher than that which he had
recently assigned to himself. Before him on his desk there lay a
communication which meant his nomination as candidate at the next
election for the state Legislature. It was pointed out to him that in
all likelihood greater honors might await him at the hands of his
district, as of the county. He found in this not so much personal
pride as a sense of responsibility. Yet there remained comfort in the
fact that he was growing, that he was in some measure attaining. As
with any man truly great, this left him no more selfish, no more
egotistic, than is the stringed instrument which, under the miracle
of a higher power, finds itself capable of music.

Upon Eddring's desk at that moment there lay close beside the opened
letter certain papers, none other than the brief in the case of
Louise Loisson against Henry Decherd, in ejectment, defendant charged
with holding certain properties without legal title thereto. For
years now Eddring had followed the curious and intricate question of
the Loisson estate, and little by little he had seen the tangled
skein unravel beneath his hand. There were necessary links of the
evidence yet to be supplied.

As against all adverse title, there needed to be urged for his client
descent for three generations, carried in each generation by a single
child, who in each case bore the name of Louise Loisson--certainly a
strange and singular legal contingency. There needed to be three
ladies Louise; and of these he had found but two. There was no great
difficulty in establishing the fact that the grandmother of Louise
Loisson was the daughter of the Comte de Loisson; that she returned
to Paris early in the nineteenth century; that in spite of her noble
birth she figured for some years as a danseuse in leading Continental
cities,--a dancer of strange dances. This Louise Loisson, as he
discovered, had some years later, after declining all manner of
titled suitors, married a distant cousin, by name Raoul de Loisson,
of Favreuil-Chantry, France; a young nobleman of democratic
tendencies, who later removed to New Orleans, in the state of
Louisiana. So much for the first Louise Loisson.

Records showed that to Raoul and Louise Loisson was born one
daughter, Louise, who married one Robert Fanning, a planter and
cattle dealer. But the confusion of records brought about by the
Civil War left it impossible to tell what became of this Louise
Loisson-Fanning, or of either of her parents. The trail ended
abruptly; nor could Eddring find any means of pursuing it further,
certain as he was that, in the person of Miss Lady, he had found the
third Louise Loisson and the rightful heiress of the Loisson
properties in the mountains below St. Louis. Again he looked at his
uncompleted papers, and again he sighed.

It was well toward noon, and Eddring was busying himself about other
matters, when he heard the knock of his faithful henchman, Jack, and
bade him enter.

"Lady done sent me over f'om de hotel, sah," said Jack. "I brung her
trunk up f'om de de-pot. Heah's her kyard. She's over to the hotel,
an' wants you to come oveh dah."

Eddring started to his feet as he saw the name upon the card. "Tell
the lady," said he, "to come here to my own office. Tell her to come
at once, and say that I will wait for her." And thus, a half-hour
later, there appeared at his door the figure of Alice Ellison,
sometime adventurous, yet not always happy, woman of fortune.

Eddring gazed at her sharply. She seemed older. Traces of dissipation
showed upon her face. Her eye, a trifle more furtive, glanced from
side to side as though she felt herself pursued. Yet in spite of all,
Alice Ellison, even at her years, was a woman not wholly without
charm. She stood now, hesitating, her hand still upon the knob of the
door, her face not altogether confident as she gazed at the man
before her.

"Come in, Madam, and be seated," said Eddring. "I am very glad to see
you."

His tone reassured her, and she entered, half-extending to him her
hand.

"I--I know you are a good lawyer, Mr. Eddring," said she, "and I--
well, I'm in trouble. I've a case, a very interesting one, which
means a great deal of money to some one. I thought that perhaps you'd
like to take my case. I have always had so much respect for you, Mr.
Eddring."

She turned upon him eyes which might have been compelling enough
under certain circumstances, but whose glance was lost upon the man
before her. Eddring stepped quietly to the door, closed it and sprung
the lock. "Madam," said he, "are you alone in this case? Do you not
really mean that you and Mr. Henry Decherd are partners in this
enterprise?"

She started up. "Open the door!" she cried. "Let me out!"

"No," said Eddring; "you can not go. In one way it is effrontery for
you to come here. But in another, it was the best thing you could do.
The case of yourself and this man Decherd might be taken without
retainer by the prosecuting attorney of any of a half-dozen
localities. You may know that I'm acquainted with many of the details
of this case in the past; but still you have done well to come here."

"You'll not tell him--" she began.

"You mean Decherd?" She nodded, her hand at her throat. "I'm afraid
of him," she said. "He'll kill me. He'll kill me some day, surely. I
wanted you--I wanted you to take care of me. I--I've always thought
so much of you, Mr. Eddring."

She reached out to him a pitiful hand, and on her face was the
horrible mask of a woman endeavoring feminine arts while upon her
soul there sat naught but horror and personal concern. Eddring looked
at her in simple pity. "Be seated here, Madam," said he. "Be quiet,
and make yourself at ease. The safest thing you can do is to tell me
the whole truth. I want your story, and I must have it. That will be
the safest thing for you."

"But I don't want--I don't want any one to hear us."

"No one need hear us. We shall not need even a notary or a clerk.
Talk to me freely, and afterward I will make a memorandum, which you
can attest. In the case of a contested land title, that can later be
introduced under a bill for the perpetuation of the evidence. You
must simply tell me the truth, now, and in your own way."

The face of Alice Ellison grew more haggard. Suddenly all the
weakness of her sex swept over her--all the weakness also of the
wrong-doer. The comfort of the confessional seemed the sole happiness
possible for her. And so it was that she gave to Eddring the first
direct confirmation of that which he had by piece-work reasoning
convinced himself to be the truth. He first rapidly ran over the
salient features of the Loisson story, explaining to her fully his
interest In the same, and pointing out to her the certainty of his
success as well as the hopelessness of any contest on the part of
herself or Decherd. Thereafter his questions induced the other to
speak definitely.

"You were right about the book," said Alice Ellison. "It was found in
the Congressional Library by that man, by Mr. Decherd. I took it from
there myself, and I always kept it. The first Louise Loisson married
her cousin, I think, in about 1841, and she and her husband came to
New Orleans not long after that. Louise Loisson the second was born
in 1848 at New Orleans, and she married, as you say, this Mr.
Fanning. She was not known as Louise Loisson. Raoul de Loisson turned
a very ardent democrat. He was known in New Orleans, or at least
publicly known, under the name of Ellison, which form of his name he
thought was more American.

"Louise, his daughter, was also known under the name of Ellison. She
was not married until 1874. Before her marriage she was an orphan,
and you might have found, had you been lucky enough, proof of the
fact that she was known on the stage of the old French Opera House,
even after the close of the Civil War. Her mother died while Louise,
the second Louise, was in her youth. Her father, then a major in a
Louisiana regiment, was killed during the war, in the fighting near
Atlanta.

"Louise Ellison was thus, like all the other unfortunate girls of
that family, left alone early in life. The first Louise perhaps
learned her strange dancing in a school of her own somewhere in the
West. Louise Ellison the second also had her own methods. She danced
in New Orleans for a time, but went from there to Paris. They all
danced--they could not help it. It was heredity, I suppose. The
second one danced, like her mother--and then married."

"I thought you said she was married in New Orleans."

"Not in New Orleans, but in Paris. You know, at one time, the rich
planters of Louisiana spent half the year regularly in Paris. It was
so with Robert Fanning. The story is that he met her first in Paris,
dancing at one of the theaters, and creating a furore, as her mother
had before her. He learned that she was American and from New
Orleans, and year after year he urged her to marry him. She must have
been late in her twenties before she finally did so, for that was in
1874. They probably lived in Paris for a time, for it was not until
1877 that they came back to Fanning's plantation, where her baby was
born."

The hand of John Eddring, lying upon the table before him, twitched
and trembled. "And that child," said he, "was Miss Lady Ellison? Tell
me, tell me at once!"

"Yes," whispered Alice Ellison, her eyes turned aside from his gaze.
Eddring drew a long sigh of relief. "Thank God!" said he. "So that
was our Miss Lady Ellison, and she was not your child. Now, tell me,
as soon as you can, how did it all happen? Tell me, where did you
meet Decherd? Who was he? Was he your husband? Tell me now, as fast
as you can."

Mrs. Ellison paled before his vehemence, and her voice broke a bit
tremulously. "Well, then, wait," said she. "I'm going to tell you.
You must know all this is hard--awfully hard. If I told you this you
could put me in prison. You could do anything. Promise me that you
will not take any action."

"I promise you," said Eddring, sharply. "Tell me the truth, and help
me to put this girl where she belongs, and I'll see that you are not
prosecuted. But now tell me about yourself and this man Decherd. Were
you married? Where did you meet him?"

"I was born in the North," she went on, hesitating. "I won't tell you
my name. My family was good enough. I may have been wild when I was a
girl. I won't say as to that. I was a good deal older than Henry
Decherd when I first met him at New York. He attended a law school
there. He told me he came of good family, and he seemed able and
well-bred enough. He was infatuated with me. We--well, we left New
York together."

"Were you married?"

"You need not know. At least we were engaged then to be married, and
God knows our lives were tangled closely enough from that time on. We
were not very old, either of us. I presume we cared for each other--
you know how that is. The trouble with him was he was following off
after all the women in the world. Some think that is strength. Any
woman who knows how to love knows it is weakness, and not strength.
At any rate, it was that which made our first trouble. Meantime, he
was not regularly taking up the practice of the law. I found him
practically disowned by his family, who were Shreveport people
originally. In one way or another he found a bit to do. He knew
Robert Fanning and his wife through the fact that he had done legal
work of some sort for Fanning. He knew also an old lawyer, or sort of
notary, who used to do business for Eaoul de Loisson, or Ralph
Ellison, as he called himself, years before. I can't tell you the
name of that old lawyer, but Decherd could if he wanted to. He was
somewhere down on Baronne Street in those days.

"At that time Mr. Decherd used to talk to me more freely. He told me
that the old lawyer had told him that the Loissons were legal heirs
to considerable lands somewhere up the river, not far from St. Louis.
He said that Raoul de Loisson always laughed at that when he brought
it up, and declared that any good American ought to be able to make
his own living by himself, without counting upon his wife's fortune.
Robert Fanning felt the same way. He thought he could make a living
for his wife, without looking up the old estate, which at that time
was not known to be of any great value."

"But go on, tell me about Fanning," broke in Eddring, impatiently.

"I am going to, as well as I can. You must remember that Mr. Decherd
was then still a very young man indeed. I myself was older, as I
said. This old notary, or lawyer, or whatever he was, had never seen
me, and I do not know whether he was well acquainted or not with the
Louise Ellison who was Fanning's wife. I only know that we went out
to Fanning's plantation sometime about the year 1877. Mr. Fanning was
away in Texas, and there came news of his death somewhere down in the
Rio Grande country, where he had gone to purchase cattle. I don't
think his wife ever knew of his fate. Henry Decherd and I were there
together at the plantation.

"If I told you the truth now you would not believe it. But what I am
telling you is the truth, and I will swear to it. Louise Fanning died
two days after her baby was born. I lay there in their house at that
time, and they told me that my baby had died. There was no one then
acting as the head of the house. The servants were all distracted.
One day some one came and put this live baby, the daughter of Louise
Fanning, in my arms. Oh! you don't know, but I longed so for my baby!
My arms fairly ached. So then I took this one and loved it. Sir, I
was a mother to her, a sort of mother--as good, I suppose, as I could
have been at all--for a long time."

Eddring sat looking at her, his fingers pressed closely to his lips.
"What you tell me, Madam, is very, very strange," said he. "It might
perhaps have been true."

"Believe it or not," said Alice Ellison, "it is the truth, as I have
told you. There was no head to that household. There was no place to
leave that little child. I took it for my own. I did not at that time
intend any wrong. I don't know whether Decherd did at that time or
not. It was there at the Fannings' that we met the girl Delphine, who
had come in there from somewhere in the Indian Nations. She was then
in her early teens, and was good-looking. I don't want to talk much
about it, but it was then, I think, that Henry Decherd got--got
interested in her. What he told her I don't know. He found out in
some way that her name was Loise. In some way then and later he got
to looking up the name of Loise in St. Louis, where the girl said her
people originally lived. He assumed the management of her case, along
with some other lawyers to whom he carried it."

"But did he think she was the heiress of the Loisson estates?"

"You, as a lawyer, can tell that better than I can. In some ways he
had a good mind. He never told me much after that, except that he
said if this case was ever decided he could not lose, no matter which
way it went. We waited, years and years, for the case to get through
the Supreme Court."

"How did you live in the meantime, and where did you go?"

"Don't ask me that. We lived the best way we could. Decherd got money
now and again, and for reasons of his own he sent some money, once in
a while, to keep me and the child, although he practically abandoned
me, and, as I think, associated the more with this girl Delphine. He
claimed to me all the time that it was necessary for him to live in
this part of the country, in order to handle the lawsuit for her. She
moved up here from New Orleans, I suppose to some town not far from
Colonel Blount's plantation. I think he got us in there at Blount's
place because he thought it would be less expense to him. In the
meantime, I had educated the girl the best I could. Sir, I loved her
in a way, until I thought other men were noticing her; and then I
could not stand it."

"But you have not told me all of your story up to that time," said
Eddring. "It is not easy for one absolutely to steal a child, and
never be detected and punished for it. Moreover, you have not
explained to me how you came by the name under which you were known
to all of us. You say you were not Mrs. Decherd. Then who were you?"

The woman's lip half-curled in scorn. "Henry Decherd would have
guessed that long ago," said she. "Who was to detect us? What was
there to hinder? The Fanning family was wiped out. After the war he
had no relatives remaining. I have just told you his wife was unknown
in this country. This was her first visit after her marriage in
Paris. When Henry Decherd and I took the baby back to New Orleans,
what was there to hinder my being Louise Ellison-Fanning, the widow
of Robert Fanning? Decherd was my attorney. The old notary helped
these supposed descendants of his friend. It was he who helped us
find the lead lands in St. Francois County. The old notary was as
much a lover of the old nobility as Raoul de Loisson was a flouter of
it."

"Ah, I begin to see," said Eddring. "I can see it unwinding now!"

"Yes, it was not difficult, but on the contrary, very simple. A
criminal, if you please, may be bold, and boldness means success.
Now, it was this old notary who, through friends of his in the
Louisiana Legislature, had the Ellison name changed back legally to
Loisson, as the records of that state show to-day, although you have
not discovered those facts. As for me, it made little difference. The
name of Ellison was established in the state of Louisiana. I simply
took it, and wore it because I had no better. I did as many another
woman has done; got on as best I could. But I tell you, I loved the
girl for a long time. She was sweet and good. I felt she was my own,
until the time when she began to dance; and then I knew perfectly
well that sometime the truth would come out. I could feel it. Blood
and breeding--I tell you, you can't escape that. It's all bound to
come out. I might have known--I did know. I dreaded it, all along. I
always knew the truth would come out some day."

The two sat looking at each other in silence for a time. "Tell me the
rest," said Eddring, at length.

"The old lawyer died in 1879 or 1880," she went on, "but by that time
Mr. Decherd knew all that he cared to learn. As I said, he was less
confidential with me after that. That was the time when he was
infatuated with Delphine. Everything was to his liking. He was fond
of intrigue, and the more intricate it was, the better for him. He
was not afraid--when he had only women to be afraid of. With
Delphine and me he did as he pleased, passing from one to the other.
Delphine knew a part of the story, I do not know just how much. I
never dared talk too much with Delphine, for fear I might learn too
much, or she might learn too much. I was afraid of her, and I was
more afraid of him. When Miss Lady grew up, then I got jealous of
her--oh! I could not help it. I'm a woman, you know, and a woman
likes to be loved by some one. I got to comparing Decherd with
Colonel Blount; and then I--well, never mind. I need only say I was
frightened, and I needed a friend, and I knew the Big House was the
best home we were apt to have, and the safest place. It was a
terrible situation down there, and only three of us knew. Of the
three, Decherd was the only one who knew all the facts."

"I'll say for him," said Eddring, "that his boldness was startling
enough. He was a dangerous man."

"Yes, he was dangerous. But when he got started in this he could not
turn back."

"Exactly what Colonel Blount said to me one time," said Eddring. "He
was on a trembling bog, and he had to keep on running."

"Did Colonel Blount say that? Does he know everything?"

"As much as I know, or presently he will do so; I shall tell him all
of this in due time."

"Where is the girl? Where is Lady now?"

"At the Big House, and safe."

"And where is Henry Decherd?"

"That I do not know. We'll hear from him some day, no doubt."

The woman looked about her, as though still in fear. "Tell me, Mr.
Eddring," said she, "did you--did you ever--I mean, do you love that
girl yourself?"

"Very much, Madam," said John Eddring, quietly,

"Are you going to marry her?"

"No."

"Then why did she give you her case?"

"I was chosen by her friend, Colonel Blount, as the lawyer best
acquainted with these facts."

"Ah! sir," said Mrs. Ellison, turning again upon him the full glance
of her dark eyes. "Why? Can you not see--do you not know? Why trouble
with a half-baked chit like her? Drop it all, sir. You are lawyer
enough to know that my case is as good as hers, if handled well. If I
knew one man upon whom I could depend--ah! you do not know, you will
not see!"

One hand, white, thick-palmed, shapely, approached his upon the
table. He could feel its warmth before it touched his own. Then
swiftly he caught the hand in a hard and stern grasp, looking
straight into the eyes of its owner. "Madam," said he, "none of this!
I have asked you to tell me the truth. I have told you the truth. The
truth leaves us very far apart. You are safe; but you must
understand." Her eyes sank, and on her cheek the dull flush
reappeared.

"Now I want you to go on and answer a few more questions," said
Eddring, finally. "I suppose that while you were all there at the Big
House you were partners, after a fashion. How much did you know of
Delphine's stirring up the negroes in that neighborhood?"

"I did not know much of it. I only guessed. I put nothing beyond
Decherd."

"Did you know anything about the levee-cutting?"

"Nothing whatever. They didn't tell me anything of that. I presume it
didn't suit Henry Decherd to tell me everything he was doing."

"I can imagine that," said Eddring. "There was a time for Decherd to
lighten ship, and, as you say, he had only women to fear."

"I knew myself when the time came for me to leave him," said the
woman, now apathetically. "I went over to St. Louis soon after Miss
Lady first left the Big House, and after Decherd followed her. I knew
that he was smitten with Miss Lady, and that there would be trouble,
and that neither Delphine nor myself would be safe. I hid as best I
could, and lived as best I could. Lately I have been frightened. I
thought I would come to see you. I hoped you might help me. I don't
know what I did think."

"You don't know where Decherd is at present?"

"No, I do not."

"Do you have any hope that he will ever care for you in any way?"

"Yes," said the woman, slowly and dully, "he cares for me. He'll care
for me. He'll find me some day, now that you've taken Miss Lady from
him."

"And you will go back to him?"

"Never! God forbid. Love him? No!"

"Yet you think he will look you up again. Why? To get help in this
lawsuit?"

"You do not know him. He knows that all his hope in this lawsuit was
gone long ago. He's not a fool. But he is going to hunt me up some
day. He's going to find me; and then--he's going to kill me. He's
killed Delphine, and he's going to kill me."

The two white hands, trembling now as though with a palsy, fell on
the table in front of her. Her eyes, not seeing Eddring, gazed
staring straight in front of her. The horror of her soul was written
upon her face. Remorse, repentance, fear for the atonement--these had
their way with her who was lately known as Alice Ellison, woman of
fortune, and now served ill by fortune's hand.

All at once she broke from her half-stupor, her overstrung nerves
giving way. A cry of terror burst from her lips. "You!" she cried,
"you will not love me, you will not save me! Oh, Lady, girl--oh, is
there no one, is there no one in all the world?"

John Eddring took her firmly by the shoulders, and after a time half-
quieted her.

"Wine," she sobbed; "brandy--give me something."

Eddring threw open the door. "Jack," he cried; "Jack, come here. Run
across the street for me. When you come back order a carriage. This
lady is ill."

She sat for a time, trembling. Eddring, himself agitated, completed
his hurried writing. She signed. He called a notary, and she made
oath with a hand that shook as she uplifted it.

John Eddring, possessed at length of the last thread of his mystery,
helped down the stairs the trembling and terror-stricken woman who
had been the final agent of a justice long deferred. "Madam," he
said, as he assisted her into the carriage, "I thank you for Miss
Lady. If you ever have any need, address me; and meantime, keep
careful watch. Take care of yourself, and be sure this knowledge will
never be used against you. We shall not see you want."

She seemed not to hear him. Her eyes still stared straight in front
of her. "He's coming," she whispered. "It will be the end!"




CHAPTER XX

THE LID OF THE GRAVE


In a little room of a poor hotel situated on a back street of the
city of New Orleans, a man bent over an old trunk which had that day
been unearthed from a long-time hiding-place. It had for years been
left unopened. It was like opening a grave now to raise its cover.
The man almost shuddered as he bent over and looked in, curious as
though these things had never before met his gaze. There was a dull
odor of dead flowers long boxed up. A faint rustling as of intangible
things became half audible, as though spirits passed out at this
contact with the outer air.

"Twelve years ago--and this is the sort of luggage I carried then,"
he mused. "What taste! What a foolish boy! Dear me. Well--what?" His
bravado failed him. He started, fearing something. Yet presently he
peered in.

It was like a grave, yet one where some beneficent or some cruel
process of nature had resisted the way of death and change. "Foolish
boy!" he muttered, as he peered in and saw Life as it had been for
him when he had shut down the lid. "God! it's strange. There ought to
be a picture or so near the top." He touched the tray, and the dead
flowers and dry papers rustled again until he started back. His face,
tired, dissipated, deeply lined, went all the paler, but presently he
delved in again.

"Pictures of myself, eh? the first thing. I was always first thing to
myself. Nice, clean boy, wasn't I? Wouldn't have known it was myself.
Might have been a parson, almost. Here's another. Militia uniform,
all that. Might have been a major, almost. Uh-hum! High school
diploma here--very important. Eighteen--great God, was it so long ago
as that? University diploma--Latin. Can't read it now. Might have
been a professor, mightn't I? Diploma of law school; also Latin.
Certificate of admission to the bar of--. Might have been a
lawyer. Might have been a judge, mightn't I? Might have a home now;
white, green blinds, brick walk up to the door, paling fence--that
kind of thing. Might have had a home--wife and babies--eh! Baby?
Children? What? Well, I couldn't call this much of a home, could I,
now?"

He unfolded some old newspapers and periodicals of a departed period,
bearing proof of certain of his own handicraft. "Might have been a
writer--poet--that sort of thing!" He smiled quizzically. "Not so
bad. Not so bad. I couldn't do as well to-day, I'm afraid. Seem to
have lost it--let go somewhere. I never could depend on myself--never
could depend--ah, what's this? Yes, here are the ladies, God bless
them--la-ladies--God bless 'em!"

The lower tray was filled with pictures of girls or women of all
types, some of them beautiful, some of them coarse, most of them
attractive from a certain point of view. "God! what a lot!" he
murmured. "How did I do it? By asking, I reckon. Six--six--six of
one--six of another. Women and men alike, eh? Well, I don't know. Ask
'em, you win. Or, don't ask 'em, you win."

His hand fell upon the frame of a little mirror laid away in the old
trunk. He picked it up and gazed steadily at what it revealed.
"Changed," he said, "changed a lot. Must have gone a pace, eh?
Lawyer. Judge. Writer-man. Poet. I thought these beat all of that,"--
and he looked down again at the smiling faces. He picked them up one
at a time and laid them on the bed beside him. "Alice, Nora, Clara,
Kate, Margaret--I'll guess at the names, and guess at some of the
faces now. It's the same, all alike, the hunting of love: the
hunting--the hunt--ing--of--love! Great thing. But of course we
never do find it, do we? Ladies, good night." This he said in half-
mocking solemnity.

He bowed ironically; yet his face was more uneasy now than wholly
mocking. He looked once more at the trunk-tray, and found what he
apparently half-feared to see. "Madam!" he whispered. "Madam! Alice!"
He gazed at a face strong and full, with deep curved lips, and wide
jaw, and large dark eyes, deeply browed and striking, the face of a
woman to beckon to a man, to make him forget, for a time--and that
was Alice Ellison as he had known her years ago, before--before--He
turned away and would not look at this. He tried to laugh, to mock.
"Bless you, ladies," he said, "I've often said I would like to see
you all together in the same room. Eh--but the finding of it--oh, we
never do find it, do we? Not love. I never could depend on myself.

"What! What's this!" he exclaimed, as his hand now touched something
else, a hard object in the bottom of the trunk, beneath the tray.
"Why, here's my old pistol. Twelve years old. I thought I'd lost it.
Loaded! My faith, loaded for twelve years. Wonder if it would go
off."

He sat on the edge of the bed, looking into the trunk, the revolver
in his hand. Slowly, slowly, as though against his will, his face
turned, and he found himself looking down at the pictured smiling
faces that stared up at him. The last picture seemed to frighten him
with its smile. All the pictures smiled. "Alice!" he whispered.

"My God!" cried Henry Decherd, suddenly. "They're alive! They're
coming to life!"

They stood about him now in the little room, smiling, beckoning;
Alice, Nora, Kate, Jane, Margaret, all the rest, as he addressed
them. They smiled and beckoned; but he could not reply, whether to
those honest or not honest, to those deceived or undeceived.

The face of Alice Ellison, strong-jawed, dark-browed, large-eyed,
stared at him steadily from behind a certain chair. He could see that
her hair was wet. It hung down on her neck, on her shoulders. It
clung to her temples. Her eyes gazed at him stonily now. He saw it
all again--the struggle! He heard his own accusations, and hers. He
heard her pleading, her cry for mercy; and then her cry of terror. He
saw her face, staring up at him from the water. As he gazed, the
other faces faded away into the darkness. He stood, staring, Henry
Decherd, murderer of the woman whom he once had loved.

The porter of the hotel said on the next day that he remembered
hearing late in the night a sort of crash, which sounded like the
dropping of a trunk lid. He did not know what it was. The lid of the
grave had fallen again for Henry Decherd!

[Illustration: "MY GOD! THEY'RE ALIVE. THEY'RE COMING TO LIFE!"]




CHAPTER XXI

THE RED RIOT OF YOUTH


The rim of the ancient forest still made the boundary of the little
world of Miss Lady. Still she looked out beyond it in query,
yearningly, longingly, though now she found herself more content than
ever in her life before.

It was the daily habit of Miss Lady to ride for a time the big
chestnut saddler which Colonel Blount had devoted to her special use.
Mounted thus on Cherry, she cantered each day over the fields, where
a renewed industry had now set on again. The simple field hands
looked upon her as a higher being, and as their special messenger. If
a baby was sick at a distant cabin, Miss Lady knew of it, and had the
proper aid despatched. If the daughter of this or the other laborer
needed shoes and could not wait until Christmas accounting time, it
was Miss Lady who interceded with the master of the Big House.

"I couldn't get along here without you now," said that stern soul to
her gruffly. "But I reckon you'd better run away again, for I'm
afraid of people that I can't get along without. Besides, you're
spoiling all my dogs, a-honeying of 'em up the way you do."

Miss Lady only laughed at that; though each day she looked out at the
edge of her world.

Sometimes so wistfully did Miss Lady look out beyond the rim of the
forest that she felt interest in the railway trains which carried her
now and then to the cities north or south of her. Sometimes, even,
girl-like she would mount Cherry, jump the front fence in violation
of Colonel Blount's imperative orders, and scurry down to the station
to have a look at the incoming trains. The conductors of all these
trains knew her well, and often the brakeman or the conductor would
hand out to her some package from the city as she rode up close to
the car step, after the train had paused. The picture of Miss Lady
and Cherry was a pleasant one, and more than one passenger peered out
of a car window to see the tall girl who rode so well and who seemed
so sure that all the world meant well and kindly toward her.

Miss Lady was now fully worthy to be called beautiful. She rarely
rode otherwise than bare-headed, and the high-rolled masses of her
hair had grown tawnier and redder for that reason. Her figure gave
perfect lines to the scarlet jacket which so well became her. Her
gauntlets fitted well the small, firm hands, and her foot was ever
well-shod. Ah, indeed, in those days, when Miss Lady for the time
forgot her past unhappiness, almost at times ceased to wonder what
lay out beyond the forest, almost resigned herself to the mere
happiness of a glorious young womanhood--she did indeed seem well-
named as Lady, thoroughbred, titled as by right. Her eyes were wide
and trustful, her lips high-curved, her cheeks pink with the rush of
the air when Cherry galloped hard; her head was high, her gaze
direct. And if, now and again, when the train had departed, Miss
Lady, having come swiftly, she knew not why, rode back again slowly,
she knew not why; if at times her eyes grew pensive as she listened
to the mockers gurgling in the dogwood or on the honeysuckle, her
spirits rose again, and her face was sure to brighten when she came
near to the house and hurried Cherry up to the mounting block. She
was the high-light in all the picture, unconsciously first in the
gaze and thought of all. No woman ever was more worshiped; no, nor
was ever one more fit for worship. Again, as old Jules once had said,
she had become a religion!

One morning Miss Lady, her hair in its usual riot of tawny brown, her
face flushed, her lips laughing as she urged Cherry's nose up to the
car side, was met by the conductor at the step, who called out to her
gaily, "Company to-day." Miss Lady did not fully understand, and so
waited, looking excellently well turned out in the bright jacket and
the dainty gloves which lay on Cherry's tugging rein, as she sat
easily, with the grace of a born horsewoman. And so, before she
understood this speech, the train passed on; and as it passed it
showed to these newly arrived passengers upon the platform this
picture of Miss Lady, one not easily to be surpassed in any land, fit
long to linger in any eye.

It was John Eddring who now gazed at this picture, and who felt rise
to his lips the swift salutation of his soul, tenderer than ever now
in its instantaneous homage. He had not dreamed that she could grow
so beautiful. He had not known that love could mean so much--that it
could mean more than everything--that it could outweigh every human
interest and every human resolve! His heart, long suppressed by an
iron determination; his whole nature, gone a-hunger in the long fight
for success, now at once rebelled and broke all shackles in one swift
instant of its mutiny. He knew now how unjust he had been to himself,
for that he had worked and had not lived. The years broke from him,
and he was young. For with him youth had not been lost, but set
aside, unspent. Now it came to him all at once--the red riot of youth
and love. It must have shone in his eyes, must have trembled in his
touch, as he hurried over the rails at which Cherry's dainty forefeet
now were pausing, and reached up his arms to her, murmuring he knew
not what.

He helped her dismount, and caught then her gaze directed behind him.
John Eddring had forgotten that his mother was with him. She came
forward now, reaching out her hand, then reaching out her arms.

"Child," said the white-haired old lady, "I've heard it all, all your
strange story. My son has come to tell you that you have succeeded at
last. Your case is won!"

She touched Miss Lady's tumbled tawny hair with her own gentle hand.
"My girl," said she, "my dear girl; and you never knew your own
mother? You never knew what that was? My dear, it is very sweet to
have a mother."

Miss Lady, knowing no better thing, kissed her impulsively, and the
older lady drew her close, in such communion as only women may
understand. Mrs. Eddring again touched lightly the red-brown hair. "I
never had a daughter," said she. "I've only a boy. That's my boy
there."

Eddring, who had meantime taken Cherry's bridle rein, was now walking
on in advance toward the lane that led to the house. The girl caught
the old lady's hands in her own, and then threw her arms about the
thin figure in a swift embrace. So, arm in arm, they also turned
toward the lane; and which was then welcoming the other home neither
could have said.




CHAPTER XXII

AMENDE HONORABLE


"Well, what do you want, boy?" Blount gruffly asked of Eddring on
the morning after his arrival. "Are you on a still hunt for that
Congressional nomination?"

"No, it's of a heap more importance than that," said Eddring.

"Humph! Maybe. Bill, oh, _Bill_! Here, you go and get the big
glass mug, and a bunch of mint. Come out here, Eddring. Sit down on
the board-pile in the shade--I've been going to build a roof on my
doghouse with these boards as long as I can remember."

They had just seated themselves upon the board-pile, and were waiting
for Bill with the mint when Eddring looked up and smiled. "Who's that
coming?" he asked, pointing down the lane.

"That? Why, I reckon that's Jim Bowles and his wife, Sar' Ann. They
come up once in a while to get a little milk, when they ain't too
durn tired. Their cow--why, say, it was a good many years ago your
blamed railroad killed that cow. They never did get another one
since. And that reminds me, Mr. John Eddring--that reminds _me_--"

He fumbled in the wallet which he drew from his pocket, and produced
an old and well-creased bit of paper. "Look here," said he, "you owe
me for that filly of mine yet. That old railroad never did settle at
all. Here it is. Fifty dollars."

"I thought it was fifteen," said Eddring, with twinkling eyes.

"That's what I said," replied Blount, solemnly, as he tore the paper
in bits and dropped them at his feet. "I said fifteen! Anyway I'm in
no humor to be a-quarreling about a little thing like that. Why, man,
I'm just beginning to enjoy life. We're going to make a big crop of
cotton this year, I've got the best pack of b'ah-dogs I ever did have
yet, and there's more b'ah out in the woods than you ever did see."

"I suppose your ladies leave you once in a while, to go down to New
Orleans?" inquired Eddring.

"No, _sir!_ New Orleans no more," said Blount. "Why, you know,
just as a business precaution, I bought that house down there that
Madame Delchasse used to own. It's sort of in the family now. Shut
off that running down to New Orleans."

"Well, how does Madame Delchasse like that?" asked Eddring.

[Illustration: "MAY I DEPEND? TELL ME, GIRL. I CANNOT WAIT."]

"Man," said Blount, earnestly, "there's some things that seem to be
sort of settled by fate--couldn't come out no other way. Do you
suppose for one minute that I'm going to allow to get away from me
the only woman I ever did see that could cook b'ah meat fit to eat?
Well, I reckon not! Besides, what she can do to most anything is
simply enough to scare you. She can take common crawfish, like the
niggers catch all around here--and a shell off of a mussel, and out
of them two things she makes what she calls a 'kokeeyon of
eckriveese,' and--_say, man_! You bet your bottom dollar Madame
Delchasse ain't going to get away from here. Don't matter a damn if
she _ain't_ got over putting hair-oil in her cocktails, like they do
at New Orleans--we won't fall out about that, either. I don't have to
drink 'em. Only thing, she calls a cussed old catfish a 'poisson.'
That's when we begin to tangle some. But taking it all in all--up one
side and down the other--I never did know before what _good_ cooking
meant. Why she's _got_ to cook--she'd die if she didn't cook. Her go
back to New Orleans?--well, I reckon not!

"Why, say," continued Blount, "don't it sometimes seem that luck
sort of runs in streaks in this world? All cloudy, then out comes the
sun--lovely world! Now, for one while it looked like things were pretty
cloudy down here. But the sun's done come out again. Everything's all
right, here at the Big House, now, sure's you're born. We'll go out and
get a b'ah to-morrow. Come on, let's go see the dogs."

"Well, you know, I must be getting back to business before long,"
began Eddring.

"Business, what business?" protested Colonel Blount. "Say, have you
asked that girl yet?" He was fumbling at the gate latch as he spoke,
or he might have seen Eddring's face suddenly flush red.

"Whom do you mean?" he managed to stammer.

Blount whirled and looked him full in the eye. "You know mighty well
who I mean."

Eddring turned away. "I told you, Cal,"--he began.

"Oh, you _told_ me! Well I could have told _you_ a long time ago that
Miss Lady had this whole thing straightened out in her head. Do you
reckon she's a fool? I don't reckon she thinks you're a thief any
more. I reckon like enough she thinks you're just a supreme damned
_fool._ I know _I_ do."

"Turn 'em loose, Cal!" cried Eddring, suddenly. "Open the gates! Let
'em out! I want to hear 'em holler!" The pack poured out, motley,
vociferous, eager for the chase, filling the air with their wild
music, with a riot of primeval, savage life. "Get me a horse saddled,
Cal, quick," cried Eddring. "I want to feel leather under me again. I
want to feel the air in my ears. I've got to ride, to move! Man, I'm
going to _live_!"

"Now," said Blount, rubbing his chin, "you're beginning to _talk_. The
man that don't like a good b'ah chase once in a while is no earthly
use to me."

But Eddring did not ride to the far forest that day. A good horseman,
and now well mounted, he made a handsome figure as he galloped off
across the field. As he rode, his eye searched here and there, till
it caught sight of the flash of a scarlet jacket beyond a distant
screen of high green brier. He put his horse over the rail fence and
pulled up at her side.

"You ride well," said Miss Lady, critically. "I didn't know that. Why
didn't you tell me?"

"There have been a good many things about me that you didn't know,"
said Eddring, "and there's a heap of things I haven't told you."

Knowing in the instant now that a time of accounting had come, she
looked at him miserably, her eyes downcast, her hands fiddling with
the reins.

"But then, Miss Lady, you didn't know; it wasn't your fault," he
added quickly.

"Oh," said the girl, impulsively taming toward him, her face very
red, "I am so sorry, I am so _sorry_! To think of all you have done
for us, for me. Why, every bit of safety and happiness in my life has
come through you. I have felt that, and wanted _so_ long to tell you
and to thank you. You--you didn't come!"

"Never mind, never mind," said Eddring, wishing now nothing in the
world so much as that he might have spared her this confession. "I've
come now--oh, my girl, I've come now."

"All this time," said she, evading as long as she might, "you were
trying, you were working, all alone. Mr. Eddring, it was not merely
kind of you, it was noble!" And now poor Miss Lady flushed even more
hotly than ever, though her heart was lighter for the truth thus
told.

Eddring looked straight on down the road ahead of them, the road
which broke the rim of the forest toward which they had now
unconsciously faced. At length he turned toward her.

"Miss Lady," said he, simply, "I have loved you so much, so very
much. I've always loved you. I didn't dare admit it to myself for a
long time; but it's run away with me now, absolutely and for ever. I
can't look at life--I can't turn any way--I can't think of _anything_
in which I don't see you. It's been this way a long time, but now I'm
gone. I can't pull up. Miss Lady, I _couldn't_ go back now and begin
life over again alone. I couldn't do that now. I wouldn't want to make
you unhappy, ever. Do you think, oh, _don't_ you think that you could
depend on me? Don't you think you could love me?"

Miss Lady's eyes were cast down, and her hands were busy at the reins
which she shifted between her fingers. Cherry walked slowly and still
more slowly, until at length Eddring laid his hand upon the bridle,
and Cherry turned about an inquiring eye. He reached out his hand and
took in it the small, gray-gloved one which had half-loosed its grasp
upon the rein.

"Miss Lady," he whispered. And then slowly the girl lifted her eyes
and looked full at him--her eyes now grown soft and gentle.

"Yes," said she, "I can depend," Her voice was very low. Yet the
woman-whisper reached to the edge of all the universe--a universe
robbed of its last secret by the woman-soul. "I can see you clearly,"
said Miss Lady, softly. "I see your heart. Yes. I am sure. I
understand--I know now who I am. And I know--I know it all. All!"

"But do you love me!" he demanded; and now Cherry's nose was drawn
quite over the neck of Jerry. Miss Lady would not answer that, but
turned away her face, which was now very pink. "Tell me," he
demanded, frowning in his own earnestness, and catching the bridle
hand in a stern clasp, "may I depend? Tell me, girl. I can not wait."

There was a gentle breeze among the tree-tops. A mocker near by
trilled and gurgled. Eddring leaned forward. It seemed to him he
heard a whisper which told him that he might be sure.


THE END







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Law of the Land, by Emerson Hough





This eBook was produced by Robert Nield, David Starner,
Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




Handy Literal Translations.

THE ORATIONS OF LYSIAS

_LITERALLY TRANSLATED_




CONTENTS.


THE ORATIONS:

II.     FUNERAL ORATION

V.      FOR CALLIAS

VII.    THE OLIVE TREE

IX.     POLYAENUS

X.      THEOMNESTUS

XII.    ERATOSTHENES

XIII.   AGORATUS

XIV.    ALCIBIADES

XVI.    MANTITHEUS

XVII.   PROPERTY OF ERATON

XIX.    PROPERTY OF ARISTOPHANES

XXII.   THE GRAIN DEALERS

XXIII.  PANCLEON

XXIV.   THE CRIPPLE

XXV.    REPLY TO "THE OVERTHROW OF THIS DEMOCRACY"

XXVIII. ERGOCLES

XXX.    NICOMACHUS

XXXI.   AGAINST PHILON

XXXII.  DIOGEITON

XXXIII. PANEGYRIC




ORATION II.

FUNERAL ORATION.


1. If I thought it were possible, O fellow-citizens who are assembled at
this burial-place, to set forth in words the valor of those who lie here,
I should blame the men who invited me to speak about them at a few days'
notice. But as all time would not be sufficient for (the combined
efforts) of all men to prepare an address adequate to their deeds, the
city seems to me, in providing for men to speak here, to make the
appointment at short notice, on the supposition that the speakers would
under the circumstances meet with less adverse criticism.

2. And though my words relate to these men, the chief difficulty is not
concerning their deeds, but with those who formerly spoke upon them. For
the valor of these men has been the occasion of such abundance (of
composition), both by those able to compose, and those wishing to speak,
that, although many noble sentiments have been uttered about them by men
in the past, yet much has been left unsaid, and enough can yet be spoken
at the present time. For they have experienced perils on land and sea,
and everywhere and among all men, who, while bewailing their own hard
fate, yet sing the praises of the courage of these men.

3. First, then, I will review the hardships of our ancestors, following
the traditions. For all men should keep them too in mind, both
celebrating them in song, speaking of them in maxims about the good,
honoring them at such times as this, and instructing the living by the
deeds of the dead.

4. The Amazons were once the daughters of Ares, living by the river
Thermodon, and they alone of the inhabitants of that region were armed
with metal, and first of all they mounted horses, by which they
unexpectedly, because of the inexperience of their adversaries, overtook
those who fled from them, and they left their pursuers far behind. So for
their spirit they were thought men, rather than women for their nature.
For they seemed to surpass men in spirit rather than to be inferior in
_physique_.

5. And after they had subdued many tribes and in fact enslaved the
surrounding nations, they heard great reports about this country, and for
the sake of glory took the most warlike of their tribes and marched
against this city. And after they met these brave men, they came to have
their souls like their nature, and with changed hearts seemed to be women
rather from their conduct in danger than from their forms.

6. And they alone were not allowed to learn from experience and to plan
better for the future, and they might not go homeward and tell of their
discomfiture and the valor of our ancestors; for they died here and paid
the penalty for their rashness, and made the memory of this city immortal
through valor, and rendered their own country nameless through their
defeat here. These women then, through their unjust desire for a country
not their own, justly lost their own.

7. After Adrastus and Polyneices had joined in the expedition against
Thebes and had been worsted in battle, the Thebans would not let them
bury their dead. So the Athenians, who believed that if these men did
wrong they had (already) the greatest punishment in death, and that the
gods of the lower world were not receiving their due, and that by the
pollution of holy places the gods above were being insulted, first sent
heralds and demanded them to grant the removal of the dead, (8) thinking
it the part of brave men to punish their enemies while alive, but of men
who distrusted themselves to show their courage on the bodies of the
dead. As they were unable to obtain this favor, they marched against the
Thebans, although previously there was no reason for hostility against
them, and not because they were trying to please the living Argives, (9)
but because they believed those who died in battle should obtain the
customary rites, they ran into danger against the Thebans in the
interests of both, on the one hand, that they might never again offer
insult to the gods by their treatment of the dead, and on the other, that
they might not return to their country with disgrace attached to their
names, without fulfilling Greek customs robbed of a common hope. 10. With
this in mind, and thinking that the chances of war are common to all men,
they made many enemies, but with right on their side they came off
victorious. And they did not, roused by success, contend for a greater
punishment for the Thebans, but they exhibited to them their own valor
instead of their impiety, and after they had obtained the prizes they
struggled for, the bodies of the Argives, they buried them in their own
Eleusis. Such were they (who fought) for the dead of the Seven at Thebes.

11. And afterwards, after Heracles had disappeared from men, and his
children fled from Eurystheus and were hunted by all the Greeks, who,
though ashamed indeed of what they did, feared the power of Eurystheus,
they came to this city and took refuge at the altars. 12. And though
Eurystheus demanded it, the Athenians would not give them up, but they
reverenced the bravery of Heracles more than they feared their own
danger, and they thought it more worthy of themselves to contend for the
weak on the side of justice than to please those in power and surrender
those wronged by them. 13. And when Eurystheus marched on them at that
time at the head of the Peloponnesus, they did not change their minds on
the approach of danger, but held the same opinion as before, though the
father (_Heracles_) had done them no special good, and the Athenians
did not know what sort of men these (children) would turn out to be. 14.
But they thought it was a just course of action, though there was no
previous reason for enmity with Eurystheus, and they had no longer hope
of reward except that of a good reputation; so they incurred this danger
for the boys, because they pitied the down-trodden, and hated the
oppressors, and tried to hinder the latter and aid the former, believing
it a mark of liberty to do nothing by compulsion, and of justice to aid
the wronged, and of courage to die, if need be, fighting for both. 15.
And both were so proud that Eurystheus and his party did not seek to gain
any favor from willing men, and the Athenians were unwilling that
Eurystheus, even if he came as a suppliant, should drive out their
suppliants. So they summoned a force and fought and conquered the army
from the whole of Peloponnesus, and brought the children of Heracles to
safety, dispelled their fear and freed their souls, and because of their
father's courage they crowned them with their own perils. 16. And they,
while children, were much more fortunate than their father; for he,
though bringing much happiness to all men, made his own life full of toil
and strife and emulation, and punished others who were wrong-doers, but
he could not punish Eurystheus who was his enemy and had sinned against
him. But his sons through this city saw on the same day their own safety
and the punishment of their enemies.

17. So many occasions came to our ancestors for fighting for this idea of
justice. For the commencement of their life was just. For they were not,
like many, collected from all quarters, and they did not settle here
after expelling the earlier inhabitants, but they sprang from the soil
and it was both their mother and country. 18. And they were the first and
only ones at that time to banish the ruling families and establish a
democracy, in the belief that freedom of all is the greatest harmony, and
making the rewards of their dangers common, they administered the
government with free minds, (19) by law honoring the good and punishing
the bad, for they thought the wild beasts struggle with one another, but
it is fitting for men to define justice by law, and to obey argument, and
to serve these by their actions ruled by law and taught by argument.

20. So being of noble descent and of one mind, the ancestors of these who
lie here did many brave and wonderful things, and their descendants
everywhere left by their valor everlasting memorials of themselves. For
in behalf of all Greece they risked their lives before the countless
hordes of barbarians. 21. For the king of Asia, not satisfied with his
own fortunes, but hoping to enslave Europe, sent an army of five hundred
thousand. And thinking, if they could make this city a willing ally or
subdue against its will, they would easily reduce the rest of Greece,
they went to Marathon, believing that the Greeks would be deserted by
their allies, if they should bring on the conflict while Greece was still
undecided how it was best to ward off the invaders. 22. And still such an
opinion prevailed among them about the city from the previous conflicts,
that they believed if they should advance against another city, they
would contend with both that and the Athenians; for these would eagerly
come to aid the oppressed; but if they should come here first, no other
Greeks would dare by aiding others to bring on themselves open hostility
(for the sake of the Athenians). 23. These then were their plans; but our
ancestors, taking no account of the dangers in war, but believing that
glorious death left immortal testimony to good deeds, did not fear the
multitudes of the enemy, but trusted their own valor. And being ashamed
that the barbarians were in their country, they did not wait for their
allies to learn of the matter and aid them, and they did not think they
ought to be indebted for their rescue to others, but the other Greeks to
them. 24. With one accord they rushed forward, few against many; for they
believed death was theirs in common with all men, and they were brave
with only a few, and on account of death their lives were not their own,
and they would leave a memory of themselves from their dangers. And they
thought that even with allies they could not have conquered those whom
they did not conquer alone. And if worsted, they would perish only a
little before the rest, and if they conquered, they would free the
others. 25. And becoming brave men they did not spare themselves, and did
not grudge their lives for valor, rather reverencing the traditions among
them, than fearing the danger from the enemy. So they erected trophies
for Greece in their country on the borders, over the barbarians who for
gain had invaded a foreign land. 26. So quickly they incurred this danger
that the same messengers announced to the other Greeks that the
barbarians had made the invasion, and that our ancestors had conquered.
No one of the rest (of the Greeks) feared for a coming danger, but
rejoiced over their own safety. So it is not remarkable when such things
happened long ago if the glory of them as if recent is still lauded by
all men. 27. And after this, Xerxes, the king of Asia, despising Greece,
and buoyed up by false hopes, and disgraced by the past, and grieved at
the disaster, angry at its causes, untried by defeat, and with no
experience with brave men, prepared for ten years and came with twelve
hundred ships, and led a multitude of foot so vast that it would be a
task indeed to recall all the tribes collected with him. 28. And the
greatest proof of its size is this; when he could have transported his
infantry on a thousand boats across the narrowest part of the Hellespont
from Asia to Europe, he did not wish to, believing it would take much
time. 29. But overlooking the natural obstacles and the deeds of the gods
and human intelligence, he made a road through the sea, and forced a
voyage through the earth, joined the Hellespont, and channeled Athos. No
one agreed, but some reluctantly submitted, and others gave way
willingly. For they were not able to ward him off, but some were
corrupted by bribes. And both were persuasive, gain and fear. 30. But the
Athenians, while Greece was in this condition, embarked and helped at
Artemisium, and the Lacedaemonians and some of the allies met at
Thermopylae, thinking on account of the narrowness of the pass they could
check their advance. 31. But when the crisis came, at the same time the
Athenians conquered in the naval battle, but the Lacedaemonians
(perished), not failing in courage, but deceived in the number (of the
enemy). For they thought they would ward off the enemy and so risk (their
lives), (and they were) not worsted by the enemy, but died where they
were ordered to fight, (32) and in this way the Spartans were unfortunate
while the Persians gained entrance. They marched to this city, and our
ancestors, learning of the misfortune of the Spartans, and in perplexity
in the dangers which surrounded them, knowing that if they should attack
the enemy by sea they would sail with a thousand ships and take the city
deserted, and if they embarked on triremes they would be taken by the
land army, and they could not do both, ward off (the enemy) and leave
sufficient guard behind, (33) while these two questions were before them,
whether it was best to leave their country or going over to the
barbarians to enslave the Greeks, they believed that freedom with virtue,
poverty and exile was better than slavery of the country with disgrace
and plenty, so for the sake of Greece they left the city, that against
each in turn but not against both they might risk their forces. 34. So
they placed the children and women in Salamis, and collected the naval
force of the allies. Not many days after, the infantry and the sea-force
of the barbarians came, (a force) which any one would fear, considering
how great and terrible a danger was encountered for the sake of the
freedom of Greece. 35. And what feelings had those who saw them in those
ships, while their safety was hazardous and the approaching conflict of
doubtful issue, or those who were about to contend for their loved ones,
for the prizes in Salamis? 36. Such a multitude of the enemy surrounded
them from all sides that the least of their impending dangers was the
prospect of death, and the greatest calamity was what they expected to
suffer in subjection to the victorious barbarians. 37. Doubtless through
their trials they frequently pledged one another, and probably
commiserated their own fortunes, knowing how few were their own ships and
seeing many of the enemy's, and realizing that the city was being
devastated and filled with barbarians, and the temples burned, and ruin
close at hand. 38. They heard together the paean of Greek and barbarian,
the exhortations of both and the cries of the vanquished, the sea full of
the dead, wrecks coming together, both friend and foe, and because the
battle was long undecided, thinking now they have conquered and are
saved, now they are worsted and lost. 39. Surely through their fear they
thought to see much they did not see, and to hear much they did not hear.
What prayers did not rise to the gods, or reminders of sacrifices,
compassion for children, longing for wives, pity for parents and
meditations on what would result in case of defeat? 40. What god would
not pity them for the magnitude of the danger? What man would not weep?
Who would not wonder at their daring? Truly these surpassed all men by
far in point of courage, both in their plans and in the face of the
danger, leaving the city, embarking upon the ships, opposing their own
lives, few as they were, to the Persian host. 41. And they showed all men
by their naval victory that it is better to struggle for freedom with a
few than for their own slavery with many subjects of the king. 42. These
made the greatest and most honorable contribution in behalf of the
freedom of the Greeks, the general Themistocles, best able to speak, to
understand and to act; more ships than the allies, and men of the most
experience. And who of the other Greeks would have claimed to be equal in
intelligence, numbers and courage? 43. So that justly they took without
dispute the rewards of the naval battle from Greece, and gained success
in proportion to their dangers and proved to the Asiatic barbarians that
their courage was genuine and native.

44. So in the naval battle they conducted themselves thus and incurred
the greatest part of the danger, and by their own valor gained freedom
for themselves and the rest. Afterwards when the Peloponnesians were
putting a wall across the Isthmus and were content with their own safety,
supposing they were rid of the danger by sea, and intending to watch the
rest of the Greeks falling into the power of the barbarians, (45) the
Athenians were angry and advised them if they had this idea to put a wall
about all the Peloponnesus; for if they, betrayed by the Greeks, should
act with the Persians, they would have no need of their thousand ships,
nor would the Isthmian wall help the Peloponnesians. For the control of
the sea would be the king's without trouble. 46. And they were convinced
and realized they were doing wrong and making poor plans, and that the
Athenians spoke fairly and were giving them the best advice, and so they
sent aid to Plataea. And when most of the allies under cover of night
fled from the ranks because of the numbers of the enemy, the
Lacedaemonians and the Tegeans put the barbarians to flight, and the
Athenians and the Plataeans conquered in the fight all the Greeks who had
despaired of freedom and submitted to slavery. 47. And on that day they
brought about the most glorious conclusion of all their trials, and
secured freedom for Europe, and in all times of danger they are
acknowledged by all, both those with whom and against whom they fought,
to have proved their own valor, both alone and with others, both on land
and on sea, against barbarians and Greeks, and to have become the leaders
of Greece.

48. Later, when the Greek war broke out through jealousy as to the past
and envy of what was done, while all were envious and each needed but
small grievances, when a naval battle was fought by the Athenians against
the Aeginetans and their allies, they took seventy triremes. 49. And
while they were struggling with Egypt and Aegina at the same time, and
while the men of military age were away on sea and in the army, the
Corinthians and their allies, thinking they would either attack a
deserted country or they (_the Athenians_) would withdraw from
Aegina, marched out and took Gereneia. 50. And the Athenians, some being
at a distance and some near, did not dare to summon either, but trusting
their own spirits and despising the invaders, the old men and the boys
thought they alone could face the danger, (51) the former gaining courage
from experience and the latter from their natures. And they in themselves
became brave and the boys imitated them, the older men knowing how to
command and the boys being able to obey commands. 52. Under the
leadership of Myronides they set out for Megaris and conquered in battle
all the forces (of the enemy), by those past service and those not yet
ready for it, going into a foreign country to meet those who presumed to
invade theirs. 53. And they set up a trophy for this glorious deed of
theirs, and shameful act of the enemy, and the men, some no longer strong
in body, the rest not yet strong, became greater in spirit and went back
home with great renown, the latter to their teachers, the former to
meditate on the future.

54. It is no easy task for one man to enumerate the brave deeds of so
many, nor to tell in a single day the acts of all time. For what speech
or time or orator could adequately testify to the valor of these men
lying here? 55. For after countless struggles and signal contests and
glorious encounters they have made Greece free, and proved their country
the greatest, which ruled the sea for seventy years, kept the allies from
revolt, (56) not permitting the many to be enslaved by the few, but
forcing all to share alike, nor weakening the allies, but establishing
them, so that the great king no longer longed for others' goods, but
yielded up some of his own possessions and trembled for the future. 57.
No ships sailed for Asia in that time, nor was a tyrant established among
the Greeks, nor was a Greek city enslaved by the barbarians. Such was the
moderation and fear their valor produced on all men. For this reason they
alone must be the champions of the Greeks and leaders of the cities.

56. And also in adversity they showed their valor. For when the ships
were lost in the Hellespont, either through the fault of the commander or
by the will of the gods, and when that great disaster resulted to us and
all the Greeks, they showed not long after that the power of the city was
the safety of Greece. 59. For under the leadership of others those
conquered the Greeks in naval battle who formerly had not embarked upon
the sea, and they sailed to Europe, and enslaved Greek cities and
established tyrannies, some after our disaster, and some after the
victory of the barbarians. 60. So it would be fitting for Greece to
grieve at his tomb, and bewail those who lie there, as if her freedom
were buried with their valor, so unfortunate is Greece in being bereft of
such men, and so fortunate is the king of Asia in meeting other leaders;
for bereft of these, slavery is their fate, while in the others a desire
springs up to emulate the wisdom of their ancestors.

61. But I have been led off to lament for all Greece; but it is fitting
to remember these men both in private and in public, who hated slavery
and fought for justice and struggled for the democracy, and having made
all men their enemies they went to the Piraeus, not compelled by law, but
impelled by instinct, imitating in fresh dangers the valor of their
ancestors, (62) and by their own courage securing the city as a common
possession for the rest also, choosing death and liberty rather than life
and slavery, no less through shame of their lack of success than through
anger at their enemies, preferring to die in their own country to living
in a foreign land, having as allies oaths and agreements, and as enemies
both the former ones and their own citizens. 63. But not fearing the
number of their opponents, but risking their own lives, they set up a
trophy to their enemies, and as evidence of their valor they buried the
Lacedaemonians near this memorial. For they proved the city great and not
small, and rendered it harmonious and not dissentious, and erected the
walls instead of pulling them down. 64. And those of them who returned,
showing plans like the deeds of those who lie here, devoted themselves
not to the punishment of their enemies but the safety of the city, and
neither being able to suffer encroachment on their privileges nor
desiring to have more, give a share of their freedom even to those
wishing to be in slavery, but they were not willing to share their
slavery. 65. And with the bravest and most glorious deeds they repelled
the charges against them, that the city met with disaster, not by their
cowardice nor the enemy's valor. For if in dissension with one another
they could enter their own country in spite of the presence of the
Peloponnesians and their other enemies, evidently if they had been agreed
they would have made a stand against them.

66. So those are admired by all men for their perils at the Piraeus. And
it is also fitting to praise those lying here, who aiding the people and
fighting for our safety, regarded valor as their country and so ended
life. For this the city bewailed them and gave them a public funeral and
granted them to have for all time the same honor as the citizens.

67. Those who are now buried, aiding the Corinthians who were wronged by
their old friends, became renewed allies, not sharing the ideas of the
Lacedaemonians, (for they envied their good fortunes, while the former
pitied them when wronged, not remembering the previous hostility, but
caring more for the present friendship) made evident to all men their own
valor. 68. For they dared, trying to make Greece great, not only to incur
danger for their own safety but to die for the liberty of their enemies;
for they fought with Sparta's allies for their freedom. And when
victorious they thought them worthy of the same privileges which they
enjoyed, and if unsuccessful they would have fastened slavery firmly on
the Peloponnesians.

69. As they so conducted themselves their life was pitiful, and their
death desired; but these lived and died praised, being brought up in the
virtues of their ancestors, and on becoming men they kept their fame
untarnished and exhibited their own valor. 70. For they brought many
benefits to their country, and made good the ill-successes of others, and
carried war far from their own land. And they ended their lives as the
good should die, having paid what is due to the country and leaving grief
for those who trained them. 71. So it is fitting for the living to bewail
these men and pity themselves and pity their relatives in future. For
what pleasure will there be left them after these men are buried, who
from their belief in the importance of virtue before all else lose their
lives, made their wives widows and their children orphans, and rendered
desolate their brothers, fathers and mothers. 72. For their many
sufferings, I envy the children who are too young to know of what sort of
parents they are bereft, and I pity their parents who are too old to
forget their trial. 73. For what could be more terrible than this, to
have and bring up children, and in old age become helpless and without
hope, become friendless and without resources, and be pitied by the same
ones who once envied them, and have death seem more to be desired than
life? The braver men they were, the greater the grief for those left
behind. 74. And how are they to cease grieving? In the crises of the
state? But others should fittingly remember them at such a time. In the
time of common prosperity? But is it then reasonable that they grieve, as
their children are dead, and the living are reaping the benefits of their
valor? But in private troubles, when they see those formerly their
friends leaving them in their distress, and their enemies exulting over
their misfortunes? 75. It seems to me that the only return we can make to
these lying here is to treat their parents as themselves, and show a
father's love to their children, and render such aid to their wives as
they would if living. 76. For to whom do we owe greater thanks than to
these men before us? Whom living should we make more of than their
relatives, who like the others share their valor, but at their death have
only sorrow.

77. But I know not why we should grieve. For we were not unaware that we
were mortal. So why should we now mourn for those (who have suffered)
what we have long realized we should suffer, or why be so downcast at
natural occurrences, in the knowledge that death is the common experience
of the evil and the good? For he (_Death_) neither overlooks the
base nor loves the good, but comes equally to all. 78. For if it is
possible for men who escaped dangers by word to be immortal for all time,
the living would bewail the dead for all time. But now nature, subject to
diseases and old age and the divinity who presides over our fates are
inexorable. 79. So it is fitting to regard those men most fortunate, who
have met their end, risking their lives for the noblest and best things,
not entrusting themselves to fortune, nor waiting the appointed death,
but choosing the noblest. For memories of them are undying, and their
honors envied by all men. 80. They are mourned as mortal for nature's
sake, but are sung of immortal for their valor. For they are publicly
buried, and for them are held contests of strength and wisdom and wealth,
as if those dying in war are to receive the same honor as the immortals.
81. Thus I praise their death and envy (them), and they are the ones of
all men who I believe are the happiest in coming into the world, who,
though in possession of mortal bodies, have left an immortal memory for
their valor. But yet we must observe the usual customs and keeping our
ancestral rites, mourn the dead.




ORATION V.

FOR CALLIAS.


1. If Callias were contending for anything else than for his freedom,
gentlemen of the jury, I should be satisfied with what the others have
said. But now I think it would be a shame not to aid Callias as well as I
can, as far as justice warrants it, for he demands and begs me (for the
service), and is a friend of mine and (was) of my father as long as he
lived, and many business transactions took place between us. 2. I used to
think that he so conducted himself in the city as to obtain some honor at
your hands much rather than be brought into such danger on such a charge
(as this). But now designing men make life no less dangerous for the
innocent than for wrong-doers.

3. And you ought not to reward as trustworthy the testimony of his
slaves, and as unreliable the evidence of these men, when you recall that
no one, either a private citizen or an official, ever brought an action
against Callias, but while living in this city, he benefited you in many
ways, and he has reached this time of life without incurring any charge
at all. These, on the other hand, while they have suffered greatly during
their lives, and gone through much misery, just as if they worked much
good, make speeches on questions of freedom. And I do not wonder. 4. For
they know that if they are caught in lies they will have no worse lot
than at present, and if they pull the wool over your eyes they will be
freed from their present miseries. Moreover, it is not right to consider
as trustworthy, either as accusers or witnesses, such men as give
testimony about others at a great gain to themselves, but much rather
such only who run some risk by aiding public interests. 5. Also it seems
to me fair to consider that the trial is not confined to these men, but
is of importance to all in the city. For these are not the only ones who
own slaves, but all other citizens also. And the (slaves), fixing their
attention on the fate of these, will no longer watch to see what good
action they may do to their masters to gain their freedom, but what
slanderous accusation they may make (to obtain it).




ORATION VII.

THE OLIVE TREE.


1. I used to think, (members of the) Boule, that it was possible, if one
wished, to keep quiet, and not to be troubled with lawsuits and vexatious
business; but I have now fallen in with such unlooked-for charges and
such villainous accusers that, were it possible, it seems to me even
unborn generations must fear for what is before them. For through this
sort of men those who have done no wrong are in as great danger as those
who have committed the greatest crimes. 2. The trial is the more
perplexing to me, as I was first charged on the indictment with having
cut down a sacred olive on my land; and my accusers went to the men who
had bought the fruit of the olives, making inquiries. As they could find
no proof against me in this way, they now charge me with having cut down
an old stump, thinking that this charge will be the hardest for me to
gainsay, and the easiest for them to prove what they wish. 3. And I am
compelled, on matter which they have brought into court fully worked up,
to fight for the enjoyment of country and property, having only heard the
charges at the same moment as you who are to decide the case. So I shall
tell you everything from the beginning.

4. The place formerly belonged to Peisander. When his estate was
confiscated, it was given by the people to Apollodorus of Megara. He
farmed it some time and a little while before the time of the Thirty,
Anticles bought it of him and let it. And I bought it of Anticles in time
of peace. 5. So I think, (members of the) Boule, that it is my duty to
prove that when I bought the place there was not an olive tree nor stump
upon it. For, if before that time there had been ten thousand olives, I
don't think I could justly be made to suffer for it. If the olives were
not injured by me, I could not be held accountable for the crimes of
others. 6. You all know that among the other evils caused by the war was
this, that while estates at a distance from the city used to be plundered
by the Lacedaemonians, the estates near it used to be sacked by our own
citizens. Would it be at all just for me to pay the penalty for the
damage done by our public disasters? Especially as the place, on account
of its confiscation, was abandoned for more than three years. 7. It is
not to be wondered at if olive trees were destroyed at a time when it was
impossible for us to protect our own property. You know, (members of the)
Boule, especially such of you as have charge of these things, that there
were at that time many places thick with olives, both private and sacred
ones, most of which have now been cut down, and the land has become bare.
You would not think of inflicting punishment on those who owned the place
in peace and war, when it was other people who out them down. 8. If those
who farmed the place at different times of the period are not held
responsible, all the more ought those who did not buy until the peace, be
considered harmless by you.

9. However much I might say about the place before I bought it, I think I
have said enough. Within five days after I obtained the place I let it
out to Callistratus in the archonship of Pythodorus. 10. He farmed it two
years, receiving no olive tree, sacred or otherwise, nor any olive stump.
Demetrius had it the third year. In the fourth year I let it to Alcias, a
freedman of Antisthenes who has been dead three years. Finally, Proteus
hired it. Come here, witnesses.

WITNESSES.

11. When that time elapsed I farmed it myself. My accuser says that it
was during the archonship of Sumiades that I out down the olive. But
those who farmed it before I did, and hired it many years of me, assure
you that there was no olive on the place. What can be clearer than that
my accuser is lying? It could not be possible if there were no tree
there, that I, farming the place last, cut it down.

12. Formerly, (members of the) Boule, when men said that I was sharp and
careful, and would do nothing without a plan and purpose, I was annoyed
and preferred that they should speak of me as they ought; now, however, I
should like all of you to have this opinion about me, that you may
believe that I took good care to see--since (as he says) I was taking
such matters in hand--what profit there was in cutting it down, and what
penalty for so doing, what good I should have had if I escaped detection,
and what I should have suffered at your hands if I was detected. 13. For
men do not do things of this kind out of lawlessness, but for gain. And
it is fitting for you to see to it that the prosecutors make their charge
on this ground, proving what advantage (the accused have) in doing this
wrong. 14. (Nicomachus) cannot show that I did it on account of my
poverty, nor that the value of the place was lessened for me by the olive
being there, nor that it interfered with the vines, or was near the
house, nor that I was ignorant of the danger I was in before you for
doing it. But I can show you that a tremendous penalty would have been
the result, had I cut it down. 15. For I was cutting the olive in broad
daylight, as though, so far from keeping it a secret from all, it was
necessary for every Athenian to know it. If the deed had been merely a
disgrace, perhaps a chance passer-by would not have troubled himself
about it. I was risking not disgrace, but great punishment. 16. Should I
not be the most wretched of all men if my slaves, being acquainted with
my crime, became no longer my slaves, but my masters for the rest of my
life? For I could not punish them for the greatest offense they might
choose to give. For they would know well that it was in their power, by
turning informers, to be revenged on me and get their own freedom. 17.
Supposing it had entered my head to disregard my slaves, how should I
have dared, when so many persons had rented the place, and every one of
them would have known it, to cut down the olive merely for gain?
Especially since, as there is no limit to the liability of those who
farmed the place, it equally concerned them all that the stump should
remain intact, so that if any one charged them they could transfer the
charge to their successor. They have evidently cleared me, and if they
have lied have become participants in the crime.

18. Again, supposing I had squared matters with them, how could I have
bribed all who are present or the neighbors, who not only know about each
other's public affairs, but also about those we try to keep a secret from
all. Some of these are my friends, but others are not on good terms with
me. 19. These my accuser should have brought as witnesses, and not made
the charge at random. He says I stood near while my slaves cut out the
stump and the driver put the stump in his cart and went away with the
wood. 20. Then was the time, Nicomachus, for you to summon the witnesses
who were there and show up the crime. You would have left me no escape,
and if I were hated by you, you would have had revenge in this way. If
you did it from patriotism, having (21) exposed me in this manner, you
would not seem to be an informer, and if you desired gain, in this way
could you have obtained most. As the crime was clear I should have had no
means of safety if I did not bribe you. As you did none of these things,
you seem, by your assertions, to be destroying me, having said in the
prosecution that no one wishes to testify on account of my influence and
wealth. 22. If, when you said you saw me cutting down the olive, you had
brought the nine archons or some one else from the Areopagus, no further
witnesses would be needed. For thus the very men who judge the case would
have known that you spoke the truth. 23. I am placed in a very unfair
position. If he had produced witnesses he would have expected you to
believe them, but since he has none he thinks to turn this to my
disadvantage. And I do not wonder at this. For in a case like this he
would not lack witnesses and arguments at the same time. But I do not
think you hold the same opinion he does. 24. You know that there were in
the country, in other places of mine, many olives and burnt stumps which,
if I had set my heart, upon it, it would have been much easier for me to
injure, cut down and encroach upon, as my crime was likely to be less
apparent on account of the number of trees. 25. Thus I make them as much
account as my country and other possessions, running the risk I do of
losing both. I shall bring before you as witnesses those men who act as
inspectors every month, and send collectors every year. No one of these
men ever fined me for farming the ground about the olive. 26. It is very
probable that taking such care about the small fines I should pay no
attention whatever to my bodily safety. Am I shown to take such care of
the many olives, against which I might have committed the trespass, but
called to account for the very olive which it was not possible to dig up
without detection? 27. Was it not easier for me, (members of the) Boule,
to break the laws during the Democracy than under the Thirty? I do not
say this because I had any influence at that time or as being now in a
position of distrust, but it was easier for any one who wished to do
wrong then than it is now. I am not charged with doing this or any
other wrong during that time. 28. Unless I of all men had been most
ill-disposed to myself, how could I have attempted to cut an olive from a
piece of ground on which there was not a single tree except, as he says,
the stump of one olive, about which the road ran on both sides, with
neighbors dwelling on all sides, and perfectly open to the view of all?
Would any one have been so utterly reckless, such, being the case, as to
have done such a deed? 29. I think it strange that those men appointed by
the city to look after the sacred olives never fined me for encroaching
upon the trees nor brought me to trial on the charge of cutting them
down, but that this man, who is not a neighbor, nor an inspector, nor old
enough to know about such things, has entered me on the indictment as
having destroyed an olive.

30. I wish you not to place more trust in the assertions of my accuser
than you do in the facts themselves, nor accept the word of my personal
enemies in matters which you yourself know about, but to form your
opinions from what I have told you and from the rest of my conduct as a
citizen. 31. For I did everything allotted to me in a grander manner than
I was compelled to do by the state: equipped a trireme, supplied a
chorus, and performed all my other duties more expensively than the rest
of the citizens. 32. If I had done these things in a moderate way, and
not expensively, I should not be fighting against exile and for my
possessions, but should be worth more and not unjustly be on trial for my
life. If I had committed the crime with which he charges me I should have
gained nothing, but only brought myself into difficulty. 33. You all
would agree that it is more just to accept weighty proofs in a great case
and to regard as more trustworthy those things to which the whole city
testifies, than those which the prosecutor alone asserts.

34. Look at the case, (members of the) Boule, from what took place
besides. I went to him, and in the presence of witnesses said that I now
had all the slaves of which I had been possessed at the time I bought the
place, and I was ready, if he wished, to give them up to be tortured,
thinking that this would be the strongest test of his assertions and of
the facts. 35. But he would not take them, saying that there was no
trusting slaves. It seems to me strange that slaves when tortured make
damning statements about themselves, knowing well that it will kill them,
but prefer to be tortured than to inform on their masters to whom they
are naturally ill-disposed, when by doing so they could free themselves.
36. If Nicomachus had asked for them, and I had refused to give them up,
it would be evident that I thought them conscious of my guilt. As he did
not wish to take them when offered, you rightly can have the same opinion
about him, for the danger was not by any means evenly divided. 37. Had
they denounced me, there would have been no escape for me. If they had
not testified what he wished he would have suffered no penalty. So that
it devolved a great deal more on him to take them than on me to offer
them. But I was thus zealous, thinking it was for my interest to have you
learn the truth of the matter either from the evidence of slaves or
freedmen or facts.

38. Consider then, (members of the) Boule, whether you ought to trust me
for whom many persons have given testimony, or my accuser for whom no one
dares testify, and whether it is more likely that he lied when there was
no risk to himself, or that in the face of such great danger I committed
the act, and whether you think he made the accusation merely for the good
of the city or as an informer.

39. For I think you know that Nicomachus, induced by my personal enemies,
brought the case into court, not hoping to prove me guilty, but expecting
to be bribed. For, in proportion as such charges are most easily imputed
and most difficult to refute, so much the more do all men endeavor to
avoid them. 40. I, (members of the) Boule, did not think it right (to
shun trial), but when he brought the charge submitted myself entirely to
your disposal, nor did I try to conciliate any one of my enemies who
speak evil of me rather than praise themselves. No one ever attempted to
do me any open injury, but set on me men of such a character as these in
whom you cannot justly place any confidence. 41. I should be the most
wretched of all men if I were driven unjustly into exile, childless and
alone, leaving my home desolate, my mother in need of everything,
deprived of my country on the most disgraceful charges, although I have
been engaged in many sea-fights and many battles, and have conducted
myself in an orderly manner both under the Democracy and under the
Oligarchy.

42. I do not know, (members of the) Boule, that it is necessary for me to
say anything more. I have shown you that there was not an olive on the
place, and I have brought witnesses and proof. You must judge the case,
bearing in mind that you should learn from this man why, when it was
possible to catch me in the act, he brings the accusation after so long a
time, (43) and why, although bringing no witness, he wants you to trust
his mere assertions when he could have arrested me in the act, and why,
although I offered him all the slaves who he says were present, he
refused to take them.




ORATION IX.

POLYAENUS.


1. What purpose have the prosecutors in disregarding the main point, and
trying to attack my character? Are they not aware that they should speak
about the question at issue? Or do they indeed understand this, but
thinking to divert your attention, present more arguments in regard to
every sort of matter than about what they should (speak)? 2. I see
clearly that they speak, not because they have a small opinion of me, but
of their case. I should not be surprised if they supposed that you would
be persuaded by their slanders and convict me. 3. I did think, gentlemen
of the jury, that my trial was in regard to the accusation, not in regard
to my character. But since the prosecutors attack that, I must make my
defense on all sides. First then, I shall tell you about the writ.

4. Two years ago I came to the city, but lived here only two months when
I was put on the list for military service. When I found out it had been
done, I immediately surmised I had been chosen for no honest reason. So I
went to the Strategus and showed I had served, but I met with no
satisfaction. I was angered at their insults, but held my peace. 5. And
not knowing what to do, and consulting a citizen about my course of
action, I found out that they threatened me with imprisonment, saying
that (I), Polyaenus, had lived in the city no less time than Callicrates.
This conversation had been held at the bank of Philias. 6. So Ctesicles,
the archon, and his associates imposed a fine upon me contrary to law,
upon the accusation of some one that I spoke evil of them, the law really
declaring "if any one speak evil of the government in council." They made
the accusation, but did not attempt to enforce the penalty, but at the
end of their term of office entered it on the register and gave it to the
stewards (of the treasury). 7. The stewards however held a different view
of the matter, and calling up those who gave them the item, demanded the
reason for the charge. After they had heard what had happened, and
understood the treatment I had received, at first they tried to persuade
them to drop the matter, showing that it was not right for any citizen to
be registered as owing a fine; but being unable to persuade them
otherwise, they ran the risk (of being called to account) by you and
decided to cancel the fine. 8. That I was then released by the stewards,
you are well aware. But although believing that in reality I have been
cleared from the charge by this showing, yet I will bring further laws
and other pleas.

LAWS.

9. You have heard that the law expressly states that a fine is imposed on
those who speak evil in the council; but I have brought witnesses that I
did not enter the place of assembly, nor ought I to have been fined
unjustly, nor could I with justice pay that amount. 10. For if it was
plain I did not enter the council, and the law states that those who
misbehave within it are to be fined, I am shown not to have transgressed
in any way, but to have been fined unreasonably from motives of personal
dislike without ill-doing (on my part). 11. And they were conscious that
they acted wrongly; for they neither submitted an account of the matter
nor came to the courts and established their proceedings as legal by a
(judicial) vote. But then, even if these men fined me legally, and
established their accusation before you, as the stewards remitted the
fine, really I should have been acquitted of the charge. 12. For if they
were competent to enforce or remit the fine, I would not with reason have
to pay the money, though fined legally; and if it is possible for them to
remit and they give account of their doings, if they have proceeded
illegally, they will easily obtain the penalty which they deserve.

13. You know now how I was transferred and fined; but you ought to know
not only the reason for the charge, but the pretext for their enmity. For
I was a friend of Sostratus before incurring their hatred, knowing that
he had materially benefited the state. 14. But although his friend, I
never took advantage of his power to punish an enemy nor aid a friend.
For during his life I remained inactive through necessity and on account
of my age, and when he died neither by word and deed did I injure any of
his accusers, and I can say so much, from which I should deserve much
more gratitude from my opponents than ill-treatment. Their enmity they
showed for the reasons which have been given, although (in reality) they
had no reason for enmity. 15. So while on oath to enroll those who had
not served, they violated their oaths and proposed to the assembly to
deliberate about my freedom, (16) fining me on the ground that I spoke
evil of the government, and utterly disregarding justice, being bound to
injure me on some plea or other. What would they have done if they were
really going to injure me greatly and benefit themselves, they who care
so little for their unfairness (even) when neither of these objects is
accomplished? 17. For they had small opinion of your assembly and had no
respect for the gods, but behaved so contemptuously and illegally as not
to attempt to defend their acts, and at last, thinking they had not
punished me sufficiently, finally banished me from the city. 18. While
acting so illegally and violently, they did not care to conceal their
unfairness, but bringing me up again on the same charges, though I have
done no wrong, they accuse and revile me, bringing charges not at all
corresponding to my habits, but which harmonize and accord with their own
characters.

19. These men are then eager in every way for me to meet punishment; but
do not, I beg you, be swayed by their slanders and condemn me, nor set
aside those who came to a better and juster decision. For these have
acted both in accord with custom and precedent, and evidently have done
no wrong, caring most for justice. 20. So if these (_the
prosecutors_) act illegally, I would be somewhat disturbed,
considering it is established to treat enemies ill and friends well; but
if I did not meet fair treatment at your hands, I should be much more
troubled. For then I should not seem to have been ill-treated through
private enmity, but through the viciousness of the state. 21. Nominally I
am contending about the writ, but actually about my citizenship. For with
fair treatment I would remain in the city (for I trust to your decision);
but if, being brought up by these men, I should be unjustly convicted, I
should have to leave the city. What hope would I have to buoy me up in
living with you, or why should I intend (to do so), knowing the desire of
my accusers, and not knowing at whose hands to expect justice? Care then
more for justice (than for anything else) and bear in mind that you grant
pardon about charges evidently unjust, and do not allow those who have
committed no wrong to meet through individual malice the most unfair
treatment.




ORATION X.

THEOMNESTUS.


1. I think, gentlemen of the jury, that I shall have no lack of
witnesses, for I see many of you sitting on the jury who were present
when Lysithous was impeaching Theomnestus for speaking in the Assembly
when it was illegal, as he had thrown away his shield. In that trial he
said I had killed my father. 2. Now if he had claimed I had killed his
father, I should have overlooked his words, (for I thought him of no
account and insignificant), (3) but now it seems a disgrace not to
punish, a man who said this in relation to my father, who benefited you
and the state so signally. And now I wish to know from you whether he
shall pay the penalty, or whether he alone of the Athenians is allowed to
act and speak illegally just as he pleases.

4. This is my thirty-third year, gentlemen of the jury, and the twentieth
since the restoration (of the Democracy). So I was clearly thirteen years
old when my father died at the hands of the Thirty. At that age I neither
understood what an oligarchy was, nor could I have helped my father under
his unjust treatment. 5. And I could not have had reason to plot against
him for the sake of the money, for my elder brother Pantaleon took
everything and as guardian took our patrimony, so that on many accounts,
gentlemen of the jury, it was for my interest to desire my father's life.
So it is necessary to call these facts to your minds, and I shall need
but few words; you know well enough that I speak the truth. And
nevertheless I will furnish evidence for these facts.

EVIDENCE.

6. Now probably, gentlemen of the jury, he will make no denial of these
facts, but will say before you, as he dared to affirm before the arbiter,
that one does not use a forbidden word in saying some one has "killed"
his father, for the law does not forbid this, but forbids the use of the
word "homicide." 7. But I think that you should make your decision not
about the letter of the law, but its intention. You all know that those
who kill others are homicides, and those who are homicides kill others.
For it would be a great task for a lawgiver to write all the words having
the same signification, but in mentioning one term, his meaning covers
all. 8. This is the case then, is it not, Theomnestus,--if any one called
you a beater of father or mother, you would think he should be punished,
but if any one said you beat your father or mother, you would then think
he should go unfined as saying no forbidden word! 9. For I should like to
hear from you (for in this you are skilled in practice and speech). If
any one should say you "flung away" your shield, and in the law was
written that a man was liable to punishment if any one declares he "threw
it away," would you not have prosecuted him, and would it have been
enough for you to say if some one declared you "flung it away," I do not
care, for _flinging_ and _throwing_ are not the same thing. 10.
Now could you admit the charge as one of the Eleven, if some one brought
in a man on the charge of having stripped off his cloak or shirt but you
would have discharged him because he was not called a "clothesstealer."
And if any one should be caught carrying off a boy, you would not say he
was a kidnapper, if you quibble with terms, and will not pay attention to
the facts to express which terms are invented. 11. Consider this now,
gentlemen of the jury. For this man seems never to have gone to the
Areopagus through indolence and indifference. For you all know that
there, whenever they are conducting a trial for murder, they do not make
their depositions with this term, but with that by which I have been
abused. For the prosecutor makes a deposition that "he killed," the
defendant that "he did not kill." 12. Accordingly it would be absurd to
acquit the one who evidently committed murder because he pleads he is a
murderer, when the prosecutor charges the defendant of "killing." For
what is the difference of which this man speaks? And you yourself brought
suit against Theon for saying you "flung away" your shield. Nothing is
said in the law about "flinging," but if any one declared he has "thrown
away" his shield, it decrees a fine of 500 drachmae. 13. Would it not be
terrible if whenever it were necessary for you to punish your enemies for
slander, for you to interpret the laws as I do now, but whenever you
speak illegally of another, to think you ought not to be punished? Are
you so powerful as to be able to employ the laws as you wish, or have you
such influence as to believe that those whom you wrong will not get a
recompense? 14. Are you not ashamed to have the thought that you should
claim advantages, not from your services to the state, but from your
unpunished deeds? But read me the law.

LAW.

15. I now, gentlemen of the jury, assume that you all know that I speak
to the point, but he is so clumsy that he cannot understand what is said.
So I wish to inform him also from other laws about these things, that
even now while he is on the platform, he may be informed and may give you
no further trouble. Now read me the old laws of Solon.

16. _Law. Let him be bound, in the stocks by the feet, if the court
decrees it in addition._

The "stocks," Theomnestus, is the same thing which is now called the
"pillory." If then a man who has been bound should on his release
complain when the Eleven were undergoing their audit that he had not been
bound in stocks but in the pillory, would they not think him crazy? Read
another law.

17. _Law. Let him give security, having sworn by Apollo, fearing to
escape on account of the penalty._

The (old-fashioned) "swearing falsely" now means "swearing by," and
"running off" is our "escape."

_And whoever shuts a door with a thief inside._

The "close" is our "shut" and means the same.

18. _Money may be at interest at whatever rate the lender wishes._

The "interest," my good friend, is not "weighed," but draws whatever
percent is wished. Read now the last law.

19. _As many as go about in plain view,_ and _He shall be
responsible for injury to a domestic or female slave._

Now attend. The "in plain view" is "openly," the "go about" is "walk the
streets," the "domestic" is "servant." And there are many other such
cases, gentlemen of the jury. 20. And unless this man is stupid, I think
he understands that these matters are the same now as in antiquity, but
that we now employ different terms for them. And he will show (his
consciousness), for he will withdraw from the platform in silence. 21.
And if he does not, I beg you, gentlemen of the jury, to vote what is
just, bearing in mind that it is a much greater evil to hear that one has
killed his father than to hear that he has thrown away his shield. I at
least would rather have thrown away all my shields, rather than to have
such a report (circulated) in relation to my father. 22. So this man,
being liable to that charge, for which the penalty would have been less
(than mine for this), not only was acquitted by you, but brought
disfranchisement upon a witness. And I have seen him doing that which you
know of, and I myself rescued his shield and yet am charged with a deed
so lawless and terrible. Now as I shall have the worst fate if he
escapes, and his penalty if convicted of slander will not be what he
deserves, shall I not obtain satisfaction from him? What charge have you
against me? 23. That there was justice in his accusation? But you
yourselves would not say so. That the defendant is a nobler man and from
nobler family than I? Not even he would claim that. That, having thrown
away my shield, I am accused of libel by the one who rescued it? Such is
not the story about town. 24. But remember that you rendered him that
great favor. In this matter who would not pity Dionysius that he met with
such misfortune, a noble man who fell into danger, coming from the
dicastery, saying (25) that we had made a most unfortunate expedition,
where many lost their lives and others who saved their shields were
convicted of perjury by those who threw theirs away? Were it not better
for him to have died there rather than to come home to such a fate? 26.
So do not pity Theomnestus that he is ill-spoken of as he deserves, and
do not give judgment in his favor while he insults (me) and speaks
illegally. For what greater sorrow could befall me than this, to hear
such base charges in relation to such a father? 27. He often served as
Strategus, and ran many other risks for you. And he was never made
prisoner by the enemy, nor lost a suit to the state through his audit,
and at sixty years of age he was put to death under the oligarchy through
his devotion to the people. 28. Am I not justified in my anger against
the slanderer, and in coming to my father's rescue as if he were
slandered by this charge? For what could be more distressing to him than
this, to die at the hands of enemies and to have the reproach of having
been put to death by his own children. His trophies of valor, gentlemen
of the jury, even now hang on your shrines, but the trophies of the
cowardice of this man (_Theon_) and his father are in an enemy's
temple, so inborn is their baseness. 29. And so, gentlemen of the jury,
the more these are brave to all appearances, the more they deserve our
anger, for they are evidently strong in body, but weak in spirit.

30. I hear, gentlemen of the jury, that he will resort to the argument
that he spoke in anger as I offered the same testimony as Dionysius. Bear
in mind, gentlemen of the jury, that the law gives no pardon to anger,
but fines one who cannot prove the truth of his words. And I twice gave
evidence, not realizing that you punish witnesses and pardon those who
throw away their shields. 31. So about these things I do not know what
more I ought to say. But I beg you to condemn Theon, bearing in mind that
no trial could be more important to me. For I prosecute him for slander
and by the same vote I am acquitted of the murder of my father, I, who by
myself, as soon as I came of age, indicted the Thirty in the Areopagus.
Recalling this, aid me and my father, and (stand by) the laws and the
oaths which you have taken.




ORATION XII.

ERATOSTHENES.


1. It does not seem to me difficult to begin the accusation, jurors, but
to cease speaking; things so important, and so many in number, have been
done by them, that neither by lying could I make the accusation worse
than it really is, nor, if I were willing, should I be able to tell the
whole truth; but it is necessary either for the accuser to grow weary, or
for time to fail. 2. But I think my experience will be just the opposite
of what (it has been) formerly. For formerly it was necessary for the
accusers to show the enmity which they had toward the accused; but now it
is necessary to ask from the accused what enmity they had toward the
state, on account of which they venture to do such wrongs to it. But I do
not use these words as if not having private enmities and misfortunes,
but as if there were plenty of reason for all to be angry, on account of
their private and public affairs. 3. In my own case, jurors, having never
pleaded either my own cause or that of others, I now have been compelled
by what has taken place, to accuse this man, so that I often have felt
the greatest despondency, lest, on account of my inexperience, I should
make the accusation, for my brother and myself, unworthily and
unskillfully; still, I will endeavor to run over the facts as briefly as
I can.

4. My father, Cephalus, was persuaded by Pericles to come to this land,
and lived there thirty years; and neither we nor he ever brought an
accusation against anybody, or were accused ourselves; but we lived in
such a manner under the Democracy, that we neither wronged others nor
were wronged by others. 5. But when the Thirty, being villains and
sycophants, were established in power, affirming that it was necessary to
rid the city of those doing wrong, and turn the remaining citizens to
virtue and justice,--though making such professions, they did not
venture to do such things, as I, speaking first in my own behalf, and in
behalf of you, shall try to remind you. 6. For Theognis and Piso said,
among the Thirty, in regard to the metics, that there were some
dissatisfied with the form of government; therefore there was a very good
pretext to seem to punish them, but in reality to get their money, for
the city was poor in every respect, and the government needed money. 7.
And they had no difficulty in persuading their hearers, for they thought
it of no account to kill men, but to take their money they considered of
the utmost importance. Therefore they decided to arrest ten, and, of
these, two poor men, in older that they might have a defense, in respect
to the others, that these things were not done for the sake of money, but
in the interest of the state, as if doing something reasonably. 8.
Accordingly they distributed the houses and went to them. They found me
entertaining guests, whom they drove out, and then gave me up to Piso,
and others, going to the workshop, took an inventory of the slaves. And I
asked Piso if he was willing to save me, taking a bribe; and he said he
would, if there was much of it. 9. Therefore I said that I was ready to
give him a talent of silver, and he agreed to do it. I knew that he
regarded neither gods nor men; still, in view of the existing state of
affairs, it seemed to me to be absolutely necessary to take a pledge from
him. 10. And when he swore, imprecating destruction upon himself and
children, that he would save me, on condition of receiving a talent, I
went to my chamber and opened the chest. Piso seeing this came in, and,
seeing what was therein, called two of his servants, and commanded them
to take what was in the chest. 11. But as he did not confine himself to
the sum agreed upon, jurors, but took three talents of silver, four
hundred cyziceni, a hundred darics, and four bowls of silver, I besought
him to give me my traveling expenses; whereupon he told me to rejoice if
I saved my life. 12. Melobius and Mnesitheides, returning from the
workshop, met Piso and myself, coming out (of the house). They overtook
us at the very doors, and asked us where we were going; he said to my
brother's (house), to see what was in that house; then they told him to
go on, but bade me accompany them to Damnippus. 13. And Piso, approaching
me, told me to keep silence, and be of good cheer, as he would come
there; and we found Theognis there, guarding the others; having given me
up to him, they went back; and, under such circumstances, it seemed best
to me to run any risk whatever, as if death were already at hand. 14. So,
having called Damnippus, I spoke to him as follows: "You happen to be a
friend of mine, and I have come to your house; I have done no wrong, but
I am about to be put to death on account of my property; do you,
therefore, in consideration of my wretched plight, kindly use your
influence in my behalf to secure my safety." And he promised to do it.
But it seemed better to him to mention it to Theognis, for he thought
that he would do anything, if one should give him money. 15. And, while
he was conversing with Theognis (as I happened to be acquainted with the
house, and knew that there were two doors), it seemed best to me to try
to save myself, thinking that, if I should escape detection, I should be
safe, but, if I should be taken, I thought that, if Theognis should be
persuaded by Damnippus to receive a bribe, I should get off nevertheless,
but otherwise I should die all the same. 16. Having thought of these
things, I fled while they were stationing a guard at the hall-door, and
of the three doors through which I must pass, all happened to be open;
then, coming to the (house) of Archeneus, the shipmaster, I sent him to
the town to learn about my brother; and he came, and said that
Eratosthenes had seized him in the road and led him off to prison, (17)
and I, having learned these things, on the following night sailed to
Megara. And the Thirty gave the command to Polemarchus, made customary by
them, to drink hemlock, before telling the accusation, on account of
which he was about to die, so far he failed of trial, and making his
defense. 18. And when he was carried out the prison-house dead, although
we had three houses, they permitted him to be carried out from neither of
them; but, having hired a bier, they laid him out. And, although there
was much clothing, they gave none to us, when we asked it for his burial,
but of his friends, one gave a garment, another a pillow, and what each
one happened to have, he gave for his burial. 19. And although we had
seven hundred shields belonging to us, together with gold, silver, brass,
ornaments, furniture and women's clothing to an amount far beyond their
expectations, besides a hundred and twenty slaves, of whom they took the
best, and threw the rest into prison, they reached such a pitch of
insatiable desire and avarice, that they showed their character; for from
the ears of the wife of Polemarchus, Melobius took the golden earrings
which she happened to be wearing, as soon as he came into the house. 20.
And not in the least part of our property did we receive compassion from
them; but they so wronged us, on account of our property, as others would
in anger for great wrongs, though we did not deserve these things from
the city, but we had paid the expenses of all the choruses, and many
taxes, and showed ourselves orderly, and did everything ordered, and had
no private enemy, but freed many of the Athenians from their enemies.
Such things they thought we deserved, although as metics we had conducted
ourselves better than those who are citizens. 21. For they drove out many
of the citizens to their enemies, and, killing many unjustly, left them
unburied; and many who enjoyed the full rights of citizenship in this
city, they deprived of them; and they prevented the daughters of many
from being married. 22. And now they have become so audacious, that they
come here to defend themselves, declaring that they have done nothing
wrong or disgraceful; and I wish that they spoke the truth, for not the
least share in this good would come to me. 23. But now they have no such
pleas either before the city or me, for, as I said before, Eratosthenes
killed my brother, not having been wronged by him privately, or seeing
him injuring the city, but zealously assisting his own transgression of
the law.

24. And having come up here, I wish, to question him, jurors, for this is
my opinion; with a view to this man's advantage, I think it impious to
converse even with another about him; but to his injury I consider it to
be holy and honorable to speak even to himself; therefore rise up, and
answer me what I ask you. 25. Did you lead away Polemarchus, or not?
"Through fear I did what was commanded by the Thirty." Were you in the
council chamber when speeches were made about us? "I was." Did you agree
with those advising to kill, or did you oppose? "I opposed." That we
might not be killed? "That you might not be killed." Thinking that we
would suffer unjustly or justly? "Unjustly." 26. Then, O basest of all
men! did you oppose, in order to save us, but arrest us, in order to kill
us? And, when the majority of you had our safety in your hands, do you
say you opposed those wishing to destroy us, but, when it was in your
power alone both to save Polemarchus and not, did you lead him away to
prison? Then because, as you say, by opposing you did no good, do you
claim to be considered an honest man? But, because you arrested and tried
to kill us, do you not think that you should suffer punishment for this?

27. And, moreover, it is not reasonable to believe him in this (if he
speaks the truth in saying that he opposed), that it was commanded him.
For surely, in the case of the metics, they did not take a pledge from
him. To whom then was it less likely to be commanded than (to one) who
happened to oppose them, and declared his opinion? For who was less
likely to be a servant in these things than the man who opposed what they
wished to be done? 28. And still it seems to me that there is a
sufficient excuse for the other Athenians, to lay the blame of what has
happened upon the Thirty. But how is it reasonable for you to accept the
statements of the Thirty themselves, if they throw the blame on each
other? 29. For, if there had been in the city any greater power than that
by which he was ordered to kill men unjustly, you might justly pardon
him; but now from whom will you ever exact punishment if it shall be
possible for the Thirty to say that they did what was commanded by the
Thirty? 30. And while it was possible to save him and abide by the
commands of the Thirty, he arrested him, not in his house, but in the
street, and led him off. And you are all angry with as many as came into
your houses making a search for you or for anything of yours. 31. But, if
it was necessary to pardon those who have killed others for their own
safety, you would more justly pardon these, for it was dangerous for
those who were sent not to go, and if caught to deny it. But it was
possible for Eratosthenes to say, first, that he did not meet him;
secondly, that he did not see him; for these things had neither proof nor
trial, so that they would not have been investigated, even by those
wishing to be enemies. 32. But you ought, Eratosthenes, if you had been
an honest man, far rather to have informed those about to be put to death
unjustly, than to arrest those about to perish unjustly; but now your
acts have been evident as those not of one troubled, but of one pleased
with what has taken place. 33. So that it is necessary for the jury to
give their decision from facts rather than from words, taking as proofs
of the things then said, what they know to have happened, since it is not
possible to furnish witnesses about these things; for it was not only
impossible for us to be present, but in our homes, so that it is in the
power of those who have done it for their own safety! 34. I do not,
however, shrink from the issue, but rather confess to you that I am
utterly opposed (to their statements). Indeed, I wonder what in Heaven's
name you would have done if in harmony with the Thirty, since when
opposing them you killed Polemarchus. Come now, what would you do if you
happened to be brother or son of his? Would you acquit him? For
Eratosthenes, jurors, must show one of two things, either that he did not
lead him away, or that he did this justly; but he has confessed that he
arrested him unjustly, so that he has made your decision about him easy.
35. And now many, both of the citizens and of the strangers, have come to
learn your opinion about these things, some of whom, being your own
citizens, will go away having learned either that they will suffer
punishment for the crimes they shall commit, or, having done what they
desire, will become tyrants of the city, but, failing, will be on equal
terms with you; but the foreigners in the city will know whether they
banished the Thirty from their city justly or unjustly, for, if the very
men who have suffered ill, shall acquit those whom they arrested, truly
they will think that they themselves have been over-zealous in taking
vengeance in your behalf. 36. Is it not then a hard thing if you punished
by death the generals who conquered in the naval battle because they said
they were not able to rescue their companions from the sea on account of
the storm, thinking it was necessary to exact punishment from them on
account of the valor of the dead, but these, who, as private citizens,
did all in their power to be defeated in the naval battle, and, when they
were established in power, confessed that they willingly put to death
many of the citizens without a trial,--is it not necessary that both they
themselves and their children should be punished by you with the most
extreme punishments?

37. I then, jurors, think that sufficient accusation has been made, for I
think it is necessary to carry the accusation up to this point until the
accused shall appear to have done things worthy of death; for this is the
most extreme punishment we can inflict upon them, so that I do not know
what need there is to make many accusations against men who would not be
able to give satisfaction for each of their offenses even by dying twice.
38. For it is not fitting for him to do that which is customary in this
city, to make no defense against the accusations but, speaking much of
themselves, they sometimes deceive, showing to you how good soldiers they
are, or how many ships of the enemy they took when in command of
triremes, or how many cities which were hostile they made friendly. 39.
For command him to show where he killed as many of the enemy as of the
citizens, or where he took as many ships as they themselves betrayed, or
what city they acquired so great as this one of ours which they enslaved.
40. For did they take as many arms from the enemy as they have taken from
you? Did they take such walls as those of their own country which they
dismantled? Who took away the garrisons about Attica, and made it plain
to you that they did not dismantle the Piraeus because the Lacedaemonians
commanded it, but because they thought that thus their own power would be
firmer?

41. Therefore I often wondered at the audacity of those speaking in their
behalf, except when I consider that it is in their power both to do all
evils and to praise those like them. 42. For this is not the first time
he has acted contrary to your majority; but in the time of the Four
Hundred, having set up an oligarchy in the camp, he fled from the
Hellespont, deserting his ship, although the commander of it, with
Iatrocles and others whose names I do not need to mention; and, having
come here, he opposed those who favored a democracy. And of these things
I will bring you witnesses.

WITNESSES.

43. I will pass over then his intervening life; but after the sea-fight
and the disaster to the city took place, there being still a democracy,
five men were made Ephors by the so-called secret societies (whence they
began a sedition), to assemble the citizens, lead the conspirators, and
oppose your democracy. Among them were Eratosthenes and Critias. 44. And
they appointed commanders over the guards, and they directed what ought
to be voted and who ought to rule, and, if they wished to do anything
else, they were masters; so not only enemies, but also those who were
citizens plotted against you, in order that you might vote nothing good,
and might be in want of many things. 45. For this they knew, that they
could not get the upper hand in any other way, but success for them
depended on your misfortune; and they thought that you, wishing to be
freed from your present evils, would not consider about future ones. 46.
That it was in the power of the Ephors at that time, I will bring
witnesses to you, not those then co-operating with him (for I should not
be able), but those who heard Eratosthenes himself. 47. But, if they had
been prudent, they would have borne witness against them, and would have
severely punished the teachers of their crimes, and, if they had been
wise, would not have considered their oaths binding to the extent of
wronging the citizens, but for the good of the state they would have
easily transgressed them; therefore I say such things to them. Call
witnesses for me, and come forward.

WITNESSES.

48. You have heard the witnesses. At last, being established in power, he
took part in no good deed, but in many of an opposite character. If,
however, he were an honest man, he ought, in the first place, not to rule
contrary to law; secondly, to inform the council concerning all the
reports, that they were false, and that Batrachus and Aeschylides did not
announce the truth, but told things invented by the Thirty, as agreed
upon for the injury of the citizens. 49. And indeed, jurors, all who were
ill disposed toward you, remained quiet just the same; for there were
others saying and doing things which were greater evils than what could
(otherwise) come to the city. But for those who said they were well
disposed, why did they not show it there, both by speaking what was best
themselves, and preventing men from doing wrong?

50. But perhaps he might be able to say he was afraid, and this will be a
sufficient excuse to some of you. (Observe) then, if he shall appear to
be opposing the Thirty in speech; otherwise it will be evident that these
things pleased him, and he had so much power that, although, he opposed,
he suffered no evil from them. And he ought to have this zeal for your
safety, but not for Theramenes, who has wronged you in many respects. 51.
But that he considered the city hostile and your enemies his friends, I
shall establish by many proofs; likewise that the quarrels with each
other arose not on your behalf, but on theirs, to determine who shall do
these things and govern the state. 52. For, if they made the revolt in
behalf of those who had been wronged, when would there have been a better
opportunity for a ruler to show his friendship than when Thrasybulus had
taken possession of Phyle? But he, instead of announcing or doing
anything good toward those at Phyle, came with his fellow-rulers to
Salamis and Eleusis, and led away three hundred of the citizens to
prison, and by one vote condemned them all to death. 53. But when we came
to the Piraeus, and disputes arose, and speeches were made about a
reconciliation, we each had many hopes of behaving towards each other, as
both parties gave indications; for the Piraeus party, being superior,
permitted them to depart, (54) and they, having come to the city, drove
out the Thirty, except Pheido and Eratosthenes, and chose as leaders
those most opposed to them, thinking justly that by the same persons both
the Thirty would be hated, and the Piraeus party loved. 55. Of these,
then, Pheido, who had been one of the Thirty, and Hippocles, and
Epichares of Lamptrae, and others seeming to be the most opposed to
Charicles and Critias and their club, when they were established in
power, created much greater party-feeling against the Piraeus party for
the city party. 56. And they openly showed that they were making the
disturbance, not on behalf of the Piraeus party, nor on behalf of those
perishing unjustly, neither did they trouble themselves about the dead,
nor those who were going to be put to death, but those who had more power
and were getting rich faster. 57. For, having seized the offices and the
city, they made war upon both parties, both the Thirty who had done all
evils, and you who had suffered all evils; and this was evident to all,
that, if the former were accused unjustly, you (were accused) justly, but
if you unjustly, the Thirty justly, for they were banished from the city,
not having been guilty of other things, but of these things. 58. So that
it is necessary to be exceedingly indignant that Pheido, having been
chosen to conciliate you and restore you, did the same things as
Eratosthenes, and with the same mind was ready to injure those who were
in the majority in their own party by means of you; and he was not
willing to restore the city to you in unjust exile, but, having come to
Sparta, he tried to persuade them to begin hostilities, falsely saying
that the city would fall into the power of the Boeotians, and other
things besides by which he hoped to persuade them. 59. But not being able
to obtain this, either because the sacred rites were in the way, or
because they themselves did not wish it, he borrowed a hundred talents in
order that he might be able to hire mercenaries; and they chose Lysander
as leader, who was very friendly to the oligarchy, and most hostile to
the state, especially the Piraeus party. 60. Then having hired all men
for the destruction of the city, and inciting cities, and finally the
Lacedaemonians, and such of their allies as they could persuade, they
made preparations not to restore but to destroy the city (and would have
succeeded), had it not been for certain brave men, to whom I charge you
to show your gratitude by punishing these wretches. 61. You know these
things yourselves, and I know it is not necessary to provide witnesses,
nevertheless (I will), for I need to stop speaking, and it is more
pleasant for you to hear the same words from as many as possible.

WITNESSES.

62. Come now, I will show you about Theramenes as briefly as I can, and I
request you to hear me, both on behalf of myself and the city. And let no
one think that I am accusing Theramenes while Eratosthenes is on trial.
For I learn that he will make this defense, that he was a friend of his,
and took part in the same acts. 63. But I suppose that he, as a citizen,
would pretend that he was acting with Themistocles, in order that the
walls might be built, since (he says he is acting) with Theramenes, in
order that they may be destroyed; for they do not seem to me to be worthy
of a comparison, for he built them up against the will of the Spartans,
but this man has torn them down, after deceiving the citizens. 64. For
the opposite has happened to the city from what was natural. For it was
right that the friends of Theramenes should be ruined with him, except if
one happened to be acting in opposition to him; but now I see that the
defense is thrown upon him, but that his companions are trying to get
honor, as if he had been the cause of many blessings, and not of great
evils. 65. In the first place, he was the chief cause of the former
oligarchy, having persuaded you to choose the constitution, in the time
of the Four Hundred. His father, being one of the commissioners, did
these things, and he himself seeming to be in full sympathy with the
affair, was chosen general by them. 66. And while he was in office, he
showed himself faithful (to the city); but, when he saw that Pisander and
Callaeschrus and others were superior to him, and that you no longer
wished to hear them, then, on account of his enmity towards them, and his
fear of you, he took part with Aristocrates. 67. And, wishing to seem to
be faithful to you, he accused and put to death, Antiphon and
Archeptolemus, who were great friends of his, and reached such a pitch of
wickedness, that at the same time, on account of his faith to them, he
enslaved you, and on account of his (faith) to you he destroyed his
friends. 68. Then being honored, and thought worthy of the greatest
things, he himself, having announced that he would save the city,
destroyed it, saying he had done a great and valuable thing. And he
promised to make peace, without giving hostages, without dismantling the
walls, and without giving up the ships, and wishing to say these things
to no one, he commanded you to trust him. 69. But you, Athenians, while
the council of the Areopagus was acting for safety, and many were
opposing Theramenes, though you knew that other men keep secrets on
account of the enemy, while he, even among his own citizens, was
unwilling to state those things which he was going to state to the enemy,
nevertheless intrusted to him your country, children, wives and
yourselves. 70. But he did nothing which he promised; on the contrary, he
reflected that the city ought to be small and weak, so that he endeavored
to persuade you to do those things which no one of the enemy ever
mentioned, or of the citizens ever expected; not being compelled by the
Lacedaemonians, but himself giving orders to them, both to destroy the
walls of the Piraeus, and to break up the existing state of government,
well knowing that, if you were not in despair, you would inflict speedy
punishment upon him. 71. And finally, jurors, he did not permit the
assembly to be held until the opportunity mentioned by him
(_Lysander_) was carefully watched by him, and he had summoned the
ships from Samos with Lysander, and the camp of the enemy was in the
city. 72. Then, this being the state of affairs, and Lysander and
Philochares and Miltiades being present, they made an assembly concerning
the constitution, in order that no orator might oppose or threaten them,
and that you might not choose what was advantageous, but might vote what
seemed best to them. 73. And Theramenes stood up, and advised you to
commit the city to thirty men, and abide by the constitution which
Dracontides proposed, but you, nevertheless, being so disposed, made a
tumult as if you would not do these things, for you knew that you were
deliberating that day concerning slavery and liberty. 74. But Theramenes,
jurors, (and of these things I will bring you yourselves as witnesses,)
said he cared nothing for your tumult, since he knew that many of the
Athenians were doing things like himself, and he said things which seemed
good to Lysander and the Lacedaemonians; and after him Lysander rose and
said a great deal, but particularly that he considered you faithless, and
that the question would be to you, not about a constitution, but about
safety, unless you did what Theramenes commands. 75. And of those in the
assembly, the better portion were aware of the preparation and the
crisis, and some remained and kept quiet; but others went off, knowing
this, at least, that they had voted nothing wrong to the city; while a
few base and evil schemers voted what was commanded. 76. For they were
commanded to elect ten whom Theramenes proposed, and ten whom, those
elected Ephors advised, and ten from those present; for they saw your
weakness, and they knew their own power, so that they knew beforehand
what was going to take place in the assembly. 77. And in these things it
is not necessary to believe me, but him, for all those things said by me
he said, in his defense in the council, reproaching the exiles, because
they came back through his means,--the Lacedaemonians not caring about
it,--and reviling those taking part in the government, because he himself
met with such treatment, after having been the cause of all the things
done in the ways mentioned by me, having himself given many pledges, and
received many from them. 78. And though he has been the cause of so many
other evils and disgraces, both long ago and recently, both small and
great, they will venture to declare that they are friends of his, when
Theramenes died not on your behalf, but on account of his own wickedness,
and was justly punish