to that part
of the United States which has a French background, though it now has made
itself felt throughout the nation. And, however little in its feature and
language the foreground may seem to take color of it, I shall always
believe that the consecration of the rivers and paths, by explorations and
ministries that were for the most part as unselfish as France's
scholarship is to-day, must in some subtle way have had such a potency as
the catalytic substances which work miracles in matter and yet are beyond
the discerning of the scientist.

An English essayist [Footnote: G. K. Chesterton, "The Fallacy of the Young
Nation," in his "Heretics," pp. 247-266.] has estimated that we of the
United States are no longer young and finds in the fact that we have
produced great artists the intimations of age. The art of Whistler and the
letters of Henry James are to him the "sweet and startling" but
"unmistakable cry of a dying man." But this essayist could not have known
the men of the valley which is the heart of the nation as it is the heart
of the country, the place of its dominant spirits. That valley, so rapidly
exploited of its resources that it has grown ages poorer, is yet virile,
youthful in its faults and its achievements. It has no "fine futility" as
yet, and the cry is not "sweet" though it may be "startling." It is the
shout of a young god, of a Jason driving the bulls in the fields of
Colchis. The attenuations of distance may easily deceive one's ears who
listens from across the ocean and the mountains.

I think it was this same essayist who said that to understand a people one
must study them with the "loyalty of a child" and the patience not of a
scientist but of a poet. I thank him for that, while I excuse his
confounding of sounds that he hears in England from America, and agree
that what we need in that valley to tell its story, to interpret it, is
not a specialist in statistics nor an annalist, not a critic who looks at
the smoke of the chimneys and visits the slaughter-houses only, but a poet
who will have the patience to consult both the statistician and the
annalist, a patient poet with the "loyalty of a child" toward his theme.



EPILOGUE

FRANCIS PARKMAN
THE HISTORIAN OF FRANCE IN THE NEW WORLD


I make the epilogue of this story my tribute to Francis Parkman, who has
in a sense made this all possible for me: first, by reason of the love he
gave me long ago for his New France with its primeval forests, its virgin
prairies, its glistening rivers, its untamed Indians, its explorers, its
gray and black cowls, its coureurs de bois, its stars whose light had
never before looked on a white face; and second, by reason of the mass of
incident and color which he has supplied for the background of the life I
have known in that valley.

On entering a college out in the midst of that region--the middle of the
Mississippi Valley--nearly thirty years ago I was assigned, as my first
important task in English, the reading and criticism of one of Parkman's
books. I think that "The Oregon Trail" was suggested. I read several
volumes, however, but found my interest greatest in "The Pioneers of
France in the New World" and "The Jesuits in North America." What I wrote
I do not now remember (nor do I wish to refresh my memory), but so
persistent was the grip of those graphic relations upon my imagination
that years later, when leaving the presidency of that same college, I
asked to be permitted to take from the library three books (replacing them
with fresher copies): the chapel Bible--from which I had been read to by
my president and professors and from which I in turn had read to
succeeding students--a copy of Spenser's "Faerie Queene"--which my
college's only poet, Eugene Field, had read through--and a volume of
Parkman's on the pioneers of France.

So I take the opportunity to pay my tribute to him who long ago put these
figures on the frontier of my imagination, and who has prevented my ever
speaking in dispassion or without favorable prejudice of them.

When Parkman was leaving America for Paris in 1868, "for medical advice
and research," uncertain as to whether he would ever return to take up his
unfinished story of the American forest, he left in the hands of a friend
a parcel, "not to be opened during his life." It is that parcel, not
opened until twenty-five years later--for Parkman lived to return to
America and to return again to Paris more than once, and then to go back
and finish, after a full half-century of struggle with physical maladies
and infirmities, the last book of the plan virtually sketched fifty years
before, and with a singular felicity of coincidence named "The Half-
Century of Conflict"--it is that parcel which has kept for later
generations his remarkable autobiography.

While on his visits in Paris he was known in a wide circle. As he himself
said in writing to his sisters, "if able to accept invitations," he "would
have had the run of Faubourg St. Germain." I doubt, however, if his
personality is remembered by many, much less that strangely tortured life
which probably gave little mark of its suffering even to those who knew
him best in France.

I therefore recall some of the detail of the years preceding those days
when he appeared in the streets of Paris seeking health, but seeing often
Margry, the "intractable yet kindly keeper" of an important department of
French archives, who had in his secretive keeping documents most precious
to the uses of Parkman.

It is not altogether an agreeable chronicle, this autobiography.
[Footnote: Printed in "Proceedings Massachusetts Historical Society, 1892-
4," series 2, 8:349-360.] It is rather like a "pathological record," and
as totally unlike the pages of his books as can be well imagined. But it
is an essential document.

The first pages of this biography were withheld by him and so removed from
the parcel; the record begins with a general characterization of his
childhood. There is no detail. But there are to be found elsewhere the
memories of others which tell of his boyish enjoyment of the little
wilderness of joyous colors near the school to which he was sent-microcosm
of the greater wilderness in which his body and then his imagination were
to wander through all his mature days till his death. His own chronicle
has forgotten or ignored those elysian days and has not in all its length
a joyful note or a bright color.

This is the summary: His childhood was neither healthful nor buoyant....
Chemical experiment was his favorite hobby, involving a lonely, confined,
unwholesome sort of life, baneful to body and mind.... The age of fifteen
or sixteen produced a revolution; retorts and crucibles were forever
discarded.... He became enamoured of the woods, a fancy which soon gained
full control over the course of his literary pursuits.... He resolved to
confine his homage to the muse of history.... At the age of eighteen (born
in 1823) the plan (to whose execution he gave his long life) was, in its
most essential features, formed. His idea was clear before him, yet
attended with unpleasant doubts as to his ability to realize it to his own
satisfaction.... The task, as he then reckoned it, would require about
twenty years. The time allowed was ample; but here he fell into a fatal
error, entering upon this long pilgrimage with all the vehemence of one
starting on a mile heat. His reliance, however, was less on books than on
such personal experience as should intimately identify him with his theme.

Let me here say that I have found traces of his steps at nearly every site
that I have visited. He had been at Fort St. Louis, at the most important
portages, and at the places where the French forts once stood. His natural
inclinations urged him in the same direction, his thoughts were constantly
in the forest, whose features, not unmixed with softer images, possessed
his waking and sleeping dreams; he was as fond of hardships as he was vain
of enduring them, cherishing a sovereign scorn for every physical weakness
or defect. Moreover, deceived by a rapid development of frame and sinews
which flattered him with the belief that discipline sufficiently unsparing
would harden him into an athlete, he slighted precautions of a more
reasonable woodcraft, tired old foresters with long marches, stopped
neither for heat nor rain, and slept on the earth without a blanket.... He
spent his summer vacations in the woods or in Canada, at the same time
reading such books as he thought suited to help him toward his object....
While in the law school he entered in earnest on two other courses, one of
general history, the other of Indian history and ethnology, studying
diligently at the same time the models of English style.... There
developed in him a state of mental tension, habitual for several years,
and abundantly mischievous in its effects. With a mind overstrained and a
body overtaxed, he was burning his candle at both ends.... A highly
irritable organism spurred the writer to excess.... Labor became a
passion, and rest intolerable yet with a keen appetite for social
enjoyments.... His condition became that of a rider whose horse runs
headlong with the bit between his teeth, or of a locomotive, built of
indifferent material, under a head of steam too great for its strength,
hissing at a score of crevices, yet rushing on with accelerating speed to
the inevitable smash.... Soon appeared, as a sign of mischief, weakness of
sight. Accordingly he went to the Rocky Mountains to rest his failing
vision and to get an inside view of Indian life.... Reeling in the saddle,
he set forth, attended by a Canadian hunter.... Joining the Ogallala
Indians, he followed their wanderings for several weeks. To have worn the
air of an invalid would have been an indiscretion, as he says, since "a
horse, a rifle, a pair of pistols, and a red shirt might have offered
temptations too strong for aboriginal virtue." So he hunted when he could
scarcely sit upright.... To the maladies of the prairies other disorders
succeeded on his return.... Flat stagnation followed, reaching its depth
in eighteen months.... The desire to return to the prairie was intense,
but exposure to the sunlight would have destroyed his sight.... When his
condition was at its worst, he resolved to attempt the composition of the
"History of the Conspiracy of Pontiac," for which he had been collecting
material since his days in college. Suffering from extreme weakness of
sight, a condition of the brain prohibiting fixed attention, and a nervous
derangement, he yet set out upon this labor, using a wooden frame strung
with parallel wires to guide his crayon. Books and documents were read to
him, but never, without injury, for more than a half-hour at a time, and
frequently not at all for days. For the first half-year he averaged six
lines of composition a day. And he wrote, I suppose, at least ten hundred
thousand lines. His health improving, he dictated, pacing a dark garret.
He then entered upon "France in the New World." The difficulties were
incalculable.... Wholly unable to use his eyes, he had before him the task
of tracing out, collecting, indexing, arranging, and digesting a great
mass of incongruous material, scattered on both sides of the Atlantic. He
was unable to employ trained assistants and had to rely mainly on his own
research, though, in some cases, receiving valuable aid of scholars and
others. He used to employ as reader of French a public-school girl wholly
ignorant of French (who, I suppose, gave English pronunciation to all the
words), but with such help and that of members of his own family the work
went on. Then came another disaster--an effusion of water on the knee
which involved a close confinement for two years; and this in turn
resulted in serious nervous disturbance centring in the head. These
extreme conditions of disorder continued for many years.... His work was
wholly interrupted for one year, four years, and numerous short
intervals.... Later the condition of sight so far improved as to permit
reading, not exceeding, on an average, five minutes at one time. By
judicious use this modicum of power was extended. By reading for one
minute and then resting for an equal time the alternate process could be
continued for about half an hour, then, after a sufficient interval,
repeated three or four times a day. Working under such conditions he makes
this report, 1868, of progress: "Most of the material is collected or
within reach; another volume, on the Jesuits of North America, is one-
third written; another, on the French explorers of the Great West, is half
written; while a third, devoted to the checkered career of Comte de
Frontenac, is partially arranged for composition." During this period he
had made many journeys in the United States and Canada for material, and
had been four times in Europe.... He wonders as to the advantage of this
tortoise pace, but says in conclusion that, "irksome as may be the
requirements of conditions so anomalous, they are far less oppressive than
the necessity they involve of being busied with the Past when the Present
has claims so urgent, and of holding the pen with the hand that should
have grasped the sword" (for he was greatly disappointed that he could not
enter the army at the time of the Civil War).

I have made this rather extensive summary of the singular autobiography--
and largely in the author's own words--not to prepare your minds for
lenient judgments of his work, but to inform them of the tenacious purpose
of the man whose infirmities of the knees kept him most of his life from
the wild forest trails and streams and compelled him to a wheel-chair in
gardens of tame roses; whose weakness of the eyes allowed him but
inadequate vision of the splendor of the woods and even robbed him of the
intimacy of books; whose malady of mind kept him ever in terror of devils
more fierce than the inhuman tortures of Jogues and Brebeuf--a tenacious
purpose that wrought its youth-selected, self-appointed work, and so well,
so splendidly, so thoroughly that it needs never to be done again.

One of his friends, in a memoir of Parkman, recalls an observation of
Sainte-Beuve, in his paper on Taine's "English Literature," that has found
its best illustration in what Parkman accomplished in spite of lameness,
blindness, and mental distress: "All things considered, every allowance
being made for general or particular elements and for circumstances, there
still remain place and space enough around men of talent, wherein they can
move and turn themselves with entire freedom. And, moreover, were the
circle drawn round each a very contracted one, every man of talent, every
genius, in so far as he is in some degree a magician and an enchanter,
possesses a secret entirely his own, whereby to perform prodigies within
this circle and work wonders there." [Footnote: "Nouveaux Lundis," vol.
VIII, English translation in "English Portraits," p. 243.]

This autobiography has shown how short was the radius of the circle. The
twelve volumes of his work attest, under Sainte-Beuve's definition, the
degree of his powers of magic and enchantment. Men of strong knees, of
good eyes, and of brains that do not keep them from sleep by night or from
work by day, have travelled over this same field, but of most that they
gathered it may be said: "To no such aureate earth 'tis turned as, buried
once, men want dug up again."

I have sat for days in the Harvard University Library among the books
bequeathed to it by Parkman (being the greater part of the library which
surrounded him in his work--books of history, of travel, and of biography;
books about Indians, flints, and folk-lore; maps and guides-among them
several guides to Paris--only twenty-five hundred volumes in all); but
they are not the material of his magic. His work was not legerdemain,
skilful manipulation, but recreation, and he found the aureate earth in
the forests, on the prairies, and in documents contemporary to his theme.

In a cabinet (bearing in its carving suggestions of the fleur-de-lis) in
the rooms of the Massachusetts Historical Society, I found some of this
precious material, also bequeathed by the historian. Its nature is
suggested in the preface to his "Montcalm and Wolfe." "A very large
amount," he says, "of unpublished material has been used in its
preparation, consisting for the most part of documents copied from the
archives and libraries of France and England. The papers copied for the
present work ["Montcalm and Wolfe"] in France alone, exceed six thousand
folio pages of manuscript, additional and supplementary to the 'Paris
Documents' procured for the State of New York.... The copies made in
England form ten volumes, besides many English documents consulted in the
original manuscript. Great numbers of autograph letters, diaries, and
other writings of persons engaged in the war have also been examined on
this [_i.e._, American] side of the Atlantic."

But even these were as the dry bones in the valley which Ezekiel saw, till
he touched these scattered fragments with his genius.

The process employed by the blind workman is described by Frothingham, one
of his friends: "The manuscripts were read over to him, slowly, one by
one. First the chief points were considered, then the details of the story
were gone over carefully and minutely. As the reading went on, he made
notes, first of essential and then of non-essential. After this he welded
everything together, made the narrative completely his own, infused into
it his own fire, quickened it by his own imagination, and made it as it
were a living experience, so that his books read like personal
reminiscences." [Footnote: "Memoirs of Francis Parkman," in "Proceedings
Massachusetts Historical Society, 1892-4," series 2, 8:555.]

In a book of Parkman memorabilia of various kinds which I found in the
Harvard Library, I happened one day upon a few scraps of paper which
furnish illustration of the first steps of the process--paper on which
were notes made in Parkman's own hand:

"Deserts covered with bones of buffalo and elk"; "No sign of man from Fort
Union to Fort Mackenzie"; "White clay, cactus dried up, grasshoppers";
"Poplars,--wild roses,--gooseberries"; "prairie dogs,--heat,--aridity";
"extraordinary castellated mountains, stone walls,--etc. above Fort
Union"; "in 1832 Blackfeet are said to have killed 58 whites, three years
before, 80"; "Blackfeet do not eat dogs--Blackfeet Societies--beaver traps
lent to Blackfeet"; "wood near Fort Clark chiefly poplar"; "fossils--
terres mauvaises"; "maize cultivated by Mandans"; "catching the war
eagle"; "Mandans etc. agricultural tribes"; "wolf-pits described";
"Exceptional cold Ft. Clark"; "Wolf attacked three women;--wooden carts no
iron"; "Barren Mts. little dells with water,--gooseberries, strawberries,
currants, very few trees, mad river."

But these and many other notes on scraps of blue paper in his hand have
significance only in their translation, transfusion into the color or
detail of some of his wonderful pictures. Somewhere in his books I felt
certain, when reading these notes, I should find those poplars growing on
the plains with wild roses and gooseberry bushes not far away; some day I
should come to the barren mountains and the dells with water, or should
hear the roaring of the mad river and witness the catching of the war-
eagle. Indeed, some of these very notes had entered, as I found, into the
description of that lonely journey of the brothers Verendrye as they
passed through the bad lands (terres mauvaises of the notes), where the
clay is sometimes white as chalk and the barren, castellated bluffs,
"carved into fantastic shapes by the storms," stand about.

"For twenty days the travellers saw no human being [see note above], so
scanty was the population of these plains. Game, however, was abundant.
Deer sprang from the tall reed grass of the river bottoms; buffalo tramped
by in ponderous columns, or dotted the swells of the distant prairie with
their grazing thousands; antelope approached, with the curiosity of their
species, to gaze at the passing horsemen, then fled like the wind; and as
they neared the broken uplands towards the Yellowstone, they saw troops of
elk (later their bones) and flocks of mountain-sheep. Sometimes, for miles
together, the dry plain was studded thick with the earthen mounds that
marked the burrows of the curious marmots, called prairie dogs from their
squeaking bark. Wolves, white and gray, howled about the camp at night,
and their cousin, the coyote, seated in the dusk of evening upright on the
grass, with nose turned to the sky, saluted them with a complication of
yelpings, as if a score of petulant voices were pouring together from the
throat of one small beast." [Footnote: Parkman, "Half-Century of
Conflict," 2 23, 24.]

It is impossible to know how much of this came from his own actual seeing
(for in his journey over the Oregon trail he had passed near the trail of
the Verendrye brothers) and how much came from those scraps of color and
incident picked up in his blindness from varied sources; nor is it of
consequence, except as it connotes something of the quality and character
of his genius, for it is all accurate and the brave brothers Verendrye
move as living men across it. He was able to revivify a dusty document as
well as a personal experience. "To him," as Mr. Barrett Wendell said out
of an intimate acquaintance with him and his work, "a document of whatever
kind,--a state paper, a Jesuit 'relation,' the diary of a provincial
soldier, the record of a Yankee church,--was merely the symbol of a fact
which had once been as real as his own hardships among the western
Indians, or as the lifetime of physical suffering, which never bent his
will." [Footnote: "Proceedings American Academy of Arts and Sciences,
1893-4," 29:439.] I have never read "The Oregon Trail" with the same keen
enthusiasm as his other books, largely, I think, because it is a mere
report of personal adventure and not a composition fused of his
imagination. It is an excellent photograph by the side of a master's
painting.

But all this accuracy of detail, this revivifying of dead Indians,
knights, voyageurs and soldiers, this painting of prairie, forest, and
mountain, was not in itself to put him among the world's great historians.
And, indeed, there are those who, appreciating the artist's skill, have
expressed regret that he gave this skill to no great theme. It is as if he
were (they would doubtless say) writing of the labors of sacrificing
missionaries in Africa, or of colonial administration in Indo-China, or of
forest adventure along the Amazon. In the Boston Public Library I found
that every work of his had duplicate copies in the boys' department. (And
how great the reading is to this day is intimated by my inability one
evening to get a copy of "Pontiac's War," though there were several copies
in the possession of the library. A reserve had finally to be called in.)
But I should say that this double classification intimated rather the
genuine human interest of his story, appealing alike to men and to boys
(as the greatest of human writings do)--a work "for all mankind and for
all time."

But I should go beyond this. His books are not merely of elemental
entertainment. He has seized the most fundamental, far-reaching, and
consequential of themes. He found going on in his forest, of which he set
out to write, not merely flame-lighted scalpings and official rapacities
and picturesque maraudings and quixotic pageants and the like. His theme
was even greater than the mere gathering of all these raids and rapacities
and maraudings and pageants into an informed racial, national struggle for
the possession of a continent. It was nothing less than the grappling, out
on the frontier of the world, between two principles of organized human
life. The forests are so demanding, the incidents so stirring in
themselves, that many have doubtless missed the high theme that expressed
itself there. But that theme possessed its author, and it possesses every
sensitive reader as some fateful, recurring, tragic melody in an opera
full of diverting incident and picturesque figures.

Parkman is more likely to keep his generalizations within the overture,
but frequently one gives summary to an act or scene, so that even he who
comes for entertainment can hardly miss the significance of it all;
though, as Mr. Wendell has said, to borrow again from his, the best, brief
tribute: "Parkman was very sparing of generalization, of philosophic
comment," whether from overconsciousness or from the intrusion of his
malady which forbade long-continued thought. He made the course of events
carry its own philosophy.

Several noble and notable generalizations have, however, already thrust
themselves into these chapters to illustrate his appreciation of the
loftiness of his theme, his candor, and his genuine sympathy with those to
whose ill-fated heroism he gave such "precious testimony."

One has only to associate with the persistent, clearly outlined purpose of
a half-century a realization of the completeness of its achievement to be
stirred, as by the victory not of a fortuitously reckless assault but of a
long, carefully planned campaign.

Among his papers (in the fleur-de-lis cabinet of which I have spoken)
there are the first prophecies: two maps of the Lake George (Champlain)
region drawn by him on the inside of a red portfolio cover, marked 1842,
when he was nineteen years old; and next an odd-covered blank book in
which he began his note-making on the "Old French War," with such notes as
these: "Rights of the two nations"; "When did Marquette make his
discoveries?" "When did La Salle settle?" "Had not the French a right both
of prior discovery and prior settlement?" "The English never settled";
"The letters patent to Louisiana are preposterous, perhaps, but not more
so than the English claim from coasts back of the Mississippi"; "The first
blood was spilt by Washington. Jumonville would seem to have been sent
with peaceful intentions. His orders charged him to attack the French."

The title is written in a strong hand, but before he has half filled the
little book he makes entry that the "French War" is laid aside, for the
time, for the history of "Pontiac's War," and thus the latter part of this
thin note-book grew into "The Conspiracy of Pontiac," and that in turn
became sequel to the whole series of which it also was the promise, a
series of books so closely related that John Fiske speaks of them as "one
book."

The scope, to be sure, is a restricted one. He has two great wildernesses
to cover, but it is a century and a half after the epic narrative begins
before enough people enter to prevent one from keeping track of all of
them. It is as if he were writing the history of man, from the last day of
creation forward, starting with a few transmigrant souls still under the
control of their oversea existence. He begins at the beginning, with not
even a twilight zone of tradition and with a stage "far more primitive
than that which is depicted in the Odyssey or even Genesis." Cartier's
route is as well known as that of the steamship that sailed yesterday
through the "Square Gulf," if the ice permitted, and the incidents of his
first days beyond the gates of the first wilderness have been as
accurately recorded, to say the least, as are yesterday's events yonder in
the morning's papers here. And when his story ends, there are not as many
people in the two great valleys along the St. Lawrence and the Mississippi
as in a good-sized city to-day. But none the less, as I have said, are the
forces (fighting in and through these few representatives of civilization)
age-old and world-important. Never has historian had such fascinating
theme--such "epic theme," says Fiske--"save when Herodotus told the story
of Greece and Persia, or when Gibbon's pages resounded with the marshalled
hosts through a thousand years of change." And Parkman met one of what
Lowell calls "the convincing tests of genius" in the choice of this
subject.

When John Fiske said at the Harvard exercises in memory of Parkman that he
was one of the world's greatest historians, I subtracted something because
of the occasion and the nearness of view. But a year later he is saying of
Parkman's work, in a critical review: "Strong in its individuality and
like to nothing besides, it clearly belongs, I think, among the world's
few masterpieces of the highest rank, along with the works of Herodotus,
Thucydides, and Gibbon." [Footnote: _Atlantic Monthly_, 73:674; "A Century
of Science and Other Essays," p. 264.]

There will never be such a story to write again, for the frontier of
forest and prairie has disappeared. It is now in the midst of cities where
civilizations grapple in their smoke and turmoil. So shall we hold even
more precious his gift and thank Heaven for "sending us such a scholar,
such an artist, such a genius before it was too late to catch the fleeting
light and fix it upon immortal canvas."

Among the writings of Francis Parkman there are a few pages--known not
even to a score of his readers, I suppose--which might very well be
printed in summary of his great work--though they find no place in any
volume--for the symbol they carry of his achievement. These few pages make
a leaflet--a reprint of a paper contributed to the _Botanical Bulletin_ in
1878 by "Francis Parkman, late Professor of Horticulture at the Bussey
Institution," and entitled "The Hybridization of Lilies." In this brief
paper is related the story of Parkman's own attempts, extending through
seven years, to combine certain well-established varieties of lilies, and
especially two superb lilies--the "Speciosum" (_Lancifolium_) and the
"Auratum,"--the pollen of the latter being carried to the deanthered
flowers of the former. The patient, anxious, exquisite care with which he
carried on these experiments suggests the infinite pains with which he
gathered and classified and sifted and weighed his historical material
(his material of "France Speciosum" and of "France Auratum"). The result
of his floral experiment, the wonderfully beautiful flower which he
produced, described in a London horticultural magazine as the "grandest
flowering plant yet introduced into our gardens," and known as the "Lilium
Parkmanni," is suggestive of his achievement in so depicting and defining
that civilization which is symbolized by the lily, the fleur-de-lis, in
its strange, wild, highly colored flowering on the prairies and by the
rivers of Nouvelle France, as to make it for all time identified with his
memory and name. He lived among roses of his own growing, through his
later invalid years, in the outskirts of Boston. He even wrote a book
about roses. But his peculiar triumph (the one flower that lingers in
gardens carrying a memory of him) is a "magnificent" lily. And though he
lived amid the heritages of the English, in the new continent, with fair
mind and most acute and industrious, he has preserved the hybrid heritages
of the French spirit in the American regions--heritages that, save for his
research lighted by imagination, might never have blossomed in the pages
of history.





End of Project Gutenberg's The French in the Heart of America, by John Finley





This eBook was produced by Michelle Shepard, Juliet Sutherland,
Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team





FLEURS DE LYS

AND

OTHER POEMS.


BY

ARTHUR WEIR, B.A. Sc.


            He only is a poet who can find
              In sorrow happiness, in darkness light,
            Love everywhere; and lead his fellow-kind
              By flowery paths towards life's sunny height.




TO

WILLIAM AND ELIZABETH SOMERVILLE WEIR,

HIS
MOST SEVERE AND KINDLY CRITICS,

THIS VOLUME
IS LOVINGLY DEDICATED BY THEIR SON.




PREFACE


The name FLEURS DE LYS has been chosen for the Canadian Poems in the
early portion of this book, because the scenes and incidents they
describe belong to the Monarchial, or Fleur de Lys, period of France in
Canada. The royal crest during the  seventeenth century is depicted
upon the cover.

Many of these poems have already appeared in the columns of the
Carnival and Jubilee _Star_, the Toronto _Week_, the
_University Gazette_, and the Montreal _Gazette_, as well as
in the Daily and Weekly _Star_, and it is the kindly reception
which they met with that has led the author to publish them in this
more permanent form.

Some of the poems were written at twenty, and the latest at twenty-
three, so that the author hopes the critics will consider this volume
rather as a bud than as a flower, and will criticize it with the view
to aiding him to avoid faults in the future rather than to censuring
him for errors of the present and past.

To Mr. George Murray, of this city, the author is deeply indebted for
encouragement when encouragement was most needed, and for much valuable
assistance in the selection and revision of these verses for
publication.

It is hoped that the notes at the end of this book will throw
sufficient light upon the verses to make them perfectly intelligible to
the reader.

December, 1st, 1887.




CONTENTS


Ode for the Queen's Jubilee


FLEURS DE LYS.

The Captured Flag
Pere Brosse
L'Ordre de Bon Temps
Champlain
The Priest and the Minister
Pilot
The Secret of the Saguenay
Jules' Letter
The Oak
Nelson's Appeal for Maisonneuve


RED ROSES.

To One Who Loves Red Roses
Three Sonnets
Long Ago
At Chateauguay
A Birthday
The Lovers
The Sea Shell
A January Day
Remembrance
In Absence
Love Guides Us
The Lover's Appeal


OTHER POEMS.

The Spirit Wife
Rhodope's Shoe
Hope and Despair
Carlotta
Equality
Lachine
De Salaberry at Chateauguay
Tennyson
At Rainbow Lake
The Race
My Treasure
Welcoming the New Year
A Greater Than He
Life in Nature
Winter and Summer
Dauntless
A Child's Kiss
The Grave and the Tree
A Mother's Jewels
Notes




_FLEURS DE LYS AND OTHER POEMS_.


ODE FOR THE QUEEN'S JUBILEE.
1837-1887.


I

_Sailor William is dead. And now
  Toll the great bells disconsolate.
    Let the maiden have time for tears
Ere you set on her gentle brow
  England's glittering crown of state.
    Heavy burden for eighteen years.
Grant the maiden some weeping space
Ere on her youthful brow you place
      England's crown.
Once her stately head it presses,
Fifty years it must rest on her tresses
      Till their brown
Turns to white beneath King Time's caresses--
      Grant her weeping space._


II.

  Set the crown on the maiden's brow,
    And silence the bells disconsolate.
  Peal! Ye loud joy-bells, now;
    Over city and wold let your echoes reverberate.
Peal! for the crowning of smiles and the death of tears,
Peal! for the crowning of hopes and the death of fears,
Peal! for a Queen who shall rule us for fifty years.
The maiden is crowned with her glorious crown,
    Heavy with care;
Yet it shall never burden her down
    Into despair.
We will watch over her with our love,
    And our loyalty prove.
      We will bear, each, his share
Of the worry, grief, and pain
That may seek to mar her reign.


III.

Blow! ye silvery bugles, over the sunny land,
  Our Queen has yielded to love.
Ring out with merry clangor, O ye bells!
Ye mountains! give the laughing bells reply.

_Hark! how the joyous tumult sinks and swells,
  And beats against the sky
    In melody!
Mark how the billows of the mighty sea
Toss their white arms in glee,
  And race along the strand,
Joining their voices with the symphony!
  Our Queen has yielded to love.
    Blow! silvery bugles blow!
      That all may know._

IV.

_Toll! toll! ye deep-mouthed bells,
  Answer! each thundering gun.
Your cadence sadly tells
  Of a great life-work done.
Death rules this changing earth,
  Through royal halls he stalks,
And with an awful mirth
  Man's noblest efforts mocks.
He stills the busy brain,
  Tears loving souls apart,
And leaves alone to reign_

      _A Queen with empty heart.
    Upon her lonely throne
      She sits, and ever weeps,
    For him who, once her own,
      Now wed to heaven sleeps.
Albert has fallen, conquered by Death's dart,
A shadow lies across her anguished heart.
She dwells in loneliness that none can gauge;
In grief that only heaven can assuage.
She trembles and her soul would fain depart,
And beats with tireless wings against its cage.
    Oh! live for us, dear Queen,
    Thou who for years hast been
    Our leader in all good,
    Live! Live for us, O Queen!_


V.

_Ring! ye loud bells, in deep, triumphal tone,
  And bind a zone
Around this earth of glorious melody,
  Till land and sea
Awaken and, rejoicing, answer ye.
Ah! noble Queen! who lookst around thee now
  On this great nation.
Thy life, since first the circlet touched thy brow,
  Was consecration
Of self to us. Through half a century
From darkness into light we followed thee.
The poet, patriot, warrior, statesman, sage
  Have given thee service long,
Lending their fiery youth and thoughtful age
  To make thy sceptre strong,
And in the never-ending march of man
To higher things, still England leads the van._


VI.

In fifty years what change! The world is bound
  In close communion, and a sentence flies
O'er half the earth ere yet the voice's sound
  Upon the calm air dies.
Behold at England's feet her offspring pour
  Their bounteous store;
To her each yields
  The first fruits of its virgin fields;
Each country throws
  Its hospitable portals open wide
To the great tide
That from the dense-thronged mother country flows.
  New homes arise
By rivers once unknown, among whose reeds
The wild fowl fed, but now no longer dwells.
  No more the bison feeds
Upon the prairie, for the once drear plain
Laughs in the sun and waves its golden grain.
  By a slender chain
Ocean is linked to ocean, and the hum
Of labor in the wilderness foretells
The greatness of a nation yet to come.
  In Southern seas
Another nation grows by slow degrees,
In dreamy India, under tropic sun,
Two hundred millions own an Empress' sway,
  And day by day.
  New territories won
Shed lustre on our Queen's half century.




FLEURS DE LYS.


THE CAPTURED FLAG.

Loudly roared the English cannon, loudly thundered back our own,
Pouring down a hail of iron from their battlements of stone,
Giving Frontenac's proud message to the clustered British ships:
"I will answer your commander only by my cannons' lips."
Through the sulphurous smoke below us, on the Admiral's ship of war,
Faintly gleamed the British ensign, as through cloudwrack gleams a
  star,
And above our noble fortress, on Cape Diamond's rugged crest--
Like a crown upon a monarch, like an eagle in its nest--
Streamed our silken flag emblazoned with the royal fleur de lys,
Flinging down a proud defiance to the rulers of the sea.
As we saw it waving proudly, and beheld the crest it bore,
Fiercely throbbed our hearts within us, and with bitter words we swore,
While the azure sky was reeling at the thunder of our guns,
We would strike that standard never, while Old France had gallant sons.

Long and fiercely raged the struggle, oft our foes had sought to land,
But with shot and steel we met them, met and drove them from the
  strand,
Though they owned them not defeated, and the stately Union Jack,
Streaming from the slender topmast, seemed to wave them proudly back.
Louder rose the din of combat, thicker rolled the battle smoke,
Through whose murky folds the crimson tongues of thundering cannon
  broke,
And the ensign sank and floated in the smoke-clouds on the breeze,
As a wounded, fluttering sea-bird floats upon the stormy seas.
While we looked upon it sinking, rising through the sea of smoke,
Lo! it shook, and bending downwards, as a tree beneath a stroke,
Hung one moment o'er the river, then precipitously fell
Like proud Lucifer descending from high heaven into hell.
As we saw it flutter downwards, till it reached the eager wave,
Not Cape Diamond's loudest echo could have matched the cheer we gave;
Yet the English, still undaunted, sent an answering echo back:
Though their flag had fallen conquered, still their fury did not slack,
And with louder voice their cannon to our cannonade replied,
As their tattered ensign drifted slowly shoreward with the tide.

There was one who saw it floating, and within his heart of fire,
Beating in a Frenchman's bosom, rose at once a fierce desire,
That the riven flag thus resting on the broad St. Lawrence tide
Should, for years to come, betoken how France humbled England's pride.
As the stag leaps down the mountain, with the baying hounds in chase,
So the hero, swift descending, sought Cape Diamond's rugged base,
And within the water, whitened by the bullets' deadly hail,
Springing, swam towards the ensign with a stroke that could not fail.
From the shore and from the fortress we looked on with bated breath,
For around him closer, closer, fell the messengers of death,
And as nearer, ever nearer, to the floating flag he drew,
Thicker round his head undaunted still the English bullets flew.
He has reached and seized the trophy. Ah! what cheering rent the skies,
Mingled with deep English curses, as he shoreward brought his prize!
Slowly, slowly, almost sinking, still he struggled to the land,
And we hurried down to meet him, as he reached the welcome strand.
Proudly up the rock we bore him, with the flag that he had won,
And that night the English vessels left us with the setting sun.




PERE BROSSE.


He had been with the Indians all the day,
  But sat with us at eve,
Chatting and laughing in his genial way,
  Till came the hour to leave;
And then he rose, we with him, for we loved
  Our good old parish priest,
Who all his lifetime in our midst had moved
  At death-bed and at feast.

He raised his hand for silence, and each head
  Was bowed as though in prayer,
Expectant of his blessing, but instead
  He stood in silence there.
Thrice he essayed to speak, and thrice in vain,
  And then his voice came back,
Vibrating in a deep, triumphal strain
  That it was wont to lack.

"My children, we must part. My task is done.
  God calls me to His rest,
And though my labors seem scarce yet begun,
  Surely He knoweth best.
I have grown old in laboring for Him,
  My hair with age is white,
My footsteps feeble, and my eyesight dim--
  But all shall change to-night.

"When strikes the hour of twelve, my weary soul
  On earth shall cease to dwell,
As sign of which the chapel bell shall toll
  Its slow funereal knell.
Then seek me, if you will, and you shall find
  Upon the altar stair
The prison-house my soul will leave behind,
  Kneeling as though in prayer.

"Seek, then, Pere Compain, on the Isle aux Coudres,
  Nor fear the rising gale,
For Heaven will guide you through the angry flood,
  And it shall not prevail.
He will be waiting for you on the sands,
  Amid the morning gloom,
To be your comrade, and, with kindly hands
  Consign me to my tomb."

He ceased, and left us, as though turned to stone,
  All motionless and still:
And faintly fell his footsteps, as alone
  He slowly climbed the hill.
Then we awoke, and all so wondrous seemed,
  His words so strange at best,
We almost fancied we had slept and dreamed
  That he had been our guest.

We turned unto our merriment anew,
  With some kind thoughts for him;
Yet as the hour of midnight nearer drew,
  And waxed the hearth fire dim,
A silence fell upon us, and in fear
  We stopped and held our breath,
As though more clearly through the gloom to hear
  The promised knell of death.

There had been something in his face that night
  That thrilled our hearts with fear,
An undefinable, mysterious light,
  Which told us Heaven was near.
He had a deeper lustre in his eyes,
  His smile had seemed more bright,
Till, looking in his face, all Paradise
  Seemed opened to our sight.

Soon chimed the clock. And scarcely had it ceased,
  Than tolled the chapel bell,
As though for some long-suffering soul released,
  Its slow funereal knell,
And on its ebon wings the rising gale
  Swept landward from the sea,
And mingled with the chapel bell's long wail
  Its own sad symphony.

We found him lying lifeless, as he said,
  Before the altar, prone,
Nor laid our sinful hands upon the dead,
  But left him there alone,
And launched our frail canoe upon the tide,
  Not marvelling to behold
Before our prow the billows fall aside,
  Like the Red Sea of old.

On every hand the screaming waters flung
  Their great, white arms on high,
And over all the thundering storm-clouds hung
  And battled in the sky.
Yet fearless we sailed on, until when day
  Broke, panting, through the night,
The fertile Isle aux Coudres before us lay,
  Its beach with breakers white.

And there, upon that tempest-beaten strand,
  Waiting, Pere Compain stood
And beckoned to us with uplifted hand
  Across the raging flood.
No need to tell our errand, for that night
  Pere Brosse had sought his cell,
And told him all, then faded from his sight,
  Breathing a kind farewell.




L'ORDRE DE BON TEMPS.


When Champlain with his faithful band
  Came o'er the stormy wave
To dwell within this lonely land,
  Their hearts were blithe as brave;
And Winter, by their mirth beguiled,
  Forgot his sterner mood,
As by the prattling of a child
  A churl may be subdued.

Among the company there came
  A dozen youths of rank,
Who in their eager search for fame
  From no adventure shrank;
But, with the lightness of their race
  That hardship laughs to scorn,
Pursued the pleasures of the chase
  'Till night from early morn.

And soon their leader, full of mirth.
  And politic withal--
Well knowing that no spot on earth
  Could hold them long in thrall,
Unless into their company,
  Its duties and its sport,
Were introduced the pageantry
  And etiquette of court--

Enrolled them in a titled band,
  _L'Ordre de Bon Temps_ named,
First knighthood's grade for which this land
  Of Canada is famed.
Each one in turn Grand Master was--
  At close of day released--
His duty to maintain the laws,
  And furnish forth a feast.

Filled with a pardonable pride
  In nobles wont to dwell,
Each with his predecessor vied
  In bounty to excel,
And thus it was the festive board
  With beaver, otter, deer,
And fish and fowl was richly stored,
  Throughout the changing year.

At mid-day--for our sires of old
  Dined when the sun was high--
To where the cloth was spread, behold
  These merry youths draw nigh,
Each bearing on a massy tray
  Some dainty for the feast,
While the Grand Master leads the way,
  Festivity's high priest!

Then seated round the banquet board,
  Afar from friends and home,
They drank from goblets freely poured
  To happier days to come.
And once again, in story, shone
  The sun, that erst in France
Was wont, in days long past and gone,
  Amid the vines to dance.

Still later, when the sun had set,
  And round the fire they drew
To sing, or tell a tale ere yet
  Too old the evening grew,
He who had ruled them for the day
  His sceptre did resign,
And drink to his successor's sway
  A brimming cup of wine.




CHAMPLAIN.

Would that with the bold Champlain,
And his comrades staunch and true,
I had crossed the stormy main,
Golden visions to pursue:
  And had shared
  Their lot, and dared
Fortune with that hardy crew!

Thus I murmur, as I close
Parkman, day being long since sped,
Yet in vain I seek repose,
For the stirring words I read
  In the sage's
  Learned pages,
Still are ringing in my head.

All the perils of the sea.
All the dangers of the land,
Of the waves that hungrily
Leapt round Champlain's stalwart band,
  Of the foes,
  That round him rose,
Numerous as the ocean sand.

Every trial he underwent,
Winter's famine and disease,
Weeks in dreary journey spent,
Battle, treason, capture--these
  Sweep my mind,
  As sweeps the wind,
Sighing, through the forest trees.

Wandering through the tangled brakes,
Where the treacherous Indians hide,
Launching upon crystal lakes,
Stemming Uttawa's dark tide;
  Still my sight,
  Pursues his flight
Through the desert, far and wide.

With the sunlight in his face,
I behold him as he plants
At Cape Diamond's rugged base,
In the glorious name of France,
  Yon fair town
  That still looks down
On the river's broad expanse.

I behold him as he hurls
Proud defiance at the foe,
And the fleur-de-lys unfurls
High o'er Admiral Kirkt below,
  Till he slips,
  With all his ships,
Down the river, sad and slow.

And I see him lying dead,
On that dreary Christmas day,
While the priests about his bed
Weeping kneel, and softly pray,
  As the bell
  Rings out its knell
For a great soul passed away!

Yes, a gallant man was he,
That brave-hearted, old French tar,
Whose great name through history
Shines on us, as from afar
  Through the gray
  Of dawning day
Gleams the glorious Morning Star!




THE PRIEST AND THE MINISTER.


From Old France once sailed a vessel,
Bearing hearts that came to nestle
In Acadia's breast and wrestle
  With its Winters cold.
Priests and ministers it bore,
Who had sought that desert shore,
Filled with ardor to restore
  Lost sheep to the fold.

Yet though on such errand wending,
They debated without ending,
Each his cherished faith defending
  Morning, noon and night.
Never on the balmy air
Heavenward rose united prayer,
Stout Champlain was in despair
  At the godless sight.

Late and early they debated,
Never ceasing, never sated,
Till the very sailors hated
  Them and their debates.
Not at dinner were they able,
Even, to forego their Babel,
But, disputing, smote the table
  Till they jarred the plates.

Tossed about by the gigantic
Billows of the wild Atlantic,
Still they argued, until, frantic
  With religious zeal,
Tonsured priests and Huguenots
From discussions came to blows,
Sieur de Monts had no repose
  From their fierce appeal.

Oft the minister came crying,
How, while he had been replying
To the cure and denying
  Something he had said,
That the latter fell on him
And, with more than priestly vim,
Beat him, body, head and limb--
  Beat him till he fled.

Days passed by, and then one morning,
While the sunbeams were adorning
Sea and sky, the lookout's warning
  Echoed from the mast;
And, before the close of day,
Safe the little vessel lay,
Anchored in a sheltered bay:
  Land was reached at last.

But, within their cabins lying,
Priest and Minister were dying,
To their future haven nighing,
  Ere the dawn they died,
And within the forest shade
Soon a narrow grave was made,
Where the two were gently laid,
  Sleeping side by side.

That same evening, as they rested
Round the fire, the sailors jested
Of the dead, how they contested
  All across the sea,
And a sailor, laughing said:
"Let us hope the reverend dead
Yonder in their narrow bed
  Manage to agree."




PILOT.


Merry Carlo, who runn'st at my heels
  Through the dense-crowded streets of the city,
In and out among hurrying wheels,
And whose run in the suburbs reveals
  Only scenes that are peaceful and pretty.

Raise to mine your intelligent face,
  Open wide your great brown eyes in wonder
While I tell how lived one of your race
Years ago in this now busy place--
  Ay, and ran at the heels of its founder.

Mistress Pilot, for that was her name,
  And you could not have called her a better,
Was a gallant and dutiful dame--
Since her breed is forgotten by Fame,
  For your sake I will call her a setter.

Pilot lived when _Ville Marie_ was young,
  And the needs of its people were sorest;
When the rifle unceasing gave tongue,
And the savage lay hidden among
  The Cimmerian shades of the forest;

When the hearts of frail women were steeled
  Not to weep for the dead and the dying;
When by night the fierce battle-cry pealed
And by day all who worked in the field
  Kept their weapons in readiness lying;

When full oft at the nunnery gate,
  As the darkness fell over the village,
Would a swart savage crouch and await,
With the patience of devilish hate,
  A chance to kill women, and pillage.

Every one had his duty to do,
  And our Pilot had hers like another,
Which she did like a heroine true,
At the head of a juvenile crew
  Of the same stalwart stuff as their mother.

In a body these keen-scented spies
  Used to roam through the forests and meadows,
And protect _Ville Marie_ from surprise,
Though its foes clustered round it like flies
  In a swamp, or like evening shadows.

Oftentimes in the heat of the day,
  Oftentimes through the mists of the morning,
Oftentimes to the sun's dying ray
There was heard her reechoing bay
  Pealing forth its brave challenge and warning.

And so nobly she labored and well,
  It was fancied--so runneth the story--
She had come down from heaven to dwell
Upon earth, and make war upon hell,
  For the welfare of man and God's glory.

"When her day's work was over, what then?"
  Well, my boy, she had one of your habits;
She would roam through the forest again,
But instead of bold hunting for men,
  Would amuse herself hunting jack rabbits.




_THE SECRET OF THE SAGUENAY._


Like a fragment of torn sea-kale,
Or a wraith of mist in the gale,
There comes a mysterious tale
  Out of the stormy past:
How a fleet, with a living freight,
Once sailed through the rocky gate
Of this river so desolate,
  This chasm so black and vast.

'Twas Cartier, the sailor bold,
Whose credulous lips had told
How glittering gems and gold
  Were found in that lonely land
How out of the priceless hoard
Within their rough bosoms stored,
These towering mountains poured
  Their treasures upon the strand.

Allured by the greed of gain,
Sieur Roberval turned again,
And sailing across the main,
  Passed up the St. Lawrence tide.
He sailed by the frowning shape
Of Jacques Cartier's Devil's Cape,
Till the Saguenay stood agape,
  With hills upon either side.

Around him the sunbeams fell
On the gentle St. Lawrence swell,
As though by some mystic spell
  The water was turned to gold;
But as he pursued, they fled,
Till his vessels at last were led
Where, cold and sullen and dead,
  The Saguenay River rolled.

Chill blew the wind in his face,
As, still on his treasure chase,
He entered that gloomy place
  Whose mountains in stony pride,
Still, soulless, merciless, sheer,
Their adamant sides uprear,
Naked and brown and drear,
  High over the murky tide.

No longer the sun shone bright
On the sails that, full and white,
Like sea gulls winging their flight,
  Dipped into the silent wave;
But shadows fell thick around,
Till feeling and sight and sound
In their awful gloom were drowned,
  And sank in a depthless grave.

Far over the topmost height
Great eagles had wheeled in flight,
But, wrapped in the gloom of night,
  They ceased to circle and soar:
Grim silence reigned over all,
Save that from a rocky wall
A murmuring waterfall
  Leapt down to the river shore.

O merciless walls of stone!
What happened that night is known
By you, and by you alone:
  Though the eagles unceasing scream,
How once through that midnight air,
For an instant a trumpet's blare,
And the voices of men in prayer,
  Arose from the murky stream.




_JULES' LETTER._

  MA CHERE,

Since the morning we parted
  On the slippery docks of Rochelle,
I have wandered, well nigh broken-hearted,
  Through many a tree-shadowed dell:
I've hunted the otter and beaver,
  Have tracked the brown bear and the deer,
And have lain almost dying with fever,
  While not a companion was near.

I've toiled in the fierce heat of summer
  Under skies like a great dome of gold,
And have tramped, growing number and number,
  In winter through snowstorm and cold.
Yet the love in my heart was far hotter,
  The fear of my soul far more chill,
As my thoughts crossed the wild waste of water
  To your little home on the hill.

But now Father Time in a measure
  Has reconciled me to my fate,
For I know he will bring my dear treasure
  Back into my arms soon or late.
And, besides, every evening, when, weary,
  I lie on my soft couch of pine,
Sleep wafts me again to my dearie,
  And your heart once more beats against mine.

You never have heard of such doings
  As those that are going on here;
We've nothing but weddings and wooings
  From dawn till the stars reappear.
For the king, gracious monarch, a vessel
  Has sent, bearing widows and maids
Within our rough bosoms to nestle,
  And make us a home in the glades.

They are tall and short, ugly and pretty,
  There are blondes and brunettes by the score:
Some silent and dull, others witty,
  And made for mankind to adore.
Some round as an apple, some slender--
  In fact--so he be not in haste--
Any man with a heart at all tender
  Can pick out a wife to his taste.

Now, darling, don't pout and grow jealous,
  I still am a bachelor free,
In spite of the governor's zealous
  And extra-judicial decree,
Commanding all men to be married
  In less than two weeks from this date,
And promising all who have tarried
  Shall feel the full strength of his hate:

In spite of his maddening order,
  That none in the country may trade
With the tribes on our side of the border,
  Who is not a benedict staid;
In spite of a clause, far the sorest,
  That none past his twentieth year,
And single, shall enter the forest
  On any pretext whatsoe'er.

Now, you know I was ever a rover,
  Half stifled by cities or towns,
Of nature--and you--a warm lover,
  Wooing both in despite of your frowns,
So you well may imagine my sorrow
  When fettered and threatened like this--
Oh! Marie, dear, pack up to-morrow,
  And bring me back freedom and bliss.

If you do not, who knows but some morning
  I'll waken and find a decree
Has been passed, that, without any warning,
  Has wedded some woman to me?
Oh! Marie, chere Marie, have pity;
  You only my woes can assuage;
I'm confined, till I wed, to the city,
  And feel like a bird in a cage.

Then come, nor give heed to the billows
  That tumble between you and Jules.
I know a sweet spot where lithe willows
  Bend over a silvery pool,
And there we will dwell, dear, defying
  Misfortune to tear us apart.
My darling, come to me, I'm dying
  To press you again to my heart.




_THE OAK._


Last of its race, beside our college
  There stands an Oak Tree, centuries old,
Which, could it voice its stores of knowledge,
  Might many a wondrous tale unfold.
It marked the birth of two fair towns,
  And mourned the cruel fate of one,
Yet still withstands grim Winter's frowns,
  And glories in the Summer sun.

Jacques Cartier passed, its branches under,
  Up yonder mount one autumn day,
And viewed, with ever-growing wonder,
  The scene that spread beneath him lay.
He was the first from Europe's shore
  To pass beneath the Oak Tree's shade,
The first whose vision wandered o'er
  Such boundless wealth of stream and glade.

Beneath his feet a little village
  Lay, like a field-lark in her nest,
Amid the treasures of its tillage,
  The maize in golden colors dressed.
Years passed; and when again there came
  A stranger to that peaceful spot,
Gone was the village and its name,
  Save by a few gray-heads, forgot.

But soon beneath the Oak, another,
  And sturdier village took its place;
One that the gentle Virgin mother
  Has kept from ruin by her grace.
She saved it from the dusky foes
  Who thirsted for its heroes' blood,
And when December waters rose
  About its walls she stilled the flood.

What noble deeds and cruel, stranger
  Than aught in fiction ere befell,
What weary years of war and danger
  That village knew, the Oak might tell.
Perchance, brave Dollard sat of yore
  Beneath its very shade, and planned
A deed should make for evermore
  His name a trumpet in the land.

Perchance, beneath its gloomy shadows
  De Vaudreuil sat that bitter day
When round about him, in the meadows
  Encamped, the British forces lay;
And as he wrote the fatal word
  That gave an Empire to the foe,
The Old Oak's noble heart was stirred
  With an unutterable woe.

The army of a hostile nation
  Once since hath entered _Ville Marie_,
But we avenged that desecration
  At Chrystler's farm and Chateauguay--
Peace! peace! 'tis cowardly to flout
  Our triumphs in a cousin's face:
That page was long since blotted out
  And Friendship written in its place.

Beloved of Time, the Old Oak flourished
  While at its foot its little charge,
An eaglet by a lion nourished,
  Grew mighty by the river marge;
Till, where the deer were wont to roam,
  There throbs to-day a nation's heart,
Of wealth and luxury the home,
  Of learning, industry and art.

No longer now the church bells' ringing
  Fills all the little town with life,
Its loud-tongued, startling clangor bringing
  Young men and aged to the strife.
No longer through the midnight air
  The savage hordes their war-cries peal,
As rushing from their forest lair
  They meet the brave defenders' steel.

Long has the reign of war been ended
  And Commerce crowned, whose stately fleet
Brings ever treasures vast and splendid
  To lay them humbly at her feet.
And now her eager sons to-day
  Have crossed the wild, north-western plain,
And made two oceans own her sway
  Held captive by a slender chain.

What further Time may be preparing
  For this fair town, the years will tell,
But while her sons retain their daring,
  Their zeal and honor, all is well.
Still, as the seasons come and go,
  Long may they spare the Old Oak Tree
In age as erst in youth to throw
  Protection over _Ville Marie_.




_NELSON'S APPEAL FOR MAISONNEUVE_.


"Silent I have stood and borne it, hoping still from year to year
That the pleading voice of justice you would some day wake to hear.
But beneath the soulless present you have sunk the glorious past,
Till I cannot bear it longer--you must learn the truth at last.
Shame upon you, shameless city, heart of this great land of yours,
That the world should say you care not if your founder's name endures!
Shame upon you, that no statue stands within your greatest square
To commemorate the hero who so often battled there!
Who long years ago sprang lightly from his pinnace to the beach,
And amid the virgin forests, spreading far as eye could reach,
Knelt and prayed, his people with him, while the prophet-priest
  foretold
How their growth should be as great as was the mustard seed's of old.

"Have you ceased to care, already, how that noble little band
Toiled, and fought with man and nature that their sons might
  rule the land,
Braving winter's cold and famine, summer's hot and stifling breath,
Danger in unnumbered forms; and in each form a cruel death,
Slain by skulking, coward foemen, now one moment in the corn
Singing some sweet Norman ditty, and the next one overborne?
Comrades, you have mothers, sisters, wives whom you would die to save,
Think, then, of the noble ones who claim your tribute to the brave;
Tender women, timid children, crouching at the barricade,
Pallid, trembling, stained with blood, yet nerved to give the
  needed aid,
Staunching deadly wounds, and wiping death-dews from a loved
  one's brow,
While their fathers, husbands, brothers fought and won they scarce
  knew how!

"Think of him among them toiling! hear his simple, trusting prayers!
See him, stern, unyielding, hopeful, with a thousand daily cares,
Sharing his companions' hardships, cheering there and chiding here,
With a head to rule them wisely, and a heart that knew not fear,
Sleeping with his armor on him and his weapons by his bed,
Ready ever for the foes that, like the shadows, came and fled.
See him fighting in the forest with a host that seeks his blood!
Hear him praying to the Virgin to restrain the rising flood,
Vowing that if she would heed him and preserve the little town,
He himself would bear a cross and plant it on Mount Royal's crown!
True crusader, in whose heart there never dwelt one sordid thought,
Guardian of the Virgin's city: this is he you honor not.

"Of our Queen a stately statue stands upon Victoria Square,
In its hand a wreath of laurel, in that wreath a tiny pair
Nesting year by year uninjured, heedless of the passing throng,
Living symbols of a reign that guards the weak from every wrong.
Loyalty upraised that statue, and were it the only one
That your city had erected still the deed were nobly done.
But to honor me, my brothers, one whose blood was never shed
On your soil or for your country, heaps but shame upon my head,
Not because you might not praise me--I may merit your esteem--
But because you place me first where he alone should stand supreme.
Shame upon you, to forget him and remember such as I!
Shame upon you, if your ears are heedless still to honor's cry!

"True, I tamed a haughty foeman at Trafalgar and the Nile,
But I had a nation's wealth and numbers at my back the while.
His was one long fight with scarcely seven score to do his will,
With a host of open foes and secret foes, more deadly still;
Foes in every bush and hollow, foes behind his monarch's throne,
Stabbing with one hand extended seemingly to clasp his own.
Yet he triumphed, and behold you! now a country growing fast,
With a glorious future breaking through the darkness of the past,
With a host of stout hearts toiling day and night to make you great,
And a glittering roll of heroes worthy of a mighty state.
Yet you cannot he a nation if your children never hear
Aught of those whose blood has won the land that they should hold most
dear.

"Can you wonder that the rains have beaten on my statued form?
Can you marvel that the winter shakes me with its fiercest storm?
Ah! not age it is but shame that makes me look so worn and old,
Makes me hang my head and tremble lest the bitter truth be told.
It is murmured by the maples, it is whispered by the wind,
Till I cannot but imagine it is heard by all mankind,
How your children, from gay boyhood until tottering age, behold
Gallant Maisonneuve forgotten and less worthy me extolled.
Oh! my comrades, if you love me, lighten the disgrace I feel,
Lend your ready hands to aid me, bend your hearts to my appeal:
Raise a statue to the founder of this great, historic town,
Chomedey de Maisonneuve, or pity me and take mine down."




RED ROSES.


_TO ONE WHO LOVES RED ROSES._


_
When our lives were in their springtime and our souls were in the bud,
  While the watchful world was silent, heeding not such childish love,
I poured forth for thee my heart-thoughts in a sweet, unthinking flood,
    Like a bird that carols freely in the grove.

And thou heardst them, half unconscious of the import that they bore,
  Till the years unlocked the chambers of thy stainless, maiden heart
And thou badest my songs be silent. They are silent evermore,
    But their echoes from my soul will not depart.

Yet the love songs that I lilted in those by-gone childhood days,
  Surely, them thou wilt not silence, let them be a memory dear
Of the happy days of childhood when unchecked I sang thy praise,
    While with thee I looked to heaven and deemed it here.
_




_THREE SONNETS._


THE MAIDEN.

The melody of birds is in her voice.
  The lake is not more crystal than her eyes,
  In whose brown depths her soul still sleeping lies.
With her soft curls the passionate zephyr toys,
And whispers in her ear of coming joys.
  Upon her breast red rosebuds fall and rise,
  Kissing her snowy throat, and, lover-wise,
Breathing forth sweetness till the fragrance cloys.

Sometimes she thinks of love, but, oftener yet,
  Wooing but wearies her, and love's warm phrase
    Repels and frightens her. Then, like the sun
At misty dawn, amid the fear and fret
    There rises in her heart at last some One,
  And all save love is banished by his rays.


THE WIFE.

There stands a cottage by a river side,
  With rustic benches sloping eaves beneath,
  Amid a scene of mountain, stream and heath.
A dainty garden, watered by the tide,
On whose calm breast the queenly lilies ride,
  Is bright with many a purple pansy wreath,
  While here and there forbidden lion's teeth
Uprear their golden crowns with stubborn pride.

See! there she leans upon the little gate,
  Unchanged, save that her curls, once flowing free,
    Are closely coiled upon her shapely head,
  And that her eyes look forth more thoughtfully.
Hark to her sigh! "Why tarries he so late?"
  But mark her smile! She hears his well-known tread.


THE MOTHER.

Beneath the eaves there is another chair,
  And a bruised lily lies upon the walk,
  With the bright drops still clinging to its stalk.
Whose careless hand has dropped its treasure there?
And whose small form does that frail settee bear?
  Whose are that wooden shepherdess and flock,
  That noble coach with steeds that never balk?
And why the gate that tops the cottage-stair?

Ah! he has now a rival for her love,
  A chubby-cheeked, soft-fisted Don Juan,
Who rules with iron hand in velvet glove
  Mother and sire, as only Baby can.
See! there they romp, the mother and her boy,
He on her shoulders perched and wild with joy.




LONG AGO.


The sun was swimming in the purple tide,
  His golden locks far floating on the sea,
When thou and I stole beachward, side by side,
  To say adieu and dream of joys to be.
The ebbing waves were whispering to the strand
  Amid the rocks a tender, sweet good-bye--
Ah! Well that night could we two understand
  What bitter grief was in their ceaseless cry.

The salt wind blew across the rank marsh grass,
  And laid its chilling, fingers on our pulse.
Sea nettles lay in many a shapeless mass,
  Half hidden, in the garnet hills of dulse.
The awkward crabs ran sideways from our path,
  And starfish sprawled face downward in the mud;
While, token of some bleak December's wrath,
  A wreck lay stranded high above the flood.

Few were our words. Love speaks from heart to heart,
  Nor needs that rude interpreter the tongue.
A few short hours and fate would bid us part,
  No more to stray the weedy rocks among.
We dared not trust our bitter thoughts to speech.
  For speech had raised the floodgates of our tears;
And so we walked in silence on the beach
  With the wild billows wailing in our ears.

How beautiful thou wast! Thy snowy gown,
  Whose rustle made sweet music, part revealed
Thy perfect form. Thy thoughtful eyes and brown,
  Beneath their drooping lashes half concealed,
Swam in a sea of tears. Thy tresses played
  Wild wanton with the wind, and kissed each cheek,
That flushed and paled, till one had well nigh said.
  Thy very blood did think and love and speak.

We sat within the shelter of the boat.
  That, buried in the sand for half its length,
Before the black-browed storm no more would float
  Nor like a gull defy the tempest's strength.
We spoke of pleasures past, of joys to be
  When we should meet again nor ever part.
I faltered forth my deathless love for thee,
  And in thy tearful silence read thy heart.

We looked upon the setting of the sun;
  We marked the summer twilight fade away;
We saw the star-worlds rising, one by one,
  And, stooping, kiss the surface of the bay.
Then sitting in the moonlight, each by each,
  I bent and kissed away thy lingering tears;
While ever plunged the billows on the beach
  And sent their dreary cadence to our ears.

The sun was swimming in the purple tide,
  His golden locks far floating on the sea,
When I stole forth yestre'en and sat beside
  The stranded wreck to dream again of thee.
Across my cheek I felt the marsh wind sweep,
  Still called the sea along the darkening shore,
Again the changeless stars began to peep;
  Naught save thyself had changed since days of yore.

O! happy period of my early youth!
  When Love was master, Reason but a slave,
When friends seemed heroes, woman crystal truth,
  Success the certain portion of the brave:
Come back, come back and give me ere I die
  The pure ideal of my life again!
In vain I plead.  Time's snowy ashes lie
  Cold on the hearth-stone of my aged brain.


_AT CHATEAUGUAY._

Memory gleams like a gem at night
  Through the gloom of to-day for me,
Bringing dreams of a summer bright
          At Chateauguay.

Summer sleeps in the ripening corn,
  Sunlight glitters on wood and lea,
Scent of flowers on the air is borne
          At Chateauguay.

Swiftly rushes the river by,
  Through the lake to the far-off sea,
Full of light as a maiden's eye,
          At Chateauguay.

Stands a house by the river side,
  (Weeds upspring where the hearth should be),
Only its tottering walls abide
         At Chateauguay.

Birds are singing the live-long day,
  Trembling, stoopeth an aspen tree.
Eager to hear what the wind will say
          At Chateauguay.

Still the sunlight around me falls,
  Still in fancy I seem to see
Two who stand on the crumbling walls
          At Chateauguay.

Once more wanders a brown-eyed maid
  Up the rough, country road with me,
Swinging her hat by its slender braid,
          At Chateauguay.

Once for a moment more we stay
   Under the tattling aspen tree--
Birds are sweetly lilting to-day
          At Chateauguay.

Tree, thou art dear for that sweet tryst,
  Dear, for the maiden's sake, to me
Is each spot that her feet have kissed
          At Chateauguay.




_A BIRTHDAY_.

Fifteen years have come and gone,
  Maiden since thy large, brown eyes
Opened first and looked upon
  Wintry English skies.

Fifteen treasure ships they were,
  Sailing on life's sunlit sea,
Bearing frankincense and myrrh
  Sent from heaven to thee:

Fifteen pilgrims, old and gray,
  Mounted upon moments fleet,
Who have seen thee but to lay
  Pleasure at thy feet:

Fifteen maids who, like a queen,
  Decked thee, Sweet, with beauty rare,
Till the world hath never seen
  Maiden half so fair.

And a sixteenth year to-day
  Brings a wreath of budding hours,
Saying: "Let not one decay;
  All must grow to flowers."

All have not the self-same needs;
  Loving smiles are life to some,
Others but by kindly deeds.
  To perfection come.

Some are quickened by a tear,
  Some by hopes and pleasures dead;
Take them, Bright Eyes, without fear,
  God is overhead.




_THE LOVERS._


With silken tresses floating free,
  A dark-eyed maiden wanders
Alone beside the murmuring sea,
  And of her lover ponders.

The fisher boats at anchor ride,
  The summer moon is waking;
Its beams of silver on the tide
  In rippling flakes are breaking.

The golden sands in murmurs speak,
  Her dainty foot that presses,
The salt sea wind upon her cheek
  Is lavish of caresses.

Afar upon a winding stream
  A youth is softly rowing;
Above his head the star-worlds gleam,
  And bright the moon is glowing.

The trees are swaying to and fro,
  Their shadowy boughs extending,
And leaf-born music, sweet and low,
  Is with the night-wind blending.

Far off, where meadows kiss the stream,
  A golden light is winking:
Upon the waves its soft rays gleam,
  From crest to hollow sinking.

Upon the youth and maiden's heart
  The lamp of love is shining,
Though distance holds them both apart,
  Their souls are intertwining.




_THE SEA SHELL._


'Tis a dainty shell, 'tis a fragile shell
  At my feet that the wild waves threw,
And I send it thee, that its lips may tell
  In thine ear that my heart is true.

It will tell thee how by the sunlit sea
  Pass the hours we were wont to share.
On its pearl-pink lips is a kiss for thee
  That my own loving lips placed there.

In a lady's hand it will snugly lie,
  'Tis as thin as a red rose-leaf,
Yet it holds the seagull's sorrowing cry,
  And the roar of the tide-lashed reef.

In its ivory cave, though the mighty sea
  May find room, and to spare, to move,
Yet this same sea shell that I send to thee
  Is too small to contain my love.




_A JANUARY DAY._


King Winter sleeps. His daughter, Spring,
  His sceptre steals away,
And, laughing, bids fair Nature bring
  For once a perfect day.

Bright glows the sun in azure skies,
  And balmy blows the breeze,
On gayer wing the sparrow flies,
  And softly sway the trees.

The seasons run like some great stream
  That to the ocean flows,
The waves that _here_ in sunshine gleam
  Bound _there_ in mountain snows:

And, as where darkling waters steal,
  Drear walls of rock between,
Yet in their depths a gem reveal
  That glows with sunny sheen.

So in this blustering month that bears
  The banner of the year,
Such days as this with balmy airs
  Amid the storms appear.

It is but meet that thy birthday
  Should open bright and warm,
And into darkness fade away
  Without a cloud or storm.




_REMEMBRANCE_


Alone I pace the path we walked last year.
  Dost thou remember it? Then everywhere
  The wheat-fields shimmered in the summer glare,
But now the moonbeams sparkle, silver clear,
On swollen stream and meadows dun and drear,
  While, with the myriad blossoms that they bear,
  The cherry trees perfume the evening air,
And gaunt and cold the ruined house stands near.

The aspens whisper to the passing breeze.
  I hear the night-hawk's scream, the pipe of frogs,
  The baying of the distant village dogs,
The lapping waves, the rustle of the trees.
  And every sound is musical to me,
  For every sound is a sweet song of thee.




_IN ABSENCE._


Sleep, dearest, sleep beside the murmuring sea;
Sleep, dearest, sleep, and bright dreams compass thee.
My sleepless thoughts a guard of love shall be
Around thy couch and bid thee dream of me.
        Sleep, Bright Eyes, sleep.

Sleep, dearest, sleep, the slumber of the pure;
Sleep, dearest, sleep, in angels' care secure.
Evil itself thy beauty would allure
To cease from ill and make thy joyance sure.
        Sleep, Bright Eyes, sleep.

Sleep, dearest, sleep; in slumber thou art mine;
Sleep, dearest, sleep; our souls still intertwine.
Yon radiant star that on thy couch doth shine
Bears from my lips a kiss to lay on thine.
        Sleep, Bright Eyes, sleep.




_LOVE GUIDES US._


Love guides our bark, and we have naught to fear.
  We are the world ourselves, and as we glide
Upon the stream of life, if Love but steer,
  We care not how tempestuous the tide.

Thy head leans on my shoulder, and my arm
  Is round thee clasped. Thine eyes upturn to mine,
So full of faith the future feels their charm
  Blunting Fate's dart that threatens joy of thine.

O Love! thy tresses wind about my sense,
  Thy glances melt my soul, and thy ripe lips
Seem morning roses, red and dewy, whence
  The bee of love a draught of nectar sips.

Float on, float on upon the crystal tide,
  Our company these snowy swans that seem
Our mirrored souls, pure love personified--
  Float on, nor ever waken from our dream.




_THE LOVER'S APPEAL._


Tell me when you'll wed me?
  Sweetest, name the day:
Hope has well nigh fled me,
  Joy has slipped away.
Dearest, why this strange delay?
Must I sigh till we are gray?
  With a smile,
  "Wait awhile,
We are young," you say.

Do you know the reason
  Why the nightingale
Through the drear night season
  Pipes her tuneful tale?
She was, once, like you, a maid,
Who her wedding day delayed,
  And her swain,
  All in vain,
For her favor prayed.

She had been a maiden
  Fair to look upon,
Sweet as breezes laden
  With the scent of dawn.
But her lover prayed that she
Rest not till eternity.
  Heaven heard,
  And this bird,
She was doomed to be.

Can you read the moral,
  Of this mournful tale?
Sweetheart, if we quarrel,
  To a nightingale
I will change you, though I weep,
You shall sing and never sleep.
  With the owl
  You shall prowl
Where the shades lie deep.

Tell me when you'll marry;
  Darling, name the day:
Do not longer tarry,
  Life slips fast away.
Do not, like the nightingale,
Live your harshness to bewail.
    At your feet
    I entreat--
Let my love prevail.




OTHER POEMS.


_THE SPIRIT WIFE._


THE SACRIFICE.


Rabbi Ben Horad was a learned man,
  Of gentle ways, who taught a pious flock,
So small, at morn and eve the sexton ran
  From door to door, and with a triple knock
Summoned the faithful who were dwelling there
  To kneel and seek the Lord in humble prayer.

The sexton had a daughter, than whom dreamed
  Man fairer none, and from whose great, dark eyes
An angel soul in spotless radiance beamed,
  As shines a star from out the midnight skies.
She loved the Rabbi with a maid's first love:
  He worshipped her well nigh like God above.

Whene'er by mortal sickness sorely pressed
  One of the little congregation lay,
The sexton's mallet to the flock expressed
  With its sad knock his woe, and bade them pray;
Arid oft their intercession with the Lord
  Prevailed, and He the invalid restored.

Late, late one night the sexton sought to sleep,
  But ere he slept himthought he heard a sound
That caused his heart to throb, his flesh to creep--
  The ghostly knocking of his daily round--
And, trembling, to his child he cried in fear:
  "Some one is dying, daughter, dost thou hear?"

She heard the sound and answered with a cry,
  Love teaching her: "Oh! it is he, mine own:
Rabbi Ben Horad is about to die--
  Oh! father, haste! life may not yet have flown;
Bid all our people pray, that God may hear,
  And in His mercy turn a willing ear."

All through the night the faithful people prayed
  That their beloved Rabbi still might live;
And by their prayers the hand of death was stayed,
  Yet could their prayers no greater favor give;
And so he lingered, while she watched the strife,
  With sinking heart, waged between death and life.

Then, as a last resort, from door to door
  The young men went, that all who wished might give
Some space of time out of their own life's store,
  That yielded to the Rabbi he might live.
Some gave a year, a month a week, a day,
  But wheresoe'r they went none said them nay.

At last they sought the maid and gravely asked:
  "What wilt thou give, O maiden?" and she cried--
By his sad plight her deathless love unmasked--
  "Oh! gladly for his sake I would have died:
Take all my life and give it unto him."
  They wrote, but saw not, for their eyes were dim.

And lo! the Rabbi lived; but ere the earth
  Had thrice upturned its face to greet the sun,
Hushed was the little congregation's mirth,
  For the sweet maiden's life its course had run;
And, decked with flowers, they bore her to her grave,
  He sobbing by whom she had died to save.




THE SPIRIT SONG.


Chastened by grief, Ben Horad holier grew,
  And, uncomplaining, toiled from day to day.
His sad, sweet smile his loving flock well knew,
  His kindly voice their sorrows charmed away;
Yet, though he bowed before his Master's will,
  His heart was sad, for he was human still.

By night or day, wherever he might stray,
  Through bustling city streets or lonely lane,
One form he ever saw--a maiden gay;
  One voice he heard--a soft, melodious strain:
And oh! the loneliness, to see and hear,
  Yet lack the tender touch of one so dear!

Long as he read into the silent night,
  The winking stars soft peeping in his room,
While at his hand the dreamy, lambent light
  Just lit his book and left all else in gloom.
His study walls evanished, and in mist
  He saw the maid whose dead lips once he kissed:

Yet dead no more, but his dear spirit wife.
  And still in heaven she sang the same glad strain
She would have sung on earth had not her life
  Been given to him that he might live again,
And as she sang he wept: "Ah! woe is me,
  Who robbed her of her sweet futurity."

There came a day when on the Rabbi's ears
  Fell the low moans of one in mortal pain.
Slowly they died, as though dissolved in tears,
  While a weak infant's wail took up the strain.
Sadly Ben Horad smiled, and raised his head:
  "She has been spared that agony," he said.

Then all his sorrow died; but not for long,
  For soon again the spirit voice he heard,
Crooning all day a little cradle song,
  With happiness and love in every word.
And as she sang he wept: "Ah! woe is me,
  Who robbed her of her sweet maternity."

Once more he heard her moans, and once again
  Heard the young mother crooning o'er her child.
And then came no more sorrow in the strain,
  Which had there been might him have reconciled,
But as she sang he wept: "Ah! woe is me,
  Who robbed her of her sweet maturity."

And still he read the Talmud, day and night,
  And still the years slipped by on noiseless wing.
Then one day as he studied, lo! the sprite,
  Till then long silent, recommenced to sing.
He sighed: "To-day she feasts her eldest boy,
  And I have robbed my darling of this joy."

Again was silence, and again there fell
  Upon the Rabbi's ears the sweet refrain,
With the glad tumult of a marriage bell,
  Now rising like a bird, now low again.
"Her daughter weds," he said. "Ah! woe is me,
  Who robbed her of her sweet maternity."

Year after year he lived, and children died
  Of age, whom he had dandled, until he,
Worn with his grief, for death's oblivion sighed;
  But still he heard the same sweet melody,
And could not die until the singing ceased,
  For by her life had his life been increased.

Long flashed the lamp upon the sacred page,
  Long peeped the star-worlds through the orioled pane,
Long nightly sat the white-haired, saintly sage
  And listened till at last the happy strain
Died into discord. "God be thanked," he said--
  Next day they found him, smiling now--but dead.




_RHODOPE'S SHOE._


In Egypt Rhodope was born,
  And lived afar from king and court;
No jewels did the maid adorn;
  She crowned herself with flowers in sport.

Her hair was like a summer night,
  Her eyes like stars that twinkle low,
Her voice like soft winds in their flight,
  When through the tremulous leaves they blow.

She dwelt beside the sacred Nile,
  And in its waters every day,
With but the sun to gaze and smile,
  Like any nymph was wont to play.

While in the limpid stream she played
  One day, an eagle cleft the blue,
And, hovering o'er the sporting maid,
  Upon the bank espied her shoe.


Loth to forget so sweet a sight,
  And lest his memory should grow dim,
He sought the earth with sudden flight,
  And bore the shoe aloft with him.

He bore it far, and let it fall
  In the king's palace, where next day
So lily-frail, so strangely small,
  Within the palace-court it lay.

The king was walking, wrapped in thought,
  Throughout his palace, up and down:
Him had his councillors besought,
  With some fair maid to share his crown,

And he had searched the wide world through
  To find a princess he could love,
Yet all in vain he sought to woo,
  His heart there was not one could move.

Into the palace-court he went,
  Still wondering whom to make his bride,
And as he strolled, eyes earthward bent,
  The wondrous tiny shoe he spied.

As leaps the sun to tropic skies,
  So sprang his heart unto its choice,
Love sparkled brightly in his eyes,
  And thrilled triumphant in his voice.

"You bid me wed, I could not do,
  For lack of love, your bidding, Sirs.
But find the maid who wore this shoe,
  And I will make my kingdom hers."

They searched the palace from the ground
  Up to the towers, but in vain;
Nowhere was maiden to be found
  To own the shoe and share the reign.

Then came a lad, who told in awe
  How just at dawn an eagle flew
Above the town, and from its claw
  Dropped to the palace-yard the shoe.

The wise men stroked their beards, and said:
  "The gods have surely done this thing,
That our beloved lord may wed
  A maiden meet for such a king."

Then far and wide the heralds rode
  To find the king's God-chosen bride;
They chanced on Rhodope's abode,
  The overflowing Nile beside.

She stood before the heralds twain,
  She fitted on the tiny shoe,
And claimed it for her own again,
  And not till then their errand knew.

The richest robes they offered her,
  But she refused them: "If my king
In my coarse garb, will deem me fair,
  Then only will I take his ring."

Before the king the maid they brought,
  And at his feet she bent the knee;
He gently raised her: "Nay, kneel not,
  O sweetheart! I should kneel to thee,

"Fair as a poet's dream thou art,
  Purer than lilies--Oh! mine own,
Since thou has won thy monarch's heart,
  'Tis meet that thou shouldst share his throne."

The wise men stroked their beards and said:
  "The gods have surely done this thing."
Then Rhodope the fair was wed,
  And ruled all Egypt with the king.




_HOPE AND DESPAIR._


You love the sun and the languid breeze
    That gently kisses the rosebud's lips,
         And delight to see
         How the dainty bee,
Stilling his gauze-winged melodies
  Into the lily's chalice dips.

I love the wind that unceasing roars,
  While cringe the trees from its wrath in vain,
         And the lightning-flash,
         And the thunder-crash,
And skies, from whose Erebus depths outpours
  In slanting drifts the autumnal rain.

You sigh to find that the time is here
  When leaves are falling from bush and tree;
        When the flowerets sweet
        Die beneath our feet,
And feebly totters the dying year
  Into the mists of eternity.

To me the autumn is never drear,
  It bears the glory of hopes fulfilled.
        Though the flowers be dead,
        There are seeds instead,
That, with the spring of the dawning year,
  With life will find all their being thrilled.

You tread the wood, and the wind behold
  Tear down the leaves from the crackling bough
        Till they make a pall,
        As they thickly fall,
To hide dead flowers. The air seems cold,
  No summer gladdens the forest now.




HOPE AND DESPAIR


I tread the maze of the changing wood,
   And though no light through the maples plays,
          Yet they glow each one,
          Like a rose-red sun,
And drop their leaves, like a glittering flood
  Of warm sunbeams, in the woodland ways.

Poor human heart, in the year of life
  All seasons are, and it rests with thee
          To enjoy them all,
          Or to drape a pall
O'er withered hopes, and to be at strife
  With things that are, and no brightness see.




_CARLOTTA._


Poor, lone Carlotta, Mexico's mad Queen,
  Babbling of him, amid thy vacant halls,
  Whose ears have long been heedless of thy calls;
Sad monument of pomp that once hath been,
Thy staring eyes mark ever the same scene
  Of levelled muskets, and a corpse which falls,
  Dabbled in blood, beneath the city walls--
Though twenty years have rolled their tides between.

Not of this world thy vengeance! They have passed,
  Traitor and victim, to the shadow-land.
Not of this world thy joy; but, when at last
  Reason returns in Paradise, its hand
Shall join the shattered links of thought again,
Save those that form this interval of pain.




_EQUALITY._


Mad fools! To think that men can be
  Made equal all, when God
Made one well nigh divinity
  And one a soulless clod.

Nowhere in Nature can we find
  Things equal, save in death,
One man must rule with thoughtful mind,
  One serve with panting breath.

The maples spread their foliage green
  To shade the grass below,
Hills rise the lowly vales between
  Or streams would never flow.

A million creatures find a home
  Within a droplet's sphere,
And giants through the woodlands roam
  While quakes the land in fear.

A tiny fall in music breaks
  Against the mountain's base,
While roars an avalanche and shakes
  The whole world in its race.

One must be weak and one be strong,
  One huge, another small,
To help this teeming world along,
  And make a home for all.

Equality is death, not life,
  In Nature and with man,
And progress is but upward strife
  With some one in the van.




_LACHINE._


You named it better than you knew
  Who called yon little town Lachine,
  Though through the lapse of years between
The then and now, men jeered at you.

You thought by it to find a way,
  Through voiceful woods and shimmering lakes,
  To where the calm Pacific breaks
On weedy ledges at Cathay.

In fancy you beheld yon tide
  Upbear a thousand argosies,
  Whose spicy odors filled the breeze,
And floated far on every side.

'Twas but a wish-born dream, men said,
  And sneered that you were so unwise.
  Blind scoffers! Would that they could rise
A few short moments from the dead,

To see how, through the power of man,
  Your vision is no more a dream,
  And learn that this majestic stream
Is now the highway to Japan!

From year to year, with dauntless strides,
  O'er fertile plains your sons have pressed,
  Portaging from the East to West,
Between the two great ocean tides.

And in their trail they drew a chain
  Of steel across the virgin land,
  Uniting with this slender band
The eastern and the western main.

Where once the bison roamed, and woke
  The heavens with his thunderous tread,
  The tireless engine speeds instead,
And tosses high its plumes of smoke.

Like spider in a web, it creeps
  On filmy bridge, o'er sparkling streams,
  Or chasms where the sunlight gleams
Part-way, and dies amid the deeps.

It scales the rugged, snow-clad peaks,
  And looks afar on East and West,
  Then, like an eagle from its nest,
Darts down, and through the valley shrieks.

It was not formed by Nature's hand,
  This sun-ward highway to Japan;
  O'er mountain-range and prairie, man
Has forced the path his genius planned.

And Commerce, universal king,
  Has followed with unnumbered needs,
  And scatters everywhere the seeds
Of towns that in a night upspring.

In tumult strange the air abounds,
  The whirr of birds is dying out,
  The swart mechanic's lusty shout
Amid the clang of iron sounds.

And streams, that once unbroken ran,
  Now on their outspread scroll reveal,
  Written by many a sliding keel,
The lordly signature of man.




DE SALABERRY AT CHATEAUGUAY.

We are scarcely one to seven,
  But our cause is just;
Help us in our trial, heaven!
  Keep the ford we must.

Swiftly through the reeds and rushes
  Pours the Outarde flood,
Turned by sunset's rosy flushes
  To a stream of blood.

Sprinkled with the hues of slaughter,
  Wave the forest trees.
Gently o'er the sparkling water,
  In the autumn breeze.

Strange that Nature should remind us
  Of the coming fight!
Let it come--it will but find us
  Battling for the right.

Never shall the land that gave us
  Birth be held a thrall:
Ere the Stars and Stripes enslave us,
  Death shall have us all!

Quickly in this silent dingle
  Raise the _abatis_,
Near where Outarde waters mingle
  With the Chateauguay.

Hasten, Night, across the meadows,
  Kiss the streams to sleep,
Wrap us in thy cloak of shadows,
  Bid the stars not peep.

Night has passed; the birds, awaking,
  Greet the dawning day.
Wherefore are our foemen making
  Such a long delay?

Hark! at last they come; now, steady!
  Wait the signal gun.
When I fire, fire you. Now! ready?
  Fire! Ah! lads, well done!

Like a vaulted wave that shatters
  On a rocky coast,
And in mist and salt spray scatters,
  Breaks the mighty host.

Like the wave, that swift returning
  Bursts upon the strand,
Falls the foe, with hatred burning,
  On our little band.

We are scarcely one to seven,
  But our cause is just;
Help us in our trial, heaven!
  Keep the ford we must.

Fall the shot-clipped leaves about us
  Like the summer rain;
Charge the bitter foes to rout us
  Ever and again.

Quarter never asked nor given,
  Still we beat them back,
Though our slender ranks are riven
  With each fierce attack.

Long the fearful battle rages,
  Death his harvest reaps--
He will live in history's pages
  In the grave who sleeps.

Round us, stronger, ever stronger,
  Sweeps the hostile horde;
If the strife continue longer,
  We shall lose the ford.

We are scarcely one to seven,
  But our cause is just;
Help us in our trial, heaven!
  Keep the ford we _must_!

Hope! The fox, when worn with running,
  Subtlety must use:
Let us strive to win by cunning
  What by force we lose.

Bugler, seek the forest border
  Whence our friends should come;
For attack, sound loud the order,
  Beat upon the drum.

So our foes may think in error
  That our friends are nigh,
And, disturbed by sudden terror,
  From the conflict fly.

Through the wood the bugler dashes,
  Far beyond the fray--
While the deadly musket flashes
  Point him on his way,

Faintly o'er the din of battle,
  On the ear there fall
From afar a drum's sharp rattle,
  And a bugle call.

Through the forest, drawing nearer,
  Ring the bugle notes,
And the drum-beat, quicker, clearer,
  On the calm air floats.

Cheer! my lads, and cease from firing,
  Sheathe the blood-stained sword,
For our foemen are retiring--
  We have kept the ford.




TENNYSON.

The noble lion groweth old,
  The weight of years his eyesight dims,
  And strength deserts his mighty limbs,
His once warm blood runs slow and cold.

The sunlight of another day
  Slants through the jungle's tangled mass;
  He marks the shadows, but, alas!
Sees not the sun among them play.

His regal head lies buried deep
  Between his paws--his reign is o'er--
  His great voice stirs the world no more,
And round his lair the jackals creep.

They scent their prey, and, with the joy
  Of meaner natures, far and wide
  From deep obscurity they glide,
The dying monarch to annoy.

With naked fangs they circle round,
  And fiercely snarl, until once more
  The thicket quivers at his roar,
And all their paltry yelps are drowned.

The woodland with his voice is thrilled,
  Though hope abandoned mars the strain;
  But echoes cease, and then again
With jackal barks the air is filled.

Though dying, he is royal yet--
  Even now, earth doth not hold his peer:
  Bark, jackals, bark! ere dies the year
The world your tumult will forget.




AT RAINBOW LAKE.

There is a spot, far from the world's uproar,
  Amid great mountains,
Where softly sleeps a lake, to whose still shore
  Steal silvery fountains,
That hide beneath the leafy underwood,
And blend their voices with the solitude.

Save where the beaver-meadow's olive sheen
  In sunlight glimmers,
On every side, a mass of waving green,
  The forest shimmers
And oft re-echoes with the black bear's tread,
That silences the song birds overhead.

Here thickly droops the moss from patriarch trees,
  And loons fly wailing.
Here king-birds' screams come hoarsely down the breeze
  And hawks are sailing
Above the trees. Here Nature dwells alone,
Of man unknowing, and to man unknown.

Smiling, she rises when the morning air,
  The dawn just breaking,
Bids the still woodlands for the day prepare,
  And Life, awaking,
Welcomes the Sun, whose bride, the Morn, is kissed
And, blushing, lays aside her veil of mist.

Here Nature with each passing hour reveals
  Peculiar graces:
At noonday she grows languid, and then steals
  To shady places,
And revels in their coolness, at her feet
A stream, that fills with music her retreat.

At eve she comes, and, blushing like a maid,
  Unrobes in shadows,
Bathes in the lake, and wanders through the glade
  And o'er the meadows.
From her dank locks, wherever she doth pass,
The diamond dew-drops dripping to the grass.

And then she sleeps; when o'er the lake's calm tide
  The Moon comes stealing,
And draws from her the veil of night aside,
  Her charms revealing,
While silent stars keep ceaseless watch above,
And all the earth breathes peace and rest and love.




THE RACE.


A girlish voice like a silver bell
Rang over the sparkling tide,
    "A race! a race!"
  She was under the trees by the river-side,
Down from whose boughs dark shadows fell,
    And hid her face.

Four skiffs are out on the moonlit stream,
And their oars like bars of silver gleam,
  As they dip and flash and kiss the river,
  As swallows do, till the moonbeams quiver.
    Then the ripples die,
    And the girlish cry
    Floats gaily again to the summer sky.

"Ready? Go!"
As the arrow springs from the straightened bow,
  The skiffs dart off for the distant goal:
      The oars are bent like blades of steel,
    And the hissing waters, cleft in twain,
    Curl away astern in a feathery train,
      While girlish laughter, peal on peal,
Rings over the river and over the shore,
  And from the island the echoes roll.
    We hear the mysterious voice again.
"We have won! we have won!
Will you race once more?"

The water drips in golden rain
  From the blade of the resting oar,
Again we take, our place, and again
  That clear voice wakes the shore:
  "Go!" And we bend to our oars once more,
And banks fly past, till the gleaming meadows
Give place to the woods and their gloomy shadows.

Our skiff is steered by skilful hands,
  Its rowers' arms are strong,
But muscles are not iron bands
  To bear such conflict long.
And hearts beat hard, and breath comes fast,
  And cheeks too hotly burn,
Before the welcome goal is passed--
  The rest two lengths astern.

The evening air is growing chill,
    The moon is sinking low:
  The race is ours--across the wave
  We call, but nothing answers save
    The winds that gently blow,
"Come race again." But all in vain--
The silvery voice is still.




_MY TREASURE_.


"What do you gather?" the maiden said,
    Shaking her sunlit curls at me--
"See, these flowers I plucked are dead,
        Ah! misery."

"What do you gather?" the miser said,
    Clinking his gold, as he spoke to me--
"I cannot sleep at night for dread
        Of thieves," said he.

"What do you gather?" the dreamer said,
    "I dream dreams of what is to be;
Daylight comes, and my dreams are fled,
        Ah! woe is me."

"What do you gather?" the young man said--
    "I seek fame for eternity,
Toiling on while the world's abed,
        Alone," said he.

"What do I gather?" I laughing said,
    "Nothing at all save memory,
Sweet as flowers, but never dead,
        Like thine, Rosie."

"I have no fear of thieves," I said,
    "Daylight kills not my reverie,
Fame will find I am snug abed,
        That comes to me."

"The past is my treasure, friends," I said,
    "Time but adds to my treasury,
Happy moments are never fled
        Away from me."

"All one needs to be rich," I said,
    "Is to live that his past shall be
Sweet in his thoughts, as a wild rose red,
        Eternally."




_WELCOMING THE NEW YEAR_.


We gathered, a jovial party,
  Together on New Year's eve,
To welcome the coming monarch
  And to see the old one leave,

We chatted around the fireside,
  And wondered what time would bring:
We had not a tear for the parting year,
  But longed for the coming king.

For youth reaches ever forward,
  And drops from its eager clasp
The realized gifts of fortune,
  Some phantom of hope to grasp.

Soon a maiden spoke of the custom,
  Now lapsed in this age of prose,
To open the door for the New Year
  The instant the Old Year goes;

Then, leaving the door wide open,
  To stand in the silent street
And, with a generous "welcome,"
  The entering guest to greet.

It suited our youthful fancy,
  And, when the glad chimes began,
From our cosy nook by the fireside
  Down into the street we ran.

And, far and near, we all could hear
The great bells ringing out the year,
  And, as they tolled, the music rolled,
  Hoarse-sounding, over town and wold.

"The year is dead," _Gros Bourdon_ said,
The clanging echoes quivering fled,
  And, far and wide, on every side,
  The bells to one another cried.

The mountain woke, and from its cloak
Shook off the echoes, stroke for stroke.
  Then silence fell on hill and bell,
  And echoes ceased to sink and swell.

Standing beside the door wide open thrown,
  Her voice more musical than any bird's,
And with a winning sweetness all its own,
  Our Queen thus winged her joyous thoughts with words:

"Ring out, bells, ring! Sing, mountain, sing!
The king is dead, long live the king!
  Now fast, now slow; now loud, now low,
  Send out your chimes across the snow.

"Old Year, adieu; welcome the New,
The door stands open here for you.
  Come in, come in, the bells begin
  To falter in their merry din."

Then, as the great bells ceased to swing, two broke
  A silver coin, for luck in days to come,
And though no tender words of love they spoke,
  Yet hearts speak best when most the lips are dumb.




_A GREATER THAN HE._



Baby sits upon the floor,
  Baby's scarce a twelvemonth old;
Baby laughs, and _goo-goos_ o'er
Memories how a babe of yore
  Humbled Glooskap bold.

Glooskap was a man of might,
  Skilled in magic, huge of limb;
Giant, wizard, goblin, sprite,
Ghost, witch, devil, imp of night,
  All had fled from him.

Then he questioned: "Can there be
  Further labors to be done?
Breathes there one to equal me,
Who before me will not flee?"
  Quoth a squaw: "Yes, one."

"Name him," angry Glooskap cried,
  "Baby," said she, "And be warned--
If you meddle, woe betide
All your glory, all your pride!
  For you will be scorned,"

Baby sat upon the ground,
  Harming none, and sucked his thumb,
Gazing with a look profound
Upon Glooskap and around,
  Solon-wise, Sphinx-dumb.

Glooskap never married was,
  So he thought, like all his kind,
That he knew the nursery laws
Wholly, and with ease could cause
  Service prompt and blind.

Sweetly, the magician smiled,
  Like the summer sun, and said:
"Hither, Baby." But the child,
By the sweet smile unbeguiled,
  Only shook his head.

Like a bird among the trees,
  Singing, Glooskap spake once more:
Baby listened to the glees,
Sucked his thumb, and sat at ease
  Still upon the floor.

Thundering, the magician spoke:
  "Hither, Baby, I command!"
Baby stirred not, only broke
Into wailings that awoke
  All the desert land.

Mystic song and magic spell,
  Fit to raise the very dead,
Fit to rule the imps that dwell
In the deepest depths of Hell,
  Glooskap sang and said.

All was vain. Upon the floor
  Baby sat, and heard each lay,
Listened close, and called for more,
When each mystic song was o'er,
  But did not obey.

Then the baffled warrior wept;
  And the baby in delight,
Sitting where a sunbeam slept,
Laughed and crowed, and crowing kept,
  Till his foe took flight.




_LIFE IN NATURE_.


Life grows not more nor less; it is but force
  And only changes;
Expended here, it takes another course,
  And ever ranges
Throughout this circling universe of ours,
Now quickening man, now in his grave-grown flowers.

Yet dwells life not alone in man and beast
  And budding flowers.
It lurks in all things, from the very least
  Gleam in dark bowers
Of the great sun, through stones, and sea, and air,
Up to ourselves, in Nature everywhere.

Life differs from the soul. This is beyond
  The realms of science;
God and mankind it joins in closest bond,
  And bids defiance
To Death and Change. By faith alone confessed,
It dwells within our bodies as a guest.

The germ of life sleeps in the aged hills
  And stately rivets,
And wakes into the life our hearts that thrills
  And in leaves quivers.
The universe is one great reservoir
From which man draws of thinking life his store.

And, therefore, is it that the weary brain,
  That seeks communion
With Nature in her haunts, finds strength again
  In that close union:
She is our mother and the mind distressed
Drinks a new draught of life at her loved breast.




_WINTER AND SUMMER_.


Come Winter, merry Winter,
  Rejoice while yet you may,
For nearer, ever nearer,
  Fair Summer draws each day,
And soon the tiny snowdrops
  Shall waken from their sleep,
And, mossy banks from under,
  The modest violets peep.

The apple trees shall scatter
  Their buds at Summer's feet,
And with their fragrant odors
  Make every zephyr sweet;
While Nature, of wild roses,
  And lilies frail and white,
Shall make a wreath for Summer,
  And crown her with delight.

Forth from the smiling heavens
  Shall fall the gentle rain,
The earth shall feel her presence
  And welcome her with grain;
The birds shall come and twitter,
  And build amid the boughs,
So Winter, merry Winter,
  While yet you may, carouse.

We love you, merry Winter,
  You and the joys you bring,
And loud and long your praises
  Throughout the world we sing;
But Summer, gentle Summer,
  Comes shyly through the glade,
And draws all hearts to love her,
  So fair is she arrayed.

We love the merry sleighing,
  The swinging snowshoe tramp,
While in the clear, cold heavens
  The calm moon holds her lamp,

We love the breathless coasting.
  The skating and the games
Played amid shouts of laughter,
  Around the hearth-fire flames.

But Summer, winsome Summer,
  Holds greater stores of bliss,
When all the land awakens,
  And blossoms at her kiss;
We soon shall feel her presence,
 And breathe her perfumed breath,
Then, Winter, dear old Winter,
  We will not mourn your death.




_DAUNTLESS_.


So he is dead. A strange, sad story clings
  About the memory of this mindless man;
A tale that strips war's tinsel off, and brings
  Its horrors out, as only history can.

Within a peaceful town he dwelt in youth,
  His sister's hero and his mother's pride--
The soul of honor, the abode of truth,
  Beloved and reverenced on every side.

He had a sweetheart, lovely as the day,
  A gentle maid, who knew not half his worth,
Who loved the sunshine, and who shrank away
  From sorrow, and forever followed mirth.

They were but young, and hope's mirage upreared
  In their warm hearts its rosy palaces;
They deemed them real, and longing, only feared
  Life was too short for all the promised bliss.

And then came war, blood-spattered, cruel as hell,
  And clamored with its iron voice for life--
Mother and sister and the wedding-bell.
  The hero left, and hastened to the strife.

In vain he struck for liberty, and fell
  A captive, in his earliest affray;
Then, threatening death, fierce Haynau bade him tell
  Where and how strong the patriot forces lay.

"I will not tell," he cried, with eyes aflame,
  "Do what thou wilt with me, I will not bring
Doom to my land, and soil my honored name:
  From these sealed lips thou shalt no secret wring."

His captor only laughed. "He croweth well,
  Go, bring his mother and his sister here,
And they shall die, if he refuse to tell!"
  The hero answered not, but paled with fear.

The brutal soldiers to the brutish court
  Dragged the weak women, and they stood o'er-awed,
Each to the other clinging for support,
  And praying in her misery to God.

The fell decree the shrinking creatures heard,
  And long in vain essayed to make reply,
For their weak speech could find no fitting word
To bear the burden of their agony.

Tears came at last. The brutal Haynau smiled,
  But all too soon. Weeping, the mother said:
"Be not thy country's, traitor, oh! my child!
  Too old am I the loss of life to dread."

Then spake the sister: "Brother mine, be brave!
  Life hath no charms, if with dishonor bought;
Think not of us, our bleeding country save--
  Life is so short at best, death matters naught."

The hero made no answer, but he drove
  His nails into his palms, and choked for breath;
His captor bade the soldiery remove
  The noble women--and they went to death.

"He hath a sweetheart," Haynau said again:
  "Go, bring her hither;" and they brought her there,
Weeping with fear, and wailing low with pain,
  Amid the golden ringlets of her hair.

Then from the earth she sprang, frenzied with fear,
  Into her lover's arms, and kissed his cheek,
And strok'd his hair, and called him "love" and "dear,"
  And prayed him for her sake to yield and speak.

He thrust her from him, clasped her yielding form
  In his lithe arms again, and then once more
Repulsed her gently, and the deadly storm
  That raged within him smote him to the floor.

Groping, he rose and spoke. None knew his voice:
  It sounded as though coming from a tomb.
"Oh! darling, it must be--I have no choice--
  Thou would'st not have me seal my country's doom?"

Haynau made sign. "Away with her," he cried.
  They seized their prey, but life to her was sweet,
And, bounding from the soldiers at her side,
  Screaming she crouched, and clasped her lover's feet.

"Oh! for the love you bear me, save my life!
  Tell what he asks, and we will fly this place
Into some unknown land, where all this strife
  Shall be forgotten in love's sweet embrace."

He made no answer save by bending low,
  And kissing her damp brow. They raised their prize,
And bore her to the door, as pale as snow,
  With all her soul outwelling from her eyes.

But here she turned, calm in her death despair,
  And in a voice that trembled with its hate,
"My dying curse be on you everywhere,
  False love," she cried, "who send me to my fate."

There was a silence, then a fusilade
  Of musketry, a woman's scream and moan,
Then silence. That was all, and in the shade
  Of night the hero laughed. Reason had flown.




_A CHILD'S KISS_.


Sweet is the maiden's kiss that tells
  The secret of her heart;
Holy the wife's--yet in them dwells
  Of earthliness a part;

While in a little child's warm kiss
  Is naught but heaven above,
So sweet it is, so pure it is,
  So full of faith and love.

'Tis like a violet in May
  That knows nor fear nor harm,
But cheers the wanderer on his way
  With its unconscious charm.

'Tis like a bird that carols free,
  And thinks not of reward,
But gives the world its melody
  Because it is a bard.




THE GRAVE AND THE TREE.


Of double depth they made her grave,
  And covered it with massive stone,
And there, where silvery birches wave,
  They left her sleeping all alone.

These words were chiselled on her tomb:
  "This grave, bought for eternity,
Even to and through the day of doom,
  And ever, shall unopened be."

For years the passing stranger saw
  The epitaph of Caroline,
And wondered, with a shuddering awe,
  That it could dare the wrath divine.

Time is of God. He does not need
  To work his purpose in an hour:
Years came and went, and then a seed,
  Borne downwards by a summer shower,

Fell gently on the scanty earth.
  Among the heaped-up stones that lay,
And soon a tiny birch had birth,
  And grew in stature day by day.

The sun, the shower, the passing wind,
  All helped the youthful tree to grow;
Its little roots ran far to find
  Subsistence in the depths below.

Years passed, until at last the tree
  Sundered the stones, and made the grave
Yawn wide, that hoped eternally
  The ravages of Time to brave.

Vain was the exercise of skill
  To seal the grave of Caroline;
And vain is every human will
  That strives to break the law divine.




A MOTHER'S JEWELS.

The daughter of a hundred earls,
  No jewels has with mine to mate,
Though she may wear in flawless pearls
  The ransom of a mighty state.

Hers glitter for the world to see,
  But chill the breast where they recline:
My jewels warmly compass me,
  And all their brilliancy is mine.

My diamonds are my baby's eyes,
  His lips, sole rubies that I crave:
They came to me from Paradise,
  And not through labors of the slave.

My darling's arms my necklace make,
  'Tis Love that links his feeble hands,
And Death, alone, that chain can break,
  And rob me of those priceless bands.




NOTES.


EXPLANATORY NOTES.


THE CAPTURED FLAG.

The incident described in these verses took place during the
unsuccessful siege of Quebec by Admiral Sir William Phipps, in 1690.
Admiral Phipps, after capturing Port Royal, now Annapolis, Nova Scotia,
sailed up the St. Lawrence, in October, arriving at Quebec on the 5th.
Frontenac, then Governor of New France, was taken almost by surprise,
yet, when summoned to surrender, he haughtily refused to do so, using
the words attributed to him in the ballad. Phipps was beaten off,
leaving with the French the cannon of his troops and this flag, which
had been shot away, and which was picked up by a Canadian, who swam out
after it. A medal was struck in France, and a church erected in Quebec,
in honor of this victory.


PERE BROSSE.

A full account of this pious legend will be found in Mr. J. Lemoine's
_Chronicles of the St. Lawrence_, pages 242, 243, and 244. Father
de La Brosse was, at the time of his death, a priest at Tadousac, at
the mouth of the Saguenay, and about seventy miles below the Isle aux
Coudres, where he celebrated the first mass, in 1765. He died at
midnight, on the 11th April, 1782, and, so says the legend, his death
was preceded and followed by miraculous occurrences. He is said to have
foretold it, and to have bidden his people seek Pere Compain on the
Isle aux Coudres, and bring him to perform the funeral offices. There
would be a storm, which they were not to heed, for he guaranteed them
against harm, and they were to find Pere Compain awaiting them. All
came true: Pere Brosse was found dead at midnight with his head on the
altar of his chapel; the men set out, and though the waves rolled
mountains high on every side, there was peace where their canoe
floated. They found Pere Compain awaiting them, for he had been
supernaturally informed of his colleague's death, and he went with them
to Tadousac. All the bells of the missions where Pere Brosse had
labored are said to have been rung without hands that night.


L'ORDRE DE BON TEMPS.

This company of _Bon Vivants_ was formed in 1606, during the
sojourn of Champlain and de Poutrincourt at Port Royal. An account of
its organization and doings will be found in Parkman's _Champlain and
His Associates_, Chapter iv.


CHAMPLAIN.

This poem is a _resume_ of the life of him whom Parkman calls "The
AEneas of a destined people." "Yon fair town" alludes to Quebec, which
Champlain founded July 3rd, 1608. His defiance of Admiral Kirkt took
place in 1628, and was successful for a season, but a second summons
from Kirkt next summer led to the first surrender of Canada to England.
Champlain died on Christmas Day, 1635, after twenty-seven years of
labor for the country in which his name can never be forgotten.


THE PRIEST AND THE MINISTER.

In the opening paragraphs of the third chapter of Parkman's
_Champlain and His Associates_, will be found an account, of which
these verses are little more than a paraphrase. When de Monts was
commissioned to settle New France, the Roman Catholic clergy insisted
that they be given charge of the souls of the heathen in the new land.
De Monts was, himself, a Huguenot, and brought his own ministers with
him, so that the ship that sailed to Acadia in 1604 bore with it clergy
of both sects. This was the cause of ceaseless quarrels. "I have seen
our _cure_ and the minister," says Champlain, "fall to with their
fists on questions of faith. I cannot say which had the more pluck, or
which hit the harder; but I know the minister complained to the Sieur
de Monts that he had been beaten." Sagard, the Franciscan friar, gives
an account of the death of two of the disputants and of their burial in
one grave. I have taken the liberty of making them the central figures
of the dispute, though, actually, they were subordinates.


PILOT.

Pilot was one of a number of dogs sent from France to Montreal shortly
after its foundation, in order to assist the brave colonists in their
warfare with the savages. She and her offspring were invaluable in
detecting ambuscades. An account of her useful life will be found in
Parkman's _Jesuits in North America_, chap. xviii.


THE SECRET OF THE SAGUENAY.

Although one legend, and, perhaps, the best substantiated one, asserts
that Roberval was assassinated in Paris, there is another to the effect
that, fired by the recitals of Cartier of untold wealth to be found in
the Saguenay district, he sailed up the river of that name, and was
never heard of again. This legend will be found in the _Illustrated
History of Canada_.


JULES' LETTER.

The date of this letter would be about 1670. From 1665 to 1673,
bachelors in Canada underwent a martyrdom of great severity, and Jules'
fear lest he find himself married in spite of himself is hardly an
exaggeration. From 1665 to 1673, about one thousand girls were sent out
from France to find husbands in Canada. Each couple married was given
an ox, a cow, a pair of swine, a pair of fowls, two barrels of salted
meat, and eleven crowns in money. Girls under sixteen and youths under
twenty were given twenty livres when they married, and were encouraged
to marry at fourteen and eighteen respectively. To such an extent was
this rage for marriage carried that, it is said, a widow was married
before her first husband's body had been consigned to the grave. Large
bounties were paid to parents having from ten to fifteen children, and
the slightest sign of courtship between the unmarried officers and
ladies of Quebec and Montreal, was chronicled in official documents and
transmitted to France. For further particulars, the reader is referred
to Parkman's _The Old Regime in Canada_, chapter xiii.


THE OAK.

The two villages referred to are Hochelaga and Ville Marie, now
Montreal. The latter place was founded by Maisonneuve in 1642. In Sir
William Dawson's _Fossil Men_ is a picture of Hochelaga as seen by
Cartier, with an oak tree near it. This oak is sketched from one in the
McGill University grounds, and it needs but a little stretch of the
imagination to consider them identical, though actually this is not so.
The poem traces the history of Montreal from its foundation up to the
present time.  Jacques Cartier's visit was made in October, 1535, when
he was well received by the Hochelagans. When Champlain came, in 1611,
Hochelaga had disappeared. The reference to the flood occurs again in
"Nelson's Appeal for Maisonneuve." The incident took place in 1642, and
Maisonneuve actually fulfilled his vow and bore a heavy cross to the
mountain top, where it was planted. Dollard, with seventeen Frenchmen
and fifty Indians, by heroic self-sacrifice, in 1660, saved Canada from
destruction by the Iroquois. Vaudreuil surrendered Canada to the
English on September 8th, 1760. He had been driven to Montreal, and was
surrounded by 17,000 men, under General Amherst. The Americans took
Montreal in 1775, and were defeated at Chateauguay, October 26th, 1813,
and at Chrysler's Farm, November 11th, of the same year. In both cases,
the Canadians were greatly outnumbered.


NELSON'S APPEAL FOR MAISONNEUVE.

This is supposed to be spoken by Horatio, Lord Nelson, whose statue,
standing on Jacques Cartier Square, by the magnificent river St.
Lawrence, is, with the exception of the bronze image of our Queen, the
only one in the city of Montreal. In five years, Montreal will see its
250th anniversary. Shall it be said that we have forgotten its founder,
when that day comes? The pages of Parkman may again be referred to for
an explanation of any points in this poem. _The Jesuits in North
America_, chapter xv., contains a long account of the foundation of
Montreal, and subsequent pages chronicle the life of Maisonneuve.


THE SPIRIT WIFE.

This is a free paraphrase of a prose tale by Israel G. Owen.


LACHINE.

Misled by the information given him by the Indians, and also by the
size of the St. Lawrence, Jacques Cartier [La Salle?] gave to Lachine
its present name, thinking that by it a western passage to China was
possible. The Canadian Pacific Railway has furnished this passage by
land, and now a large portion of China's merchandise comes overland to
Montreal for shipment to Europe.


DE SALABERRY AT CHATEAUGUAY.

During the Anglo-American War of 1812, the brunt of the fighting fell
upon the Canadian Volunteers, and one of their most notable exploits is
that which I have striven to portray in this poem. Hearing of the
advance of the Americans, De Salaberry, with 400 Voltigeurs, entrenched
himself at the junction of the Chateauguay and Outarde rivers, not many
miles from Montreal. On the morning of October the 26th, this little
band of heroes was attacked by 3,500 Americans. In spite of the most
determined bravery, the Canadians would have been overcome by sheer
force of numbers, but for the ruse described in the poem, assisted by a
rapid discharge of musketry from new ambuscades. The Americans
withdrew, and Lower Canada was saved.


TENNYSON.

This poem was written shortly after the appearance of "Sixty Years
After," by Lord Tennyson, and while the critics on both sides of the
Atlantic were, for the most part, tearing him to pieces.


A GREATER THAN HE.

Glooskap is to the Penobscot Indians much what Hiawatha was to those of
Longfellow's wonderful poem. He is supposed to be making arrows in a
long hut, waiting for the time, when, like Barbarossa, he shall come to
save his countrymen. The only time that he was defeated was when he
strove to conquer a baby. The story will be found in C. G. Leland's
_Algonquin Legends_.


DAUNTLESS.

This is a true episode of the Hungarian rebellion of 1849. The young
man's name was Ferenz Renyi, and he died recently in the asylum at
Buda-Pesth. Haynau was attacked in Barclay's Brewery, London, in 1850,
for cruelties of this kind, and barely escaped with his life from the
infuriated employes.





End of Project Gutenberg's Fleurs de lys and other poems, by Arthur Weir





Produced by Anne Soulard, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




FORMATION OF THE UNION
1750-1829

BY
ALBERT BUSHNELL HART, PH.D.



To the Memory

OF

THOMAS H. LAMSON,

_A GENEROUS FRIEND OF LEARNING._




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


The second volume of the EPOCHS OF AMERICAN HISTORY aims to follow out the
principles laid down for "THE COLONIES,"--the study of causes rather than
of events, the development of the American nation out of scattered and
inharmonious colonies. The throwing off of English control, the growth out
of narrow political conditions, the struggle against foreign domination,
and the extension of popular government, are all parts of the
uninterrupted process of the Formation of the Union.

So mighty a development can be treated only in its elements in this small
volume. Much matter is thrown into graphic form in the maps; the
Suggestions for Readers and Teachers, and the bibliographies at the heads
of the chapters are meant to lead to more detailed accounts, both of
events and of social and economic conditions. Although the book includes
three serious wars, there is no military history in it. To the soldier,
the movement of troops is a professional question of great significance;
the layman needs to know, rather, what were the means, the character, and
the spirit of the two combatants in each case, and why one succeeded where
the other was defeated.

To my colleague, Professor Edward Channing, I am indebted for many
suggestions on the first four chapters.

ALBERT BUSHNELL HART.
CAMBRIDGE, July 1, 1892.




PREFACE TO THE EIGHTH EDITION.


During the five years since this volume of the _Epochs of American
History_ was first issued, the literature of the subject has made
constant advances; and hence the Suggestions for Readers and Teachers and
the bibliographies at the head of each chapter have been pruned, enlarged,
and rewritten. The text has undergone fewer changes. The good-will of
users of the book has pointed out some errors and inaccuracies, which have
been corrected from time to time; and new light has in some cases dawned
upon the author. I shall always be grateful for corrections of fact or of
conclusions.

ALBERT BUSHNELL HART
CAMBRIDGE, July 1, 1897.




SUGGESTIONS FOR READERS AND TEACHERS.


Each of the volumes in the series is intended to be complete in itself,
and to furnish an account of the period it covers sufficient for the
general reader or student. Those who wish to supplement this book by
additional reading or study will find useful the bibliographies at the
heads of the chapters.

For the use of teachers the following method is recommended. A chapter at
a time may be given out to the class for their preliminary reading, or the
paragraph numbers may be used in assigning lessons. From the references at
the head of the chapter a report may then be prepared by one or more
members of the class on each of the numbered sections included in that
chapter; these reports may be filed, or may be read in class when the
topic is reached in the more detailed exercises. Pupils take a singular
interest in such work, and the details thus obtained will add a local
color to the necessarily brief statements of the text.




STUDENTS' REFERENCE LIBRARY.


The following brief works will be found useful for reference and
comparison, or for the preparation of topics. The set should cost not more
than twelve dollars. Of these books, Lodge's _Washington_, Morse's
_Jefferson_, and Schurz's _Clay_, read in succession, make up a
brief narrative history of the whole period.

1. EDWARD CHANNING: _The United States of America, 1765-1865_. New
York: Macmillan Co., 1896.--Excellent survey of conditions and causes.

2. ALEXANDER JOHNSTON: _History of American Politics_. 2d ed. New
York: Holt, 1890.--Lucid account of political events in brief space.

3, 4. HENRY CABOT LODGE: _George Washington_ (_American Statesmen
Series_). 2 vols. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1889.--Covers the
period 1732-1799.

5. JOHN T. MORSE, JR.: _Thomas Jefferson_ (_American Statesmen Series_).
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1883.--Covers the period 1750-1809.

6. CARL SCHURZ: _Henry Clay_, I. (_American Statesmen Series_).
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1887.--Covers the period 1777-1833.

7. EDWARD STANWOOD: _A History of Presidential Elections_. 3d ed.
revised. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1892.--An account of the
political events of each presidential campaign, with the platforms and a
statement of the votes.

8. SIMON STERNE: _Constitutional History and Political Development of
the United States_. 4th ed. revised. New York: Putnam's, 1888.--An
excellent brief summary of the development of the Constitution.

9. HERMANN VON HOLST: _The Constitutional and Political History of the
United States_. Vol. I. _1750-1833_. _State Sovereignty and
Slavery_. Chicago: Callaghan & Co., 1877.--Not a consecutive history,
but a philosophical analysis and discussion of the principal
constitutional events.


SCHOOL REFERENCE LIBRARY.


The following works make up a convenient reference library of secondary
works for study on the period of this volume. The books should cost not
more than thirty-five dollars.

1-9. The brief works enumerated in the previous list.

10. EDWARD CHANNING and ALBERT BUSHNELL HART. _Guide to the Study of
American History_. Boston: Ginn & Co., 1896.--A classified bibliography,
with suggestions as to methods.

11. 12. GEORGE TICKNOR CURTIS: _Constitutional History of the United
States from their Declaration of Independence to the Close of their Civil
War_. 2 vols. New York: Harpers, 1889-1896.--Volume I. is a reprint of
Curtis's earlier _History of the Constitution_, in two volumes, and
covers the period 1774-1790. Chapters i.-vii. of Volume II. come down to
about 1830.

13. RICHARD FROTHINGHAM: _The Rise of the Republic of the United
States_. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1872.--A careful study of the
progress of independence, from 1750 to 1783. Indispensable.

14. SYDNEY HOWARD GAY: _James Madison (American Statesmen Series)_.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1884.

15. JUDSON S. LANDON: _The Constitutional History and Government of the
United States_. A Series of Lectures. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co.,
1889.--The only recent brief constitutional history, except Sterne.

16. HENRY CABOT LODGE: _Alexander Hamilton (American Statesmen
Series)_. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1882.

17. JOHN T. MORSE, JR.: _John Adams (American Statesmen Series)_.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1885.

18. JOHN T. MORSE, JR.: _John Adams (American Statesmen Series)_.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1882.

19-21. JAMES SCHOULER: _History of the United States of America under
the Constitution_. New ed. 5 vols. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1895.--
This is the only recent and complete history which systematically covers
the whole period from 1783 to 1861. The style is very inelegant, but it is
an excellent repository of facts. Vols. I.-III. (sold separately) cover
the period 1783-1830.

22. WILLIAM MILLIGAN SLOANE: _The French War and the Revolution
(American History Series)_. New York: Scribners, 1893.--Covers the
period 1700-1783.

23. FRANCIS A. WALKER: _The Making of the Nation (American History
Series)_. New York: Scribners, 1894.--Covers the period 1783-1817.


LARGER REFERENCE LIBRARY.


For school use or for extended private reading, a larger collection of the
standard works on the period 1750-1829 is necessary. The following books
ought to cost about a hundred and fifty dollars. Many may be had at
secondhand through dealers, or by advertising in the _Publishers' Weekly_.

Additional titles may be found in the bibliographies at the heads of the
chapters, and through the formal bibliographies, such as Foster's
_References to Presidential Administrations_, Winsor's _Narrative
and Critical History_, Bowker and Iles's _Reader's Guide_, and Channing
and Hart's _Guide_.

1-23. The books enumerated in the two lists above.

24-32. HENRY ADAMS: _History of the United States of America_. 9 vols. New
York: Scribners, 1889-1891.--Period, 1801-1817. Divided into four sets,
for the first and second administrations of Jefferson and of Madison; each
set obtainable separately. The best history of the period.

33. HENRY ADAMS: _John Randolph (American Statesmen Series)_. Boston:
Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1882.

34-43. GEORGE BANCROFT: _History of the United States, from the Discovery
of the American Continent_. 10 vols. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1834-
1874.--Vols. IV.-X. cover the period 1748-1782. Of the third edition, or
"author's last revision," in six volumes (New York: Appleton, 1883-1885),
Vols. III.-VI. cover the period 1763-1789. The work is rhetorical and
lacks unity, but is valuable for facts.

44. WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT and SYDNEY HOWARD GAY: _A Popular History of
the United States_. 4 vols. New York: Scribners, 1876-1881.--Entirely
the work of Mr. Gay. Well written and well illustrated.

45,46. JOHN FISKE: _The American Revolution_. 2 vols. Boston: Houghton,
Mifflin & Co., 1891.

47. JOHN FISKE: _The Critical Period of American History_, 1783-1789.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1888.--Remarkable narrative style.

48. DANIEL C. GILMAN: _James Monroe (American Statesmen Series)_.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1883.

49-52. RICHARD HILDRETH: _The History of the United States of America_.
Two series, each 3 vols. New York: Harpers, 1849-1856 (also later editions
from the same plates).--Vols. II.-VI. cover the period 1750-1821. Very
full and accurate, but without foot-notes. Federalist standpoint.

53. JAMES K. HOSMER: _Samuel Adams (American Statesmen Series)_.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1885.

54-57. JOHN BACH MCMASTER: _A History of the People of the United
States, from the Revolution to the Civil War_. 4 vols. New York: Appleton,
1883-1895.--The four volumes published cover the period 1784-1820. The
point of view in the first volume is that of social history; in later
volumes there is more political discussion.

58. JOHN T. MORSE, JR.: _Benjamin Franklin (American Statesmen Series)_.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1889.

59, 60. FRANCIS PARKMAN: _Montcalm and Wolfe_. 2 vols. Boston: Little,
Brown & Co., 1885.

61. GEORGE PELLEW: _John Jay (American Statesmen Series)_. Boston:
Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1890.

62, 63. TIMOTHY PITKIN: _A Political and Civil History of the United
States of America, from the Year 1763 to the Close of the Administration
of President Washington, in March, 1797_. 2 vols. New Haven: Howe and
Durrie & Peck, 1828.--An old book, but well written, and suggestive as to
economic and social conditions.

64. THEODORE ROOSEVELT:_ Gouverneur Morris (American Statesmen Series)_.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1888.

65. JOHN AUSTIN STEVENS: _Albert Gallatin (American Statesmen Series)_.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1884.

66-69. GEORGE TUCKER: _The History of the United States, from their
Colonization to the End of the Twenty-Sixth Congress, in 1841_. 4 vols.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1856-1857.--Practically begins in 1774. Written
from a Southern standpoint.

70. MOSES COIT TYLER: _Patrick Henry (American Statesmen Series)_.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1887.

71-78. JUSTIN WINSOR: _Narrative and Critical History of America_. 8 vols.
Boston & New York: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1886-1889.--Vol. VI. And part
of Vol. VII. cover the period 1750-1789. The rest of Vol. VII. covers
the period 1789-1830. Remarkable for its learning and its bibliography,
but not a consecutive history.


SOURCES.


In the above collections are not included the sources which are necessary
for proper school and college work. References will be found in the
bibliographies preceding each chapter below, and through the other
bibliographies there cited.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.
THE AMERICANS IN 1750.
1. References--2. Colonial geography--3. The people and their
distribution--4. Inherited institutions--5. Colonial development of
English institutions--6. Local government in the colonies--7. Colonial
government--8. English control of the colonies--9. Social and economic
conditions--10. Colonial slavery.

CHAPTER II.
EXPULSION OF THE FRENCH (1750-1763).
11. References--12. Rival claims in North America (1690-1754)--13.
Collisions on the frontier (1749-1754)--14. The strength of the parties
(1754)--15. Congress of Albany (1754)--16. Military operations (1755-
1757)--17. The conquest of Canada (1758-1760)--18. Geographical results of
the war (1763)--19. The colonies during the war (1754-1763)--20. Political
effects of the war (1763).

CHAPTER III.
CAUSES OF THE REVOLUTION (1763-1775).
21. References--22. Condition of the British Empire (1763)--23. New
schemes of colonial regulation (1763)--24. Writs of Assistance (1761-
1764)--25. The Stamp Act (1763-1765)--26. The Stamp Act Congress (1765)--
27. Revenue acts (1767)--28. Colonial protests and repeal (1767-1770)--29.
Spirit of violence in the colonies (1770-1773)--30. Coercive acts of 1774
--31. The First Continental Congress (1774)--32. Outbreak of hostilities
(1775)--33. Justification of the Revolution.

CHAPTER IV.
UNION AND INDEPENDENCE (1775-1783).
34. References--35. The strength of the combatants (1775)--36. The Second
Continental Congress (1775)--37. The national government formed (1775)--
38. Independence declared (1776)--39. New State governments formed (1775-
1777)--40. The first period of the war (1775-1778)--41. Foreign relations
(1776-1780)--42. The war ended (1778-1782)--43. Finances of the Revolution
(1775-1783)--44. Internal difficulties (1775-1782)--45. Formation of a
Constitution (1776-1781)--46. Peace negotiated (1781-1783)--47. Political
effects of the war (1775-1783).

CHAPTER V.
THE CONFEDERATION (1781-1788).
48. References--49. The United States in 1781--50. Form of the government
(1781-1788)--51. Disbandment of the army (1783)--52. Territorial
settlement with the States (1781-1802)--53. Finances (1781-1788)--54.
Disorders in the States (1781-1788)--55. Slavery (1777-1788)--56. Foreign
relations and commerce (1781-1788)--57. Disintegration of the Union (1786,
1787)--58. Reorganization attempted (1781-1787).

CHAPTER VI.
THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION (1787-1789).
59. References--60. The Federal Convention assembled (1787)--61.
Difficulties of the convention (1787)--62. Sources of the Constitution--
63. The great compromises (1787)--64. Details of the Constitution (1787)--
65. Difficulties of ratification (1787, 1788)--66. State conventions
(1787, 1788)--67. Expiration of the Confederation (1788)--68. Was the
Constitution a compact?

CHAPTER VII.
ORGANIZATION OF THE GOVERNMENT (1789-1793).
69. References--70. Geography of the United States in 1789--71. The people
of the United States in 1789--72. Political methods in 1789--73.
Organization of Congress (1789)--74. Organization of the Executive (1789,
1790)--75. Organization of the courts (1789-1793)--76. Revenue and
protection (1789, 1790)--77. National and State debts (1789, 1790)--78.
United States Bank (1791, 1792)--79. Slavery questions (1789-1798)--80.
The success of the new government (1789-1792).

CHAPTER VIII.
FEDERAL SUPREMACY (1793-1801).
81. References--82. Formation of political parties (1792-1794)--83. War
between France and England (1793)--84. American neutrality (1793)--85. The
Jay Treaty (1794-1796)--86. The Whiskey Rebellion (1794)--87. Election of
John Adams (1796)--88. Breach with France (1795-1798)--89. Alien and
Sedition Acts (1798)--90. Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions (1798-1800)--
91. Election of 1800, 1801--92. Causes of the fall of the Federalists.

CHAPTER IX.
REPUBLICAN SUPREMACY (1801-1809).
93. References--94. The political revolution of 1801--95. Jefferson's
civil service (1801-1803)--96. Attack on the judiciary (1801-1805)--97.
The policy of retrenchment (1801-1809)--98. Barbary Wars (1801-1806)--99.
Annexation of Louisiana (1803)--100. Federal schemes of disunion (1803-
1809)--101. The Burr conspiracy (1806, 1807)--102. Aggressions on neutral
trade (1803-1807)--103. Policy of non resistance (1805-1807)--104. The
embargo (1807, 1808)--105. Repeal of the embargo (1809).

CHAPTER X.
THE UNION IN DANGER (1809-1815)
106. References--107. Non intercourse laws (1809, 1810)--108. Fruitless
negotiations (1809-1811)--109. The war party (1811)--110. Strength of the
combatants (1812)--111. War on the northern frontier (1812, 1813)--112.
Naval war (1812-1815)--113. Disastrous campaign of 1814--114. Question of
the militia (1812-1814)--115. Secession movement in New England (1814)--
116. Peace of Ghent (1812-1814)--117. Political effects of the war (1815).

CHAPTER XI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC REORGANIZATION (1815-1824)
118. References--119. Conditions of national growth (1815)--120. The
second United States Bank (1815)--121. Internal improvements (1806-1817)--
122. The first protective tariff (1816)--123. Monroe's administration
(1817-1825)--124. Territorial extension (1805-1819)--125. Judicial
decisions (1812-1824)--126. The slavery question revived (1815-1820)--127.
The Missouri Compromises (1818-1821)--128. Relations with Latin American
States (1815-1823)--129. The Monroe Doctrine (1823).

CHAPTER XII.
ELEMENTS OF POLITICAL REORGANIZATION (1824-1829).
130. References--131. Political methods in 1824--132. The tariff of 1824
(1816-1824)--133. The election of 1824--134. The election of 1825--135.
The Panama Congress (1825, 1826)--136. Internal improvements (1817-1829)--
137. The Creek and Cherokee questions (1824-1829)--138. The tariff of
abominations (1828)--139. Organized opposition to Adams (1825-1829)--140.
The triumph of the people (1828).

INDEX




LIST OF MAPS.

1. Territorial Growth of the United States

2. English Colonies, 1763-1775

3. The United States, 1783

4 The United States, March 4, 1801

5. The United States, March 4, 1825




FORMATION OF THE UNION.
1750-1829


CHAPTER I.

THE AMERICANS IN 1750


1. REFERENCES


BIBLIOGRAPHIES.--R. G. Thwaites, _Colonies_, secs. 39, 74, 90; notes to
Joseph Story, _Commentaries_, secs. 1-197; notes to H. C. Lodge, _Colonies,
passim_; notes to Justin Winsor, _Narrative and Critical History_, V. chs.
ii.-vi., Channing and Hart, _Guide_, secs. 130-133.

HISTORICAL MAPS.--R. G. Thwaites, _Colonies_, Maps Nos. 1 and 4 (_Epoch
Maps_, Nos. 1 and 4); G. P. Fisher _Colonial Era_, Maps Nos. 1 and 3;
Labberton, _Atlas_, lxiii., B. A. Hinsdale, _Old Northwest_ (republished
from MacCoun's _Historical Geography_).

GENERAL ACCOUNTS.--Joseph Story _Commentaries_, secs. 146-190; W. E. H.
Lecky, _England in the Eighteenth Century_, II. 1-21, III. 267-305; T. W.
Higginson, _Larger History_, ch. ix.; Edward Channing, _The United
States_, 1765-1865 ch. i.; H. E. Scudder, _Men and Manners in America_;
Hannis Taylor, _English Constitution_, Introduction, I.; H. C. Lodge,
_Colonies_ (chapters on social life); T. Pitkin, _United States_, I.
85-138, Justin Winsor, _Narrative and Critical History_, V. chs. ii.-vi.;
R. Frothingham, _Rise of the Republic_, chs. i., iv.; Grahame, _United
States_, III. 145-176.

SPECIAL HISTORIES.--W. B. Weeden, _Economic and Social History of New
England_, II. chs. xiv., xv.; G. E. Howard, _Local Constitutional
History_, I. chs. ii., iii., vii.-ix.; C. F. Adams, _History of Quincy_,
chs. iii.-xiv.; M. C. Tyler, _History of American Literature_, II.; Edward
Channing, _Town and County Government_, and _Navigation Acts_; F. B.
Dexter, _Estimates of Population_; C. F. Bishop, _Elections in the
Colonies_; Wm. Hill, _First Stages of the Tariff Policy_; W. E. DuBois,
_Suppression of the Slave Trade_; J. R. Brackett, _Negro in Maryland_.

CONTEMPORARY ACCOUNTS.--Benjamin Franklin, _Autobiography_ (1706-1771);
John Woolman _Journal_ (1720-1772); George Whitefield, _Journals_
(especially 1739); Kalm, _Travels_ (1748-1749); Robert Rogers, _Concise
Account of North America_ (1765); A. Burnaby, _Travels_ (1759-1760);
Edmund Burke, _European Settlements in America_; William Douglass,
_Summary_; the various colonial archives and documents.--Reprints in II.
W. Preston, _Documents Illustrative of American History_ (charters, etc.);
_New Jersey Archives_, XI., XII., XVIII. (extracts from newspapers);
_American History Leaflets_, No. 16; _Library of American Literature_,
III.; _American History told by Contemporaries_, II.


2. COLONIAL GEOGRAPHY.


[Sidenote: British America.]

By the end of the eighteenth century the term "Americans" was commonly
applied in England, and even the colonists themselves, to the English-
speaking subjects of Great Britain inhabiting the continent of North
America and the adjacent islands. The region thus occupied comprised the
Bahamas, the Bermudas, Jamaica, and some smaller West Indian islands,
Newfoundland, the outlying dependency of Belize, the territory of the
great trading corporation known as the Hudson's Bay Company, and--more
important than all the rest--the broad strip of territory running along
the coast from the Gulf of St. Lawrence to the Altamaha River.

[Sidenote: Boundaries.]

It is in this continental strip, lying between the sea and the main chain
of the Appalachian range of mountains, that the formation of the Union was
accomplished. The external boundaries of this important group of colonies
were undetermined; the region west of the mountains was drained by
tributaries of the St. Lawrence and the Mississippi rivers, and both these
rivers were held in their lower course by the French. Four successive
colonial wars had not yet settled the important question of the
territorial rights of the two powers, and a fifth war was impending.

So far as the individual colonies were concerned, their boundaries were
established for them by English grants. The old charters of Massachusetts,
Virginia, and the Carolinas had given title to strips of territory
extending from the Atlantic westward to the Pacific. Those charters had
lapsed, and the only colony in 1750 of which the jurisdiction exercised
under the charter reached beyond the Appalachian mountains was
Pennsylvania. The Connecticut grant had long since been ignored; the
Pennsylvania limits included the strategic point where the Alleghany and
Monongahela rivers unite to form the Ohio. Near this point began the final
struggle between the English and the French colonies. The interior
boundaries between colonies in 1750 were matters of frequent dispute and
law-suits. Such questions were eventually brought to the decision of the
English Privy Council, or remained to vex the new national government
after the Revolution had begun.

[Sidenote: The frontiers.]

At this date, and indeed as late as the end of the Revolution, the
continental colonies were all maritime. Each of them had sea-ports
enjoying direct trade with Europe. The sea was the only national highway;
the sea-front was easily defensible. Between contiguous colonies there was
intercourse; but Nova Scotia, the last of the continental colonies to be
established, was looked upon as a sort of outlyer, and its history has
little connection with the history of the thirteen colonies farther south.
The western frontier was a source of apprehension and of danger. In
northern Maine, on the frontiers of New York, on the west and southwest,
lived tribes of Indians, often disaffected, and sometimes hostile. Behind
them lay the French, hereditary enemies of the colonists. The natural
tendency of the English was to push their frontier westward into the
Indian and French belt.


3. THE PEOPLE AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION.


[Sidenote: Population.]

This westward movement was not occasioned by the pressure of population.
All the colonies, except, perhaps, Rhode Island, New Jersey, and Delaware,
had abundance of vacant and tillable land. The population in 1750 was
about 1,370,000. It ranged from less than 5,000 in Georgia to 240,000 in
Virginia. Several strains of non-English white races were included in
these numbers. There were Dutch in New York, a few Swedes in Pennsylvania
and New Jersey, Germans in New York and Pennsylvania, Scotch Irish and
Scotch Highlanders in the mountains of Pennsylvania and South Carolina, a
few Huguenots, especially in the South, and a few Irish and Jews. All the
rest of the whites were English or the descendants of English. A slow
stream of immigration poured into the colonies, chiefly from England.
Convicts were no longer deported to be sold as private servants; but
redemptioners--persons whose services were mortgaged for their passage--
were still abundant. Many years later, Washington writes to an agent
inquiring about "buying a ship-load of Germans," that is, of
redemptioners. There was another important race-element,--the negroes,
perhaps 220,000 in number; in South Carolina they far out-numbered the
whites. A brisk trade was carried on in their importation, and probably
ten thousand a year were brought into the country. This stream poured
almost entirely into the Southern colonies. North of Maryland the number
of blacks was not significant in proportion to the total population. A few
Indians were scattered among the white settlements, but they were an alien
community, and had no share in the development of the country.

[Sidenote: Settlements.]
[Sidenote: American character.]

The population of 1,370,000 people occupied a space which in 1890
furnished homes for more than 25,000,000. The settlements as yet rested
upon, or radiated from, the sea-coast and the watercourses; eight-tenths
of the American people lived within easy reach of streams navigable to the
sea. Settlements had crept up the Mohawk and Susquehanna valleys, but they
were still in the midst of the wilderness. Within each colony the people
had a feeling of common interest and brotherhood. Distant, outlying, and
rebellious counties were infrequent. The Americans of 1750 were in
character very like the frontiersmen of to-day, they were accustomed to
hard work, but equally accustomed to abundance of food and to a rude
comfort; they were tenacious of their rights, as became offshoots of the
Anglo-Saxon race. In dealing with their Indian neighbors and their slaves
they were masterful and relentless. In their relations with each other
they were accustomed to observe the limitations of the law. In deference
to the representatives of authority, in respect for precedent and for the
observances of unwritten custom, they went beyond their descendants on the
frontier. Circumstances in America have greatly changed in a century and a
half: the type of American character has changed less. The quieter,
longer-settled communities of that day are still fairly represented by
such islands of undisturbed American life as Cape Cod and Cape Charles.
The industrious and thriving built good houses, raised good crops, sent
their surplus abroad and bought English goods with it, went to church, and
discussed politics. In education, in refinement, in literature and art,
most of the colonists had made about the same advance as the present
farmers of Utah. The rude, restless energy of modern America was not yet
awakened.


4. INHERITED INSTITUTIONS.


[Sidenote: Sources of American government.]

In comparison with other men of their time, the Americans were
distinguished by the possession of new political and social ideas, which
were destined to be the foundation of the American commonwealth. One of
the strongest and most persistent elements in national development has
been that inheritance of political traditions and usages which the new
settlers brought with them. Among the more rigid sects of New England the
example of the Hebrew theocracy, as set forth in the Scriptures, had great
influence on government; they were even more powerfully affected by the
ideas of the Christian commonwealth held by the Protestant theologians,
and particularly by John Calvin. The residence of the Plymouth settlers in
the Netherlands, and the later conquest of the Dutch colonies, had brought
the Americans into contact with the singularly wise and free institutions
of the Dutch. To some degree the colonial conception of government had
been affected by the English Commonwealth of 1649, and the English
Revolution of 1688. The chief source of the political institutions of the
colonies was everywhere the institutions with which they were familiar at
the time of the emigration from England. It is not accurate to assert that
American government is the offspring of English government. It is nearer
the truth to say that in the middle of the seventeenth century the Anglo-
Saxon race divided into two branches, each of which developed in its own
way the institutions which it received from the parent stock. From the
foundation of the colonies to 1789 the development of English government
had little influence on colonial government. So long as the colonies were
dependent they were subject to English regulation and English legal
decisions, but their institutions developed in a very different direction.

[Sidenote: Political ideas.]

Certain fundamental political ideas were common to the older and the
younger branches of the Anglo-Saxon race, and have remained common to this
day. The first was the idea of the supremacy of law, the conception that a
statute was binding on the subject, on the members of the legislative
body, and even on the sovereign. The people on both sides of the water
were accustomed to an orderly government, in which laws were made and
administered with regularity and dignity. The next force was the
conception of an unwritten law, of the binding power of custom. This idea,
although by no means peculiar to the English race, had been developed into
an elaborate "common law,"--a system of legal principles accepted as
binding on subject and on prince, even without a positive statute. Out of
these two underlying principles of law had gradually developed a third
principle, destined to be of incalculable force in modern governments,--
the conception of a superior law, higher even than the law-making body. In
England there was no written constitution, but there was a succession of
grants or charters, in which certain rights were assured to the
individual. The long struggle with the Stuart dynasty in the seventeenth
century was an assertion of these rights as against the Crown. In the
colonies during the same time those rights were asserted against all
comers,--against the colonial governors, against the sovereign, and
against Parliament. The original colonies were almost all founded on
charters, specific grants which gave them territory and directed in what
manner they should carry on government therein. These charters were held
by the colonists to be irrevocable except for cause shown to the
satisfaction of a court of law; and it was a recognized right of the
individual to plead that a colonial law was void because contrary to the
charter. Most of the grants had lapsed or had been forcibly, and even
illegally, annulled; but the principle still remained that a law was
superior to the will of the ruler, and that the constitution was superior
to the law. Thus the ground was prepared for a complicated federal
government, with a national constitution recognized as the supreme law,
and superior both to national enactments and to State constitutions or
statutes.

[Sidenote: Principles of freedom.]

The growth of constitutional government, as we now understand it, was
promoted by the establishment of two different sets of machinery for
making laws and carrying on government. The older and the younger branches
of the race were alike accustomed to administer local affairs in local
assemblies, and more general affairs in a general assembly. The two
systems in both countries worked side by side without friction; hence
Americans and Englishmen were alike unused to the interference of
officials in local matters, and accustomed through their representatives
to take an educating share in larger affairs. The principle was firmly
rooted on both sides of the water that taxes were not a matter of right,
but were a gift of the people, voted directly or through their
representatives. On both sides of the water it was a principle also that a
subject was entitled to his freedom unless convicted of or charged with a
crime, and that he should have a speedy, public, and fair trial to
establish his guilt or innocence. Everywhere among the English-speaking
race criminal justice was rude, and punishments were barbarous; but the
tendency was to do away with special privileges and legal exemptions.
Before the courts and before the tax-gatherers all Englishmen stood
practically on the same basis.


5. COLONIAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENGLISH INSTITUTIONS.


Beginning at the time of colonization with substantially the same
principles of liberty and government, the two regions developed under
circumstances so different that, at the end of a century and a half, they
were as different from each other as from their prototype.

[Sidenote: Separation of departments.]
[Sidenote: Aristocracy.]

The Stuart sovereigns of England steadily attempted to strengthen their
power, and the resistance to that effort caused an immense growth of
Parliamentary influence. The colonies had little occasion to feel or to
resent direct royal prerogative. To them the Crown was represented by
governors, with whom they could quarrel without being guilty of treason,
and from whom in general they feared very little, but whom they could not
depose. Governors shifted rapidly, and colonial assemblies eventually took
over much of the executive business from the governors, or gave it to
officers whom they elected. But while, in the eighteenth century, the
system of a responsible ministry was growing up in England under the
Hanoverian kings, the colonies were accustomed to a sharp division between
the legislative and the executive departments. Situated as they were at a
great distance from the mother-country, the assemblies were obliged to
pass sweeping laws. The easiest way of checking them was to limit the
power of the assemblies by strong clauses in the charters or in the
governor's instructions; and to the very last the governors, and above the
governors the king, retained the power of royal veto, which in England was
never exercised after 1708. Thus the colonies were accustomed to see their
laws quietly and legally reversed, while Parliament was growing into the
belief that its will ought to prevail against the king or the judges. In a
wild frontier country the people were obliged to depend upon their
neighbors for defence or companionship. More emphasis was thus thrown upon
the local governments than in England. The titles of rank, which continued
to have great social and political force in England, were almost unknown
in America. The patroons in New York were in 1750 little more than great
land-owners; the fanciful system of landgraves, palsgraves, and caciques
in Carolina never had any substance. No permanent colonial nobility was
ever created, and but few titles were conferred on Americans. An American
aristocracy did grow up, founded partly on the ownership of land, and
partly on wealth acquired by trade. It existed side by side with a very
open and accessible democracy of farmers.

[Sidenote: Powers of the colonies.]

The gentlemen of the colonies were leaders; but if they accepted too many
of the governor's favors or voted for too many of that officer's measures,
they found themselves left out of the assemblies by their independent
constituents. The power over territory, the right to grant wild lands, was
also peculiar to the New World, and led to a special set of difficulties.
In New England the legislatures insisted on sharing in this power. In
Pennsylvania there was an unceasing quarrel over the proprietors' claim to
quit-rents. Farther south the governors made vast grants unquestioned by
the assemblies. In any event, colonization and the grant of lands were
provincial matters. Each colony became accustomed to planting new
settlements and to claiming new boundaries. The English common law was
accepted in all the colonies, but it was modified everywhere by statutes,
according to the need of each colony. Thus the tendency in colonial
development was toward broad legislation on all subjects; but at the same
time the limitations laid down by charters, by the governor's
instructions, or by the home government, increased and were observed.
Although the assemblies freely quarrelled with individual governors and
sheared them of as much power as they could, the people recognized that
the executive was in many respects beyond their reach. The division of the
powers of government into departments was one of the most notable things
in colonial government, and it made easier the formation of the later
state and national governments.


6.  LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE COLONIES.


[Sidenote: English local government.]

In each colony in 1750 were to be found two sets of governing
organizations,--the local and the general. The local unit appears at
different times and in different colonies under many names; there were
towns, townships, manors, hundreds, ridings, liberties, parishes,
plantations, shires, and counties. Leaving out of account minor
variations, there were three types of local government,--town government,
county government, and a combination of the two. Each of these forms was
founded on a system with which the colonists were familiar at the time of
settlement, but each was modified to meet the changed conditions of
America. The English county in 1600 was a military and judicial
subdivision of the kingdom; but for some local purposes county taxes were
levied by the quarter sessions, a board of local government. The officers
were the lord lieutenant, who was the military commander, and the justices
of the peace, who were at the same time petty judges and members of the
administrative board. The English "town" had long since disappeared except
as a name, but its functions were in 1600 still carried out by two
political bodies which much resembled it: the first was the parish,--an
organization of persons responsible as tax-payers for the maintenance of
the church building. In some places an assembly of these tax-payers met
periodically, chose officers, and voted money for the church edifice, the
poor, roads, and like local purposes. In other places a "select vestry,"
or corporation of persons filling its own vacancies, exercised the powers
of parish government. In such cases the members were usually of the more
important persons in the parish. The other wide-spread local organization
was the manor; in origin this was a great estate, the tenants of which
formed an assembly and passed votes for their common purposes.

[Sidenote: Towns.]

From these different forms of familiar local government the colonists
chose those best suited to their own conditions. New Englanders were
settled in compact little communities; they liked to live near the church,
and where they could unite for protection from enemies. They preferred the
open parish assembly, to which they gave the name of "town meeting." Since
some of the towns were organized before the colonial legislatures began to
pass comprehensive laws, the towns continued, by permission of the
colonial governments, to exercise extended powers. The proceedings of a
Boston town meeting in 1731 are thus reported:--

"After Prayer by the Revt. mr. John Webb,

"Habijah Savage Esqr. was chose to be Moderator for this meeting

"Proposed to Consider About Reparing mr. Nathaniell Williams His Kitchen
&c.--

"In Answer to the Earnest Desire of the Honourable House of
Representatives--

"Voted an Entire Satisfaction in the Town in the late Conduct of their
Representatives in Endeavoring to preserve their Valuable Priviledges, And
Pray their further Endeavors therein--

"Voted. That the Afair of Repairing of the Wharff leading to the North
Battrey, be left with the Selectmen to do therein as they Judge best--"

[Sidenote: Counties.]

The county was also organized in New England, but took on chiefly judicial
and military functions, and speedily abandoned local administration. In
the South the people settled in separate plantations, usually strung out
along the rivers. Popular assemblies were inconvenient, and for local
purposes the people adopted the English select vestry system in what they
called parishes. The county government was emphasized, and they adopted
the English system of justices of the peace, who were appointed by the
governor and endowed with large powers of county legislation. Hence in the
South the local government fell into the hands of the principal men of
each parish without election, while in New England it was in the hands of
the voters.

[Sidenote: Mixed System.]

In some of the middle colonies the towns and counties were both active and
had a relation with each other which was the forerunner of the present
system of local government in the Western States. In New York each town
chose a member of the county board of supervisors; in Pennsylvania the
county officers as well as the town officers became elective. Whatever the
variations, the effect of local government throughout the colonies was the
same. The people carried on or neglected their town and county business
under a system defined by colonial laws; but no colonial officer was
charged with the supervision of local affairs. In all the changes of a
century and a half since 1750 these principles of decentralization have
been maintained.


7. COLONIAL GOVERNMENT.


[Sidenote: General form.]
[Sidenote: Suffrage.]

Earlier than local governments in their development, and always superior
to them in powers, were the colonial governments. In 1750 there was a
technical distinction between the charter governments of Connecticut,
Massachusetts, and Rhode Island, the proprietary governments of
Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland, and the provincial governments of
the eight other continental colonies. In the first group there were
charters which were substantially written constitutions binding on both
king and colonists, and unalterable except by mutual consent. In the
second group some subject, acting under a royal charter, appointed the
governors, granted the lands, and stood between the colonists and the
Crown. In the third group, precedent and the governor's instructions were
the only constitution. In essence, all the colonies of all three groups
had the same form of government. In each there was an elective
legislature; in each the suffrage was very limited; everywhere the
ownership of land in freehold was a requisite, just as it was in England,
for the county suffrage. In many cases there was an additional provision
that the voter must have a specified large quantity of land or must pay
specified taxes. In some colonies there was a religious requirement. The
land qualification worked very differently from the same system in
England. Any man of vigor and industry might acquire land; and thus,
without altering the letter of the law to which they were accustomed, the
colonial suffrage was practically enlarged, and the foundations of
democracy were laid. Nevertheless, the number of voters at that time was
not more than a fifth to an eighth as large in proportion to the
population as at present. In Connecticut in 1775 among 200,000 people
there were but 4,325 voters. In 1890, the fourth Connecticut district,
having about the same population, cast a vote of 36,500.

[Sidenote: Legislature.]

The participation of the people in their own government was the more
significant, because the colonies actually had what England only seemed to
have,--three departments of government. The legislative branch was
composed in almost all cases of two houses; the lower house was elective,
and by its control over money bills it frequently forced the passage of
measures unacceptable to the co-ordinate house. This latter, except in a
few cases, was a small body appointed by the governor, and had the
functions of the executive council as well as of an upper house. The
governor was a third part of the legislature in so far as he chose to
exercise his veto power. The only other limitation on the legislative
power of the assemblies was the general proviso that no act "was to be
contrary to the law of England, but agreeable thereto."

[Sidenote: Executive.]

The governor was the head of the executive department,--sometimes a native
of the colony, as Hutchinson of Massachusetts, and Clinton of New York.
But he was often sent from over seas, as Cornbury of New York, and Dunmore
of Virginia. In Connecticut and Rhode Island the legislatures chose the
governor; but they fell in with the prevailing practice by frequently re-
electing men for a succession of years. The governor's chief power was
that of appointment, although the assemblies strove to deprive him of it
by electing treasurers and other executive officers. He had also the
prestige of his little court, and was able to form at least a small party
of adherents. As a representative of the home government he was the object
of suspicion and defiance. As the receiver and dispenser of annoying fees,
he was likely to be unpopular; and wherever it could do so, the assembly
made him feel his dependence upon it for his salary.

[Sidenote: Judiciary.]

Colonial courts were nearly out of the reach of the assemblies, except
that their salaries might be reduced or withheld. The judges were
appointed by the governor, held during good behavior, and were reasonably
independent both of royal interference and of popular clamor. The
governor's council was commonly the highest court in the colony; hence the
question of the constitutionality of an act was seldom raised: since the
council could defeat the bill by voting against it, it was seldom
necessary to quash it by judicial process. Legal fees were high, and the
courts were the most unpopular part of the governments.


8. ENGLISH CONTROL OF THE COLONIES.


[Sidenote: English statutes.]
[Sidenote: The Crown.]
[Sidenote: Parliament.]

In Connecticut and Rhode Island, where the governor was not appointed by
the Crown, the colonies closely approached the condition of republics; but
even in these cases they acknowledged several powers in England to which
they were all subject. First came English law. It was a generally accepted
principle that all English statutes in effect at the time of the first
colonization held good for the colonies so far as applicable; and the
principles of the common law were everywhere accepted. Second came the
Crown. When the colonies were founded, the feudal system was practically
dead in England; but the conception that the Crown held the original title
to all the lands was applied in the colonies, so that all titles went back
to Indian or royal grants. Parliament made no protest when the king
divided up and gave away the New World. Parliament acquiesced when by
charter he created trading companies and bestowed upon them powers of
government. Down to 1765 Parliament seldom legislated for individual
colonies, and it was generally held that the colonies were not included in
English statutes unless specially mentioned. The Crown created the
colonies, gave them governors, permitted the local assemblies to grow up,
and directed the course of the colonial executive by royal instructions.

[Sidenote: Means of control.]

The agent of the sovereign in these matters was from 1696 to 1760 the so-
called Lords of the Board of Trade and Plantations. This commission,
appointed by The Crown, corresponded with the governors, made
recommendations, and examined colonial laws. Through them were exercised
the two branches of English control. Governors were directed to carry out
a specified policy or to veto specified classes of laws. If they were
disobedient or weak, the law might still be voided by a royal rescript.
The attorneys-general of the Crown were constantly called on to examine
laws with a view to their veto, and their replies have been collected in
Chalmers's "Opinions,"--a storehouse of material concerning the relations
of the colonies with the home government. The process of disallowance was
slow. Laws were therefore often passed in the colonies for successive
brief periods, thus avoiding the effects of a veto; or "Resolves" were
passed which had the force, though not the name, of statutes. In times of
crisis the Crown showed energy in trying to draw out the military strength
of the colonies; but if the assemblies hung back there was no means of
forcing them to be active. During the Stuart period the troubles at home
prevented strict attention to colonial matters. Under the Hanoverian kings
the colonies were little disturbed by any active interference. In one
respect only did the home government press hard upon the colonies. A
succession of Navigation Acts, beginning about 1650, limited the English
colonies to direct trade with the home country, in English or colonial
vessels. Even between neighboring English colonies trade was hampered by
restrictions or absolute prohibitions. Against the legal right of
Parliament thus to control the trade of the colonies the Americans did not
protest. Protest was unnecessary, since in 1750 the Acts were
systematically disregarded: foreign vessels carried freights to and from
American ports; American goods were shipped direct to foreign countries
(sec. 23; Colonies, secs. 44, 128).


9. SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS.


[Sidenote: Social life.]
[Sidenote: Intellectual life.]
[Sidenote: Economic conditions.]

Thus, partly from circumstances, and partly by their own design, the
colonies in 1750 were developing a political life of their own. Changes of
dynasties and of sovereigns or of ministers in England little affected
them. In like manner their social customs were slowly changing. The
abundance of land favored the growth of a yeoman class accustomed to take
part in the government. Savage neighbors made necessary a rough military
discipline, and the community was armed. The distance from England and an
independent spirit threw great responsibility on the assemblies. The
general evenness of social conditions, except that some men held more land
than others, helped on a democratic spirit. The conditions of the colonies
were those of free and independent communities. On the other hand,
colonial life was at best retired and narrow; roads were poor, inns
indifferent, and travelling was unusual. The people had the boisterous
tastes and dangerous amusements of frontiersmen. Outside of New England
there were almost no schools, and in New England schools were very poor.
In 1750 Harvard, Yale, William and Mary, and the College of New Jersey
(now Princeton) were the only colleges, and the education which they gave
was narrower than that now furnished by a good high school. Newspapers
were few and dull. Except in theology, there was no special instruction
for professional men. In most colonies lawyers were lightly esteemed, and
physicians little known. City life did not exist; Philadelphia, Boston,
New York, and Charleston were but provincial towns. The colonies had only
three industries,--agriculture, the fisheries, and shipping. Tobacco had
for more than a century been the staple export. Next in importance was the
New England fishery, employing six hundred vessels, and the commerce with
the West Indies, which arose out of that industry. Other staple exports
were whale products, bread-stuffs, naval stores, masts, and pig-iron.
The total value of exports in 1750 is estimated at 814,000 pounds. To carry
these products a fleet of at least two hundred vessels was employed;
they were built in the colonies north of Virginia, and most of them in New
England. The vessels themselves were often sold abroad. With the proceeds
of the exports the colonists bought the manufactured articles which they
prized. Under the Navigation Acts these ought all to have come from
England; but French silks, Holland gin, and Martinique sugar somehow found
their way into the colonies. The colonists and the home government tried
to establish new industries by granting bounties. Thus the indigo culture
in South Carolina was begun, and many unsuccessful attempts were made to
start silk manufactures and wine raising. The method of stimulating
manufactures by laying protective duties was not unknown; but England
could not permit the colonies to discriminate against home merchants, and
had no desire to see them establish by protective duties competitors for
English manufactures. Nevertheless, Pennsylvania did in a few cases lay
low protective duties. Except for the sea-faring pursuits of the Northern
colonies, the whole continental group was in the same dependent condition.
The colonists raised their own food and made their own clothes; the
surplus of their crops was sent abroad and converted into manufactured
goods.

10. COLONIAL SLAVERY.


[Sidenote: Slave trade.]
[Sidenote: The sections.]

In appearance the labor system of all the colonies was the same. Besides
paid white laborers, there was everywhere a class of white servants bound
without wages for a term of years, and a more miserable class of negro
slaves. From Nova Scotia to Georgia, in all the West Indies, in the
neighboring French and Spanish colonies, negro slavery was in 1750 lawful,
and appeared to flourish. Many attempts had been made by colonial
legislatures to cut off or to tax the importation of slaves. Sometimes
they feared the growing number of negroes, sometimes they desired more
revenue. The legislators do not appear to have been moved by moral
objections to slavery. Nevertheless, there was a striking difference
between the sections with regard to slavery. In all the colonies north of
Maryland the winters were so cold as to interfere with farming, and some
different winter work had to be provided. For such variations of labor,
slaves are not well fitted; hence there were but two regions in the North
where slaves were profitably employed as field-hands,--on Narragansett Bay
and on the Hudson: elsewhere the negroes were house or body servants, and
slaves were rather an evidence of the master's consequence than of their
value in agriculture. In the South, where land could be worked during a
larger portion of the year, and where the conditions of life were easier,
slavery was profitable, and the large plantations could not be kept up
without fresh importations. Hence, if any force could be brought to bear
against negro slavery it would easily affect the North, and would be
resisted by the South; in the middle colonies the struggle might be long;
but even there slavery was not of sufficient value to make it permanent.

[Sidenote: Anti-slavery agitation.]

Such a force was found in a moral agitation already under way in 1750. The
Puritans and the Quakers both upheld principles which, if carried to their
legitimate consequences, would do away with slavery. The share which all
men had in Christ's saving grace was to render them brethren hereafter;
and who should dare to subject one to another in this earthly life? The
voice of Roger Williams was raised in 1637 to ask whether, after "a due
time of trayning to labour and restraint, they ought not to be set free?"
"How cursed a crime is it," exclaimed old Sewall in 1700, "to equal men to
beasts! These Ethiopians, black as they are, are sons and daughters of the
first Adam, brethren and sisters of the last Adam, and the offspring of
God." On "2d mo. 18, 1688," the Germantown Friends presented the first
petition against slavery recorded in American history. By 1750
professional anti-slavery agitators like John Woolman and Benezet were at
work in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and many wealthy Quakers had set free
their slaves. The wedge which was eventually to divide the North from the
South was already driven in 1750. In his great speech on the Writs of
Assistance in 1761, James Otis so spoke that John Adams said: "Not a
Quaker in Philadelphia, or Mr. Jefferson of Virginia, ever asserted the
rights of negroes in stronger terms."




CHAPTER II.

EXPULSION OF THE FRENCH (1750-1763).


11. REFERENCES.


BIBLIOGRAPHIES.--Justin Winsor, _Narrative and Critical History_, V.
560-622; Channing and Hart, _Guide_, secs. 131-132.

HISTORICAL MAPS.--No. 2, this volume (_Epoch Maps_, No. 5); Labberton,
_Historical Atlas_, lxiii.; B. A. Hinsdale, _Old Northwest_, I. 38, 63
(republished from MacCoun, _Historical Geography_); S. R. Gardiner,
_School Atlas_, No. 45; Francis Parkman, _Montcalm and Wolfe_,
frontispiece; Oldmixen, _British Empire_ (1741); _Mitchell's Map_ (1755);
_Evans's Map_ (1755); school histories of Channing, Johnston, Scudder,
Thomas.

GENERAL ACCOUNTS.--Geo. Bancroft, _United States_, III. chs. xxiii.,
xxiv., IV. (last revision, II. 419-565); R. Hildreth, _United States_, II.
433-513; W. E. H. Lecky, _England in the Eighteenth Century_, II. ch.
viii., III. ch. x.; B. A. Hinsdale, _Old Northwest_, ch. v.; W. M. Sloane,
_French War and Revolution_, ch. viii.; Bryant and Gay, _Popular History_,
III. 254-328; J. R. Green, _English People_, IV. 166-218; Abiel Holmes,
_Annals of America_, II. 41-123; Geo. Chalmers, _Revolt of the American
Colonies_, II. book ix. ch. xx.; T. Pitkin, _Political and Civil History_,
I. 138-154.

SPECIAL HISTORIES.--Francis Parkman, _Montcalm and Wolfe_ (2 vols.),
latest and best detailed account; G. Warburton, _Conquest of Canada_,
(1849); T. Mante, _Late War_ (1772); W. B. Weeden, _New England_, II. chs.
xvi., xvii.; M. C. Tyler, _American Literature_, II. ch. xviii.; Theodore
Roosevelt, _Winning of the West_, II.

CONTEMPORARY ACCOUNTS.--John Knox, _Historical Journal_ (1757-1760);
Pouchot, _Memoires_ (also in translation); Franklin, _Works_
(especially on the Albany Congress); Washington, _Works_, especially
his _Journal_ (Sparks's edition, II. 432-447); Robert Rogers, _Journal;
Documents relative to the Colonial History of New York_, X.--Reprints in
_American History told by Contemporaries_, II.


12. RIVAL CLAIMS IN NORTH AMERICA (1690-1754).


[Sidenote: International rivalry.]

"The firing of a gun in the woods of North America brought on a conflict
which drenched Europe in blood." In this rhetorical statement is suggested
the result of a great change in American conditions after 1750. For the
first time in the history of the colonies the settlements of England and
France were brought so near together as to provoke collisions in time of
peace. The attack on the French by the Virginia troops under Washington in
1754 was an evidence that France and England were ready to join in a
struggle for the possession of the interior of the continent, even though
it led to a general European war.

[Sidenote: Legal arguments.]

The peace of Aix-la-Chapelle of 1748 (Colonies, sec. 112) had not laid down
a definite line between the French and the English possessions west of the
mountains, According to the principles of international law observed at
the time of colonization, each power was entitled to the territory drained
by the rivers falling into that part of the sea-coast which it controlled.
The French, therefore, asserted a _prima facie_ title to the valleys
of the St. Lawrence and of the Mississippi (sec. 2); if there was a natural
boundary between the two powers, it was the watershed north and west of
the sources of the St. John, Penobscot, Connecticut, Hudson, Susquehanna,
Potomac, and James. On neither side had permanent settlements been
established far beyond this irregular ridge. This natural boundary had,
however, been disregarded in the early English grants. Did not the charter
of 1609 give to Virginia the territory "up into the land, from sea to sea,
west and northwest"? (Colonies, sec. 29.) Did not the Massachusetts,
Connecticut, and Carolina grants run westward to the "South Sea"? And
although these grants had lapsed, the power of the king to make them was
undiminished; the Pennsylvania charter, the latest of all, gave title far
west of the mountains.

[Sidenote: Expediency.]

To these paper claims were added arguments of convenience: the Lake
Champlain region, the southern tributaries of Lake Ontario, and the
headwaters of the Ohio, were more easily reached from the Atlantic coast
than by working up the rapids of the St Lawrence and its tributaries, or
against two thousand miles of swift current on the Mississippi. To the
Anglo-Saxon hunger for more land was added the fear of Indian attacks; the
savages were alarmed by the advance of settlements, and no principles of
international law could prevent frontiersmen from exploring the region
claimed by France, or from occupying favorite spots. There was no
opportunity for compromise between the two parties; agreement was
impossible, a conflict was a mere matter of time, and the elaborate
arguments which each side set forth as a basis for its claim were intended
only to give the prestige of a legal title. In the struggle the English
colonies had one significant moral advantage: they desired the land that
they might occupy it; the French wished only to hold it vacant for some
future and remote settlement, or to control the fur-trade.


13. COLLISIONS ON THE FRONTIER (1749-1754).


[Sidenote: The Iroquois]

For many years the final conflict had been postponed by the existence of a
barrier state,--the Iroquois, or Six Nations of Indians. This fierce,
brave, and statesmanlike race held a strip of the watershed from Lake
Champlain to the Allegheny River. For many years they had been subject to
English influence, exercised chiefly by William Johnson; but the
undisturbed possession of their lands was the price of their friendship.
They held back the current of immigration through the Mohawk. They aimed
to be the intermediary for the fur-trade from the northwest. They remained
throughout the conflict for the most part neutral, but forced the
contestants to carry on their wars east or south of them.

[Sidenote: English claims.]

Southwest of the territory of the Iroquois lay the region of the upper
Ohio and its tributaries, particularly the valleys of the Tennessee, the
Muskingum, the Allegheny, the Monongahela and its mountain-descending
tributary, the Youghioghany, of which the upper waters interlace with
branches of the Potomac. In this rich country, heavily wooded and
abounding in game, there were only a few Indians and no white inhabitants.
In 1749 France began to send expeditions through the Ohio valley to raise
the French flag and to bury leaden plates bearing the royal arms. A part
of the disputed region was claimed by Pennsylvania as within her charter
limits; Virginia claimed it, apparently on the convenient principle that
any unoccupied land adjacent to her territory was hers; the English
government claimed it as a vacant royal preserve; and in 1749 an Ohio
company was formed with the purpose of erecting the disputed region into a
"back colony." A royal grant of land was secured, and a young Virginian,
named George Washington, was sent out as a surveyor. He took the
opportunity to locate some land for himself, and frankly says that "it is
not reasonable to suppose that those, who had the first choice,... were
inattentive to ... the advantages of situation."

[Sidenote: Attempts to occupy.]

Foreseeing the struggle, the French began to construct a chain of forts
connecting the St. Lawrence settlements with the Mississippi. The chief
strategic point was at the junction of the Allegheny and Monongahela
rivers,--the present site of Pittsburg. The Ohio company were first on the
ground, and in 1753 took steps to occupy this spot. They were backed up by
orders issued by the British government to the governors of Pennsylvania
and Maryland "to repel force by force whenever the French are found within
the undoubted limits of their province." Thus the French and English
settlements were brought dangerously near together, and it was resolved by
Virginia to send George Washington with a solemn warning to the French. In
October, 1753, he set forth, and returned in December to announce that the
French were determined to hold the country. They drove the few English out
of their new post, fortified the spot, and called it Fort Duquesne. The
crisis seemed to Benjamin Franklin so momentous that at the end of his
printed account of the capture of the post he added a rude woodcut of a
rattlesnake cut into thirteen pieces, with the motto, addressed to the
colonies, "Join or die."

[Sidenote: No compromise.]

This was no ordinary intercolonial difficulty, to be patched up by
agreements between the frontier commanders. Both French and English
officers acted under orders from their courts. England and France were
rivals, not only on the continent, but in the West Indies, in India, and
in Europe. There was no disposition either to prevent or to heal the
breach on the Pennsylvania frontier.

[Sidenote: Washington attacks.]

When Washington set out with a small force in April, 1754, it was with the
deliberate intention of driving the French out of the region. As he
advanced towards Fort Duquesne they came out to meet him. He was the
quicker, and surprised the little expedition at Great Meadows, fired upon
the French, and killed ten of them. A few days later Washington and his
command were captured at Fort Necessity, and obliged to leave the country.
As Half King, an Iroquois chief, said, "The French behaved like cowards,
and the English like fools." The colonial war had begun. Troops were at
once despatched to America by both belligerents. In 1755 hostilities also
broke out between the two powers on the sea; but it was not until May 18,
1756, that England formally declared war on France, and the Seven Years'
War began in Europe.


14. THE STRENGTH OF THE PARTIES (1754).


[Sidenote: England and France.]

The first organized campaign in America was in 1755. Its effect was to
show that the combatants were not far from equally matched. France claimed
the position of the first European power: her army was large, her soldiers
well trained; her comparative weakness at sea was not yet evident. The
English navy had been reduced to 17,000 men; the whole English army
counted 18,000 men, of whom there were in America but 1,000. Yet England
was superior when it came to building ships, equipping troops, and
furnishing money subsidies to keep her allies in the field. The advantage
of prestige in Europe was thrown away when France allied herself with her
hereditary enemy, Austria, and thus involved herself in wars which kept
her from sending adequate reinforcements to America.

[Sidenote: The colonies.]

Until 1758 the war in the western world was fought on both sides chiefly
by the colonists. Here the British Americans had a numerical advantage
over the French. Against the 80,000 white Canadians and Louisianians they
could oppose more than 1,100,000 whites. Had the English colonists, like
the Canadians, been organized into one province, they might have been
successful within a year; but the freedom and local independence of the
fourteen colonies made them, in a military sense, weaker than their
neighbors. In Canada there was neither local government nor public
opinion; governors and intendants sent out from Paris ruled the people
under regulations framed in Paris for the benefit of the court centred in
Paris. While the colonies with difficulty raised volunteer troops, the
French commander could make a _levee en masse_ of the whole adult male
population. During the four campaigns from 1755 to 1758 the Canadians
lost little territory, and they were finally conquered only by a powerful
expedition of British regular troops and ships.

[Sidenote: Indians.]
[Sidenote: Theatre of war.]

One reason for this unexpected resistance was the aid of the Indians. The
Latin races have always had more influence over savage dependents than the
Anglo-Saxon. The French knew how to use the Indians as auxiliaries by
letting them make war on their own account and in their own barbarous
fashion. Nevertheless the Indians did not fight for the mere sake of
obliging the French, and when the tide turned, in 1759, they were mostly
detached. One other great advantage was enjoyed by the French: their
territory was difficult of access. The exposed coast was protected by the
strong fortresses of Louisbourg and Quebec, On the east, in the centre,
and on the Ohio they were in occupation and stood on the defensive. Acting
on the interior of their line, they could mass troops at any threatened
point. In the end their line was rolled up like a scroll from both ends.
Louisbourg and Fort Duquesne were both taken in 1758, but Montreal was
able to hold out until 1760.


15. CONGRESS OF ALBANY (1754).


[Sidenote: Indian treaty.]
[Sidenote: Union proposed]

Foreseeing a general colonial war, the Lords of Trade, in September, 1753,
directed the colonial governors to procure the sending of commissioners to
Albany. The first purpose was to make a treaty with the Iroquois; but a
suggestion was made in America that the commissioners also draw up a plan
of colonial union. In June, 1754, a body of delegates assembled from the
New England colonies, New York, Pennsylvania, and Maryland. The Indian
treaty was duly framed, notwithstanding the ominous suggestion of one of
the savages: "It is but one step from Canada hither, and the French may
easily come and turn you out of your doors." On June 24 the Congress of
Albany adopted unanimously the resolution that "a union of all the
colonies is at present absolutely necessary for their security and
defence;" and that "it would be necessary that the union be established by
Act of Parliament."

[Sidenote: Franklin's scheme.]

Since the extinction of the New England Confederation in 1684 (Colonies,
sec. 69) there had been no approach to any colonial union. The suggestions
of William III., of the Lords of Trade, of ministers, of colonial governors,
and of private individuals had remained without effect To Benjamin
Franklin was committed the task of drawing up a scheme which should at the
same time satisfy the colonial assemblies and the mother government. The
advantages of such an union were obvious. Combined action meant speedy
victory; separate defence meant that much of the border would be exposed
to invasion. Franklin hoped to take advantage of the pressure of the war
to induce the colonies to accept a permanent union. His draft, therefore,
provided for a "President General," who should have toward the union the
powers usually enjoyed by a governor towards his colony. This was not
unlike a project in view when Andros was sent over in 1685. The startling
innovation of the scheme was a "Grand Council," to be chosen by the
colonial assemblies. The duty of this general government was to regulate
Indian affairs, make frontier settlements, and protect and defend the
colonists. The plan grew upon Franklin as he considered it, and he added a
scheme for general taxes, the funds to be raised by requisitions for
specific sums on the separate colonial treasurers.

[Sidenote: The union fails.]

The interest of the plan is that it resembles the later Articles of
Confederation. At first it seemed likely to succeed; none of the twenty-
five members of the congress seem to have opposed it, but not one colony
accepted it. The charter and proprietary colonies feared that they might
lose the guaranty afforded by their existing grants. The new union was to
be established by Act of Parliament. Of government by that body they knew
little, and they had no disposition to increase the power of the Crown.
The town of Boston voted "to oppose any plan of union whereby they shall
apprehend the Liberties and Priviledges of the People are endangered." The
British government also feared a permanent union, lest it teach the
colonies their own strength in organization. The movement for the union
had but the faint approval of the Lords of Trade, and received no
consideration in England. As Franklin said: "The assemblies all thought
there was too much _prerogative_, and in England it was thought to have
too much of the _democratic_."


16. MILITARY OPERATIONS (1755-1757).


[Sidenote: Character of the war]

Washington's defeat in 1754 was followed by active military preparations
on both sides. So far as the number of campaigns and casualties goes, it
was a war of little significance; but it was marked by romantic incidents
and heroic deeds. Much of the fighting took place in the forest. The
Indians showed their characteristic daring and their characteristic
unwillingness to stand a long-continued, steady attack. Their scalping-
knives and stakes added a fearful horror to many of the battles. On both
sides the military policy seemed simple. The English must attack, the
French must do their best to defend. The French were vulnerable in Nova
Scotia and on the Ohio; their centre also was pierced by two highways
leading from the Hudson,--one through Lake Champlain, the other through
the Mohawk and Lake Ontario. These four regions must be the theatre of
war, and in 1755 the British government, seconded by the colonists,
planned an attack on the four points simultaneously.

[Sidenote: Braddock's expedition.]

The most difficult of the four tasks was the reduction of Fort Duquesne,
and it was committed to a small force of British regulars, with colonial
contingents, under the command of General Braddock. The character of this
representative of British military authority is summed up in a phrase of
his secretary's: "We have a general most judiciously chosen for being
disqualified for the service he is employed on in almost every respect."
Before him lay three plain duties,--to co-operate with the provincial
authorities in protecting the frontier, to impress upon the Indians the
superior strength of the English, and to occupy the disputed territory. He
did none of them. Among the provincials was George Washington, whose
experience in this very region ought to have influenced the general; but
the latter obstinately refused to learn that the rules of war must be
modified in a rough and wooded country, among frontiersmen and savage
enemies. July 9, 1755, the expedition reached a point eight miles from
Fort Duquesne. As Braddock's little army marched forward, with careful
protection against surprise, it was greeted with a volley from 250 French
Canadians and 230 Indian allies. Though the Canadians fled, the Indians
stood their ground from behind trees and logs. The Virginians and a few
regulars took to trees also, but were beaten back by the oaths and blows
of Braddock. "We would fight," they said, "if we could see anybody to
fight with." After three hours' stand against an invisible foe, Braddock's
men broke and abandoned the field. Out of 1,466 officers and men, but 482
came off safe. The remnant of the expedition fled, abandoned the country,
left the frontier unprotected; and over the road which they had
constructed came a stream of marauding Indians.

[Sidenote: Removal of the Acadians.]

In the centre the double campaign was equally unfruitful. On the borders
of Nova Scotia the French forts were captured. The victors felt unable to
hold the province, although it had been theirs since 1713, except by
removing the French Acadian inhabitants. It was a strong measure, carried
out with severity. Six thousand persons were distributed among the
colonies farther south, where their religion and their language both
caused them to be suspected and often kept them from a livelihood. The
justification was that the Acadians were under French influence, and were
likely to be added to the fighting force of the enemy; the judgment of
Parkman is that the "government of France began with making the Acadians
its tools, and ended with making them its victims."

[Sidenote: Campai