ed down
with liquids.  Instead of giving stale bread, zwieback may be used.
Occasionally feed a few spoons of very thin and well cooked oatmeal or
whole wheat gruel, but the less sloppy food given the better, for it
does not get the proper mouth treatment. The wheat products fed the
child should be made from whole wheat flour, or at least three-fourths
whole wheat and only one-fourth of the white flour. The refined flour is
lacking in the salts that the child needs for health and growth.

Many mothers begin feeding starches when the baby is four or five months
old. The child is given potatoes, bread or any other starchy food that
may be on the table. This is a mistake, for the child is not prepared to
digest starches at that early age. Some of the digestive ferments are
practically absent during the first few months of life. Such feeding
will invariably cause trouble. The baby should not be taken to the
table.

It is quite generally believed that a baby should cry to exercise its
lungs. A healthy, comfortable baby will do little or no crying, and it
is not necessary. It is not difficult to give the little ones some
exercise to fill their lungs. Babies can hang on to a finger or a thin
rod tenaciously. Elevate the infant that does not cry thus a few times
above the bed and let it hang for a few seconds each time. This throws
the chest forward and exercises the lungs. What is more, this small
amount of gymnastic work is thoroughly enjoyed. It helps to build
strength and good temper. The crying helps to make the baby ill-tempered
and fretful. A little crying now and then is all right, but much
indicates discomfort, disease or a spoiled child. It would surprise most
mothers how good babies are when they have a chance to be good.

After reading this, some are sure to ask how many ounces to feed the
baby. I don't know. No one else knows. Different babies have different
requirements. The key is given above. If the babies become ill it is
nearly always due to overfeeding and poor food, so the proper thing to
do is to reduce the food intake.

A healthy baby is a source of unending joy, while a sick one saps the
mother's vitality. It is too bad that the art of efficient child culture
is so little known.


CHILDHOOD.

Children may roughly be divided into two types, the robust and the more
delicate or nervous ones. The robust children can stand almost all kinds
of abuse with no apparent harm resulting, but the immunity is only
apparent. The growing child naturally throws off disease influences
easily and quickly, but if the handicap is too great the child loses out
in the race.

The nervous type can not be abused with impunity, for the bodies of
these delicately balanced children are easily disturbed. They must have
more intelligent care than is usually bestowed upon the robust type. If
the care is not forthcoming they become weak in body, with an unstable
nervous system, or perish early.

Some parents complain because other people's children can do what their
own can not and they wonder why. No time should be wasted in making such
comparisons, for no two children are exactly alike, as no two leaves and
not even two such apparently similar objects as grains of wheat are
exactly alike. Therefore the care necessary varies somewhat, though it
is basically the same.

If the nervous type is given proper care, good health will be the
result. These children do not tolerate as much exposure or as much food
as do the robust children. The important thing is to learn what they
require and then see that there is no excess, and in this way allow the
child to grow physically strong and mentally efficient.

The delicate children are perhaps more fortunate than the stronger ones,
for they learn early in life that they have limitations. If they commit
excesses the results are so disagreeable that they soon learn to be
prudent. This prudence serves as protection so long as life lasts.

The robust children on the other hand soon learn that they are strong.
They hear their parents boast about it. They get the idea that because
they are strong they will always remain so, that nothing will do them
any serious harm. By living up to this fallacy they undermine their
constitutions. Parents should teach their children about the law of
compensation as applied to health, that is, he has permanent health who
deserves it, and no one else. The children will not always heed true
teachings after they have left the parental influence, but the parents
have at least done the best they could.

The robust children have their troubles, such as chicken-pox, mumps,
fevers and measles, but these are thrown off so quickly and with so
little inconvenience that they are soon forgotten. As a rule the parents
do not realize that these diseases are due to faulty nutrition, and that
faulty nutrition is caused by improper feeding. It is generally believed
that children must have all the so-called children's diseases. Some
mothers expose their infants to all of these that may happen to be in
the neighborhood, hoping that the children will take them and be through
with them.

Every time a child is sick it is a reflection on either the intelligence
or the performance of the parents. It is natural for children to be
perfectly well, and they will remain in that happy state if they are
given the opportunity. If they are properly fed they will not take any
of the children's diseases in spite of repeated exposure. There is not a
disease germ known to medical science strong enough to establish itself
in the system of an uninjured, healthy child and do damage. The child's
health must first be impaired, through poor care, and then the so-called
disease germs will find a hospitable dwelling place. If children are
given natural food in normal quantities they are disease-proof. Feeding
them on refined sugar and white flour products, pasteurized or
sterilized milk, potatoes fried in grease pickled meats, and various
other ruined foods breaks down their resistance and then they fall an
easy prey to disease.

Some parents make the mistake of believing that they can feed their
children improperly and ward off disease by vaccinations or inoculations
of the products of disease taken from various animals. This is contrary
to reason, common sense and nature and it is impossible. Any individual
who is continually abused in any way, be he infant or adult, will
deteriorate. If the disease is not the one that has been feared, it will
be some other one.

The robust children generally develop into careless adults. That is why
so many of them, in fact the vast majority, die before they are fifty
years old, although they are equipped with constitutions that were
intended to last over a century. They are shining marks for typhoid
fever, Bright's disease, various forms of heart and liver troubles,
rheumatism and pneumonia, all of which are largely caused by too hearty
eating. These diseases often come without apparent warning. That is, the
victims have thought themselves healthy. However, they have not known
what real health is. They have been in a state of tolerable health, not
suffering any very annoying aches or pains, but they have lacked the
normal state of body which results in a clear, keen mind. As a rule
there is enough indigestion present to cause gas in the bowels and a
coated tongue. Enough food is generally eaten to produce excessive blood
pressure.

The foundation for such a state of affairs is laid in childhood, yes,
often before the child is born. It can readily be seen how important it
is for parents to impart a little sound health information to the
children. At least, they should teach them what health really is, which
many people do not know.

When these strong people become sick it is often difficult, or even
impossible, to do anything for them, for their habits are so gross and
have gained such a mastery that the patients will not or can not change
their ways.

The weaklings have a better chance to survive to old age, because many
of them learn to be careful early in life. In reading the lives of
eminent men who have lived long it is common to find that they were
never strong.

At the age of one year the baby is generally weaned. The ordinary child
needs the mother's milk no longer, for by this time the digestive power
is great enough to cope with cow's milk and various starches. The most
important problem now is how to feed the child. If no errors of
importance are made it will enjoy uninterrupted growth and health. If
the errors are many and serious there will surely be disease and too
often the abuse is so great that death comes and ends the suffering.

Until the child reaches the age of two years the best foods are milk,
whole wheat products and fruits. No other foods are necessary. The
simpler the baby's food, and the more naturally and plainly prepared,
the better. Adults who overeat until they suffer from jaded appetites,
may think that they need great variety of food, but it is never
necessary for infants or normal adults. Milk, whole wheat and fruits
contain all the elements needed for growth and strength and health. By
all means feed simply. Children are perfectly satisfied with bread and
milk or simply one kind of fruit at a meal, if they are properly
trained. The craving for a great variety of foods at each meal is due to
parental mismanagement.

Children should not be fed more than three times a day. There should be
no lunching. The children will get all that is good for them, all they
need in three meals. Candy should not be given between meals, and fruit
is to be looked upon as a food, not as a dainty to be consumed at all
hours of the day. If they are not accustomed to lunching, there will be
no craving for lunches. If children are used to four or five meals a day
they want them and raise annoying objections when deprived of one or two
of them. It is easy to get children into bad habits. We can not blame
the average mother for giving her children lunches, for she knows no
better and sees other mothers doing the same.

The children who do not get lunches thrive better than those who always
have candy, fruit or bread and jam at their command. It is the same with
adults. In the Dakotas and Minnesota are many Scandinavians and Germans.
During the haying and harvest these people, who are naturally very
strong, eat four and five times a day. The heat, the excessive amount of
food and the great quantities of coffee consumed cause much sickness
during and after the season of hard work and heroic eating. The
so-called Americans in these communities are generally satisfied with
three meals a day, and they are as well nourished and capable of working
as those who eat much more.

Refined sugar made from cane and beets should be given to children
sparingly. Refined sugar is the chemical which is largely responsible
for the perversion of children's tastes. A normal taste is very
desirable, for it protects the possessor. A perverted taste, on the
contrary, leads him into trouble. Sugar is not a good food. It is an
extract. It is easy to cultivate a desire for sugar, but to people who
are not accustomed to it, concentrated sugar has an unpleasant taste.

The perversion of the sense of taste, generally begun with sugar, is
made worse by the use of much salt, pepper and various condiments and
spices. If the child is fed on unnatural food, highly seasoned, at the
age of a few years its taste is so perverted that it does not know how
most of the common foods really taste, and refuses to eat the best of
them when the health-destroying concoctions to which it has been
accustomed can be had.

It is natural for children to relish fruit, but some are so perverted in
taste that they object to a meal of it if they can get pancakes or
waffles with butter and syrup, mushes with sugar and cream, ham or bacon
with fried potatoes, or fresh bread and meat with pickles. Many parents
allow their children to live on this class of food to the exclusion of
all natural foods. Children need a great deal of the natural salts, and
when they live so largely on denatured foods there is always physical
deterioration. It is true that to the average eye such children may
appear healthy, but they are not in one-half as good physical condition
as they could be.

Tea and coffee should never be given to children. They are bad enough
for adults. In children they retard bodily development. The stimulation
and sedation are bad for the nervous system. Coffee is as harmful as
tobacco for the growing child.

To warn against alcohol may seem foolish, but some parents really give
beer and whiskey to their infants. The beer is given as a beverage and
the whiskey as medicine to kill pain and soothe the children. Those who
have not seen children abused in this way may find it difficult to
believe that there is such a profundity of ignorance. These children die
easily.

Others quiet their children with the various soothing syrups. The last
analyses that came under my eyes showed that these remedies contained
considerable opium, laudanum, morphine and other deadly poisons.
Morphine and opium are not well borne by children and these "mother's
friends" have soothed many a baby into the sleep from which there is no
waking. Make it a rule to give the children no medicines, either patent
or those prescribed by physicians. Please remember that any remedy that
quiets a child is poisonous. Children who get proper care require no
medical quieting.

Condiments should not be used. Salt is not necessary despite the popular
belief to the contrary, though a small amount does no harm. Salt eating
is a habit and when carried to excess it is a bad one. Salt is a good
preservative, but there is little excuse for our using preserved foods
extensively. There are so many foods that can be had without being
preserved in this country that it would not be difficult to exclude
these inferior foods from the dietary. Children whose foods are not
seasoned do not desire seasoning, provided they are fed on natural foods
from the start. They want the seasoning because they are taught to eat
their food that way. If they are given fresh fruit every day, such as
apples, oranges, cherries, grapes and berries, they get all the
seasoning they need and they get it in natural form.

The objection is made that such feeding deprives children of many of the
good things of life. This is not true. Natural foods taste better than
the doctored ones every time. Nature imparts a flavor to food products
which man has never been able to equal, to say nothing of surpassing it.
Children are taught to like abnormal foods. What is better, to give
children good foods upon which they thrive, or denatured foods which
taste well to a perverted palate, but are injurious?

Instead of giving sugar or candy, give raisins, figs, dates or sweet
prunes. Small children may be given the strained juices of these fruits,
obtained either by soaking the raw fruits several hours or by stewing
them. Children who are given these fruits do not crave refined sugar.
They like these natural sugars better than the artificial extract. These
sweet fruits take the place of starchy food.

Very few people know anything definite about food values. Those who have
studied foods and their values in order to be able to feed children
properly generally make the mistake of believing that they should have
all the necessary elements at each meal in about the proper proportion.
This is a grave mistake and leads to trouble. The child needs salts,
protein, sugar and fat, and in the absence of sugar some starch. Milk
contains all these substances except starch. Give one fruit meal and two
meals of starch daily. Milk may be given with all the meals or it may be
given but once or twice. Do not overfeed on milk, for it is a rich food.

Until the child is two years old, confine it in its starch eating pretty
much to the products of whole wheat. Give no white bread. White bread is
an unsatisfying form of food. It is so tasteless and insipid and so
deprived of the natural wheat salts that too much has to be eaten to
satisfy. Children who would be satisfied with a reasonable amount of
whole wheat bread eat more white bread and still do not feel satisfied.
The same is true of rice, the natural brown rice being so superior to
the polished article that there is no comparison.

The bread should be toasted in the oven until it is crisp clear through,
or else it should be stale. Let the bread for toast get stale, and then
place it in the oven when this is cooling off. Make the slices
moderately thin. This is an easy and satisfactory way of making toast.
Scorched bread--what is usually called toast--is not fit food for young
children.

After the second year is completed gradually increase the variety of
starch. Some of the better forms of starch that are easy to obtain are:
Puffed rice or puffed wheat; brown, unpolished rice; triscuit or
shredded wheat biscuit; the prepared corn and wheat flakes; baked
potatoes; occasionally well cooked oatmeal or whole wheatmeal gruel.
Mushes are to be given seldom or never. Children seldom chew them well,
and they require thorough mastication. The rice is not to be sugared but
after the child has had enough, milk may be given. A small amount of
butter may be served with either rice or baked potato. The cereal foods
should be eaten dry. Let the children masticate them, as they should,
and as they will not if the starches are moistened with milk. When they
have had sufficient of these starches, and but one kind is to be served
at a meal, give milk, if milk is to be a part of the meal. To observe
the suggestions here given for the manner of feeding starches to
children may mean the difference between success and failure in raising
them. It is the little things that are important in the care of
children.

The acid fruits should not be given in the meals containing starchy
foods. Strong children who have plenty of opportunity to be in the fresh
air and who are very active can stand this combination, but it is
injurious to the nervous type. It is not a good thing to make such
combinations habitually for robust children. A good meal can be made of
fruit followed by milk. Do not slice the fruit, sprinkle it with sugar
and cover it with cream. Give the child the fruit and nothing else.
Neither oranges nor grapefruits are to be sugared. Their flavor is
better without. If the children want sweets, give them a meal of sweet
fruits.

When the child is eighteen months old it should have learned to
masticate well enough to eat various fruits. Apples, oranges,
grapefruits, berries, cherries, grapes and melons are among the foods
that may be given. If the child does not masticate well, either grind
the fruit or scrape it very fine. The sweet fruits require so much
mastication that only their juices should be fed until the child is old
enough to masticate thoroughly. Bananas should also be withheld until
there is no doubt about the mastication. They must be thoroughly ripe,
the skin being dark in spots and the flesh firm and sweet. A green
banana is very starchy, but a ripe one contains hardly any starch and
digests easily.

At first the meal is fruit, followed with milk. Buttermilk or clabbered
milk may be substituted for sweet milk. A little later, begin giving
cottage cheese occasionally in place of milk, if the child likes it.

The succulent vegetables may be given quite early. At the age of two
years stewed onions, green peas, cauliflower, egg plant and summer
squash may be given. Gradually increase the variety until all the
succulent vegetables are used. At first it may be necessary to mash
these vegetables.

The longer children go without meat the better, and if they never
acquired the meat-eating habit it would be a blessing. If the parents
believe in feeding their children meat, they should wait until the
little ones are at least four years old before beginning. Meats are
digestible enough, but too stimulating for young people. Chicken and
other fowls may be used at first, and it is best to use young birds.
Beef and pork should not be on the children's menu. At the age of seven
or eight the variety may be increased. However, parents who wish to do
the best by their children will give them little or no meat. Many of the
sorrows that parents suffer through their wayward children would be done
away with if the young people were fed on less stimulating foods.

Eggs are better for children than meat. However, it is not necessary to
give them. The children get enough milk to supply all the protein they
need. Eggs may be given earlier than meat. At the age of two and
one-half years an egg may be given occasionally. At three they may be
given every other day, one egg at a meal. At five or six years of age,
an egg may be given daily, but not more than one at a time. If they are
soft boiled, three and one-half minutes will suffice. If hard boiled,
cook them fifteen to twenty minutes. An egg boiled seven or eight
minutes is not only hard but tough. Longer boiling makes the albumin
mellow. Always prepare eggs simply without using grease.

Eggs may be given in combination with either fruits or vegetables. Milk
is not to be taken in the egg meal, for if such combinations are made
the child gets more protein than necessary. Eggs are easy to digest and
the chief objection to their free use in feeding children is that the
protein intake will be too great, which causes disease.

Nuts should not be given until the children are old enough to masticate
them thoroughly. The best combination is the same as for eggs. Children
under six years of age should not have much more than one-half of an
ounce of nut meats at a meal. The pecans are the best. Children rarely
chew nuts well enough, so they should seldom be used. They may be ground
very fine and made into nut butter, which may be substituted for
ordinary butter.

Give no butter until the child has completed his second year. The whole
milk contains all the fat necessary. Butter should always be used in
moderation, for although it digests easily, it is a very concentrated
food.

Again the question will be asked: "How much shall I feed my child?" I do
not know, but I do know that most children get at least three times as
much food as is good for them. People can establish a toleration to a
certain poison, and seemingly take it with impunity for a while. Some
arsenic eaters and morphine addicts take enough of their respective
drugs daily to kill a dozen normal men. However, the drugs, if not
stopped, always ruin the user in the end. It is the same way with food.
Children seem to establish a toleration for an excess for a shorter or
longer period of time, but the overeating always produces discomfort and
disease in the end, and if it is continued it will cause premature
death.

About one-third or one-fourth of what children eat is needed to nourish
them. The rest makes trouble. Read the chapters in this book on
overeating and on normal food intake. They give valuable pointers.
Parents know their children best, and the mother can, or should be able
to tell when there are signs of impending danger. If there is a decided
change in the child's disposition it generally denotes illness. Some
children become very sweet when they are about to be ill, but most of
them are so cranky that they make life miserable for the family. A foul,
feverish breath nearly always comes before the attack. A common danger
signal is a white line around the mouth. Another one is a white, pinched
appearance of the nose. A flushed face is quite common. The tongue never
looks normal. Except the abnormal tongue, these symptoms are not all
present before every attack, but one or more of them generally are. No
matter what the signs of trouble may be, stop all feeding immediately.
If this is done, the disease generally fails to develop, but if feeding
is continued there is sure to be illness. These symptoms indicate that
the digestion is seriously disturbed. It is folly to feed when there is
an acute attack of indigestion. Besides, it is very cruel, for it causes
much suffering.

Such symptoms in children are caused by improper eating, and overeating
is generally the chief fault. The remedy is very simple: Feed less.

A coated tongue indicates too much food. A clean tongue shows that the
digestive organs are working well. If the tongue is not smooth and a
pretty pink in color, it means that the child has had too much food and
the meals must be reduced in quantity until the tongue does become
normal, which may take a few months in chronic cases. Peculiar little
protruding spots when red and prominent on the tip and edges of the
tongue indicate irritation of the alimentary tract and call for
reduction of food intake.

The parents can soon learn how much to feed the children if they will be
guided by these hints. Poor health in the children indicates parental
failure, and this is one place where they can not afford to fail.
Parents must be honest with themselves and not put the blame where the
doctors put it--on bacteria, draughts, the weather, etc. Sometimes the
climate is very trying on the babies, but it never kills those who have
intelligent care.

If it is found that the child next door, of the same age, eats three or
four times as much as your child, do not become alarmed about your
little one, but give the neighbor's child a little silent sympathy
because its parents are ignorant enough to punish the little one so
cruelly.

For those who desire more definite hints regarding feeding of children,
an outline has been prepared for several days. This is very simple
feeding, but it is the kind of feeding that will make a rose bloom in
each cheek. The child will be happy and contented and bring joy to the
hearts of the parents.

Breakfast: Whole wheat toast, butter and a glass of milk.

Lunch: A baked apple and a dish of cottage cheese.

Supper: Steamed or boiled brown rice and milk.


Breakfast: Puffed wheat and milk.

Lunch: Oranges and milk.

Supper: An egg, parsnips and onions, both stewed.


Breakfast: Oatmeal or whole wheat porridge and milk.

Lunch: Berries and milk.

Supper: Baked potato, spinach and a plate of lettuce.


Breakfast: Shredded wheat biscuit and milk.

Lunch: Stewed prunes and milk or cottage cheese.

Supper: Whole wheat toast and milk.


These are merely hints. Where one juicy fruit is suggested, another may
be substituted. In place of the succulent vegetables named, others may
be used. Any of the starches may be selected in place of the ones given.
However, no mistake will be made in using the whole wheat products as
the starch mainstay.

Desserts should not be fed to children often. Rich cakes and all kinds
of pies should be omitted from the bill of fare. It is true that some
children can take care of them, but what is the use of taking chances? A
plain custard, lightly flavored, may be given with toast. If ice cream
is above suspicion a moderate dish of this with some form of starch may
be given, but milk is not to be taken in the same meal with either ice
cream or custard.

At the end of the third year it is time enough to begin to feed the
salad vegetables, though they may be given earlier to children who
masticate well. The dressing should be very plain, nothing more than a
little salt and olive oil, or some clabbered cream. No dressing is
necessary. The salad vegetables may be eaten with the meal containing
eggs and the stewed succulent vegetables.

At the age of about seven or eight the child may be put on the same diet
as the parents, provided they live simply. Otherwise, continue in the
old way a little longer. For the best results in raising children,
simplicity is absolutely necessary.

Children who are early put on a stimulating diet develop mental and
sexual precocity, both of which are detrimental to physical welfare. The
first desideratum is to give the children healthy bodies, and then there
will be no trouble in giving them what knowledge they need.

In overfed boys the sex urge is so strong that they acquire secret
habits, and sometimes commit overt acts. Too much protein is especially
to blame. These facts are not understood by many and the result is that
the parents fail in their duty to their children.

It is best not to bring young children to the table, if there is
anything on it that they should not have, for it nearly always results
in improper feeding. The children are curious and they beg for a little
of this and a little of that. Unthinkingly the parents give them little
tastes and bites and before the meal is over they have had from six to
twelve different kinds of food, some of them not fit for adult
consumption. If the child understands that it is not to ask for these
things and abides by this rule, it is all right, but such children are
rare. A child that fretfully begs for this and that at the table upsets
itself and the parents.

Make no sudden changes in the manner of feeding, unless the feeding is
decidedly wrong.

Active children get all the exercise they need. They should spend a
large part of the day in the open, and this is even more important for
the delicate ones. The bedroom should be well ventilated, but the
children must be kept cozy and warm or they do not sleep well.

After the child is old enough not to soil itself, one or two baths a
week are sufficient. There is no virtue in soaking. Swimming is
different, for here the child is active in the water and it does not
weaken him so. Swimming should be a part of every child's education.

Bed time should be early. The children should be tucked in and the light
turned off by 8 o'clock, and 7 o'clock is better for children under
five. If they want to get up early in the morning, let them, but put
them to bed early at night.

Infants should not be exposed long to the direct rays of the summer sun,
for it is liable to cause illness. It upsets the stomach and then there
is a feverish spell. If nothing is fed that will generally be all, but
it is unnecessary to make babies ill in this way. They should not be
chilled either.

Husband and wife do not agree at all times, but they make a mistake when
they disagree in the presence of their children. Young people are quick
to take advantage of such a state of affairs and they begin to play the
parents against each other. When a point comes up where there is a
difference of opinion, the decision of the parent who speaks first
should stand, at least for the time being. Then when they are by
themselves, man and wife can discuss the matter if it is not
satisfactory, and even quarrel about it, if that gives them pleasure.
Parents who do not control themselves can not long retain the full
respect of their children. Lost respect is not very far distant from
lost love.

People often object to a change in methods, for, they say, the new plan
will cause too much trouble. The plan here outlined causes less trouble
than the conventional method of caring for children. It is simpler and
gives better results. If it were followed out the mortality of children
under ten years of age in this country would be reduced from over
400,000 annually to less than 25,000. In spite of everything, a number
of young people will get into fatal pranks.

There are difficulties in the way of raising children properly, but a
healthy child is such a great reward that the efforts are paid for a
hundred times over. Nothing wears the parents out more quickly than a
child who is always fretting and crying, always on the brink of disease
or in its grasp. In raising children the best way is the easiest way.


THE CHILD'S MENTAL TRAINING.

A healthy body is the child's first requirement. However, if the mental
training is poor, giving wrong views of life, a good physique is of but
little service.

It is quite generally agreed among observers that the first seven years
of life leave the mental impressions which guide the whole life, and
that after the age of fourteen the mental trend rarely changes. There
are a few individuals with strength enough to make themselves over
mentally after reaching adult life, but these are so few that they are
almost negligible, and even they are largely influenced by their youth
and infancy. It is as easy to form good mental habits as bad ones. It is
within the power of all parents to give their children healthy bodies
and healthy minds, and this is a duty, which should prove a pleasure.
The reason such heritage is so rare is that it requires considerable
self-control and most parents live chaotic lives.

Upon the mentality depends the success in life. "It is the mind that
makes the body rich." No matter how great an individual's success may
seem in the eyes of the public, if the person lacks the proper
perspective, the proper vision and the right understanding, his success
is an empty thing. Wealth and success are considered synonymous, but I
have found more misery in the homes of the rich than among the poor.
Physical wants can be supplied and the suffering is over, but mental
wants can only be satisfied through understanding, which should be
cultivated in childhood.

"All our problems go back to the child--corrupt politics, dishonesty and
greed in commerce, war, anarchism, drunkenness, incompetence and
criminality."--Moxom.

Given a healthy body and a good mind, every individual is able to become
a useful member of society, and that is all that can be expected of the
average individual. All can not be eminent, and it is not necessary.

Upon the child's mental impressions and the habits formed in infancy and
youth depend the mental workings and the habits of later life. Therefore
it is necessary to nurture the little people in the right kind of
atmosphere. If the child is trained properly from infancy there will be
no serious bad habits to overcome during later years,  and, as all know,
habits are the hardest of all bonds to break. To overcome the coffee and
alcohol habits is hard, but to overcome bad mental habits is even more
difficult.

First of all, let the infant alone most of the time. Some mothers are so
full of love and nonsense that they take their babies up to cuddle and
love them at short intervals, and then there are the admiring relatives
who like to flatter the parents by telling them that the baby is the
finest one they have seen; it is an exceptional baby. So the relatives
have to bother the infant and kiss it. This should not be. The child
should be kept in a quiet room and should not be disturbed. There are no
exceptional babies. They are all much alike, except that some are a
little healthier than others. If they are let alone, they have the best
opportunity to develop into exceptional men and women.

Paying too much attention to babies makes them cross and irritable. They
soon learn to like and then to demand attention. If they do not get it
at once they become ill-tempered and cry until attention is given. Thus
the foundation of bad temper is laid in the very cradle. They gain their
ends in infancy by crying. Later on they develop the whining habit. When
they grow older they fret and worry. Such dispositions are the faults of
the parents.

It does not take long for children to learn how to get their way, and if
they can do it by being disagreeable, you may be sure that they will
develop the worst side of their nature. Let the child understand that
being disagreeable buys nothing, and there will soon be an end of it.
Children who are well and well cared for are happy. They cause their
elders almost no trouble. To lavish an excessive amount of care on a
baby may be agreeable to the mother at first, but it is different when
it comes to caring for an ill-tempered, spoiled child of eight or nine
years.

Many crimes are committed in the name of love. Many babies are killed by
love. Unless love is tempered by understanding it is as lethal as
poison. Many parents think they are showing love when they indulge their
children, but instead they are putting them onto the road that leads to
physical and mental decay. True love is helpful, kind and patient. The
spurious kind is noisy, demonstrative and impatient.

Do what is necessary for children, but do not allow them to cause
unnecessary work. What they can do for themselves they should do. They
can be taught to be helpful very early. They should be taught to be neat
and tidy. They should learn to dress themselves and how to keep their
rooms and personal effects in good order early in life, no matter how
many servants there may be. These little things are reflected in their
later lives. They help to form the individual's character. It is what we
do that largely make us what we are, and every little act and every
thought has a little influence in shaping our lives. An orderly body
helps to make an orderly mind and vice versa.

Many of the rich children are unfortunate indeed. Some times poor
parents have so many children that each one gets scant attention, but
the children of many of the rich get no parental attention. The parents
are too busy accumulating or preserving a fortune and climbing a social
ladder to bother with their children. Their raising is delegated to
servants. At times the little ones are put on display for a few minutes
and then the parents are as proud of them as they are of the expensive
paintings that adorn the walls or the blooded dogs and horses in kennels
and stables. No amount of paid service can compensate for the lack of
parental love.

The ideal today, especially for female children, seems to be to make
ornaments of them, to train them to be useless. Girls, as well as boys,
should be taught to be useful. They should be taught that those who do
not labor are parasites. If some do not work, others have to work too
hard. The story is told of Mark Twain that he dined with an English
nobleman who boasted that he was an earl and did not labor. "In our
country," said Mark Twain, "we do not call people of your class earls;
we call them hoboes."

It does not matter how wealthy parents are, they should teach their
children how to earn a living, and they should instill into them the
ideal of service, for a life of idleness is a failure. The shirkers and
wasters are not happy. The greatest contentment in life comes from the
performance of good work. Ecstatic love and riotous pleasure can not
last. Work with love and pleasure is good. But love and pleasure without
work are corroding.

Children who are waited upon much become selfish. They soon become
grafters, expecting and taking everything and giving nothing. This is
immoral, for life is a matter of compensation, and consists in giving as
well as in taking. Children should be taught consideration for others,
and should not be allowed to order the servants around; not that it
harms the servants, but it has a bad effect on the children.

Because the child's period of development is so long, it is important to
have a proper adjustment in the home between parents and the children.
Lack of adjustment wears out the parents, especially the mother, and
gives false impressions to the young people. To prevent friction and get
good results, children should be taught obedience. Obedience is one of
the stepping stones to ability to command.

In those homes where the words of the parents are law there is but
little friction. Obedience should be taught from the very start. As soon
as the child realizes that the parents mean what they say and that it is
useless to fret and complain about a command, that is the end of the
matter. How different it is with disobedient children! The parents have
to tell them what to do several times and then the bidding often remains
undone.

Begin to teach obedience and promptness as soon as the children
understand, for it is more difficult later. The older the children the
harder it is. Children know so little and are so conceited that they do
not realize that because of lack of experience, observation and
reflection they can not safely guide themselves at all times. When they
are allowed to act so that they are a nuisance to others and harmful to
themselves, they do not give up this license with good grace. There are
times to be firm and then firmness should be used. It is necessary for
the parents to cooperate.

Various parents have different ways of correcting their children, and it
is not difficult to make them realize that obedience is a part of the
plan of early life. To illustrate: If the children are called for a
meal, they should come promptly. If there is a tendency to lag, tell
them that if they do not come when called they will get nothing to eat
until next mealtime, and act accordingly. This is no cruelty, for no one
is harmed by missing a meal. It generally proves very effective.

At the table, serve the children what your experience has told you they
can take with benefit, without saying anything about it. If they ask for
anything else, give it if you think proper. If not, say no. If they
start to beg and whine, tell them that such conduct will result in their
being sent away from the table, and if they still continue, do as you
have said, and let there be no weakening. This may cause a few very
disagreeable experiences at first, but it is much better to have a few
of them and be through, than to continue year after year to have such
trouble. Some children can eat everything with apparent impunity and
their parents usually pay no attention to what they eat. But there are
others who become ill if they are improperly fed. Children who are often
feverish and take all the diseases peculiar to the young, are
maltreated. They are not properly fed. Those who are prone to
convulsions must be fed with great care, or there is danger of their
becoming epileptics. Firmness in such cases generally means the
difference between health and disease or even death.

By all means be firm in such matters. Indulging the children to excess
is invariably harmful. When your children become ill and die, you can
truly say, "Behold my handiwork."

In the same way teach the children to do promptly whatever they are told
to do. If they are told to go to bed, it should be done without delay or
protest. All the little duties that fall to their lot should likewise be
accomplished promptly. However, the parents should be reasonable and
they should avoid bombarding their children with commands to do or not
to do a thousand and one things that do not matter at all. Let the
children alone except when it is really necessary to direct them.

Unfortunately, most of the parents are blind to their own faults, but
see very clearly those of others. The mistakes they make in their own
families open their eyes to those of others, and then they are often
very impatient. I know one gentleman who has excellent knowledge of the
proper training of the young, but as a parent he is a total failure. He
is so explosive and lacking in patience and firmness, perhaps also in
love, that his knowledge has not helped him. It is not what we know, but
what we apply, that makes or mars.

Obedience reduces friction and trains the children into habits of
efficiency. It is not only valuable in preserving the health of the
parents, but in increasing the child's earning capacity when the time
comes to labor in earnest.

Plato said that democracies are governed as well as they deserve to be.
Likewise, parents get as much obedience, respect, affection and love as
they deserve, and the three latter are largely dependent upon the
former. It would be difficult to overemphasize the importance of
obedience.

In nature we find that the animals teach their young how to live
independently as soon as they have the strength to care for themselves.
This is what parents should teach their children. This may cause the
mother pain, for many mothers like to keep their children helpless,
dependent and away from contact with the world as long as possible. Wise
mothers do not handicap their children thus. The best parents are those
who teach their children early how to make their own way.

Doubtless the greatest happiness is to be found in a congenial family,
where the parents understand and love each other and their children.
Those parents who are so busy that they lack the time to become
acquainted with their infants and keep up this intimacy, are losing a
part of life that neither money nor social position can give them. Many
wait until too late to get on intimate terms with their children. When
young, the children are naturally loving and then the beautiful ties
which neither time nor misfortune can sunder are formed. When the
children are grown it is too late to establish such a relation. Then
they look at their parents with as critical eyes as they use toward
other people, and though they may become very good friends, the tender
love is lacking. Love between man and woman is unstable, but the
beautiful love that springs from companionship of children and parents
lasts until the end.

While some mothers neglect their children, many become too absorbed in
them. The children become all of the mother's life. As the young people
become older, their horizon naturally widens. During infancy the parents
can fill the child's whole life, but soon other interests crave
attention. There is always a tragedy in store for the mother who refuses
to see that her children, as they grow older, will demand the human
experience necessary for individual growth and development. If the
mother has no other interest than her children she will one day be left
with a heart as empty as the home from which the children are gone.
There are so many interesting things in this world, and every mother
should have her hobby. She should have at least one hour each day sacred
to herself, in which she can relax and cultivate the mind. This will
help to fill the coming years, which too often prove barren. Loving
parents get all the reward they should expect from the beautiful
intimacy that exists between them and their growing children. So-called
ungrateful children have incompetent parents. Parents have no right to
demand gratitude. They do no more for their children than was done for
themselves in the morning of their lives. The right kind of parents
never want for rewards. They are repaid every day so long as they live.
Children grow under the care of their parents, but the parents also grow
and expand in understanding, sympathy and love through association with
their children.

Today society does not treat the mothers with the proper consideration.
The mothers deserve well, for they have to give many of their best years
to the children. These are the productive years, and generally unfit the
women to go into economic competition with the rest of the world
afterwards. Society owes it to the mothers of the race to see that they
are not made to suffer for fulfilling their destiny. Motherhood today is
as dangerous as the soldier's life, though it ought not to be, and it is
more difficult to raise children than to conduct a successful business.
However, the financial rewards for motherhood are generally nil. The
least society can do is to see that these women do not want for the
necessities of life.

Most children are interrogation points. This is well, for they learn
through curiosity. The questions should be answered honestly, or not at
all. It is common to give untrue answers. This is poor policy, for the
answers are a part of the child's education and untruths make the young
people ignorant and superstitious. It takes considerable patience to
raise a child and he who is unwilling to exercise a little patience has
no right to become a parent.

Whether to use corporeal punishment or not is a question that the
parents must decide for themselves. Many parents are in the habit of
nagging their children. It is, "Don't do this," and "Don't do that,"
until the little ones feel as exasperated as the Americans in Berlin,
where everything that one has an impulse to do is "Verboten." The
children have not yet acquired caution, nor are they able to think of
more than one or two things at a time. Consequently they forget what
they are not to do, and then parental wrath descends upon them. Parents
can well afford to be deaf and blind to many things that happen. Those
mothers who are ever shouting prohibitions soon cultivate a fretful,
irritable tone that is bad for all concerned, and which does not breed
respect and obedience. Make it a rule not to interfere with the children
except when it is necessary, and tell them to do but one thing at a
time.

If too many commands and prohibitions are issued, the children are prone
to forget them all. If they are talked to less, what is said is more
deeply impressed on their minds, and the chances are that they will
remember. Boisterousness is not badness, but indicates a state of
well-being, which results in bodily activity, including the use of the
vocal cords. It is common to all young animals, and the human animal is
the only one that is severely punished for manifesting happiness.

If the parents decide that corporeal punishment is necessary, they
should be sure that it has been deserved, for a child resents being
punished unjustly, and undeserved punishment is always harmful. Many
parents become so angry that they inflict physical punishment to relieve
their own feelings, and this is very wrong. If a parent calmly decides
that his child needs punishment, perhaps this is the case. The
punishment should be given calmly. Nothing can be more cowardly and
disgusting than the brutal assault of an angry parent upon a defenseless
child, and such parents always regret their actions if they have any
conscience, but they are generally of such poor moral fibre and so full
of false pride that they fail to apologize to the children for the
injustice done. These parents inflict suffering upon their children, but
they punish themselves most of all, for they kill filial regard and
love. Children have a very keen sense of fair play.

If it is decided to administer corporeal punishment, it should have
enough sting to it so that it will be remembered. Parents who temper
their justice with patience and love are not compelled to resort to
corporeal punishment often.

Children should never be hit on the head. Pulling or boxing the ears
should not be recognized as civilized warfare. Blows on the head may
partly destroy the hearings and affect the brain.

Another thing that may not come under the head of punishment in the
strictest sense, is lifting children by one of the arms. Women are prone
to do this. Often it partly dislocates the elbow joint. The children
whine and no one knows exactly what is the matter. If one arm is
occupied and the child has to be lifted from curb to street or over a
puddle, stoop and pass the unoccupied arm about the child's body and no
harm will be done.

No one should suggest to the child that it is bad. It is better to dwell
upon goodness. If a child is often told that it is bad, it will soon
begin to live up to its name and reputation, just as adults often do.

Many parents are in the habit of scaring their children. If the little
ones cry or disobey, they are told that the boogy-man is coming after
them, or they are threatened with being put out into the dark, or
perhaps some animal or bad person is coming to get them. Fear is
injurious to everybody, being ruinous to both the body and the mind, and
it is especially bad for growing children. The fear instilled in them
during childhood remains with some people to the end of life. It is not
uncommon to find people who dare not go out alone after dark because
they were scared in childhood. Children like exciting stories that would
naturally inspire fear, but it is not difficult for the reader or story
teller to inform the little ones that there are no big black bears or
bold robbers in the neighborhood, and that now there is nothing to fear
in the darkness.

Many teach the children to be ashamed of their bodies. Every part of the
body has its use and whatever is useful is good. Those who do not abuse
their bodies have nothing of which to be ashamed.

The education of children in the past has been along wrong lines. It has
been the aim to cram them full of isolated facts, many of them untrue.
We are slowly outgrowing this tendency, but too much remains. Thanks
largely to Froebel and Doctor Montessori, our methods are growing more
natural. The adult learns by doing and so does the child. Doctor
Montessori teaches the children to use all their senses. She gives them
fabrics of various textures and objects of different shapes and colors.
Thus they learn colors, forms, smoothness, roughness, etc. She teaches
them how to dress and undress and how to take their baths. She lets them
go about the schoolroom instead of compelling them to sit still at their
desks in cramped positions. In this way they get knowledge that they
never forget. They learn to read and write and figure in playful ways
through the proper direction of their curiosity. Little tots of four, or
even younger, are often able to read, and there has been no forcing. All
has come about through utilizing the child's curiosity.

If children are delicate, they should not be put into a schoolroom with
thirty or forty other children. Keep such children outdoors when the
weather permits and allow them to become strong. The education will take
care of itself later. There is nothing to be gained by overtaxing a
delicate child in the schoolroom, which too often is poorly ventilated,
and having a funeral a little later.

Children should be taught the few simple fundamental rules of nutrition
until they are second nature. A thorough knowledge of the fact that it
is very injurious to eat when there is bodily or mental discomfort is
worth ten thousand times as much to a child as the ability to extract
cube root or glibly recite, "Arma virumque cano Trojae," etc. The
realization that underchewing and overeating will cause mental and
physical degeneration is much more valuable than the ability to
demonstrate that a straight line is the shortest distance between two
points. This knowledge can be given so unobtrusively that the child does
not realize that it is learning, for there are many opportunities.

When a child gets sick and is old enough to understand, instead of
sympathizing with it explain how the illness came about, and please
remember that in explaining you can leave the germs out of the question,
for diseases of childhood are almost entirely due to improper feeding.
The value of education like that is beyond any price, for it is a form
of health insurance. Reforming the race, means that we must begin with
the children.

In parts of Europe cultured people have a working knowledge of two or
three languages. This is certainly convenient. Those who wish their
children to know one or two tongues beside English should remember that
in infancy two tongues are learned as readily as one, if they are
spoken. Those who can use three languages when they are four years old
are not infant prodigies. They have had the opportunity to learn, and
languages are simply absorbed. The language teaching in the public
schools is a joke. After taking several years of French or German the
school children can not speak about the common things of life in those
tongues, though they may know more about the grammar than the natives.
In other words, they know the science of the language, but not the
language itself.

A time comes when the child wants to know about the origin of life. If
the parents have been companions, they can impart this knowledge better
than anyone else. If they are unable to explain, the family doctor
should be able to impart the knowledge with delicacy. I do not believe
that such knowledge should be imparted to mixed classes in the public
schools, as advocated by some. If the parents do their duty, there will
be no need of public education in sex hygiene.

The doctor should be an educator, so he merits consideration here.
Nearly all families have their medical advisers, and these professional
people have it in their power to bring more sunshine into the homes than
their fees will pay for. On the other hand, they can, and too often do,
give both advice and remedies that are harmful They should sow seeds of
truth. If the infant is properly cared for, it is never ill. Inasmuch as
there are but few families with sufficient knowledge to keep their
babies healthy at all times, there are many calls for the doctor.
Parents are generally unduly alarmed about their infants. Nearly always
the trouble is primarily in the alimentary tract, due to improper
feeding, and the doctor with his wide experience can relieve the
parental anxiety, and at the same time tell them where they have made
their mistakes and how they have brought suffering upon their little
ones.

Of course, there should be no dosing with medicine and no injections of
foreign matter into the blood stream. Rest, quiet, cleanliness and
warmth are what the children need to restore them to health. The right
kind of physician when acting as adviser to intelligent parents who wish
to do the best by their children will see to it that there is little or
no disease.

If the parents do not know what to do, the most economical procedure is
to consult a physician who has understanding of and confidence in
nature. Pay no attention to the women of many words who give advice
"because they have had many children and have buried them all."

It is not as difficult to raise healthy children as sickly ones. It is
so simple that it takes many pages to explain it.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

DURATION OF LIFE.

Old age today brings to mind a picture of decrepitude and decay. This is
because there is practically no natural old age. Those who live so that
they are unhealthy during the early years of life will not be well if
they reach advanced years. Old people can be well in body and sound in
mind. In order to attain this desirable end, it is necessary to live
properly during the first part of life. It is true that people may
dissipate and reform and then live long in comfort, but usually those
who spend too lavishly destroy their capital and go into physical or
mental bankruptcy.

There are many who during their prime say that they do not wish to grow
old. Their desire for a short life can easily be satisfied. All that is
necessary is to live in the conventional manner and the chance of dying
before reaching the age of fifty or sixty is good. A few live to be
seventy or more in spite of dissipation, but these are the exceptions.
They were endowed with excellent constitutions to begin with,
constitutions that were made to last over one hundred years. Where we
find one who has lived long in spite of intemperance, thousands have
died from it.

Most people desire to remain on earth long and they can have their wish.
They can advance in years healthy in body and with growing serenity of
mind. Physical and mental well-being are necessary to attain one's
life's expectancy. Old age should not be considered as apart from the
rest of life. It is but one of the natural phases. Those who do not live
to be old have failed to live completely.

Those who express their desire to die young generally change their mind
when they face death. Man clings to life.

Old age is a desirable condition. The physical tempests have been
subdued, if the life has been well spent. On the other hand, the faults
and foibles of the self-indulgent are accentuated and in such cases old
age is a misfortune.

No one knows what man's natural length of life is. Anatomists and
physiologists compare the human body with the bodies of various animals.
In this they are justified, for we all develop according to the same
laws. Most of the animals, when allowed to live as nature intended them
to live, reach an age of from five to six times the length of the period
of their growth. Human beings, with their ability to control their
environment, should be able to do even better than that. Man reaches
physical maturity between twenty and twenty-five years of age. This
would make his natural age one hundred and twenty-five to one hundred
and fifty years. There are cases on record that have lived longer and it
may be that if man would cease going in the way of self-destruction and
spend more thought and time on the welfare of the race, life would be
prolonged beyond even one hundred and fifty years. R. T. Trall, M. D.,
thought that man should live to be two hundred years old.

"What man has done man can do." If long life is worth while, doubtless a
time will come when long life will be enjoyed. The worry, fretting and
foolish haste of today will doubtless be partly done away with some
time. Then men and women will have time to live, instead of merely
existing, as most people do today. Men have lived long and found life
good. Long life for its own sake is perhaps not to be desired, but the
benefit that can be bestowed upon the race by those advanced in years is
desirable. Occasionally a brilliant individual appears on the scene,
doing superior work in life's morning, but most of the work that has
been found worthy of the consideration of the ages has been done by men
of mature years.

Galen, the famous physician, is said to have lived to a great age. It is
hard to tell exactly how old he was, but he was probably well past the
century mark at his death. His long life gave him time to do work that
is appreciated after the lapse of eighteen centuries. For many hundred
years after his death he dominated the practice of medicine and he is
today spoken of as often as any living medical man.

Thomas Parr, an Englishman, died at the age of one hundred and
fifty-two. He was hale and hearty to the very end. Unfortunately, his
reputation traveled far. He was brought to the English court, where he
was wined and dined, and as a consequence he died. Before this he had
always led the simple life. An autopsy was performed and the physicians
found his organs in excellent condition. The only reason they could give
for his death was his departure from the simple life which he had led in
his home.

Henry Jenkins, also an Englishman, lived to the age of one hundred and
sixty-nine years. He lived very frugally and was always on friendly
terms with nature. His favorite drink was water, though he partook in
moderation of "hop bitters." He was moderate in all things, and it is
said that he was never really ill until near the end of life. He was not
shriveled and shrunken, but a wholesome looking man. King Charles II.
sent a carriage to bring Mr. Jenkins to London, when he was one hundred
and sixty years old. The old gentleman declined to ride and walked the
two hundred miles to the metropolis. The king questioned him regarding
his life and desired to know the reason for his longevity. Mr. Jenkins
replied that he had always been sober and temperate and that this was
the reason for his many years. The Merry Monarch was neither sober nor
temperate, and you may be sure that this reply did not please him. Mr.
Jenkins was wiser than Mr. Parr had been, refusing to dissipate, even
though he was old. Consequently he returned to his home to enjoy life
nine years longer.

These two cases are authentic.

All are familiar with the records given in the Bible. Whether they are
figurative or not it is hard to tell. However, so many cases of
longevity are recorded that they in all probability have a basis in
fact. The Hebrews of old must have been a long-lived people. One hundred
and twenty years was not an extreme age. In Genesis is the record of
many over five hundred years old, and a few over nine hundred years of
age. At the time of the apostles the life span of the Hebrews had grown
shorter and hence the dictum of three score years and ten. Between the
time of Moses and that of the apostles the Hebrews had advanced--or
shall we say degenerated?--from a semi-barbarous people to one that had
the graces and also the vices of a higher civilization. The Hebrews of
old were husbandmen, who lived simply and got their vigor from the soil.

The cause of so much unnecessary suffering and of the premature deaths
has been discussed elsewhere in this book. In short, it is wrong living
and wrong thinking. Impure air and bad food kill no more surely than
does worry.

The bodies of children are composed largely of water. The structures are
flexible and elastic. The bones are made up mostly of cartilaginous
structure. As the children grow older more solids are deposited in the
body and the proportion of solid matter to water grows greater. Lime is
deposited in the bones. When they are limy throughout they are said to
be ossified. After this process is complete no more growth can take
place. Bone formation continues until about the age of twenty-five. At
this age the body is efficient. The fluids circulate without
obstruction. Could this condition be maintained, there would be no
decay.

During the early years of life the food intake in proportion to the
weight of the body is great. The child is active and uses much fuel to
produce power and to repair the waste. Considerable food is required for
body building. At this time a broken bone mends quickly and cuts heal in
a short time. With advancing years come slowness and sluggishness of the
various vital activities. The slowing up can be retarded almost
indefinitely by proper care of the body.

If the circulation could be maintained and the purity of the blood
stream guarded, old age would be warded off. A healthy body is able to
cleanse itself under favorable conditions and so long as the body is
clean through and through there is no opportunity for disease to take
place and there can be no aging. By aging I mean not so much the number
of years one has lived as the amount of hardening and degeneration of
the body that take place.

Some are as old at forty as others are at seventy.

When people have reached physical maturity they should begin to reduce
their food intake. There is no need for building material then. All that
is necessary is enough to repair the waste and to keep up the
temperature. The individual at twenty-seven should eat a little less
than when he was twenty and by the age of thirty-five he should have
reduced his food still more and made his meals very simple. Children
enjoy the gratification of the sense of taste, but at the age of
thirty-five a man has lived enough and experienced enough so that he
should know that the overgratification of appetites is an evanescent and
unprofitable pleasure, always costing more than it is worth. It is best
to grow into good habits while young, for it is difficult to do so after
one has grown old. The man who reforms after fifty is the exception.

Children are fond of cereal foods and sugars. They can eat these foods
two or three times a day and thrive. A man of thirty-five should make it
a general rule to limit his starch eating to once a day. Various
physiologists say that as much as sixteen ounces of dry starch
(equivalent to about thirty ounces of ordinary bread) are necessary each
day. This is entirely too much. Very few people can profitably eat more
than four ounces of dry starch a day, and for many this is too much.
Through eating as much as is popularly and professionally advocated,
early decay and death result.

The arteries are normally pliable and elastic. When too much food is
taken, the system is unable to cleanse itself. Debris is left at various
points. One of the favorite lodging places is in the coats of the
arteries. After considerable deposits have been formed the arteries lose
their elasticity. They become hard and unyielding. A normal radial
artery can easily be compressed with one finger. Sometimes the radial
artery becomes so hard that it is difficult to compress it with three
fingers. As the arteries grow harder they become more brittle and
sometimes they break, often a fatal accident.

This hardness of the arteries impedes the circulation, for the tone and
natural elasticity of the vessel walls is one of the aids to a normal
circulation.

So long as the arteries are normal all parts of the body are bathed in a
constantly changing stream of blood. The muscles, the nerves, the bones,
in fact all parts of the body, remove from the blood stream those
elements that are necessary for repairing or building the various
tissues. They also throw into the blood stream the refuse and waste due
to the constant repair and combustion going on all over the body. The
blood then leaves this refuse with the skin, lungs, kidneys and bowels,
which throw it out of the body.

So long as there are enough fuel and food, but not too much, and so long
as all the debris is carried away, there is health. But let this process
be thrown out of balance and there will be disease. The food intake is
seldom too small, though the digestion is frequently so poor that not
enough good food gets into the blood. Old age is largely due to
overeating and eating the wrong kinds of food. This is how overeating
causes premature aging, when it does not kill more quickly: When too
much food is taken, too much is absorbed into the blood, provided the
nutritive processes are active. Then all the food in the blood can not
be used for repair and fuel. The balance must either be excreted or
stored away in the body as deposits. If this storing takes place in the
joints, the result may be rheumatism or gout and at times even a
complete locking of the joints (anchylosis). If it is stored in the
walls of the blood-vessels they become hard and unyielding. No matter
where deposits take place, some of them will be found in the walls of
the blood-vessels. When these vessels grow hard they decrease in
caliber. The result is that the heart is compelled to work very hard,
but even then enough blood is not forced through the vessels. The
circulation becomes sluggish. The blood in the various parts becomes
stagnant.

Then insufficient good oxygen and first-class nourishment are brought to
the parts and not enough waste is carried away. Now the billions of
cells of which the body is composed are constantly bathed in poisonous
blood. The result is lowering of physical tone, or degeneration, of the
whole body. The hands and the feet suffer most at first from the poor
blood supply and become cold easily. Those who suffer constantly from
cold hands and feet should know that they are aging, although they may
be but twenty years old.

Such a condition as this often gives rise to varicose veins in the legs.
The feet are so far away from the heart, and it is such a long upgrade
return of the blood, that the circulation in the lower extremities
easily becomes sluggish. The flabby, relaxed tissues and the hardened
blood-vessels allow the blood to stagnate. This is why senile gangrene
is so common in the feet and so often fatal.

The brain gets a copious blood supply, yet the hardening of the arteries
often deprives this organ of its necessary nourishment. Then the higher
faculties begin to abdicate. If the hardening is extensive senile
softening of the brain may take place. This is always due to a lack of
pure blood. Sometimes the arteries are brittle enough to break. Baldness
is another symptom of physical decay. The hair follicles are not
properly nourished, for the arteries have become so contracted and the
tissues of the scalp so hardened that there is not enough blood to feed
the hair roots. Baldness begins on top of the head, generally the only
part affected, because it is farthest away from the blood supply.
Baldness is also partly due to man's headwear. Women are rarely bald.
There is a saying that there are no bald men in the poorhouse. Even if
this were true, it would not be very consoling, for the bald heads on
the street cleaning forces are numerous.

Overeating also causes premature aging because if results in
fermentation in the alimentary tract. The acids produced cause
degeneration of various tissues, having an especially bad effect on the
nervous system, which reflects the evil to other parts of the body.

It is well to bear in mind how this comes about: First there is
overeating; too much food improperly prepared is taken into the blood
stream; this makes the blood impure; deposits, causing hardening of the
tissues and reduction of the lumen of the vessels, are formed; the blood
grows more impure and the circulation sluggish; the tissues are
constantly bathed in impure blood, causing further degeneration. When a
certain point is reached nature can tolerate no more and life flits
away.

Those who wish to remain young must give some thought to the selection
of their food, especially if they are hearty eaters. If only sufficient
food is taken to keep the body well nourished it does not make much
difference what is eaten, provided it contains sufficient of fresh
foods, for when only enough food is taken to supply fuel and repairing
material, the food will all be used and none is left to ferment in the
digestive tract and form deposits in the body. The body will then keep
itself clean, or at least the formation of deposits takes place so
slowly that it is hardly perceptible. This can be compared with the
process taking place in the flues of a boiler. Stoke properly and they
remain clean. Choke the firebox with an excess of coal and the
combustion is so incomplete that the flues are soon filled up and the
grates are often burned out. Just so with the body: Feed too heavily and
the digestive organs are burned by the abnormal amount of acid produced
and the blood-vessels are filled with debris.

As most people lack the self-control to eat a normal amount of food,
they should select foods that are compatible and that are not too
concentrated. Too much meat causes degeneration of all parts of the body
and hardening. Too much starch causes acidity and hardening. The fruits
and the light vegetables have a tendency to overcome these degenerating
processes.

Starch is surely the chief offender in aging people. It is such a
concentrated food that overeating is easy, especially when it is taken
in the soft forms, such as mushes, fresh bread, griddle cakes and mashed
potatoes. If people would masticate their starchy foods thoroughly it
would greatly reduce the danger of overeating. It is common to eat bread
three times a day and in addition to take potatoes once or twice a day.
Those who consume so much starch carry into the system more food than
can be used and more of the mineral salts than can be excreted. The
result is the formation of deposits, chiefly of  lime carbonate and lime
phosphate; fatty deposits are also common.

In order to live long and comfortably it would be well to reduce the
starch intake to once a day. The meats also are objectionable when taken
in excess. To them can be attributed the chief blame for the formation
of gelatinous deposits in the body. However, they do not carry so much
earthy matter into the blood stream as do the starches. It is best to
partake of meat but once a day, or even more seldom. Meat should
certainly not be taken more than twice a day even by those who are
advanced in years. People who care enough for starch to take it three
times a day, or are compelled to live chiefly upon it, grow old and
homely more quickly than do those who are able to partake more
plentifully of the more expensive proteins. The flesh obtained from
young animals and birds is not so heavily charged with earthy matters as
is that which is obtained from old animals and birds.

Fruits and nuts do not carry so much earthy matter as do the starches
and meats. The sweet fruits could with profit partly take the place of
the starchy foods. The sugar they contain, which has the same nutritive
value as starches, needs very little preparation before entering the
blood stream. Thus a large part of the energy required for starch
digestion is saved. On the other hand, the use of too much refined sugar
is even worse than an excessive intake of starch. Nuts are not difficult
to digest if they are well masticated..

The objection to acid fruits during the latter years of life is that
they thin the blood and cause chilliness. This is true if they are
partaken of too liberally. It is not necessary to refrain from eating
acid fruits, but they should be taken in moderation and the mild ones
should be selected. Pears, mild apples and grapes are better than
oranges, grapefruits and apricots. Those who have learned moderation can
eat all the fruit desired, for they will not be harmed by what a normal
appetite craves.

Vegetables carry considerable earthy matter, but on account of their
helpfulness in keeping the blood sweet they should be eaten several
times a week.

Those who think that overeating of starch is too harshly condemned are
referred to the horse. When he is allowed to roam about and partake of
his natural food, grass, he stays well and lives to be forty or more
years old. When compelled to eat great quantities of corn and oats,
which are very rich in starch, the horse becomes listless and slow at an
early age. He is old at fifteen and before twenty he is generally dead.
When horses suffer from stiffness in the joints a few weeks spent in
pasture, where they have nothing but green grass and water, remove the
stiffness and make them younger. This shows what partaking of nature's
green salad does for them. Any good stock man will tell you that feeding
too much grain "burns a cow out." It does exactly the same for a human
being, burns him out and fills him with clinkers. Many people think that
it is a hardship to be moderate in eating and drinking, but it is not.
It brings such a feeling of well-being and comfort that it is
unbelievable to those who have not experienced it.

Many envy the rich, thinking that they can and do live riotously. Rich
men must live as simply as though they were poor or else they soon lose
the mental efficiency that brought them their fortunes, for when health
is gone mental power is reduced.

According to information in the Saturday Evening Post, the eating habits
of many of our most influential business men are very simple and the
amount of food partaken of small. John D. Rockefeller could hardly live
more simply and plainly than he does. William Rockefeller, George F.
Baker, James Stillman, Otto H. Kahn, Thomas Fortune Ryan, George W.
Perkins, J. Ogden Armour, John H. Patterson, Jacob H. Schiff and Andrew
Carnegie, all business giants with money enough to subsist on the most
expensive delicacies, are said to live more plainly than does the
average American who is complaining of the high cost of living. It is
the price they have had to pay for success and it is the price that you
and I will have to pay to live successfully, though our success may not
take the form of financial power.

The one conspicuous exception among the financially great to the rule of
simplicity was J. P. Morgan. His eating habits were somewhat gross, but
on account of his rugged constitution he lived to be more than
seventy-five years old. If he had given himself just a little more care
he would be alive today. They say that his strong black cigars did him
no apparent harm, but those who read of his last illness understandingly
cannot agree to that statement. Mr. Morgan started with enough vitality
to live and work far beyond the century mark. John D. Rockefeller was
not physically strong when young. He has been compelled to take good
care of himself and to be moderate. Now he is past seventy and enjoying
good health.

John W. Gates died a martyr to excess, partly excess of food. He lacked
balance. His son followed in his footsteps and died young.

Frank A. Vanderlip, who is looming large on the financial horizon takes
but two meals a day, from which he gets enough sustenance to do good
work and he says that this plan makes for efficiency. Perhaps now that
such men as Mr. Vanderlip live well on two meals a day, it is time to
cease calling those who live thus faddists. Eating three meals a day is
a habit and many can and do get along very well on two meals, and a few
take only one meal daily.

E. H. Harriman also lived simply. He illustrates the evil of a poorly
controlled mind. He died when but little past sixty, probably because
his frail body was too weak to harbor his great ambition. He took his
business wherever he went. When ill and business was forbidden by his
physician, Mr. Harriman had a telephone concealed in his bedroom and as
soon as the doctor was gone, he was on the wire.

Another cause of premature aging is the drinking of very hard water. The
earthy matter is absorbed into the blood stream with the water, and a
part of it is deposited in the various tissues. People beyond middle age
should drink water containing only a small portion of salts. Those who
partake of fresh fruits or fresh vegetables daily get all the salts that
the system needs. Even the young should not drink water that is
exceedingly hard. We can well illustrate the harm that comes from the
excessively hard water by referring to the disease known as cretinism.
This disease is quite prevalent in some parts of Europe. They say that
the disease is hereditary, which is questionable. What is inherited is
the environment and the habits of the parents. The chief cause is
without doubt the superabundance of earthy matter in the drinking water.
The cretins are ill-favored in face and figure. They do not reach normal
mental or physical maturity. They are old long before the normal person
has reached his prime. They die young, rarely living to be over thirty
years old. The bones are completely ossified early, which is the cause
of their small stature and their stupidity. The bones of the skull
harden so early that the brain has no room to expand.

There is no need of suffering, even in a mild degree, from the disease
of cretinism. If the water is very hard it is easy to distill what is
needed for drinking purposes. Such water should at least be boiled. It
is much better to have a teakettle lined with earthy matters than to
have such a lining in our arteries.

The excessive use of table salt is another cause of early aging. It is a
good preservative and pickles meat very well. People have long used salt
as a preservative and perhaps they got the salt-eating habit in this
way, first using it on the foods to be preserved, and then on nearly all
foods. Salts to excess, especially table salt, help to mummify or pickle
those who partake of them too liberally. The addition of sodium chloride
to foods is unnecessary. We get all we need of this salt in our fruits,
vegetables and cereals. Salt should be used in moderation.

Alcohol, tobacco and coffee are harmful. However, it will be found that
most of the old people have used one or more of these drugs for many
years and this is often largely responsible for their reaching old age.
Overeating causes more deaths than any other single factor. The use of
tobacco, coffee or alcohol has a tendency to reduce the desire for food
and thus these drugs at times prove to be conservers of individual
lives, though they are undoubted racial evils. They never can or will
take the place of self-control. The senses were given us to use for our
protection, but most people abuse them for temporary gratification, and
thus they go in the way of self-destruction.

Other things being equal, a healthy child will live longer than a weakly
one. But other things are not equal, so it often happens that a weakling
has as much chance to survive as a healthy person. Strong people
frequently squander their inheritance by the time they are forty or
fifty years old. Healthy people are very imprudent. They are well so
they think they will always remain well. What a surprise it is when
after thirty they discover that they cannot do with impunity what they
could do before with apparently no bad results! When warned about their
eating habits they boast that they can "eat tacks". Smoking and drinking
are harmless, they say! But the day of reckoning always comes and the
account is often so great that under the conventional treatment of today
they die.

The weakling has been compelled to be careful. Habits of moderation grew
upon him in youth, and his health has improved as he has advanced in
years. He may never be strong, but great physical strength is not
essential to health. Thus the strong often perish and the weak survive.
If both classes lived with equal care the strong would outlive and
outwork the weak every time.

It is necessary to give the skin some care if continued good health is
desired during the latter part of life. The skin has a tendency to grow
hard, which should not be allowed. It will always remain soft if it is
properly cared for. When our ancestors roved forests and plains with
scarcely any attire, the skin exposed to the rain and the sunshine,
there was no need to give it special care. It served its purpose of
protecting their bodies and was exercised through its immediate contact
with the elements in all kinds of weather. Now the skin has little
opportunity to exercise its protective function and the result is that
it is not as active as it should be. The skin must be active to rid
itself of the waste that the blood-vessels leave with it. The best
exercise for this important organ is rubbing. The whole body should be
rubbed every day and it would be well to do this twice a day. An
occasional olive oil rub is also good. The rubbings make the body
hardier. They also help to keep the circulation active and the skin
smooth and soft. The blood is brought near the surface. The tendency as
we grow older is for the circulation to grow less and less near the
surface and in the extremities. This is slow death.

The daily rub is more important than the daily bath. If we have enough
rubbing very little bathing is necessary, for an active skin cleans
itself.

There are many men who have lived in the conventional way until the age
of forty, fifty or sixty. They have been healthy, which means that they
have been able to work most of the time, but have had their share of
ills, which have incapacitated them for work or business at various
times. They find after reaching a certain age that they are surely going
down hill physically and that they are not as active mentally as
previously. The question is, can anything be done under the
circumstances? Very few of these people are in such a bad physical state
that death is inevitable within the next few years. If they seek the
right advice and follow it, they can generally continue to live in
improved health for thirty to sixty years more.

A celebrated case in point is that of Louis Cornaro, an Italian, who
died in the year 1566 at the age of one hundred and two years. In his
youth he was very indiscreet and dissipated. He lived riotously until he
was forty years old, and then he found himself in such poor physical
condition that it was only a question of a few months until the end
would come. He had everything to make life worth living, except health,
so he decided to attempt to regain health and prolong his life. He quit
his old life, began to live simply and instead of being a waster he
became a useful citizen. We are unable to get much definite information
about his habits from what he wrote but we learn that he reduced the
quantity of food taken and used fewer varieties. Also, he drank
sparingly of wine. He did not have any definite ideas regarding diet
except that it is best to eat moderately and avoid the foods that
disagree with one. In his own words: "Little by little I began to draw
myself away from my disorderly life, and, little by little, to embrace
the orderly one. In this manner I gave myself up to the temperate life,
which has not since been wearisome to me; although, on account of the
weakness of my constitution, I was compelled to be extremely careful
with regard to the quality and quantity of my food and drink. However,
those persons who are blessed with strong constitutions may make use of
many other kinds and qualities of food and drink, and partake of them,
in greater quantities, than I do; so that, even though the life they
follow be the temperate one, it need not be as strict as mine, but much
freer."

These sentences were written fifty or sixty years after he changed his
mode of life, and show how well Mr. Cornaro realized the important fact
that all people need not be treated alike. They also show that after
making the change, Mr. Cornaro did not find it difficult to live simply
enough to enjoy health. In nearly every instance it is temporarily
disagreeable to forsake the path that is leading to death and take the
one that leads to life, but after one gets used to the new way, it
appears more beautiful and is more pleasant than the old.

If Cornaro had died at forty, as nearly every person situated as he was
would have done, his life would have been a total loss. A few of those
who were his boon companions and dissipated with him would have thought
of him for a few years and regretted his early passing, for "he was a
jolly good fellow." He lived a useful life, for over sixty years
thereafter, and has left us in his debt for his beautiful exhortations
to be temperate.

Many of the physical wrecks we meet, who will probably live from a few
months to a few years more, if they continue in the old way, are in the
same boat as Mr. Cornaro was at forty. They have had enough experience
to begin to do good work, to be of some benefit to humanity. Instead of
living and giving the world their best, they die. The world has had to
educate these people, and it is expensive. Instead of living on and
doing their work, they leave us when they ought to begin to repay us for
what we have done for them. They are quitters.

Suppose Andrew Carnegie had died at the time he sold out his steel
business. To most people he would have left an unsavory memory, for
though we should have considered him successful from the business
standpoint, many of us would say that the means were not justified by
the end. However, Mr. Carnegie has spent many years since in furthering
the cause of the spread of knowledge and in working for universal peace.
Perhaps when Carnegie, the man of business, is well nigh forgotten,
Carnegie, the educator, will be held in tender and thankful memory. He
is now influencing the times for good and this influence will go down
the ages.

A man has no right to say that he is weary of life and that he wants to
die. The race has a claim on him. We learn through our mistakes. The
race in general has to pay and suffer for every individual's education.
When a man has acquired a measure of wisdom through experience, we have
a right to claim it as our own.

Many men are wise in their own lines, but they have been so busy
attending to the affairs that brought them success that they have
omitted to learn how to have health. These people owe it to themselves
and to humanity to take enough time to learn how to live so that they
can work in health. The better the health the finer their product.
Health and efficiency go hand in hand.

What is a man to do when he has reached middle age and finds himself
degenerating? A man ought to know how to live at forty, but if he does
not he should immediately learn. It may be true that "a man is a fool or
a physician at forty," yet there is time and if a man lacks wisdom at
forty he should immediately acquire some. Such an individual should get
the best health adviser possible, avoiding any man who would have him
take drugs. What he needs is not medicine, but to learn how to live. I
am confident that the careful reader will find enough knowledge in this
book to give him the key to the situation.

If the sufferer uses narcotics and stimulants, they must be stopped
immediately. Even the least harmful of these, such as beer and light
wine, should be avoided until good health has been won. These beverages
need never be used. If they are taken rarely and in moderation they do
no harm.

In every case that has come under my observation it has been necessary
to simplify the food intake, that is, to reduce the quantity and the
number of articles of food taken at each meal, also to simplify the
cooking. The result is that the individual gets less food, but it is of
better quality, for the conventional cooking spoils much of the food.

Most of these men neglect to exercise. It is necessary to be active and
in the open, also to take good care of that important organ, the skin.
Constipation is common, and it is a very annoying symptom, which
disappears in time under proper living. The absorption of poisons from a
constipated lower bowel is one of the factors that causes premature
aging. When the constipation is overcome there are a feeling of physical
well-being and a mental clearness which are impossible in the presence
of constipation.

The treatment of such a condition is very much the same as the treatment
of catarrh or any other curable disease, that is, find the errors of
living and correct them.

It is really surprising how little food people need after they are fifty
or sixty years old. If such people eat enough to be well nourished, but
not enough to produce any bad feelings there will be no disease. People
who die from disease are physical failures, for the natural end does not
come in a physical upheaval. Those who live as they should will pass
away without any pain. The organism simply grows weary and goes into the
last sleep.

There are people who say that there needs be no physical death. Harry
Gaze wrote an entertaining book on the subject some years ago and gave
lectures in this country. It will not convince the average student of
nature that people can live forever, for in nature there is constant
change. The order of life is birth, development, reproduction, decline
and death. It is not likely that man is an exception.

It is believed that in olden times men were larger and lived longer than
they do today. There is not much foundation for such a belief to rest
upon, except in a few cases. The last census shows that there are
several thousand centennarians in the United States. In the Technical
World for March, 1914, appeared an article by Byron C. Utecht, entitled,
"When is Man Old?" This magazine is careful in gathering its facts. I
shall quote a few paragraphs:

"Abraham Wilcox, of Fort Worth, Texas, is one hundred and twelve years
old, but he takes keen enjoyment in life. He walks two miles or more
every day as a constitutional and, occasionally, he even takes a small
glass of beer. He looks forward with all the enthusiasm of a boy to a
visit to the Panama-Pacific Exposition in 1915. Mr. Wilcox reads the
newspapers every day and is interested in everything about him, from the
food being prepared for his dinner to the latest feats by aeroplanes.
This aged man looks forty or fifty years younger than he really is. His
skin is white but not deeply lined. His vision is excellent and he walks
nearly erect. Thirty years ago he gave up smoking, as his doctors warned
him he was near death from old age and that the use of tobacco would
only hasten the end."

"In the Ozark Mountains of Marion County, Arkansas, just across the
Missouri line, lives Mrs. Elmyra Wagoner. She, too, is one hundred and
twelve years old. There are a thousand wrinkles in her face and she
looks her age, but in her actions she is sixty. Up until a very few
years ago, when still past the hundred-year mark, Mrs. Wagoner kept a
large garden and was able to work in the fields. While she has given up
outdoor work, she is still active. On inclement days she sits by the
fireplace in her mountain home and spins. On pleasant days she may be
found walking about the yard. Recently her great-great-granddaughter was
married at Protein, Missouri, six miles from the Wagoner home. This
woman of one hundred and twelve years walked to the wedding, enjoyed it,
and then walked back home, a distance that would tire many persons half
that age. There are scores of persons at Protein who vouch for this and
they tell of similar feats by Mrs. Wagoner showing remarkable physical
power.

"Asked to give the causes of her longevity, the aged woman smiled and
said that she hated to admit she was getting old. 'Clean, honest living,
plenty of work, plenty of good food, and a desire to help others when
sick or in trouble, I think gave me my long lease of life. I was always
so busy caring for others and thinking of them that I never had time to
worry whether I was getting old or not.'"

"Asa Goodwin, of Serrett, Alabama, is one hundred and six years old. His
endurance powers are even more remarkable than those of Mrs. Wagoner or
Abraham Wilcox. He walks five miles every day. He works several hours
daily in his garden, eats anything he likes, and reads without glasses.
His family is probably the largest in the United States. A reunion
recently held in his honor was attended by eight hundred and fifty
persons, three hundred and fifty being blood relatives. Goodwin has been
a hunter all his life and he frequently takes down his rifle and proves
that his aim is still good. He ascribes his length of life and vitality
to his great interest in outdoor sport and hunting, when a young man,
developing a rugged constitution that lasted him many years after he was
forced to quit strenuous work because of 'old age.' He asserts that he
was so busy living that he reached one hundred and six years before he
realized it and wants to live fifty years more if possible. 'I feel as
if I could do it, too,' he declares. 'I now can take my ease and comfort
and the world looks good to me. I have always lived a temperate life,
never drank, never kept late hours, and still have had as much or more
fun than the average man, I think. It is only now when I have nothing to
do that I get to worrying and when I find myself in that condition I
take a walk or weed the garden and then feel better.'"

These people are not in what some call the higher walks of life, but
they have succeeded in living, where almost all fail. They have been
useful members of society, satisfied to take life as it comes, and thus
they have gathered much of the sweet. They have enjoyed life, and those
who enjoy give enjoyment to others. It takes an audience to make even
the best of plays.

Mrs. Wagoner is not rich, but she has a philosophy that is riches
enough. She knows that she receives through giving. She has lived this
knowledge, which has brought blessings upon her.

These people have all led simple lives and they have worked. There is no
secret about growing old gracefully. It means self-control, simple
living, work for body and mind, cleanliness of body and mind, and the
most important part of physical cleanliness is a clean colon. It is
necessary to have a tranquil mind most of the time, for anger and worry
are injurious to health.

The average span of life is lengthening. In the sixteenth century the
average European did not live to be twenty years old. Now he lives to be
about forty. The same increase has taken place in America. In India and
China the average of life is still below twenty-four years. As
civilization advances the tendency is for the average of life to
lengthen, provided life does not grow so complex that knowledge is
antidoted by too great artificiality.

However, it is well to note that it is not the last part of life that is
being lengthened. We are allowing less and less infants to die as the
years roll on. The proportion of the adult population that reaches
advanced age is no greater than in the past. Our mode of life is so
wrong that tuberculosis, typhoid fever, cancer, kidney diseases,
pneumonia and circulatory degeneration carry off immense numbers of
those whom we call middle aged, but who are really young people. These
are diseases of degeneration. It is to our interest to reduce these
diseases. Proper living will do it.

The life expectancy of people over fifty is even less than it was thirty
years ago. Middle aged people die from diseases caused by bad habits,
extended over a period of years. Therefore, these people should learn to
live well if they would live longer.

The diet of the old can be about the same as that of an adult in the
prime of life, except that less should be eaten. Those who live
correctly have no digestive disturbances. It will be noted by those who
are normal that there is not a desire for as much food as earlier in
life, and this should be a guide. Old people get all the nourishment
they need in two moderate meals a day. If the three-meal-a-day plan is
preferred, it is all right, but then less should be taken at each meal.

White flour products are easier to digest than the whole wheat products,
but normal people can digest the latter very well and it is a better
food than white flour. I know one gentleman in his eighth decade of life
who has grown stronger and younger by abandoning the conventional eating
habits and living mostly on moderate meals of milk and whole wheat
biscuits. As Cornaro said, some need more than others, but all should be
moderate.

One meal a day of milk and biscuits is all right. These biscuits should
be well baked and well masticated. The milk should be taken slowly.

Another meal can be meat or eggs or fish with some of the cooked and raw
succulent vegetables.

If a third meal is taken, it may consist of clabbered milk or
buttermilk; or of one of the sweet fruits, and the sweet fruits may be
used any time in place of bread or biscuits. Cottage cheese is a good
food at any time, and may be taken with fruits, either acid or sweet.

As often as desired, in summer, take fruit. Because the very acid, juicy
fruits have a tendency to cause chilliness and to thin the blood, it is
well to take them in moderation during advanced years, but that does not
mean that those who like them should avoid them. In winter time the
sweet fruit is best. Mild apples and bananas may be used as often as
there is a desire for them. Oranges should be taken more rarely, as well
as grapefruit, pineapples and other fruits that are heavily charged with
acid.

As a general rule, the starchy foods should be eaten but once a day, but
those who are very moderate may take them twice a day without bad
results. Vegetarians have eggs and milk to take the place of flesh
foods. They also have lentils, peas, beans and the protein in the whole
wheat and other cereals. Lentils, peas and beans must be taken in
moderation, for they are rich in nutriment and if too much is eaten they
soon cause disease. Nuts, if well masticated, are also all right.

The general basis of feeding should be starch once a day and protein
once a day in moderation. All kinds of starch and all kinds of protein
may be used. Fruits more moderately than during the earlier years of
life is best. All the succulent vegetables that are desired may be
partaken of. By cooking the foods simply, as recommended in this book,
they are rendered easier to digest than under the conventional manner of
cooking. Simple cooking will help to preserve health and prolong life.

Work is one of the greatest blessings of life. Those who would live long
and be useful must exercise both body and mind. Like all other
blessings, if it is carried to excess it is injurious. It is unfortunate
that some people must work too hard because there is a class of people
who do nothing useful, being content to be wasters.

Work has been looked upon as a curse. This is a mistake. Those who live
in the hope and expectation that they may some day cease working in
order to enjoy life, will find when they reach the goal that life
without work is not worth while. Those who can afford it can with
benefit lessen the amount of productive work they do and evolve more
into cultural lines, but it is dangerous to cease working. The human
being is so constituted that without activity of body and mind there is
degeneration. What is sadder than to see a capable individual who has
won a competence and then has retired to enjoy it! He does not enjoy it.
Either he has to get into some line of work, physical or mental, or he
soon dies. We must have a lively interest in something or there is
stagnation.

There are many beautiful things in life, and we should cultivate them
while we are young enough to be able to learn to enjoy them. The
loftiest spirits of the ages have left their inspirations and their
aspirations with us in poetry, prose, music, painting, statuary and in
other forms. We should try to cultivate understanding of these subjects,
not necessarily all of them, but of one or more, for with understanding
come the elevation and broadening of mind that are always present when
there is sympathy, and sympathy is closely related to understanding.
Culture along one or more lines broadens the mind and makes a person
more worth while not only to himself, but to others. We can not estimate
the value of the beauty in life in dollars and cents, but he is poor
indeed who is rich in worldly goods alone.

It is necessary to be interested in the activities about us. Those who
think of nothing or no one except themselves are almost dead to the
world, even though they go through the same physical activities as other
people. The tendency is to get into a rut with advancing years and
remain there. It is easy to keep both a pliable mind and a pliable body
in spite of age, and this can be done by intelligent use. A short time
daily should be spent in becoming informed of what is happening
throughout the world and thinking it over. A mental hobby is most
excellent. A garden or a few birds can furnish an almost inexhaustible
source of interest. Those who doubt this should read of the comedy and
tragedy among such humble beings as the spider, the fly and the beetle.
J. H. Fabre has written charmingly about these, investing them with an
interest rarely to be found in good fiction. This naturalist is a good
example of what can be accomplished when one has years to do it in and
is content to labor along from day to day without giving too much
thought for the morrow. At fifty Mr. Fabre was practically unknown. Now,
at about ninety, he is one of the most admired and best loved of men.
His recognition came late and he has done much of his best work during
his later years. If Mr. Fabre had died at the average age of forty, the
world would have been deprived of his beautiful insight.

Another cause of old age is getting mentally old. An individual begins
to grow old by dwelling on the subject. The girl of thirteen must cease
romping and racing about because it is not lady-like. At twenty-five it
is very, very undignified to run a little. At forty a woman must be
rather sedate, for being natural would mean frivolity. People are
continually growing too old to do this and that, not because they have
lost the desire and the ability, but because it is unbecoming at their
age. This is folly. Keep a young heart all through life. A heartfelt
laugh is one of nature's best tonics. There is no more harm in dancing
at fifty than at fifteen and not so much danger.

The relaxation of muscles and sagging of the face are as much the result
of mental attitude as of loss of tonicity. Thinking young and
associating with children are helpful and healthful. People who are very
stiff and dignified are mentally sterile. The charming people are the
ones who are willing and able to understand and sympathize with the aims
and aspirations of others, and in order to do so it is necessary to thaw
out.

The art of life is delightful if properly developed.

Worry is such a detriment that its victims can neither live nor work as
they should. It is necessary to overcome this bad habit. Most of the
worry is due to narrow selfishness. Much of it is caused by the fact
that others will not do as we do. To try to make others accept our
standards and then worry and fret because they will not is folly. When
force is employed to convert anyone the conversion is but superficial
and lasts only so long as the converted individual's hypocrisy holds
out. To get the best out of life we have to be broad, forbearing,
patient and forgiving.

A normal old age is beautiful. It is the privilege, nay more, the duty
of every intelligent being to attain it. When we adjust ourselves we
shall live longer.

It is with old age as it is with health. We can have it if we wish it.
Accidents alone can deprive us of either. Let us hope that the day will
come when men and women will not be satisfied to die as life is but
beginning, but that they will live as they should and could live, thus
proving a blessing to the race.




CHAPTER XXIX.

EVOLVING INTO HEALTH.

By the time most people are twenty years old they have some kind of
disease. It may be only a slight catarrh, a touch of indigestion,
trouble with the eyes, defective hearing, or some other ill. Very seldom
do we meet a person of this age who is perfectly well.

Most people are taught to believe that health is something mysterious
which may come to them or may pass them by, but that they have little or
nothing to do with it. If they are well, they are fortunate, but if they
are ill they are not to blame.

Most of them go to conventional physicians when they are ill, expecting
to be cured. They take medicine or injections of serums or they are
operated upon. When they are through with the doctors they are no wiser
than they were before.

A few have friends who tell them that they must change their mode of
living if they would have health. They are interested enough to go to a
healer who believes in nature. He tells them that they are well or ill
according to their desserts, that they can be well at all times, if they
wish, for if they live as they should health is a natural consequence.

This sounds like nonsense at first. It is different from anything else
they have heard. The sufferer often makes up his mind that the healer is
a fool or a faker. He remembers that when he went to the conventional
physicians they sounded and thumped him and examined all his excretions.
They were very thorough and scientific. The natural healer does not
generally go into so many details. He asks enough and examines enough to
find the trouble and then he stops. This the patient charges against
him, for he takes for granted that the healer is brief from lack of
knowledge.

So he goes back to his old physician. As his trouble is due to deranged
nutrition, he does not get well. He thinks over what the natural healer
said, and the more he thinks about it the more reasonable it sounds, and
he returns again. This time he gets instructions, and he follows them
enough to get benefit, but not faithfully enough to get well. He is
convinced that the conventional physicians are wrong, but still believes
that the natural healer can hardly be right.

After a while he makes up his mind to get down to business and he goes
to the healer for instructions and follows them. The results are
surprising. The trouble he has had for years may disappear within a
month or two, or it may become less and less apparent, but take
considerable time before it leaves entirely.

The healer gives instructions. The most important ones are those
concerning the diet. A plan is given that brings good results. The
healer fails to explain that this is but one correct method of feeding,
that there are other good ones. The patient is enthused over the
benefits derived, he makes up his mind that he is living the only
correct life, and he too often becomes a food crank, trying to force his
ideas upon all about him. Here the healer is at fault, for he should
explain that some method is necessary, but that there is no one and only
method of feeding.

If the patient is fairly intelligent, in time he realizes that it is not
so much what he eats as his manner of eating and moderation that are
helpful, and that any plan in which moderation and simplicity are
followed is better than the ordinary way of eating.

As the patient evolves into health and gets a broader view of the art of
living, he gets a better perspective of life. He learns that under like
conditions like causes always produce like effects, that the law of
compensation is always operative, and we therefore get what we deserve.
He loses his fear of many things that caused him grave concern
previously. He sees in sickness and death the working of natural law,
not of chance.

Some patients realize that healers who work in accordance with nature
are right, at the very start, but most people are not so logically
constructed. It often takes from one to three years before people make
up their mind to order their lives so that they can have health at their
command.

In the old way, the doctor was supposed to cure, which was impossible.
In the new way, the healer educates people and then if they live their
knowledge they get health.

The healer must instruct in the care of all parts of the body, weeding
out bad habits and trying to instill good ones in their place.

Eating according to correct principles is the most helpful and powerful
aid in regaining health. The patient finds that as the years pass his
tastes change, becoming more simple and more moderate. He is well
nourished on one-half to one-third of what he used to consume and
consider necessary.

The following is the last half of a month's record of food intake for a
man in the thirties. Some years ago he changed his manner of living in
order to regain health, in which he succeeded. Now he takes only one or
two meals a day, according to his desires, not that he has any objection
to three meals a day, but he finds it best to eat more seldom. He is in
good physical condition, as heavy as he ought to be, and he has not had
any real physical trouble for a number of years. His work is mental, but
he walks considerably and swims from three to six times a week, besides
taking a few set exercises.

It was taken in spring, the weather averaging cool. This is a little
lighter than usual, because the record was taken during a period of
exceptionally hard mental work. In cold weather heavier foods are taken.

Lunch: Nothing.

Dinner: Three slices of rye toast, very thin, celery, three slices
broiled onion, dish of peas, glass of beer.


Dinner at noon: Roast lamb, dish of spinach, one and one-half dishes
summer squash, lettuce and tomato salad.

Supper: Nothing.


Lunch: Dish of baked lentils, vegetable soup, lettuce.

Dinner: Two small oranges, cottage cheese.


Lunch: Piece of gingerbread, cup of cocoa, two lumps of sugar.

Dinner: Two small oranges, cottage cheese.


Lunch: Dish of stewed prunes, tablespoonful cottage cheese.

Dinner: Two eggs, two slices buttered toast.


Lunch: Small grapefruit.

Dinner: Vegetable soup, dish of stewed turnips, dish of peas.


Lunch: Nothing.

Dinner: Half a grapefruit, three stewed figs, glass of milk.


Lunch: Dish of strawberries, large dish of rhubarb with grapefruit juice
in it and cream on the side; half serving cream cheese.

Dinner: Two small baked apples.


Lunch: Small grapefruit.

Dinner: Two eggs, dish of turnips, dish of spinach, sliced tomatoes.


Lunch: One raw apple.

Dinner: Two shredded wheat biscuits, glass of milk.


Lunch: Dish of rhubarb.

Dinner: Vegetable soup, one egg, a boiled potato.


Lunch: Dish of rhubarb.

Dinner: Sweet potato, dish of parsnips, stewed peas.


Lunch: Dish of ice cream, piece of white cake. Dinner: Cheese cake, dish
of fruit salad.


Lunch: One hard boiled egg, about one and one-half slices white bread,
two big radishes, one young onion, butter.

Dinner: Nothing.


The servings are the ordinary restaurant servings. No dressings were
used except the ones mentioned. This man used to be very fond of sweets
and employed salt freely. Now he finds his foods more agreeable when
taken plain, for they have a better flavor. He rarely uses salt or
pepper. He has simplified his food intake because he finds he feels
better and stronger and is able to think to better advantage than he did
when he partook of a greater variety and amount of food at each meal.

Food scientists say that from two thousand, seven hundred to three
thousand, three hundred calories are needed daily, but you will note
that this man generally keeps below one-half of this, if you are able to
figure food values.

People who are trying to get well are often called fools and cranks when
they treat themselves properly, but this does not matter, for such fools
generally live to see their wise critics prematurely consigned to the
earth.

When taking health advice, try to keep your balance. Get thoroughly well
before you try to guide others.




CHAPTER XXX.

RETROSPECT.

Several hundred pages have been devoted to those matters which must
receive attention in order to have good physical and mental health, so
as to be able to get the most out of life and give the most, that is, in
order to live fully. The basis of health is internal cleanliness, and to
attain this it is necessary to exercise self-control and moderation, as
well as to cultivate good will and kindliness towards others. Kindness
and love lubricate life and make the running smooth. Envy, spite, hatred
and the other negative emotions act like sand in the bearings, producing
friction in the vital machinery, which they destroy in the end.

Success in life means balance, poise, adjustment. We must adjust
ourselves so as to be in harmony with others, and we must be in harmony
with nature. Our minds will at times be in opposition to the laws of
nature. Then we must exercise enough self-control to bring them into
harmony again, for natural laws are no respecters of persons. It is said
that we break these laws, but that is not true. If we disregard them
often enough they break us. We must realize our unity with nature, our
at-one-ment. We must realize that we are a part of nature, not above it,
and hence that we are governed by the same fixed laws that govern the
rest of nature. These laws are for our good. Attempts to escape from
their workings indicate a lack of understanding.

Discord produces disease and death. Harmony leads to health and long
life.

The adjustment must be both physical and mental.

The physical part means to live or adjust ourselves so that all the
functions of the body are carried on normally. The body is
self-regulating and if we do nothing harmful health will be our portion.
However, life under our present civilization is so complex that the
demands upon our nervous systems are excessive. It is easy to live so
that we can have health, but to do so is not conventional, and hence not
very popular.

In order to have good physical health under present conditions, it is
necessary to make some effort. The effort is not great enough to be
onerous and does not require much time. It is important to get health
knowledge, which the majority lacks today. This knowledge is most
excellent, but it does not benefit the individual unless it is applied.
We all wish to have health, but this is not enough. We must will to have
it. When we say that we cannot, it should generally be interpreted to
mean that we will not.

Some important subjects regarding which special knowledge should be
secured are: Food, drink, exercise, care of the skin, sleep, work and
play, breathing, clothing, and mental attitude.

These subjects, as well as others, have been quite extensively
discussed. It is impossible to give full information in tabloid form. It
is also impossible to read a book of this character once and get all the
information it contains. Those who are in earnest will study the
subject, instead of merely reading it.

Allow me to remind you that nearly all of our diseases are due to faulty
dietary habits. So it was in the time of Hippocrates, according to that
sage, and so it is today. It is a common statement that about 90 per
cent. of our physical ills come from improper diet, and this is the
truth. It follows from this that it is most important to know about
correct feeding habits, and put them in practice. Improper diet results
in faulty nutrition, after which physical and mental ills make their
appearance.

There are many systems of feeding, and nearly all of them will bring
good results if the most important prescription is followed, namely,
moderation. Simplicity leads to moderation.

Those who are reasonable about their food intake often serve as targets
for the shafts of ridicule launched at them by those who are ignorant of
the subject or too self-indulgent to exercise a little self-control.
Ridicule is one of the most deadly of weapons, but it never harms those
who have the hardihood of getting down to basic facts and classifying
things and ideas according to their true value. Why should we be guided
by the wit and sarcasm of indolent voluptuaries who daily desecrate
their bodies through ruinous indulgences?

There is no need of becoming harsh and austere, nor is it necessary to
fall into deadly habits of self-indulgence. Sometimes we can go with the
current with benefit, but at times it is also necessary to paddle
up-stream. Life demands a certain amount of hardihood from those who
would live in health, and this comes not from self-indulgence, but from
self-denial. It is necessary to do almost daily something that we are
not inclined to do.

It is well to remember that if the eating is correct, it is difficult to
become physically deranged, and consequently to become mentally
deranged. Allow me to repeat four short sentences which are helpful and
most important guides, sentences which ought to form a part of every
child's education:

If ill, eat nothing, but live on water.

Eat only when there is a desire for food.

Masticate all foods thoroughly.

Always be moderate in your food intake.

These are the four golden rules regarding eating, and if they were
adhered to, they would save us from an incalculable amount of sin and
suffering. They would increase the duration of life and the joy of
living. They would add to our physical and mental prosperity. Hence they
are worthy of the emphasis given them.

In brief: Physical health is based on internal cleanliness, which can be
attained only through moderation, that is, by not habitually
overburdening the system, especially with food. Our bodies thrive when
used, but not when abused. It is necessary for our physical well-being
to get air, sunshine, water, food, sleep, rest, exercise, work and play
in proper proportion, and in addition cultivate a kindly, balanced
spirit. Drugs, such as alcohol, coffee, morphine, bromine, and hundreds
of others which could be named, are not only unnecessary, but harmful.

The mental side is as important as the physical side. With a healthy
body it is easy to have a happy outlook. Indigestion and biliousness can
make a dreary waste out of the most beautiful landscape. The body and
mind react and interact, one upon the other. When one is poised it is
easy to get the other into balance. It requires a poised body to produce
the best fruitage--a fine spirit.

It is necessary to be honest with one's self. Face life courageously and
honestly. If you do, you will soon realize that the physical and mental
ills from which you suffer are mostly of your own making. Then you can
choose whether to let them continue or to end them, but if you choose to
remain ill, bear your cross uncomplainingly, for you have no right to
afflict others with your self-imposed sufferings.

On the other hand, try to see life from the view point of others, and
you will often find that what you think is the highest good and most
desirable in life does not seem worthy of great effort to them. Variety
adds spice to life. To impose one's own views and ways on others has
always seemed desirable to the majority of people, but it is the height
of folly and stupidity. So long as the race exists there will be many
men of many minds, and it is best so. We can not force any benefit, such
as health or goodness, upon others. Instead of attracting, the process
of forcing repels.

What we can do mentally to benefit ourselves and others is to get
adjusted, to cultivate kindness and charity, to be broad-minded and
forgiving, to be slow to take and give offense, to accept the little
buffetings that fate has in store for us all with good grace, and
through it all to possess our souls in patience.

Physically, be moderate.

Mentally, cultivate equanimity.








Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Tonya Allen
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




[Illustration: Mrs. Mouser Cat walked up to Aunt Amy with a mouse in her
mouth]


MOUSER CATS' STORY

By AMY PRENTICE


With Thirty-Five Illustrations and a Frontispiece in Colors

BY J. WATSON DAVIS



[Illustration]

MOUSER CAT'S STORY.


On that day last week when it stormed so very hard, your Aunt Amy was
feeling very lonely, because all of her men and women friends in the
house were busy, and it was not reasonable to suppose any of her bird or
animal acquaintances would be out. As she sat by the window, watching
the little streams of water as they ran down the glass, she said to
herself that this was one of the days when she could not hope to be
entertained by story-telling.

[Illustration: Mrs. Mouser Cat.]

"You don't seem to care whether Mrs. Man makes the pickles properly, or
not," a voice from the doorway said, and, looking around in surprise,
your Aunt Amy saw Mrs. Mouser Cat, an animal with whom she was very well
acquainted, but who had never before ventured to speak with her.

Considerably astonished, because it had not come into her mind that Mrs.
Mouser might prove to be as entertaining as any of the other animals she
had talked with, your Aunt Amy asked:

"What about the pickles, Mrs. Mouser?"

"Why, Mrs. Man is putting them up; didn't you know it?" the cat replied,
and your Aunt Amy said with a sigh:

"Oh, yes indeed, Mrs. Mouser, I know that, and you also know it is not
possible for me to do any work around the house, owing to my illness.
That is why I am idle on this day when the storm makes it seem very,
very lonely.

"You can sit out of doors all the afternoon with a foolish old duck, or
talk by the hour with Mr. Turtle, who hasn't got sense enough to go in
when it rains, and yet you never invited me for an afternoon's
story-telling," and Mrs. Mouser arched her back as if she was angry.

"Do you know any stories?" your Aunt Amy asked, surprised again, and
Mrs. Mouser replied quickly:

"It would be funny if I didn't. I've lived on this farm more than six
years, and have known pretty much all that has happened around here in
that time."




WHY CATS CATCH MICE.


"I wish you could think of a story to tell me now," your Aunt Amy said.
"I am just in the mood for hearing one."

"It is the hardest thing in the world to stand up and begin telling a
story without anything to start one going," Mrs. Mouser said
thoughtfully, as she brushed her whiskers with her paw. "After you once
get into it, of course, they come easy enough. How would it do if I
should explain why it is that cats catch mice?"

"Was there ever a time when they didn't catch mice?" your Aunt Amy
asked, surprised for the third time.

[Illustration: Mrs. Pussy Cat Visits her Cousin]

"Oh, yes indeed," Mrs. Mouser said in a matter-of-fact tone. "All cats
used to be good friends with the mice, once upon a time, and it happened
that because an old Mrs. Pussy, who lived in the city, didn't have
anything in the house to eat, the cats took up catching mice. You see it
was in this way: A cat that had always lived in the country, made up her
mind one day to go and see her cousin in the city, so she put on her
bonnet and shawl, wrapped some fried fish in a paper, and started.

"When she got there her cousin saw the fish, and it made her ashamed
because she hadn't anything in the house to offer the visitor, so she
asked, turning up her nose considerably:

"Do you cats in the country eat fish?' and Mrs. Pussy replied:

"Why, yes, of course we do; don't you?"

"Certainly not; it is thought to be a sign of ill-breeding to eat such
vulgar food,' and then remembering that she could not offer her cousin
the least little thing, she said, never stopping to think very much
about it. We eat mice here. They are delicious; you would be surprised
to know what a delicate flavor they have."

That surprised the country cousin, and nothing would do but that she
must go right out hunting for mice. Of course some one had to go with
her, and then it was that the city cat found she hadn't made any such a
very great mistake after all, for mice or rats, take them any way you
please, cooked or raw, are very nice indeed.




THE KITTY WHICH THE SNOW BROUGHT.


"Do you think that is a true story?" your Aunt Amy asked, and Mrs.
Mouser replied:

"I can't really say; but I think it is as true as that the snow brought
a white cat to Dolly Man." Your Aunt Amy knew Miss Dolly's kitten very
well; but she had never heard any such thing as Mrs. Mouser intimated,
therefore, as a matter of course, she was curious regarding the affair,
and asked that it be explained to her.

"I was in the house when this happened, so there is no mistake about the
story part of it," Mrs. Mouser began. "It was snowing one day, and
Dolly, standing by the window, said to her mother that she wished the
snow-flakes would turn into a pretty, little, white kitten, so she could
have something to play with. She hadn't hardly more than spoken, when
they heard a cat calling from out of doors, and Dolly ran into the
hallway, believing the snow-flakes had really turned into a pet for her.
Now it is kind of odd, but true just the same, that when she opened the
door there stood a white kitten, the same one we call Kitty Snow.

"She was the forlornest little stray kitten you could ever imagine, and
as white then as she is now, from her nose to the tip of her tail, but
so nearly frozen when Dolly took her in, that they had to wrap her in a
blanket, and keep her near the fire two or three hours before she thawed
out."

"I believe that you and Kitty Snow are not very good friends," your Aunt
Amy said.

[Illustration: Dolly and Kitty Snow.]

"Well, I can't say that we are," Mrs. Mouser replied thoughtfully. "That
white cat has been petted so much that she really isn't of any very
great service about the house. I don't believe she has caught a mouse in
six months, and yet I heard her tell Mr. Towser Dog no longer ago than
yesterday, that she was of more value around this farm than I. Just
think of it! And it has been proven that I have a good deal more sense
than Mr. Fox, cunning as he thinks he is."




WHEN MR. FOX WAS FOOLISH.


As a matter of course, your Aunt Amy asked her what she meant, and Mrs.
Mouser sat down at one side of the fireplace, as if making ready for an
afternoon of story-telling.

[Illustration: Mrs. Mouser Flatters Mr. Fox.]

"It was like this;" she said. "I was down in the meadow looking for
field mice one day, and met Mr. Fox. You know some animals think that he
and I are relations; but whether we are or not, we have always been good
friends. So he sat down for a chat, and we talked of first this thing
and then that, until finally I said, just to make myself agreeable:

"'Do you know, Mr. Fox, I think you are very smart.'

"Well now, would you believe it, that puffed him way up with pride, and
he said, grinning in a way that was enough to make any cat laugh:

"'Indeed I am, Mrs. Mouser. There isn't an animal around here who can
hold a candle to me for smartness.'

"'What about the dogs?' I asked, thinking to joke him a little, and he
turned up his nose as he said:

"'I don't give a snap of my claws for all the dogs there are around this
place! Even if four or five of them should come right up here this
minute, it wouldn't bother me any. You may not think it; but Mr. Towser
is actually afraid of me.

"Well now, do you know that made me laugh again, because in the first
place I knew it wasn't true; but what was the use of saying anything of
the kind to him? He was swelled way out with pride, so I changed the
conversation, and began talking about mice, when suddenly there was a
terrible commotion down the lane, and up came Mr. Towser, Miss Spaniel
and four or five other dogs, barking and yelping.

"Oh me, oh my, how frightened I was! Up a tree I scurried as fast as my
legs would carry me, and not until I was safe on the highest limb did I
look around to see Mr. Fox, who didn't care the snap of his claws for
dogs; but, bless you, he was going toward the meadow with his tail
hanging straight out behind him, while the dogs were gaining on him at
every jump. Mr. Towser told me afterward that they made Mr. Fox just
about as sick as Mrs. Toad made the bugs."

"What was it Mrs. Toad did?" your Aunt Amy asked, and Mrs. Mouser
replied with a grin:

"Perhaps you never heard that Mr. Crow is a great hand at making
poetry?"

[Illustration: Mr. Crow.]

"I have indeed," your Aunt Amy replied, and it was only with difficulty
she prevented herself from laughing aloud. "I have heard of his poetry
from every bird and animal around this farm."

[Illustration: Mr. Fox forgets how bold he was as the dogs chase him
through the field.]




A WET-WEATHER PARTY.


"Then perhaps you don't care to hear any more?" Mrs. Mouser said
inquiringly.

"Indeed I do," your Aunt Amy replied, "if it is anything new, and I
surely have never heard of a wet-weather party."

[Illustration: Mr. and Miss Cricket.]

Mrs. Mouser stroked her whiskers a moment, and then began to repeat the
following:

  A little Black Ant was journeying home
    From a marketing visit to town,
  When down came the ram, pitter-patter, so fast,
    It threatened to spoil her best gown.

  She wandered about till she quite lost her way,
    Till at last a big Toadstool she found,
  "Ah, here I can rest!" said the little Black Ant,
    And she wearily sank to the ground.

  And as she sat resting, a light she espied,
    And a Glow-worm came twinkling by.
  "Dear me!" exclaimed he, with a gasp and a sob,
    "I don't think I'll ever be dry!"

  "Come in, sir, come in," said the little Black Ant,
    "Here is plenty of room, sir, for two.
  Pray bring in your light, sir, and sit down by me,
    Or else you'll be surely wet through."

[Illustration: Mr. Stag-Beetle and the Newspaper Reporter.]

  The Glow-worm agreed, and soon brought in his light,
    When a cricket appeared on the scene
  With her fiddle and bow (she's a minstrel, you know)
    --To a concert in town she had been.

  "Come in, ma'am, come in!" said the little Black Ant,
    "Here is shelter and light for us all!
  And if you could play us a nice little tune,
    We might fancy we were at a ball."

[Illustration: Mr. Beetle Arrives.]

  "Hear, hear!" said the voice of the Stag-Beetle bold,
    Who just then was passing that way;
  "And if there is dancing, I hope, dear Miss Ant,
    That you will allow _me_ to stay!"

  "Come in, sir, come in!" said the little Black Ant,
    "The more, sir, the merrier we!
  And here, I declare, is my friend Mrs. Snail,
    As busy as ever, I see!"

  "Come in, Mrs. Snail," said the little Black Ant,
    "Come join our small party to-night!
  Here's the Beetle and Cricket all quite snug and dry,
    And the Glow-worm to give us some light!"

  So the Snail came and joined them, still knitting away,
    And the Cricket her fiddle got out;
  And then--well, you just should have seen how they
      danced,
    How they jumped and all capered about!

[Illustration: Mrs. Toad Breaks up the Party.]

  The Little Black Ant did a skirt-dance quite well;
    The Beetle a gay Highland fling;
  And as for the Glow-worm, he just jigged about,
    And _danced_ really nothing at all.

  But all of a sudden a croaking was heard,
    And who should appear but a Toad,
  Who hoarsely demanded their business, and why
    They were all gathered in her abode?

  Then what a commotion! The little Black Ant
    Went from one fainting fit to another;
  The Snail simply shut herself up in her house,
    And thought she'd escape all the bother!

  The Beetle and Glow-worm soon took themselves off,
    And the Cricket and Ant with them too,
  And once more these poor creatures were out in the rain,
    And didn't know what they should do.

  But they presently came to the trunk of a tree,
    And there they all stayed for the night;
  But they never forgot that old, cross Mrs. Toad,
    Who gave them so dreadful a fright!"

"Mrs. Toad certainly succeeded in raising quite a disturbance," your
Aunt Amy said, feeling it necessary to make some comment, and Mrs.
Mouser replied thoughtfully:




MR. THOMAS CAT'S NARROW ESCAPE.


"Yes, almost as much as Mr. Man did when he tried to drown Mr. Thomas
Cat the other day. It seems that Mr. Thomas had been out in the stable
stealing the food which was left for Mr. Towser, and one of the maids,
seeing it, told Mr. Man, so then and there it was decided that Mr.
Thomas must be drowned. Mr. Man called him up, as if he was the best
friend he ever had, and when Mr. Thomas got near enough, he caught him
by the tail, starting off at once for the stream.

[Illustration: Dragging Mr. Thomas to his Fate.]

"'What are you going to do with me?' Mr. Thomas cried, and Mr. Man said:

"'You wait and see. I'll teach you to steal Mr. Towser's food! You are
no good, that's what's the trouble with you--you are no good!'

"So he took a rope out of his pocket and tied it around Mr. Thomas'
neck, after they got near the water. Then bent down over the bank to get
a big rock, when his foot slipped, and in he went splashing and howling
until you might have heard him on the next farm, for he couldn't swim a
stroke, and the water was deep where he went in.

"Of course Mr. Thomas wasn't able to do anything to help him, so off he
started for the house the best he knew how, with the rope dragging on
behind, and when he got there, Mrs. Man couldn't help seeing him.
Knowing what her husband had counted on doing she mistrusted that
something was wrong, so down she ran to the stream, getting there just
in time to pull Mr. Man out of the water before he drew his last breath.

"'How did you know where I was?' Mr. Man asked after the water had run
out of his mouth.

"'Why the cat just the same as told me, when he came back with a rope
around his neck.'

"'Well, he was some good after all,' Mr. Man said.' I had begun to think
all cats were useless, but it seems Mr. Crow was right in that poetry of
his, after all.'

"Then Mr. Man went up to the house, and since then Mr. Thomas has been
allowed to stay round the farm, just as he pleases."




MR. CROW'S FANCY.


"What did he mean by saying Mr. Crow was right?"

"Oh, that was on account of a piece of poetry he wrote about me. There
isn't much of it, and perhaps you had just as soon I would repeat it."

Then, without waiting for permission, Mrs. Mouser recited the following:

  Some people love the gay giraffe
  Because his antics make them laugh
    (I've never found him witty),
  Others prefer the cockatoo--
  He does things I should hate to do;
    He's vulgar--more's the pity!

  An ostrich draws admiring throngs
  Whenever he sings his comic songs,
    And, really, it's no wonder!
  The dormouse has been highly rated
  (and justly) for his celebrated
    Mimicking of thunder.

  I know some friends who'd journey miles
  To see a bat's face wreathed in smiles,
    They say it's grandly funny!
  To see a buzzard drink port wine
  Another eager friend of mine
    Would pay no end of money.

  But that which most appeals to me--
  I know my taste may curious be--
    Is--not a mouse in mittens.
  It is to see a homely cat,
  Dressed up in an old battered hat,
  A-walking with her kittens!

[Illustration: Mrs. Tabby and Her Kittens.]

"One would think from the verses, that you and Mr. Crow were very good
friends," your Aunt Amy suggested, and Mrs. Mouser said with a purr of
content:

"We have always got along very well together, and I hope we always
shall, for really, say what you please about that old bird, it wouldn't
be pleasant to have him making sport of you in his verses. We are
neither of us as much in love with ourselves as were the peacock and the
crane, therefore I don't fancy we shall ever have any very serious
trouble."




A QUESTION OF BEAUTY.


"What about the peacock and the crane?" your Aunt Amy asked, not
disposed to let slip any opportunity of hearing a story.

"Oh, that's something very, very old--why, my grandmother used to tell
about it. You know the crane thinks he has got a pretty tail, and I'm
not saying anything against it, for it is handsome; but this crane my
grandmother used to tell about, had the idea that he was the finest
looking bird who ever came out of an egg. He went around making a good
deal of such talk as that, and one day he met with a peacock for the
first time. Strangely enough, he had never heard about such a bird, so
he strutted back and forth as usual, and after they had talked a while
of the weather, and all that sort of thing, Mr. Crane said:

[Illustration: As Mr. Peacock spread his tail, Mr. Crane flew off in
disgust]

"'People tell me I am one of the handsomest birds that ever lived.
There's nothing in this world that quite comes up to my tail feathers,
and that much I can say without risk of being thought vain.'

"'You have some very pretty feathers,' Mr. Peacock said, keeping his own
tail folded up so it couldn't be seen very well. 'But do you really
think they are more beautiful than can be found on any other bird?'

"'I don't _think_ so, I know it,' Mr. Crane said, spreading the
long plumes of his tail out so they would show to the best advantage,
and just then Mr. Peacock unfolded his tail to its full size.

"If you ever saw an astonished bird, it was Mr. Crane. He looked at the
beautiful feathers spread out like a great, big fan, and then started to
fly away.

"'Where are you going?' Mr. Peacock asked.

"And Mr. Crane answered, while he was in the air:

"'Off somewhere to hide until I have got sense enough to hold my tongue
when I don't know what I'm talking about.'

"Since that time I have never heard any of the cranes doing very much
bragging, and it is a pity that there are yet others around this place
who ought to get just such a lesson, for many of the animals here need
it sadly."

"You among the rest?" your Aunt Amy asked laughingly, and Mrs. Mouser
Cat replied:

"Thank goodness, I am not proud, and perhaps it is because I haven't
very much to take pride in. But I have lived long enough in this world
to know that one of us is of just about as much importance as another,
and the animal or the bird who thinks this world couldn't move very well
without him, is making a big mistake. There is nobody whose place cannot
be filled when it becomes necessary; there would even be somebody to run
this farm as well as Mr. Man does, if he should die to-morrow."




MENAGERIE POETRY.


"What I have in mind is told, in a foolish kind of a way, I suppose, by
Mr. Crow, who wrote the verses when Mr. Man's little girl Dolly wanted a
pet, and no matter how much she thought of one, if it died, or got lost,
the next that came along suited her almost as well.

"Of course I don't want you to suppose I think this is anything but
nonsense; but at the same time it carries out the idea of what I have
been trying to say," and then Mrs. Mouser repeated the following:

  I once possessed an Elephant
    Who fed on potted grouse;
  One day I lost him, but I think
    He's somewhere in the house.

[Illustration: The Delicate Pet.]

  I had a Hippopotamus
    Who really was quite slim;
  He caught a chill, and so I thought
    I'd best get rid of him.

  I also had a gay Giraffe,
    Whose antics made me wince;
  He went a walk to Brooklyn town,
    I've never seen him since.

[Illustration: The Pet Who Went to Brooklyn.]

  The Puffing Fish that I possessed
    Would fill my heart with pride;
  But ah! one day I made a joke--
    He laughed so that he died.

  You should have seen my Polar Bear,
    He was a lively beast;
  But what became of him at last
    I've no idea, the least.

[Illustration: The Very Sociable Pet.]

  My Grizzly Bear was certainly
    By all my friends admired.
  He tried to climb the Monument,
    And when he failed, expired.

  Perhaps the dearest of them all
    Was James, my Cockatoo--
  He took to stopping out at nights;
    I gave him to the Zoo

[Illustration: The Lively Pet]

  So now I haven't anything;
    It's lonely, I must own.
  I'll get a little calf, I think--
    I cannot live alone!

"I don't wonder you call that 'Menagerie Poetry,'" your Aunt Amy said
when Mrs. Mouser ceased speaking; "but I think I understood, even
without the aid of the verses, the moral you intended to draw."

"I should hope you did; but I remembered those lines, and it seemed to
me they came in just right. There is a story he tells about the Elephant
and the Bee, which teaches the same kind of a lesson."




WHEN MR. ELEPHANT AND MR. BEE HAD A QUARREL.


"I certainly would like to hear it," your Aunt Amy said when Mrs. Mouser
Cat ceased speaking, as if waiting for some such permission.

"Well, in the first place you must understand that there was once an
Elephant and a Bee that were the very best of friends," Mrs. Mouser Cat
said as she curled her tail around her fore paws to prevent them from
being chilled by the draft. "One day the Elephant had walked a long
distance, and thought he would sit down to rest for a little while. Now
it seems the Bee had been flying around there, and he had got tired too,
so he laid down on the grass and went to sleep.

"Now what do you think? When Mr. Elephant sat down he happened to hit
Mr. Bee's hind foot, and then there was a time! Mr. Bee talked
disgracefully, so it is said, to Mr. Elephant, and you would have
thought they never had been friends; but Mr. Elephant didn't answer him
back, because he was a peaceable kind of an animal, and knew that the
least said is the soonest mended.

"When Mr. Bee got through scolding, they went on their journey again. I
don't know where they were traveling, but that doesn't make any
difference in the story. Off they started, and after a while it seemed
as if Mr. Bee got to feeling better, and Mr. Elephant said:

"'I'm glad to see that you've got over being cross, for it was all an
accident, my hitting your foot.'

"'Oh yes,' Mr. Bee answered, as if he intended to be friendly again.
'We'll try to forget all about it. Have you seen anything of my collars
and cuffs since we started?'

"'Why, no,' replied Mr. Elephant. 'Have you lost them?'

"'I haven't seen them since we left home, and I believe they must be in
your trunk.'

"'I think not,' Mr. Elephant said; 'but you can go in and look for them,
if you choose.'

"Now Mr. Bee hadn't got over his cross fit a little bit, and he was only
waiting for a chance to pay Mr. Elephant back. Well, he crawled into the
trunk just as far as he could get, and then he gave poor Mr. Elephant
the very hardest sting you ever dreamed about.

[Illustration: When Mr. Elephant Sneezed.]

"'Oh me, oh my!' Mr. Elephant howled. 'What a wicked little thing you
are! I'll fix you for that!' and then he hunched himself together, and
gave the biggest kind of a big sneeze. Now if you never saw anything of
the kind, you can't have an idea what a commotion it made when Mr.
Elephant did that, and, bless your heart, that was the last of Mr. Bee.
I don't know what became of him, and neither does anybody else. He must
have been dashed to pieces in the terrible wind that was raised, and it
served him good and right, too, for he deserved it just as much as ever
Mr. Bear did when he got so worn out by Mr. Man's boy Tommy."




WHEN TOMMY GOT THE BEST OF MR. BEAR.


"Is that another story?" your Aunt Amy asked, and Mrs. Mouser replied
with a laugh:

"Yes, and it is a good one, too. Last year there was an old Mr. Bear
living near this farm, who was the most quarrelsome animal you ever saw,
and besides that, he was wicked. Do you know, he made up his mind that
he would bite a big piece out of Mr. Man's boy's leg, just because Tommy
drove him away when he was stealing honey. So one night he crept up to
the well, and got into the bucket, letting himself way down to the
bottom where he could float around until Tommy came out to get a pail of
water.

"'I'll have him sure,' Mr. Bear said to himself, 'for when he pulls up
the bucket in the morning, I'll jump out and grab him, so he can't get
away.'

"Well, Tommy went to the well at just about the same time as usual, and
when he started to raise the bucket with the windlass, he found it was
terribly heavy. He thought some one must have been putting rocks in it
to play a joke on him, so he kept on turning the crank around until the
bucket was nearly to the top, and then he saw what was the matter:

[Illustration: Mr. Bear Makes a Mistake.]

"'My goodness!' he cried. 'There's Mr. Bear, and it's water I'm after,
not bear!'

"Then Tommy Man let go of the windlass, and of course down went Mr. Bear
to the bottom of the well with a bump that nearly shook him to pieces.

"Now almost anybody might have thought that Tommy would run away after
that; but no, he made up his mind to serve Mr. Bear out good and hard,
so he went to work winding up the windlass again. Then, when he had
hauled Mr. Bear nearly to the top, he let him go back with a worse bump
than before, and so he kept on doing this same thing thirteen or fifteen
times, until Mr. Bear was so sore and bruised that he couldn't do much
of anything more than hold himself on to the edge of the bucket.

"By that time Tommy had got all the sport he wanted, and he let Mr. Bear
crawl out of the bucket. I have heard it said that it was more than two
weeks before the old fellow could get out of bed, and the lesson did him
as much good as the one Mr. Donkey gave the Wild Hog, for he wasn't
quarrelsome again, and behaved himself decently well forever after."




MR. DONKEY'S LESSON IN GOOD MANNERS.


"I think the story about the donkey must be one which I have never
heard," your Aunt Amy said. "Although the animals on the farm have told
me quite a lot about Mr. Donkey, I have never thought of him as a
teacher.

"It isn't what you might rightly call a story; but only something that
happened when Mr. Donkey showed his good sense. Now I don't understand
why Mr. Man tells about any one being as stupid as a donkey. Why, our
Neddy is as wise as anybody on this farm, and you will think so when I
have told this story about him.

"It was one night after supper, and he thought he would take a stroll up
the road, because he hadn't been working very hard that day, and the
exercise might do him good. He was going along, minding his own
business, when Mr. Wild Hog came out from the bushes, and into the road.

"Mr. Donkey stepped over one side so as to give him plenty of room,
saying 'good evening' politely, and was walking on when Mr. Wild Hog
bristled up to him, showing both his big tusks, and said:

"'Why don't you turn out when you meet anybody of consequence?'

"'Perhaps I do when I meet them,' Mr. Donkey replied, and that made Mr.
Hog terribly angry. "'Do you know I have a mind to give you a lesson in
good manners?' growled Mr. Hog, and Mr. Donkey said with a grin:

"'Why not go off somewhere alone, and give yourself a lesson or two?'

"Of course that made Mr. Hog more angry than ever, and he said:

"'Do you know what I do when stupid animals like you try to be too
smart?'

"'No; I don't care either,' Mr. Donkey replied; 'but I will show you
what I do when animals make bigger hogs of themselves than is natural.'

"Just as he said this he turned around, swung up both heels, struck Mr.
Hog under the chin, and knocked him over and over as many as six times.
Then Mr. Donkey trotted off slowly, with a smile on his face that was
for all the world like Mr. Crocodile's after he had been to the
dentist's."

[Illustration: Mr. Wild Hog tries to give Mr. Donkey a lesson in good
manners.]




WHEN MR. CROCODILE HAD HIS TEETH EXTRACTED.


"Why did he go to the dentist?" your Aunt Amy asked, thinking to hear
another story.

[Illustration: Mr. Crocodile in Pain.]

"I had better repeat the poetry Mr. Crow wrote about it, for that tells
the whole story, and without further delay Mrs. Mouser Cat recited the
following:

  Come, listen, and I'll sing awhile
  About a winsome crocodile,
  Who had a most engaging smile
     Whene'er he smole.

  His basket with fresh fish to fill
  Each day he'd tramp o'er vale and hill,
  For he possessed quite wondrous skill
     With rod and pole.

  But as he fished, one summer's day,
  A toothache chased his smiles away;
  No longer could he fish and play
     His favorite role.

[Illustration: Not a Tooth in His Head.]

  He stamped and growled, the pain was vile,
  No more he grinned, Sir Crocodile,
  (And he'd a most engaging smile
     Whene'er he smole.)

  So straight he to the dentist went,
  On stopping or extraction bent,
  His soul was with such anguish rent;
     He reached his goal.

  "Come sit down in the chair awhile;
  Open your mouth, Sir Crocodile!"
  (He had a most engaging smile
     Whene'er he smole.)

  "Which is the tooth?" the dentist said;
  "Dear, dear! You must have suffered--
  You've not a sound tooth in your head,
     Not one that's whole!"

  He pulled them out; it took some while,
  And then that toothsome crocodile
  Had not quite such a pleasing smile
     Whene'er he smole.

"How do you suppose Mr. Crocodile felt when he was hungry, and wanted to
eat something?" your Aunt Amy asked.




THE DISSATISFIED CAT.


"Most likely much the same as did old Mrs. Pussy Cat up on the next
farm."

"How was that?" your Aunt Amy asked.

"Well, you see, she was partly black and partly white, and not being a
very neat cat, the white hair got dirty so often that she believed it
would be a great thing if it was all black. So she got the idea into her
head that if she should shave off the white hair, it would be the color
she wanted when it grew out again.

"Well, now what do you suppose that poor foolish thing did? Why she went
to the barber's, and had him shave all the white hair off of her body.
She actually frightened the ducks and the geese when she came home, she
looked so queer; but you couldn't have made her believe it. She thought
she was a perfect beauty, and when she came over to this farm that
evening, Mr. Thomas Cat said to her:

"'Why you are a perfect sight, that's what you are, with those tufts of
black hair all over you!'

"'That's all the style,' Mrs. Pussy Cat said, and I think she really
believed that she was as handsome as any cat you could find.

"Well, things went along all right while the weather was warm, but in
the course of ten days we had a heavy frost, and dear me, dear me, how
cold it grew all of a sudden! Poor Mrs. Pussy Cat was almost frozen to
death the first night of the cold snap, when she tried to stay with the
rest of us to a concert, and went home moaning:

"'Oh, give me back my hair! Give me back my hair!'

[Illustration: Mrs. Pussy Cat in Style.]

"Of course that couldn't be done, because she had to wait for it to grow
again; but Mrs. Man on the next farm wrapped her up in an old shawl, and
she had to stay in a basket until her hair grew, else she'd have frozen
to death, for we had a terrible hard winter that season. When the hair
did come out it was uneven, of course, and she was the worst looking cat
you ever saw.

"Mr. Man was shaving the first morning Mrs. Pussy Cat came out of the
basket, and he hadn't seen her since she had been to the barber's.

[Illustration: Mr. Man is Disturbed.]

"She jumped up on a chair by the side of him, thinking he would stroke
her fur as he always used to do, when the poor man got one glimpse of
her, and it nearly scared him into hysterics. I suppose he thought it
was a ghost, or something like that, for she looked bad enough to be
almost anything.

"He gave a yell, and jumped in the air. That scared Mrs. Pussy Cat, and
she screamed as she leaped out of the chair. Then Mr. Man went after her
with that big razor in his hand.

"I don't know how far he chased her; but Mr. Towser said that Mrs. Pussy
Cat ran more than five miles before she stopped, and when she sneaked
back home that night, I'm thinking she felt a good deal as Mr. Crow did
when he tried to make folks believe peacock feathers were growing in his
tail."




MR. CROW'S DECEIT.


"I have heard a great many stories which Mr. Crow has told; but never
one about him," your Aunt Amy interrupted. "If he tried to deceive the
other birds, I surely would like to know about it."

"Well, he did," Mrs. Mouser Cat said emphatically, sitting bolt upright;
"but of course he doesn't like to have the story told, so I had rather
you wouldn't let him know I mentioned it.

"I don't know how he happened to get it into his head to do such a
thing, for, as a rule, he spends the most of his time over in the big
tree telling stories or making poetry; but he grew foolish once, and
whenever anybody came where he was, he said he had strange growing
feathers, and the doctor believed he was turning into a peacock.

"Of course that made a good deal of excitement around here, among all of
us, for it would be a strange thing for a crow to change in that way,
and he had twice as many visitors as he ever had before, all wanting to
know about the new feathers.

"Well, of course he couldn't keep saying that they were coming, and not
show any signs of them, so one day he said he felt terribly sick and
guessed he should go into the hospital. Then we didn't see anything of
him for most a week, until little Redder Squirrel came around and said
Mr. Crow was all right; that he had as many as six peacock feathers
growing right out of his tail.

"Well, now, you can believe we were astonished, and more excited over it
than we had been since young Mr. Thomas Cat painted the canary yellow.
Of course we asked Redder Squirrel where we could see him, and he said
Mr. Crow had agreed to come out on the hill, just under the tree, that
afternoon.

"If we animals around here were anxious to see him, you can guess that
the peacocks were just about wild, and when the time came for Mr. Crow
to show himself, all the peacocks for as many as five miles around were
gathered under the big tree. Mr. Crow didn't know anything about their
coming, until he marched right out in the midst of them.

[Illustration: Mr. Crow showing his new feathers to the peacocks.]

"Now Mr. Crow is really a wise bird, and how it happened that he was so
foolish as to do what he did, beats me. Anybody with half an eye could
see that he had simply stuck these feathers in his tail, and was trying
to make us believe they had grown there. If he had stayed on the tree
where we couldn't get very near him, there might have been some chance
of deceiving us; but there he was right down where we could put our paws
on him if we wanted to. And the peacocks! Angry? Oh me, oh my, don't say
a word!

"One big one reached over with his beak, and pulled a feather from Mr.
Crow's tail.

"'The next time you set yourself up for one of us, it would be a good
idea to tie the feathers in, else they may drop out, as this one has,'
the peacock said, and I expected to see Mr. Crow almost faint away with
shame. But bless you, he never thought of doing anything of that kind.
He took the feather as bold as a lion, looked at the end of it, and then
he said, careless-like:

"'Well, I declare! I guess I must be moulting,' and with that, off he
flew. We didn't see him again for as much as two weeks, and then he
agreed not to write any poetry about us if we wouldn't tell the story of
the feathers; but young Mr. Thomas Cat couldn't hold in, and reported it
far and near, till Mr. Crow paid him back in good shape."




WHEN YOUNG THOMAS CAT PAINTED A CANARY.


"But what about painting a canary?" your Aunt Amy asked. "You spoke of
such a thing a moment ago."

"Yes, and it is what I am telling you about. Mr. Crow wrote the poetry
which tells the story, and you shall hear it."

Then Mrs. Mouser Cat repeated the following:

  For he was such a knowing puss--
          Oh yes, he was!
  A really clever, sharp young puss--
          Oh yes, he was!
  He wouldn't do as others do,
  He said, "I know a thing or two,
          _I_ do!

  "To-morrow is the great bird show--
          I think it is;
  The far-renowned canary show--
          Of course it is.
  Some yellow ochre, so I've heard,
  Will wondrously improve a bird,
          I've heard

[Illustration: Thomas Cat Paints the Canary]

  "I think I'll enter at that show--
          I think I will,
  Just make one entry for that show--
          By Jove, I will.
  And if my bird don't get the prize,
  Why it will be, as I surmise,
          A surprise!"

  The show was held--a great success--
          Of course it was!
  By all 'twas called a huge success--
          Indeed it was!
  The judges were experienced cats;
  They wore tail-coats, and large top-hats--
          _Such_ hats!

  Young Tom was there--he'd brought his bird--
         Just think! he had!
  He'd really dared to bring that bird--
         Oh yes, he had!
  He said, "No one will ever know
  That my canary's all no go,
         Oh no!"

[Illustration: The Spry Old Judge]

  But one old judge was rather spry--
         Oh yes, he was!
  You'd not have thought him half so spry,
         But oh, he was!
  He said, "Why really, on my word!
  Disqualify that shocking bird!--
         Absurd!"

  So Tom's bird was disqualified--
         Of course it was!
  Disgracefully disqualified,
         Ah yes, it was!
  And Tom, although he thought he knew
  A thing or two, found others too
         Who knew.

"Mr. Thomas must have believed that honesty was the best policy, before
he got through with the bird show," your Aunt Amy suggested, and Mrs.
Mouser Cat laughed as she replied:

"It would have shamed almost any cat; but it didn't seem to make a bit
of difference with young Thomas. He was just as pert as ever the next
day, and went around telling about the prize he would have taken if the
judge hadn't discovered the fraud. It would have served him right if he
had been punished as was Mr. Fox."




WHEN MR. FOX WAS TOO CUNNING.


"Is that another story?" your Aunt Amy asked.

"Yes, it is," Mrs. Mouser said reflectively, "and it shows that there
are times when even a fox can be too cunning. One day while Mr. Fox, who
used to live down in the swamp, was sneaking around behind the barn on
this farm, he saw a bag hanging on the limb of a tree just over the
water barrel.

"'Now I wonder what that is?' he said to himself, as he stopped and
looked first at the bag and then at the barrel. 'It smells good, and I
believe there's meat somewhere around here.'

[Illustration: Mr. Fox Hits Upon a Plan.]

"Then he climbed upon the barrel, and saw that it was half full of
water, so he began to wonder what the meaning of it was.

"'It must be a trap Mr. Man has set for me,' he said rubbing his ear as
if he thought himself very wise. 'He thinks I'll jump up for the bag,
and fall into the water. Now he's got to find a younger fox than I am,
if he wants to make that plan work, for I'm going to know what's hanging
up there, and I won't take any chances of getting drowned, either,
because I'll drink all the water first. Then that will settle it.'

"Well, he began to drink, and drink, and drink, until he swelled up
amazingly; but there was plenty of water still left in the barrel. Then
he drank some more; ran around a few moments, came back and drank again,
until he was all swelled out, and couldn't swallow another drop; but the
barrel appeared to be as full as when he commenced.

"By this time it wasn't possible for him to run the least little bit,
and he was feeling a good deal as his father did after he had found the
crab, when along came Mr. Man, who said:

"'Hello! here's a nice fat fox! I guess I'll take his skin,' and the
next day, lo and behold, there was Mr. Fox's hide nailed up on the barn,
showing that sometimes it is dangerous to be too cunning."




WHEN SONNY BUNNY RABBIT WAS RASH.


"I never saw an animal who didn't get into trouble when he thought he
knew everything," Mrs. Mouser went on thoughtfully, giving no heed to
the fact that your Aunt Amy was on the point of interrupting her. "Now
there is Sonny Bunny Rabbit, he got it into his head that he was the
greatest ever lived; that he could do just as he wanted to around this
neighborhood, because he led Mr. Fox into a trap one day.

"Why, that foolish little rabbit used to sit out in the field at night,
and tell me, who am old enough to be his grandmother at the very least,
that he could do anything he pleased; that there was no animal around
here who could get the best of him.

"Well, Sonny Bunny kept that idea in his mind, and one day Mr. Hawk came
sailing along just when Sonny Bunny was talking with Redder Squirrel,
and Redder he screamed:

"'Run, Sonny Bunny! Run for your life!'

"'You don't catch me running away from any old hawk,' Sonny Bunny said,
as bold as a lion. 'I'm going to stay right here, and kick dirt in his
face if he comes where I am.'

"'Run, Sonny Bunny, run!' Redder Squirrel cried, and for once he showed
more sense than usual.

"But Sonny Bunny was so puffed up with what he thought he could do, that
he stood still, and got ready to kick dirt, while old Mr. Hawk came
sailing round, and round, and round, making ready to light on him. If
you'll believe it, that foolish rabbit stayed right there until down
came Mr. Hawk, and then, oh me, oh my, how Sonny did kick dirt!

[Illustration: When Sonny Bunny was an Invalid.]

"I'm willing to admit that part of his plan was all right. He blinded
Mr. Hawk, but at the same time didn't save all of his own skin, for the
old fellow's claws went into Sonny Bunny's back so far, as his mother
told me, that you could almost see the bones, and the foolish rabbit
laid in bed three or four weeks before he was fit to go out of doors
again."

"It seems to me as if I had heard something like that before," your Aunt
Amy said, and Mrs. Mouser replied:

"Very likely you've heard the same story, for all the animals around
here know about it."

"But what was it you said about Mr. Fox's father meeting a crab?" your
Aunt Amy asked.




MR. FOX AND MISS CRAB.


"Well, that isn't what you might really call a story; it's only
something which happened to old Mr. Fox when he went down to the
seashore for his health, and met young Miss Crab. He had never seen
anybody of the kind, and didn't know whether she was an animal, or a
fish, or a bird.

"'Good morning,' he said very politely, and Miss Crab answered him back
as nice as you please.

"'Are you out for a walk?' he asked.

"'Oh no, indeed,' she said. 'I am here taking the sea air for my health.
The doctor recommends it, but I am not allowed to move around very much
because I'm so feeble.'

[Illustration: Old Mr. Fox trying to coax Miss Crab out of her shell.]

"Now old Mr. Fox was puzzled. He put his paw on her shell, and it was
hard; but whether it was the house she lived in, or a part of herself,
he couldn't for the life of him tell.

"Well, after a time he made up his mind that the shell must be her
house, so he said:

"'Why don't you come outside where you can get purer air than you do in
there?' and she replied, just as a gull went sailing by:

"'I don't dare to for fear some of those rude birds will eat me.'

"That settled old Mr. Fox. He thought if the birds liked Miss Crab well
enough to eat her, she would make a good supper for him. So he began to
coax and coax her to come out, and after a long time, finding that she
would not do as he wanted, he began trying to bite the shell into
pieces. Then she caught hold of his tongue with one of her big claws,
and bit as much as an inch and a half right straight off the end of it.

"Oh me, oh my, how old Mr. Fox did howl! I'm told that he went home in a
most dreadful rage, with the blood streaming out of his mouth, and when
his wife asked him what the matter was, he couldn't say a word, of
course not, because his tongue was gone. I don't know how long it was
before he got well; but they do say he was the most shamefaced looking
animal that was ever seen, whenever any one spoke to him about crabs, or
the seashore."




THE BABY ELEPHANT.


"Speaking of the seashore reminds me of another piece of Mr. Crow's
poetry, and if you can stand any more, I wish you would, because I think
this is really good."

As a matter of course your Aunt Amy could do no less than say she would
be pleased to hear it, and Mrs. Mouser recited that which is set down
here:

  To little John Adolphus Chubb
    Your kind attention I invite;
  Oh, how he loves to bathe and scrub,
    Each day at noon and eke at night.

  Now John Adolphus William Chubb
    A fine young elephant is he;
  And when he's in his little tub,
    Oh, 'tis a pleasant sight to see!

  His nurse,--a motherly old thing--
    No need to coax the rogue has she;
  Adolphus, when he sees her bring
    The water, trumpets in his glee.

[Illustration: Johnny Chubb.]

  Oh, how he loves the cold, cold stream
    Descending on him in the tub!
  He feels as if he'd like to scream--
    He loves it so--does William Chubb.

  And then, the evening's washing o'er
    (Though he could wish it lasted still),
  His nurse will gay, "Come, come, no more;
    You've had enough now, Master Will!"

  So swift he's dried, his night-gown on,
    A night-cap tied upon his head,
  And to the rattle's music,
    John Adolphus William goes to bed.

[Illustration: Johnny Goes to Bed.]

"I don't think that is very nice poetry," your Aunt Amy said when Mrs.
Mouser had come to the end of the verses. "It is too ridiculous."

"That may be; but I have heard some of your friends, like Mr. Turtle,
for example, tell you even worse than that," and Mrs. Mouser spoke quite
sharply. "Now if you want a really pretty little story, that hasn't got
much fun in it, I can tell you one about two mice, and it must be true,
because I had it from a cat friend of mine who was on the spot."




THE STORY OF SQUEAKY MOUSE.


Your Aunt Amy said to Mrs. Mouser that she would be very much pleased to
hear it, and, telling the story as if she did not entirely approve of it
herself, Mrs. Mouser began:

"Mother Mouse had two little daughters, Meeky and Squeaky. Meeky was a
good little mouse, and did everything her mother told her. Squeaky was
very brave and daring, but she was the torment of everybody's life.

"One day Mother Mouse was too ill to go out and do her own marketing.

"'I wish you children would go and get me a little lump of cheese,' she
moaned.

"Away scampered the two little mice to a high shelf they knew of; their
mother had warned them against traps and cats, so they were careful not
to linger on the pantry floor. When they found the cheese, Meeky began
at once rolling up a little lump to take home to her mother, but Squeaky
filled her mouth as full as it would hold, and ran up and down the
shelf, making a great clatter.

"'Be careful,' said her sister. 'The cat will hear you.'

[Illustration: Squeaky sees Mrs. Cat.]

"Squeaky looked down and saw the cat on the pantry shelf; she knew it
couldn't get up to her, and she could not resist calling: "'Peekaboo!'

"Dear me, how Mrs. Cat glared!

"'Oh,' said Meeky, 'how are we to get down with mother's cheese now?'

"Squeaky said they would wait till the cat went to sleep, and pretty
soon this seemed to be the case. But Mrs. Cat was only shamming, for the
minute Squeaky reached the floor she pounced upon her, and while the
mouse was carried shrieking away, Meeky made her escape.

"Of course, Mother Mouse and Meeky felt badly for a while, but the other
mice said it was just what might have been expected, and just what
happened to young mice who would not mind what their elders told them."

"Don't you ever feel badly, Mrs. Mouser, when you have caught a mouse,
to think that it had a mother, and brothers and sisters, in its hole,
waiting for it to come back?" your Aunt Amy asked.

"Why should I?" and Mrs. Cat spoke sharply. "Mice were made for cats to
eat, and even if they were not, unless I killed all I could, Mr. Man's
house would be over-run with them."




A SAUCY MOUSE.


"Of course I can't do very much in the daytime, because they don't come
out of their holes; but I work all night, and it would surprise you to
know how many there are in the house, I don't kill off a tenth part of
them, and they seem to think they have more rights here than I have.

"Why, it is only last week that I happened to look up on the broad shelf
in the dining-room closet, and there were six mice, sitting around as
bold as you please. Five ran for their lives the minute they saw me; but
what do you think the other one did? Why, he sat on his tail with his
paws behind him, and actually scolded because I had come around there.

[Illustration: Mr. Mouse is angry.]

"I really believe the foolish creature thought he could frighten me, for
he kept right on scolding and sputtering until I got my paw on his neck,
and of course that settled him. I left him a good deal worse off than
Mrs. Lioness did Mr. Rat, when she wanted to play with him."




FATAL SPORT.


"That must be a new story," your Aunt Amy said, and Mrs. Mouser looked
surprised as she replied:

"Well, well, I don't understand what all the animals around here have
talked about! This is the third or fourth very old story that you
haven't heard, and when I came in here to visit this afternoon, I had an
idea that everything I might offer to tell, you had heard from some of
the others."

"Suppose you tell me what Mrs. Lioness did to Mr. Rat?" your Aunt Amy
suggested, and Mrs. Mouser began:

"Once upon a time--you can see from the beginning how old this story
is--Mr. Rat ate his way into the place where they keep animals to show
them off--a Zoological Garden, I believe Mr. Man calls it. Well, after
Mr. Rat got in he found a Mrs. Lion who was all alone, and feeling as
though she really needed company. She was just as kind to Mr. Rat as she
could be, and asked him why he didn't make his home there with her.

"'I would like to,' Mr. Rat said, 'for you seem to be a very nice kind
of a Mrs. Lion; but when Mr. Man, who owns this place, comes along, he
will kill me if he can.'

"'I would like to see Mr. Man try to hurt any one who was visiting me!'
Mrs. Lion said sharply, as she held up her paw. 'Do you see that? I
could kill Mr. Man with it in a minute if I struck him.'

"As she spoke she laid her paw on Mr. Rat in play, just to show him what
she could do, and the 'play' was so rough that the breath of life was
squeezed out of Mr. Rat in a jiffy.

"Now you might have supposed that Mrs. Lion would feel badly because she
had killed Mr. Rat without meaning to; but instead of that she said,
looking at his body:

"'What a poor kind of a creature he must be, when he allows himself to
be killed with what was no more than a love pat!'

"And a little mouse, who was sitting in a hole in the wall, having seen
all that happened, squeaked with a nervous snicker:

"'A lion's sport is altogether too strenuous for such as us, and if Mr.
Rat had been wise, he would have kept well outside the cage, fearing
your play even more than your anger.'

[Illustration: "What a poor creature Mr. Rat is to be killed with a love
pat, said Mrs. Lion.]

"'It seems to me he was a wise little mouse,' your Aunt Amy said, and
Mrs. Mouser replied with a sneer:

"He was a good deal like many others I know of, exceeding wise after
they have seen the result of another's folly. But it seems to me that we
are talking altogether too much about mice."




A CAT'S DREAM.


"I have been wanting to repeat to you what I call some very nice poetry,
which Mr. Crow made about a dream of mine. It is really the best thing
he ever wrote, and although I the same as promised not to ask you to
listen to anything more of his, I am very anxious for you to hear it."

"Don't think that I object so severely to what Mr. Crow writes," your
Aunt Amy replied. "I have heard a number of things he wrote which I
thought were very good indeed."

Then Mrs. Mouser Cat repeated the following:

  Kitty cat, kitty cat, asleep on the rug,
  With velvet paws beneath your head nice and snug,
  What are you dreaming of? What do you think
  When out slips your little tongue so soft and pink?

  When you flick your ears, and your whiskers quiver so,
  And you give an eager cry like a whisper low;
  When your tail pats the rug so intent, and you seem
  Just ready for a spring, tell me what do you dream?

[Illustration: When Mrs. Mouser Dreams.]

  "Oh, I have a fairy-land I visit in my sleep,
  Where the mice don't expect me and are playing bo-peep;
  Down I pounce upon them, they are not so quick as I,
  And I smile as I regale myself upon a mouse pie;

  "There are pantries where the pans of milk are brimming o'er,
  Where I lap the rich cream and spill no drop upon the floor;
  Loveliest custards, daintiest bits of fragrant cheese;
  And I help myself without a word as often as I please.

  "Then I walk along the fences and I grandly wave my tail;
  My whiskers are so fierce all the other cats turn pale;
  When Pug and Towser eye me, suspiciously, I know,
  I give a spring upon them and off in fright they go.

  "And in my pretty fairy-land no cruel boys appear;
  Only black eats and white cats, and purrs and mews to hear.
  And these are what my visions are, oh little mistress sweet;
  Sure any cat would need to smile asleep here at your feet."

[Illustration: A Cat's Dreamland.]

"Now I really think that is good, Mrs. Mouser," and your Aunt Amy spoke
no more than the truth. "I don't seriously object to Mr. Crow's nonsense
verses; but at the same time I never really enjoy them."




BLOOD RELATIONS.


"Of course there's a difference in tastes," Mrs. Mouser said
thoughtfully. "Some of the things which Bunny Rabbit thinks are good, I
don't like at all, and perhaps he objects to what I believe is very
fine. Now here is a story Mr. Crow has got about Mr. Man's boy Tommy.
Mamma Speckle thinks there was nothing like it ever told. He says that
Tommy Man, one night after he had been tucked up in his crib, was
awakened by a strange, humming, buzzing sound close to his head, and
when he got out the sand that the 'sand-man' had put in his eyes, he
stared about him. There on the bottom of the bed was a fearful
hobgoblin, so Tommy Man thought, with big round eyes, awfully long legs
and wings, and a beak that looked like a trooper's sword.

"'Are you one of those angels that my mamma said took care of little
boys at night?' asked Tommy Man, trembling.' 'Cause if you are I guess I
can get along by myself all right; you needn't stay.'

"But the mosquito made a jab with his bill at the bed-clothes over
Tommy's chin, and said, loudly:

"'Cousin-n-n-n-n, Cousin-n-n-n.'

"'Oh, you're a cousin, are you? I wonder which one?'

"'Z-z-i-m m-m,' answered the mosquito, buzzing about Tommy Man's head.

[Illustration: The Unexpected Visitor.]

"'Zim? Oh, I guess you must be that soldier cousin of mother's by the
looks of the sword you carry; his name was Jim.'

"'Cousin-n-n-n-n!' buzzed the mosquito sharply. 'Don't you know your own
relations?'

"'You my relation?' Tommy asked in amazement. 'How do you make that
out?'

"'Oh, easy. Relations are those who have the same blood in them, ain't
they?'

"'Yes,' assented Tommy.

"'Well, you and I have the same blood. You had it, and now I've got it.
I just tapped you, you know.'

"Tommy didn't know anything of the kind, and he was terribly frightened,
so he just covered up his head, and trembled until Mr. Mosquito flew
away."

"Those are what I call nonsense stories," your Aunt Amy said when Mrs.
Mouser ceased speaking, and she replied quite sharply:

"Of course they are, and that is about all the animals on this farm
know."

"I am certain you make a mistake, Mrs. Mouser Cat, for you have told me
several this afternoon which teach a good lesson," your Aunt Amy said,
and for a moment it seemed very much as if Mrs. Mouser was angry, but
her face brightened an instant later, as she cried:

"I've got the very story for you, although it's about a mouse, and I
don't really believe in talking of them so much, for it makes it appear
as if they were of great importance, when all they are fit for is to
furnish food for us cats.

"Once upon a time there was a miller who lived in his mill, and on a
certain morning, when he was opening the sacks of grain, out hopped a
little mouse.

"'Oh, wife, wife!' he cried as if he had seen some horrible animal.
'Bring me the butcher knife so that I can kill this mouse!'

"But the little mouse put her paws together and begged for her life. She
promised to keep the mill free from mice if the miller would spare her
life. Well, after a good deal of talk the miller agreed that she should
be allowed to live in the mill, and for a whole month she kept her word
so well that not even a mouse's tail was seen anywhere around the place.
Then, one morning the miller heard a faint squeaking, and he cried out
angrily:

"'What's this, Mrs. Mouse? You have forgotten your promise, and let in
some of your friends.'

"No,' answered the little mouse, 'I have kept my promise. Those are my
three babies, who were born last night,' and she led the way proudly to
her nest, where the three squirming little mouse babies lay.

"'So this is the way you keep your word, is it?' the miller cried
angrily. 'You promised to drive all other mice away from this mill, and
here are three who have come to get their living from me!'

"Then he picked up the babies and threw them into the river. Oh, but the
little mouse was angry! Yet she was only a mouse, and he was a man, so
she said nothing; but after that, whenever she got a chance, she gnawed
and gnawed and gnawed at the outer post of the mill, sometimes working
the whole night long.

"Then came a big storm, and the river rose very high; the posts which
were half gnawed through, broke, and the mill fell over into the river.

"'Save me! Save me!' shouted the miller as the swiftly-running current
carried him down the stream.

"'I am sending you to find my lost babies,' squeaked the little mouse as
she ran to and fro on the bank.

"There's a good lesson in that story, if you know how to find it," Mrs.
Mouser said as she curled herself into a little ball near the fireplace,
much as though she had come to an end of her story-telling; but just at
that moment a mouse showed his nose in one corner of the room.

In an instant Mrs. Mouser Cat was on her feet looking as if she had
never thought of such a thing as taking a nap, and in a very few seconds
she had the mouse in her claws.

[Illustration: Mrs. Mouser Cat Catches a Mouse.]

"I guess this breaks up my visit," she said, going toward the door. "I
must give the kittens a chance to learn how a mouse should be caught,
and it isn't likely I'll have time to come back here this afternoon."

Then Mrs. Mouser Cat disappeared through the half-opened door, and your
Aunt Amy was left alone, wondering which, of all the animals on the
farm, would be the next to provide her with an afternoon's
entertainment.

THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mouser Cats' Story, by Amy Prentice





This etext was produced by Martin Robb <MartinRobb@ieee.org>



THE FAIR MAID OF PERTH

or

St. Valentine's Day

by Sir Walter Scott, Bart.







INTRODUCTORY.

The ashes here of murder'd kings Beneath my footsteps sleep; And
yonder lies the scene of death, Where Mary learn'd to weep.

CAPTAIN MARJORIBANKS.


Every quarter of Edinburgh has its own peculiar boast, so that the
city together combines within its precincts, if you take the word
of the inhabitants on the subject, as much of historical interest
as of natural beauty. Our claims in behalf of the Canongate are
not the slightest. The Castle may excel us in extent of prospect
and sublimity of site; the Calton had always the superiority of
its unrivalled panorama, and has of late added that of its towers,
and triumphal arches, and the pillars of its Parthenon. The High
Street, we acknowledge, had the distinguished honour of being
defended by fortifications, of which we can show no vestiges. We
will not descend to notice the claims of more upstart districts,
called Old New Town and New New Town, not to mention the favourite
Moray Place, which is the Newest New Town of all. We will not match
ourselves except with our equals, and with our equals in age only,
for in dignity we admit of one. We boast being the court end of the
town, possessing the Palace and the sepulchral remains of monarchs,
and that we have the power to excite, in a degree unknown to the
less honoured quarters of the city, the dark and solemn recollections
of ancient grandeur, which occupied the precincts of our venerable
Abbey from the time of St. David till her deserted halls were once
more made glad, and her long silent echoes awakened, by the visit
of our present gracious sovereign.

My long habitation in the neighbourhood, and the quiet respectability
of my habits, have given me a sort of intimacy with good Mrs. Policy,
the housekeeper in that most interesting part of the old building
called Queen Mary's Apartments. But a circumstance which lately
happened has conferred upon me greater privileges; so that, indeed,
I might, I believe, venture on the exploit of Chatelet, who was
executed for being found secreted at midnight in the very bedchamber
of Scotland's mistress.

It chanced that the good lady I have mentioned was, in the discharge
of her function, showing the apartments to a cockney from London
--not one of your quiet, dull, commonplace visitors, who gape,
yawn, and listen with an acquiescent "umph" to the information doled
out by the provincial cicerone. No such thing: this was the brisk,
alert agent of a great house in the city, who missed no opportunity
of doing business, as he termed it--that is, of putting off the
goods of his employers, and improving his own account of commission.
He had fidgeted through the suite of apartments, without finding
the least opportunity to touch upon that which he considered
as the principal end of his existence. Even the story of Rizzio's
assassination presented no ideas to this emissary of commerce,
until the housekeeper appealed, in support of her narrative, to
the dusky stains of blood upon the floor.

"These are the stains," she said; "nothing will remove them from
the place: there they have been for two hundred and fifty years,
and there they will remain while the floor is left standing--
neither water nor anything else will ever remove them from that
spot."

Now our cockney, amongst other articles, sold Scouring Drops,
as they are called, and a stain of two hundred and fifty years'
standing was interesting to him, not because it had been caused
by the blood of a queen's favourite, slain in her apartment, but
because it offered so admirable an opportunity to prove the efficacy
of his unequalled Detergent Elixir. Down on his knees went our
friend, but neither in horror nor devotion.

"Two hundred and fifty years, ma'am, and nothing take it away? Why,
if it had been five hundred, I have something in my pocket will
fetch it out in five minutes. D'ye see this elixir, ma'am? I will
show you the stain vanish in a moment."

Accordingly, wetting one end of his handkerchief with the all
deterging specific, he began to rub away on the planks, without
heeding the remonstrances of Mrs. Policy. She, good soul, stood
at first in astonishment, like the abbess of St. Bridget's, when a
profane visitant drank up the vial of brandy which had long passed
muster among the relics of the cloister for the tears of the blessed
saint. The venerable guardian of St. Bridget probably expected the
interference of her patroness--she of Holyrood might, perhaps, hope
that David Ruzzio's spectre would arise to prevent the profanation.
But Mrs. Policy stood not long in the silence of horror. She uplifted
her voice, and screamed as loudly as Queen Mary herself when the
dreadful deed was in the act of perpetration--

"Harrow, now out, and walawa!" she cried.

I happened to be taking my morning walk in the adjoining gallery,
pondering in my mind why the kings of Scotland, who hung around me,
should be each and every one painted with a nose like the knocker
of a door, when lo! the walls once more re-echoed with such shrieks
as formerly were as often heard in the Scottish palaces as were
sounds of revelry and music. Somewhat surprised at such an alarm
in a place so solitary, I hastened to the spot, and found the well
meaning traveller scrubbing the floor like a housemaid, while Mrs.
Policy, dragging him by the skirts of the coat, in vain endeavoured
to divert him from his sacrilegious purpose. It cost me some trouble
to explain to the zealous purifier of silk stockings, embroidered
waistcoats, broadcloth, and deal planks that there were such things
in the world as stains which ought to remain indelible, on account
of the associations with which they are connected. Our good friend
viewed everything of the kind only as the means of displaying the
virtue of his vaunted commodity. He comprehended, however, that he
would not be permitted to proceed to exemplify its powers on the
present occasion, as two or three inhabitants appeared, who, like
me, threatened to maintain the housekeeper's side of the question.
He therefore took his leave, muttering that he had always heard the
Scots were a nasty people, but had no idea they carried it so far
as to choose to have the floors of their palaces blood boltered, like
Banquo's ghost, when to remove them would have cost but a hundred
drops of the Infallible Detergent Elixir, prepared and sold by
Messrs. Scrub and Rub, in five shilling and ten shilling bottles,
each bottle being marked with the initials of the inventor, to
counterfeit which would be to incur the pains of forgery.

Freed from the odious presence of this lover of cleanliness, my
good friend Mrs. Policy was profuse in her expressions of thanks;
and yet her gratitude, instead of exhausting itself in these
declarations, according to the way of the world, continues as lively
at this moment as if she had never thanked me at all. It is owing
to her recollection of this piece of good service that I have the
permission of wandering, like the ghost of some departed gentleman
usher, through these deserted halls, sometimes, as the old Irish
ditty expresses it--

Thinking upon things that are long enough ago;

--and sometimes wishing I could, with the good luck of most editors
of romantic narrative, light upon some hidden crypt or massive
antique cabinet, which should yield to my researches an almost
illegible manuscript, containing the authentic particulars of some
of the strange deeds of those wild days of the unhappy Mary.

My dear Mrs. Baliol used to sympathise with me when I regretted
that all godsends of this nature had ceased to occur, and that an
author might chatter his teeth to pieces by the seaside without a
wave ever wafting to him a casket containing such a history as that
of Automates; that he might break his shins in stumbling through
a hundred vaults without finding anything but rats and mice;
and become the tenant of a dozen sets of shabby tenements without
finding that they contained any manuscript but the weekly bill for
board and lodging. A dairymaid of these degenerate days might as
well wash and deck her dairy in hopes of finding the fairy tester
in her shoe.

"It is a sad and too true a tale, cousin," said Mrs. Baliol,
"I am sure we all have occasion to regret the want of these ready
supplements to a failing invention. But you, most of all, have right
to complain that the fairest have not favoured your researches--
you, who have shown the world that the age of chivalry still exists
--you, the knight of Croftangry, who braved the fury of the 'London
'prentice bold,' in behalf of the fair Dame Policy, and the memorial
of Rizzio's slaughter! Is it not a pity, cousin, considering the
feat of chivalry was otherwise so much according to rule--is it
not, I say, a great pity that the lady had not been a little younger,
and the legend a little older?"

"Why, as to the age at which a fair dame loses the benefit of
chivalry, and is no longer entitled to crave boon of brave knight,
that I leave to the statutes of the Order of Errantry; but for the
blood of Rizzio I take up the gauntlet, and maintain against all
and sundry that I hold the stains to be of no modern date, but to
have been actually the consequence and the record of that terrible
assassination."

"As I cannot accept the challenge to the field, fair cousin, I am
contented to require proof."

"The unaltered tradition of the Palace, and the correspondence of
the existing state of things with that tradition."

"Explain, if you please."

"I will. The universal tradition bears that, when Rizzio was
dragged out of the chamber of the Queen, the heat and fury of the
assassins, who struggled which should deal him most wounds, despatched
him at the door of the anteroom. At the door of the apartment,
therefore, the greater quantity of the ill fated minion's blood was
spilled, and there the marks of it are still shown. It is reported
further by historians, that Mary continued her entreaties for his
life, mingling her prayers with screams and exclamations, until
she knew that he was assuredly slain; on which she wiped her eyes
and said, 'I will now study revenge.'"

"All this is granted. But the blood--would it not wash out, or
waste out, think you, in so many years?"

"I am coming to that presently. The constant tradition of the
Palace says, that Mary discharged any measures to be taken to remove
the marks of slaughter, which she had resolved should remain as a
memorial to quicken and confirm her purposed vengeance. But it is
added that, satisfied with the knowledge that it existed, and not
desirous to have the ghastly evidence always under her eye, she
caused a traverse, as it is called (that is, a temporary screen of
boards), to be drawn along the under part of the anteroom, a few
feet from the door, so as to separate the place stained with the
blood from the rest of the apartment, and involve it in considerable
obscurity. Now this temporary partition still exists, and, by
running across and interrupting the plan of the roof and cornices,
plainly intimates that it has been intended to serve some temporary
purpose, since it disfigures the proportions of the room, interferes
with the ornaments of the ceiling, and could only have been put
there for some such purpose as hiding an object too disagreeable
to be looked upon. As to the objection that the bloodstains would
have disappeared in course of time, I apprehend that, if measures
to efface them were not taken immediately after the affair happened
--if the blood, in other words, were allowed to sink into the wood,
the stain would become almost indelible. Now, not to mention that
our Scottish palaces were not particularly well washed in those
days, and that there were no Patent Drops to assist the labours
of the mop, I think it very probable that these dark relics might
subsist for a long course of time, even if Mary had not desired or
directed that they should be preserved, but screened by the traverse
from public sight. I know several instances of similar bloodstains
remaining for a great many years, and I doubt whether, after a certain
time, anything can remove them save the carpenter's plane. If any
seneschal, by way of increasing the interest of the apartments, had,
by means of paint, or any other mode of imitation, endeavoured to
palm upon posterity supposititious stigmata, I conceive that the
impostor would have chosen the Queen's cabinet and the bedroom for
the scene of his trick, placing his bloody tracery where it could
be distinctly seen by visitors, instead of hiding it behind the
traverse in this manner. The existence of the said traverse, or
temporary partition, is also extremely difficult to be accounted
for, if the common and ordinary tradition be rejected. In short,
all the rest of this striking locality is so true to the historical
fact, that I think it may well bear out the additional circumstance
of the blood on the floor."

"I profess to you," answered Mrs. Baliol, "that I am very willing
to be converted to your faith. We talk of a credulous vulgar, without
always recollecting that there is a vulgar incredulity, which, in
historical matters as well as in those of religion, finds it easier
to doubt than to examine, and endeavours to assume the credit of
an esprit fort, by denying whatever happens to be a little beyond
the very limited comprehension of the sceptic. And so, that point
being settled, and you possessing, as we understand, the open
sesamum into these secret apartments, how, if we may ask, do you
intend to avail yourself of your privilege? Do you propose to pass
the night in the royal bedchamber?"

"For what purpose, my dear lady? If to improve the rheumatism, this
east wind may serve the purpose."

"Improve the rheumatism! Heaven forbid! that would be worse than
adding colours to the violet. No, I mean to recommend a night on the
couch of the nose of Scotland, merely to improve the imagination. Who
knows what dreams might be produced by a night spent in a mansion
of so many memories! For aught I know, the iron door of the postern
stair might open at the dead hour of midnight, and, as at the time
of the conspiracy, forth might sally the phantom assassins, with
stealthy step and ghastly look, to renew the semblance of the deed.
There comes the fierce fanatic Ruthven, party hatred enabling him
to bear the armour which would otherwise weigh down a form extenuated
by wasting disease. See how his writhen features show under the
hollow helmet, like those of a corpse tenanted by a demon, whose
vindictive purpose looks out at the flashing eyes, while the visage
has the stillness of death. Yonder appears the tall form of the boy
Darnley, as goodly in person as vacillating in resolution; yonder
he advances with hesitating step, and yet more hesitating purpose,
his childish fear having already overcome his childish passion.
He is in the plight of a mischievous lad who has fired a mine, and
who now, expecting the explosion in remorse and terror, would give
his life to quench the train which his own hand lighted. Yonder--
yonder--But I forget the rest of the worthy cutthroats. Help me
if you can."

"Summon up," said I, "the postulate, George Douglas, the most active
of the gang. Let him arise at your call--the claimant of wealth
which he does not possess, the partaker of the illustrious blood of
Douglas, but which in his veins is sullied with illegitimacy. Paint
him the ruthless, the daring, the ambitious--so nigh greatness,
yet debarred from it; so near to wealth, yet excluded from possessing
it; a political Tantalus, ready to do or dare anything to terminate
his necessities and assert his imperfect claims."

"Admirable, my dear Croftangry! But what is a postulate?"

"Pooh, my dear madam, you disturb the current of my ideas. The
postulate was, in Scottish phrase, the candidate for some benefice
which he had not yet attained. George Douglas, who stabbed Rizzio,
was the postulate for the temporal possessions of the rich abbey
of Arbroath."

"I stand informed. Come, proceed; who comes next?" continued Mrs.
Baliol.

"Who comes next? Yon tall, thin made, savage looking man, with the
petronel in his hand, must be Andrew Ker of Faldonside, a brother's
son, I believe, of the celebrated Sir David Ker of Cessford; his
look and bearing those of a Border freebooter, his disposition
so savage that, during the fray in the cabinet, he presented his
loaded piece at the bosom of the young and beauti