s in the
library with Major Saranoff. Why do you come to me?

LOUKA. But he asks for you, madam. And I don't think he knows
who you are: he said the lady of the house. He gave me this
little ticket for you. (She takes a card out of her bosom; puts
it on the salver and offers it to Catherine.)

CATHERINE (reading). "Captain Bluntschli!" That's a German
name.

LOUKA. Swiss, madam, I think.

CATHERINE (with a bound that makes Louka jump back). Swiss!
What is he like?

LOUKA (timidly). He has a big carpet bag, madam.

CATHERINE. Oh, Heavens, he's come to return the coat! Send him
away--say we're not at home--ask him to leave his address and
I'll write to him--Oh, stop: that will never do. Wait! (She
throws herself into a chair to think it out. Louka waits.) The
master and Major Saranoff are busy in the library, aren't they?

LOUKA. Yes, madam.

CATHERINE (decisively). Bring the gentleman out here at once.
(Imperatively.) And be very polite to him. Don't delay. Here
(impatiently snatching the salver from her): leave that here;
and go straight back to him.

LOUKA. Yes, madam. (Going.)

CATHERINE. Louka!

LOUKA (stopping). Yes, madam.

CATHERINE. Is the library door shut?

LOUKA. I think so, madam.

CATHERINE. If not, shut it as you pass through.

LOUKA. Yes, madam. (Going.)

CATHERINE. Stop! (Louka stops.) He will have to go out that way
(indicating the gate of the stable yard). Tell Nicola to bring
his bag here after him. Don't forget.

LOUKA (surprised). His bag?

CATHERINE. Yes, here, as soon as possible. (Vehemently.) Be
quick! (Louka runs into the house. Catherine snatches her apron
off and throws it behind a bush. She then takes up the salver
and uses it as a mirror, with the result that the handkerchief
tied round her head follows the apron. A touch to her hair and a
shake to her dressing gown makes her presentable.) Oh,
how--how--how can a man be such a fool! Such a moment to select!
(Louka appears at the door of the house, announcing "Captain
Bluntschli;" and standing aside at the top of the steps to let
him pass before she goes in again. He is the man of the
adventure in Raina's room. He is now clean, well brushed,
smartly uniformed, and out of trouble, but still unmistakably
the same man. The moment Louka's back is turned, Catherine
swoops on him with hurried, urgent, coaxing appeal.) Captain
Bluntschli, I am very glad to see you; but you must leave this
house at once. (He raises his eyebrows.) My husband has just
returned, with my future son-in-law; and they know nothing. If
they did, the consequences would be terrible. You are a
foreigner: you do not feel our national animosities as we do. We
still hate the Servians: the only effect of the peace on my
husband is to make him feel like a lion baulked of his prey. If
he discovered our secret, he would never forgive me; and my
daughter's life would hardly be safe. Will you, like the
chivalrous gentleman and soldier you are, leave at once before
he finds you here?

BLUNTSCHLI (disappointed, but philosophical). At once, gracious
lady. I only came to thank you and return the coat you lent me.
If you will allow me to take it out of my bag and leave it with
your servant as I pass out, I need detain you no further. (He
turns to go into the house.)

CATHERINE (catching him by the sleeve). Oh, you must not think
of going back that way. (Coaxing him across to the stable
gates.) This is the shortest way out. Many thanks. So glad to
have been of service to you. Good-bye.

BLUNTSCHLI. But my bag?

CATHERINE. It will be sent on. You will leave me your address.

BLUNTSCHLI. True. Allow me. (He takes out his card-case, and
stops to write his address, keeping Catherine in an agony of
impatience. As he hands her the card, Petkoff, hatless, rushes
from the house in a fluster of hospitality, followed by
Sergius.)

PETKOFF (as he hurries down the steps). My dear Captain
Bluntschli--

CATHERINE. Oh Heavens! (She sinks on the seat against the wall.)

PETKOFF (too preoccupied to notice her as he shakes
Bluntschli's hand heartily). Those stupid people of mine thought
I was out here, instead of in the--haw!--library. (He cannot
mention the library without betraying how proud he is of it.) I
saw you through the window. I was wondering why you didn't come
in. Saranoff is with me: you remember him, don't you?

SERGIUS (saluting humorously, and then offering his hand with
great charm of manner). Welcome, our friend the enemy!

PETKOFF. No longer the enemy, happily. (Rather anxiously.) I
hope you've come as a friend, and not on business.

CATHERINE. Oh, quite as a friend, Paul. I was just asking
Captain Bluntschli to stay to lunch; but he declares he must go
at once.

SERGIUS (sardonically). Impossible, Bluntschli. We want you
here badly. We have to send on three cavalry regiments to
Phillipopolis; and we don't in the least know how to do it.

BLUNTSCHLI (suddenly attentive and business-like).
Phillipopolis! The forage is the trouble, eh?

PETKOFF (eagerly). Yes, that's it. (To Sergius.) He sees the
whole thing at once.

BLUNTSCHLI. I think I can shew you how to manage that.

SERGIUS. Invaluable man! Come along! (Towering over Bluntschli,
he puts his hand on his shoulder and takes him to the steps,
Petkoff following. As Bluntschli puts his foot on the first
step, Raina comes out of the house.)

RAINA (completely losing her presence of mind). Oh, the
chocolate cream soldier!

    (Bluntschli stands rigid. Sergius, amazed, looks
     at Raina, then at Petkoff, who looks back at him
     and then at his wife.)

CATHERINE (with commanding presence of mind). My dear Raina,
don't you see that we have a guest here--Captain Bluntschli, one
of our new Servian friends?

    (Raina bows; Bluntschli bows.)

RAINA. How silly of me! (She comes down into the centre of the
group, between Bluntschli and Petkoff) I made a beautiful
ornament this morning for the ice pudding; and that stupid
Nicola has just put down a pile of plates on it and spoiled it.
(To Bluntschli, winningly.) I hope you didn't think that you
were the chocolate cream soldier, Captain Bluntschli.

BLUNTSCHLI (laughing). I assure you I did. (Stealing a
whimsical glance at her.) Your explanation was a relief.

PETKOFF (suspiciously, to Raina). And since when, pray, have
you taken to cooking?

CATHERINE. Oh, whilst you were away. It is her latest fancy.

PETKOFF (testily). And has Nicola taken to drinking? He used to
be careful enough. First he shews Captain Bluntschli out here
when he knew quite well I was in the--hum!--library; and then
he goes downstairs and breaks Raina's chocolate soldier. He
must--(At this moment Nicola appears at the top of the steps R.,
with a carpet bag. He descends; places it respectfully before
Bluntschli; and waits for further orders. General amazement.
Nicola, unconscious of the effect he is producing, looks
perfectly satisfied with himself. When Petkoff recovers his
power of speech, he breaks out at him with) Are you mad, Nicola?

NICOLA (taken aback). Sir?

PETKOFF. What have you brought that for?

NICOLA. My lady's orders, sir. Louka told me that--

CATHERINE (interrupting him). My orders! Why should I order you
to bring Captain Bluntschli's luggage out here? What are you
thinking of, Nicola?

NICOLA (after a moment's bewilderment, picking up the bag as he
addresses Bluntschli with the very perfection of servile
discretion). I beg your pardon, sir, I am sure. (To Catherine.)
My fault, madam! I hope you'll overlook it! (He bows, and is
going to the steps with the bag, when Petkoff addresses him
angrily.)

PETKOFF. You'd better go and slam that bag, too, down on Miss
Raina's ice pudding! (This is too much for Nicola. The bag drops
from his hands on Petkoff's corns, eliciting a roar of anguish
from him.) Begone, you butter-fingered donkey.

NICOLA (snatching up the bag, and escaping into the house).
Yes, sir.

CATHERINE. Oh, never mind, Paul, don't be angry!

PETKOFF (muttering). Scoundrel. He's got out of hand while I
was away. I'll teach him. (Recollecting his guest.) Oh, well,
never mind. Come, Bluntschli, lets have no more nonsense about
you having to go away. You know very well you're not going back
to Switzerland yet. Until you do go back you'll stay with us.

RAINA. Oh, do, Captain Bluntschli.

PETKOFF (to Catherine). Now, Catherine, it's of you that he's
afraid. Press him and he'll stay.

CATHERINE. Of course I shall be only too delighted if
(appealingly) Captain Bluntschli really wishes to stay. He knows
my wishes.

BLUNTSCHLI (in his driest military manner). I am at madame's
orders.

SERGIUS (cordially). That settles it!

PETKOFF (heartily). Of course!

RAINA. You see, you must stay!

BLUNTSCHLI (smiling). Well, If I must, I must!
(Gesture of despair from Catherine.)




ACT III

    In the library after lunch. It is not much of a
    library, its literary equipment consisting of a
    single fixed shelf stocked with old paper-covered
    novels, broken backed, coffee stained, torn and
    thumbed, and a couple of little hanging shelves
    with a few gift books on them, the rest of the
    wall space being occupied by trophies of war and
    the chase. But it is a most comfortable
    sitting-room. A row of three large windows in the
    front of the house shew a mountain panorama, which
    is just now seen in one of its softest aspects in
    the mellowing afternoon light. In the left hand
    corner, a square earthenware stove, a perfect
    tower of colored pottery, rises nearly to the
    ceiling and guarantees plenty of warmth. The
    ottoman in the middle is a circular bank of
    decorated cushions, and the window seats are well
    upholstered divans. Little Turkish tables, one of
    them with an elaborate hookah on it, and a screen
    to match them, complete the handsome effect of the
    furnishing. There is one object, however, which is
    hopelessly out of keeping with its surroundings.
    This is a small kitchen table, much the worse for
    wear, fitted as a writing table with an old
    canister full of pens, an eggcup filled with ink,
    and a deplorable scrap of severely used pink
    blotting paper.

    At the side of this table, which stands on the
    right, Bluntschli is hard at work, with a couple
    of maps before him, writing orders. At the head of
    it sits Sergius, who is also supposed to be at
    work, but who is actually gnawing the feather of a
    pen, and contemplating Bluntschli's quick, sure,
    businesslike progress with a mixture of envious
    irritation at his own incapacity, and awestruck
    wonder at an ability which seems to him almost
    miraculous, though its prosaic character forbids
    him to esteem it. The major is comfortably
    established on the ottoman, with a newspaper in
    his hand and the tube of the hookah within his
    reach. Catherine sits at the stove, with her back
    to them, embroidering. Raina, reclining on the
    divan under the left hand window, is gazing in a
    daydream out at the Balkan landscape, with a
    neglected novel in her lap.

    The door is on the left. The button of the
    electric bell is between the door and the
    fireplace.

PETKOFF (looking up from his paper to watch how they are
getting on at the table). Are you sure I can't help you in any
way, Bluntschli?

BLUNTSCHLI (without interrupting his writing or looking up).
Quite sure, thank you. Saranoff and I will manage it.

SERGIUS (grimly). Yes: we'll manage it. He finds out what to
do; draws up the orders; and I sign 'em. Division of labour,
Major. (Bluntschli passes him a paper.) Another one? Thank you.
(He plants the papers squarely before him; sets his chair
carefully parallel to them; and signs with the air of a man
resolutely performing a difficult and dangerous feat.) This hand
is more accustomed to the sword than to the pen.

PETKOFF. It's very good of you, Bluntschli, it is indeed, to let
yourself be put upon in this way. Now are you quite sure I can
do nothing?

CATHERINE (in a low, warning tone). You can stop interrupting,
Paul.

PETKOFF (starting and looking round at her). Eh? Oh! Quite
right, my love, quite right. (He takes his newspaper up, but
lets it drop again.) Ah, you haven't been campaigning,
Catherine: you don't know how pleasant it is for us to sit here,
after a good lunch, with nothing to do but enjoy ourselves.
There's only one thing I want to make me thoroughly comfortable.

CATHERINE. What is that?

PETKOFF. My old coat. I'm not at home in this one: I feel as if
I were on parade.

CATHERINE. My dear Paul, how absurd you are about that old coat!
It must be hanging in the blue closet where you left it.

PETKOFF. My dear Catherine, I tell you I've looked there. Am I
to believe my own eyes or not? (Catherine quietly rises and
presses the button of the electric bell by the fireplace.) What
are you shewing off that bell for? (She looks at him majestically,
and silently resumes her chair and her needlework.) My dear: if
you think the obstinacy of your sex can make a coat out of two
old dressing gowns of Raina's, your waterproof, and my
mackintosh, you're mistaken. That's exactly what the blue closet
contains at present. (Nicola presents himself.)

CATHERINE (unmoved by Petkoff's sally). Nicola: go to the blue
closet and bring your master's old coat here--the braided one he
usually wears in the house.

NICOLA. Yes, madam. (Nicola goes out.)

PETKOFF. Catherine.

CATHERINE. Yes, Paul?

PETKOFF. I bet you any piece of jewellery you like to order from
Sophia against a week's housekeeping money, that the coat isn't
there.

CATHERINE. Done, Paul.

PETKOFF (excited by the prospect of a gamble). Come: here's an
opportunity for some sport. Who'll bet on it? Bluntschli: I'll
give you six to one.

BLUNTSCHLI (imperturbably). It would be robbing you, Major.
Madame is sure to be right. (Without looking up, he passes
another batch of papers to Sergius.)

SERGIUS (also excited). Bravo, Switzerland! Major: I bet my
best charger against an Arab mare for Raina that Nicola finds
the coat in the blue closet.

PETKOFF (eagerly). Your best char--

CATHERINE (hastily interrupting him). Don't be foolish, Paul.
An Arabian mare will cost you 50,000 levas.

RAINA (suddenly coming out of her picturesque revery). Really,
mother, if you are going to take the jewellery, I don't see why
you should grudge me my Arab.

   (Nicola comes back with the coat and brings it
    to Petkoff, who can hardly believe his eyes.)

CATHERINE. Where was it, Nicola?

NICOLA. Hanging in the blue closet, madam.

PETKOFF. Well, I am d--

CATHERINE (stopping him). Paul!

PETKOFF. I could have sworn it wasn't there. Age is beginning to
tell on me. I'm getting hallucinations. (To Nicola.) Here: help
me to change. Excuse me, Bluntschli. (He begins changing coats,
Nicola acting as valet.) Remember: I didn't take that bet of
yours, Sergius. You'd better give Raina that Arab steed
yourself, since you've roused her expectations. Eh, Raina? (He
looks round at her; but she is again rapt in the landscape. With
a little gush of paternal affection and pride, he points her out
to them and says) She's dreaming, as usual.

SERGIUS. Assuredly she shall not be the loser.

PETKOFF. So much the better for her. I shan't come off so cheap,
I expect. (The change is now complete. Nicola goes out with the
discarded coat.) Ah, now I feel at home at last. (He sits down
and takes his newspaper with a grunt of relief.)

BLUNTSCHLI (to Sergius, handing a paper). That's the last
order.

PETKOFF (jumping up). What! finished?

BLUNTSCHLI. Finished. (Petkoff goes beside Sergius; looks
curiously over his left shoulder as he signs; and says with
childlike envy) Haven't you anything for me to sign?

BLUNTSCHLI. Not necessary. His signature will do.

PETKOFF. Ah, well, I think we've done a thundering good day's
work. (He goes away from the table.) Can I do anything more?

BLUNTSCHLI. You had better both see the fellows that are to take
these. (To Sergius.) Pack them off at once; and shew them that
I've marked on the orders the time they should hand them in by.
Tell them that if they stop to drink or tell stories--if they're
five minutes late, they'll have the skin taken off their backs.

SERGIUS (rising indignantly). I'll say so. And if one of them
is man enough to spit in my face for insulting him, I'll buy his
discharge and give him a pension. (He strides out, his humanity
deeply outraged.)

BLUNTSCHLI (confidentially). Just see that he talks to them
properly, Major, will you?

PETKOFF (officiously). Quite right, Bluntschli, quite right.
I'll see to it. (He goes to the door importantly, but hesitates
on the threshold.) By the bye, Catherine, you may as well come,
too. They'll be far more frightened of you than of me.

CATHERINE (putting down her embroidery). I daresay I had
better. You will only splutter at them. (She goes out, Petkoff
holding the door for her and following her.)

BLUNTSCHLI. What a country! They make cannons out of cherry
trees; and the officers send for their wives to keep discipline!
(He begins to fold and docket the papers. Raina, who has risen
from the divan, strolls down the room with her hands clasped
behind her, and looks mischievously at him.)

RAINA. You look ever so much nicer than when we last met. (He
looks up, surprised.) What have you done to yourself?

BLUNTSCHLI. Washed; brushed; good night's sleep and breakfast.
That's all.

RAINA. Did you get back safely that morning?

BLUNTSCHLI. Quite, thanks.

RAINA. Were they angry with you for running away from Sergius's
charge?

BLUNTSCHLI. No, they were glad; because they'd all just run away
themselves.

RAINA (going to the table, and leaning over it towards him). It
must have made a lovely story for them--all that about me and my
room.

BLUNTSCHLI. Capital story. But I only told it to one of them--a
particular friend.

RAINA. On whose discretion you could absolutely rely?

BLUNTSCHLI. Absolutely.

RAINA. Hm! He told it all to my father and Sergius the day you
exchanged the prisoners. (She turns away and strolls carelessly
across to the other side of the room.)

BLUNTSCHLI (deeply concerned and half incredulous). No! you
don't mean that, do you?

RAINA (turning, with sudden earnestness). I do indeed. But they
don't know that it was in this house that you hid. If Sergius
knew, he would challenge you and kill you in a duel.

BLUNTSCHLI. Bless me! then don't tell him.

RAINA (full of reproach for his levity). Can you realize what
it is to me to deceive him? I want to be quite perfect with
Sergius--no meanness, no smallness, no deceit. My relation to
him is the one really beautiful and noble part of my life. I
hope you can understand that.

BLUNTSCHLI (sceptically). You mean that you wouldn't like him
to find out that the story about the ice pudding was
a--a--a--You know.

RAINA (wincing). Ah, don't talk of it in that flippant way. I
lied: I know it. But I did it to save your life. He would have
killed you. That was the second time I ever uttered a falsehood.
(Bluntschli rises quickly and looks doubtfully and somewhat
severely at her.) Do you remember the first time?

BLUNTSCHLI. I! No. Was I present?

RAINA. Yes; and I told the officer who was searching for you
that you were not present.

BLUNTSCHLI. True. I should have remembered it.

RAINA (greatly encouraged). Ah, it is natural that you should
forget it first. It cost you nothing: it cost me a lie!--a lie!!
(She sits down on the ottoman, looking straight before her with
her hands clasped on her knee. Bluntschli, quite touched, goes
to the ottoman with a particularly reassuring and considerate
air, and sits down beside her.)

BLUNTSCHLI. My dear young lady, don't let this worry you.
Remember: I'm a soldier. Now what are the two things that happen
to a soldier so often that he comes to think nothing of them?
One is hearing people tell lies (Raina recoils): the other is
getting his life saved in all sorts of ways by all sorts of
people.

RAINA (rising in indignant protest). And so he becomes a
creature incapable of faith and of gratitude.

BLUNTSCHLI (making a wry face). Do you like gratitude? I don't.
If pity is akin to love, gratitude is akin to the other thing.

RAINA. Gratitude! (Turning on him.) If you are incapable of
gratitude you are incapable of any noble sentiment. Even animals
are grateful. Oh, I see now exactly what you think of me! You
were not surprised to hear me lie. To you it was something I
probably did every day--every hour. That is how men think of
women. (She walks up the room melodramatically.)

BLUNTSCHLI (dubiously). There's reason in everything. You said
you'd told only two lies in your whole life. Dear young lady:
isn't that rather a short allowance? I'm quite a straightforward
man myself; but it wouldn't last me a whole morning.

RAINA (staring haughtily at him). Do you know, sir, that you
are insulting me?

BLUNTSCHLI. I can't help it. When you get into that noble
attitude and speak in that thrilling voice, I admire you; but I
find it impossible to believe a single word you say.

RAINA (superbly). Captain Bluntschli!

BLUNTSCHLI (unmoved). Yes?

RAINA (coming a little towards him, as if she could not believe
her senses). Do you mean what you said just now? Do you know
what you said just now?

BLUNTSCHLI. I do.

RAINA (gasping). I! I!!! (She points to herself incredulously,
meaning "I, Raina Petkoff, tell lies!" He meets her gaze
unflinchingly. She suddenly sits down beside him, and adds, with
a complete change of manner from the heroic to the familiar) How
did you find me out?

BLUNTSCHLI (promptly). Instinct, dear young lady. Instinct, and
experience of the world.

RAINA (wonderingly). Do you know, you are the first man I ever
met who did not take me seriously?

BLUNTSCHLI. You mean, don't you, that I am the first man that
has ever taken you quite seriously?

RAINA. Yes, I suppose I do mean that. (Cosily, quite at her ease
with him.) How strange it is to be talked to in such a way! You
know, I've always gone on like that--I mean the noble attitude
and the thrilling voice. I did it when I was a tiny child to my
nurse. She believed in it. I do it before my parents. They
believe in it. I do it before Sergius. He believes in it.

BLUNTSCHLI. Yes: he's a little in that line himself, isn't he?

RAINA (startled). Do you think so?

BLUNTSCHLI. You know him better than I do.

RAINA. I wonder--I wonder is he? If I thought that--!
(Discouraged.) Ah, well, what does it matter? I suppose, now
that you've found me out, you despise me.

BLUNTSCHLI (warmly, rising). No, my dear young lady, no, no, no
a thousand times. It's part of your youth--part of your charm.
I'm like all the rest of them--the nurse--your
parents--Sergius: I'm your infatuated admirer.

RAINA (pleased). Really?

BLUNTSCHLI (slapping his breast smartly with his hand, German
fashion). Hand aufs Herz! Really and truly.

RAINA (very happy). But what did you think of me for giving you
my portrait?

BLUNTSCHLI (astonished). Your portrait! You never gave me your
portrait.

RAINA (quickly). Do you mean to say you never got it?

BLUNTSCHLI. No. (He sits down beside her, with renewed interest,
and says, with some complacency.) When did you send it to me?

RAINA (indignantly). I did not send it to you. (She turns her
head away, and adds, reluctantly.) It was in the pocket of that
coat.

BLUNTSCHLI (pursing his lips and rounding his eyes). Oh-o-oh! I
never found it. It must be there still.

RAINA (springing up). There still!--for my father to find the
first time he puts his hand in his pocket! Oh, how could you be
so stupid?

BLUNTSCHLI (rising also). It doesn't matter: it's only a
photograph: how can he tell who it was intended for? Tell him he
put it there himself.

RAINA (impatiently). Yes, that is so clever--so clever! What
shall I do?

BLUNTSCHLI. Ah, I see. You wrote something on it. That was rash!

RAINA (annoyed almost to tears). Oh, to have done such a thing
for you, who care no more--except to laugh at me--oh! Are you
sure nobody has touched it?

BLUNTSCHLI. Well, I can't be quite sure. You see I couldn't
carry it about with me all the time: one can't take much luggage
on active service.

RAINA. What did you do with it?

BLUNTSCHLI. When I got through to Peerot I had to put it in safe
keeping somehow. I thought of the railway cloak room; but that's
the surest place to get looted in modern warfare. So I pawned
it.

RAINA. Pawned it!!!

BLUNTSCHLI. I know it doesn't sound nice; but it was much the
safest plan. I redeemed it the day before yesterday. Heaven only
knows whether the pawnbroker cleared out the pockets or not.

RAINA (furious--throwing the words right into his face). You
have a low, shopkeeping mind. You think of things that would
never come into a gentleman's head.

BLUNTSCHLI (phlegmatically). That's the Swiss national
character, dear lady.

RAINA. Oh, I wish I had never met you. (She flounces away and
sits at the window fuming.)

   (Louka comes in with a heap of letters and
    telegrams on her salver, and crosses, with her
    bold, free gait, to the table. Her left sleeve is
    looped up to the shoulder with a brooch, shewing
    her naked arm, with a broad gilt bracelet covering
    the bruise.)

LOUKA (to Bluntschli). For you. (She empties the salver
recklessly on the table.) The messenger is waiting. (She is
determined not to be civil to a Servian, even if she must bring
him his letters.)

BLUNTSCHLI (to Raina). Will you excuse me: the last postal
delivery that reached me was three weeks ago. These are the
subsequent accumulations. Four telegrams--a week old. (He opens
one.) Oho! Bad news!

RAINA (rising and advancing a little remorsefully). Bad news?

BLUNTSCHLI. My father's dead. (He looks at the telegram with his
lips pursed, musing on the unexpected change in his
arrangements.)

RAINA. Oh, how very sad!

BLUNTSCHLI. Yes: I shall have to start for home in an hour. He
has left a lot of big hotels behind him to be looked after.
(Takes up a heavy letter in a long blue envelope.) Here's a
whacking letter from the family solicitor. (He pulls out the
enclosures and glances over them.) Great Heavens! Seventy! Two
hundred! (In a crescendo of dismay.) Four hundred! Four
thousand!! Nine thousand six hundred!!! What on earth shall I do
with them all?

RAINA (timidly). Nine thousand hotels?

BLUNTSCHLI. Hotels! Nonsense. If you only knew!--oh, it's too
ridiculous! Excuse me: I must give my fellow orders about
starting. (He leaves the room hastily, with the documents in his
hand.)

LOUKA (tauntingly). He has not much heart, that Swiss, though
he is so fond of the Servians. He has not a word of grief for
his poor father.

RAINA (bitterly). Grief!--a man who has been doing nothing but
killing people for years! What does he care? What does any
soldier care? (She goes to the door, evidently restraining her
tears with difficulty.)

LOUKA. Major Saranoff has been fighting, too; and he has plenty
of heart left. (Raina, at the door, looks haughtily at her and
goes out.) Aha! I thought you wouldn't get much feeling out of
your soldier. (She is following Raina when Nicola enters with an
armful of logs for the fire.)

NICOLA (grinning amorously at her). I've been trying all the
afternoon to get a minute alone with you, my girl. (His
countenance changes as he notices her arm.) Why, what fashion is
that of wearing your sleeve, child?

LOUKA (proudly). My own fashion.

NICOLA. Indeed! If the mistress catches you, she'll talk to you.
(He throws the logs down on the ottoman, and sits comfortably
beside them.)

LOUKA. Is that any reason why you should take it on yourself to
talk to me?

NICOLA. Come: don't be so contrary with me. I've some good news
for you. (He takes out some paper money. Louka, with an eager
gleam in her eyes, comes close to look at it.) See, a twenty
leva bill! Sergius gave me that out of pure swagger. A fool and
his money are soon parted. There's ten levas more. The Swiss
gave me that for backing up the mistress's and Raina's lies
about him. He's no fool, he isn't. You should have heard old
Catherine downstairs as polite as you please to me, telling me
not to mind the Major being a little impatient; for they knew
what a good servant I was--after making a fool and a liar of me
before them all! The twenty will go to our savings; and you
shall have the ten to spend if you'll only talk to me so as to
remind me I'm a human being. I get tired of being a servant
occasionally.

LOUKA (scornfully). Yes: sell your manhood for thirty levas,
and buy me for ten! Keep your money. You were born to be a
servant. I was not. When you set up your shop you will only be
everybody's servant instead of somebody's servant.

NICOLA (picking up his logs, and going to the stove). Ah, wait
till you see. We shall have our evenings to ourselves; and I
shall be master in my own house, I promise you. (He throws the
logs down and kneels at the stove.)

LOUKA. You shall never be master in mine. (She sits down on
Sergius's chair.)

NICOLA (turning, still on his knees, and squatting down rather
forlornly, on his calves, daunted by her implacable disdain).
You have a great ambition in you, Louka. Remember: if any luck
comes to you, it was I that made a woman of you.

LOUKA. You!

NICOLA (with dogged self-assertion). Yes, me. Who was it made
you give up wearing a couple of pounds of false black hair on
your head and reddening your lips and cheeks like any other
Bulgarian girl? I did. Who taught you to trim your nails, and
keep your hands clean, and be dainty about yourself, like a fine
Russian lady? Me! do you hear that? me! (She tosses her head
defiantly; and he rises, ill-humoredly, adding more coolly) I've
often thought that if Raina were out of the way, and you just a
little less of a fool and Sergius just a little more of one, you
might come to be one of my grandest customers, instead of only
being my wife and costing me money.

LOUKA. I believe you would rather be my servant than my husband.
You would make more out of me. Oh, I know that soul of yours.

NICOLA (going up close to her for greater emphasis). Never you
mind my soul; but just listen to my advice. If you want to be a
lady, your present behaviour to me won't do at all, unless when
we're alone. It's too sharp and imprudent; and impudence is a
sort of familiarity: it shews affection for me. And don't you
try being high and mighty with me either. You're like all
country girls: you think it's genteel to treat a servant the way
I treat a stable-boy. That's only your ignorance; and don't you
forget it. And don't be so ready to defy everybody. Act as if
you expected to have your own way, not as if you expected to be
ordered about. The way to get on as a lady is the same as the
way to get on as a servant: you've got to know your place;
that's the secret of it. And you may depend on me to know my
place if you get promoted. Think over it, my girl. I'll stand by
you: one servant should always stand by another.

LOUKA (rising impatiently). Oh, I must behave in my own way.
You take all the courage out of me with your cold-blooded
wisdom. Go and put those logs on the fire: that's the sort of
thing you understand. (Before Nicola can retort, Sergius comes
in. He checks himself a moment on seeing Louka; then goes to the
stove.)

SERGIUS (to Nicola). I am not in the way of your work, I hope.

NICOLA (in a smooth, elderly manner). Oh, no, sir, thank you
kindly. I was only speaking to this foolish girl about her habit
of running up here to the library whenever she gets a chance, to
look at the books. That's the worst of her education, sir: it
gives her habits above her station. (To Louka.) Make that table
tidy, Louka, for the Major. (He goes out sedately.)

    (Louka, without looking at Sergius, begins to
     arrange the papers on the table. He crosses slowly
     to her, and studies the arrangement of her sleeve
     reflectively.)

SERGIUS. Let me see: is there a mark there? (He turns up the
bracelet and sees the bruise made by his grasp. She stands
motionless, not looking at him: fascinated, but on her guard.)
Ffff! Does it hurt?

LOUKA. Yes.

SERGIUS. Shall I cure it?

LOUKA (instantly withdrawing herself proudly, but still not
looking at him). No. You cannot cure it now.

SERGIUS (masterfully). Quite sure? (He makes a movement as if
to take her in his arms.)

LOUKA. Don't trifle with me, please. An officer should not
trifle with a servant.

SERGIUS (touching the arm with a merciless stroke of his
forefinger). That was no trifle, Louka.

LOUKA. No. (Looking at him for the first time.) Are you sorry?

SERGIUS (with measured emphasis, folding his arms). I am never
sorry.

LOUKA (wistfully). I wish I could believe a man could be so
unlike a woman as that. I wonder are you really a brave man?

SERGIUS (unaffectedly, relaxing his attitude). Yes: I am a
brave man. My heart jumped like a woman's at the first shot; but
in the charge I found that I was brave. Yes: that at least is
real about me.

LOUKA. Did you find in the charge that the men whose fathers are
poor like mine were any less brave than the men who are rich
like you?

SERGIUS (with bitter levity.) Not a bit. They all slashed and
cursed and yelled like heroes. Psha! the courage to rage and
kill is cheap. I have an English bull terrier who has as much of
that sort of courage as the whole Bulgarian nation, and the
whole Russian nation at its back. But he lets my groom thrash
him, all the same. That's your soldier all over! No, Louka, your
poor men can cut throats; but they are afraid of their officers;
they put up with insults and blows; they stand by and see one
another punished like children---aye, and help to do it when
they are ordered. And the officers!---well (with a short, bitter
laugh) I am an officer. Oh, (fervently) give me the man who will
defy to the death any power on earth or in heaven that sets
itself up against his own will and conscience: he alone is the
brave man.

LOUKA. How easy it is to talk! Men never seem to me to grow up:
they all have schoolboy's ideas. You don't know what true
courage is.

SERGIUS (ironically). Indeed! I am willing to be instructed.

LOUKA. Look at me! how much am I allowed to have my own will? I
have to get your room ready for you--to sweep and dust, to fetch
and carry. How could that degrade me if it did not degrade you
to have it done for you? But (with subdued passion) if I were
Empress of Russia, above everyone in the world, then--ah, then,
though according to you I could shew no courage at all; you
should see, you should see.

SERGIUS. What would you do, most noble Empress?

LOUKA. I would marry the man I loved, which no other queen in
Europe has the courage to do. If I loved you, though you would
be as far beneath me as I am beneath you, I would dare to be the
equal of my inferior. Would you dare as much if you loved me?
No: if you felt the beginnings of love for me you would not let
it grow. You dare not: you would marry a rich man's daughter
because you would be afraid of what other people would say of
you.

SERGIUS (carried away). You lie: it is not so, by all the
stars! If I loved you, and I were the Czar himself, I would set
you on the throne by my side. You know that I love another
woman, a woman as high above you as heaven is above earth. And
you are jealous of her.

LOUKA. I have no reason to be. She will never marry you now. The
man I told you of has come back. She will marry the Swiss.

SERGIUS (recoiling). The Swiss!

LOUKA. A man worth ten of you. Then you can come to me; and I
will refuse you. You are not good enough for me. (She turns to
the door.)

SERGIUS (springing after her and catching her fiercely in his
arms). I will kill the Swiss; and afterwards I will do as I
please with you.

LOUKA (in his arms, passive and steadfast). The Swiss will kill
you, perhaps. He has beaten you in love. He may beat you in war.

SERGIUS (tormentedly). Do you think I believe that she--she!
whose worst thoughts are higher than your best ones, is capable
of trifling with another man behind my back?

LOUKA. Do you think she would believe the Swiss if he told her
now that I am in your arms?

SERGIUS (releasing her in despair). Damnation! Oh, damnation!
Mockery, mockery everywhere: everything I think is mocked by
everything I do. (He strikes himself frantically on the breast.)
Coward, liar, fool! Shall I kill myself like a man, or live and
pretend to laugh at myself? (She again turns to go.) Louka! (She
stops near the door.) Remember: you belong to me.

LOUKA (quietly). What does that mean--an insult?

SERGIUS (commandingly). It means that you love me, and that I
have had you here in my arms, and will perhaps have you there
again. Whether that is an insult I neither know nor care: take
it as you please. But (vehemently) I will not be a coward and a
trifler. If I choose to love you, I dare marry you, in spite of
all Bulgaria. If these hands ever touch you again, they shall
touch my affianced bride.

LOUKA. We shall see whether you dare keep your word. But take
care. I will not wait long.

SERGIUS (again folding his arms and standing motionless in the
middle of the room). Yes, we shall see. And you shall wait my
pleasure.

   (Bluntschli, much preoccupied, with his papers
    still in his hand, enters, leaving the door open
    for Louka to go out. He goes across to the table,
    glancing at her as he passes. Sergius, without
    altering his resolute attitude, watches him
    steadily. Louka goes out, leaving the door open.)

BLUNTSCHLI (absently, sitting at the table as before, and
putting down his papers). That's a remarkable looking young
woman.

SERGIUS (gravely, without moving). Captain Bluntschli.

BLUNTSCHLI. Eh?

SERGIUS. You have deceived me. You are my rival. I brook no
rivals. At six o'clock I shall be in the drilling-ground on the
Klissoura road, alone, on horseback, with my sabre. Do you
understand?

BLUNTSCHLI (staring, but sitting quite at his ease). Oh, thank
you: that's a cavalry man's proposal. I'm in the artillery; and
I have the choice of weapons. If I go, I shall take a machine
gun. And there shall be no mistake about the cartridges this
time.

SERGIUS (flushing, but with deadly coldness). Take care, sir.
It is not our custom in Bulgaria to allow invitations of that
kind to be trifled with.

BLUNTSCHLI (warmly). Pooh! don't talk to me about Bulgaria. You
don't know what fighting is. But have it your own way. Bring
your sabre along. I'll meet you.

SERGIUS (fiercely delighted to find his opponent a man of
spirit). Well said, Switzer. Shall I lend you my best horse?

BLUNTSCHLI. No: damn your horse!---thank you all the same, my
dear fellow. (Raina comes in, and hears the next sentence.) I
shall fight you on foot. Horseback's too dangerous: I don't want
to kill you if I can help it.

RAINA (hurrying forward anxiously). I have heard what Captain
Bluntschli said, Sergius. You are going to fight. Why? (Sergius
turns away in silence, and goes to the stove, where he stands
watching her as she continues, to Bluntschli) What about?

BLUNTSCHLI. I don't know: he hasn't told me. Better not
interfere, dear young lady. No harm will be done: I've often
acted as sword instructor. He won't be able to touch me; and
I'll not hurt him. It will save explanations. In the morning I
shall be off home; and you'll never see me or hear of me again.
You and he will then make it up and live happily ever after.

RAINA (turning away deeply hurt, almost with a sob in her
voice). I never said I wanted to see you again.

SERGIUS (striding forward). Ha! That is a confession.

RAINA (haughtily). What do you mean?

SERGIUS. You love that man!

RAINA (scandalized). Sergius!

SERGIUS. You allow him to make love to you behind my back, just
as you accept me as your affianced husband behind his.
Bluntschli: you knew our relations; and you deceived me. It is
for that that I call you to account, not for having received
favours that I never enjoyed.

BLUNTSCHLI (jumping up indignantly). Stuff! Rubbish! I have
received no favours. Why, the young lady doesn't even know
whether I'm married or not.

RAINA (forgetting herself). Oh! (Collapsing on the ottoman.)
Are you?

SERGIUS. You see the young lady's concern, Captain Bluntschli.
Denial is useless. You have enjoyed the privilege of being
received in her own room, late at night--

BLUNTSCHLI (interrupting him pepperily). Yes; you blockhead!
She received me with a pistol at her head. Your cavalry were at
my heels. I'd have blown out her brains if she'd uttered a cry.

SERGIUS (taken aback). Bluntschli! Raina: is this true?

RAINA (rising in wrathful majesty). Oh, how dare you, how dare
you?

BLUNTSCHLI. Apologize, man, apologize! (He resumes his seat at
the table.)

SERGIUS (with the old measured emphasis, folding his arms). I
never apologize.

RAINA (passionately). This is the doing of that friend of
yours, Captain Bluntschli. It is he who is spreading this
horrible story about me. (She walks about excitedly.)

BLUNTSCHLI. No: he's dead--burnt alive.

RAINA (stopping, shocked). Burnt alive!

BLUNTSCHLI. Shot in the hip in a wood yard. Couldn't drag
himself out. Your fellows' shells set the timber on fire and
burnt him, with half a dozen other poor devils in the same
predicament.

RAINA. How horrible!

SERGIUS. And how ridiculous! Oh, war! war! the dream of patriots
and heroes! A fraud, Bluntschli, a hollow sham, like love.

RAINA (outraged). Like love! You say that before me.

BLUNTSCHLI. Come, Saranoff: that matter is explained.

SERGIUS. A hollow sham, I say. Would you have come back here if
nothing had passed between you, except at the muzzle of your
pistol? Raina is mistaken about our friend who was burnt. He was
not my informant.

RAINA. Who then? (Suddenly guessing the truth.) Ah, Louka! my
maid, my servant! You were with her this morning all that time
after---after---Oh, what sort of god is this I have been
worshipping! (He meets her gaze with sardonic enjoyment of her
disenchantment. Angered all the more, she goes closer to him,
and says, in a lower, intenser tone) Do you know that I looked
out of the window as I went upstairs, to have another sight of
my hero; and I saw something that I did not understand then. I
know now that you were making love to her.

SERGIUS (with grim humor). You saw that?

RAINA. Only too well. (She turns away, and throws herself on the
divan under the centre window, quite overcome.)

SERGIUS (cynically). Raina: our romance is shattered. Life's a
farce.

BLUNTSCHLI (to Raina, goodhumoredly). You see: he's found
himself out now.

SERGIUS. Bluntschli: I have allowed you to call me a blockhead.
You may now call me a coward as well. I refuse to fight you. Do
you know why?

BLUNTSCHLI. No; but it doesn't matter. I didn't ask the reason
when you cried on; and I don't ask the reason now that you cry
off. I'm a professional soldier. I fight when I have to, and am
very glad to get out of it when I haven't to. You're only an
amateur: you think fighting's an amusement.

SERGIUS. You shall hear the reason all the same, my
professional. The reason is that it takes two men--real men--men
of heart, blood and honor--to make a genuine combat. I could no
more fight with you than I could make love to an ugly woman.
You've no magnetism: you're not a man, you're a machine.

BLUNTSCHLI (apologetically). Quite true, quite true. I always
was that sort of chap. I'm very sorry. But now that you've found
that life isn't a farce, but something quite sensible and
serious, what further obstacle is there to your happiness?

RAINA (riling). You are very solicitous about my happiness and
his. Do you forget his new love--Louka? It is not you that he
must fight now, but his rival, Nicola.

SERGIUS. Rival!! (Striking his forehead.)

RAINA. Did you not know that they are engaged?

SERGIUS. Nicola! Are fresh abysses opening! Nicola!!

RAINA (sarcastically). A shocking sacrifice, isn't it? Such
beauty, such intellect, such modesty, wasted on a middle-aged
servant man! Really, Sergius, you cannot stand by and allow such
a thing. It would be unworthy of your chivalry.

SERGIUS (losing all self-control). Viper! Viper! (He rushes to
and fro, raging.)

BLUNTSCHLI. Look here, Saranoff; you're getting the worst of
this.

RAINA (getting angrier). Do you realize what he has done,
Captain Bluntschli? He has set this girl as a spy on us; and her
reward is that he makes love to her.

SERGIUS. False! Monstrous!

RAINA. Monstrous! (Confronting him.) Do you deny that she told
you about Captain Bluntschli being in my room?

SERGIUS. No; but--

RAINA (interrupting). Do you deny that you were making love to
her when she told you?

SERGIUS. No; but I tell you--

RAINA (cutting him short contemptuously). It is unnecessary to
tell us anything more. That is quite enough for us. (She turns
her back on him and sweeps majestically back to the window.)

BLUNTSCHLI (quietly, as Sergius, in an agony of mortification,
rinks on the ottoman, clutching his averted head between his
fists). I told you you were getting the worst of it, Saranoff.

SERGIUS. Tiger cat!

RAINA (running excitedly to Bluntschli). You hear this man
calling me names, Captain Bluntschli?

BLUNTSCHLI. What else can he do, dear lady? He must defend
himself somehow. Come (very persuasively), don't quarrel. What
good does it do? (Raina, with a gasp, sits down on the ottoman,
and after a vain effort to look vexedly at Bluntschli, she falls
a victim to her sense of humor, and is attacked with a
disposition to laugh.)

SERGIUS. Engaged to Nicola! (He rises.) Ha! ha! (Going to the
stove and standing with his back to it.) Ah, well, Bluntschli,
you are right to take this huge imposture of a world coolly.

RAINA (to Bluntschli with an intuitive guess at his state of
mind). I daresay you think us a couple of grown up babies, don't
you?

SERGIUS (grinning a little). He does, he does. Swiss
civilization nursetending Bulgarian barbarism, eh?

BLUNTSCHLI (blushing). Not at all, I assure you. I'm only very
glad to get you two quieted. There now, let's be pleasant and
talk it over in a friendly way. Where is this other young lady?

RAINA. Listening at the door, probably.

SERGIUS (shivering as if a bullet had struck him, and speaking
with quiet but deep indignation). I will prove that that, at
least, is a calumny. (He goes with dignity to the door and opens
it. A yell of fury bursts from him as he looks out. He darts
into the passage, and returns dragging in Louka, whom he flings
against the table, R., as he cries) Judge her, Bluntschli--you,
the moderate, cautious man: judge the eavesdropper.

    (Louka stands her ground, proud and silent.)

BLUNTSCHLI (shaking his head). I mustn't judge her. I once
listened myself outside a tent when there was a mutiny brewing.
It's all a question of the degree of provocation. My life was at
stake.

LOUKA. My love was at stake. (Sergius flinches, ashamed of her
in spite of himself.) I am not ashamed.

RAINA (contemptuously). Your love! Your curiosity, you mean.

LOUKA (facing her and retorting her contempt with interest). My
love, stronger than anything you can feel, even for your
chocolate cream soldier.

SERGIUS (with quick suspicion--to Louka). What does that mean?

LOUKA (fiercely). It means--

SERGIUS (interrupting her slightingly). Oh, I remember, the ice
pudding. A paltry taunt, girl.

    (Major Petkoff enters, in his shirtsleeves.)

PETKOFF. Excuse my shirtsleeves, gentlemen. Raina: somebody has
been wearing that coat of mine: I'll swear it--somebody with
bigger shoulders than mine. It's all burst open at the back.
Your mother is mending it. I wish she'd make haste. I shall
catch cold. (He looks more attentively at them.) Is anything the
matter?

RAINA. No. (She sits down at the stove with a tranquil air.)

SERGIUS. Oh, no! (He sits down at the end of the table, as at
first.)

BLUNTSCHLI (who is already seated). Nothing, nothing.

PETKOFF (sitting down on the ottoman in his old place). That's
all right. (He notices Louka.) Anything the matter, Louka?

LOUKA. No, sir.

PETKOFF (genially). That's all right. (He sneezes.) Go and ask
your mistress for my coat, like a good girl, will you? (She
turns to obey; but Nicola enters with the coat; and she makes a
pretence of having business in the room by taking the little
table with the hookah away to the wall near the windows.)

RAINA (rising quickly, as she sees the coat on Nicola's arm).
Here it is, papa. Give it to me, Nicola; and do you put some
more wood on the fire. (She takes the coat, and brings it to the
Major, who stands up to put it on. Nicola attends to the fire.)

PETKOFF (to Raina, teasing her affectionately). Aha! Going to
be very good to poor old papa just for one day after his return
from the wars, eh?

RAINA (with solemn reproach). Ah, how can you say that to me,
father?

PETKOFF. Well, well, only a joke, little one. Come, give me a
kiss. (She kisses him.) Now give me the coat.

RAINA. Now, I am going to put it on for you. Turn your back. (He
turns his back and feels behind him with his arms for the
sleeves. She dexterously takes the photograph from the pocket
and throws it on the table before Bluntschli, who covers it with
a sheet of paper under the very nose of Sergius, who looks on
amazed, with his suspicions roused in the highest degree. She
then helps Petkoff on with his coat.) There, dear! Now are you
comfortable?

PETKOFF. Quite, little love. Thanks. (He sits down; and Raina
returns to her seat near the stove.) Oh, by the bye, I've found
something funny. What's the meaning of this? (He put his hand
into the picked pocket.) Eh? Hallo! (He tries the other pocket.)
Well, I could have sworn--(Much puzzled, he tries the breast
pocket.) I wonder--(Tries the original pocket.) Where can
it--(A light flashes on him; he rises, exclaiming) Your mother's
taken it.

RAINA (very red). Taken what?

PETKOFF. Your photograph, with the inscription: "Raina, to her
Chocolate Cream Soldier--a souvenir." Now you know there's
something more in this than meets the eye; and I'm going to find
it out. (Shouting) Nicola!

NICOLA (dropping a log, and turning). Sir!

PETKOFF. Did you spoil any pastry of Miss Raina's this morning?

NICOLA. You heard Miss Raina say that I did, sir.

PETKOFF. I know that, you idiot. Was it true?

NICOLA. I am sure Miss Raina is incapable of saying anything
that is not true, sir.

PETKOFF. Are you? Then I'm not. (Turning to the others.) Come:
do you think I don't see it all? (Goes to Sergius, and slaps him
on the shoulder.) Sergius: you're the chocolate cream soldier,
aren't you?

SERGIUS (starting up). I! a chocolate cream soldier! Certainly
not.

PETKOFF. Not! (He looks at them. They are all very serious and
very conscious.) Do you mean to tell me that Raina sends
photographic souvenirs to other men?

SERGIUS (enigmatically). The world is not such an innocent
place as we used to think, Petkoff.

BLUNTSCHLI (rising). It's all right, Major. I'm the chocolate
cream soldier. (Petkoff and Sergius are equally astonished.) The
gracious young lady saved my life by giving me chocolate creams
when I was starving--shall I ever forget their flavour! My late
friend Stolz told you the story at Peerot. I was the fugitive.

PETKOFF. You! (He gasps.) Sergius: do you remember how those two
women went on this morning when we mentioned it? (Sergius smiles
cynically. Petkoff confronts Raina severely.) You're a nice young
woman, aren't you?

RAINA (bitterly). Major Saranoff has changed his mind. And when
I wrote that on the photograph, I did not know that Captain
Bluntschli was married.

BLUNTSCHLI (much startled protesting vehemently). I'm not
married.

RAINA (with deep reproach). You said you were.

BLUNTSCHLI. I did not. I positively did not. I never was married
in my life.

PETKOFF (exasperated). Raina: will you kindly inform me, if I
am not asking too much, which gentleman you are engaged to?

RAINA. To neither of them. This young lady (introducing Louka,
who faces them all proudly) is the object of Major Saranoff's
affections at present.

PETKOFF. Louka! Are you mad, Sergius? Why, this girl's engaged
to Nicola.

NICOLA (coming forward ). I beg your pardon, sir. There is a
mistake. Louka is not engaged to me.

PETKOFF. Not engaged to you, you scoundrel! Why, you had
twenty-five levas from me on the day of your betrothal; and she
had that gilt bracelet from Miss Raina.

NICOLA (with cool unction). We gave it out so, sir. But it was
only to give Louka protection. She had a soul above her station;
and I have been no more than her confidential servant. I intend,
as you know, sir, to set up a shop later on in Sofea; and I look
forward to her custom and recommendation should she marry into
the nobility. (He goes out with impressive discretion, leaving
them all staring after him.)

PETKOFF (breaking the silence). Well, I am---hm!

SERGIUS. This is either the finest heroism or the most crawling
baseness. Which is it, Bluntschli?

BLUNTSCHLI. Never mind whether it's heroism or baseness.
Nicola's the ablest man I've met in Bulgaria. I'll make him
manager of a hotel if he can speak French and German.

LOUKA (suddenly breaking out at Sergius). I have been insulted
by everyone here. You set them the example. You owe me an
apology. (Sergius immediately, like a repeating clock of which
the spring has been touched, begins to fold his arms.)

BLUNTSCHLI (before he can speak). It's no use. He never
apologizes.

LOUKA. Not to you, his equal and his enemy. To me, his poor
servant, he will not refuse to apologize.

SERGIUS (approvingly). You are right. (He bends his knee in his
grandest manner.) Forgive me!

LOUKA. I forgive you. (She timidly gives him her hand, which he
kisses.) That touch makes me your affianced wife.

SERGIUS (springing up). Ah, I forgot that!

LOUKA (coldly). You can withdraw if you like.

SERGIUS. Withdraw! Never! You belong to me! (He puts his arm
about her and draws her to him.) (Catherine comes in and finds
Louka in Sergius's arms, and all the rest gazing at them in
bewildered astonishment.)

CATHERINE. What does this mean? (Sergius releases Louka.)

PETKOFF. Well, my dear, it appears that Sergius is going to
marry Louka instead of Raina. (She is about to break out
indignantly at him: he stops her by exclaiming testily.) Don't
blame me: I've nothing to do with it. (He retreats to the
stove.)

CATHERINE. Marry Louka! Sergius: you are bound by your word to
us!

SERGIUS (folding his arms). Nothing binds me.

BLUNTSCHLI (much pleased by this piece of common sense).
Saranoff: your hand. My congratulations. These heroics of yours
have their practical side after all. (To Louka.) Gracious young
lady: the best wishes of a good Republican! (He kisses her hand,
to Raina's great disgust.)

CATHERINE (threateningly). Louka: you have been telling
stories.

LOUKA. I have done Raina no harm.

CATHERINE (haughtily). Raina! (Raina is equally indignant at
the liberty.)

LOUKA. I have a right to call her Raina: she calls me Louka. I
told Major Saranoff she would never marry him if the Swiss
gentleman came back.

BLUNTSCHLI (surprised). Hallo!

LOUKA (turning to Raina). I thought you were fonder of him than
of Sergius. You know best whether I was right.

BLUNTSCHLI. What nonsense! I assure you, my dear Major, my dear
Madame, the gracious young lady simply saved my life, nothing
else. She never cared two straws for me. Why, bless my heart and
soul, look at the young lady and look at me. She, rich, young,
beautiful, with her imagination full of fairy princes and noble
natures and cavalry charges and goodness knows what! And I, a
common-place Swiss soldier who hardly knows what a decent life
is after fifteen years of barracks and battles--a vagabond--a
man who has spoiled all his chances in life through an incurably
romantic disposition--a man--

SERGIUS (starting as if a needle had pricked him and
interrupting Bluntschli in incredulous amazement). Excuse me,
Bluntschli: what did you say had spoiled your chances in life?

BLUNTSCHLI (promptly). An incurably romantic disposition. I ran
away from home twice when I was a boy. I went into the army
instead of into my father's business. I climbed the balcony of
this house when a man of sense would have dived into the nearest
cellar. I came sneaking back here to have another look at the
young lady when any other man of my age would have sent the coat
back--

PETKOFF. My coat!

BLUNTSCHLI.--Yes: that's the coat I mean--would have sent it
back and gone quietly home. Do you suppose I am the sort of
fellow a young girl falls in love with? Why, look at our ages!
I'm thirty-four: I don't suppose the young lady is much over
seventeen. (This estimate produces a marked sensation, all the
rest turning and staring at one another. He proceeds
innocently.) All that adventure which was life or death to me,
was only a schoolgirl's game to her--chocolate creams and hide
and seek. Here's the proof! (He takes the photograph from the
table.) Now, I ask you, would a woman who took the affair
seriously have sent me this and written on it: "Raina, to her
chocolate cream soldier--a souvenir"? (He exhibits the
photograph triumphantly, as if it settled the matter beyond all
possibility of refutation.)

PETKOFF. That's what I was looking for. How the deuce did it get
there?

BLUNTSCHLI (to Raina complacently). I have put everything
right, I hope, gracious young lady!

RAINA (in uncontrollable vexation). I quite agree with your
account of yourself. You are a romantic idiot. (Bluntschli is
unspeakably taken aback.) Next time I hope you will know the
difference between a schoolgirl of seventeen and a woman of
twenty-three.

BLUNTSCHLI (stupefied). Twenty-three! (She snaps the photograph
contemptuously from his hand; tears it across; and throws the
pieces at his feet.)

SERGIUS (with grim enjoyment of Bluntschli's discomfiture).
Bluntschli: my one last belief is gone. Your sagacity is a
fraud, like all the other things. You have less sense than even
I have.

BLUNTSCHLI (overwhelmed). Twenty-three! Twenty-three!! (He
considers.) Hm! (Swiftly making up his mind.) In that case,
Major Petkoff, I beg to propose formally to become a suitor for
your daughter's hand, in place of Major Saranoff retired.

RAINA. You dare!

BLUNTSCHLI. If you were twenty-three when you said those things
to me this afternoon, I shall take them seriously.

CATHERINE (loftily polite). I doubt, sir, whether you quite
realize either my daughter's position or that of Major Sergius
Saranoff, whose place you propose to take. The Petkoffs and the
Saranoffs are known as the richest and most important families
in the country. Our position is almost historical: we can go
back for nearly twenty years.

PETKOFF. Oh, never mind that, Catherine. (To Bluntschli.) We
should be most happy, Bluntschli, if it were only a question of
your position; but hang it, you know, Raina is accustomed to a
very comfortable establishment. Sergius keeps twenty horses.

BLUNTSCHLI. But what on earth is the use of twenty horses? Why,
it's a circus.

CATHERINE (severely). My daughter, sir, is accustomed to a
first-rate stable.

RAINA. Hush, mother, you're making me ridiculous.

BLUNTSCHLI. Oh, well, if it comes to a question of an
establishment, here goes! (He goes impetuously to the table and
seizes the papers in the blue envelope.) How many horses did you
say?

SERGIUS. Twenty, noble Switzer!

BLUNTSCHLI. I have two hundred horses. (They are amazed.) How
many carriages?

SERGIUS. Three.

BLUNTSCHLI. I have seventy. Twenty-four of them will hold twelve
inside, besides two on the box, without counting the driver and
conductor. How many tablecloths have you?

SERGIUS. How the deuce do I know?

BLUNTSCHLI. Have you four thousand?

SERGIUS. NO.

BLUNTSCHLI. I have. I have nine thousand six hundred pairs of
sheets and blankets, with two thousand four hundred eider-down
quilts. I have ten thousand knives and forks, and the same
quantity of dessert spoons. I have six hundred servants. I have
six palatial establishments, besides two livery stables, a tea
garden and a private house. I have four medals for distinguished
services; I have the rank of an officer and the standing of a
gentleman; and I have three native languages. Show me any man in
Bulgaria that can offer as much.

PETKOFF (with childish awe). Are you Emperor of Switzerland?

BLUNTSCHLI. My rank is the highest known in Switzerland: I'm a
free citizen.

CATHERINE. Then Captain Bluntschli, since you are my daughter's
choice, I shall not stand in the way of her happiness. (Petkoff
is about to speak.) That is Major Petkoff's feeling also.

PETKOFF. Oh, I shall be only too glad. Two hundred horses! Whew!

SERGIUS. What says the lady?

RAINA (pretending to sulk). The lady says that he can keep his
tablecloths and his omnibuses. I am not here to be sold to the
highest bidder.

BLUNTSCHLI. I won't take that answer. I appealed to you as a
fugitive, a beggar, and a starving man. You accepted me. You
gave me your hand to kiss, your bed to sleep in, and your roof
to shelter me--

RAINA (interrupting him). I did not give them to the Emperor of
Switzerland!

BLUNTSCHLI. That's just what I say. (He catches her hand quickly
and looks her straight in the face as he adds, with confident
mastery) Now tell us who you did give them to.

RAINA (succumbing with a shy smile). To my chocolate cream
soldier!

BLUNTSCHLI (with a boyish laugh of delight). That'll do. Thank
you. (Looks at his watch and suddenly becomes businesslike.)
Time's up, Major. You've managed those regiments so well that
you are sure to be asked to get rid of some of the Infantry of
the Teemok division. Send them home by way of Lom Palanka.
Saranoff: don't get married until I come back: I shall be here
punctually at five in the evening on Tuesday fortnight. Gracious
ladies--good evening. (He makes them a military bow, and goes.)

SERGIUS. What a man! What a man!











This etext was produced by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk,
from the 1889 Macmillan and Co. edition.





THE ROMAN AND THE TEUTON
A SERIES OF LECTURES DELIVERED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
BY CHARLES KINGSLEY, M.A.




Contents
   Preface by Professor F. Max Muller
   The Forest Children
   The Dying Empire
   Preface to Lecture III
   The Human Deluge
   The Gothic Civilizer
   Dietrich's End
   The Nemesis of the Goths
   Paulus Diaconus
   The Clergy and the Heathen
   The Monk a Civilizer
   The Lombard Laws
   The Popes and the Lombards
   The Strategy of Prividence
   Appendix--Inaugural Lecture:  The Limits of Exact Science as
Applied to History



PREFACE



Never shall I forget the moment when for the last time I gazed upon
the manly features of Charles Kingsley, features which Death had
rendered calm, grand, sublime.  The constant struggle that in life
seemed to allow no rest to his expression, the spirit, like a caged
lion, shaking the bars of his prison, the mind striving for
utterance, the soul wearying for loving response,--all that was over.
There remained only the satisfied expression of triumph and peace, as
of a soldier who had fought a good fight, and who, while sinking into
the stillness of the slumber of death, listens to the distant sounds
of music and to the shouts of victory.  One saw the ideal man, as
Nature had meant him to be, and one felt that there is no greater
sculptor than Death.

As one looked on that marble statue which only some weeks ago had so
warmly pressed one's hand, his whole life flashed through one's
thoughts.  One remembered the young curate and the Saint's Tragedy;
the chartist parson and Alton Locke; the happy poet and the Sands of
Dee; the brilliant novel-writer and Hypatia and Westward-Ho; the
Rector of Eversley and his Village Sermons; the beloved professor at
Cambridge, the busy canon at Chester, the powerful preacher in
Westminster Abbey.  One thought of him by the Berkshire chalk-streams
and on the Devonshire coast, watching the beauty and wisdom of
Nature, reading her solemn lessons, chuckling too over her inimitable
fun.  One saw him in town-alleys, preaching the Gospel of godliness
and cleanliness, while smoking his pipe with soldiers and navvies.
One heard him in drawing-rooms, listened to with patient silence,
till one of his vigorous or quaint speeches bounded forth, never to
be forgotten.  How children delighted in him!  How young, wild men
believed in him, and obeyed him too!  How women were captivated by
his chivalry, older men by his genuine humility and sympathy!

All that was now passing away--was gone.  But as one looked on him
for the last time on earth, one felt that greater than the curate,
the poet, the professor, the canon, had been the man himself, with
his warm heart, his honest purposes, his trust in his friends, his
readiness to spend himself, his chivalry and humility, worthy of a
better age.

Of all this the world knew little;--yet few men excited wider and
stronger sympathies.

Who can forget that funeral on the 28th Jan., 1875, and the large sad
throng that gathered round his grave?  There was the representative
of the Prince of Wales, and close by the gipsies of the Eversley
common, who used to call him their Patrico-rai, their Priest-King.
There was the old Squire of his village, and the labourers, young and
old, to whom he had been a friend and a father.  There were Governors
of distant Colonies, officers, and sailors, the Bishop of his
diocese, and the Dean of his abbey; there were the leading
Nonconformists of the neighbourhood, and his own devoted curates,
Peers and Members of the House of Commons, authors and publishers;
and outside the church-yard, the horses and the hounds and the
huntsman in pink, for though as good a clergyman as any, Charles
Kingsley had been a good sportsman too, and had taken in his life
many a fence as bravely as he took the last fence of all, without
fear or trembling.  All that he had loved, and all that had loved him
was there, and few eyes were dry when he was laid in his own yellow
gravel bed, the old trees which he had planted and cared for waving
their branches to him for the last time, and the grey sunny sky
looking down with calm pity on the deserted rectory, and on the short
joys and the shorter sufferings of mortal men.

All went home feeling that life was poorer, and every one knew that
he had lost a friend who had been, in some peculiar sense, his own.
Charles Kingsley will be missed in England, in the English colonies,
in America, where he spent his last happy year; aye, wherever Saxon
speech and Saxon thought is understood.  He will be mourned for,
yearned for, in every place in which he passed some days of his busy
life.  As to myself, I feel as if another cable had snapped that tied
me to this hospitable shore.

When an author or a poet dies, the better part of him, it is often
said, is left in his works.  So it is in many cases.  But with
Kingsley his life and his works were one.  All he wrote was meant for
the day when he wrote it.  That was enough for him.  He hardly gave
himself time to think of fame and the future.  Compared with a good
work done, with a good word spoken, with a silent grasp of the hand
from a young man he had saved from mischief, or with a 'Thank you,
Sir,' from a poor woman to whom he had been a comfort, he would have
despised what people call glory, like incense curling away in smoke.
He was, in one sense of the word, a careless writer.  He did his best
at the time and for the time.  He did it with a concentrated energy
of will which broke through all difficulties.  In his flights of
imagination, in the light and fire of his language he had few equals,
if any; but the perfection and classical finish which can be obtained
by a sustained effort only, and by a patience which shrinks from no
drudgery, these are wanting in most of his works.

However, fame, for which he cared so little, has come to him.  His
bust will stand in Westminster Abbey, in the Chapel of St. John the
Baptist, by the side of his friend, Frederick Maurice; and in the
Temple of Fame which will be consecrated to the period of Victoria
and Albert, there will be a niche for Charles Kingsley, the author of
Alton Locke and Hypatia.

Sooner or later a complete edition of his works will be wanted,
though we may doubt whether he himself would have wished all his
literary works to be preserved.  From what I knew of him and his
marvellous modesty, I should say decidedly not.  I doubt more
especially, whether he would have wished the present book, The Roman
and the Teuton, to be handed down to posterity.  None of his books
was so severely criticised as this volume of Lectures, delivered
before the University of Cambridge, and published in 1864.  He
himself did not republish it, and it seems impossible to speak in
more depreciatory terms of his own historical studies than he does
himself again and again in the course of his lectures.  Yet these
lectures, it should be remembered, were more largely attended than
almost any other lectures at Cambridge.  They produced a permanent
impression on many a young mind.  They are asked for again and again,
and when the publishers wished for my advice as to the expediency of
bringing out a new and cheaper edition, I could not hesitate as to
what answer to give.

I am not so blinded by my friendship for Kingsley as to say that
these lectures are throughout what academical lectures ought to be.
I only wish some one would tell me what academical lectures at Oxford
and Cambridge can be, as long as the present system of teaching and
examining is maintained.  It is easy to say what these lectures are
not.  They do not profess to contain the results of long continued
original research.  They are not based on a critical appreciation of
the authorities which had to be consulted.  They are not well
arranged, systematic or complete.  All this the suddenly elected
professor of history at Cambridge would have been the first to grant.
'I am not here,' he says, 'to teach you history.  I am here to teach
you how to teach yourselves history.'  I must say even more.  It
seems to me that these lectures were not always written in a
perfectly impartial and judicial spirit, and that occasionally they
are unjust to the historians who, from no other motive but a sincere
regard for truth, thought it their duty to withhold their assent from
many of the commonly received statements of mediaeval chroniclers.

But for all that, let us see what these Lectures are, and whether
there is not room for them by the side of other works.  First of all,
according to the unanimous testimony of those who heard them
delivered at Cambridge, they stirred up the interest of young men,
and made them ask for books which Undergraduates had never asked for
before at the University libraries.  They made many people who read
them afterwards, take a new interest in old and half-forgotten kings
and battles, and they extorted even from unfriendly critics the
admission that certain chapters, such as, for instance, 'The Monk as
a Civiliser,' displayed in an unexpected way his power of
appreciating the good points in characters, otherwise most antipathic
to the apostle of Manly Christianity.  They contain, in fact, the
thoughts of a poet, a moralist, a politician, a theologian, and,
before all, of a friend and counsellor of young men, while reading
for them and with them one of the most awful periods in the history
of mankind, the agonies of a dying Empire and the birth of new
nationalities.  History was but his text, his chief aim was that of
the teacher and preacher, and as an eloquent interpreter of the
purposes of history before an audience of young men to whom history
is but too often a mere succession of events to be learnt by heart,
and to be ready against periodical examinations, he achieved what he
wished to achieve.  Historians by profession would naturally be
incensed at some portions of this book, but even they would probably
admit by this time, that there are in it whole chapters full of
excellence, telling passages, happy delineations, shrewd remarks,
powerful outbreaks of real eloquence, which could not possibly be
consigned to oblivion.

Nor would it have been possible to attempt to introduce any
alterations, or to correct what may seem to be mistakes.  The book is
not meant as a text-book or as an authority, any more than Schiller's
History of the Thirty Years' War; it should be read in future, as
what it was meant to be from the first, Kingsley's thoughts on some
of the moral problems presented by the conflict between the Roman and
the Teuton.  One cannot help wishing that, instead of lectures,
Kingsley had given us another novel, like Hypatia, or a real
historical tragedy, a Dietrich von Bern, embodying in living
characters one of the fiercest struggles of humanity, the death of
the Roman, the birth of the German world.  Let me quote here what
Bunsen said of Kingsley's dramatic power many years ago:

'I do not hesitate (he writes) to call these two works, the Saint's
Tragedy and Hypatia, by far the most important and perfect of this
genial writer.  In these more particularly I find the justification
of a hope which I beg to be allowed to express--that Kingsley might
continue Shakspeare's historical plays.  I have for several years
made no secret of it, that Kingsley seems to me the genius of our
century, called to place by the side of that sublime dramatic series
from King John to Henry VIII, another series of equal rank, from
Edward VI to the Landing of William of Orange.  This is the only
historical development of Europe which unites in itself all vital
elements, and which we might look upon without overpowering pain.
The tragedy of St. Elizabeth shows that Kingsley can grapple, not
only with the novel, but with the more severe rules of dramatic art.
And Hypatia proves, on the largest scale, that he can discover in the
picture of the historical past, the truly human, the deep, the
permanent, and that he knows how to represent it.  How, with all
this, he can hit the fresh tone of popular life, and draw humourous
characters and complications with Shakspearian energy, is proved by
all his works.  And why should he not undertake this great task?
There is a time when the true poet, the prophet of the present, must
bid farewell to the questions of the day, which seem so great because
they are so near, but are, in truth, but small and unpoetical.  He
must say to himself, "Let the dead bury their dead"--and the time has
come that Kingsley should do so.'

A great deal has been written on mistakes which Kingsley was supposed
to have made in these Lectures, but I doubt whether these criticisms
were always perfectly judicial and fair.  For instance, Kingsley's
using the name of Dietrich, instead of Theodoric, was represented as
the very gem of a blunder, and some critics went so far as to hint
that he had taken Theodoric for a Greek word, as an adjective of
Theodorus.  This, of course, was only meant as a joke, for on page
120 Kingsley had said, in a note, that the name of Theodoric,
Theuderic, Dietrich, signifies 'king of nations.'  He therefore knew
perfectly well that Theodoric was simply a Greek adaptation of the
Gothic name Theode-reiks, theod meaning people, reiks, according to
Grimm, princeps {p1}.  But even if he had called the king Theodorus,
the mistake would not have been unpardonable, for he might have
appealed to the authority of Gregory of Tours, who uses not only
Theodoricus, but also Theodorus, as the same name.

A more serious charge, however, was brought against him for having
used the High-German form Dietrich, instead of the original form
Theodereiks or Theoderic, or even Theodoric.  Should I have altered
this?  I believe not; for it is clear to me that Kingsley had his
good reasons for preferring Dietrich to Theodoric.

He introduces him first to his hearers as 'Theodoric, known in German
song as Dietrich of Bern.'  He had spoken before of the Visi-Gothic
Theodoric, and of him he never speaks as Dietrich.  Then, why should
he have adopted this High-German name for the great Theodoric, and
why should he speak of Attila too as Etzel?

One of the greatest of German historians, Johannes von Muller, does
the same.  He always calls Theodoric, Dietrich of Bern; and though he
gives no reasons for it, his reasons can easily be guessed.  Soon
after Theodoric's death, the influence of the German legends on
history, and of history on the German legends, became so great that
it was impossible for a time to disentangle two characters,
originally totally distinct, viz. Thjodrekr of the Edda, the Dietrich
of the German poetry on one side, and the King of the Goths,
Theodoric, on the other.  What had long been said and sung about
Thjodrekr and Dietrich was believed to have happened to King
Theodoric, while at the same time historical and local elements in
the life of Theodoric, residing at Verona, were absorbed by the
legends of Thjodrekr and Dietrich.  The names of the legendary hero
and the historical king were probably identical, though even that is
not quite certain {p2}; but at all events, after Theodoric's death,
all the numerous dialectic varieties of the name, whether in High or
in Low-German, were understood by the people at large, both of the
hero and of the king.

Few names have had a larger number of alias'.  They have been
carefully collected by Graff, Grimm, Forstemann, Pott, and others.  I
here give the principal varieties of this name, as actually occurring
in MSS., and arranged according to the changes of the principal
consonants:-

(1)  With Th-d:  Theudoricus, Theudericus, [Greek text which cannot
be reproduced], Thiodiricus, Thiodericus, Thiodric, Thiodricus,
Thiodrih, Theodoricus, Theodericus, Theoderic, Theodrich, Thiadric,
Thiadrich, Thiedorik, Thiederic, Thiederik, Thiederich, Thiedorich,
Thiedric, Thiedrich, Thideric, Thiederich, Thidrich, Thodericus,
Thiaedric, Thieoderich, Thederich, Thedric.

(2)  With T-d Teudericus, Teudricus, Tiodericus, Teodoricus,
Teodericus, Teodric, Teodrich, Tiadric, Tiedrik, Tiedrich, Tiedric,
Tidericus, Tiderich, Tederich.

(3)  With D-d:  [Greek text], Diodericus, Deoderich, Deodrich,
Diederich, Diderich.

(4)  With Th-t:  Thiotiricus, Thiotirih, Thiotiricus, Thiotrih,
Theotoricus, Theotericus, Theoterih, Theotrih, Theotrich, Thiatric,
Thieterich, Thietrih, Thietrich, Theatrih.

(5)  With T-t:  Teutrich, Teoterih, Teotrich, Teotrih, Tieterich,
Teatrih, Tiheiterich.

(6)  With D-t:  Dioterih, Diotericus, Diotricus, Deotrich, Deotrih,
Dieterih, Dieterich, Dietrich, Diterih, Ditricus.

(7)  With Th-th:  Theotherich, Theothirich.

(8)  With T-th:  deest.

(9)  With D-th:  Dietherich.

It is quite true that, strictly speaking, the forms with Th-d, are
Low-German, and those with D-t, High-German, but before we trust
ourselves to this division for historical purposes, we must remember
three facts:  (1) that Proper Names frequently defy Grimm's Law; (2)
that in High-German MSS. much depends on the locality in which they
are written; (3) that High-German is not in the strict sense of the
word a corruption of Low-German, and, at all events, not, as Grimm
supposed, chronologically posterior to Low-German, but that the two
are parallel dialects, like Doric and Aeolic, the Low-German being
represented by the earliest literary documents, Gothic and Saxon, the
High-German asserting its literary presence later, not much before
the eighth century, but afterwards maintaining its literary and
political supremacy from the time of Charlemagne to the present day.

When Theodoric married Odeflede, the daughter of Childebert, and a
sister of Chlodwig, I have little doubt that, at the court of
Chlodwig or Clovis, his royal brother-in-law was spoken of in
conversation as Dioterih, although in official documents, and in the
history of Gregory of Tours, he appears under his classical name of
Theodoricus, in Jornandes Theodericus.  Those who, with Grimm {p3},
admit a transition of Low into High-German, and deny that the change
of Gothic Th into High-German D took place before the sixth or
seventh century, will find it difficult to account, in the first
century, for the name of Deudorix, a German captive, the nephew of
Melo the Sigambrian, mentioned by Strabo {p4}.  In the oldest German
poem in which the name of Dietrich occurs, the song of Hildebrand and
Hadebrand, written down in the beginning of the ninth century {p5},
we find both forms, the Low-German Theotrih, and the High-German
Deotrih, used side by side.

Very soon, however, when High-German became the more prevalent
language in Germany, German historians knew both of the old legendary
hero and of the Ost-gothic king, by one and the same name, the High-
German Dietrich.

If therefore Johannes von Muller spoke of Theodoric of Verona as
Dietrich von Bern, he simply intended to carry on the historical
tradition.  He meant to remind his readers of the popular name which
they all knew, and to tell them,--This Dietrich with whom you are all
acquainted from your childhood, this Dietrich of whom so much is said
and sung in your legendary stories and poems, the famous Dietrich of
Bern, this is really the Theoderic, the first German who ruled Italy
for thirty-three years, more gloriously than any Roman Emperor before
or after.  I see no harm in this, as long as it is done on purpose,
and as long as the purpose which Johannes von Muller had in his mind,
was attained.

No doubt the best plan for an historian to follow is to call every
man by the name by which he called himself.  Theodoric, we know,
could not write, but he had a gold plate {p6} made in which the first
four letters of his name were incised, and when it was fixed on the
paper, the King drew his pen through the intervals.  Those four
letters were [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], and though we
should expect that, as a Goth, he would have spelt his name
Thiudereik, yet we have no right to doubt, that the vowels were eo,
and not iu.  But again and again historians spell proper names, not
as they were written by the people themselves, but as they appear in
the historical documents through which they became chiefly known.  We
speak of Plato, because we have Roman literature between us and
Greece.  American names are accepted in history through a Spanish,
Indian names through an English medium.  The strictly Old High-German
form of Carolus Magnus would be Charal, A. S. Carl; yet even in the
Oaths of Strassburg (842) the name appears as Karlus and as Karl, and
has remained so ever since {p7}.  In the same document we find Ludher
for Lothar, Ludhuwig and Lodhuvig for Ludovicus, the oldest form
being Chlodowich:  and who would lay down the law, which of these
forms shall be used for historical purposes?

I have little doubt that Kingsley's object in retaining the name
Dietrich for the Ost-gothic king was much the same as Johannes von
Muller's.  You know, he meant to say, of Dietrich of Bern, of all the
wonderful things told of him in the Nibelunge and other German poems.
Well, that is the Dietrich of the German people, that is what the
Germans themselves have made of him, by transferring to their great
Gothic king some of the most incredible achievements of one of their
oldest legendary heroes.  They have changed even his name, and as the
children in the schools of Germany {p8} still speak of him as their
Dietrich von Bern, let him be to us too Dietrich, not simply the Ost-
gothic Theoderic, but the German Dietrich.

I confess I see no harm in that, though a few words on the strange
mixture of legend and history might have been useful, because the
case of Theodoric is one of the most luculent testimonies for that
blending of fact and fancy in strictly historical times which people
find it so difficult to believe, but which offers the key, and the
only true key, for many of the most perplexing problems, both of
history and of mythology.

Originally nothing could be more different than the Dietrich of the
old legend and the Dietrich of history.  The former is followed by
misfortune through the whole of his life.  He is oppressed in his
youth by his uncle, the famous Ermanrich {p9}; he has to spend the
greater part of his life (thirty years) in exile, and only returns to
his kingdom after the death of his enemy.  Yet whenever he is called
Dietrich of Bern, it is because the real Theodoric, the most
successful of Gothic conquerors, ruled at Verona.  When his enemy was
called Otacher, instead of Sibich, it is because the real Theodoric
conquered the real Odoacer.  When the king, at whose court he passes
his years of exile, is called Etzel, it is because many German heroes
had really taken refuge in the camp of Attila.  That Attila died two
years before Theodoric of Verona was born, is no difficulty to a
popular poet, nor even the still more glaring contradiction between
the daring and ferocious character of the real Attila and the
cowardice of his namesake Etzel, as represented in the poem of the
Nibelunge.  Thus was legend quickened by history.

On the other hand, if historians, such as Gregory I (Dial. iv. 36)
{p10}, tell us that an Italian hermit had been witness in a vision to
the damnation of Theodoric, whose soul was plunged, by the ministers
of divine vengeance, into the volcano of Lipari, one of the flaming
mouths of the infernal world, we may recognise in the heated
imagination of the orthodox monk some recollection of the mysterious
end of the legendary Dietrich {p11}.  Later on, the legendary and the
real hero were so firmly welded together that, as early as the
twelfth century, chroniclers are at their wits' end how to reconcile
facts and dates.

Ekkehard, in his Chronicon Universale {p12}, which ends 1126 A.D.,
points out the chronological contradiction between Jornandes, who
places the death of Ermanrich long before Attila, and the popular
story which makes him and Dietrich, the son of Dietmar, his
contemporaries.

Otto von Freising {p13}, in the first half of the twelfth century,
expresses the same perplexity when he finds that Theodoric is made a
contemporary of Hermanricus and Attila, though it is certain that
Attila ruled long after Hermanric, and that, after the death of
Attila, Theodoric, when eight years old, was given by his father as a
hostage to the emperor Leo.

Gottfried von Viterbo {p14}, in the second half of the twelfth
century, expresses his difficulties in similar words.

All these chroniclers who handed down the historical traditions of
Germany were High-Germans, and thus it has happened that in Germany
Theodoric the Great became Dietrich, as Strataburgum became
Strassburg, or Turicum, Zurich.  Whether because English belongs to
the Low German branch, it is less permissible to an English historian
than to a German to adopt these High-German names, I cannot say:  all
I wished to point out was that there was a very intelligible reason
why Kingsley should have preferred the popular and poetical name of
Dietrich, even though it was High-German, either to his real Gothic
name, Theodereik, or to its classical metamorphosis, Theodoricus or
Theodorus.

Some other mistakes, too, which have been pointed out, did not seem
to me so serious as to justify their correction in a posthumous
edition.  It was said, for instance, that Kingsley ought not to have
called Odoacer and Theodoric, Kings of Italy, as they were only
lieutenants of the Eastern Caesar.  Cassiodorus, however, tells us
that Odoacer assumed the name of king (nomen regis Odoacer
assumpsit), and though Gibbon points out that this may only mean that
he assumed the abstract title of a king, without applying it to any
particular nation or country, yet that great historian himself calls
Odoacer, King of Italy, and shows how he was determined to abolish
the useless and expensive office of vicegerent of the emperor.
Kingsley guesses very ingeniously, that Odoacer's assumed title, King
of nations, may have been the Gothic Theode-reiks, the very name of
Theodoric.  As to Theodoric himself, Kingsley surely knew his real
status, for he says:  'Why did he not set himself up as Caesar of
Rome?  Why did he always consider himself as son-in-arms, and quasi-
vassal of the Caesar of Constantinople?'

Lastly, in speaking of the extinction of the Western Empire with
Romulus Augustulus, Kingsley again simply followed the lead of Gibbon
and other historians; nor can it be said that the expression is not
perfectly legitimate, however clearly modern research may have shown
that the Roman Empire, though dead, lived.

So much in defence, or at all events, in explanation, of expressions
and statements which have been pointed out as most glaring mistakes
in Kingsley's lectures.  I think it must be clear that in all these
cases alterations would have been impossible.  There were other
passages, where I should gladly have altered or struck out whole
lines, particularly in the ethnological passages, and in the
attempted etymologies of German proper names.  Neither the one nor
the other, I believe, are Kingsley's own, though I have tried in vain
to find out whence he could possibly have taken them.

These, however, are minor matters which are mentioned chiefly in
order to guard against the impression that, because I left them
unchanged, I approved of them.  The permanent interest attaching to
these lectures does not spring from the facts which they give.  For
these, students will refer to Gibbon.  They will be valued chiefly
for the thoughts which they contain, for the imagination and
eloquence which they display, and last, not least, for the sake of
the man, a man, it is true, of a warm heart rather than of a cold
judgment, but a man whom, for that very reason, many admired, many
loved, and many will miss, almost every day of their life.

M. M.



LECTURE 1--THE FOREST CHILDREN.



I wish in this first lecture to give you some general conception of
the causes which urged our Teutonic race to attack and destroy Rome.
I shall take for this one lecture no special text-book:  but suppose
you all to be acquainted with the Germania of Tacitus, and with the
9th Chapter of Gibbon.  And I shall begin, if you will allow me, by a
parable, a myth, a saga, such as the men of whom I am going to tell
you loved; and if it seem to any of you childish, bear in mind that
what is childish need not therefore be shallow.  I know that it is
not history.  These lectures will not be, in the popular sense,
history at all.  But I beg you to bear in mind that I am not here to
teach you history.  No man can do that.  I am here to teach you how
to teach yourselves history.  I will give you the scaffolding as well
as I can; you must build the house.

Fancy to yourself a great Troll-garden, such as our forefathers
dreamed of often fifteen hundred years ago;--a fairy palace, with a
fairy garden; and all around the primaeval wood.  Inside the Trolls
dwell, cunning and wicked, watching their fairy treasures, working at
their magic forges, making and making always things rare and strange;
and outside, the forest is full of children; such children as the
world had never seen before, but children still:  children in
frankness, and purity, and affectionateness, and tenderness of
conscience, and devout awe of the unseen; and children too in fancy,
and silliness, and ignorance, and caprice, and jealousy, and
quarrelsomeness, and love of excitement and adventure, and the mere
sport of overflowing animal health.  They play unharmed among the
forest beasts, and conquer them in their play; but the forest is too
dull and too poor for them; and they wander to the walls of the
Troll-garden, and wonder what is inside.  One can conceive easily for
oneself what from that moment would begin to happen.  Some of the
more adventurous clamber in.  Some, too, the Trolls steal and carry
off into their palace.  Most never return:  but here and there one
escapes out again, and tells how the Trolls killed all his comrades:
but tells too, of the wonders he has seen inside, of shoes of
swiftness, and swords of sharpness, and caps of darkness; of charmed
harps, charmed jewels, and above all of the charmed wine:  and after
all, the Trolls were very kind to him--see what fine clothes they
have given him--and he struts about awhile among his companions; and
then returns, and not alone.  The Trolls have bewitched him, as they
will bewitch more.  So the fame of the Troll-garden spreads; and more
and more steal in, boys and maidens, and tempt their comrades over
the wall, and tell of the jewels, and the dresses, and the wine, the
joyous maddening wine, which equals men with gods; and forget to tell
how the Trolls have bought them, soul as well as body, and taught
them to be vain, and lustful, and slavish; and tempted them, too
often, to sins which have no name.

But their better nature flashes out at times.  They will not be the
slaves and brutes in human form, which the evil Trolls would have
them; and they rebel, and escape, and tell of the horrors of that
fair foul place.  And then arises a noble indignation, and war
between the Trolls and the forest-children.  But still the Trolls can
tempt and bribe the greedier or the more vain; and still the wonders
inside haunt their minds; till it becomes a fixed idea among them
all, to conquer the garden for themselves and bedizen themselves in
the fine clothes, and drink their fill of the wine.  Again and again
they break in:  but the Trolls drive them out, rebuild their walls,
keep off those outside by those whom they hold enslaved within; till
the boys grow to be youths, and the youths men:  and still the Troll-
garden is not conquered, and still it shall be.  And the Trolls have
grown old and weak, and their walls are crumbling away.  Perhaps they
may succeed this time--perhaps next.

And at last they do succeed--the fairy walls are breached, the fairy
palace stormed--and the Trolls are crouching at their feet, and now
all will be theirs, gold, jewels, dresses, arms, all that the Troll
possesses--except his cunning.

For as each struggles into the charmed ground, the spell of the place
falls on him.  He drinks the wine, and it maddens him.  He fills his
arms with precious trumpery, and another snatches it from his grasp.
Each envies the youth before him, each cries--Why had I not the luck
to enter first?  And the Trolls set them against each other, and
split them into parties, each mad with excitement, and jealousy, and
wine, till, they scarce know how, each falls upon his fellow, and all
upon those who are crowding in from the forest, and they fight and
fight, up and down the palace halls, till their triumph has become a
very feast of the Lapithae, and the Trolls look on, and laugh a
wicked laugh, as they tar them on to the unnatural fight, till the
gardens are all trampled, the finery torn, the halls dismantled, and
each pavement slippery with brothers' blood.  And then, when the wine
is gone out of them, the survivors come to their senses, and stare
shamefully and sadly round.  What an ugly, desolate, tottering ruin
the fairy palace has become!  Have they spoilt it themselves? or have
the Trolls bewitched it?  And all the fairy treasure--what has become
of it? no man knows.  Have they thrown it away in their quarrel? have
the cunningest hidden it? have the Trolls flown away with it, to the
fairy land beyond the Eastern mountains? who can tell?  Nothing is
left but recrimination and remorse.  And they wander back again into
the forest, away from the doleful ruin, carrion-strewn, to sulk each
apart over some petty spoil which he has saved from the general
wreck, hating and dreading each the sound of his neighbour's
footstep.

What will become of the forest children, unless some kind saint or
hermit comes among them, to bind them in the holy bonds of
brotherhood and law?

This is my saga, gentlemen; and it is a true one withal.  For it is
neither more nor less than the story of the Teutonic tribes, and how
they overthrew the Empire of Rome.

Menzel, who though he may not rank very high as a historian, has at
least a true German heart, opens his history with a striking passage.

'The sages of the East were teaching wisdom beneath the palms; the
merchants of Tyre and Carthage were weighing their heavy anchors, and
spreading their purple sails for far seas; the Greek was making the
earth fair by his art, and the Roman founding his colossal empire of
force, while the Teuton sat, yet a child, unknown and naked among the
forest beasts:  and yet unharmed and in his sport he lorded it over
them; for the child was of a royal race, and destined to win glory
for all time to come.'

To the strange and complicated education which God appointed for this
race; and by which he has fitted it to become, at least for many
centuries henceforth, the ruling race of the world, I wish to call
your attention in my future lectures.  To-day, I wish to impress
strongly on your minds this childishness of our forefathers.  For
good or for evil they were great boys; very noble boys; very often
very naughty boys--as boys with the strength of men might well be.
Try to conceive such to yourselves, and you have the old Markman,
Allman, Goth, Lombard, Saxon, Frank.  And the notion may be more than
a mere metaphor.  Races, like individuals, it has been often said,
may have their childhood, their youth, their manhood, their old age,
and natural death.  It is but a theory--perhaps nothing more.  But at
least, our race had its childhood.  Their virtues, and their sad
failings, and failures, I can understand on no other theory.  The
nearest type which we can see now is I fancy, the English sailor, or
the English navvy.  A great, simple, honest, baby--full of power and
fun, very coarse and plain spoken at times:  but if treated like a
human being, most affectionate, susceptible, even sentimental and
superstitious; fond of gambling, brute excitement, childish
amusements in the intervals of enormous exertion; quarrelsome among
themselves, as boys are, and with a spirit of wild independence which
seems to be strength; but which, till it be disciplined into loyal
obedience and self-sacrifice, is mere weakness; and beneath all a
deep practical shrewdness, an indomitable perseverance, when once
roused by need.  Such a spirit as we see to this day in the English
sailor--that is the nearest analogue I can find now.  One gets hints
here and there of what manner of men they were, from the evil day,
when, one hundred and two years before Christ, the Kempers and
Teutons, ranging over the Alps toward Italy, 300,000 armed men and
15,000 mailed knights with broad sword and lances, and in their
helmets the same bulls'-horns, wings, and feathers, which one sees
now in the crests of German princes, stumbled upon Marius and his
Romans, and were destroyed utterly, first the men, then the women,
who like true women as they were, rather than give up their honour to
the Romans, hung themselves on the horns of the waggon-oxen, and were
trampled to death beneath their feet; and then the very dogs, who
fought on when men and women were all slain--from that fatal day,
down to the glorious one, when, five hundred years after, Alaric
stood beneath the walls of Rome, and to their despairing boast of the
Roman numbers, answered, 'Come out to us then, the thicker the hay,
the easier mowed,'--for five hundred years, I say, the hints of their
character are all those of a boy-nature.

They were cruel at times:  but so are boys--much more cruel than
grown men, I hardly know why--perhaps because they have not felt
suffering so much themselves, and know not how hard it is to bear.
There were varieties of character among them.  The Franks were always
false, vain, capricious, selfish, taking part with the Romans
whenever their interest or vanity was at stake--the worst of all
Teutons, though by no means the weakest--and a miserable business
they made of it in France, for some five hundred years.  The Goths,
Salvian says, were the most ignavi of all of them; great lazy
lourdans; apt to be cruel, too, the Visigoths at least, as their
Spanish descendants proved to the horror of the world:  but men of
honour withal, as those old Spaniards were.  The Saxons were famed
for cruelty--I know not why, for our branch of the Saxons has been,
from the beginning of history, the least cruel people in Europe; but
they had the reputation--as the Vandals had also--of being the most
pure; Castitate venerandi.  And among the uncivilized people coldness
and cruelty go often together.  The less passionate and sensitive the
nature, the less open to pity.  The Caribs of the West Indies were
famed for both, in contrast to the profligate and gentle inhabitants
of Cuba and Hispaniola; and in double contrast to the Red Indian
tribes of North America, who combined, from our first acquaintance
with them, the two vices of cruelty and profligacy, to an extent
which has done more to extirpate them than all the fire-water of the
white man.

But we must be careful how we compare our forefathers with these, or
any other savages.  Those who, like Gibbon, have tried to draw a
parallel between the Red Indian and the Primaeval Teuton, have done
so at the expense of facts.  First, they have overlooked the broad
fact, that while the Red Indians have been, ever since we have known
them, a decreasing race, the Teutons have been a rapidly increasing
one; in spite of war, and famine, and all the ills of a precarious
forest life, proving their youthful strength and vitality by a
reproduction unparalleled, as far as I know, in history, save perhaps
by that noble and young race, the Russian.  These writers have not
known that the Teuton had his definite laws, more simple, doubtless,
in the time of Tacitus than in that of Justinian, but still founded
on abstract principles so deep and broad that they form the
groundwork of our English laws and constitution; that the Teuton
creed concerning the unseen world, and divine beings, was of a
loftiness and purity as far above the silly legends of Hiawatha as
the Teuton morals were above those of a Sioux or a Comanche.  Let any
one read honest accounts of the Red Indians; let him read Catlin,
James, Lewis and Clarke, Shoolbred; and first and best of all, the
old 'Travaile in Virginia,' published by the Hakluyt Society:  and
then let him read the Germania of Tacitus, and judge for himself.
For my part, I believe that if Gibbon was right, and if our
forefathers in the German forests had been like Powhattan's people as
we found them in the Virginian forests, the Romans would not have
been long in civilizing us off the face of the earth.

No.  All the notes which Tacitus gives us are notes of a young and
strong race; unconscious of its own capabilities, but possessing such
capabilities that the observant Romans saw at once with dread and awe
that they were face to face with such a people as they had never met
before; that in their hands, sooner or later, might be the fate of
Rome.  Mad Caracalla, aping the Teuton dress and hair, listening in
dread to the songs of the Allman Alrunas, telling the Teutons that
they ought to come over the Rhine and destroy the empire, and then,
murdering the interpreters, lest they should repeat his words, was
but babbling out in an insane shape the thought which was brooding in
the most far-seeing Roman minds.  He felt that they could have done
the deed; and he felt rightly, madman as he was.  They could have
done it then, if physical power and courage were all that was needed,
in the days of the Allman war.  They could have done it a few years
before, when the Markmen fought Marcus Aurelius Antoninus; on the day
when the Caesar, at the advice of his augurs, sent two lions to swim
across the Danube as a test of victory; and the simple Markmen took
them for big dogs, and killed them with their clubs.  From that day,
indeed, the Teutons began to conquer slowly, but surely.  Though
Antoninus beat the Markmen on the Danube, and recovered 100,000 Roman
prisoners, yet it was only by the help of the Vandals; from that day
the empire was doomed, and the Teutons only kept at bay by bribing
one tribe to fight another, or by enlisting their more adventurous
spirits into the Roman legions, to fight against men of their own
blood;--a short-sighted and suicidal policy; for by that very method
they were teaching the Teuton all he needed, the discipline and the
military science of the Roman.

But the Teutons might have done it a hundred years before that, when
Rome was in a death agony, and Vitellius and Vespasian were
struggling for the purple, and Civilis and the fair Velleda, like
Barak and Deborah of old, raised the Teuton tribes.  They might have
done it before that again, when Hermann slew Varus and his legions in
the Teutoburger Wald; or before that again, when the Kempers and
Teutons burst over the Alps, to madden themselves with the fatal
wines of the rich south.  And why did the Teutons NOT do it?  Because
they were boys fighting against cunning men.  Boiorich, the young
Kemper, riding down to Marius' camp, to bid him fix the place and
time of battle--for the Teuton thought it mean to use surprises and
stratagems, or to conquer save in fair and open fight--is the type of
the Teuton hero; and one which had no chance in a struggle with the
cool, false, politic Roman, grown grey in the experience of the forum
and of the camp, and still as physically brave as his young enemy.
Because, too, there was no unity among them; no feeling that they
were brethren of one blood.  Had the Teuton tribes, at any one of the
great crises I have mentioned, and at many a crisis afterwards,
united for but three years, under the feeling of a common blood,
language, interest, destiny, Rome would have perished.  But they
could not learn that lesson.  They could not put aside their boyish
quarrels.

They never learnt the lesson till after their final victory, when the
Gospel of Christ--of a Being to whom they all owed equal allegiance,
in whose sight they were all morally equal--came to unite them into a
Christendom.

And it was well that they did not learn it sooner.  Well for them and
for the world, that they did not unite on any false ground of
interest or ambition, but had to wait for the true ground of unity,
the knowledge of the God-man, King of all nations upon earth.

Had they destroyed Rome sooner, what would not they have lost?  What
would not the world have lost?  Christianity would have been stifled
in its very cradle; and with Christianity all chance--be sure of it--
of their own progress.  Roman law, order, and discipline, the very
things which they needed to acquire by a contact of five hundred
years, would have been swept away.  All classic literature and
classic art, which they learnt to admire with an almost superstitious
awe, would have perished likewise.  Greek philosophy, the germs of
physical science, and all that we owe to the ancients, would have
perished; and we should have truly had an invasion of the barbarians,
followed by truly dark ages, in which Europe would have had to begin
all anew, without the help of the generations which had gone before.

Therefore it was well as it was, and God was just and merciful to
them and to the human race.  They had a glorious destiny, and
glorious powers wherewith to fulfil it:  but they had, as every man
and people has, before whom there is a noble future, to be educated
by suffering.  There was before them a terrible experience of sorrow
and disappointment, sin and blood, by which they gained the first
consciousness of what they could do and what they could not.  Like
Adam of old, like every man unto this day, they ate of the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, and were driven out of the paradise
of unconsciousness; had to begin again sadder and wiser men, and eat
their bread in the sweat of their brow; and so to rise, after their
fall, into a nobler, wiser, more artificial, and therefore more truly
human and divine life, than that from which they had at first fallen,
when they left their German wilds.

One does not, of course, mean the parallel to fit in all details.
The fall of the Teuton from the noble simplicity in which Tacitus
beheld and honoured him, was a work of four centuries; perhaps it was
going on in Tacitus' own time.  But the culminating point was the
century which saw Italy conquered, and Rome sacked, by Visigoth, by
Ostrogoth, by Vandal, till nothing was left save fever-haunted ruins.
Then the ignorant and greedy child, who had been grasping so long
after the fair apples of Sodom, clutched them once and for all, and
found them turn to ashes in his hands.

Yes--it is thus that I wish you to look at the Invasion of the
Barbarians, Immigration of the Teutons, or whatsoever name you may
call it.  Before looking at questions of migration, of ethnology, of
laws, and of classes, look first at the thing itself; and see with
sacred pity--and awe, one of the saddest and grandest tragedies ever
performed on earth.  Poor souls!  And they were so simple withal.
One pities them, as one pities a child who steals apples, and makes
himself sick with them after all.  It is not the enormous loss of
life which is to me the most tragic part of the story; it is that
very simplicity of the Teutons.  Bloodshed is a bad thing, certainly;
but after all nature is prodigal of human life--killing her twenty
thousand and her fifty thousand by a single earthquake; and as for
death in battle--I sometimes am tempted to think, having sat by many
death beds, that our old forefathers may have been right, and that
death in battle may be a not unenviable method of passing out of this
troublesome world.  Besides, we have no right to blame those old
Teutons, while we are killing every year more of her Majesty's
subjects by preventible disease, than ever they killed in their
bloodiest battle.  Let us think of that, and mend that, ere we blame
the old German heroes.  No, there are more pitiful tragedies than any
battlefield can shew; and first among them, surely, is the
disappointment of young hopes, the degradation of young souls.

One pities them, I say.  And they pitied themselves.  Remorse, shame,
sadness, mark the few legends and songs of the days which followed
the fall of Rome.  They had done a great work.  They had destroyed a
mighty tyranny; they had parted between them the spoils wrung from
all the nations; they had rid the earth of a mighty man-devouring
ogre, whose hands had been stretched out for centuries over all the
earth, dragging all virgins to his den, butchering and torturing
thousands for his sport; foul, too, with crimes for which their
language, like our own (thank God) has scarcely found a name.
Babylon the Great, drunken with the blood of the saints, had fallen
at last before the simple foresters of the north:  but if it looks a
triumph to us, it looked not such to them.  They could only think how
they had stained their hands in their brothers' blood.  They had got
the fatal Nibelungen hoard:  but it had vanished between their hands,
and left them to kill each other, till none was left.

You know the Nibelungen Lied?  That expresses, I believe, the key-
note of the old Teuton's heart, after his work was done.  Siegfried
murdered by his brother-in-law; fair Chriemhild turned into an
avenging fury; the heroes hewing each other down, they scarce know
why, in Hunnish Etzel's hall, till Hagen and Gunther stand alone;
Dietrich of Bern going in, to bind the last surviving heroes;
Chriemhild shaking Hagen's gory head in Gunther's face, himself hewed
down by the old Hildebrand, till nothing is left but stark corpses
and vain tears: --while all the while the Nibelungen hoard, the cause
of all the woe, lies drowned in the deep Rhine until the judgment
day.--What is all this, but the true tale of the fall of Rome, of the
mad quarrels of the conquering Teutons?  The names are confused,
mythic; the dates and places all awry:  but the tale is true--too
true.  Mutato nomine fabula narratur.  Even so they went on, killing,
till none were left.  Deeds as strange, horrible, fratricidal, were
done, again and again, not only between Frank and Goth, Lombard and
Gepid, but between Lombard and Lombard, Frank and Frank.  Yes, they
were drunk with each other's blood, those elder brethren of ours.
Let us thank God that we did not share their booty, and perish, like
them, from the touch of the fatal Nibelungen hoard.  Happy for us
Englishmen, that we were forced to seek our adventures here, in this
lonely isle; to turn aside from the great stream of Teutonic
immigration; and settle here, each man on his forest-clearing, to
till the ground in comparative peace, keeping unbroken the old
Teutonic laws, unstained the old Teutonic faith and virtue, cursed
neither with poverty nor riches, but fed with food sufficient for us.
To us, indeed, after long centuries, peace brought sloth, and sloth
foreign invaders and bitter woes:  but better so, than that we should
have cast away alike our virtue and our lives, in that mad quarrel
over the fairy gold of Rome.



LECTURE II--THE DYING EMPIRE.



It is not for me to trace the rise, or even the fall of the Roman
Empire.  That would be the duty rather of a professor of ancient
history, than of modern.  All I need do is to sketch, as shortly as I
can, the state in which the young world found the old, when it came
in contact with it.

The Roman Empire, toward the latter part of the fourth century, was
in much the same condition as the Chinese or the Turkish Empire in
our own days.  Private morality (as Juvenal and Persius will tell
you), had vanished long before.  Public morality had, of course,
vanished likewise.  The only powers really recognised were force and
cunning.  The only aim was personal enjoyment.  The only God was the
Divus Caesar, the imperial demigod, whose illimitable brute force
gave him illimitable powers of self-enjoyment, and made him thus the
paragon and ideal of humanity, whom all envied, flattered, hated, and
obeyed.  The palace was a sink of corruption, where eunuchs,
concubines, spies, informers, freedmen, adventurers, struggled in the
basest plots, each for his share of the public plunder.  The senate
only existed to register the edicts of their tyrant, and if need be,
destroy each other, or any one else, by judicial murders, the willing
tools of imperial cruelty.  The government was administered (at least
since the time of Diocletian) by an official bureaucracy, of which
Professor Goldwin Smith well says, 'the earth swarmed with the
consuming hierarchy of extortion, so that it was said that they who
received taxes were more than those who paid them.'  The free middle
class had disappeared, or lingered in the cities, too proud to
labour, fed on government bounty, and amused by government
spectacles.  With them, arts and science had died likewise.  Such
things were left to slaves, and became therefore, literally, servile
imitations of the past.  What, indeed, was not left to slaves?  Drawn
without respect of rank, as well as of sex and age, from every nation
under heaven by an organized slave-trade, to which our late African
one was but a tiny streamlet compared with a mighty river; a slave-
trade which once bought 10,000 human beings in Delos in a single day;
the 'servorum nationes' were the only tillers of the soil, of those
'latifundia' or great estates, 'quae perdidere Romam.'  Denied the
rights of marriage, the very name of humanity; protected by no law,
save the interest or caprice of their masters; subjected, for slight
offences, to cruel torments, they were butchered by thousands in the
amphitheatres to make a Roman holiday, or wore out their lives in
'ergastula' or barracks, which were dens of darkness and horror.
Their owners, as 'senatores,' 'clarissimi,' or at least 'curiales,'
spent their lives in the cities, luxurious and effeminate, and left
their slaves to the tender mercy of 'villici,' stewards and gang-
drivers, who were themselves slaves likewise.

More pampered, yet more degraded, were the crowds of wretched beings,
cut off from all the hopes of humanity, who ministered to the wicked
pleasures of their masters, even in the palaces of nominally
Christian emperors--but over that side of Roman slavery I must draw a
veil, only saying, that the atrocities of the Romans toward their
slaves--especially of this last and darkest kind--notably drew down
on them the just wrath and revenge of those Teutonic nations, from
which so many of their slaves were taken. {p15}

And yet they called themselves Christians--to whom it had been said,
'Be not deceived, God is not mocked.  For these things cometh the
wrath of God on the children of disobedience.'  And the wrath did
come.

If such were the morals of the Empire, what was its political state?
One of complete disorganization.  The only uniting bond left seems to
have been that of the bureaucracy, the community of tax-gatherers,
who found it on the whole safer and more profitable to pay into the
imperial treasury a portion of their plunder, than to keep it all
themselves.  It stood by mere vi inertiae, just because it happened
to be there, and there was nothing else to put in its place.  Like an
old tree whose every root is decayed, it did not fall, simply because
the storm had not yet come.  Storms, indeed, had come; but they had
been partial and local.  One cannot look into the pages of Gibbon,
without seeing that the normal condition of the empire was one of
revolt, civil war, invasion--Pretenders, like Carausius and Allectus
in Britain, setting themselves up as emperors for awhile--Bands of
brigands, like the Bagaudae of Gaul, and the Circumcelliones of
Africa, wandering about, desperate with hunger and revenge, to slay
and pillage--Teutonic tribes making forays on the frontier, enlisted
into the Roman armies, and bought off, or hired to keep back the
tribes behind them, and perish by their brethren's swords.

What kept the empire standing, paradoxical as it may seem, was its
own innate weakness.  From within, at least, it could not be
overthrown.  The masses were too crushed to rise.  Without unity,
purpose, courage, they submitted to inevitable misery as to rain and
thunder.  At most they destroyed their own children from poverty, or,
as in Egypt, fled by thousands into the caves and quarries, and
turned monks and hermits; while the upper classes, equally without
unity or purpose, said each to himself, 'Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die.'

The state of things at Rome, and after the rise of Byzantium under
Constantine at Byzantium likewise, was one altogether fantastic,
abnormal, utterly unlike anything that we have seen, or can imagine
to ourselves without great effort.  I know no better method of
illustrating it, than quoting, from Mr. Sheppard's excellent book,
The Fall of Rome and the Rise of New Nationalities, a passage in
which he transfers the whole comi-tragedy from Italy of old to
England in 1861.

'I have not thought it necessary to give a separate and distinct
reply to the theory of Mr. Congreve, that Roman Imperialism was the
type of all good government, and a desirable precedent for ourselves.
Those who feel any penchant for the notion, I should strongly
recommend to read the answer of Professor G. Smith, in the Oxford
Essays for 1856, which is as complete and crushing as that
gentleman's performances usually are.  But in order to convey to the
uninitiated some idea of the state of society under Caesarian rule,
and which a Caesarian rule, so far as mere government is concerned,
if it does not produce, has never shewn any tendency to prevent, let
us give reins to imagination for a moment, and picture to ourselves a
few social and political analogies in our own England of the
nineteenth century.

'An entire revolution has taken place in our principles, manners, and
form of government.  Parliaments, meetings, and all the ordinary
expressions of the national will, are no longer in existence.  A free
press has shared their fate.  There is no accredited organ of public
opinion; indeed there is no public opinion to record.  Lords and
Commons have been swept away, though a number of the richest old
gentlemen in London meet daily at Westminster to receive orders from
Buckingham Palace.  But at the palace itself has broken out one of
those sanguinary conspiracies which have of late become unceasing.
The last heir of the house of Brunswick is lying dead with a dagger
in his heart, and everything is in frightful confusion.  The armed
force of the capital are of course "masters of the situation," and
the Guards, after a tumultuous meeting at Windsor or Knightsbridge,
have sold the throne to Baron Rothschild, for a handsome donation of
25 pounds a-piece.  Lord Clyde, however, we may be sure, is not
likely to stand this, and in a few months will be marching upon
London at the head of the Indian Army.  In the mean time the Channel
Fleet has declared for its own commander, has seized upon Plymouth
and Portsmouth, and intends to starve the metropolis by stopping the
imports of "bread-stuffs" at the mouth of the Thames.  And this has
become quite possible; for half the population of London, under the
present state of things, subsist upon free distributions of corn
dispensed by the occupant of the throne for the time being.  But a
more fatal change than even this has come over the population of the
capital and of the whole country.  The free citizens and 'prentices
of London; the sturdy labourers of Dorsetshire and the eastern
counties; and the skilful artizans of Manchester, Sheffield and
Birmingham; the mariners and shipwrights of Liverpool, have been long
ago drafted into marching regiments, and have left their bones to
bleach beneath Indian suns and Polar snows.  Their place has been
supplied by countless herds of negro slaves, who till the fields and
crowd the workshops of our towns, to the entire exclusion of free
labour; for the free population, or rather the miserable relics of
them, disdain all manual employment:  they divide their time between
starvation and a degrading debauchery, the means for which are
sedulously provided by the government.  The time-honoured
institutions of the bull-bait, the cockpit, and the ring, are in
daily operation, under the most distinguished patronage.  Hyde Park
has been converted into a gigantic arena, where criminals from
Newgate "set-to" with the animals from the Zoological Gardens.  Every
fortnight there is a Derby Day, and the whole population pour into
the Downs with frantic excitement, leaving the city to the slaves.
And then the moral condition of this immense mass!  Of the doings
about the palace we should be sorry to speak.  But the lady
patronesses of Almack's still more assiduously patronize the prize-
fights, and one of them has been seen within the ropes, in battle
array, by the side of Sayers himself.  No tongue may tell the orgies
enacted, with the aid of French cooks, Italian singers, and foreign
artists of all sorts, in the gilded saloons of Park Lane and Mayfair.
Suffice to say, that in them the worst passions of human nature have
full swing, unmodified by any thought of human or divine restraints,
and only dashed a little now and then by the apprehension that the
slaves may rise, and make a clean sweep of the metropolis with fire
and steel.  But n'importe--Vive la bagatelle!  Mario has just been
appointed prime minister, and has made a chorus singer from the Opera
Duke of Middlesex and Governor-General of India.  All wise men and
all good men despair of the state, but they are not permitted to say
anything, much less to act.  Mr. Disraeli lost his head a few days
ago; Lords Palmerston and Derby lie in the Tower under sentence of
death; Lord Brougham, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Mr.
Gladstone, opened their veins and died in a warm bath last week.
Foreign relations will make a still greater demand on the reader's
imagination.  We must conceive of England no longer as


"A precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a moat defensive of a house."


but rather as open to the inroad of every foe whom her aggressive and
colonizing genius has provoked.  The red man of the West, the Caffre,
the Sikh, and the Sepoy, Chinese braves, and fierce orientals of all
sorts, are hovering on her frontiers in "numbers numberless," as the
flakes of snow in the northern winter.  They are not the impotent
enemy which we know, but vigorous races, supplied from inexhaustible
founts of population, and animated by an insatiate appetite for the
gold and silver, purple and fine linen, rich meats and intoxicating
drinks of our effete civilization.  And we can no longer oppose them
with those victorious legions which have fought and conquered in all
regions of the world.  The men of Waterloo and Inkermann are no more.
We are compelled to recruit our armies from those very tribes before
whose swords we are receding!

'Doubtless the ordinary reader will believe this picture to be
overcharged, drawn with manifest exaggeration, and somewhat
questionable taste.  EVERY SINGLE STATEMENT WHICH IT CONTAINS may be
paralleled by the circumstances and events of the decadence of the
Roman Empire.  The analogous situation was with the subjects of this
type of all good government, ALWAYS A POSSIBLE, often an actual,
state of things.  We think this disposes of the theory of Mr.
Congreve.  With it may advantageously be contrasted the opinion of a
man of more statesman-like mind.  "The benefits of despotism are
short-lived; it poisons the very springs which it lays open; if it
display a merit, it is an exceptional one; if a virtue, it is created
of circumstances; and when once this better hour has passed away, all
the vices of its nature break forth with redoubled violence, and
weigh down society in every direction."  So writes M. Guizot.  Is it
the language of prophecy as well as of personal experience?'

Mr. Sheppard should have added, to make the picture complete, that
the Irish have just established popery across St. George's Channel,
by the aid of re-immigrants from America; that Free Kirk and National
Kirk are carrying on a sanguinary civil war in Scotland; that the
Devonshire Wesleyans have just sacked Exeter cathedral, and murdered
the Bishop at the altar, while the Bishop of London, supported by the
Jews and the rich churchmen (who are all mixed up in financial
operations with Baron Rothschild) has just commanded all Dissenters
to leave the metropolis within three days, under pain of death.

I must add yet one more feature to this fearful, but accurate
picture, and say how, a few generations forward, an even uglier thing
would be seen.  The English aristocracy would have been absorbed by
foreign adventurers.  The grandchildren of these slaves and
mercenaries would be holding the highest offices in the state and the
army, naming themselves after the masters who had freed them, or
disguising their barbarian names by English endings.  The De Fung-
Chowvilles would be Dukes, the Little-grizzly-bear-Joe-Smiths Earls,
and the Fitz-Stanleysons, descended from a king of the gipsies who
enlisted to avoid transportation, and in due time became Commander-
in-Chief, would rule at Knowsley in place of the Earl of Derby,
having inherited the same by the summary process of assassination.
Beggars on horseback, only too literally; married, most of them, to
Englishwomen of the highest rank; but looking on England merely as a
prey; without patriotism, without principle; they would destroy the
old aristocracy by legal murders, grind the people, fight against
their yet barbarian cousins outside, as long as they were in luck:
but the moment the luck turned against them, would call in those
barbarian cousins to help them, and invade England every ten years
with heathen hordes, armed no more with tulwar and matchlock, but
with Enfield rifle and Whitworth cannon.  And that, it must be
agreed, would be about the last phase of the British empire.  If you
will look through the names which figure in the high places of the
Roman empire, during the fourth and fifth centuries, you will see how
few of them are really Roman.  If you will try to investigate, not
their genealogies--for they have none--not a grandfather among them--
but the few facts of their lives which have come down to us; you will
see how that Nemesis had fallen on her which must at last fall on
every nation which attempts to establish itself on slavery as a legal
basis.  Rome had become the slave of her own slaves.

It is at this last period, the point when Rome has become the slave
of her own slaves, that I take up the story of our Teutonic race.

I do not think that anyone will call either Mr. Sheppard's
statements, or mine, exaggerated, who knows the bitter complaints of
the wickedness and folly of the time, which are to be found in the
writings of the Emperor Julian.  Pedant and apostate as he was, he
devoted his short life to one great idea, the restoration of the
Roman Empire to what it had been (as he fancied) in the days of the
virtuous stoic Emperors of the second century.  He found his dream a
dream, owing to the dead heap of frivolity, sensuality, brutality,
utter unbelief, not merely in the dead Pagan gods whom he vainly
tried to restore, but in any god at all, as a living, ruling,
judging, rewarding, punishing power.

No one, again, will call these statements exaggerated who knows the
Roman history of his faithful servant and soldier, Ammianus
Marcellinus, and especially the later books of it, in which he sets
forth the state of the Empire after Julian's death, under Jovian,
Procopius, Valentinian, (who kept close to his bed-chamber two she-
bears who used to eat men, one called Golden Camel, and the other
Innocence--which latter, when she had devoured a sufficiency of his
living victims, he set free in the forests as a reward for her
services--a brutal tyrant, whose only virtue seems to have been his
chastity); and Valens, the shameless extortioner who perished in that
great battle of Adrianople, of which more hereafter.  The last five
remaining books of the honest soldier's story are a tissue of
horrors, from reading which one turns away as from a slaughter-house
or a witches' sabbath.

No one, again, will think these statements exaggerated who knows
Salvian's De Gubernatione Dei.  It has been always and most justly
held in high esteem, as one great authority of the state of Gaul when
conquered by the Franks and Goths and Vandals.

Salvian was a Christian gentleman, born somewhere near Treves.  He
married a Pagan lady of Cologne, converted her, had by her a
daughter, and then persuaded her to devote herself to celibacy, while
he did the like.  His father-in-law, Hypatius, quarrelled with him on
this account; and the letter in which he tries to soothe the old man
is still extant, a curious specimen of the style of cultivated men in
that day.  Salvian then went down to the south of France and became a
priest at Marseilles, and tutor to the sons of Eucherius, the Bishop
of Lyons.  Eucherius, himself a good man, speaks in terms of
passionate admiration of Salvian, his goodness, sanctity, learning,
talents.  Gennadius (who describes him as still living when he wrote,
about 490) calls him among other encomiums, the Master of Bishops;
and both mention familiarly this very work, by which he became
notorious in his own day, and which he wrote about 450 or 455, during
the invasion of the Britons.  So that we may trust fully that we have
hold of an authentic contemporaneous work, written by a good man and
true.

Let me first say a few words on the fact of his having--as many good
men did then--separated from his wife in order to lead what was
called a religious life.  It has a direct bearing on the History of
those days.  One must not praise him because he (in common with all
Christians of his day) held, no doubt, the belief that marriage was a
degradation in itself; that though the Church might mend it somewhat
by exalting it into a sacrament, still, the less of a bad thing the
better: --a doctrine against which one need not use (thank God) in
England, the same language which Michelet has most justly used in
France.  We, being safe from the poison, can afford to talk of it
calmly.  But I boldly assert, that few more practically immoral
doctrines than that of the dignity of celibacy and the defilement of
marriage (which was the doctrine of all Christian devotees for 1000
years) have, as far as I know, ever been preached to man.  That is a
strong statement.  It will be answered perhaps, by the patent fact,
that during those very 1000 years the morality of Europe improved
more, and more rapidly, than it had ever done before.  I know it; and
I thank God for it.  But I adhere to my statement, and rejoin--And
how much more rapidly have the morals of Europe improved, since that
doctrine has been swept away; and woman, and the love of woman, have
been restored to their rightful place in the education of man?

But if we do not praise Salvian, we must not blame him, or any one
else who meant to be an honest and good man.  Such did not see to
what their celibate notions would lead.  If they had, we must believe
that they would have acted differently.  And what is more, their
preference for celibacy was not fancy, but common sense of a very
lofty kind.  Be sure that when two middle-aged Christian people
consider it best to part, they have very good reasons for such a
solemn step, at which only boys or cynics will laugh.  And the
reasons, in Salvian's case, and many more in his day, are patent to
common human understanding.  Do not fancy that he had any private
reason, such as we should very fairly assign now:  public reasons,
and those, such as God grant no living man may see, caused wise men
to thank God that they were not burdened with wife and child.
Remember the years in which Salvian lived--from 416 perhaps to 490.
It was a day of the Lord such as Joel saw; 'a day of clouds and of
thick darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains; a great
people and strong; there had not been ever the like, neither should
be any more after it:  the land was a garden of Eden before them, and
behind them a desolate wilderness:  Yea, and nothing should escape
them.'  All things were going to wrack; the country was overrun by
foreign invaders; bankruptcy, devastation, massacre, and captivity
were for perhaps 100 years the normal state of Gaul, and of most
other countries besides.  I have little doubt that Salvian was a
prudent man, when he thought fit to bring no more human beings into
the world.  That is an ugly thought--I trust that you feel how ugly,
unnatural, desperate a thought it is.  If you do not, think over it
till you do, till it frightens you.  You will gain a great step
thereby in human sympathy, and therefore in the understanding of
history.  For many times, and in many places, men have said, rightly
or wrongly, 'It is better to leave none behind me like myself.  The
miseries of life (and of what comes after this life) are greater than
its joys.  I commit an act of cruelty by bringing a fresh human being
into the world.'  I wish you to look at that thought steadily, and
apply it for yourselves.  It has many applications:  and has
therefore been a very common one.

But put to yourselves--it is too painful for me to put to you--the
case of a married gentleman who sees his country gradually devastated
and brought to utter ruin by foreign invaders; and who feels--as poor
Salvian felt, that there is no hope or escape; that the misery is
merited, deserved, fairly EARNED (for that is the true meaning of
those words), and therefore must come.  Conceive him seeing around
him estates destroyed, farms burnt, ladies and gentlemen, his own
friends and relations, reduced in an hour to beggary, plundered,
stript, driven off in gangs--I do not choose to finish the picture:
but ask yourselves, would an honourable man wish to bring sons--much
more daughters--into the world to endure that?

Put yourselves in Salvian's place.  Forget for a few minutes that you
are Englishmen, the freest and bravest nation upon earth, strong in
all that gives real strength, and with a volunteer army which is now
formidable by numbers and courage--which, did the terrible call come,
might be increased ten times in as many months.  Forget all that
awhile; and put yourselves in Salvian's place, the gentleman of Gaul,
while Franks and Goths, Burgunds and Vandals were sweeping, wave
after wave, over that lovely land; and judge him rationally, and talk
as little as possible of his superstition, and as much as possible of
his human feeling, prudence, self-control, and common sense.  Believe
me, neither celibacy, nor any other seemingly unnatural superstition
would have held its ground for a generation if there had not been
some practical considerations of common sense to back them.  We
wonder why men in old times went into monasteries.  The simplest
answer is, common sense sent them thither.  They were tired of being
the slaves of their own passions; they were tired of killing, and of
running the chance of being killed.  They saw society, the whole
world, going to wrack, as they thought, around them:  what could they
do better, than see that their own characters, morals, immortal souls
did not go to wrack with the rest.  We wonder why women, especially
women of rank, went into convents; why, as soon as a community of
monks was founded, a community of nuns sprung up near them.  The
simplest answer is, common sense sent them thither.  The men,
especially of the upper fighting classes, were killed off rapidly;
the women were not killed off, and a large number always remained,
who, if they had wished to marry, could not.  What better for them
than to seek in convents that peace which this world could not give?

They may have mixed up with that simple wish for peace the notion of
being handmaids of God, brides of Christ, and so forth.  Be it so.
Let us instead of complaining, thank heaven that there was some
motive, whether quite right or not, to keep alive in them self-
respect, and the feeling that they were not altogether useless and
aimless on earth.  Look at the question in this light, and you will
understand two things; first, how horrible the times were, and
secondly, why there grew up in the early middle age a passion for
celibacy.

Salvian, in a word, had already grown up to manhood and reason, when
he saw a time come to his native country, in which were fulfilled,
with fearful exactness, the words of the prophet Isaiah:-


'Behold, the Lord maketh the land empty, and maketh it waste, and
turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants
thereof.  And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as
with the slave, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her
mistress; as with the seller, so with the buyer; as with the lender,
so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver
of usury to him.  The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly
spoiled; for the Lord hath spoken this word.'


And Salvian desired to know the reason why the Lord had spoken that
word, and read his Bible till he found out, and wrote thereon his
book De Gubernatione Dei, of the government of God; and a very noble
book it is.  He takes his stand on the ground of Scripture, with
which he shews an admirable acquaintance.  The few good were
expecting the end of the world.  Christ was coming to put an end to
all these horrors:  but why did he delay his coming?  The many weak
were crying that God had given up the world; that Christ had deserted
his Church, and delivered over Christians to the cruelties of heathen
and Arian barbarians.  The many bad were openly blaspheming, throwing
off in despair all faith, all bonds of religion, all common decency,
and crying, Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.  Salvian
answers them like an old Hebrew prophet:  'The Lord's arm is not
shortened.  The Lord's eyes are not closed.  The Lord is still as
near as ever.  He is governing the world as He has always governed
it:  by the everlasting moral laws, by which the wages of sin are
death.  Your iniquities have withheld good things from you.  You have
earned exactly what God has paid you.  Yourselves are your own
punishment.  You have been wicked men, and therefore weak men; your
own vices, and not the Goths, have been your true conquerors.'  As I
said in my inaugural lecture--that is after all the true theory of
history.  Men may forget it in piping times of peace.  God grant that
in the dark hour of adversity, God may always raise up to them a
prophet, like good old Salvian, to preach to them once again the
everlasting judgments of God; and teach them that not faulty
constitutions, faulty laws, faulty circumstances of any kind, but the
faults of their own hearts and lives, are the causes of their misery.

M. Guizot, in his elaborate work on the History of Civilization in
France, has a few curious pages, on the causes of the decline of
civil society in Roman Gaul, and its consequent weakness and ruin.
He tells you how the Senators or Clarissimi did not constitute a true
aristocracy, able to lead and protect the people, being at the mercy
of the Emperor, and nominated and removed at his pleasure.  How the
Curiales, or wealthy middle class, who were bound by law to fulfil
all the municipal offices, and were responsible for the collection of
the revenue, found their responsibilities so great, that they by
every trick in their power, avoided office.  How, as M. Guizot well
puts it, the central despotism of Rome stript the Curiales of all
they earned, to pay its own functionaries and soldiers; and gave them
the power of appointing magistrates, who were only after all the
imperial agents of that despotism, for whose sake they robbed their
fellow-citizens.  How the plebs, comprising the small tradesmen and
free artizans, were utterly unable to assert their own opinions or
rights.  How the slave population, though their condition was much
improved, constituted a mere dead weight of helpless brutality.

And then he says, that the Roman Empire was dying.  Very true:  but
often as he quotes Salvian, he omits always to tell us what Roman
society was dying of.  Salvian says, that it was dying of vice.  Not
of bad laws and class arrangements, but of bad men.  M. Guizot
belongs to a school which is apt to impute human happiness and
prosperity too exclusively to the political constitution under which
they may happen to live, irrespectively of the morality of the people
themselves.  From that, the constitutionalist school, there has been
of late a strong reaction, the highest exponent, nay the very
coryphaeus of which is Mr. Carlyle.  He undervalues, even despises,
the influence of laws and constitutions:  with him private virtue,
from which springs public virtue, is the first and sole cause of
national prosperity.  My inaugural lecture has told you how deeply I
sympathize with his view--taking my stand, as Mr. Carlyle does, on
the Hebrew prophets.

There is, nevertheless, a side of truth in the constitutionalist
view, which Mr. Carlyle, I think, overlooks.  A bad political
constitution does produce poverty and weakness:  but only in as far
as it tends to produce moral evil; to make men bad.  That it can help
to do.  It can put a premium on vice, on falsehood, on peculation, on
laziness, on ignorance; and thus tempt the mass to moral degradation,
from the premier to the slave.  Russia has been, for two centuries
now but too patent a proof of the truth of this assertion.  But even
in this case, the moral element is the most important, and just the
one which is overlooked.  To have good laws, M. Guizot is apt to
forget, you must first have good men to make them; and second, you
must have good men to carry them out, after they are made.  Bad men
can abuse the best of laws, the best of constitutions.  Look at the
working of our parliaments during the reigns of William III and Anne,
and see how powerless good constitutions are, when the men who work
them are false and venal.  Look, on the other hand, at the Roman
Empire from the time of Vespasian to that of the Antonines, and see
how well even a bad constitution will succeed, when good men are
working it.

Bad laws, I say, will work tolerably under good men, if fitted to the
existing circumstances by men of the world, as all Roman laws were.
If they had not been such, how was the Roman Empire, at least in its
first years, a blessing to the safety, prosperity, and wealth of
every country it enslaved?  But when defective Roman laws began to be
worked by bad men, and that for 200 years, then indeed came times of
evil.  Let us take, then, Salvian's own account of the cause of Roman
decay.  He, an eye-witness, imputes it all to the morals of Roman
citizens.  They were, according to him, of the very worst.  To the
general dissoluteness he attributes, in plain words, the success of
the Frank and Gothic invaders.  And the facts which he gives, and
which there is no reason to doubt, are quite enough to prove him in
the right.  Every great man's house, he says, was a sink of
profligacy.  The women slaves were at the mercy of their master; and
the slaves copied his morals among themselves.  It is an ugly
picture:  but common sense will tell us, if we but think a little,
that such will, and must, be the case in slave-holding countries,
wherever Christianity is not present in its purest and strongest
form, to control the passions of arbitrary power.

But there was not merely profligacy among these Gauls.  That alone
would not have wrought their immediate ruin.  Morals were bad enough
in old Greece and Rome; as they were afterwards among the Turks:
nevertheless as long as a race is strong; as long as there is
prudence, energy, deep national feeling, outraged virtue does not
avenge itself at once by general ruin.  But it avenges itself at
last, as Salvian shews--as all experience shews.  As in individuals
so in nations, unbridled indulgence of the passions must produce, and
does produce, frivolity, effeminacy, slavery to the appetite of the
moment, a brutalized and reckless temper, before which, prudence,
energy, national feeling, any and every feeling which is not centered
in self, perishes utterly.  The old French noblesse gave a proof of
this law, which will last as a warning beacon to the end of time.
The Spanish population of America, I am told, gives now a fearful
proof of this same terrible penalty.  Has not Italy proved it
likewise, for centuries past?  It must be so, gentlemen.  For
national life is grounded on, is the development of, the life of the
family.  And where the root is corrupt, the tree must be corrupt
likewise.  It must be so.  For Asmodeus does not walk alone.  In his
train follow impatience and disappointment, suspicion and jealousy,
rage and cruelty, and all the passions which set man's hand against
his fellow-man.  It must be so.  For profligacy is selfishness; and
the family, and the society, the nation, exists only by casting away
selfishness and by obeying law:- not only the outward law, which says
in the name of God, 'Thou shalt not,' but the inward law, the Law of
Christ, which says, 'Thou must;' the law of self-sacrifice, which
selfish lust tramples under foot, till there is no more cohesion left
between man and man, no more trust, no more fellow-help, than between
the stags who fight for the hinds; and God help the nation which has
brought itself to that!

No wonder, therefore, if Salvian's accounts of Gaulish profligacy be
true, that Gaulish recklessness reached at last a pitch all but
incredible.  It is credible, however shocking, that as he says, he
himself saw, both at Treves, and another great city (probably
Cologne, Colonia Agrippina, or 'The Colony' par excellence) while the
destruction of the state was imminent, 'old men of rank, decrepit
Christians, slaves to gluttony and lust, rabid with clamour, furious
with bacchanalian orgies.'  It is credible, however shocking, that
all through Gaul the captivity was 'foreseen, yet never dreaded.'
And 'so when the barbarians had encamped almost in sight, there was
no terror among the people, no care of the cities.  All was possest
by carelessness and sloth, gluttony, drunkenness, sleep, according to
that which the prophet saith:  A sleep from the Lord had come over
them.'  It is credible, however shocking, that though Treves was four
times taken by the barbarians, it remained just as reckless as ever;
and that--I quote Salvian still--when the population was half
destroyed by fire and sword, the poor dying of famine, corpses of men
and women lying about the streets breeding pestilence, while the dogs
devoured them, the few nobles who were left comforted themselves by
sending to the Emperor to beg for Circensian games.

Those Circensian games, and indeed all the public spectacles, are
fresh proofs of what I said just now; that if a bad people earn bad
government, still a bad government makes a bad people.

They were the most extraordinary instance which the world ever saw,
of a government setting to work at a vast expense to debauch its
subjects.  Whether the Roman rulers set that purpose consciously
before them, one dare not affirm.  Their notion probably was (for
they were as worldly wise as they were unprincipled) that the more
frivolous and sensual the people were, the more quietly they would
submit to slavery; and the best way to keep them frivolous and
sensual, the Romans knew full well; so well, that after the Empire
became Christian, and many heathen matters were done away with, they
did not find it safe to do away with the public spectacles.  The
temples of the Gods might go:  but not the pantomimes.

In one respect, indeed, these government spectacles became worse, not
better, under Christianity.  They were less cruel, no doubt:  but
also they were less beautiful.  The old custom of exhibiting
representations of the old Greek myths, which had something of grace
and poetry about them, and would carry back the spectators' thoughts
to the nobler and purer heroic ages, disappeared before Christianity;
but the old vice did not.  That was left; and no longer ennobled by
the old heroic myths round which it had clustered itself, was simply
of the silliest and most vulgar kind.  We know in detail the
abominations, as shameless and ridiculous, which went on a century
after Salvian, in the theatres of Constantinople, under the eyes of
the most Christian Emperor Justinian, and which won for that most
infamous woman, Theodora, a share in his imperial crown, and the
right to dictate doctrine to the Christian Bishops of the East, and
to condemn the soul of Origen to everlasting damnation, for having
exprest hopes of the final pardon of sinners.  We can well believe,
therefore, Salvian's complaints of the wickedness of those pantomimes
of which he says, that 'honeste non possunt vel accusari;' he cannot
even accuse them without saying what he is ashamed to say; I believe
also his assertion, that they would not let people be modest, even if
they wished; that they inflamed the passions, and debauched the
imaginations of young and old, man and woman, and--but I am not here
to argue that sin is sin, or that the population of London would be
the worse if the most shameless persons among them were put by the
Government in possession of Drury Lane and Covent Garden; and that,
and nothing less than that, did the Roman pantomimes mean, from the
days of Juvenal till those of the most holy and orthodox Empress
Theodora.

'Who, knowing the judgment of God, that they who do such things are
worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that
do them.'

Now in contrast to all these abominations, old Salvian sets, boldly
and honestly, the superior morality of the barbarians.  That, he
says, is the cause of their strength and our weakness.  We,
professing orthodoxy, are profligate hypocrites.  They, half
heathens, half Arians, are honester men, purer men than we.  There is
no use, he says, in despising the Goths as heretics, while they are
better men than we.  They are better Christians than the Romans,
because they are better men.  They pray to God for success, and trust
in him, and we presumptuously trust in ourselves.  We swear by
Christ:  but what do we do but blaspheme him, when we swear 'Per
Christum tollo eum,' 'I will make away with him,' 'Per Christum hunc
jugulo,' 'I will cut his throat,' and then believe ourselves bound to
commit the murder which we have vowed? . . . 'The Saxons,' he says,
'are fierce, the Franks faithless, the Gepidae inhuman, the Huns
shameless.  But is the Frank's perfidy as blameable as ours?  Is the
Alman's drunkenness, or the Alan's rapacity, as damnable as a
Christian's?  If a Hun or a Gepid deceives you, what wonder?  He is
utterly ignorant that there is any sin in falsehood.  But what of the
Christian who does the same?  The Barbarians,' he says, 'are better
men than the Christians.  The Goths,' he says, 'are perfidious, but
chaste.  The Alans unchaste, but less perfidious.  The Franks are
liars, but hospitable; the Saxons ferociously cruel, but venerable
for their chastity.  The Visigoths who conquered Spain,' he says,
'were the most "ignavi" (heavy, I presume he means, and loutish) of
all the barbarians:  but they were chaste, and therefore they
conquered.'

In Africa, if we are to believe Salvian, things stood even worse, at
the time of the invasion of the Vandals.  In his violent invectives
against the Africans, however, allowance must be made.  Salvian was a
great lover of monks; and the Africans used, he says, to detest them,
and mob them wherever they appeared; for which offence, of course, he
can find no words too strong.  St. Augustine, however, himself a
countryman of theirs, who died, happily, just before the storm burst
on that hapless land, speaks bitterly of their exceeding profligacy--
of which he himself in his wild youth, had had but too sad
experience.  Salvian's assertion is, that the Africans were the most
profligate of all the Romans; and that while each barbarian tribe had
(as we have just seen) some good in them, the Africans had none.

But there were noble souls left among them, lights which shone all
the more brightly in the surrounding darkness.  In the pages of
Victor Vitensis, which tell the sad story of the persecution of the
African Catholics by the Arian Vandals, you will find many a moving
tale which shews that God had his own, even among those degraded
Carthaginians.

The causes of the Arian hatred to the Catholics is very obscure.  You
will find all that is known in Dean Milman's History of Latin
Christianity.  A simple explanation may be found in the fact that the
Catholics considered the Arians, and did not conceal their opinion,
as all literally and actually doomed to the torments of everlasting
fire; and that, as Gibbon puts it, 'The heroes of the north, who had
submitted with some reluctance, to believe that all their ancestors
were in hell, were astonished and exasperated to learn, that they
themselves had only changed the mode of their eternal condemnation.'
The Teutons were (Salvian himself confesses it) trying to serve God
devoutly, in chastity, sobriety, and honesty, according to their
light.  And they were told by the profligates of Africa, that this
and no less, was their doom.  It is not to be wondered at, again, if
they mistook the Catholic creed for the cause of Catholic immorality.
That may account for the Vandal custom of re-baptizing the Catholics.
It certainly accounts for the fact (if after all it be a fact) which
Victor states, that they tortured the nuns to extort from them
shameful confessions against the priests.  But the history of the
African persecution is the history of all persecutions, as confest
again and again by the old fathers, as proved by the analogies of
later times.  The sins of the Church draw down punishment, by making
her enemies confound her doctrine and her practice.  But in return,
the punishment of the Church purifies her, and brings out her
nobleness afresh, as the snake casts his skin in pain, and comes out
young and fair once more; and in every dark hour of the Church, there
flashes out some bright form of human heroism, to be a beacon and a
comfort to all future time.  Victor, for instance, tells the story of
Dionysia, the beautiful widow whom the Vandals tried to torture into
denying the Divinity of our Lord.--How when they saw that she was
bolder and fairer than all the other matrons, they seized her, and
went to strip her:  and she cried to them, 'Qualiter libet occidite:
verecunda tamen membra nolite nudare,' but in vain.  They hung her up
by the hands, and scourged her till streams of blood ran down every
limb.  Her only son, a delicate boy, stood by trembling, knowing that
his turn would come next; and she saw it, and called to him in the
midst of her shame and agony.  'He had been baptized into the name of
the Blessed Trinity; let him die in that name, and not lose the
wedding-garment.  Let him fear the pain that never ends, and cling to
the life that endures for ever.'  The boy took heart, and when his
turn came, died under the torture; and Dionysia took up the little
corpse, and buried it in her own house; and worshipped upon her boy's
grave to her dying day.

Yes.  God had his own left, even among those fallen Africans of
Carthage.

But neither there, nor in Spain, could the Vandals cure the evil.
'Now-a-days,' says Salvian, 'there are no profligates among the
Goths, save Romans; none among the Vandals, save Romans.  Blush,
Roman people, everywhere, blush for your morals.  There is hardly a
city free from dens of sin, and none at all from impurity, save those
which the barbarians have begun to occupy.  And do we wonder if we
are surpassed in power, by an enemy who surpasses us in decency?  It
is not the natural strength of their bodies which makes them conquer
us.  We have been conquered only by the vices of our own morals.'

Yes.  Salvian was right.  Those last words were no mere outburst of
national vanity, content to confess every sin, save that of being
cowards.  He was right.  It was not the mere muscle of the Teuton
which enabled him to crush the decrepit and debauched slave-nations,
Gaul and Briton, Iberian and African, as the ox crushes the frogs of
the marsh.  The 'sera juvenum Venus, ideoque inexhausta pubertas,'
had given him more than his lofty stature, and his mighty limbs.  Had
he had nought but them, he might have remained to the end a blind
Samson, grinding among the slaves in Caesar's mill, butchered to make
a Roman holiday.  But it had given him more, that purity of his; it
had given him, as it may give you, gentlemen, a calm and steady
brain, and a free and loyal heart; the energy which springs from
health; the self-respect which comes from self-restraint; and the
spirit which shrinks from neither God nor man, and feels it light to
die for wife and child, for people, and for Queen.



PREFACE TO LECTURE III.--ON DR. LATHAM'S 'GERMANIA.'



If I have followed in these lectures the better known and more widely
received etymology of the name Goth, I have done so out of no
disrespect to Dr. Latham; but simply because his theory seems to me
adhuc sub judice.  It is this, as far as I understand it.  That
'Goth' was not the aboriginal name of the race.  That they were
probably not so called till they came into the land of the Getae,
about the mouths of the Danube.  That the Teutonic name for the
Ostrogoths was Grutungs, and that of the Visigoths (which he does not
consider to mean West-Goths) Thervings, Thuringer.  That on reaching
the land of the Getae they took their name; 'just as the Kentings of
Anglo-Saxon England took name from the Keltic country of Kent;' and
that the names Goth, Gothones, Gothini were originally given to
Lithuanians by their Sclavonic neighbours.  I merely state the
theory, and leave it for the judgment of others.

The principal points which Dr. Latham considers himself to have
established, are -

That the area and population of the Teutonic tribes have been, on the
authority of Tacitus, much overrated; many tribes hitherto supposed
to be Teutonic being really Sclavonic, &c.

This need not shock our pride, if proved--as it seems to me to be.
The nations who have influenced the world's destiny have not been
great, in the modern American sense of 'big;' but great in heart, as
our forefathers were.  The Greeks were but a handful at Salamis; so
were the Romans of the Republic; so were the Spaniards of America;
so, probably, were the Aztecs and Incas whom they overthrew; and
surely our own conquerors and re-conquerers of Hindostan have shewn
enough that it is not numbers, but soul, which gives a race the power
to rule.

Neither need we object to Dr. Latham's opinion, that more than one of
the tribes which took part in the destruction of the Empire were not
aboriginal Germans, but Sclavonians Germanized, and under German
leaders.  It may be so.  The custom of enslaving captives would
render pure Teutonic blood among the lower classes of a tribe the
exception and not the rule; while the custom of chiefs choosing the
'thegns,' 'gesitha,' or 'comites,' who lived and died as their
companions-in-arms, from among the most valiant of the unfree, would
tend to produce a mixed blood in the upper classes also, and
gradually assimilate the whole mass to the manners and laws of their
Teutonic lords.  Only by some such actual superiority of the upper
classes to the lower can I explain the deep respect for rank and
blood, which distinguishes, and will perhaps always distinguish, the
Teutonic peoples.  Had there even been anything like a primaeval
equality among our race, a hereditary aristocracy could never have
arisen, or if arising for a while, never could have remained as a
fact which all believed in, from the lowest to the highest.  Just, or
unjust, the institution represented, I verily believe, an
ethnological fact.  The golden-haired hero said to his brown-haired
bondsman, 'I am a gentleman, who have a "gens," a stamm, a pedigree,
and know from whom I am sprung.  I am a Garding, an Amalung, a
Scylding, an Osing, or what not.  I am a son of the gods.  The blood
of the Asas is in my veins.  Do you not see it?  Am I not wiser,
stronger, more virtuous, more beautiful than you?  You must obey me,
and be my man, and follow me to the death.  Then, if you prove a
worthy thane, I will give you horse, weapons, bracelets, lands; and
marry you, it may be, to my daughter or my niece.  And if not, you
must remain a son of the earth, grubbing in the dust of which you
were made.'  And the bondsman believed him; and became his lord's
man, and followed him to the death; and was thereby not degraded, but
raised out of selfish savagery and brute independence into loyalty,
usefulness, and self-respect.  As a fact, that is the method by which
the thing was done:  done;--very ill indeed, as most human things are
done; but a method inevitable--and possibly right; till (as in
England now) the lower classes became ethnologically identical with
the upper, and equality became possible in law, simply because it
existed in fact.

But the part of Dr. Latham's 'Germania' to which I am bound to call
most attention, because I have not followed it, is that interesting
part of the Prolegomena, in which he combats the generally received
theory, that, between the time of Tacitus and that of Charlemagne,
vast masses of Germans had migrated southward from between the Elbe
and the Vistula; and that they had been replaced by the Sclavonians
who certainly were there in Charlemagne's days.

Dr. Latham argues against this theory with a great variety of facts
and reasons.  But has he not overstated his case on some points?

Need the migrations necessary for this theory have been of
'unparalleled magnitude and rapidity'?

As for the 'unparalleled completeness' on which he lays much stress,
from the fact that no remnants of Teutonic population are found in
the countries evacuated:

Is it the fact that 'history only tells us of German armies having
advanced south'?  Do we not find four famous cases--the irruption of
the Cimbri and Teutons into Italy; the passage of the Danube by the
Visigoths; and the invasions of Italy first by the Ostrogoths, then
by the Lombards--in which the nations came with men, women, and
children, horses, cattle, and dogs, bag and baggage?  May not this
have been the custom of the race, with its strong feeling for the
family tie; and may not this account for no traces of them being left
behind?

Does not Dr. Latham's theory proceed too much on an assumption that
the Sclavonians dispossest the Teutons by force?  And is not this
assumption his ground for objecting that the movement was effected
improbably 'by that division of the European population (the
Sclavonic and Lithuanian) which has, within the historic period,
receded before the Germanic'?

Are these migrations, though 'unrepresented in any history' (i.e.
contemporaneous), really 'unrepresented in any tradition'?  Do not
the traditions of Jornandes and Paulus Diaconus, that the Goths and
the Lombards came from Scandinavia, represent this very fact?--and
are they to be set aside as naught?  Surely not.  Myths of this kind
generally embody a nucleus of truth, and must be regarded with
respect; for they often, after all arguments about them are spent,
are found to contain the very pith of the matter.

Are the 'phenomena of replacement and substitution' so very strange--
I will not say upon the popular theory, but at least on one half-way
between it and Dr. Latham's?  Namely -

That the Teutonic races came originally, as some of them say they
did, from Scandinavia, Denmark, the South Baltic, &c.

That they forced their way down, wave after wave, on what would have
been the line of least resistance--the Marches between the Gauls,
Romanized or otherwise, and the Sclavonians.  And that the Alps and
the solid front of the Roman Empire turned them to the East, till
their vanguard found itself on the Danube.

This would agree with Dr. Latham's most valuable hint, that Markmen,
'Men of the Marches,' was perhaps the name of many German tribes
successively.

That they fought, as they went, with the Sclavonian and other tribes
(as their traditions seem to report), and rolled them back to the
eastward; and that as each Teutonic tribe past down the line, the
Sclavonians rolled back again, till the last column was past.

That the Teutons also carried down with them, as slaves or allies, a
portion of this old Sclavonic population (to which Dr. Latham will
perhaps agree); and that this fact caused a hiatus, which was
gradually filled by tribes who after all were little better than
nomad hunters, and would occupy (quite nominally) a very large tract
with a small population.

Would not this theory agree at once tolerably with the old traditions
and with Dr. Latham's new facts?

The question still remains--which is the question of all.  What put
these Germanic peoples on going South?  Were there no causes
sufficient to excite so desperate a resolve?

(1)  Did they all go?  Is not Paulus Diaconus' story that one-third
of the Lombards was to emigrate by lot, and two-thirds remain at
home, a rough type of what generally happened--what happens now in
our modern emigrations?  Was not the surplus population driven off by
famine toward warmer and more hopeful climes?

(2)  Are not the Teutonic populations of England, North Germany, and
the Baltic, the descendants, much intermixed, and with dialects much
changed, of the portions which were left behind?  This is the
opinion, I believe, of several great ethnologists.  Is it not true?
If philological objections are raised to this, I ask (but in all
humility), Did not these southward migrations commence long before
the time of Tacitus?  If so, may they not have commenced before the
different Teutonic dialects were as distinct as they were in the
historic period?  And are we to suppose that the dialects did not
alter during the long journeyings through many nations?  Is it
possible that the Thervings and Grutungs could have retained the same
tongue on the Danube, as their forefathers spoke in their native
land?  Would not the Moeso-Gothic of Ulfilas have been all but
unintelligible to the Goth who, upon the old theory, remained in
Gothland of Sweden?

(3)  But were there not more causes than mere want, which sent them
south?  Had the peculiar restlessness of the race nothing to do with
it?  A restlessness not nomadic, but migratory:  arising not from
carelessness of land and home, but from the longing to found a home
in a new land, like the restlessness of us, their children?  As soon
as we meet them in historic times, they are always moving, migrating,
invading.  Were they not doing the same in pre-historic times, by
fits and starts, no doubt with periods of excitement, periods of
collapse and rest?  When we recollect the invasion of the Normans;
the wholesale eastward migration of the Crusaders, men, women, and
children; and the later colonization by Teutonic peoples, of every
quarter of the globe, is there anything wonderful in the belief that
similar migratory manias may have seized the old tribes; that the
spirit of Woden, 'the mover,' may have moved them, and forced them to
go ahead, as now?  Doubtless the theory is strange.  But the Teutons
were and are a strange people; so strange, that they have conquered--
one may almost say that they are--all nations which are alive upon
the globe; and we may therefore expect them to have done strange
things even in their infancy.

The Romans saw them conquer the empire; and said, the good men among
them, that it was on account of their superior virtue.  But beside
the virtue which made them succeed, there must have been the
adventurousness which made them attempt.  They were a people fond of
'avanturen,' like their descendants; and they went out to seek them;
and found enough and to spare.

(4)  But more, had they never heard of Rome?  Surely they had, and at
a very early period of the empire.  We are apt to forget, that for
every discovery of the Germans by the Romans, there was a similar
discovery of the Romans by the Germans, and one which would tell
powerfully on their childish imagination.  Did not one single Kemper
or Teuton return from Marius' slaughter, to spread among the tribes
(niddering though he may have been called for coming back alive) the
fair land which they had found, fit for the gods of Valhalla; the
land of sunshine, fruits and wine, wherein his brothers' and sisters'
bones were bleaching unavenged?  Did no gay Gaul of the Legion of the
Lark, boast in a frontier wine-house to a German trapper, who came in
to sell his peltry, how he himself was a gentleman now, and a
civilized man, and a Roman; and how he had followed Julius Caesar,
the king of men, over the Rubicon, and on to a city of the like of
which man never dreamed, wherein was room for all the gods of heaven?
Did no captive tribune of Varus' legions, led with horrid shouts
round Thor's altar in the Teutoburger Wald, ere his corpse was hung
among the horses and goats on the primaeval oaks, turn to bay like a
Roman, and tell his wild captors of the Eternal City, and of the
might of that Caesar who would avenge every hair upon his head with a
German life; and receive for answer a shout of laughter, and the cry-
-'You have come to us:  and some day we will go to you?'  Did no
commissary, bargaining with a German for cattle to be sent over the
frontier by such a day of the week, and teaching him to mistranslate
into those names of Thor, Woden, Freya, and so forth, which they now
carry, the Jewish-Assyrian-Roman days of the se'nnight, amuse the
simple forester by telling him how the streets of Rome were paved
with gold, and no one had anything to do there but to eat and bathe
at the public expense, and to go to the theatre, and see 20,000
gladiators fight at once?  Did no German 'Regulus,' alderman, or
king, enter Rome on an embassy, and come back with uplifted eyes and
hands, declaring that he had seen things unspeakable--a 'very fine
plunder,' as Blucher said of London; and that if it were not for the
walls, they might get it all; for not only the ladies, but the
noblemen, went about in litters of silver and gold, and wore gauze
dresses, the shameless wretches, through which you might see every
limb, so that as for killing them, there was no more fear of them
than of a flock of sheep:  but that he did not see as well as he
could have wished how to enter the great city, for he was more or
less the worse for liquor the whole time, with wondrous stuff which
they called wine?  Or did no captive, escaped by miracle from the
butcheries of the amphitheatre, return to tell his countrymen how all
the rest had died like German men; and call on them to rise and
avenge their brothers' blood?  Yes, surely the Teutons knew well,
even in the time of Tacitus, of the 'micklegard,' the great city and
all its glory.  Every fresh tribe who passed along the frontier of
Gaul or of Noricum would hear more and more of it, see more and more
men who had actually been there.  If the glory of the city exercised
on its own inhabitants an intoxicating influence, as of a place
omnipotent, superhuman, divine--it would exercise (exaggerated as it
would be) a still stronger influence on the barbarians outside:  and
what wonder if they pressed southwards at first in the hope of taking
the mighty city; and afterwards, as her real strength became more
known, of at least seizing some of those colonial cities, which were
as superhuman in their eyes as Rome itself would have been?  In the
crusades, the children, whenever they came to a great town, asked
their parents if that was not Jerusalem.  And so, it may be, many a
gallant young Teuton, on entering for the first time such a city as
Cologne, Lyons, or Vienna, whispered half trembling to his lord--
'Surely this must be Rome.'

Some such arguments as these might surely be brought in favour of a
greater migration than Dr. Latham is inclined to allow:  but I must
leave the question for men of deeper research and wider learning,
than I possess.



LECTURE III.--THE HUMAN DELUGE



'I have taken in hand,' said Sir Francis Drake once to the crew of
the immortal Pelican, 'that which I know not how to accomplish.  Yea,
it hath even bereaved me of my wits to think of it.'

And so I must say on the subject of this lecture.  I wish to give you
some notion of the history of Italy for nearly one hundred years; say
from 400 to 500.  But it is very difficult.  How can a man draw a
picture of that which has no shape; or tell the order of absolute
disorder?  It is all a horrible 'fourmillement des nations,' like the
working of an ant-heap; like the insects devouring each other in a
drop of water.  Teuton tribes, Sclavonic tribes, Tartar tribes, Roman
generals, empresses, bishops, courtiers, adventurers, appear for a
moment out of the crowd, dim phantoms--nothing more, most of them--
with a name appended, and then vanish, proving their humanity only by
leaving behind them one more stain of blood.

And what became of the masses all the while? of the men, slaves the
greater part of them, if not all, who tilled the soil, and ground the
corn--for man must have eaten, then as now?  We have no hint.  One
trusts that God had mercy on them, if not in this world, still in the
world to come.  Man, at least, had none.

Taking one's stand at Rome, and looking toward the north, what does
one see for nearly one hundred years?  Wave after wave rising out of
the north, the land of night, and wonder, and the terrible unknown;
visible only as the light of Roman civilization strikes their crests,
and they dash against the Alps, and roll over through the mountain
passes, into the fertile plains below.  Then at last they are seen
but too well; and you discover that the waves are living men, women,
and children, horses, dogs, and cattle, all rushing headlong into
that great whirlpool of Italy:  and yet the gulf is never full.  The
earth drinks up the blood; the bones decay into the fruitful soil;
the very names and memories of whole tribes are washed away.  And the
result of an immigration which may be counted by hundreds of
thousands is this--that all the land is waste.

The best authorities which I can give you (though you will find many
more in Gibbon) are--for the main story, Jornandes, De Rebus Geticis.
Himself a Goth, he wrote the history of his race, and that of Attila
and his Huns, in good rugged Latin, not without force and sense.

Then Claudian, the poet, a bombastic panegyrist of contemporary Roman
scoundrels; but full of curious facts, if one could only depend on
them.

Then the earlier books of Procopius De Bello Gothico, and the
Chronicle of Zosimus.

Salvian, Ennodius and Sidonius Apollinaris, as Christians, will give
you curious details, especially as to South France and North Italy;
while many particulars of the first sack of Rome, with comments
thereon which express the highest intellects of that day, you will
find in St. Jerome's Letters, and St. Augustine's City of God.

But if you want these dreadful times EXPLAINED to you, I do not think
you can do better than to take your Bibles, and to read the
Revelations of St. John the Apostle.  I shall quote them, more than
once, in this lecture.  I cannot help quoting them.  The words come
naturally to my lips, as fitter to the facts than any words of my
own.

I do not come here to interpret the Book of Revelations.  I do not
understand that book.  But I do say plainly, though I cannot
interpret the book, that the book has interpreted those times to me.
Its awful metaphors give me more living and accurate pictures of what
went on than any that Gibbon's faithful details can give.

You may see, if you have spiritual eyes wherewith to see, the Dragon,
the serpent, symbol of political craft and the devilish wisdom of the
Roman, giving authority to the Beast, the symbol of brute power; to
mongrel AEtiuses and Bonifaces, barbarian Stilichos, Ricimers and
Aspars, and a host of similar adventurers, whose only strength was
force.

You may see the world wondering after the beast, and worshipping
brute force, as the only thing left to believe in.

You may see the nations of the world gnawing their tongues for pain,
and blaspheming God, but not repenting of their deeds.

You may see the faith and patience of the saints--men like Augustine,
Salvian, Epiphanius, Severinus, Deogratias of Carthage, and a host
more, no doubt, whose names the world will never hear--the salt of
the earth, which kept it all from rotting.

You may see Babylon the great fallen, and all the kings and merchants
of the earth bewailing her afar off, and watching the smoke of her
torment.

You may see, as St. John warns you, that--after her fall, mind--if
men would go on worshipping the beast, and much more his image--the
phantom and shadow of brute force, after the reality had passed away-
-they should drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and be tormented
for ever.  For you may see how those degenerate Romans did go on
worshipping the shadow of brute force, and how they were tormented
for ever; and had no rest day or night, because they worshipped the
Beast and his image.

You may see all the fowl of the heavens flocking together to the
feast of the great God, to eat the flesh of kings and captains, horse
and rider, bond and free.--All carrion-birds, human as well as brute-
-All greedy villains and adventurers, the scoundreldom of the whole
world, flocking in to get their share of the carcass of the dying
empire; as the vulture and the raven flock in to the carrion when the
royal eagles have gorged their fill.

And lastly, you may see, if God give you grace, One who is faithful
and true, with a name which no man knew, save Himself, making war in
righteousness against all evil; bringing order out of disorder, hope
out of despair, fresh health and life out of old disease and death;
executing just judgment among all the nations of the earth; and
sending down from heaven the city of God, in the light of which the
nations of those who are saved should walk, and the kings of the
earth should bring their power and their glory into it; with the tree
of life in the midst of it, whose leaves should be for the healing of
the nations.

Again, I say, I am not here to interpret the Book of Revelations; but
this I say, that that book interprets those times to me.

Leaving, for the present at least, to better historians than myself
the general subject of the Teutonic immigrations; the conquest of
North Gaul by the Franks, of Britain by the Saxons and Angles, of
Burgundy by the Burgundians, of Africa by the Vandals, I shall speak
rather of those Teutonic tribes which actually entered and conquered
Italy; and first, of course, of the Goths.  Especially interesting to
us English should their fortunes be, for they are said to be very
near of kin to us; at least to those Jutes who conquered Kent.  As
Goths, Geats, Getae, Juts, antiquarians find them in early and
altogether mythic times, in the Scandinavian peninsula, and the isles
and mainland of Denmark.

Their name, it is said, is the same as one name for the Supreme
Being.  Goth, Guth, Yuth, signifies war.  'God' is the highest
warrior, the Lord of hosts, and the progenitor of the race, whether
as an 'Eponym hero' or as the supreme Deity.  Physical force was
their rude notion of Divine power, and Tiu, Tiv, or Tyr, in like
manner, who was originally the god of the clear sky, the Zeus or Jove
of the Greeks and Romans, became by virtue of his warlike character,
identical with the Roman Mars, till the dies Martis of the Roman week
became the German Tuesday.

Working their way down from Gothland and Jutland, we know not why nor
when, thrusting aside the cognate Burgunds, and the Sclavonic tribes
whom they met on the road, they had spread themselves, in the third
century, over the whole South of Russia, and westward over the
Danubian Provinces, and Hungary.  The Ostrogoths (East-goths) lay
from the Volga to the Borysthenes, the Visigoths (West-goths?) from
the Borysthenes to the Theiss.  Behind them lay the Gepidae, a German
tribe, who had come south-eastward with them, and whose name is said
to signify the men who had 'bided' (remained) behind the rest.

What manner of men they were it is hard to say, so few details are
left to us.  But we may conceive them as a tall, fair-haired people,
clothed in shirts and smocks of embroidered linen, and gaiters cross-
strapped with hide; their arms and necks encircled with gold and
silver rings; the warriors, at least of the upper class, well horsed,
and armed with lance and heavy sword, with chain-mail, and helmets
surmounted with plumes, horns, towers, dragons, boars, and the other
strange devices which are still seen on the crests of German nobles.
This much we can guess; for in this way their ancestors, or at least
relations, the War-Geats, appear clothed in the grand old song of
Beowulf.  Their land must have been tilled principally by slaves,
usually captives taken in war:  but the noble mystery of the forge,
where arms and ornaments were made, was an honourable craft for men
of rank; and their ladies, as in the middle age, prided themselves on
their skill with the needle and the loom.  Their language has been
happily preserved to us in Ulfilas' Translation of the Scriptures.
For these Goths, the greater number of them at least, were by this
time Christians, or very nearly such.  Good Bishop Ulfilas, brought
up a Christian and consecrated by order of Constantine the Great, had
been labouring for years to convert his adopted countrymen from the
worship of Thor and Woden.  He had translated the Bible for them, and
had constructed a Gothic alphabet for that purpose.  He had omitted,
however (prudently as he considered) the books of Kings, with their
histories of the Jewish wars.  The Goths, he held, were only too fond
of fighting already, and 'needed in that matter the bit, rather than
the spur.'  He had now a large number of converts, some of whom had
even endured persecution from their heathen brethren.  Athanaric,
'judge,' or alderman of the Thervings, had sent through the camp--so
runs the story--the waggon which bore the idol of Woden, and had
burnt, with their tents and their families, those who refused to
worship.

They, like all other German tribes, were ruled over by two royal
races, sons of Woden and the Asas.  The Ostrogoth race was the
Amalungs--the 'heavenly,' or 'spotless' race; the Visigoth race was
the Balthungs--the 'bold' or 'valiant' race; and from these two
families, and from a few others, but all believed to be lineally
descended from Woden, and now much intermixed, are derived all the
old royal families of Europe, that of the House of Brunswick among
the rest.

That they were no savages, is shewn sufficiently by their names, at
least those of their chiefs.  Such names as Alaric, 'all rich' or
'all powerful,' Ataulf, 'the helping father,' Fridigern, 'the willing
peace-maker,' and so forth--all the names in fact, which can be put
back into their native form out of their Romanized distortions, are
tokens of a people far removed from that barbarous state in which men
are named after personal peculiarities, natural objects, or the
beasts of the field.  On this subject you may consult, as full of
interest and instruction, the list of Teutonic names given in
Muratori.

They had broken over the Roman frontier more than once, and taken
cities.  They had compelled the Emperor Gratian to buy them off.
They had built themselves flat-bottomed boats without iron in them
and sailed from the Crimea round the shores of the Black Sea, once
and again, plundering Trebizond, and at last the temple itself of
Diana at Ephesus.  They had even penetrated into Greece and Athens,
plundered the Parthenon, and threatened the capitol.  They had fought
the Emperor Decius, till he, and many of his legionaries, were
drowned in a bog in the moment of victory.  They had been driven with
difficulty back across the Danube by Aurelian, and walled out of the
Empire with the Allemanni by Probus's 'Teufels-Mauer,' stretching
from the Danube to the Rhine.  Their time was not yet come by a
hundred years.  But they had seen and tasted the fine things of the
sunny south, and did not forget them amid the steppes and snows.

At last a sore need came upon them.  About 350 there was a great king
among them, Ermanaric, 'the powerful warrior,' comparable, says
Jornandes, to Alexander himself, who had conquered all the conquered
tribes around.  When he was past 100 years old, a chief of the
Roxolani (Ugrians, according to Dr. Latham; men of Ros, or Russia),
one of these tribes, plotted against him, and sent for help to the
new people, the Huns, who had just appeared on the confines of Europe
and Asia.  Old Ermanaric tore the traitor's wife to pieces with wild
horses:  but the Huns came nevertheless.  A magic hind, the Goths
said, guided the new people over the steppes to the land of the
Goths, and then vanished.  They fought with the Goths, and defeated
them.  Old Ermanaric stabbed himself for shame, and the hearts of the
Goths became as water before the tempest of nations.  They were
supernatural creatures, the Goths believed, engendered of witches and
demons on the steppes; pig-eyed hideous beings, with cakes instead of
faces, 'offam magis quam faciem,' under ratskin caps, armed with
arrows tipped with bone, and lassos of cord, eating, marketing,
sleeping on horseback, so grown into the saddle that they could
hardly walk in their huge boots.  With them were Acatzirs, painted
blue, hair as well as skin; Alans, wandering with their waggons like
the Huns, armed with heavy cuirasses of plaited horn, their horses
decked with human scalps; Geloni armed with a scythe, wrapt in a
cloak of human skin; Bulgars who impaled their prisoners--savages
innumerable as the locust swarms.  Who could stand against them?

In the year 375, the West Goths came down to the Danube-bank and
entreated the Romans to let them cross.  There was a Christian party
among them, persecuted by the heathens, and hoping for protection
from Rome.  Athanaric had vowed never to set foot on Roman soil, and
after defending himself against the Huns, retired into the forests of
'Caucaland.'  Good Bishop Ulfilas and his converts looked longingly
toward the Christian Empire.  Surely the Christians would receive
them as brothers, welcome them, help them.  The simple German fancied
a Roman even such a one as themselves.

Ulfilas went on embassy to Antioch, to Valens the Emperor.  Valens,
low-born, cruel, and covetous, was an Arian, and could not lose the
opportunity of making converts.  He sent theologians to meet Ulfilas,
and torment him into Arianism.  When he arrived, Valens tormented him
himself.  While the Goths starved he argued, apostasy was the
absolute condition of his help, till Ulfilas, in a weak moment, gave
his word that the Goths should become Arians, if Valens would give
them lands on the South bank of the Danube.  Then they would be the
Emperor's men, and guard the marches against all foes.  From that
time Arianism became the creed, not only of the Goths, but of the
Vandals, the Sueves, and almost all the Teutonic tribes.

It was (if the story be true) a sinful and foolish compact, forced
from a good man by the sight of his countrymen's extreme danger and
misery.  It avenged itself, soon enough, upon both Goths and Romans.

To the Goths themselves the change must have seemed not only
unimportant, but imperceptible.  Unaccustomed to that accuracy of
thought, which is too often sneered at by Gibbon as 'metaphysical
subtlety,' all of which they would have been aware was the change of
a few letters in a creed written in an unknown tongue.  They could
not know, (Ulfilas himself could not have known, only two years after
the death of St. Athanasius at Alexandria; while the Nicaean Creed
was as yet received by only half of the Empire; and while he
meanwhile had been toiling for years in the Danubian wilds, ignorant
perhaps of the controversy which had meanwhile convulsed the Church)-
-neither the Goths nor he, I say, could have known that the Arianism,
which they embraced, was really the last, and as it were apologetic,
refuge of dying Polytheism; that it, and not the Catholic Faith,
denied the abysmal unity of the Godhead; that by making the Son
inferior to the Father, as touching his Godhead, it invented two
Gods, a greater and a lesser, thus denying the absoluteness, the
infinity, the illimitability, by any category of quantity, of that
One Eternal, of whom it is written, that God is a Spirit.  Still less
could they have guessed that when Arius, the handsome popular
preacher (whose very name, perhaps, Ulfilas never heard) asked the
fine ladies of Alexandria--'Had you a son before that son was born?'-
-'No.'  'Then God could have no son before that son was begotten,
&c.'--that he was mingling up the idea of Time with the idea of that
Eternal God who created Time, and debasing to the accidents of before
and after that Timeless and Eternal Generation, of which it is
written, 'Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.'  Still
less could Ulfilas, or his Goths, have known, that the natural human
tendency to condition God by Time, would be, in later ages, even long
after Arianism was crushed utterly, the parent of many a cruel,
gross, and stupid superstition.  To them it would have been a mere
question whether Woden, the All-father, was superior to one of his
sons, the Asas:  and the Catholic faith probably seemed to them an
impious assumption of equality, on the part of one of those Asas,
with Woden himself.

Of the battle between Arianism and Orthodoxy I have said enough to
shew you that I think it an internecine battle between truth and
falsehood.  But it has been long ago judged by wager of battle:  by
the success of that duel of time, of which we must believe (as our
forefathers believed of all fair duels) that God defends the right.

So the Goths were to come over the Danube stream:  but they must give
up their arms, and deliver their children (those of rank, one
supposes), as hostages, to be educated by the Romans, as Romans.

They crossed the fatal river; they were whole days in crossing; those
set to count them gave it up in despair; Ammianus says:  'He who
wishes to know their number,'


   'Libyci velit aequoris idem
Discere quam multae Zephyro volvuntur arenae.'


And when they were across, they gave up the children.  They had not
the heart to give up the beloved weapons.  The Roman commissioners
let them keep the arms, at the price of many a Gothic woman's honour.
Ugly and foul things happened, of which we have only hints.  Then
they had to be fed for the time being, till they could cultivate
their land.  Lupicinus and Maximus, the two governors of Thrace
pocketed the funds which Valens sent, and starved the Goths.  The
markets were full of carrion and dogs' flesh.  Anything was good
enough for a barbarian.  Their fringed carpets, their beautiful
linens, all went.  A little wholesome meat cost 10 pounds of silver.
When all was gone, they had to sell their children.  To establish a
slave-trade in the beautiful boys and girls was just what the wicked
Romans wanted.

At last the end came.  They began to rise.  Fridigern, their king,
kept them quiet till the time was ripe for revenge.  The Romans,
trying to keep the West Goths down, got so confused, it seems, that
they let the whole nation of the East Goths (of whom we shall hear
more hereafter) dash across the Danube, and establish themselves in
the north of the present Turkey, to the east of the West Goths.

Then at Marcianopolis, the capital of Lower Moesia, Lupicinus asked
Fridigern and his chiefs to a feast.  The starving Goths outside were
refused supplies from the market, and came to blows with the guards.
Lupicinus, half drunk, heard of it, and gave orders for a massacre.
Fridigern escaped from the palace, sword in hand.  The smouldering
embers burst into flame, the war-cry was raised, and the villain
Lupicinus fled for his life.

Then began war south of the Danube.  The Roman legions were defeated
by the Goths, who armed themselves with the weapons of the dead.
Moesia was overrun with fire and sword.  Adrianople was attacked, but
in vain.  The slaves in the gold mines were freed from their misery,
and shewed the Goths the mountain-passes and the stores of grain.  As
they went on, the Goths recovered their children.  The poor things
told horrid tales; and the Goths, maddened, avenged themselves on the
Romans of every age and sex.  'They left,' says St. Jerome, 'nothing
alive--not even the beasts of the field; till nothing was left but
growing brambles and thick forests.'

Valens, the Emperor, was at Antioch.  Now he hurried to
Constantinople, but too late.  The East Goths had joined the West
Goths; and hordes of Huns, Alans, and Taifalae (detestable savages,
of whom we know nothing but evil) had joined Fridigern's confederacy.

Gratian, Valens' colleague and nephew, son of Valentinian the bear-
ward, had just won a great victory over the Allemanni at Colmar in
Alsace; and Valens was jealous of his glory.  He is said to have been
a virtuous youth, whose monomania was shooting.  He fell in love with
the wild Alans, in spite of their horse-trappings of scalps, simply
because of their skill in archery; formed a body-guard of them, and
passed his time hunting with them round Paris.  Nevertheless, he won
this great victory by the help, it seems, of one Count Ricimer
('ever-powerful'), Count of the Domestics, whose name proclaims him a
German.

Valens was jealous of Gratian's fame; he was stung by the reproaches
of the mob of Constantinople; and he undervalued the Goths, on
account of some successes of his lieutenants, who had recovered much
of the plunder taken by them, and had utterly overpowered the foul
Taifalae, transporting them to lands about Modena and Parma in Italy.
He rejected Count Ricimer's advice to wait till Gratian reinforced
him with the victorious western legions, and determined to give
battle a few miles from Adrianople.  Had he waited for Gratian, the
history of the whole world might have been different.

For on the ninth of August, A.D. 378, the fatal day, the second
Cannae, from which Rome never recovered as from that first, the young
world and the old world met, and fought it out; and the young world
won.  The light Roman cavalry fled before the long lances and heavy
swords of the German knights.  The knights turned on the infantry,
broke them, hunted them down by charge after charge, and left the
footmen to finish the work.

Two-thirds of the Roman army were destroyed; four Counts of the
Empire; generals and officers without number.  Valens fled wounded to
a cottage.  The Goths set it on fire, and burned him and his staff
therein, ignorant that they had in their hands the Emperor of Rome.
Verily there is a God who judgeth the earth.

So thought the Catholics of that day, who saw in the fearful death of
Valens a punishment for his having forced the Goths to become Arians.
'It was just,' says one, 'that he should burn on earth, by whose
counsels so many barbarians will burn in hell for ever.'  There are
(as I have shewn) still darker counts in the conduct of the Romans
toward the Goths; enough (if we believe our Bibles) to draw down on
the guilty the swift and terrible judgments of God.

At least, this was the second Cannae, the death-wound of Rome.  From
that day the end was certain, however slow.  The Teuton had at last
tried his strength against the Roman.  The wild forest-child had
found himself suddenly at death-grips with the Enchanter whom he had
feared, and almost worshipped, for so long; and behold, to his own
wonder, he was no more a child, but grown into a man, and the
stronger, if not the cunninger of the two.  There had been a spell
upon him; the 'Romani nominis umbra.'  But from that day the spell
was broken.  He had faced a Roman Emperor, a Divus Caesar, the man-
god by whose head all nations swore, rich with the magic wealth, wise
with the magic cunning, of centuries of superhuman glory; and he had
killed him, and behold he died, like other men.  That he had done.
What was there left for him now that he could not do?

The stronger he was, but not yet the cunninger of the two.  The Goths
could do no more.  They had to leave Adrianople behind them, with the
Emperor's treasures safe within its walls; to gaze with childish
wonder at the Bosphorus and its palaces; to recoil in awe from the
'long walls' of Constantinople, and the great stones which the
engines thereon hurled at them by 'arsmetricke and nigromancy,' as
their descendants believed of the Roman mechanicians, even five
hundred years after; to hear (without being able to avenge) the
horrible news, that the Gothic lads distributed throughout Asia, to
be educated as Romans, had been decoyed into the cities by promises
of lands and honours, and then massacred in cold blood; and then to
settle down, leaving their children unavenged, for twenty years on
the rich land which we now call Turkey in Europe, waiting till the
time was come.

Waiting, I say, till the time was come.  The fixed idea that Rome, if
not Constantinople, could be taken at last, probably never left the
minds of the leading Goths after the battle of Adrianople.  The
altered policy of the Caesars was enough of itself to keep that idea
alive.  So far from expelling them from the country which they had
seized, the new Emperor began to flatter and to honour them.

They had been heretofore regarded as savages, either to be driven
back by main force, or tempted to enlist in the Roman ranks.
Theodosius regarded them as a nati