e is false,--it is impalpable,--
         it shrinks to nothing within his grasp."

Finally, American literature has striven to impress the truth voiced in
these lines:--

  "As children of the Infinite Soul
   Our Birthright is the boundless whole....

  "High truths which have not yet been dreamed,
   Realities of all that seemed....

  "No fate can rob the earnest soul
   Of his great Birthright in the boundless whole!"




SUPPLEMENTARY LIST OF AUTHORS AND THEIR CHIEF WORKS

[Footnote: For a complete record of the work of contemporary authors,
consult _Who's Who in America_.]


EASTERN AUTHORS

ABBOTT, JACOB (1803-1879), b. Hallowell, Maine. One of America's most
voluminous writers on all classes of popular subjects. He wrote one hundred
and eighty volumes and aided in the preparation of thirty-one more.
_Illustrated Histories_, _The Rollo Books_.

ADAMS, HENRY (1838-    ), b. Boston, Mass. Historian. _History of the
United States_ from 1801 to 1817, that is, under Jefferson's and Madison's
administrations. 9 vols. Excellent for this important period.

ALCOTT, LOUISA MAY (1832-1888), b. Germantown, Pa. Daughter of Amos Bronson
Alcott. Writer of wholesome, humorous, and interesting stories for young
people. _Little Women_, _An Old-Fashioned Girl_, _Eight Cousins_, _Rose in
Bloom_.

ALLSTON, WASHINGTON (1779-1843), b. Waccamaw, S. C. Moved to New England
and graduated at Harvard in 1800. Artist; early poet of Wordsworthian
school. _The Sylphs of the Seasons, and Other Poems_.

AMES, FISHER (1758-1808), b. Dedham, Mass. Orator, statesman. Best speech,
_On the British Treaty_ (1796).

AUSTIN, JANE G. (1831-1894), b. Worcester, Mass. Novelist of early colonial
New England. _Standish of Standish_, _Betty Alden_, _Dr. Le Baron and his
Daughters_, _A Nameless Nobleman_, _David Alden's Daughter, and Other
Stories of Colonial Times_.

BACHELLER, IRVING (1859-    ), b. Pierrepont, N. Y. Novelist. _Eben
Holden_, _D'ri and I_, _Darrel of the Blessed Isles_.

BANCROFT, GEORGE (1800-1891), b. Worcester, Mass. Historian, diplomatist.
_History of the United States, from the Discovery of the Continent to the
Establishment of the Constitution in 1789_, 6 vols. _History of the
Formation of the Constitution of the United States_, 2 vols. Covers the
period to the inauguration of Washington. The volumes on the Revolutionary
War and the formation of the Constitution are the best part of the work.
While Bancroft's improved methods of research among original authorities
almost entitle him to be called the founder of the new American school of
historical writing, yet the best critics do not to-day consider his work
scientific. They regard it more as an apotheosis of democracy, written by a
man who loved truth intensely, who shirked no drudgery in original
investigations, but who shows the strong bias of the days of Andrew Jackson
in the tendency to believe that what democracy does is almost necessarily
right.

BANGS, JOHN KENDRICK (1862-    ), b. Yonkers, N. Y. Humorist. _House-Boat
on the Styx_, _The Idiot at Home_, _A Rebellious Heroine._

BARR, AMELIA E. (1831-    ), b. Ulverston, Lancashire, Eng. Anglo-American
novelist. _A Bow of Orange Ribbon_, _Jan Vedder's Wife_, _A Daughter of
Fife_, and _Between Two Loves_.

BATES, ARLO (1850-    ), b. East Machias, Me. Educator, author. _Under the
Beech Tree_ (poems), _Talks on the Study of Literature_.

BEDOTT, WIDOW. See WHITCHER, FRANCES.

BEECHER, HENRY WARD (1813-1887), b. Litchfield, Conn. Congregational
clergyman, widely popular as a preacher and lecturer. Delivered noted
anti-slavery lectures in England. Some of his published works are _Eyes and
Ears_, _Life Thoughts_, _Star Papers_, _Yale Lectures on Preaching_.

"BILLINGS, JOSH." See SHAW, HENRY WHEELER.

BOKER, GEO. H. (1823-1890), b. Philadelphia, Pa. Dramatist, poet, diplomat.
_Francesca da Rimini_, _Dirge for a Soldier_.

"BREITMANN, HANS." See LELAND, CHARLES GODFREY.

BROOKS, PHILLIPS (1835-1893), b. Boston, Mass. Bishop of the Episcopal
Diocese of Massachusetts. One of the foremost preachers of his day. Wrote
many works on religious subjects, also _Essays and Addresses_, _Letters of
Travel._

BROWN, ALICE (1857-    ), b. Hampton Falls, N. H. Novelist, _The Story of
Thyrza, John Winterburn's Family, Country Neighbors, Tiverton Tales, The
Mannerings._

BROWNE, CHARLES F. ("Artemus Ward") (1834-1867), b. Waterford, Maine.
Newspaper writer and lecturer. Famous humorist of the middle of the
nineteenth century. _Artemus Ward: His Book_, _Artemus Ward: His Travels_,
_Artemus Ward in London._

BROWNSON, ORESTES A. (1803-1876), b. Stockbridge, Vt. Clergyman,
journalist, Christian socialist. Brownson's _Quarterly Review_ (1844-1875),
_New Views of Christianity, Society, and the Church._

BUNNER, HENRY CUYLER (1855-1896), b. Oswego, N. Y. Editor of _Puck_ for
many years. A clever and successful short-story writer. _Short Sixes_,
_Love in Old Cloathes_, _Zadoc Pine and Other Stories._

BURROUGHS, JOHN (1837-    ), b. Roxbury, N. Y. An exact observer of life in
the woods and one of the most conservative and entertaining writers on
nature. He tells only what he sees and does not draw on his fancy to endow
animals with man's power to reason. Some of his nature books are:
_Wake-Robin, Signs and Seasons, Pepacton, Riverby, Locusts and Wild Honey,
Squirrels and Other Fur-Bearers. Indoor Studies_ and _Whitman, A Study_,
show keen critical powers and genuine literary appreciation. Burroughs
reminds the reader of Thoreau in closeness of observation and honesty of
expression, but Burroughs is less of a philosopher and poet and more of a
scientist.

CARY, ALICE (1820-1871) and her sister Phoebe Gary (1824-1871), b. Miami
Valley, near Cincinnati, Ohio. Moved to New York, N. Y. Poets. _Poems_ by
Alice and Phoebe Cary.

CHAMBERS, ROBERT W. (1865-    ), b. Brooklyn, N. Y. Author of exciting
romances. _The Red Republic_, _A King and a Few Dukes_, _The Conspirators._

CHARMING, WILLIAM ELLERY (1780-1842), b. Newport, R. I. Great Unitarian
preacher and reformer. _Spiritual Freedom_, _Evidences of Christianity and
of Revealed Religion_, _Self-Culture_, _Slavery._

CHILD, LYDIA MARIA (1802-1880), b. Medford, Mass. Novelist, editor.
Hobomok, a story of life in colonial Salem; _The Rebels,_ a tale of the
Revolution, introduces James Otis, Governor Hutchinson, and the Boston
Massacre; _Appeal for that Class of Americans called Africans._

CHURCHILL, WINSTON (1871-    ), b. St. Louis, Mo. Home in Cornish, N. H.
Novelist. _Richard Carvel, The Crisis,_ and _The Crossing_ are interesting
novels of American historical events. _Mr. Crewe's Career._

CLARKE, JAMES FREEMAN (1810-1888), b. Hanover, N. H. Noted Unitarian
clergyman. _Orthodoxy: Its Truths and Errors_, _Ten Great Religions_,
_Self-Culture._

CONE, HELEN GRAY (1859-    ), b. New York, N. Y. Poet. _Oberon and Puck_,
_The Ride to the Lady_, _Verses Grave and Gay._

COOKE, ROSE TERRY (1827-1892), b. West Hartford, Conn. Poet and short-story
writer. _The Two Villages_ is her best-known poem, and _The Deacon's Week_
one of her best stories.

CRAIGIE, PEARL MARY TERESA ("John Oliver Hobbes") (1867-1906), b. Boston,
Mass. Novelist. _School for Saints_, _The Herb Moon_, _The Flute of Pan_,
_The Tales of John Oliver Hobbes._

CRANCH, CHRISTOPHER PEARSE (1813-1892), b. Alexandria, Va. Educated in
Massachusetts. Artist, transcendental poet, and contributor to _The Dial_.
Best poems, _Gnosis, I in Thee._

CRANE, STEPHEN (1870-1900), b. Newark, N. J. Novelist. _The Red Badge of
Courage_ is a remarkable romance of the American Civil War.

CRAWFORD, FRANCIS MARION (1854-1909), b. Bagni di Lucca, Italy. Voluminous
writer of novels and romances. Some are historical, and the scenes of the
best of them are laid in Italy. He wrote his _Zoroaster_ and _Marzio's
Crucifix_ in both English and French, and received a reward of one thousand
francs from the French Academy. _Saracinesca_, _Sant' Ilario_, and _Don
Orsino_, a trio of novels about one Roman family, and _Katherine
Lauderdale_ and its sequel, _The Ralstons_, are among his best works.

CURTIS, GEORGE WILLIAM (1824-1892), b. Providence, R. I. Literary and
political essayist, civil service reformer, and critic. Was a resident in
his youth at Brook Farm. Spent four years of his early life in foreign
travel. _Nile Notes of a Howadji_ and _The Howadji in Syria_ are poetic
descriptions of his trip. His masterpiece is _Prue and I_, a prose idyl of
simple, contented, humble life. The largest part of his work was done as
editor. He was editor of _Putnam's Magazine_ at the time of its failure in
1857, and undertook to pay up every creditor, a task which consumed sixteen
years. He wrote the _Easy Chair_ papers in _Harper's Monthly_. A volume of
these essays contains some of his easiest, most urbane, and humorous
writings. They are light and in the vein of Addison's _Spectator_. In
_Orations and Addresses_ are to be found some of his strongest and most
polished speeches on moral, historical, and political subjects.

DANA, RICHARD HENRY, SR. (1787-1879), b. Cambridge, Mass. Author, diplomat,
judge. Co-editor _North American Review_ when it published Bryant's
_Thanatopsis_. Champion of the romantic school of Wordsworth and Coleridge.
Dana's best known poem, _The Buccaneer_, shows the influence of this
school.

DANA, RICHARD HENRY, JR. (1815-1882), b. Cambridge, Mass. Lawyer,
statesman, author. His _Two Years before the Mast_ keeps, its place among
the best books written for boys during the nineteenth century. The British
admiralty officially adopted this book for circulation in the navy.

DAVIS, RICHARD HARDING (1864-1916), b. Philadelphia, Pa. Journalist,
playwright, novelist. Best works are short stones of New York life, such as
_Van Bibber and Others_, _Gallegher and Other Stories_. _The Bar Sinister_,
which holds boys spellbound, is an excellent story of a dog.

DELAND, MARGARETTA WADE (1857-    ), b. Allegheny, Pa. Voluminous writer of
stories. _Old Chester Tales_, _Dr. Lavendar's People_, _John Ward_,
_Preacher._

DICKINSON, EMILY (1830-1886), b. Amherst, Mass. Author of unique short
lyrics. _Poems_.

DICKINSON, JOHN (1732-1808), b. Crosia, Md. Statesman. _The Farmer's
Letters to the Inhabitants of the British Colonies_.

DODGE, MARY MAPES (1838-1905), b. New York, N. Y. Editor of _Saint Nicholas
Magazine_. Among her juvenile books may be mentioned _Hans Brinker_,
_Donald and Dorothy_, _The Land of Pluck_.

DORR, JULIA C. R. (1825-    ), b. Charleston, S. C. Moved to Vermont. Poet,
novelist. _Poems_, _In Kings' Houses_, _Farmingdale_.

DWIGHT, JOHN S. (1813-1893), b. Boston, Mass. Musician, transcendentalist.
Best poem, _Rest_, appeared in first number of _The Dial_.

EGAN, MAURICE FRANCIS (1852-    ), b. Philadelphia, Pa. Diplomat, poet,
essayist, novelist. _Preludes_, _Songs and Sonnets_, _Lectures on English
Literature_, _The Ghost of Hamlet_.

EVERETT, EDWARD (1794-1865), b. Dorchester, Mass. Orator, statesman.
_Orations and Speeches_.

FIELDS, JAMES T. (1817-1881), b. Portsmouth, N. H. Editor _Atlantic
Monthly_ and publisher. _Yesterdays with Authors_.

FISKE, JOHN (1842-1901), b. Hartford, Conn. Scientist and historian. His
histories are both philosophical and interesting. _The Critical Period of
American History_, _The Beginnings of New England_, _The American
Revolution_, _The Discovery of America_.

FORD, PAUL LEICESTER (1865-1902), b. Brooklyn, N. Y. Novelist, historian.
_The Honorable Peter Stirling_, _Janice Meredith_.

FOSTER, STEPHEN COLLINS (1826-1864), b. Pittsburgh, Pa. Writer of some of
the most widely known songs of the nineteenth century. _Old Folks at Home_
("Down on the Suwanee River"), _My Old Kentucky Home_, _Nellie was a Lady_.

FREDERIC, HAROLD (1856-1898), b. Utica, N.Y. Novelist, journalist. _The
Damnation of Theron Ware_, _Gloria Mundi_.

GILDER, RICHARD WATSON (1844-1909), b. Bordentown, N. J. Editor and poet.
Editor of _Century Magazine_ until his death. Poems: _The New Day_, _Five
Books of Song_, _For the Country_.

GOODWIN, MAUD WILDER (1856-    ), b. Ballston Spa, N. Y. Writer of
romances, chiefly historical. _The Colonial Cavalier_, _or Southern Life
before the Revolution_, _Four Roads to Paradise_.

GRANT, ROBERT (1852-    ), b. Boston, Mass. Novelist, essayist, jurist.
_Confessions of a Frivolous Girl_, _An Average Man_, _The Art of Living_.

GREELEY, HORACE (1811-1872), b. Amherst, N. H. Founder and editor of The
Tribune, New York, N. Y. Exerted strong influence on the thought of his
time. _Recollections of a Busy Life_.

GREEN, ANNA KATHARINE (Mrs. Charles Rohlfs) (1846-    ), b. Brooklyn, N. Y.
Voluminous writer of interesting detective stories, of which _The
Leavenworth Case_ is the most noted.

GUINEY, LOUISE IMOGEN (1861-    ), b. Boston, Mass. Poet, essayist. _The
White Sail and Other Poems_, _A Roadside Harp_, _The Martyr's Idyl and
Shorter Poems_.

HALE, EDWARD EVERETT (1822-1909), b. Boston, Mass. Unitarian divine,
author, philanthropist. Best known story, _The Man without a Country_.
Wrote many miscellaneous essays.

HARDY, ARTHUR S. (1847-    ), b. Andover, Mass. Educator, novelist,
diplomat. _But Yet a Woman_, _Wind of Destiny_, _Passe Rose_.

HARLAND, HENRY ("Sidney Luska") (1861-1905), b. Petrograd, Russia.
Novelist. _The Cardinal's Snuff-Box_, _My Friend Prospero_, _The Lady
Paramount_.

HAWTHORNE, JULIAN (1846-    ), b. Boston, Mass., son of Nathaniel
Hawthorne. Novelist, essayist. Deserves to be called his father's Boswell
for the excellent and sympathetic two volumes, entitled _Nathaniel
Hawthorne and his Wife_.

HEDGE, FREDERICK H. (1805-1890), b. Cambridge, Mass. Clergyman,
transcendentalist. Best poem, _Questionings_, appeared in _The Dial_.

HIGGINSON, THOMAS WENTWORTH (1823-    ), b. Cambridge, Mass. Unitarian
minister, prominent anti-slavery agitator, author. _Life of Margaret Fuller
Ossoli_, _Cheerful Yesterdays_, _Contemporaries_, _Old Cambridge_.

"HOBBES, JOHN OLIVER," See CRAIGIE, PEARL MARY TERESA.

HOLLAND, J. G. (1819-1881), b. Belchertown, Mass. Editor of the first
series of _Scribner's Monthly_, wrote several poems, of which
_Bitter-Sweet_ was the most popular, and several novels, the best of which
is _Arthur Bonnicastle_.

HOLLEY, MARIETTA (1850-    ), b. Ellisburg, N. Y. Humorist, Author of
_Josiah Allen's Wife_, _My Opinions and Betsey Bobbet's_, _Sweet Cicely_,
_Samantha at Saratoga_, and _Poems_.

HOWARD, BLANCHE WILLIS (1847-1898), b. Bangor, Maine. Novelist. _Guenn_ is
an unusually strong novel. _One Summer_, _Aunt Serena_, and _The Open Door_
are wholesome, pleasing stories.

HOWE, JULIA WARD (1819-1910), b. New York, N. Y. Philanthropist, author of
the famous _Battle Hymn of the Republic_.

HUTCHINSON, THOMAS (1711-1780), b. Boston, Mass. America's greatest
historical writer before the nineteenth century. His great work is _The
History of the Province of Massachusetts Bay_.

IRELAND, JOHN (1838-    ), b. Ireland. Roman Catholic archbishop. _The
Church and Modern Society_.

JANVIER, THOMAS ALLIBONE (1849-1913), b. Philadelphia, Pa. Journalist and
author. _Color Studies_, _Stories of Old New Spain_, _An Embassy to
Provence_, _The Passing of Thomas_.

JEWETT, SARAH ORNE (1849-1909), b. South Berwick, Maine. Artistic novelist
of old New England villages. _Deephaven_, _The Country of the Pointed
Firs_, _The Tory Lover_. She shows a more genial side of New England life
than Miss Wilkins gives.

KING, CHARLES (1844-    ), b. Albany, N. Y. Soldier, novelist. _A War-Time
Wooing_, _The Colonel's Daughter_, _The Deserter_, _The General's Double_.

KIRK, ELLEN OLNEY (1842-    ), b. Southington, Conn. Novelist. _Through
Winding Ways_, _A Midsummer Madness_, _The Story of Margaret Kent_,
_Marcia_.

LARCOM, LUCY (1826-1893), b. Beverly Farms, Mass. A factory hand in Lowell,
encouraged by Whittier to write. _Poems; A New England Girlhood, Outlined
from Memory_.

LATHROP, GEORGE P. (1851-1898), b. Oahu, Hawaii. Son-in-law of Nathaniel
Hawthorne, editor, author. _A Study of Hawthorne_, _Spanish Vistas_,
_Newport_.

LAZARUS, EMMA (1849-1887), b. New York, N. Y. Poet, translator, essayist.
_Admetus_, _Songs of a Semite_, _Poems_.

LELAND, CHARLES GODFREY ("Hans Breitmann") (1824-1903), b. Philadelphia,
Pa. Humorist. _Hans Breitmann's Ballads_, written in what is known as
Pennsylvania Dutch dialect.

LOCKE, DAVID ROSS ("Petroleum V. Nasby") (1833-1888), b. Vestal, N. Y.
Political satirist. _Nasby Letters_.

LODGE, HENRY CABOT (1850-    ), b. Boston, Mass. Statesman, historian,
essayist. _A Short History of the English Colonies in America, Alexander
Hamilton, Daniel Webster, Studies in History, Hero Tales from American
History_ (with Theodore Roosevelt).

"LUSKA, SIDNEY." See HARLAND, HENRY.

MABIE, HAMILTON W. (1846-1916), b. Cold Spring, N. Y. Editor, essayist. _My
Study Fire, William Shakespeare: Poet, Dramatist, and Man, Essays on Books
and Culture_.

MACKAYE, PERCY WALLACE (1875-    ), b. New York, N. Y. Dramatist. _Jeanne
d'Arc_, _Sappho and Phaon_, _The Canterbury Pilgrims_, _Ticonderoga and
Other Poems_.

MCMASTER, JOHN BACH (1852-    ), b. Brooklyn, N. Y. Historian and professor
of American history. _A History of the People of the United States from the
Revolution to the Civil War_. 7 vols. An entertaining history, sometimes
suggestive of Macaulay.

MARKS, MRS. LIONEL. See PEABODY, JOSEPHINE PRESTON.

"MARVEL, IK." See MITCHELL, DONALD G.

MELVILLE, HERMAN (1819-1891), b. New York, N. Y. Novelist. _Typee Omoo_,
_Mardi_, _White Jacket or the World in a Man of War_, _Moby Dick or the
White Whale_ contain interesting accounts of his wide travels.

MITCHELL, DONALD GRANT ("Ik Marvel") (1822-1908), b. Norwich, Conn.
Essayist. _Reveries of a Bachelor_, _Dream Life_.

MITCHELL, S. WEIR (1829-    ), b. Philadelphia, Pa. Physician, novelist,
and poet. _Hugh Wynne, Free Quaker_; _The Adventures of Francois_; _Dr.
North and his Friends_; and _Constance Trescot_.

MOORE, CLEMENT CLARKE (1779-1863), b. New York, N. Y. Oriental scholar and
poet. Known to children to-day for his poem, _'Twas the Night before
Christmas_.

MOULTON, ELLEN LOUISE CHANDLER (1835-1908), b. Pomfret, Conn. Story writer,
poet, correspondent. _Some Women's Hearts_, _Swallow Flights and Other
Poems_, _In Childhood's Country_.

"NASBY, PETROLEUM V." See LOCKE, DAVID ROSS.

ODELL, JONATHAN (1737-1818), b. Newark, N.J. Clergyman, greatest
anti-Revolution poetic satirist. Shows influence of Dryden and Pope. _The
American Congress_, _The American Times_.

O'REILLY, JOHN BOYLE (1844-1890), b. Ireland. Journalist, poet. _Songs,
Legends and Ballads_; _Moondyne_; _Songs from the Southern Seas_.

"PARTINGTON, MRS." See SHILLABER, BENJAMIN P.

PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE (1779-1860), b. Pleasant Valley, N.Y. Satirical
humorist and descriptive writer. _The Dutchman's Fireside._ Assisted Irving
in the _Salmagundi_ papers.

PAYNE, JOHN HOWARD (1792-1852), b. New York, N.Y. Dramatist. Author of the
song, _Home, Sweet Home_.

PEABODY, JOSEPHINE PRESTON (Mrs. Lionel Marks) (1874-    ), b. New York,
N.Y. Poet, dramatist. _The Singing Leaves_, _Fortune and Men's Eyes_,
_Marlowe_, _The Piper_ (Stratford-on-Avon prize drama). Author of excellent
poems for children.

PERRY, BLISS (1860-    ), b. Williamstown, Mass. Educator, editor, author.
_Walt Whitman_, _A Study of Prose Fiction_, _John Greenleaf Whittier_.

READ, THOMAS BUCHANAN (1822-1872), b. Chester Co., Pa. Poet and painter.
_The New Pastoral_, _Sheridan's Ride_.

REPPLIER, AGNES (1857-    ), b. Philadelphia, Pa. Witty essayist. _Books
and Men_, _Points of View_, _Essays in Idleness_.

RIGGS, MRS. See WIGGIN, KATE DOUGLAS.

ROE, EDWARD PAYSON (1838-1888), b. New Windsor, N.Y. Clergyman, novelist.
_Barriers Burned Away_, _Opening a Chestnut Burr_, _Nature's Serial Story_.

ROHLFS, MRS. CHARLES. See GREEN, ANNA KATHERINE.

ROOSEVELT, THEODORE (1858-1919), b. New York, N. Y. Ex-President of the
United States. Lived for awhile on a western ranch and amassed material for
some of his most popular works. _Ranch Life and the Hunting Trail_, _The
Winning of the West_, _The Rough Riders_. He has written also on civil,
economic, and ethical subjects with great vigor and incisive clearness. His
_African Game Trails_ is the record of his trip to Africa.

SANGSTER, MARGARET (1838-    ), b. New Rochelle, N. Y. Editor, writer of
stories and poems. _Poems of the Household_, _Home Fairies and Heart
Flowers_.

SAXE, JOHN GODFREY (1816-1887), b. Highgate, Vt. Journalist, writer of
humorous verse. _Humorous and Satirical Poems_, _The Money King and Other
Poems_.

SCHOULER, JAMES (1839-    ), b. Arlington, Mass. Lawyer, historian. _A
History of the United States under the Constitution_. 6 vols.

SCOLLARD, CLINTON (1860-    ), b. Clinton, N. Y. Educator, poet. _With Reed
and Lyre_, _The Hills of Song_, _Voices and Visions_.

SEDGWICK, CATHERINE M. (1789-1867), b. Stockbridge, Mass. Novelist. Her
best stories are those of simple New England country life. _Redwood_,
_Clarence_, _A New England Tale_.

SHAW, HENRY WHEELER (Josh Billings) (1818-1885), b. Lanesborough, Mass.
Humorist. _Farmers' Allminax_, _Every Boddy's Friend_, _Josh Billings'
Spice Box_.

SHEA, JOHN DAWSON GILMARY (1824-1892), b. New York, N. Y. Editor,
historian. _Discovery and Exploration of the Mississippi Valley_, _History
of the Catholic Missions among the Indian Tribes of the United States_,
_History of the Catholic Church in the United States_, and many other
historical and religious studies.

SHERMAN, FRANK DEMPSTER (1860-1916), b. Peekskill, N.Y. Professor of
architecture, poet. _Madrigals and Catches_, _Lyrics for a Lute_, _Lyrics
of Joy_.

SHILLABER, BENJAMIN P. ("Mrs. Partington") (1814-1890), b. Portsmouth, N.
H. Humorist of Mrs. Malaprop's style, mistaking words of similar sounds but
dissimilar sense. _Life and Sayings of Mrs. Partington_, _Partingtonian
Patchwork_, _Ike and his Friend_.

SMITH, SAMUEL F. (1808-1895), b. Boston, Mass. Clergyman. Author of our
national poem, _America_. Of him, Holmes wrote, "Fate tried to conceal him
by naming him Smith."

SPARKS, JARED (1789-1866), b. Willington, Conn. Unitarian minister and
historian. _Diplomatic Correspondence of the American Revolution_, _The
Writings of George Washington_, _The Works of Benjamin Franklin_.

SPOFFORD, HARRIET PRESCOTT (1835-    ), b. Calais, Maine. Novelist, poet.
_The Amber Gods and Other Stories_, _New England Legends_, _Poems_.

STEDMAN, EDMUND CLARENCE (1833-1908), b. Hartford, Conn. Poet, critic. One
of America's fairest critics. Did valuable work in compiling and
criticizing modern English and American literature. _A Victorian
Anthology_, _An American Anthology_, _Victorian Poets_, _Poets of America_.
Co-editor of _Library of American Literature_ in eleven large octavo
volumes.

STOCKTON, FRANK R. (1834-1902), b. Philadelphia, Pa. Novelist and humorist.
His novels have a farcical humor, due to ridiculous situations and
absurdities, treated in a mock-serious vein. _The Lady or the Tiger?_ _The
Late Mrs. Null_, _The Casting away of Mrs. Leeks and Mrs. Aleshine_, _The
Hundredth Man_.

STODDARD, CHARLES WARREN (1843-1909), b. Rochester, N.Y. Author, educator,
traveler. _South Sea Idyls_, _Lepers of Molokai_, _Poems_.

STODDARD, RICHARD HENRY (1825-1903), b. Hingham, Mass. Journalist, editor,
poet. _Songs of Summer_, _Abraham Lincoln: a Horatian Ode_, _The Lion's
Cub_.

STORY, WILLIAM WETMORE (1819-1895), b. Salem, Mass. Sculptor, author. _Roba
di Roma_, or _Walks and Talks about Rome_, _Poems_, _Conversations in a
Studio_, _Excursions in Art and Letters_.

SUMNER, CHAS. (1811-1874), b. Boston, Mass. Noted anti-slavery statesman.
His published speeches and orations fill fifteen volumes.

TAYLOR, BAYARD (1825-1878), b. Kennett Square, Chester Co., Pa. Extensive
traveler, wrote twelve different volumes of travels, the first being _Views
Afoot, or Europe Seen with Knapsack and Staff_ (1846). He wrote also much
poetry. Among the best of his shorter poems are _The Bedouin Song_,
_Nubia_, and _The Song of the Camp. Lars: a Pastoral of Norway_ is his best
long poem. The work by which he will probably remain longest known in
literature is his excellent translation of Goethe's _Faust_.

THAXTER, CELIA LAIGHTON (1836-1894), b. Portsmouth, N.H. Spent most of life
upon Isles of Shoals. Artist, author. _Poems_ (Appledore Edition, 1896).
Best single poem, _The Sandpiper_.

THOMAS, EDITH MATILDA (1854-    ), b. Chatham, Ohio. Poet. _A New Year's
Masque, A Winter Swallow, and Other Verse, Fair Shadow Land, Lyrics and
Sonnets_.

TICKNOR, GEORGE (1791-1871), b. Boston, Mass. _A History of Spanish
Literature_.

TORREY, BRADFORD (1843-1912), b. Weymouth, Mass. Nature writer. _Birds in
the Bush_, _The Footpath Way_, _Footing it in Franconia_. Editor of
Thoreau's _Journal_.

TOURGEE, ALBION W. (1838-1905), b. Williamsfield, Ohio. Educated in New
York. Soldier, judge, novelist of the reconstruction period. _A Fool's
Errand_, _Bricks without Straw_.

TROWBRIDGE, JOHN TOWNSEND (1827-1916), b. Ogden, N.Y. Editor, novelist,
poet, juvenile writer. _My Own Story_ (biography) Among his stories for
young people are _The Drummer Boy_, _The Prize Cup_, _The Tide-Mill
Stories._ Best known poem, _The Vagabonds_.

VAN DYKE, HENRY (1852-    ), b. Germantown, Pa. Clergyman, professor,
essayist, poet. _The Builders and Other Poems_, _Fisherman's Luck and Some
Other Uncertain Things_, _The Story of the Other Wise Man_. An interesting,
optimistic philosopher, and lover of nature, whose works deserve the widest
reading.

WARD, ARTEMUS. See BROWNE, CHARLES F.

WARD, ELIZABETH STUART PHELPS (1844-1911), b. Boston, Mass. Novelist. _The
Gates Ajar_, _The Story of Avis_, _A Singular Life_.

WARNER, CHARLES DUDLEY (1829-1900), b. Plainfield, Mass. Traveler,
journalist, essayist. Wrote the _Editor's Drawer_ and _Editor's Study of
Harper's Magazine. My Summer in a Garden_ and _Backlog Studies_ are
delightful for their subtle humor and style. He wrote many entertaining
books of travel, such as _Saunerings_, _In the Levant_, _My Winter on the
Nile_, _Baddeck and that Sort of Thing._ He wrote _The Gilded Age_ in
collaboration with Mark Twain.

WEBSTER, NOAH (1758-1843), b. Hartford, Conn. Philologist. Published in
1783 his famous _Speller_, which superseded _The New England Primer_, and
which almost deserves to be called "literature by reason of its admirable
fables." More than sixty million copies of this _Speller_ have been sold.

WESTCOTT, EDWARD NOYES (1847-1898), b. Syracuse, N. Y. Banker, author of
one remarkable novel which was published posthumously, _David Harum_, a
story of central New York.

WHARTON, EDITH (1862-    ), b. New York, N. Y. Essayist, novelist. Her
fiction deals largely with modern society problems. She treats subtle
psychological questions with especial skill in the short story. _The Valley
of Decision_, _Crucial Instances_, _The House of Mirth_, _The Fruit of the
Tree_, _Italian Backgrounds._

WHIPPLE, EDWIN PERCY (1819-1886), b. Gloucester, Mass. Critic, essayist.
_Essays and Reviews_, _American Literature and Other Papers_,
_Recollections of Eminent Men._

WHITCHER, FRANCES ("Widow Bedott") (1811-1852), b. Whitestown, N. Y.
Humorist. _The Widow Bedott Papers._

WHITNEY, ADELINE BUTTON TRAIN (1824-1906), b. Boston, Mass. Poet, novelist,
and writer of juvenile stories. _Faith Gartney's Girlhood, We Girls, Boys
at Chequasset, Summer in Leslie Goldthwaite's Life, Poems._

WIGGIN, KATE DOUGLAS (Mrs. Riggs) (1857-    ), b. Philadelphia, Pa.
Novelist and writer on kindergarten subjects. Author of _The Bird's
Christmas Carol, Timothy's Quest, Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm, Penelope's
Progress, A Cathedral Courtship._ Pathos, humor, and sympathy for the poor,
the weak, and the helpless are characteristic qualities of her work. There
are few better children's stories than the first two mentioned.

WILLIAMS, ROGER (1604?-1683), b. probably in London. Founder of Rhode
Island. The first great preacher of "soul liberty" in America. _The Bloody
Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience Discussed_, _The Bloody
Tenent yet More Bloody_.

WILLIS, N.P. (1806-1867), b. Portland, Maine. Traveler, prose writer, poet,
editor. While his work has proved ephemeral, he taught many writers of his
day the necessity of artistic finish in their prose. His prose _Letters
from under a Bridge_, and his poems, _Parrhasius_ and _Unseen Spirits_, may
be mentioned.

WINSOR, JUSTIN (1831-1897), b. Boston, Mass. Librarian at Harvard,
historian, editor of _Narrative and Critical History of America_. Author of
_The Mississippi Basin: the Struggle in America between England and France,
1697-1763_; _The Westward Movement, 1763-1798_; _Reader's Handbook of the
American Revolution_, _Christopher Columbus_.

WINTER, WILLIAM (1836-    ), b. Gloucester, Mass. Dramatic editor of the
New York _Tribune_ from 1865 to 1909. Edited numbers of plays. Author of
_Shakespeare's England_, _Gray Days and Gold_, _Life and Art of Edwin
Booth_, _Wanderers_ (poems).

WINTHROP, THEODORE (1828-1861), b. New Haven, Conn. Novelist. His best
story, _John Brent_, contains some of his western experiences.

WISTER, OWEN (1860-    ), b. Philadelphia, Pa. Lawyer and novelist. Gives
realistic pictures of the middle West. _New Swiss Family Robinson, The
Dragon of Wantley, Red Men and White, Lin McLean, Lady Baltimore_, and _The
Virginian_.

WOODBERRY, GEO. E. (1855-    ), b. Beverly, Mass. Educator, author of
excellent biographies of Poe, Hawthorne, and Emerson. _America in
Literature_, _Poems_.

WOOLSON, CONSTANCE FENIMORE (1848-1894), b. Claremont, N. H. Novelist. Best
novel, _Horace Chase_. Some of her other novels are _Castle Nowhere, Anne,
East Angels, Jupiter Lights, The Old Stone House_.


SOUTHERN AUTHORS

ALSOP, GEORGE (1638-?), b. England. Published in 1666 an entertaining
volume, _A Character of the Province of Maryland_.

AUDUBON, JOHN J. (1780-1851), b. near New Orleans, La. Noted ornithologist
and painter of birds. Published _Birds of America_ at one thousand dollars
a copy and _Ornithological Biography_ in 5 vols.

AZARIAS, BROTHER. See MULLANY, P. F.

BURNETT, FRANCES HODGSON (1849-    ), b. Manchester, Eng. Anglo-American
novelist. _Little Lord Fauntleroy_, _That Lass o' Lowrie's_, _Haworth's_,
_A Fair Barbarian_, _A Lady of Quality_.

CALHOUN, JOHN C. (1782-1850), b. Abbeville District, S.C. Statesman,
orator. Best work, _Disquisition on Government and Discourse on the
Constitution and Government of the United States_. Best speech,
_Nullification and the Force Bill_ (1833).

CLAY, HENRY (1777-1852), b. near Richmond, Va. Orator, statesman. Best
speeches: _On the War of 1812_ (1813), _The Seminole War_ (1819), _The
American System_ (1832).

COOKE, JOHN ESTEN (1830-1886), b. Winchester, Va. Colonial and military
story writer. Best romance, _The Virginia Comedians_.

DIXON, THOMAS (1864-    ), b. Shelby, N. C. Clergyman, novelist. _The
Leopard's Spots_, _The One Woman_, _The Clansman_.

EVANS, AUGUSTA. See WILSON, AUGUSTA EVANS.

FOX, JOHN JR. (1863-    ), b. in Bourbon Co., Kentucky. Novelist of life in
the Kentucky mountains. _The Kentuckians_, _A Mountain Europa_, _A
Cumberland Vendetta_, _The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come_, _The Trail of
the Lonesome Pine_.

GAYARRE, CHARLES E. A. (1805-1895), b. New Orleans, La. Jurist, historian.
_History of Louisiana_.

GIBBONS, JAMES (1834-    ), b. Baltimore, Md. Roman Catholic cardinal. _The
Faith of Our Fathers_, _The Ambassador of Christ_.

GLASGOW, ELLEN ANDERSON GHOLSON (1874-    ), b. Richmond, Va. Novelist.
_The Descendant_, _The Voice of the People_, _The Deliverance_.

GRADY, HENRY W. (1851-1889), b. Athens, Ga. Editor, orator. Best oration,
_The New South_.

HEARN, LAFCADIO (1850-1904), b. in Ionian Islands of Irish and Greek
parentage. Journalist, author. Lived many years in New Orleans, went thence
to New York, and still later to Japan. Author of _Stray Leaves from Strange
Literature_, _Two Years in the French West Indies_, _Glimpses of Unfamiliar
Japan_, _Out of the East_. Shows marked descriptive ability.

HEGAN, ALICE. See RICE, ALICE HEGAN.

"HENRY, O." See PORTER, SIDNEY.

JOHNSTON, MARY (1870-    ), b. Buchanan, Va. Writer of vigorous,
well-handled romances of Virginia history. _Prisoners of Hope_, _To Have
and to Hold_, _Audrey_, _Lewis Rand_.

JOHNSTON, RICHARD MALCOLM (1822-1898), b. Hancock Co., Ga. Lawyer,
professor of English. Writer of Georgia stories. _Dukesborough Tales_.

KENNEDY, J. P. (1795-1870), b. Baltimore, Md. Wrote three works of fiction,
_Swallow Barn_, a picture of the manners and customs of Virginia at the end
of the eighteenth century, _Horse-Shoe Robinson, a Tale of the Tory
Ascendency_, _Rob of the Bowl_, a story of colonial Maryland.

KEY, FRANCIS SCOTT (1780-1843), b. Frederick Co., Md. _The Star-Spangled
Banner_.

KING, GRACE E. (1852-    ), b. New Orleans, La. Novels of Creole life and
historical works on De Soto and New Orleans: _Monsieur Motte_, _Tales of
Time and Place_, _Balcony Stones_.

LONGSTREET, AUGUSTUS B. (1790-1870), b. Augusta, Ga. Judge, and (later) a
Methodist minister. His _Georgia Scenes_ is one of the liveliest pictures
of provincial Georgia life.

MARSHALL, JOHN (1755-1835), b. Germantown, Va. Great Chief Justice of U. S.
_The Life of George Washington_.

MARTIN, GEORGE MADDEN (1866-    ), b. Louisville, Ky. Novelist. _Emmy
Lou--Her Book and Heart_.

MATTHEWS, JAMES BRANDER (1852-    ), b. New Orleans, La. Lecturer on
literature at Columbia College. Critic and story writer. _French Dramatists
of the Nineteenth Century_, _Margery's Lovers, A Secret of the Sea and
Other Stories, The Story of a Story, The Historical Novel, Study of the
Drama, The Short Story._

MULLANY, P. F. (Brother Azarias) (1847-1893), b. Ireland. Educator,
essayist. _The Development of Old English Thought_, _Phases of Thought and
Criticism._

O'HARA, THEODORE (1820-1867), b. Danville, Ky. Poet. _The Bivouac of the
Dead._

PECK, SAMUEL MINTURN (1854-    ), b. Tuscaloosa, Ala. Poet and novelist.
_Caps and Bells_, _Rhymes and Roses._

PIKE, ALBERT (1809-1891), b. Boston, Mass. Moved to Arkansas. Teacher,
editor, lawyer. Wrote the popular song, _Dixie_, and _To the Mocking Bird._

PINKNEY, EDWARD COATE (1802-1828), b. London, Eng. Poet. Best lyrics, _A
Serenade_, _A Health_, _Songs_, _The Indian's Bride._

PORTER, SYDNEY ("O. Henry") (1867-1910), b. Greensboro, N. C. Edited
newspapers in Texas. Successful short-story writer. _The Four Million, The
Heart of the West, The Gentle Grafter, Roads of Destiny, Options, The Voice
of the City._

PRENTICE, GEO. D. (1802-1870), b. Preston, Conn. Editor Louisville
_Journal_, poet. _Poems._ Best poem, _The Closing Year._

PRESTON, MARGARET JUNKIN (1825-1897), b. Philadelphia, Pa. Moved to
Lexington, Va. Representative woman poet of the Confederacy. _Cartoons, For
Love's Sake, Colonial Ballads, Sonnets, and Other Verse._

RANDALL, JAMES RYDER (1839-1908), b. Baltimore, Md. Teacher, poet.
_Maryland, My Maryland_ (song).

REID, CHRISTIAN. See TIERNAN, FRANCES F.

RICE (Alice Hegan) (1870-    ), b. Shelbyville, Ky. A widely popular story
writer of humble folk, a humorist of rare power, a cheery, breezy
philosopher, and a sympathetic interpreter of the simple heart of the brave
poor. _Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch, Lovey Mary, Captain June, Sandy,
Mr. Opp._

RICE, CALE YOUNG (1872-    ), b. Dixon, Ky. Author of exquisite lyrics. One
of the greatest of the younger poetic dramatists whose plays have acting
qualities. Poems: _From Dusk to Dusk, _With Omar_, _Song-Surf_, _Nirvana
Days_. Plays: _Charles di Tocca_, _David_, _Yolanda of Cyprus_, _A Night in
Avignon_.

RIVES, AMELIE (PRINCESS TROUBETSKOY) (1863-    ), b. Richmond, Va.
Novelist. _The Quick or the Dead_, _Virginia of Virginia_.

RUSSELL, IRWIN (1853-1879), b. Port Gibson, Miss. Caricaturist, musician,
poet. He was among the first to see the possibilities of the negro dialect
in verse. _Poems_.

SEAWELL, MOLLY ELLIOT (1860-1916), b. Gloucester Co., Va. Novelist. _Little
Jarvis_ (awarded a $500 prize), _Sprightly Romance of Marsac_ (awarded a
$3000 prize), _Throckmorton_.

SMITH, F. HOPKINSON (1838-1915), b. Baltimore, Md. Artist, author,
engineer. _Colonel Carter of Cartersville_ is his most enduring work. The
Colonel is a remarkable portrait. _A Gentleman Vagabond and Some Others_,
_Caleb West: Master Diver_, _A Day at Laguerre's and Other Days_, _The
Fortunes of Oliver Horn_.

STITH, WILLIAM (1689-1755), b. Virginia. Scholarly historian who was so
painstaking and detailed in his accounts that he was almost neglected until
the present time. _History of Virginia from the First Discovery to the
Dissolution of the London Company_.

STUART, RUTH MCENERY (1856-    ), b. in parish of Avoyelles, La. Specially
liked for her humorous negro and plantation stories. _A Golden Wedding and
Other Tales_, _Sonny_, _Holly and Pizen_.

THOMPSON, WILLIAM TAPPAN (1812-1882), b. Ravenna, Ohio. Georgia journalist
and humorist. _Major Jones's Courtship_.

TIERNAN, FRANCES F. ("Christian Reid") (1846-    ), b. Salisbury, N. C.
Novelist. _Child of Mary_, _Heart of Steel_.

TROUBETSKOY, PRINCESS. See RIVES, AMELIE.

WEEMS, MASON LOCKE (1760-1825), b. Dumfries, Va. Clergyman, biographer.
_Life of Washington_.

WILSON, AUGUSTA EVANS (1835-1909), b. Columbus, Ga. Prolific novelist. Best
novel, _Saint Elmo_.

WILSON, WOODROW (1856-    ), b. Staunton, Va. Educator, historian,
statesman. _A History of the American People_.

WIRT, WILLIAM (1772-1834), b. Bladensburg, Md. Lawyer. _Life and Character
of Patrick Henry_, _Letters of the British Spy_.


WESTERN AUTHORS

ATHERTON, GERTRUDE FRANKLIN (1859-    ), b. San Francisco, Calif. Novelist.
_The Doomswoman_, _The Aristocrats_, _The Conqueror._

BALDWIN, JAMES (1841-    ), b. Westfield, Ind. Writer of excellent stories
for children. _The Story of Siegfried, Old Greek Stories', Stories of the
King, Discovery of the Old Northwest, The Book Lover._

BIERCE, AMBROSE (1842-    ), b. Ohio. For many years a San Francisco
journalist. _Can Such Things Be? In the Midst of Life_ (tales of soldiers
and civilians).

BURDETTE, ROBERT JONES (1844-1914), b. Greensboro, Pa. Journalist on
Burlington (Iowa) _Hawkeye_ and other papers, lecturer, humorist,
clergyman. _The Rise and Fall of the Moustache_, _Hawkeyetems_, _Life of
William Penn._

BURNHAM, CLARA LOUISE (1854-    ) b. Newton, Mass. Moved to Chicago.
Novelist. _Dr. Latimer_, _The Wise Woman._

CARLETON, WILL (1845-1912), b. Hudson, Mich. Poet, editor, lecturer. _Farm
Ballads_, _Farm Legends_, _Farm Festivals_, _City Ballads_. _Over the Hills
to the Poor House,_ best known single poem.

CATHERWOOD, MARY HARTWELL (1847-1902), b. Luray, Ohio. Writer of historical
tales of Canada and the Northwest. _A Woman in Armour, The Lady of Fort St.
John, The Romance of Dollard, The White Islander, a Story of Mackinac,
Lazarre._

CHENEY, JOHN VANCE (1848-    ), b. Groveland, N.Y. Moved to the West. Poet
and critic. _Thistle-Drift, Wood-Blooms, Queen Helen and Other Poems._
Critical Works: _That Dome in Air_ and _The Golden Guess._

DUNBAR, PAUL LAURENCE (1872-1906), b. Dayton, Ohio. African descent.
Journalist, poet. Wrote many fine lyrics. _Oak and Ivy_, _Lyrics of Lowly
Life_, _Lyrics of the Hearthside._

DUNNE, FINLEY PETER (1867-    ), b. Chicago, Ill. Humorist, journalist.
_Mr. Dooley's Philosophy._

EGGLESTON, EDWARD (1837-1902), b. Vevay, Ind. Novelist of the early life of
southern Indiana. _The Hoosier Schoolmaster_, _The Hoosier Schoolboy_,
_Roxy_, _The Graysons._

FOOTE, MARY HALLOCK (1847-    ), b. Milton, N. Y. Her novels give vivid
representations of western life. _The Led Horse Claim_, _The Chosen
Valley_, _Coeur d'Alene_.

FRENCH, ALICE ("Octave Thanet") (1850-    ), b. Andover, Mass. Novelist.
_Knitters in the Sun_, _Stories of a Western Town_, _A Book of True
Lovers_, _The Man of the Hour_.

GARLAND, HAMLIN (1860-    ), b. West Salem, Wis. Presents graphic pictures
of the middle West in such stories as _Main-Traveled Roads_, _Prairie
Folks_, _Rose of Dutcher's Coolly_, _Boy Life on the Prairie_.

HAY, JOHN (1838-1905), b. Salem, Ind. Private secretary to President
Lincoln. Lawyer, journalist, diplomatist, and statesman. _Pike County
Ballads_. Joint author with J. G. Nicolay of _Abraham Lincoln: A History_,
9 vols.

HERRICK, ROBERT (1868-    ), b. Cambridge, Mass. Professor (University of
Chicago), novelist. _The Web of Life_, _The Common Lot_, _The Master of the
Inn_.

HOVEY, RICHARD (1864-1900), b. Normal, Ill. Poet, dramatist. _Songs from
Vagabondia_, _The Marriage of Guenevere_, _Taliesin: A Masque_.

JACKSON, HELEN HUNT (1831-1885), b. Amherst, Mass. Novelist, poet. Her
great western novel, _Ramona_, stands in the same relation to the Indian as
_Uncle Tom's Cabin_ to the negro. Her _Century of Dishonor_ shows the
wrongs done to the Indian race. _Poems_.

LONDON, JACK (1876-1916), b. San Francisco, Calif. Novelist of adventure.
_The Call of the Wild_, _The Children of the Frost_, _The Sea Wolf_, _The
Game_.

LUMMIS, CHARLES F. (1859-    ), b. Lynn, Mass. Traveler, librarian, writer.
_The Spanish Pioneers_, _The Man Who Married the Moon_, _The Enchanted
Burn_.

MCCUTCHEON, GEO. BARR (1866-    ), b. Tippecanoe Co., Ind. Novelist.
_Castle Craneycrow_, _Brewster's Millions_, _Beverly of Graustark_.

MARKHAM, EDWIN (1852-    ), b. Oregon City, Oregon. Poet. _The Man with the
Hoe and Other Poems_.

MILLER, CINCINNATUS HEINE (Joaquin Miller) (1841-1913), b. Wabash District,
Ind. Lived in the far West, about which he writes in his poetry. _Songs of
the Sierras_, _Songs of the Sunlands_, _Songs of the Desert_.

MOODY, WILLIAM VAUGHAN (1869-1910), b. Spencer, Ind. Poet, dramatist. _The
Masque of Judgment_, _The Fire Bringer_, _The Great Divide_ (play).

NICHOLSON, MEREDITH (1866-    ), b. Crawforusville, Ind. Novelist. _The
House of a Thousand Candles_, _The Port of Missing Men_, _The Hoosiers_ (in
_National Studies in American Letters_).

NORRIS, FRANK (1870-1902), b. Chicago, Ill. Realistic novel writer.
_McTeague_, _The Octopus_, _The Pit_.

PHILLIPS, DAVID GRAHAM (1867-1911), b. Madison, Ind. Novelist. _The Social
Secretary_, _The Second Generation_, _The Fashionable Adventures of Joshua
Craig_.

PIATT, JOHN JAMES (1835-    ), b. James Mills, Ind. Poet. _Western
Windows_, _Idyls and Lyrics of the Ohio Valley_, _Poems of Two Friends_
(with W. D. Howells).

RHODES, JAMES FORD (1848-    ), b. Cleveland, Ohio. Historian. _History of
the United States from the Compromise of 1850_, 7 vols. The seventh volume
ends with 1877.

SETON, ERNEST THOMPSON (1860-    ), b. South Shields, Eng. Painter,
naturalist. _Wild Animals I Have Known, Lives of the Hunted, Natural
History of the Ten Commandments, The Trail of the Sandhill Stag, The
Biography of a Grizzly_.

SILL, EDWARD ROWLAND (1841-1887), b. Windsor, Conn. Professor in University
of California. Transcendental poet. Some fine verse may be found in his
volumes, _Hermione and Other Poems_ and _The Hermitage and Later Poems_.

SPALDING, JOHN L. (1840-    ), b. Lebanon, Ky. Roman Catholic archbishop.
_Education and the Higher Life_, _Things of the Mind_, _Socialism and
Labor_

TARKINGTON, NEWTON BOOTH (1869-    ), b. Indianapolis, Ind. Novelist. _The
Gentleman from Indiana, Monsieur Beaucaire, The Two Vanrevels, Cherry, The
Conquest of Canaan._

"THANET, OCTAVE." See FRENCH, ALICE.

THOMPSON, MAURICE (1844-1901), b. Fairfield, Ind. Novelist, naturalist,
poet. Best known works, _By-Ways and Bird Notes_, _My Winter Garden_,
_Alice of Old Vincennes_.

WALLACE, LEW (1827-1905), b. Brookville, Ind. Lawyer, diplomat, author.
_Ben Hur_, a tale of remarkable power; _The Fair God_, _The Prince of
India_.

WHITE, STEWART EDWARD (1873-    ) b. Grand Rapids, Mich. Writer of vigorous
stories of western mountain life. _The Blazed Trail_, _The Silent Places_,
_The Claim Jumpers_, _The Riverman_.

WILCOX, ELLA WHEELER (1855-    ), b. Johnstown Center, Wis. Journalist and
poet. _Poems of Passion_, _Poems of Pleasure_, _Poems of Power_, _Poems of
Sentiment_.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of American Literature
by Reuben Post Halleck





Prepared by tapri@kolumbus.fi (Tapio Riikonen)






THE AMERICAN SENATOR

By Anthony Trollope




VOLUME I



CHAPTER I

Dillsborough


I never could understand why anybody should ever have begun to live
at Dillsborough, or why the population there should have been at
any time recruited by new comers. That a man with a family should
cling to a house in which he has once established himself is
intelligible. The butcher who supplied Dillsborough, or the baker,
or the ironmonger, though he might not drive what is called a
roaring trade, nevertheless found himself probably able to live,
and might well hesitate before he would encounter the dangers of a
more energetic locality. But how it came to pass that he first got
himself to Dillsborough, or his father, or his grandfather before
him, has always been a mystery to me. The town has no attractions,
and never had any. It does not stand on a bed of coal and has no
connection with iron. It has no water peculiarly adapted for beer,
or for dyeing, or for the cure of maladies. It is not surrounded by
beauty of scenery strong enough to bring tourists and holiday
travellers. There is no cathedral there to form, with its bishops,
prebendaries, and minor canons, the nucleus of a clerical circle.
It manufactures nothing specially. It has no great horse fair, or
cattle fair, or even pig market of special notoriety. Every
Saturday farmers and graziers and buyers of corn and sheep do
congregate in a sleepy fashion about the streets, but Dillsborough
has no character of its own, even as a market town. Its chief glory
is its parish church, which is ancient and inconvenient, having not
as yet received any of those modern improvements which have of late
become common throughout England; but its parish church, though
remarkable, is hardly celebrated. The town consists chiefly of one
street which is over a mile long, with a square or market-place in
the middle, round which a few lanes with queer old names are
congregated, and a second small open space among these lanes, in
which the church stands. As you pass along the street north-west,
away from the railway station and from London, there is a steep
hill, beginning to rise just beyond the market-place. Up to that
point it is the High Street, thence it is called Bullock's Hill.
Beyond that you come to Norrington Road,--Norrington being the next
town, distant from Dillsborough about twelve miles. Dillsborough,
however, stands in the county of Rufford, whereas at the top of
Bullock's Hill you enter the county of Ufford, of which Norrington
is the assize town. The Dillsborough people are therefore divided,
some two thousand five hundred of them belonging to Rufford, and
the remaining five hundred to the neighbouring county. This
accident has given rise to not a few feuds, Ufford being a large
county, with pottery, and ribbons, and watches going on in the
farther confines; whereas Rufford is small and thoroughly
agricultural. The men at the top of Bullock's Hill are therefore
disposed to think themselves better than their fellow-townsfolks,
though they are small in number and not specially thriving in their
circumstances.

At every interval of ten years, when the census is taken, the
population of Dillsborough is always found to have fallen off in
some slight degree. For a few months after the publication of the
figures a slight tinge of melancholy comes upon the town. The
landlord of the Bush Inn, who is really an enterprising man in his
way and who has looked about in every direction for new sources of
business, becomes taciturn for a while and forgets to smile upon
comers; Mr. Ribbs, the butcher, tells his wife that it is out of
the question that she and the children should take that
long-talked-of journey to the sea-coast; and Mr. Gregory Masters,
the well-known old-established attorney of Dillsborough, whispers
to some confidential friend that he might as well take down his
plate and shut up his house. But in a month or two all that is
forgotten, and new hopes spring up even in Dillsborough; Mr.
Runciman at the Bush is putting up new stables for hunting-horses,
that being the special trade for which he now finds that there is
an opening; Mrs. Ribbs is again allowed to suggest Mare-Slocumb;
and Mr. Masters goes on as he has done for the last forty years,
making the best he can of a decreasing business.

Dillsborough is built chiefly of brick, and is, in its own way,
solid enough. The Bush, which in the time of the present landlord's
father was one of the best posting inns on the road, is not only
substantial, but almost handsome. A broad coach way, cut through
the middle of the house, leads into a spacious, well-kept, clean
yard, and on each side of the coach way there are bay windows
looking into the street,--the one belonging to the commercial
parlour, and the other to the so-called coffee-room. But the
coffee-room has in truth fallen away from its former purposes, and
is now used for a farmer's ordinary on market days, and other
similar purposes. Travellers who require the use of a public
sitting-room must all congregate in the commercial parlour at the
Bush. So far the interior of the house has fallen from its past
greatness. But the exterior is maintained with much care. The
brickwork up to the eaves is well pointed, fresh, and comfortable
to look at. In front of the carriage-way swings on two massive
supports the old sign of the Bush, as to which it may be doubted
whether even Mr. Runciman himself knows that it has swung there, or
been displayed in some fashion, since it was the custom for the
landlord to beat up wine to freshen it before it was given to the
customers to drink. The church, too, is of brick--though the tower
and chancel are of stone. The attorney's house is of brick, which
shall not be more particularly described now as many of the scenes
which these pages will have to describe were acted there; and
almost the entire High Street in the centre of the town was brick
also.

But the most remarkable house in Dillsborough was one standing in a
short thoroughfare called Hobbs Gate, leading down by the side of
the Bush Inn from the market-place to Church Square, as it is
called. As you pass down towards the church this house is on the
right hand, and it occupies with its garden the whole space between
the market-place and Church Square. But though the house enjoys the
privilege of a large garden,--so large that the land being in the
middle of a town would be of great value were it not that
Dillsborough is in its decadence,--still it stands flush up to the
street upon which the front door opens. It has an imposing flight
of stone steps guarded by iron rails leading up to it, and on each
side of the door there is a row of three windows, and on the two
upper stories rows of seven windows. Over the door there is a
covering, on which there are grotesquely-formed, carved wooden
faces; and over the centre of each window, let into the brickwork,
is a carved stone. There are also numerous underground windows,
sunk below the earth and protected by iron railings. Altogether the
house is one which cannot fail to attract attention; and in the
brickwork is clearly marked the date, 1701,--not the very best
period for English architecture as regards beauty, but one in which
walls and roofs, ceilings and buttresses, were built more
substantially than they are to-day. This was the only house in
Dillsborough which had a name of its own, and it was called Hoppet
Hall, the Dillsborough chronicles telling that it had been
originally built for and inhabited by the Hoppet family. The only
Hoppet now left in Dillsborough is old Joe Hoppet, the ostler at
the Bush; and the house, as was well known, had belonged to some
member of the Morton family for the last hundred years at least.
The garden and ground it stands upon comprise three acres, all of
which are surrounded by a high brick wall, which is supposed to be
coeval with the house. The best Ribston pippins,--some people say
the only real Ribston pippins,--in all Rufford are to be found
here, and its Burgundy pears and walnuts are almost equally
celebrated. There are rumours also that its roses beat everything
in the way of roses for ten miles round. But in these days very few
strangers are admitted to see the Hoppet Hall roses. The pears and
apples do make their way out, and are distributed either by Mrs.
Masters, the attorney's wife, or Mr. Runciman, the innkeeper. The
present occupier of the house is a certain Mr. Reginald Morton,
with whom we shall also be much concerned in these pages, but whose
introduction to the reader shall be postponed for awhile.

The land around Dillsborough is chiefly owned by two landlords, of
whom the greatest and richest is Lord Rufford. He, however, does
not live near the town, but away at the other side of the county,
and is not much seen in these parts unless when the hounds bring
him here, or when, with two or three friends, he will sometimes
stay for a few days at the Bush Inn for the sake of shooting the
coverts. He is much liked by all sporting men, but is not otherwise
very popular with the people round Dillsborough. A landlord if he
wishes to be popular should be seen frequently. If he lives among
his farmers they will swear by him, even though he raises his
rental every ten or twelve years and never puts a new roof to a
barn for them. Lord Rufford is a rich man who thinks of nothing but
sport in all its various shapes, from pigeon-shooting at Hurlingham
to the slaughter of elephants in Africa; and though he is lenient
in all his dealings, is not much thought of in the Dillsborough
side of the county, except by those who go out with the hounds. At
Rufford, where he generally has a full house for three months in
the year and spends a vast amount of money, he is more highly
considered.

The other extensive landlord is Mr. John Morton, a young man, who,
in spite of his position as squire of Bragton, owner of Bragton
Park, and landlord of the entire parishes of Bragton and
Mallingham, the latter of which comes close up to the confines of
Dillsborough,--was at the time at which our story begins, Secretary
of Legation at Washington. As he had been an absentee since he came
of age, soon after which time he inherited the property, he had
been almost less liked in the neighbourhood than the lord. Indeed,
no one in Dillsborough knew much about him, although Bragton Hall
was but four miles from the town, and the Mortons had possessed the
property and lived on it for the last three centuries. But there
had been extravagance, as will hereafter have to be told, and there
had been no continuous residence at Bragton since the death of old
Reginald Morton, who had been the best known and the best loved of
all the squires in Rufford, and had for many years been master of
the Rufford hounds. He had lived to a very great age, and, though
the great-grandfather of the present man, had not been dead above
twenty years. He was the man of whom the older inhabitants of
Dillsborough and the neighbourhood still thought and still spoke
when they gave vent to their feelings in favour of gentlemen. And
yet the old squire in his latter days had been able to do little or
nothing for them,--being sometimes backward as to the payment of
money he owed among them. But he had lived all his days at Bragton
Park, and his figure had been familiar to all eyes in the High
Street of Dillsborough and at the front entrance of the Bush.
People still spoke of old Mr. Reginald Morton as though his death
had been a sore loss to the neighbourhood.

And there were in the country round sundry yeomen, as they ought to
be called,--gentlemen-farmers as they now like to style
themselves,--men who owned some acres of land, and farmed these
acres themselves. Of these we may specially mention Mr. Lawrence
Twentyman, who was quite the gentleman-farmer. He possessed over
three hundred acres of land, on which his father had built an
excellent house. The present Mr. Twentyman, Lawrence Twentyman,
Esquire, as he was called by everybody, was by no means unpopular
in the neighbourhood. He not only rode well to hounds but paid
twenty-five pounds annually to the hunt, which entitled him to feel
quite at home in his red coat. He generally owned a racing colt or
two, and attended meetings; but was supposed to know what he was
about, and to have kept safely the five or six thousand pounds
which his father had left him. And his farming was well done; for
though he was, out-and-out, a gentleman-farmer, he knew how to get
the full worth in work done for the fourteen shillings a week which
he paid to his labourers,--a deficiency in which knowledge is the
cause why gentlemen in general find farming so expensive an
amusement. He was a handsome, good-looking man of about thirty, and
would have been a happy man had he not been too ambitious in his
aspirations after gentry. He had been at school for three years at
Cheltenham College, which, together with his money and appearance
and undoubted freehold property, should, he thought, have made his
position quite secure to him; but, though he sometimes called young
Hampton of Hampton Wick "Hampton," and the son of the rector of
Dillsborough "Mainwaring," and always called the rich young brewers
from Norrington "Botsey,"--partners in the well-known firm of
Billbrook & Botsey; and though they in return called him "Larry"
and admitted the intimacy, still he did not get into their houses.
And Lord Rufford, when he came into the neighbourhood, never asked
him to dine at the Bush. And--worst of all,--some of the sporting
men and others in the neighbourhood, who decidedly were not
gentlemen, also called him "Larry." Mr. Runciman always did so.
Twenty or twenty-five years ago Runciman had been his father's
special friend, before the house had been built and before the days
at Cheltenham College. Remembering this Lawrence was too good a
fellow to rebuke Runciman; but to younger men of that class he
would sometimes make himself objectionable. There was another
keeper of hunting stables, a younger man, named Stubbings, living
at Stanton Corner, a great hunting rendezvous about four miles from
Dillsborough; and not long since Twentyman had threatened to lay
his whip across Stubbings' shoulders if Stubbings ever called him
"Larry" again. Stubbings, who was a little man and rode races, only
laughed at Mr. Twentyman who was six feet high, and told the story
round to all the hunt. Mr. Twentyman was more laughed at than
perhaps he deserved. A man should not have his Christian name used
by every Tom and Dick without his sanction. But the difficulty is
one to which men in the position of Mr. Lawrence Twentyman are
often subject.

Those whom I have named, together with Mr. Mainwaring the rector,
and Mr. Surtees his curate, made up the very sparse aristocracy of
Dillsborough. The Hamptons of Hampton Wick were Ufford men, and
belonged, rather to Norrington than Dillsborough. The Botseys, also
from Norrington, were members of the U.R.U., or Ufford and Rufford
United Hunt Club; but they did not much affect Dillsborough as a
town. Mr. Mainwaring, who has been mentioned, lived in another
brick house behind the church, the old parsonage of St. John's.
There was also a Mrs. Mainwaring, but she was an invalid. Their
family consisted of one son, who was at Brasenose at this time. He
always had a horse during the Christmas vacation, and if rumour did
not belie him, kept two or three up at Oxford. Mr. Surtees, the
curate, lived in lodgings in the town. He was a painstaking,
clever, young man, with aspirations in church matters, which were
always being checked by his rector. Quieta non movere was the motto
by which the rector governed his life, and he certainly was not at
all the man to allow his curate to drive him into activity.

Such, at the time of our story, was the little town of
Dillsborough.



CHAPTER II

The Morton Family


I can hardly describe accurately the exact position of the Masters
family without first telling all that I know about the Morton
family; and it is absolutely essential that the reader should know
all the Masters family intimately. Mr. Masters, as I have said in
the last chapter, was the attorney in Dillsborough, and the Mortons
had been for centuries past the squires of Bragton.

I need not take the reader back farther than old Reginald Morton.
He had come to the throne of his family as a young man, and had sat
upon it for more than half a century. He had been a squire of the
old times, having no inclination for London seasons, never wishing
to keep up a second house, quite content with his position as quire
of Bragton, but with considerable pride about him as to that
position. He had always liked to have his house full, and had hated
petty oeconomies. He had for many years hunted the county at his
own expense, the amusement at first not having been so expensive as
it afterwards became. When he began the work, it had been considered
sufficient to hunt twice a week. Now the Rufford and Ufford hounds
have four days, and sometimes a bye. It went much against Mr.
Reginald Morton's pride when he was first driven to take a
subscription.

But the temporary distress into which the family fell was caused
not so much by his own extravagance as by that of two sons, and by
his indulgence in regard to them. He had three children, none of
whom were very fortunate in life. The eldest, John, married the
daughter of a peer, stood for Parliament, had one son, and died
before he was forty, owing something over 20,000 pounds. The estate
was then worth 7,000 pounds a year. Certain lands not lying either
in Bragton or Mallingham were sold, and that difficulty was
surmounted, not without a considerable diminution of income.
In process of time the grandson, who was a second John Morton,
grew up and married, and became the father of a third John Morton,
the young man who afterwards became owner of the property and
Secretary of Legation at Washington. But the old squire outlived
his son and his grandson, and when he died had three or four
great-grand-children playing about the lawns of Bragton Park. The
peer's daughter had lived, and had for many years drawn a dower
from the Bragton property, and had been altogether a very heavy
incumbrance.

But the great trial of the old man's life, as also the great
romance, had arisen from the career of his second son, Reginald. Of
all his children, Reginald had been the dearest to him. He went to
Oxford, and had there spent much money; not as young men now spend
money, but still to an extent that had been grievous to the old
squire. But everything was always paid for Reginald. It was
necessary, of course, that he should have a profession, and he took
a commission in the army. As a young man he went to Canada. This
was in 1829, when all the world was at peace, and his only
achievement in Canada was to marry a young woman who is reported to
have been pretty and good, but who had no advantages either of
fortune or birth. She was, indeed, the daughter of a bankrupt
innkeeper in Montreal. Soon after this he sold out and brought his
wife home to Bragton. It was at this period of the squire's life
that the romance spoken of occurred. John Morton, the brother with
the aristocratic wife, was ten or twelve years older than Reginald,
and at this time lived chiefly at Bragton when he was not in town.
He was, perhaps, justified in regarding Bragton as almost belonging
to him, knowing as he did that it must belong to him after his
father's lifetime, and to his son after him. His anger against his
brother was hot, and that of his wife still hotter. He himself had
squandered thousands, but then he was the heir. Reginald, who was
only a younger brother, had sold his commission. And then he had
done so much more than this! He had married a woman who was not a
lady! John was clearly of opinion that at any rate the wife should
not be admitted into Bragton House. The old squire in those days
was not a happy man; he had never been very strong-minded, but now
he was strong enough to declare that his house-door should not be
shut against a son of his,--or a son's wife, as long as she was
honest. Hereupon the Honourable Mrs. Morton took her departure, and
was never seen at Bragton again in the old squire's time. Reginald
Morton came to the house, and soon afterwards another little
Reginald was born at Bragton Park. This happened as long ago as
1835, twenty years before the death of the old squire.

But there had been another child, a daughter, who had come between
the two sons, still living in these days, who will become known to
any reader who will have patience to follow these pages to the end.
She married, not very early in life, a certain Sir William Ushant,
who was employed by his country in India and elsewhere, but who
found, soon after his marriage, that the service of his country
required that he should generally leave his wife at Bragton. As her
father had been for many years a widower, Lady Ushant became the
mistress of the house.

But death was very busy with the Mortons. Almost every one died,
except the squire himself and his daughter, and that honourable
dowager, with her income and her pride who could certainly very
well have been spared. When at last, in 1855, the old squire went,
full of years, full of respect, but laden also with debts and money
troubles, not only had his son John, and his grandson John, gone
before him, but Reginald and his wife were both lying in Bragton
Churchyard.

The elder branch of the family, John the great-grandson, and his
little sisters, were at once taken away from Bragton by the
honourable grandmother. John, who was then about seven years old,
was of course the young squire, and was the owner of the property.
The dowager, therefore, did not undertake an altogether
unprofitable burden. Lady Ushant was left at the house, and with
Lady Ushant, or rather immediately subject to her care, young
Reginald Morton, who was then nineteen years of age, and who was
about to go to Oxford. But there immediately sprang up family
lawsuits, instigated by the honourable lady on behalf of her
grandchildren, of which Reginald Morton was the object. The old man
had left certain outlying properties to his grandson Reginald, of
which Hoppet Hall was a part. For eight or ten years the lawsuit
was continued, and much money was expended. Reginald was at last
successful, and became the undoubted owner of Hoppet Hall; but in
the meantime he went to Germany for his education, instead of to
Oxford, and remained abroad even after the matter was decided,--
living, no one but Lady Ushant knew where, or after what fashion.

When the old squire died the children were taken away, and Bragton
was nearly deserted. The young heir was brought up with every
caution, and, under the auspices of his grandmother and her family,
behaved himself very unlike the old Mortons. He was educated at
Eton, after leaving which he was at once examined for Foreign
Office employment, and commenced his career with great eclat. He
had been made to understand clearly that it would be better that he
should not enter in upon his squirearchy early in life. The estate
when he came of age had already had some years to recover itself,
and as he went from capital to capital, he was quite content to
draw from it an income which enabled him to shine with peculiar
brilliance among his brethren. He had visited Bragton once since
the old squire's death, and had found the place very dull and
uninviting. He had no ambition whatever to be master of the U.R.U.;
but did look forward to a time when he might be Minister
Plenipotentiary at some foreign court.

For many years after the old man's death, Lady Ushant, who was then
a widow, was allowed to live at Bragton. She was herself childless,
and being now robbed of her great-nephews and nieces, took a little
girl to live with her, named Mary Masters. It was a very desolate
house in those days, but the old lady was careful as to the
education of the child, and did her best to make the home happy for
her. Some two or three years before the commencement of this story
there arose a difference between the manager of the property and
Lady Ushant, and she was made to understand, after some
half-courteous manner, that Bragton house and park would do better
without her. There would be no longer any cows kept, and painters
must come into the house, and there were difficulties about fuel.
She was not turned out exactly; but she went and established
herself in lonely lodgings at Cheltenham. Then Mary Masters, who
had lived for more than a dozen years at Bragton, went back to her
father's house in Dillsborough.

Any reader with an aptitude for family pedigrees will now
understand that Reginald, Master of Hoppet Hall, was first cousin
to the father of the Foreign Office paragon, and that he is
therefore the paragon's first cousin once removed. The relationship
is not very distant, but the two men, one of whom was a dozen years
older than the other, had not seen each other for more than twenty
years,--at a time when one of them was a big boy, and the other a
very little one; and during the greater part of that time a lawsuit
had been carried on between them in a very rigorous manner. It had
done much to injure both, and had created such a feeling of
hostility that no intercourse of any kind now existed between them.

It does not much concern us to know how far back should be dated
the beginning of the connection between the Morton family and that
of Mr. Masters, the attorney; but it is certain that the first
attorney of that name in Dillsborough became learned in the law
through the patronage of some former Morton. The father of the
present Gregory Masters, and the grandfather, had been thoroughly
trusted and employed by old Reginald Morton, and the former of the
two had made his will. Very much of the stewardship and management
of the property had been in their hands, and they had thriven as
honest men, but as men with a tolerably sharp eye to their own
interests. The late Mr. Masters had died a few years before the
squire, and the present attorney had seemed to succeed to these
family blessings. But the whole order of things became changed.
Within a few weeks of the squire's death Mr. Masters found that he
was to be entrusted no further with the affairs of the property,
but that, in lieu of such care, was thrown upon him the task of
defending the will which he had made against the owner of the
estate. His father and grandfather had contrived between them to
establish a fairly good business, independently of Bragton, which
business, of course, was now his. As far as reading went, and
knowledge, he was probably a better lawyer than either of them; but
he lacked their enterprise and special genius, and the thing had
dwindled with him. It seemed to him, perhaps not unnaturally, that
he had been robbed of an inheritance. He had no title deeds, as had
the owners of the property; but his ancestors before him, from
generation to generation, had lived by managing the Bragton
property. They had drawn the leases, and made the wills, and
collected the rents, and had taught themselves to believe that a
Morton could not live on his land without a Masters. Now there was
a Morton who did not live on his land, but spent his rents
elsewhere without the aid of any Masters, and it seemed to the old
lawyer that all the good things of the world had passed away. He
had married twice, his first wife having, before her marriage, been
well known at Bragton Park. When she had died, and Mr. Masters had
brought a second wife home, Lady Ushant took the only child of the
mother, whom she had known as a girl, into her own keeping, till
she also had been compelled to leave Bragton. Then Mary Masters had
returned to her father and stepmother.

The Bragton Park residence is a large, old-fashioned, comfortable
house, but by no means a magnificent mansion. The greater part of
it was built one hundred and fifty years ago, and the rooms are
small and low. In the palmy days of his reign, which is now more
than half a century since, the old squire made alterations, and
built new stables and kennels, and put up a conservatory; but what
he did then has already become almost old-fashioned now. What he
added he added in stone, but the old house was brick. He was much
abused at the time for his want of taste, and heard a good deal
about putting new cloth as patches on old rents; but, as the shrubs
and ivy have grown up, a certain picturesqueness has come upon the
place, which is greatly due to the difference of material. The
place is somewhat sombre, as there is no garden close to the house.
There is a lawn, at the back, with gravel walks round it; but it is
only a small lawn; and then divided from the lawn by a ha-ha fence,
is the park. The place, too, has that sad look which always comes
to a house from the want of a tenant. Poor Lady Ushant, when she
was there, could do little or nothing. A gardener was kept, but
there should have been three or four gardeners. The man grew
cabbages and onions, which he sold, but cared nothing for the walks
or borders. Whatever it may have been in the old time, Bragton Park
was certainly not a cheerful place when Lady Ushant lived there. In
the squire's time the park itself had always been occupied by deer.
Even when distress came he would not allow the deer to be sold. But
after his death they went very soon, and from that day to the time
of which I am writing, the park has been leased to some butchers or
graziers from Dillsborough.

The ground hereabouts is nearly level, but it falls away a little
and becomes broken and pretty where the river Dill runs through the
park, about half a mile from the house. There is a walk called the
Pleasance, passing down through shrubs to the river, and then
crossing the stream by a foot-bridge, and leading across the fields
towards Dillsborough. This bridge is, perhaps, the prettiest spot
in Bragton, or, for that matter, anywhere in the county round; but.
even here there is not much of beauty to be praised. It is here, on
the side of the river away from the house, that the home meet of
the hounds used to be held; and still the meet at Bragton Bridge is
popular in the county.



CHAPTER III

The Masters Family


At six o'clock one November morning, Mr. Masters, the attorney, was
sitting at home with his family in the large parlour of his house,
his office being on the other side of the passage which cut the
house in two and was formally called the hall. Upstairs, over the
parlour, was a drawing-room; but this chamber, which was supposed
to be elegantly furnished, was very rarely used. Mr. and Mrs.
Masters did not see much company, and for family purposes the
elegance of the drawing-room made it unfit. It added, however, not
a little to the glory of Mrs. Masters' life. The house itself was a
low brick building in the High Street, at the corner where the High
Street runs into the market-place, and therefore, nearly opposite
to the Bush. It had none of the elaborate grandeur of the inn nor
of the simple stateliness of Hoppet Hall, but, nevertheless, it
maintained the character of the town and was old, substantial,
respectable, and dark.

"I think it a very spirited thing of him to do, then," said Mrs.
Masters.

"I don't know, my dear. Perhaps it is only revenge."

"What have you to do with that? What can it matter to a lawyer
whether it's revenge or anything else? He's got the means, I
suppose?"

"I don't know, my dear."

"What does Nickem say?"

"I suppose he has the means," said Mr. Masters, who was aware that
if he told his wife a fib on the matter, she would learn the truth
from his senior clerk, Mr. Samuel Nickem. Among the professional
gifts which Mr. Masters possessed, had not been that great gift of
being able to keep his office and his family distinct from each
other. His wife always knew what was going on, and was very free
with her advice; generally tendering it on that side on which money
was to be made, and doing so with much feminine darkness as to
right or wrong. His Clerk, Nickem, who was afflicted with no such
darkness, but who ridiculed the idea of scruple in an attorney,
often took part against him. It was the wish of his heart to get
rid of Nickem; but Nickem would have carried business with him and
gone over to some enemy, or, perhaps have set up in some irregular
manner on his own bottom; and his wife would have given him no
peace had he done so, for she regarded Nickem as the mainstay of
the house.

"What is Lord Rufford to you?" asked Mrs. Masters.

"He has always been very friendly."

"I don't see it at all. You have never had any of his money. I
don't know that you are a pound richer by him."

"I have always gone with the gentry of the county."

"Fiddlesticks! Gentry! Gentry are very well as long as you can make
a living out of them. You could afford to stick up for gentry till
you lost the Bragton property." This was a subject that was always
sore between Mr. Masters and his wife. The former Mrs. Masters had
been a lady--the daughter of a neighbouring clergyman; and had been
much considered by the family at Bragton. The present Mrs. Masters
was the daughter of an ironmonger at Norrington, who had brought a
thousand pounds with her, which had been very useful. No doubt Mr.
Masters' practice had been considerably affected by the lowliness
of his second marriage. People who used to know the first Mrs.
Masters, such as Mrs. Mainwaring, and the doctor's wife, and old
Mrs. Cooper, the wife of the vicar of Mallingham, would not call on
the second Mrs. Masters. As Mrs. Masters was too high-spirited to
run after people who did not want her, she took to hating gentry
instead.

"We have always been on the other side," said the old attorney, "I
and my father and grandfather before me."

"They lived on it and you can't. If you are going to say that you
won't have any client that isn't a gentleman, you might as well put
up your shutters at once."

"I haven't said so. Isn't Runciman my client?" "He always goes with
the gentry. He a'most thinks he's one of them himself."

"And old Nobbs, the greengrocer. But it's all nonsense. Any man is
my client, or any woman, Who can come and pay me for business that
is fit for me to do."

"Why isn't this fit to be done? If the man's been damaged, why
shouldn't he be paid?"

"He's had money offered him."

"If he thinks it ain't enough, who's to say that it is,--unless a
jury?" said Mrs. Masters, becoming quite eloquent. "And how's a
poor man to get a jury to say that, unless he comes to a lawyer? Of
course, if you won't have it, he'll go to Bearside. Bearside won't
turn him away." Bearside was another attorney, an interloper of
about ten years' standing, whose name was odious to Mr. Masters.

"You don't know anything about it, my dear," said he, aroused at
last to anger.

"I know you're letting anybody who likes take the bread out of the
children's mouths." The children, so called, were sitting round the
table and could not but take an interest in the matter. The eldest
was that Mary Masters, the daughter of the former wife, whom Lady
Ushant had befriended, a tall girl, with dark brown hair, so dark
as almost to be black, and large, soft, thoughtful grey eyes. We
shall have much to say of Mary Masters, and can hardly stop to give
an adequate description of her here. The others were Dolly and
Kate, two girls aged sixteen and fifteen. The two younger
"children" were eating bread and butter and jam in a very healthy
manner, but still had their ears wide open to the conversation that
was being held. The two younger girls sympathised strongly with
their mother. Mary, who had known much about the Mortons, and was
old enough to understand the position which her grandfather had
held in reference to the family, of course leaned in her heart to
her father's side. But she was wiser than her father, and knew that
in such discussions her mother often showed a worldly wisdom which,
in their present circumstances, they could hardly afford to
disregard, unpalatable through it might be.

Mr. Masters disliked these discussions altogether, but he disliked
them most of all in presence of his children. He looked round upon
them in a deprecatory manner, making a slight motion with his hand
and bringing his head down on one side, and then he gave a long
sigh. If it was his intention to convey some subtle warning to his
wife, some caution that she alone should understand, he was
deceived. The "children" all knew what he meant quite as well as
did their mother.

"Shall we go out, mamma?" asked Dolly. "Finish your teas, my
dears," said Mr. Masters, who wished to stop the discussion rather
than to carry it on before a more select audience.

"You've got to make up your mind to-night," said Mrs. Masters, "and
you'll be going over to the Bush at eight"

"No, I needn't. He is to come on Monday. I told Nickem I wouldn't
see him to-night; nor, of course, to-morrow."

"Then he'll go to Bearside."

"He may go to Bearside and be --! Oh, Lord! I do wish you'd let me
drop the business for a few minutes when I am in here. You don't
know anything about it. How should you?"

"I know that if I didn't speak you'd let everything slip through
your fingers. There's Mr. Twentyman. Kate, open the door."

Kate, who was fond of Mr. Twentyman, rushed up, and opened the
front door at once. In saying so much of Kate, I do not mean it to
be understood that any precocious ideas of love were troubling that
young lady's bosom. Kate Masters was a jolly bouncing schoolgirl of
fifteen, who was not too proud to eat toffy, and thought herself
still a child. But she was very fond of Lawrence Twentyman, who had
a pony that she could ride, and who was always good-natured to her.
All the family liked Mr. Twentyman,--unless it might be Mary, who
was the one that he specially liked himself. And Mary was not
altogether averse to him, knowing him to be good-natured, manly,
and straightforward. But Mr. Twentyman had proposed to her, and she
had certainly not accepted him. This, however, had broken none of
the family friendship. Every one in the house, unless it might be
Mary herself, hoped that Mr. Twentyman might prevail at last. The
man was worth six or seven hundred a year, and had a good house,
and owed no one a shilling. He was handsome, and about the
best-tempered fellow known. Of course they all desired that he
should prevail with Mary. "I wish that I were old enough, Larry,
that's all!" Kate had said to him once, laughing. "I wouldn't have
you, if you were ever laughing." "I wouldn't have you, if you were
ever so old," Larry had replied; "you'd want to be out hunting
every day." That will show the sort of terms that Larry was on with
his friend Kate. He called at the house every Saturday with the
declared object of going over to the club that was held that
evening in the parlour at the Bush, whither Mr. Masters also always
went. It was understood at home that Mr. Masters should attend this
club every Saturday from eight till eleven, but that he was not at
any other time to give way to the fascinations of the Bush. On this
occasion, and we may say on almost every Saturday night, Mr.
Twentyman arrived a full hour before the appointed time. The reason
of his doing so was of course well understood, and was quite
approved by Mrs. Masters. She was not, at any rate as yet, a cruel
stepmother; but still, if the girl could be transferred to so
eligible a home as that which Mr. Twentyman could give her, it
would be well for all parties.

When he took his seat he did not address himself specially to the
lady of his love. I don't know how a gentleman is to do so in the
presence of her father, and mother, and sisters. Saturday after
Saturday he probably thought that some occasion would arise; but,
if his words could have been counted, it would have been found that
he addressed fewer to her than to any one in the room.

"Larry," said his special friend Kate, "am I to have the pony at
the Bridge meet?"

"How very free you are, Miss!" said her mother.

"I don't know about that," said Larry. "When is there to be a meet
at the Bridge? I haven't heard."

"But I have. Tony Tuppett told me that they would be there this day
fortnight." Tony Tuppett was the huntsman of the U.R.U.

"That's more than Tony can know. He may have guessed it."

"Shall I have the pony if he has guessed right?"

Then the pony was promised; and Kate, trusting in Tony Tuppett's
sagacity, was happy.

"Have you heard of all this about Dillsborough Wood?" asked Mrs.
Masters. The attorney shrank at the question, and shook himself
uneasily in his chair.

"Yes; I've heard about it," said Larry.

"And what do you think about it? I don't see why Lord Rufford is to
ride over everybody because he's a lord." Mr. Twentyman scratched
his head. Though a keen sportsman himself, he did not specially
like Lord Rufford,--a fact which had been very well known to Mrs.
Masters. But, nevertheless, this threatened action against the
nobleman was distasteful to him. It was not a hunting affair, or
Mr. Twentyman could not have doubted for a moment. It was a
shooting difficulty, and as Mr. Twentyman had never been asked to
fire a gun on the Rufford preserves, it was no great sorrow to him
that there should be such a difficulty. But the thing threatened
was an attack upon the country gentry and their amusements, and Mr.
Twentyman was a country gentleman who followed sport. Upon the
whole his sympathies were with Lord Rufford.

"The man is an utter blackguard, you know," said Larry. "Last year
he threatened to shoot the foxes in Dillsborough Wood."

"No!" said Kate, quite horrified.

"I'm afraid he's a bad sort of fellow all round," said the
attorney.

"I don't see why he shouldn't claim what he thinks due to him,"
said Mrs. Masters.

"I'm told that his lordship offered him seven-and-six an acre for
the whole of the two fields," said the gentleman-farmer.

"Goarly declares," said Mrs. Masters, "that the pheasants didn't
leave him four bushels of wheat to the acre."

Goarly was the man who had proposed himself as a client to Mr.
Masters, and who was desirous of claiming damages to the amount of
forty shillings an acre for injury, done to the crops on two fields
belonging to himself which lay adjacent to Dillsborough Wood, a
covert belonging to Lord Rufford, about four miles from the town,
in which both pheasants and foxes were preserved with great care.

"Has Goarly been to you?" asked Twentyman.

Mr. Masters nodded his head. "That's just it," said Mrs. Masters.
"I don't see why a man isn't to go to law if he pleases--that
is, if he can afford to pay for it. I have nothing to say against
gentlemen's sport; but I do say that they should run the same
chance as others. And I say it's a shame if they're to band
themselves together and make the county too hot to hold any one as
doesn't like to have his things ridden over, and his crops
devoured, and his fences knocked to Jericho. I think there's a
deal of selfishness in sport and a deal of tyranny."

"Oh, Mrs. Masters!" exclaimed Larry.

"Well, I do. And if a poor man,--or a man whether he's poor or no,"
added Mrs. Masters, correcting herself, as she thought of the money
which this man ought to have in order that he might pay for his
lawsuit,--"thinks himself injured, it's nonsense to tell me that
nobody should take up his case. It's just as though the butcher
wouldn't sell a man a leg of mutton because Lord Rufford had a
spite against him. Who's Lord Rufford?"

"Everybody knows that I care very little for his lordship," said'
Mr. Twentyman.

"Nor I; and I don't see why Gregory should. If Goarly isn't
entitled to what he wants he won't get it; that's all. But let it
be tried fairly."

Hereupon Mr. Masters took up his hat and left the room, and Mr.
Twentyman followed him, not having yet expressed any positive
opinion on the delicate matter submitted to his judgment. Of
course, Goarly was a brute. Had he not threatened to shoot foxes?
But, then, an attorney must live by lawsuits, and it seemed to Mr.
Twentyman that an attorney should not stop to inquire whether a new
client is a brute or not.



CHAPTER IV

The Dillsborough Club

The club, so called at Dillsborough, was held every Saturday
evening in a back parlour at the Bush, and was attended generally
by seven or eight members. It was a very easy club. There was no
balloting, and no other expense attending it other than that of
paying for the liquor which each man chose to drink. Sometimes,
about ten o'clock, there was a little supper, the cost of which was
defrayed by subscription among those who partook of it. It was one
rule of the club, or a habit, rather, which had grown to be a rule,
that Mr. Runciman might introduce into it any one he pleased. I do
not know that a similar privilege was denied to any one else; but
as Mr. Runciman had a direct pecuniary advantage in promoting the
club, the new-comers were generally ushered in by him. When the
attorney and Twentyman entered the room Mr. Runciman was seated as
usual in an arm-chair at the corner of the fire nearest to the
door, with the bell at his right hand. He was a hale, good-looking
man about fifty, with black hair, now turning grey at the edges,
and a clean-shorn chin. He had a pronounced strong face of his own,
one capable of evincing anger and determination when necessary, but
equally apt for smiles or, on occasion, for genuine laughter. He
was a masterful but a pleasant man, very civil to customers and to
his friends generally while they took him the right way; but one
who could be a Tartar if he were offended, holding an opinion that
his position as landlord of an inn was one requiring masterdom. And
his wife was like him in everything,--except in this, that she
always submitted to him. He was a temperate man in the main; but on
Saturday nights he would become jovial, and sometimes a little
quarrelsome. When this occurred the club would generally break
itself up and go home to bed, not in the least offended. Indeed Mr.
Runciman was the tyrant of the club, though it was held at his
house expressly with the view of putting money into his pocket.
Opposite to his seat was another arm-chair,--not so big as Mr.
Runciman's, but still a soft and easy chair, which was always left
for the attorney. For Mr. Masters was a man much respected through
all Dillsborough, partly on his own account, but more perhaps for
the sake of his father and grandfather. He was a round-faced,
clean-shorn man, with straggling grey hair, who always wore black
clothes and a white cravat. There was something in his appearance
which recommended him among his neighbours, who were disposed to
say he "looked the gentleman;" but a stranger might have thought
his cheeks to be flabby and his mouth to be weak.

Making a circle, or the beginning of a circle, round the fire, were
Nupper, the doctor,--a sporting old bachelor doctor who had the
reputation of riding after the hounds in order that he might be
ready for broken bones and minor accidents; next to him, in another
arm-chair, facing the fire, was Ned Botsey, the younger of the two
brewers from Norrington, who was in the habit during the hunting
season of stopping from Saturday to Monday at the Bush, partly
because the Rufford hounds hunted on Saturday and Monday and on
those days seldom met in the Norrington direction, and partly
because he liked the sporting conversation of the Dillsborough
Club. He was a little man, very neat in his attire, who liked to be
above his company, and fancied that he was so in Mr. Runciman's
parlour. Between him and the attorney's chair was Harry Stubbings,
from Stanton Corner, the man who let out hunters, and whom
Twentyman had threatened to thrash. His introduction to the club
had taken place lately, not without some opposition; but Runciman
had set his foot upon that, saying that it was "all d-- nonsense."
He had prevailed, and Twentyman had consented to meet the man; but
there was no great friendship between them. Seated back on the sofa
was Mr. Ribbs, the butcher, who was allowed into the society as
being a specially modest man. His modesty, perhaps, did not hinder
him in an affair of sheep or bullocks, nor yet in the collection of
his debts; but at the club he understood his position, and rarely
opened his mouth to speak. When Twentyman followed the attorney
into the room there was a vacant chair between Mr. Botsey and Harry
Stubbings; but he would not get into it, preferring to seat himself
on the table at Botsey's right hand.

"So Goarly was with you, Mr. Masters," Mr. Runciman began as soon
as the attorney was seated. It was clear that they had all been
talking about Goarly and his law-suit, and that Goarly and the
law-suit would be talked about very generally in Dillsborough.

"He was over at my place this evening," said the attorney.

"You are not going to take his case up for him, Mr. Masters?" said
young Botsey. "We expect something better from you than that."

Now Ned Botsey was rather an impudent young man, and Mr. Masters,
though he was mild enough at home, did not like impudence from the
world at large. "I suppose, Mr. Botsey," said he, "that if Goarly
were to go to you for a barrel of beer you'd sell it to him?"

"I don't know whether I should or not. I dare say my people would.
But that's a different thing."

"I don't see any difference at all. You're not very particular as
to your customers, and I don't ask you any questions about them.
Ring the bell, Runciman, please." The bell was rung, and the two
newcomers ordered their liquor.

It was quite right that Ned Botsey should be put down. Every one in
the room felt that. But there was something in the attorney's tone
which made the assembled company feel that he had undertaken
Goarly's case; whereas, in the opinion of the company, Goarly was a
scoundrel with whom Mr. Masters should have had nothing to do. The
attorney had never been a sporting man himself, but he had always
been, as it were, on that side.

"Goarly is a great fool for his pains," said the doctor. "He has
had a very fair offer made him, and, first or last, it'll cost him
forty pounds."

"He has got it into his head," said the landlord, "that he can sue
Lord Rufford for his fences. Lord Rufford is not answerable for his
fences."

"It's the loss of crop he's going for," said Twentyman.

"How can there be pheasants to that amount in Dillsborough Wood,"
continued the landlord, "when everybody knows that foxes breed
there every year? There isn't a surer find for a fox in the whole
county. Everybody knows that Lord Rufford never lets his game stand
in the way of foxes."

Lord Rufford was Mr. Runciman's great friend and patron and best
customer, and not a word against Lord Rufford was allowed in that
room, though elsewhere in Dillsborough ill-natured things were
sometimes said of his lordship. Then there came on that well-worn
dispute among sportsmen, whether foxes and pheasants are or are not
pleasant companions to each other. Every one was agreed that, if
not, then the pheasants should suffer, and that any country
gentleman who allowed his gamekeeper to entrench on the privileges
of foxes in order that pheasants might be more abundant, was a
"brute" and a "beast," and altogether unworthy to live in England.
Larry Twentyman and Ned Botsey expressed an opinion that pheasants
were predominant in Dillsborough Wood, while Mr. Runciman, the
doctor, and Harry Stubbings declared loudly that everything that
foxes could desire was done for them in that Elysium of sport.

"We drew the wood blank last time we were there," said Larry.
"Don't you remember, Mr. Runciman, about the end of last March?"

"Of course I remember," said the landlord. "Just the end of the
season, when two vixens had litters in the wood! You don't suppose
Bean was going to let that old butcher, Tony, find a fox in
Dillsborough at that time." Bean was his lordship's head gamekeeper
in that part of the country. "How many foxes had we found there
during the season?"

"Two or three," suggested Botsey.

"Seven!" said the energetic landlord; "seven, including
cub-hunting,--and killed four! If you kill four foxes out of an
eighty-acre wood, and have two litters at the end of the season,
I don't think you have much to complain of."

"If they all did as well as Lord Rufford, you'd have more foxes
than you'd know what to do with," said the doctor.

Then this branch of the conversation was ended by a bet of a new
hat between Botsey and the landlord as to the finding of a fox in
Dillsborough Wood when it should next be drawn; as to which, when
the speculation was completed, Harry Stubbings offered Mr. Runciman
ten shillings down for his side of the bargain.

But all this did not divert the general attention from the
important matter of Goarly's attack. "Let it be how it will," said
Mr. Runciman, "a fellow like that should be put down." He did not
address himself specially to Mr. Masters, but that gentleman felt
that he was being talked at.

"Certainly he ought," said Dr. Nupper. "If he didn't feel satisfied
with what his lordship offered him, why couldn't he ask his
lordship to refer the matter to a couple of farmers who understood
it?"

"It's the spirit of the thing," said Mr. Ribbs, from his place on
the sofa. "It's a hodious spirit."

"That's just it, Mr. Ribbs," said Harry Stubbings. "It's all meant
for opposition. Whether it's shooting or whether it's hunting, it's
all one. Such a chap oughtn't to be allowed to have land. I'd take
it away from him by Act of Parliament. It's such as him as is
destroying the country."

"There ain't many of them hereabouts, thank God!" said the
landlord.

"Now, Mr. Twentyman," said Stubbings, who was anxious to make
friends with the gentleman-farmer, "you know what land can do, and
what land has done, as well as any man. What would you say was the
real damage done to them two wheat-fields by his lordship's game
last autumn? You saw the crops as they were growing, and you know
what came off the land."

"I wouldn't like to say."

"But if you were on your oath, Mr. Twentyman?

"Was there more than seven-and-sixpence an acre lost?"

"No, nor five shillings," said Runciman.

"I think Goarly ought to take his lordship's offer--if you mean
that," said Twentyman.

Then there was a pause, during which more drink was brought in, and
pipes were re-lighted. Everybody wished that Mr. Masters might be
got to say that he would not take the case, but there was a
delicacy about asking him. "If I remember right he was in Rufford
Gaol once," said Runciman.

"He was let out on bail and then the matter was hushed up somehow,"
said the attorney.

"It was something about a woman," continued Runciman. "I know that
on that occasion he came out an awful scoundrel."

"Don't you remember," asked Botsey, "how he used to walk up and
down the covert-side with a gun, two years ago, swearing he would
shoot the fox if he broke over his land?"

"I heard him say it, Botsey," said Twentyman. "It wouldn't have
been the first fox he's murdered," said the doctor.

"Not by many," said the landlord.

"You remember that old woman near my place?" said Stubbings. "It
was he that put her up to tell all them lies about her turkeys. I
ran it home to him! A blackguard like that! Nobody ought to take
him up."

"I hope you won't, Mr. Masters;" said the doctor. The doctor was as
old as the attorney, and had known him for many years. No one else
could dare to ask the question.

"I don't suppose I shall, Nupper," said the attorney from his
chair. It was the first word he had spoken since he had put down
young Botsey. "It wouldn't just suit me; but a man has to judge of
those things for himself."

Then there was a general rejoicing, and Mr. Runciman stood broiled
bones, and ham and eggs, and bottled stout for the entire club; one
unfortunate effect of which unwonted conviviality was that Mr.
Masters did not get home till near twelve o'clock. That was sure to
cause discomfort; and then he had pledged himself to decline
Goarly's business.



CHAPTER V

Reginald Morton


We will now go back to Hoppet Hall and its inhabitants. When the
old squire died he left by his will Hoppet Hall and certain other
houses in Dillsborough, which was all that he could leave, to his
grandson Reginald Morton. Then there arose a question whether this
property also was not entailed. The former Mr. Masters, and our
friend of the present day, had been quite certain of the squire's
power to do what he liked with it; but others had been equally
certain on the other side, and there had been a lawsuit. During
that time Reginald Morton had been forced to live on a very small
allowance. His aunt, Lady Ushant, had done what little she could
for him, but it had been felt to be impossible that he should
remain at Bragton, which was the property of the cousin who was at
law with him. From the moment of his birth the Honourable Mrs.
Morton, who was also his aunt by marriage, had been his bitter
enemy. He was the son of an innkeeper's daughter, and according to
her theory of life, should never even have been noticed by the real
Mortons. And this honourable old lady was almost equally adverse to
Lady Ushant, whose husband had simply been a knight, and who had
left nothing behind him. Thus Reginald Morton had been friendless
since his grandfather died, and had lived in Germany, nobody quite
knew how. During the entire period of this law-suit Hoppet Hall had
remained untenanted.

When the property was finally declared to belong to Reginald
Morton, the Hall, before it could be used, required considerable
repair. But there was other property. The Bush Inn belonged to
Reginald Morton, as did the house in which Mr. Masters lived, and
sundry other smaller tenements in the vicinity. There was an income
from these of about five hundred pounds a year. Reginald, who was
then nearly thirty years of age, came over to England, and stayed
for a month or two at Bragton with his aunt, to the infinite
chagrin of the old dowager. The management of the town property was
entrusted to Mr. Masters, and Hoppet Hall was repaired. At this
period Mr. Mainwaring had just come to Dillsborough, and having a
wife with some money and perhaps quite as much pretension, had
found the rectory too small, and had taken the Hall on a lease for
seven years. When this was arranged Reginald Morton again went to
Germany, and did not return till the lease had run out. By that
time Mr. Mainwaring, having spent a little money, found that the
rectory would be large enough for his small family. Then the Hall
was again untenanted for awhile, till, quite suddenly, Reginald
Morton returned to Dillsborough, and took up his permanent
residence in his own house.

It soon became known that the new-comer would not add much to the
gaiety of the place. The only people whom he knew in Dillsborough
were his own tenants, Mr. Runciman and Mr. Masters, and the
attorney's eldest daughter. During those months which he had spent
with Lady Ushant at Bragton, Mary had been living there, then a
child of twelve years old; and, as a child, had become his fast
friend. With his aunt he had, continually corresponded, and partly
at her instigation, and partly from feelings of his own, he had at
once gone to the attorney's house. This was now two years since,
and he had found in his old playmate a beautiful young woman, in
his opinion very unlike the people with whom she lived. For the
first twelvemonths he saw her occasionally,--though not indeed very
often. Once or twice he had drunk tea at the attorney's house, on
which occasions the drawing-room upstairs had been almost as grand
as it was uncomfortable. Then the attentions of Larry Twentyman
began to make themselves visible, infinitely to Reginald Morton's
disgust. Up to that time he had no idea of falling in love with the
girl himself. Since he had begun to think on such subjects at all
he had made up his mind that he would not marry. He was almost the
more proud of his birth by his father's side, because he had been
made to hear so much of his mother's low position. He had told
himself a hundred times that under no circumstances could he marry
any other than a lady of good birth. But his own fortune was small,
and he knew himself well enough to be sure that he would not marry
for money. He was now nearly forty years of age and had never yet
been thrown into the society of any one that had attracted him. He
was sure that he would not marry. And yet when he saw that Mr.
Twentyman was made much of and flattered by the whole Masters
family, apparently because he was regarded as an eligible husband
for Mary, Reginald Morton was not only disgusted, but personally
offended. Being a most unreasonable man he conceived a bitter
dislike to poor Larry, who, at any rate, was truly in love, and was
not looking too high in desiring to marry the portionless daughter
of the attorney. But Morton thought that the man ought to be kicked
and horsewhipped, or, at any rate, banished into some speechless
exile for his presumption.

With Mr. Runciman he had dealings, and in some sort friendship.
There were two meadows attached to Hoppet Hall, fields lying close
to the town, which were very suitable for the landlord's purposes.
Mr. Mainwaring had held them in his own hands, taking them up from
Mr. Runciman, who had occupied them while the house was untenanted,
in a manner which induced Mr. Runciman to feel that it was useless
to go to church to hear such sermons as those preached by the
rector. But Morton had restored the fields, giving them rent free,
on condition that he should be supplied with milk and butter. Mr.
Runciman, no doubt, had the best of the bargain, as he generally
had in all bargains; but he was a man who liked to be generous when
generously treated. Consequently he almost overdid his neighbour
with butter and cream, and occasionally sent in quarters of lamb
and sweetbreads to make up the weight. I don't know that the
offerings were particularly valued; but friendship was engendered.
Runciman, too, had his grounds for quarrelling with those who had
taken up the management of the Bragton property after the squire's
death, and had his own antipathy to the Honourable Mrs. Morton and
her grandson, the Secretary of Legation. When the law-suit was
going on he had been altogether on Reginald Morton's side. It was
an affair of sides, and quite natural that Runciman and the
attorney should be friendly with the new-comer at Hoppet Hall,
though there were very few points of personal sympathy between
them.

Reginald Morton was no sportsman, nor was he at all likely to
become a member of the Dillsborough Club. It was currently reported
of him in the town that he had never sat on a horse or fired off a
gun. As he had been brought up as a boy by the old squire this was
probably an exaggeration, but it is certain that at this period of
his life he had given up any aptitudes in that direction for which
his early training might have suited him. He had brought back with
him to Hoppet Hall many cases of books which the ignorance of
Dillsborough had magnified into an enormous library, and he was
certainly a sedentary, reading man. There was already a report in
the town that he was engaged in some stupendous literary work, and
the men and women generally looked upon him as a disagreeable
marvel of learning. Dillsborough of itself was not bookish, and
would have regarded any one known to have written an article in a
magazine almost as a phenomenon.

He seldom went to church, much to the sorrow of Mr. Surtees, who
ventured to call at the house and remonstrate with him. He never
called again. And though it was the habit of Mr. Surtees' life to
speak as little ill as possible of any one, he was not able to say
any good of Mr. Morton. Mr. Mainwaring, who would never have
troubled himself though his parishioner had not entered a place of
worship once in a twelvemonth, did say many severe things against
his former landlord. He hated people who were unsocial and averse
to dining out, and who departed from the ways of living common
among English country gentlemen. Mr. Mainwaring was, upon the
whole, prepared to take the other side.

Reginald Morton, though he was now nearly forty, was a young
looking handsome man, with fair hair, cut short, and a light beard,
which was always clipped. Though his mother had been an innkeeper's
daughter in Montreal he had the Morton blue eyes and the handsome
well-cut Morton nose. He was nearly six feet high, and strongly
made, and was known to be a much finer man than the Secretary of
Legation, who was rather small, and supposed to be not very robust.

Our lonely man was a great walker, and had investigated every lane
and pathway, and almost every hedge within ten miles of
Dillsborough before he had resided there two years; but his
favourite rambles were all in the neighbourhood of Bragton. As
there was no one living in the house,--no one but the old
housekeeper who had lived there always,--he was able to wander
about the place as he pleased. On the Tuesday afternoon, after
the meeting of the Dillsborough Club which has been recorded, he
was seated, about three o'clock, on the rail of the foot-bridge
over the Dil, with a long German pipe hanging from his mouth. He
was noted throughout the whole country for this pipe, or for others
like it, such a one usually being in his mouth as he wandered
about. The amount of tobacco which he had smoked since his return
to these parts, exactly in that spot, was considerable, for there
he might have been found at some period of the afternoon at least
three times a week. He would sit on this rail for half an hour
looking down at the sluggish waters of the little river, rolling
the smoke out of his mouth at long intervals, and thinking perhaps
of the great book which he was supposed to be writing. As he sat
there now, he suddenly heard voices and laughter, and presently
three girls came round the corner of the hedge, which, at this
spot, hid the Dillsborough path,--and he saw the attorney's three
daughters.

"It's Mr. Morton," said Dolly in a whisper.

"He's always walking about Bragton," said Kate in another whisper.
"Tony Tuppett says that he's the Bragton ghost"

"Kate," said Mary, also in a low voice, "you shouldn't talk so much
about what you hear from Tony Tuppett."

"Bosh!" said Kate, who knew that she could not be scolded in the
presence of Mr. Morton.

He came forward and shook hands with them all, and took off his hat
to Mary. "You've walked a long way, Miss Masters," he said.

"We don't think it far. I like sometimes to come and look at the
old place."

"And so do I. I wonder whether you remember how often I've sat you
on this rail and threatened to throw you into the river?"

"I remember very well that you did threaten me once, and that I
almost believed that you would throw me in."

"What had she done that was naughty, Mr. Morton?" asked Kate.

"I don't think she ever did anything naughty in those days. I don't
know whether she has changed for the worse since."

"Mary is never naughty now," said Dolly. "Kate and I are naughty,
and it's very much better fun than being good."

"The world has found out that long ago, Miss Dolly; only the world
is not quite so candid in owning it as you are. Will you come and
walk round the house, Miss Masters? I never go in, but I have no
scruples about the paths and park."

At the end of the bridge leading into the shrubbery there was a
stile, high indeed, but made commodiously with steps, almost like a
double stair case, so that ladies could pass it without trouble.
Mary had given her assent to the proposed walk, and was in the act
of putting out her hand to be helped over the stile, when Mr.
Twentyman appeared at the other side of it.

"If here isn't Larry!" said Kate.

Morton's face turned as black as thunder, but he immediately went
back across the bridge, leading Mary with him. The other girls, who
had followed him on to the bridge, had of course to go back also.

Mary was made very unhappy by the meeting. Mr. Morton would of
course think that it had been planned, whereas by Mary herself it
had been altogether unexpected. Kate, when the bridge was free,
rushed over it and whispered something to Larry. The meeting had
indeed been planned between her and Dolly and the lover, and this
special walk had been taken at the request of the two younger
girls.

Morton stood stock still, as though he expected that Twentyman
would pass by. Larry hurried over the bridge, feeling sure that the
meeting with Morton had been accidental and thinking that he would
pass on towards the house.

Larry was not at all ashamed of his purpose, nor was he inclined to
give way and pass on. He came up boldly to his love, and shook
hands with her with a pleasant smile. "If you are walking back to
Dillsborough," he said, "maybe you'll let me go a little way with
you?"

"I was going round the house with Mr. Morton," she said timidly.

"Perhaps I can join you?" said he, bobbing his head at the other
man.

"If you intended to walk back with Mr. Twentyman--," began Morton.

"But I didn't," said the poor girl, who in truth understood more of
it all than did either of the two men. "I didn't expect him, and I
didn't expect you. It's a pity I can't go both ways, isn't it?" she
added, attempting to appear cheerful.

"Come back, Mary," said Kate; "we've had walking enough, and shall
be awfully tired before we get home."

Mary had thought that she would like extremely to go round the
house with her old friend and have a hundred incidents of her early
life called to her memory. The meeting with Reginald Morton had
been altogether pleasant to her. She had often felt how much she
would have liked it had the chance of her life enabled her to see
more frequently one whom as a child she had so intimately known.
But at the moment she lacked the courage to walk boldly across the
bridge, and thus to rid herself of Lawrence Twentyman. She had
already perceived that Morton's manner had rendered it impossible
that her lover should follow them. "I am afraid I must go home,"
she said. It was the very thing she did not want to do,--this
going home with Lawrence Twentyman; and yet she herself said that
she must do it,--driven to say so by a nervous dread of showing
herself to be fond of the other man's company.

"Good afternoon to you," said Morton very gloomily, waving his hat
and stalking across the bridge.



CHAPTER VI

Not in Love


Reginald Morton, as he walked across the bridge towards the house,
was thoroughly disgusted with all the world. He was very angry with
himself, feeling that he had altogether made a fool of himself by
his manner. He had shown himself to be offended, not only by Mr.
Twentyman, but by Miss Masters also, and he was well aware, as he
thought of it all, that neither of them had given him any cause of
offence. If she chose to make an appointment for a walk with Mr.
Lawrence Twentyman and to keep it, what was that to him? His anger
was altogether irrational, and he knew that it was so. What right
had he to have an opinion about it if Mary Masters should choose to
like the society of Mr. Twentyman? It was an affair between her and
her father and mother in which he could have no interest; and yet
he had not only taken offence, but was well aware that he had shown
his feeling.

Nevertheless, as to the girl herself, he could not argue himself
out of his anger. It was grievous to him that he should have gone
out of his way to ask her to walk with him just at the moment when
she was expecting this vulgar lover,--for that she had expected him
he felt no doubt. Yet he had heard her disclaim any intention of
walking with the man! But girls are sly, especially when their
lovers are concerned. It made him sore at heart to feel that this
girl should be sly, and doubly sore to think that she should have
been able to love such a one as Lawrence Twentyman.

As he roamed about among the grounds this idea troubled him much.
He assured himself that he was not in love with her himself, and
that he had no idea of falling in love with her; but it sickened
him to think that a girl who had been brought up by his aunt, who
had been loved at Bragton, whom he had liked, who looked so like a
lady, should put herself on a par with such a wretch as that. In
all this he was most unjust to both of them. He was specially
unjust to poor Larry, who was by no means a wretch. His costume was
not that to which Morton had been accustomed in Germany, nor would
it have passed without notice in Bond Street. But it was rational
and clean. When he came to the bridge to meet his sweetheart he had
on a dark-green shooting coat, a billicock hat, brown breeches, and
gaiters nearly up to his knees. I don't know that a young man in
the country could wear more suitable attire. And he was a well-made
man, just such a one as, in this dress, would take the eye of a
country girl. There was a little bit of dash about him, just a
touch of swagger, which better breeding might have prevented. But
it was not enough to make him odious to an unprejudiced observer. I
could fancy that an old lady from London, with an eye in her head
for manly symmetry, would have liked to look at Larry, and would
have thought that a girl in Mary's position would be happy in
having such a lover, providing that his character was good and his
means adequate. But Reginald Morton was not an old woman, and to
his eyes the smart young farmer with his billicock hat, not quite
straight on his head, was an odious thing to behold. He exaggerated
the swagger, and took no notice whatever of the well-made limbs.
And then this man had proposed to accompany him, had wanted to join
his party, had thought it possible that a flirtation might be
carried on in his presence! He sincerely hated the man. But what
was he to think of such a girl as Mary Masters when she could bring
herself to like the attentions of such a lover?

He was very cross with himself because he knew how unreasonable was
his anger. Of one thing only could he assure himself,--that he
would never again willingly put himself in Mary's company. What was
Dillsborough and the ways of its inhabitants to him? Why should he
so far leave the old fashions of his life as to fret himself about
an attorney's daughter in a little English town? And yet he did
fret himself, walking rapidly, and smoking his pipe a great deal
quicker than was his custom.

When he was about to return home he passed the front of the house,
and there, standing at the open door, he saw Mrs. Hopkins, the
housekeeper, who had in truth been waiting for him. He said a
good-natured word to her, intending to make his way on without
stopping, but she called him back. "Have you heard the news,
Mr. Reginald?" she said.

"I haven't heard any news this twelvemonth," he replied.

"Laws, that is so like you, Mr. Reginald. The young squire is to be
here next week."

"Who is the young squire? I didn't know there was any squire now."

"Mr. Reginald!"

"A squire as I take it, Mrs. Hopkins, is a country gentleman who
lives on his own property. Since my grandfather's time no such
gentleman has lived at Bragton."

"That's true, too, Mr. Reginald. Any way Mr. Morton is coming down
next week."

"I thought he was in America."

"He has come home, for a turn like,--and is staying up in town with
the old lady." The old lady always meant the Honourable Mrs.
Morton.

"And is the old lady coming down with him?"

"I fancy she is, Mr. Reginald. He didn't say as much, but only that
there would be three or four, a couple of ladies he said, and
perhaps more. So I am getting the east bedroom, with the
dressing-room, and the blue room for her ladyship." People about
Bragton had been accustomed to call Mrs. Morton her ladyship.
"That's where she always used to be. Would you come in and see,
Mr. Reginald?"

"Certainly not, Mrs. Hopkins. If you were asking me into a house of
your own, I would go in and see all the rooms and chat with you for
an hour; but I don't suppose I shall ever go into this house again
unless things change very much indeed."

"Then I'm sure I hope they will change, Mr. Reginald." Mrs. Hopkins
had known Reginald Morton as a boy growing up into manhood, had
almost been present at his birth, and had renewed her friendship
while he was staying with Lady Ushant; but of the present squire,
as she called him, she had seen almost nothing, and what she had
once remembered of him had now been obliterated by an absence of
twenty years. Of course she was on Reginald's side in the family
quarrel, although she was the paid servant of the Foreign Office
paragon.

"And they are to be here next week. What day next week, Mrs.
Hopkins?" Mrs. Hopkins didn't know on what day she was to expect
the visitors, nor how long they intended to stay. Mr. John Morton
had said in his letter that he would send his own man down two days
before his arrival, and that was nearly all that he had said.

Then Morton started on his return walk to Dillsborough, again
taking the path across the bridge. "Ah!" he said to himself with a
shudder as he crossed the stile, thinking of his own softened
feelings as he had held out his hand to help Mary Masters, and then
of his revulsion of feeling when she declared her purpose of
walking home with Mr. Twentyman. And he struck the rail of the
bridge with his stick as though he were angry with the place
altogether. And he thought to himself that he would never come
there any more, that he hated the place, and that he would never
cross that bridge again.

Then his mind reverted to the tidings he had heard from Mrs.
Hopkins. What ought he to do when his cousin arrived? Though there
had been a long lawsuit, there had been no actual declared quarrel
between him and the heir. He had, indeed, never seen the heir for
the last twenty years, nor had they ever interchanged letters.
There had been no communication whatever between them, and
therefore there could hardly be a quarrel. He disliked his cousin;
nay, almost hated him; he was quite aware of that. And he was sure
also that he hated that Honourable old woman worse than any one
else in the world, and that he always would do so. He knew that the
Honourable old woman had attempted to drive his own mother from
Bragton, and of course he hated her. But that was no reason why he
should not call on his cousin. He was anxious to do what was right.
He was specially anxious that blame should not be attributed to
him. What he would like best would be that he might call, might
find nobody at home,--and that then John Morton should not return
the courtesy. He did not want to go to Bragton as a guest; he did
not wish to be in the wrong himself; but he was by no means equally
anxious that his cousin should keep himself free from reproach.

The bridge path came out on the Dillsborough road just two miles
from the town, and Morton, as he got over the last stile, saw
Lawrence Twentyman coming towards him on the road. The man, no
doubt, had gone all the way into Dillsborough with the girls, and
was now returning home. The parish of Bragton lies to the left of
the high road as you go into the town from Rufford and the
direction of London, whereas Chowton Farm, the property of Mr.
Twentyman, is on the right of the road, but in the large parish of
St. John's, Dillsborough. Dillsborough Wood lies at the back of
Larry Twentyman's land, and joining on to Larry's land and also to
the wood is the patch of ground owned by "that scoundrel Goarly".
Chowton Farm gate opens on to the high road, so that Larry was now
on his direct way home. As soon as he saw Morton he made up his
mind to speak to him. He was quite sure from what had passed
between him and the girls, on the road home, that he had done
something wrong. He was convinced that he had interfered in some
ill-bred way, though he did not at all know how. Of Reginald Morton
he was not in the least jealous. He, too, was of a jealous
temperament, but it had never occurred to him to join Reginald
Morton and Mary Masters together. He was very much in love with
Mary, but had no idea that she was in any way above the position
which she might naturally hold as daughter of the Dillsborough
attorney. But of Reginald Morton's attributes and scholarship and
general standing he had a mystified appreciation which saved him
from the pain of thinking that such a man could be in love with his
sweetheart. As he certainly did not wish to quarrel with Morton,
having always taken Reginald's side in the family disputes, he
thought that he would say a civil word in passing, and, if
possible, apologise. When Morton came up he raised his hand to his
head and did open his mouth, though not pronouncing any word very
clearly. Morton looked at him as grim as death, just raised his
hand, and then passed on with a quick step. Larry was displeased;
but the other was so thoroughly a gentleman,--one of the Mortons,
and a man of property in the county,--that he didn't even yet wish
to quarrel with him. "What the deuce have I done?" said he to
himself as he walked on--"I didn't tell her not to go up to the
house. If I offered to walk with her what was that to him?" It must
be remembered that Lawrence Twentyman was twelve years younger than
Reginald Morton, and that a man of twenty-eight is apt to regard a
man of forty as very much too old for falling in love. It is a
mistake which it will take him fully ten years to rectify, and then
he will make a similar mistake as to men of fifty. With his awe for
Morton's combined learning and age, it never occurred to him to be
jealous.

Morton passed on rapidly, almost feeling that he had been a brute.
But what business had the objectionable man to address him? He
tried to excuse himself, but yet he felt that he had been a brute,
and had so demeaned himself in reference to the daughter of the
Dillsborough attorney! He would teach himself to do all he could to
promote the marriage. He would give sage advice to Mary Masters as
to the wisdom of establishing herself,--having not an hour since
made up his mind that he would never see her again! He would
congratulate the attorney and Mrs. Masters. He would conquer the
absurd feeling which at present was making him wretched. He would
cultivate some sort of acquaintance with the man, and make the
happy pair a wedding present. But, yet, what "a beast" the man was,
with that billicock hat on one side of his head, and those tight
leather gaiters.

As he passed through the town towards his own house, he saw Mr.
Runciman standing in front of the hotel. His road took him up Hobbs
gate, by the corner of the Bush; but Runciman came a little out of
the way to meet him. "You have heard the news?" said the innkeeper.

"I have heard one piece of news."

"What's that, sir?"

"Come,--you tell me yours first"

"The young squire is coming down to Bragton next week."

"That's my news too. It is not likely that there should be two
matters of interest in Dillsborough on the same day."

"I don't know why Dillsborough should be worse off than any other
place, Mr. Morton; but at any rate the squire's coming."

"So Mrs. Hopkins told me. Has he written to you?"

"His coachman or his groom has; or perhaps he keeps what they call
an ekkery. He's much too big a swell to write to the likes of me.
Lord bless me,--when I think of it, I wonder how many dozen of
orders I've had from Lord Rufford under his own hand. 'Dear
Runcimam, dinner at eight; ten of us; won't wait a moment. Yours
R.' I suppose Mr. Morton would think that his lordship had let
himself down by anything of that sort?"

"What does my cousin want?"

"Two pair of horses,--for a week certain, and perhaps longer, and
two carriages. How am I to let anyone have two pair of horses for a
week certain,--and perhaps longer? What are other customers to do?
I can supply a gentleman by the month and buy horses to suit; or I
can supply him by the job. But I guess Mr. Morton don't well know
how things are managed in this country. He'll have to learn.

"What day does he come?"

"They haven't told me that yet, Mr. Morton."



CHAPTER VII

The Walk Home


Mary Masters, when Reginald Morton had turned his back upon her at
the bridge, was angry with herself and with him, which was
reasonable; and very angry also with Larry Twentyman, which was
unreasonable. As she had at once acceded to Morton's proposal that
they should walk round the house together, surely he should not
have deserted her so soon. It had not been her fault that the other
man had come up. She had not wanted him. But she was aware that
when the option had in some sort been left to herself, she had
elected to walk back with Larry. She knew her own motives and her
own feelings, but neither of the men would understand them. Because
she preferred the company of Mr. Morton, and had at the moment
feared that her sisters would have deserted her had she followed
him, therefore she had declared her purpose of going back to
Dillsborough, in doing which she knew that Larry and the girls
would accompany her. But of course Mr, Morton would think that she
had preferred the company of her recognised admirer. It was pretty
well known in Dillsborough that Larry was her lover. Her stepmother
had spoken of it very freely; and Larry himself was a man who did
not keep his lights hidden under a bushel. "I hope I've not been in
the way, Mary," said Mr. Twentyman, as soon as Morton was out of
hearing.

"In the way of what?"

"I didn't think there was any harm in offering to go up to the
house with you if you were going."

"Who has said there was any harm?" The path was only broad enough
for one and she was walking first. Larry was following her and the
girls were behind him.

"I think that Mr. Morton is a very stuck-up fellow," said Kate, who
was the last.

"Hold your tongue, Kate," said Mary. "You don't know what you are
talking about"

"I know as well as any one when a person is good-natured. What made
him go off in that hoity-toity fashion? Nobody had said anything to
him."

"He always looks as though he were going to eat somebody," said
Dolly.

"He shan't eat me," said Kate.

Then there was a pause, during which they all went along quickly,
Mary leading the way. Larry felt that he was wasting his
opportunity; and yet hardly knew how to use it, feeling that the
girl was angry with him.

"I wish you'd say, Mary, whether you think that I did anything
wrong?"

"Nothing wrong to me, Mr. Twentyman."

"Did I do anything wrong to him?"

"I don't know how far you may be acquainted with him. He was
proposing to go somewhere, and you offered to go with him."

"I offered to go with you," said Larry, sturdily. "I suppose I'm
sufficiently acquainted with you."

"Quite so," said Mary.

"Why should he be so proud? I never said an uncivil word to him.
He's nothing to me. If he can do without me, I'm sure that I can do
without him."

"Very well indeed, I should think."

"The truth is, Mary--"

"There has been quite enough said about it, Mr. Twentyman."

"The truth is, Mary, I came on purpose to have a word with you."
Hearing this, Kate rushed on and pulled Larry by the tail of his
coat.

"How did you know I was to be there?" demanded Mary sharply.

"I didn't know. I had reason to think you perhaps might be there.
The girls I knew had been asking you to come as far as the bridge.
At any rate I took my chance. I'd seen him some time before, and
then I saw you."

"If I'm to be watched about in that way," said Mary angrily, "I
won't go out at all."

"Of course I want to see you. Why shouldn't I? I'm all fair and
above board;--ain't I? Your father and mother know all about it. It
isn't as though I were doing anything clandestine." He paused for a
reply, but Mary walked on in silence. She knew quite well that he
was warranted in seeking her, and that nothing but a very positive
decision on her part could put an end to his courtship. At the
present moment she was inclined to be very positive, but he had
hardly as yet given her an opportunity of speaking out. "I think
you know, Mary, what it is that I want." They were now at a rough
stile which enabled him to come close up to her and help her. She
tripped over the stile with a light step and again walked on
rapidly. The field they were in enabled him to get up to her side,
and now if ever was his opportunity. It was a long straggling
meadow which he knew well, with the Dill running by it all the
way,--or rather two meadows with an open space where there had once
been a gate. He had ridden through the gap a score of times, and
knew that at the further side of the second meadow they would come
upon the high road. The fields were certainly much better for his
purpose than the road. "Don't you think, Mary, you could say a kind
word to me?"

"I never said anything unkind."

"You can't think ill of me for loving you better than all the
world."

"I don't think ill of you at all. I think very well of you."

"That's kind."

"So I do. How can I help thinking well of you, when I've never
heard anything but good of you?"

"Then why shouldn't you say at once that you'll have me, and make
me the happiest man in all the county?"

"Because--"

"Well!"

"I told you before, Mr. Twentyman, and that ought to have been
enough. A young woman doesn't fall in love with every man that she
thinks well of. I should like you as well as all the rest of the
family if you would only marry some other girl,"

"I shall never do that."

"Yes you will;--some day."

"Never. I've set my heart upon it, and I mean to stick to it. I'm
not the fellow to turn about from one girl to another. What I want
is the girl I love. I've money enough and all that kind of thing of
my own."

"I'm sure you're disinterested, Mr. Twentyman."

"Yes, I am. Ever since you've been home from Bragton it has been
the same thing, and when I felt that it was so, I spoke up to your
father honestly. I haven't been beating about the bush, and I
haven't done anything that wasn't honourable." They were very near
the last stile now. "Come, Mary, if you won't make me a promise,
say that you'll think of it"

"I have thought of it, Mr. Twentyman, and I can't make you any
other answer. I dare say I'm very foolish."

"I wish you were more foolish. Perhaps then you wouldn't be so hard
to please."

"Whether I'm wise or foolish, indeed, indeed, it's no good your
going on. Now we're on the road. Pray go back home, Mr. Twentyman."

"It'll be getting dark in a little time."

"Not before we're in Dillsborough. If it were ever so dark we could
find our way home by ourselves. Come along, Dolly."

Over the last stile he had stayed a moment to help the younger
girl, and as he did so Kate whispered a word in his ear. "She's
angry because she couldn't go up to the house with that stuck-up
fellow." It was a foolish word; but then Kate Masters had not
had much experience in the world. Whether overcome by Mary's
resolute mode of speaking, or aware that the high road would not
suit his purpose, he did turn back as soon as he had seen them a
little way on their return towards the town. He had not gone half a
mile before he met Morton, and had been half-minded to make some
apology to him. But Morton had denied him the opportunity, and he
had walked on to his own house,--low in spirits indeed, but still
with none of that sorest of agony which comes to a lover from the
feeling that his love loves some one else. Mary had been very
decided with him,--more so he feared than before; but still he saw
no reason why he should not succeed at last. Mrs. Masters had told
him that Mary would certainly give a little trouble in winning, but
would be the more worth the winner's trouble when won. And she had
certainly shown no preference for any other young man about the
town. There had been a moment when he had much dreaded Mr. Surtees.
Young clergymen are apt to be formidable rivals, and Mr. Surtees
had certainly made some overtures of friendship to Mary Masters.
But Larry had thought that he had seen that these overtures had not
led to much, and then that fear had gone from him. He did believe
that Mary was now angry because she had not been allowed to walk
about Bragton with her old friend Mr. Morton. It had been natural
that she should like to do so. It was the pride of Mary's life that
she had been befriended by the Mortons and Lady Ushant. But it did
not occur to him that he ought to be jealous of Mr. Morton,--though
it had occurred to Kate Masters.

There was very little said between the sisters on their way back to
the town. Mary was pretty sure now that the two girls had made the
appointment with Larry, but she was unwilling to question them on
the subject. Immediately on their arrival at home they heard the
great news. John Morton was coming to Bragton with a party of
ladies and gentlemen. Mrs. Hopkins had spoken of four persons. Mrs.
Masters told Mary that there were to be a dozen at least, and that
four or five pairs of horses and half a dozen carriages had been
ordered from Mr. Runciman. "He means to cut a dash when he does
begin," said Mrs. Masters.

"Is he going to stay, mother?"

"He wouldn't come down in that way if it was only for a few days I
suppose. But what they will do for furniture I don't know."

"There's plenty of furniture, mother."

"A thousand years old. Or for wine, or fruit, or plate."

"The old plate was there when Lady Ushant left."

"People do things now in a very different way from what they used.
A couple of dozen silver forks made quite a show on the old
squire's table. Now they change the things so often that ten dozen
is nothing. I don't suppose there's a bottle of wine in the
cellar."

"They can get wine from Cobbold, mother."

"Cobbold's wine won't go down with them I fancy. I wonder what
servants they're bringing."

When Mr. Masters came in from his office the news was corroborated.
Mr. John Morton was certainly coming to Bragton. The attorney had
still a small unsettled and disputed claim against the owner of the
property, and he had now received by the day mail an answer to a
letter which he had written to Mr. Morton, saying that that
gentleman would see him in the course of the next fortnight.



CHAPTER VIII

The Paragon's Party at Bragton


There was certainly a great deal of fuss made about John Morton's
return to the home of his ancestors,--made altogether by himself
and those about him, and not by those who were to receive him. On
the Thursday in the week following that of which we have been
speaking, two carriages from the Bush met the party at the Railway
Station and took them to Bragton. Mr. Runciman, after due
consideration, put up with the inconsiderate nature of the order
given, and supplied the coaches and horses as required,--consoling
himself no doubt with the reflection that he could charge for the
unreasonableness of the demand in the bill. The coachman and butler
had come down two days before their master, so that things might be
in order. Mrs. Hopkins learned from the butler that though the
party would at first consist only of three, two other very august
persons were to follow on the Saturday,--no less than Lady Augustus
Trefoil and her daughter Arabella. And Mrs. Hopkins was soon led to
imagine, though no positive information was given to her on the
subject, that Miss Trefoil was engaged to be married to their
Master. "Will he live here altogether, Mr, Tankard?" Mrs. Hopkins
asked. To this question Mr. Tankard was able to give a very
definite answer. He was quite sure that Mr. Morton would not live
anywhere altogether. According to Mr. Tankard's ideas, the whole
foreign policy of England depended on Mr. John Morton's presence in
some capital, either in Europe, Asia, or America,--upon Mr.
Morton's presence, and of course upon his own also. Mr. Tankard
thought it not improbable that they might soon be wanted at Hong
Kong, or some very distant place, but in the meantime they were
bound to be back at Washington very shortly. Tankard had himself
been at Washington, and also before that at Lisbon, and could tell
Mrs. Hopkins how utterly unimportant had been the actual ministers
at those places, and how the welfare of England had depended
altogether on the discretion and general omniscience of his young
master,--and of himself. He, Tankard, had been the only person in
Washington who had really known in what order Americans should go
out to dinner one after another. Mr. Elias Gotobed, who was coming,
was perhaps the most distinguished American of the day, and was
Senator for Mickewa.

"Mickey war!" said poor Mrs. Hopkins,--"that's been one of them
terrible American wars we used to hear of." Then Tankard explained
to her that Mickewa was one of the Western States and Mr. Elias
Gotobed was a great Republican, who had very advanced opinions of
his own respecting government, liberty, and public institutions in
general. With Mr. Morton and the Senator was coming the Honourable
Mrs. Morton. The lady had her lady's maid,--and Mr, Morton had his
own man; so that there would be a great influx of persons.

Of course there was very much perturbation of spirit. Mrs. Hopkins,
after that first letter, the contents of which she had communicated
to Reginald Morton, had received various despatches and been asked
various questions. Could she find a cook? Could she find two
housemaids? And all these were only wanted for a time. In her
distress she went to Mrs. Runciman, and did get assistance. "I
suppose he thinks he's to have the cook out of my kitchen?"
Runciman had said. Somebody, however, was found who said she could
cook, and two girls who professed that they knew how to make beds.
And in this way an establishment was ready before the arrival of
the Secretary of Legation and the great American Senator. Those
other. questions of wine and plate and vegetables had, no doubt,
settled themselves after some fashion.

John Morton had come over to England on leave of absence for four
months, and had brought with him the Senator from Mickewa. The
Senator had never been in England before, and was especially
anxious to study the British Constitution and to see the ways of
Britons with his own eyes. He had only been a fortnight in London
before this journey down to the county had been planned. Mr.
Gotobed wished to see English country life and thought that he
could not on his first arrival have a better opportunity. It must
be explained also that there was another motive, for this English
rural sojourn. Lady Augustus Trefoil, who was an adventurous lady,
had been travelling in the United States with her daughter, and had
there fallen in with Mr. John Morton. Arabella Trefoil was a
beauty, and a woman of fashion, and had captivated the Paragon. An
engagement had been made, subject to various stipulations; the
consent of Lord Augustus in the first place,--as to which John
Morton who only understood foreign affairs was not aware, as he
would have been had he lived in England, that Lord Augustus was
nobody. Lady Augustus had spoken freely as to settlements, value of
property, life insurance and such matters; and had spoken firmly,
as well as freely, expressing doubt as to the expediency of such an
engagement;--all of which had surprised Mr. Morton considerably,
for the young lady had at first been left in his hands with almost
American freedom. And now Lady Augustus and her daughter were
coming down on a visit of inspection. They had been told, as had
the Senator, that things would be in the rough. The house had not
been properly inhabited for nearly a quarter of a century. The
Senator had expressed himself quite contented. Lady Augustus had
only hoped that everything would be made as comfortable as possible
for her daughter. I don't know what more could have been done at so
short a notice than to order two carriages, two housemaids, and a
cook.

A word or two must also be said of the old lady who made one of the
party. The Honourable Mrs. Morton was now seventy, but no old lady
ever showed less signs of advanced age. It is not to be understood
from this that she was beautiful;---but that she was very strong.
What might be the colour of her hair, or whether she had any, no
man had known for many years. But she wore so perfect a front that
some people were absolutely deluded. She was very much wrinkled;--
but as there are wrinkles which seem to come from the decay of
those muscles which should uphold the skin, so are there others
which seem to denote that the owner has simply got rid of the
watery weaknesses of juvenility. Mrs. Morton's wrinkles were strong
wrinkles. She was thin, but always carried herself bolt upright,
and would never even lean back in her chair. She had a great idea
of her duty, and hated everybody who differed from her with her
whole heart. She was the daughter of a Viscount, a fact which she
never forgot for a single moment, and which she thought gave her
positive superiority to all women who were not the daughters of
Dukes or Marquises, or of Earls. Therefore, as she did not live
much in the fashionable world, she rarely met any one above
herself. Her own fortune on her marriage had been small, but now
she was a rich woman. Her husband had been dead nearly half a
century and during the whole of that time she had been saving
money. To two charities she gave annually five pounds per annum
each. Duty demanded it, and the money was given. Beyond that she
had never been known to spend a penny in charity. Duty, she had
said more than once, required of her that she do something to
repair the ravages made on the Morton property by the preposterous
extravagance of the old squire in regard to the younger son, and
that son's--child. In her anger she had not hesitated on different
occasions to call the present Reginald a bastard, though the
expression was a wicked calumny for which there was no excuse.
Without any aid of hers the Morton property had repaired itself.
There had been a minority of thirteen or fourteen years, and since
that time the present owner had not spent his income. But John
Morton was not himself averse to money, and had always been careful
to maintain good relations with his grandmother. She had now been
asked down to Bragton in order that she might approve, if possible,
of the proposed wife. It was not likely that she should approve
absolutely of anything; but to have married without an appeal to
her would have been to have sent the money flying into the hands of
some of her poor paternal cousins. Arabella Trefoil was the
granddaughter of a duke, and a step had so far been made in the
right direction. But Mrs. Morton knew that Lord Augustus was
nobody, that there would be no money, and that Lady Augustus had
been the daughter of a banker, and that her fortune had been nearly
squandered.

The Paragon was not in the least afraid of his American visitor,
nor, as far as the comforts of his house were concerned, of his
grandmother. Of the beauty, and her mother he did stand in awe;--
but he had two days in which to look to things before they would
come. The train reached the Dillsborough Station at half-past
three, and the two carriages were there to meet them. "You will
understand, Mr. Gotobed," said the old lady, "that my grandson has
nothing of his own established here as yet." This little excuse was
produced by certain patches and tears in the cushions and linings
of the carriages. Mr. Gotobed smiled and bowed and declared that
everything was "fixed convenient" Then the Senator followed the old
lady into one carriage; Mr. Morton followed alone into the other;
and they were driven away to Bragton.

When Mrs. Hopkins had taken the old lady up to her room Mr. Morton
asked the Senator to walk round the grounds. Mr. Gotobed, lighting
an enormous cigar of which he put half down his throat for more
commodious and quick consumption, walked on to the middle of the
drive, and turning back looked up at the house, "Quite a pile," he
said, observing that the offices and outhouses extended a long way
to the left till they almost joined other buildings in which were
the stables and coach-house.

"It's a good-sized house;"--said the owner; "nothing very
particular, as houses are built now-a-days."

"Damp; I should say?"

"I think not. I have never lived here much myself; but I have not
heard that it is considered so."

"I guess it's damp. Very lonely;--isn't it?"

"We like to have our society inside, among ourselves, in the
country."

"Keep a sort of hotel-like?" suggested Mr. Gotobed. "Well, I don't
dislike hotel life, especially when there are no charges. How many
servants do you want to keep up such a house as that?"

Mr. Morton explained that at present he knew very little about it
himself, then led him away by the path over the bridge, and turning
to the left showed him the building which had once been the kennels
of the Rufford hounds, "All that for dogs!" exclaimed Mr. Gotobed.

"All for dogs," said Morton. "Hounds, we generally call them."

"Hounds are they? Well; I'll remember; though 'dogs' seems to me
more civil. How many used there to be?"

"About fifty couple, I think."

"A hundred dogs! No wonder your country gentlemen burst up so
often. Wouldn't half-a-dozen do as well,--except for the show of
the thing?"

"Half-a-dozen hounds couldn't hunt a fox, Mr. Gotobed."

"I guess half-a-dozen would do just as well, only for the show.
What strikes me, Mr. Morton, on visiting this old country is that
so much is done for show."

"What do you say to New York, Mr. Gotobed?"

"There certainly are a couple of hundred fools in New York, who,
having more money than brains, amuse themselves by imitating
European follies. But you won't find that through the country, Mr.
Morton. You won't find a hundred dogs at an American planter's
house when ten or twelve would do as well."

"Hunting is not one of your amusements."

"Yes it is. I've been a hunter myself. I've had nothing to eat but
what I killed for a month together. That's more than any of your
hunters can say. A hundred dogs to kill one fox!"

"Not all at the same time, Mr. Gotobed."

"And you have got none now?"

"I don't hunt myself."

"And does nobody hunt the foxes about here at present?" Then Morton
explained that on the Saturday following the U.R.U. hounds, under
the mastership of that celebrated sportsman Captain Glomax, would
meet at eleven o'clock exactly at the spot on which they were then
standing, and that if Mr. Gotobed would walk out after breakfast he
should see the whole paraphernalia, including about half a hundred
"dogs," and perhaps a couple of hundred men on horseback. "I shall
be delighted to see any institution of this great country," said
Mr. Gotobed, "however much opposed it may be to my opinion either
of utility or rational recreation." Then, having nearly eaten up
one cigar, he lit another preparatory to eating it, and sauntered
back to the house.

Before dinner that evening there were a few words between the
Paragon and his grandmother. "I'm afraid you won't like my American
friend," he said.

"He is all very well, John. Of course an American member of
Congress can't be an English gentleman. You, in your position, have
to be civil to such people. I dare say I shall get on very well
with Mr. Gotobed."

"I must get somebody to meet him."

"Lady Augustus and her daughter are coming."

"They knew each other in Washington. And there will be so many
ladies."

"You could ask the Coopers from Mallingham," suggested the lady.

"I don't think they would dine out. He's getting very old."

"And I'm told the Mainwarings at Dillsborough are very nice
people," said Mrs. Morton, who knew that Mr. Mainwaring at any rate
came from a good family.

"I suppose they ought to call first. I never saw them in my life.
Reginald Morton, you know, is living at Hoppet Hall in
Dillsborough."

"You don't mean to say you wish to ask him to this house?"

"I think I ought. Why should I take upon myself to quarrel with a
man I have not seen since I was a child, and who certainly is my
cousin?"

"I do not know that he is your cousin; nor do you."

John Morton passed by the calumny which he had heard before, and
which he knew that it was no good for him to attempt to subvert.
"He was received here as one of the family, ma'am."

"I know he was; and with what result?"

"I don't think that I ought to turn my back upon him because my
great-grandfather left property away from me to him. It would give
me a bad name in the county. It would be against me when I settle
down to live here. I think quarrelling is the most foolish thing a
man can do,--especially with his own relations."

"I can only say this, John;--let me know if he is coming, so that I
may not be called upon to meet him. I will not eat at table with
Reginald Morton." So saying the old lady, in a stately fashion,
stalked out of the room.



CHAPTER IX

The Old Kennels


On the next morning Mrs. Morton asked her grandson what he meant to
do with reference to his suggested invitation to Reginald. "As you
will not meet him of course I have given up the idea," he said. The
"of course" had been far from true. He had debated the matter very
much with himself. He was an obstinate man, with something of
independence in his spirit. He liked money, but he liked having his
own way too. The old lady looked as though she might live to be a
hundred,--and though she might last only for ten years longer, was
it worth his while to be a slave for that time? And he was by no
means sure of her money, though he should be a slave. He almost
made up his mind that he would ask Reginald Morton. But then the
old lady would be in her tantrums, and there would be the
disagreeable necessity of making an explanation to that
inquisitive gentleman Mr. Elias Gotobed.

"I couldn't have met him, John; I couldn't indeed. I remember so
well all that occurred when your poor infatuated great-grandfather
would have that woman into the house! I was forced to have my meals
in my bedroom, and to get myself taken away as soon as I could get
a carriage and horses. After all that I ought not to be asked to
meet the child."

"I was thinking of asking old Mr. Cooper on Monday. I know she
doesn't go out. And perhaps Mr. Mainwaring wouldn't take it amiss.
Mr. Puttock, I know, isn't at home; but if he were, he couldn't
come." Mr. Puttock was the rector of Bragton, a very rich living,
but was unfortunately afflicted with asthma.

"Poor man. I heard of that; and he's only been here about six
years. I don't see why Mr. Mainwaring should take it amiss at all.
You can explain that you are only here a few days. I like to meet
clergymen. I think that it is the duty of a country gentleman to
ask them to his house. It shows a proper regard for religion.
By-the-bye, John, I hope that you'll see that they have a fire in
the church on Sunday." The Honourable Mrs. Morton always went to
church, and had no doubt of her own sincerity when she reiterated
her prayer that as she forgave others their trespasses, so might
she be forgiven hers. As Reginald Morton had certainly never
trespassed against her perhaps there was no reason why her thoughts
should be carried to the necessity of forgiving him.

The Paragon wrote two very diplomatic notes, explaining his
temporary residence and expressing his great desire to become
acquainted with his neighbours. Neither of the two clergymen were
offended, and both of them promised to eat his dinner on Monday.
Mr. Mainwaring was very fond of dining out, and would have gone
almost to any gentleman's house. Mr. Cooper had been enough in the
neighbourhood to have known the old squire, and wrote an
affectionate note expressing his gratification at the prospect of
renewing his acquaintance with the little boy whom he remembered.
So the party was made up for Monday. John Morton was very nervous
on the matter, fearing that Lady Augustus would think the land to
be barren.

The Friday passed by without much difficulty. The Senator was
driven about, and everything was inquired into. One or two farm
houses were visited, and the farmers' wives were much disturbed by
the questions asked them. "I don't think they'd get a living in the
States," was the Senator's remark after leaving one of the
homesteads in which neither the farmer nor his wife had shown much
power of conversation. "Then they're right to stay where they are,"
replied Mr. Morton, who in spite of his diplomacy could not save
himself from being nettled. "They seem to get a very good living
here, and they pay their rent punctually."

On the Saturday morning the hounds met at the "Old Kennels," as the
meet was always called, and here was an excellent opportunity of
showing to Mr. Gotobed one of the great institutions of the
country. It was close to the house and therefore could be reached
without any trouble, and as it was held on Morton's own ground, he
could do more towards making his visitor understand the thing than
might have been possible elsewhere. When the hounds moved the
carriage would be ready to take them about the roads, and show them
as much as could be seen on wheels.

Punctually at eleven John Morton and his American guest were on the
bridge, and Tony Tuppett was already occupying his wonted place,
seated on a strong grey mare that had done a great deal of work,
but would live,--as Tony used to say,--to do a great deal more.
Round him the hounds were clustered,--twenty-three couple in all,--
some seated on their haunches, some standing obediently still,
while a few moved about restlessly, subject to the voices and on
one or two occasions to a gentle administration of thong from the
attendant whips. Four or five horsemen were clustering round, most
of them farmers, and were talking to Tony. Our friend Mr. Twentyman
was the only man in a red coat who had yet arrived, and with him,
on her brown pony, was Kate Masters, who was listening with all her
ears to every word that Tony said.

"That, I guess, is the Captain you spoke of," said the Senator
pointing to Tony Tuppett.

"Oh no;--that's the huntsman. Those three men in caps are the
servants who do the work."

"The dogs can't be brought out without servants to mind them!
They're what you call gamekeepers." Morton was explaining that the
men were not gamekeepers when Captain Glomax himself arrived,
driving a tandem. There was no road up to the spot, but on hunt
mornings,--or at any rate when the meet was at the old kennels,--
the park-gates were open so that vehicles could come up on the
green sward.

"That's Captain Glomax, I suppose," said Morton. "I don't know him,
but from the way he's talking to the huntsman you may be sure of
it"

"He is the great man, is he? All these dogs belong to him?"

"Either to him or the hunt"

"And he pays for those servants?"

"Certainly."

"He is a very rich man, I suppose." Then Mr. Morton endeavoured to
explain the position of Captain Glomax. He was not rich. He was no one
in particular--except that he was Captain Glomax; and his one attribute
was a knowledge of hunting. He didn't keep the "dogs" out of his own
pocket. He received 2,000 pounds a year from the gentlemen of the
county, and he himself only paid anything which the hounds and horses
might cost over that. "He's a sort of upper servant then?" asked the
Senator.

"Not at all. He's the greatest man in the county on hunting days."

"Does he live out of it?"

"I should think not."

"It's a deal of trouble, isn't it?"

"Full work for an active man's time, I should say." A great many
more questions were asked and answered, at the end of which the
Senator declared that he did not quite understand it, but that as
far as he saw he did not think very much of Captain Glomax.

"If he could make a living out of it I should respect him," said
the Senator;--" though it's like knife-grinding or handling
arsenic, an unwholesome sort of profession."

"I think they look very nice," said Morton, as one or two
well-turned-out young men rode up to the place.

"They seem to me to have thought more about their breeches than
anything else," said the Senator. "But if they're going to hunt why
don't they hunt? Have they got a fox with them?" Then there was a
further explanation.

At this moment there was a murmur as of a great coming arrival, and
then an open carriage with four post-horses was brought at a quick
trot into the open space. There were four men dressed for hunting
inside, and two others on the box. They were all smoking, and all
talking. It was easy to see that they did not consider themselves
the least among those who were gathered together on this occasion.
The carriage was immediately surrounded by grooms and horses, and
the ceremony of disencumbering themselves of great coats and
aprons, of putting on spurs and fastening hat-strings was
commenced. Then there were whispered communications from the
grooms, and long faces under some of the hats. This horse hadn't
been fit since last Monday's run, and that man's hack wasn't as it
should be. A muttered curse might have been heard from one
gentleman as he was told, on jumping from the box, that Harry
Stubbings hadn't sent him any second horse to ride. "I didn't hear
nothing about it till yesterday, Captain," said Harry Stubbings,
"and every foot I had fit to come out was bespoke." The groom,
however, who heard this was quite aware that Mr. Stubbings did not
wish to give unlimited credit to the Captain, and he knew also that
the second horse was to have carried his master the whole day, as
the animal which was brought to the meet had been ridden hard on
the previous Wednesday. At all this the Senator looked with curious
eyes, thinking that he had never in his life seen brought together
a set of more useless human beings.

"That is Lord Rufford," said Morton, pointing to a stout,
ruddy-faced, handsome man of about thirty, who was the owner of the
carriage.

"Oh, a lord. Do the lords hunt, generally?"

"That's as they like it."

"Senators with us wouldn't have time for that," said the Senator.

"But you are paid to do your work."

"Everybody from whom work is expected should be paid. Then the work
will be done, or those who pay will know the reason why."

"I must speak to Lord Rufford," said Morton. "If you'll come with
me, I'll introduce you." The Senator followed willingly enough and
the introduction was made while his lordship was still standing by
his horse. The two men had known each other in London, and it was
natural that Morton, as owner of the ground, should come out and
speak to the only man who knew him. It soon was spread about that
the gentleman talking to Lord Rufford was John Morton, and many who
lived in the county came up to shake hands with him, To some of
these the Senator was introduced and the conversation for a few
minutes seemed to interrupt the business on hand. "I am sorry you
should be on foot, Mr. Gotobed," said the lord.

"And I am sorry that I cannot mount him," said Mr. Morton.

"We can soon get over that difficulty if he will allow me to offer
him a horse."

The Senator looked as though he would almost like it, but he didn't
quite like it. "Perhaps your horse might kick me off, my lord."

"I can't answer for that; but he isn't given to kicking, and there
he is, if you'll get on him." But the Senator felt that the
exhibition would suit neither his age nor position, and refused.

"We'd better be moving," said Captain Glomax. "I suppose, Lord
Rufford, we might as well trot over to Dillsborough Wood at once. I
saw Bean as I came along and he seemed to wish we should draw the
wood first." Then there was a little whispering between his
lordship and the Master and Tony Tuppett. His lordship thought that
as Mr. Morton was there the hounds might as well be run through the
Bragton spinnies. Tony made a wry face and shook his head. He knew
that though the Old Kennels might be a very good place for meeting
there was no chance of finding a fox at Bragton. And Captain
Glomax, who, being an itinerary master, had no respect whatever for
a country gentleman who didn't preserve, also made a long face and
also shook his head. But Lord Rufford, who knew the wisdom of
reconciling a newcomer in the county to foxhunting, prevailed and
the hounds and men were taken round a part of Bragton Park.

"What if t' old squire 've said if he'd 've known there hadn't been
a fox at Bragton for more nor ten year?" This remark was made by
Tuppett to Mr. Runciman who was riding by him. Mr. Runciman replied
that there was a great difference in people. "You may say that, Mr.
Runciman. It's all changes. His lordship's father couldn't bear the
sight of a hound nor a horse and saddle. Well;--I suppose I needn't
gammon any furder. We'll just trot across to the wood at once"

"They haven't begun yet as far as I can see," said Mr. Gotobed
standing up in the carriage.

"They haven't found as yet," replied Morton.

"They must go on till they find a fox? They never bring him with
them?" Then there was an explanation as to bagged foxes, Morton not
being very conversant with the subject he had to explain. "And if
they shouldn't find one all day?"

"Then it'll be a blank."

"And these hundred gentlemen will go home quite satisfied with
themselves?"

"No; they'll go home quite dissatisfied."

"And have paid their money and given their time for nothing? Do you
know it doesn't seem to me the most heart-stirring thing in the
world. Don't they ride faster than that?" At this moment Tony with
the hounds at his heels was trotting across the park at a
huntsman's usual pace from covert to covert. The Senator was
certainly ungracious. Nothing that he saw produced from him a
single word expressive of satisfaction.

Less than a mile brought them to the gate and road leading up to
Chowton Farm. They passed close by Larry Twentyman's door, and not
a few, though it was not yet more than half-past eleven, stopped to
have a glass of Larry's beer. When the hounds were in the
neighbourhood Larry's beer was always ready. But Tony and his
attendants trotted by with eyes averted, as though no thought of
beer was in their minds. Nothing had been done, and a huntsman is
not entitled to beer till he has found a fox. Captain Glomax
followed with Lord Rufford and a host of others. There was plenty
of way here for carriages, and half a dozen vehicles passed through
Larry's farmyard. Immediately behind the house was a meadow, and at
the bottom of the meadow a stubble field, next to which was the
ditch and bank which formed the bounds of Dillsborough Wood. Just
at this side of the gate leading into the stubble-field there was
already a concourse of people when Tony arrived near it with the
hounds, and immediately there was a holloaing and loud screeching
of directions, which was soon understood to mean that the hounds
were at once to be taken away! The Captain rode on rapidly, and
then sharply gave his orders. Tony was to take the hounds back to
Mr. Twentyman's farmyard as fast as he could, and shut them up in a
barn. The whips were put into violent commotion. Tony was eagerly
at work. Not a hound was to be allowed near the gate. And then, as
the crowd of horsemen and carriages came on, the word "poison" was
passed among them from mouth to mouth!

"What does all this mean?" said the Senator.

"I don't at all know. I'm afraid there's something wrong," replied
Morton.

"I heard that man say `poison'. They have taken the dogs back
again." Then the Senator and Morton got out of the carriage and
made their way into the crowd. The riders who had grooms on second
horses were soon on foot, and a circle was made, inside which there
was some object of intense interest. In the meantime the hounds had
been secured in one of Mr. Twentyman's barns.

What was that object of interest shall be told in the next chapter.



CHAPTER X

Goarly's Revenge


The Senator and Morton followed close on the steps of Lord Rufford
and Captain Glomax and were thus able to make their way into the
centre of the crowd. There, on a clean sward of grass, laid out as
carefully as though he were a royal child prepared for burial,
was--a dead fox. "It's pi'son, my lord; it's pi'son to a moral,"
said Bean, who as keeper of the wood was bound to vindicate himself,
and his master, and the wood. "Feel of him, how stiff he is." A
good many did feel, but Lord Rufford stood still and looked at the
poor victim in silence. "It's easy knowing how he come by it," said
Bean.

The men around gazed into each other's faces with a sad tragic air,
as though the occasion were one which at the first blush was too
melancholy for many words. There was whispering here and there and
one young farmer's son gave a deep sigh, like a steam-engine
beginning to work, and rubbed his eyes with the back of his hand.
"There ain't nothin' too bad,--nothin," said another,--leaving his
audience to imagine whether he were alluding to the wretchedness of
the world in general or to the punishment which was due to the
perpetrator of this nefarious act. The dreadful word "vulpecide"
was heard from various lips with an oath or two before it. "It
makes me sick of my own land, to think it should be done so near,"
said Larry Twentyman, who had just come up. Mr. Runciman declared
that they must set their wits to work not only to find the criminal
but to prove the crime against him, and offered to subscribe a
couple of sovereigns on the spot to a common fund to be raised for
the purpose. "I don't know what is to be done with a country like
this," said Captain Glomax, who, as an itinerant, was not averse to
cast a slur upon the land of his present sojourn.

"I don't remember anything like it on my property before," said the
lord, standing up for his own estate and the county at large.

"Nor in the hunt," said young Hampton. "Of course such a thing may
happen anywhere. They had foxes poisoned in the Pytchley last
year."

"It shows a d-- bad feeling somewhere," said the Master.

"We know very well where the feeling is," said Bean who had by this
time taken up the fox, determined not to allow it to pass into any
hands less careful than his own.

"It's that scoundrel, Goarly," said one of the Botseys. Then there
was an indignant murmur heard, first of all from two or three and
then running among the whole crowd. Everybody knew as well as
though he had seen it that Goarly had baited meat with strychnine
and put it down in the wood. "Might have pi'soned half the pack!"
said Tony Tuppett, who had come up on foot from the barn where
the hounds were still imprisoned, and had caught hold in an
affectionate manner of a fore pad of the fox which Bean had
clutched by the two hind legs. Poor Tony Tuppett almost shed tears
as he looked at the dead animal, and thought what might have been
the fate of the pack. "It's him, my lord," he said, "as we run
through Littleton gorse Monday after Christmas last, and up to
Impington Park where he got away from us in a hollow tree. He's
four year old," added Tony, looking at the animal's mouth, "and
there warn't a finer dog fox in the county."

"Do they know all the foxes?" asked the Senator. In answer to this,
Morton only shook his head, not feeling quite sure himself how far
a huntsman's acquaintance in that line might go, and being also too
much impressed by the occasion for speculative conversation.

"It's that scoundrel Goarly" had been repeated again and again; and
then on a sudden Goarly himself was seen standing on the further
hedge of Larry's field with a gun in his hand. He was not at this
time above two hundred yards from them, and was declared by one of
the young farmers to be grinning with delight. The next field was
Goarly's, but the hedge and ditch belonged to Twentyman. Larry
rushed forward as though determined to thrash the man, and two or
three followed him. But Lord Rufford galloped on and stopped them.
"Don't get into a row with a fellow like that," he said to
Twentyman.

"He's on my land, my lord," said Larry impatiently.

"I'm on my own now, and let me see who'll dare to touch me," said
Goarly jumping down.

"You've put poison down in that wood," said Larry.

"No I didn't; but I knows who did. It ain't I as am afeard for my
young turkeys" Now it was well known that old Mrs. Twentyman,
Larry's mother, was fond of young turkeys, and that her
poultry-yard had suffered. Larry, in his determination to be a
gentleman, had always laughed at his mother's losses. But now to be
accused in this way was terrible to his feelings! He made a rush as
though to jump over the hedge, but Lord Rufford again intercepted
him. "I didn't think, Mr. Twentyman, that you'd care for what such
a fellow as that might say." By this time Lord Rufford was off his
horse, and had taken hold of Larry.

"I'll tell you all what it is," screamed Goarly, standing just at
the edge of his own field,--"if a hound comes out of the wood on to
my land, I'll shoot him. I don't know nothing about p'isoning,
though I dare say Mr. Twentyman does. But if a hound comes on my
land, I'll shoot him,--open, before you all" There was, however, no
danger of such a threat being executed on this day, as of course no
hound would be allowed to go into Dillsborough Wood.

Twentyman was reluctantly brought back into the meadow where the
horses were standing, and then a consultation was held as to what
they should do next. There were some who thought that the hounds
should be taken home for the day. It was as though some special
friend of the U.R.U. had died that morning, and that the spirits of
the sportsmen were too dejected for their sport. Others, with
prudent foresight, suggested that the hounds might run back from
some distant covert to Dillsborough, and that there should be no
hunting till the wood had been thoroughly searched. But the
strangers, especially those who had hired horses, would not hear of
this; and after considerable delay it was arranged that the hounds
should be trotted off as quickly as possible to Impington Gorse,
which was on the other side of Impington Park, and fully five miles
distant. And so they started, leaving the dead fox in the hands of
Bean the gamekeeper.

"Is this the sort of thing that occurs every day?" asked the
Senator as he got back into the carriage.

"I should fancy not," answered Morton. "Somebody has poisoned a
fox, and I don't think that that is very often done about here."

"Why did he poison him?"

"To save his fowls I suppose."

"Why shouldn't he poison him if the fox takes his fowls? Fowls are
better than foxes."

"Not in this country," said Morton.

"Then I'm very glad I don't live here," said Mr. Gotobed. "These
friends of yours are dressed very nicely and look very well,--but a
fox is a nasty animal. It was that man standing up on the bank;--
wasn't it?" continued the Senator, who was determined to understand
it all to the very bottom, in reference to certain lectures which
he intended to give on his return to the States,--and perhaps also
in the old country before he left it.

"They suspect him."

"That man with the gun! One man against two hundred! Now I respect
that man;--I do with all my heart."

"You'd better not say so here, Mr. Gotobed."

"I know how full of prejudice you all air',--but I do respect him.
If I comprehend the matter rightly, he was on his own land when we
saw him."

"Yes;--that was his own field."

"And they meant to ride across it whether he liked it or no?"

"Everybody rides across everybody's land out hunting."

"Would they ride across your park, Mr. Morton, if you didn't let
them?"

"Certainly they would,--and break down all my gates if I had them
locked, and pull down my park palings to let the hounds through."

"And you could get no compensation?"

"Practically I could get none. And certainly I should not try. The
greatest enemy to hunting in the whole county would not be foolish
enough to make the attempt"

"Why so?"

"He would get no satisfaction, and everybody would hate him."

"Then I respect that man the more. What is that man's name?" Morton
hadn't heard the name, or had forgotten it. "I shall find that man
out, and have some conversation with him, Mr. Morton. I respect
that man, Mr. Morton. He's one against two hundred, and he insists
upon his rights. Those men standing round and wiping their eyes,
and stifled with grief because a fox had been poisoned, as though
some great patriot had died among them in the service of his
country, formed one of the most remarkable phenomena, Sir, that
ever I beheld in any country. When I get among my own people in
Mickewa and tell them that, they won't believe me, sir."

In the meantime the cavalcade was hurrying away to Impington
Gorse, and John Morton, feeling that he had not had an opportunity
as yet of showing his American friend the best side of hunting,
went with them. The five miles were five long miles, and as the
pace was not above seven miles an hour, nearly an hour was
occupied. There was therefore plenty of opportunity for the Senator
to inquire whether the gentlemen around him were as yet enjoying
their sport. There was an air of triumph about him as to the
misfortunes of the day, joined to a battery of continued raillery,
which made it almost impossible for Morton to keep his temper. He
asked whether it was not at any rate better than trotting a pair of
horses backwards and forwards over the same mile of road for half
the day, as is the custom in the States. But the Senator, though he
did not quite approve of trotting matches, argued that there was
infinitely more of skill and ingenuity in the American pastime.
"Everybody is so gloomy," said the Senator, lighting his third
cigar. "I've been watching that young man in pink boots for the
last half hour, and he hasn't spoken a word to any one."

"Perhaps he's a stranger," said Morton.

"And that's the way you treat him!"

It was past two when the hounds were put into the gorse, and
certainly no one was in a very good humour. A trot of five miles is
disagreeable, and two o'clock in November is late for finding a
first fox; and then poisoning is a vice that may grow into a habit!
There was a general feeling that Goarly ought to be extinguished,
but an idea that it might be difficult to extinguish him. The
whips, nevertheless, cantered on to the corner of the covert, and
Tony put in his hounds with a cheery voice. The Senator remarked
that the gorse was a very little place,--for as they were on the
side of an opposite hill they could see it all. Lord Rufford, who
was standing by the carriage, explained to him that it was a
favourite resort of foxes, and difficult to draw as being very
close. "Perhaps they've poisoned him too," said the Senator. It was
evident from his voice that had such been the case, he would not
have been among the mourners. "The blackguards are not yet thick
enough in our country for that," said Lord Rufford, meaning to be
sarcastic.

Then a whimper was heard from a hound,--at first very low, and then
growing into a fuller sound. "There he is," said young Hampton.
"For heaven's sake get those fellows away from that side, Glomax."
This was uttered with so much vehemence that the Senator looked up
in surprise. Then the Captain galloped round the side of the
covert, and, making use of some strong language, stopped the ardour
of certain gentlemen who were in a hurry to get away on what they
considered good terms. Lord Rufford, Hampton, Larry Twentyman and
others sat stock-still on their horses, watching the gorse. Ned
Botsey urged himself a little forward down the hill, and was
creeping on when Captain Glomax asked him whether he would be so--
--obliging kind as to remain where he was for half a minute. Fred
took the observations in good part and stopped his horse. "Does he
do all that cursing and swearing for the 2,000 pounds?" asked the
Senator.

The fox traversed the gorse back from side to side and from corner
to corner again and again. There were two sides certainly at which
he might break, but though he came out more than once he could not
be got to go away.

"They'll kill him now before he breaks," said the elder Botsey.

"Brute!" exclaimed his brother.

"They're hot on him now," said Hampton. At this time the whole side
of the hill was ringing with the music of the hounds.

"He was out then, but Dick turned him," said Larry. Dick was one of
the whips.

"Will you be so kind, Mr. Morton," asked the Senator, "as to tell
me whether they're hunting yet? They've been at it for three hours
and a half, and I should like to know when they begin to amuse
themselves."

Just as he had spoken there came from Dick a cry that he was away.
Tony, who had been down at the side of the gorse, at once jumped
into it, knowing the passage through. Lord Rufford, who for the
last five or six minutes had sat perfectly still on his horse,
started down the hill as though he had been thrown from a catapult.
There was a little hand-gate through which it was expedient to
pass, and in a minute a score of men were jostling for the way,
among whom were the two Botseys, our friend Runciman, and Larry
Twentyman, with Kate Masters on the pony close behind him. Young
Hampton jumped a very nasty fence by the side of the wicket, and
Lord Rufford followed him. A score of elderly men, with some young
men among them too, turned back into a lane behind them, having
watched long enough to see that they were to take the lane to the
left, and not the lane to the right. After all there was time
enough, for when the men had got through the hand-gate the hounds
were hardly free of the covert, and Tony, riding up the side of the
hill opposite, was still blowing his horn. But they were off at
last, and the bulk of the field got away on good terms with the
hounds. "Now they are hunting," said Mr. Morton to the Senator.

"They all seemed to be very angry with each other at that narrow
gate"

"They were in a hurry, I suppose."

"Two of them jumped over the hedge. Why didn't they all jump? How
long will it be now before they catch him?"

"Very probably they may not catch him at all."

"Not catch him after all that! Then the man was certainly right to
poison that other fox in the wood. How long will they go on?"

"Half an hour perhaps."

"And you call that hunting! Is it worth the while of all those men
to expend all that energy for such a result? Upon the whole, Mr.
Morton, I should say that it is one of the most incomprehensible
things that I have ever seen in the course of a rather long and
varied life. Shooting I can understand, for you have your birds.
Fishing I can understand, as you have your fish. Here you get a fox
to begin with, and are all broken-hearted. Then you come across
another, after riding about all day, and the chances are you can't
catch him!"

"I suppose," said Mr. Morton angrily, "the habits of one country
are incomprehensible to the people of another. When I see Americans
loafing about in the bar-room of an hotel, I am lost in amazement."

"There is not a man you see who couldn't give a reason for his
being there. He has an object in view, though perhaps it may be no
better than to rob his neighbour. But here there seems to be no
possible motive."



CHAPTER XI

From Impington Gorse


The fox ran straight from the covert through his well-known haunts
to Impington Park, and as the hounds were astray there for two or
three minutes there was a general idea that he too had got up into
a tree,--which would have amused the Senator very much had the
Senator been there. But neither had the country nor the pace been
adapted to wheels, and the Senator and the Paragon were now
returning along the road towards Bragton. The fox had tried his old
earths at Impington High wood, and had then skulked back along the
outside of the covert. Had not one of the whips seen him he would
have been troubled no further on that day, a fact, which if it
could have been explained to the Senator in all its bearings, would
greatly have added to his delight. But Dick viewed him; and with
many holloas and much blowing of horns, and prayers from Captain
Glomax that gentlemen would only be so good as to hold their
tongues, and a full-tongued volley of abuse from half the field
against an unfortunate gentleman who rode after the escaping fox
before a hound was out of the covert, they settled again to their
business. It was pretty to see the quiet ease and apparent
nonchalance and almost affected absence of bustle of those who knew
their work,--among whom were especially to be named young Hampton,
and the elder Botsey, and Lord Rufford, and, above all, a
dark-visaged, long-whiskered, sombre, military man who had been in
the carriage with Lord Rufford, and who had hardly spoken a word to
any one the whole day. This was the celebrated Major Caneback, known
to all the world as one of the dullest men and best riders across
country that England had ever produced. But he was not so dull but
that he knew how to make use of his accomplishment, so as always to
be able to get a mount on a friend's horses. If a man wanted to
make a horse, or to try a horse, or to sell a horse, or to buy a
horse, he delighted to put Major Caneback up. The Major was
sympathetic and made his friend's horses, and tried them, and sold
them. Then he would take his two bottles of wine,--of course from
his friend's cellar,--and when asked about the day's sport would be
oracular in two words, "Rather slow," "Quick spurt," "Goodish
thing," "Regularly mulled," and such like. Nevertheless it was a
great thing to have Major Caneback with you. To the list of those
who rode well and quietly must in justice be added our friend Larry
Twentyman, who was in truth a good horseman. And he had three
things to do which it was difficult enough to combine. He had a
young horse which he would have liked to sell; he had to coach Kate
Masters on his pony; and he desired to ride like Major Caneback.

From Impington Park they went in a straight line to Littleton Gorse
skirting certain small woods which the fox disdained to enter. Here
the pace was very good, and the country was all grass. It was the
very cream of the U.R.U; and could the Senator have read the
feelings of the dozen leading men in the run, he would have owned
that they were for the time satisfied with their amusement. Could
he have read Kate Master's feelings he would have had to own that
she was in an earthly Paradise. When the pony paused at the big
brook, brought his four legs steadily down on the brink as though
he were going to bathe, then with a bend of his back leaped to the
other side, dropping his hind legs in and instantly recovering
them, and when she saw that Larry had waited just a moment for her,
watching to see what might be her fate, she was in heaven. "Wasn't
it a big one, Larry?" she asked in her triumph. "He did go in
behind!" "Those cats of things always do it somehow," Larry replied
darting forward again and keeping the Major well in his eye. The
brook had stopped one or two, and tidings came up that Ned Botsey
had broken his horse's back. The knowledge of the brook had sent
some round by the road,--steady riding men such as Mr. Runciman and
Doctor Nupper. Captain Glomax had got into it and came up
afterwards wet through, with temper by no means improved. But the
glory of the day had been the way in which Lord Rufford's young bay
mare, who had never seen a brook before, had flown over it with the
Major on her back, taking it, as Larry afterwards described, "just
in her stride, without condescending to look at it. I was just
behind the Major, and saw her do it" Larry understood that a man
should never talk of his own place in a run, but he didn't quite
understand that neither should he talk of having been close to
another man who was supposed to have had the best of it. Lord
Rufford, who didn't talk much of these things, quite understood
that he had received full value for his billet and mount in the
improved character of his mare.

Then there, was a little difficulty at the boundary fence of
Impington Hall Farm. The Major who didn't know the ground, tried it
at an impracticable place, and brought his mare down. But she fell
at the right side, and he was quick enough in getting away from
her, not to fall under her in the ditch. Tony Tuppet, who knew
every foot of that double ditch and bank, and every foot in the
hedge above, kept well to the left and crept through a spot where
one ditch ran into the other, intersecting of the fence. Tony, like
a knowing huntsman as he was, rode always for the finish and not
for immediate glory. Both Lord Rufford and Hampton, who in spite of
their affected nonchalance were in truth rather riding against one
another, took it all in a fly, choosing a lighter spot than that
which the Major had encountered. Larry had longed to follow them,
or rather to take it alongside of them, but was mindful at last of
Kate and hurried down the ditch to the spot which Tony had chosen
and which was now crowded by horsemen. "He would have done it as
well as the best of them," said Kate, panting for breath.

"We're all right," said Larry. "Follow me. Don't let them hustle
you out. Now, Mat, can't you make way for a lady half a minute?"
Mat growled, quite understanding the use which was being made of
Kate Masters; but he did give way and was rewarded with a gracious
smile. "You are going uncommon well, Miss Kate," said Mat, "and I
won't stop you." "I am so much obliged to you, Mr. Ruggles," said
Kate, not scrupling for a moment to take the advantage offered her.
The fox had turned a little to the left, which was in Larry's
favour, and the Major was now close to him, covered on one side
with mud, but still looking as though the mud were all right. There
are some men who can crush their hats, have their boots and
breeches full of water, and be covered with dirt from their faces
downwards, and yet look as though nothing were amiss, while, with
others, the marks of a fall are always provocative either of pity
or ridicule. "I hope you're not hurt, Major Caneback," said Larry,
glad of the occasion to speak to so distinguished an individual.
The Major grunted as he rode on, finding no necessity here even for
his customary two words. Little accidents, such as that, were the
price he paid for his day's entertainment.

As they got within view of Littleton Gorse Hampton, Lord Rufford,
and Tony had the best of it, though two or three farmers were very
close to them. At this moment Tony's mind was much disturbed, and
he looked round more than once for Captain Glomax. Captain Glomax
had got into the brook, and had then ridden down to the high road
which ran here near to them and which, as he knew, ran within one
field of the gorse. He had lost his place and had got a ducking and
was a little out of humour with things in general. It had not been
his purpose to go to Impington on this day, and he was still, in
his mind, saying evil things of the U.R.U. respecting that poisoned
fox. Perhaps he was thinking, as itinerant masters often must
think, that it was very hard to have to bear so many unpleasant
things for a poor 2,000 pounds a year, and meditating, as he had
done for the last two seasons, a threat that unless the money were
increased, he wouldn't hunt the country more than three times a
week. As Tony got near to the gorse and also near to the road he
managed with infinite skill to get the hounds off the scent, and to
make a fictitious cast to the left as though he thought the fox had
traversed that way. Tony knew well enough that the fox was at that
moment in Littleton Gorse;--but he knew also that the gorse was
only six acres, that such a fox as he had before him wouldn't stay
there two minutes after the first hound was in it, and that
Dillsborough Wood, which to his imagination was full of poison,--
would then be only a mile and a half before him. Tony, whose fault
was a tendency to mystery,--as is the fault of most huntsmen,--
having accomplished his object in stopping the hounds, pretended to
cast about with great diligence. He crossed the road and was down
one side of a field and along another, looking anxiously for the
Captain. "The fox has gone on to the gorse," said the elder Botsey;
"what a stupid old pig he is;"--meaning that Tony Tuppet was the
pig.

"He was seen going on," said Larry, who had come across a man
mending a drain.

"It would be his run of course," said Hampton, who was generally up
to Tony's wiles, but who was now as much in the dark as others.
Then four or five rode up to the huntsman and told him that the fox
had been seen heading for the gorse. Tony said not a word but bit
his lips and scratched his head and bethought himself what fools
men might be even though they did ride well to hounds. One word of
explanation would have settled it all, but he would not speak that
word till he whispered it to Captain Glomax.

In the meantime there was a crowd in the road waiting to see the
result of Tony's manoeuvres. And then, as is usual on such
occasions, a little mild repartee went about,--what the sportsmen
themselves would have called "chaff." Ned Botsey came up, not
having broken his horse's back as had been rumoured, but having had
to drag the brute out of the brook with the help of two countrymen,
and the Major was asked about his fall till he was forced to open
his mouth. "Double ditch; mare fell; matter of course." And then he
got himself out of the crowd, disgusted with the littleness of
mankind. Lord Rufford had been riding a very big chestnut horse,
and had watched the anxious struggles of Kate Masters to hold her
place. Kate, though fifteen, and quite up to that age in
intelligence and impudence, was small and looked almost a child.
"That's a nice pony of yours, my dear," said the Lord. Kate, who
didn't quite like being called "my dear," but who knew that a lord
has privileges, said that it was a very good pony. "Suppose we
change," said his lordship. "Could you ride my horse?" "He's very
big," said Kate. "You'd look like a tom-tit on a haystack," said
his lordship. "And if you got on my pony, you'd look like a
haystack on a tom-tit," said Kate. Then it was felt that Kate
Masters had had the best of that little encounter. "Yes;--I got one
there," said Lord Rufford, while his friends were laughing at him.

At length Captain Glomax was seen in the road and Tony was with him
at once, whispering in his ear that the hounds if allowed to go on
would certainly run into Dillsborough Wood. "D-- the hounds,"
muttered the Captain; but he knew too well what he was about to
face so terrible a danger. "They're going home," he said as soon as
he had joined Lord Rufford and the crowd.

"Going home!" exclaimed a pink-coated young rider of a hired horse
which had been going well with him; and as he said so he looked at
his watch.

"Unless you particularly wish me to take the hounds to some covert
twenty miles off," answered the sarcastic Master.

"The fox certainly went on to Littleton," said the elder Botsey.

"My dear fellow," said the Captain, "I can tell you where the fox
went quite as well as you can tell me. Do allow a man to know what
he's about some times."

"It isn't generally the custom here to take the hounds off a
running fox," continued Botsey, who subscribed 50 pounds, and did
not like being snubbed.

"And it isn't generally the custom to have fox-coverts poisoned,"
said the Captain, assuming to himself the credit due to Tony's
sagacity. "If you wish to be Master of these hounds I haven't the
slightest objection, but while I'm responsible you must allow me to
do my work according to my own judgment" Then the thing was
understood and Captain Glomax was allowed to carry off the hounds
and his ill-humour without another word.

But just at that moment, while the hounds and the master, and Lord
Rufford and his friends, were turning back in their own direction,
John Morton came up with his carriage and the Senator. "Is it all
over?" asked the Senator.

"All over for to-day," said Lord Rufford. "Did you catch the
animal?"

"No, Mr. Gotobed; we couldn't catch him. To tell the truth we
didn't try; but we had a nice little skurry for four or five
miles."

"Some of you look very wet" Captain Glomax and Ned Botsey were
standing near the carriage; but the Captain as soon as he heard
this, broke into a trot and followed the hounds.

"Some of us are very wet," said Ned. "That's part of the fun."

"Oh;--that's part of the fun. You found one fox dead and you didn't
kill another because you didn't try. Well; Mr. Morton, I don't
think I shall take to fox hunting even though they should introduce
it in Mickewa. "What's become of the rest of the men?"

"Most of them are in the brook," said Ned Botsey as he rode on
towards Dillsborough.

Mr. Runciman was also there and trotted on homewards with Botsey,
Larry, and Kate Masters. "I think I've won my bet," said the
hotel-keeper.

"I don't see that at all. We didn't find in Dillsborough Wood."

"I say we did find in Dillsborough Wood. We found a fox though
unfortunately the poor brute was dead."

"The bet's off I should say. What do you say, Larry?"

Then Runciman argued his case at great length and with much
ability. It had been intended that the bet should be governed by
the fact whether Dillsborough Wood did or did not contain a fox on
that morning. He himself had backed the wood, and Botsey had been
strong in his opinion against the wood. Which of them had been
practically right? Had not the presence of the poisoned fox shown
that he was right? "I think you ought to pay," said Larry.

"All right," said Botsey riding on, and telling himself that that
was what came from making a bet with a man who was not a gentleman.

"He's as unhappy about that hat," said Runciman, "as though beer
had gone down a penny a gallon."



CHAPTER XII

Arabella Trefoil


On the Sunday the party from Bragton went to the parish church,--
and found it very cold. The duty was done by a young curate who
lived in Dillsborough, there being no house in Bragton for him. The
rector himself had not been in the church for the last six months,
being an invalid. At present he and his wife were away in London,
but the vicarage was kept up for his use. The service was certainly
not alluring. It was a very wet morning and the curate had ridden
over from Dillsborough on a little pony which the rector kept for
him in addition to the 100 pounds per annum paid for his services.
That he should have got over his service quickly was not a matter
of surprise,--nor was it wonderful that there should have been no
soul-stirring matter in his discourse as he had two sermons to
preach every week and to perform single-handed all the other
clerical duties of a parish lying four miles distant from his
lodgings. Perhaps had he expected the presence of so distinguished
a critic as the Senator from Mickewa he might have done better. As
it was, being nearly wet through and muddy up to his knees, he did
not do the work very well. When Morton and his friends left the
church and got into the carriage for their half-mile drive home
across the park, Mrs. Morton was the first to speak. "John," she
said, "that church is enough to give any woman her death. I won't
go there any more."

"They don't understand warming a church in the country," said John
apologetically.

"Is it not a little too large for the congregation?" asked the
Senator.

The church was large and straggling and ill arranged, and on this
particular Sunday had been almost empty. There was in it an
harmonium which Mrs. Puttock played when she was at home, but in
her absence the attempt made by a few rustics to sing the hymns had
not been a musical success. The whole affair had been very sad, and
so the Paragon had felt it who knew,--and was remembering through
the whole service, how these things are done in transatlantic
cities.

"The weather kept the people away I suppose," said Morton.

"Does that gentleman generally draw large congregations?" asked the
persistent Sena