ought the rest the suicide would find."


The traveller of the present day, as he enters the town of Guilford,
on the southern confines of Vermont, will soon be struck with the
peculiar appearance of many things around him. Few or no traces of a
primitive forest are to be seen, while its place is supplied by a
heavy second growth of woods, sixty or seventy years old, in the midst
of which the remains of old enclosures and other indications of former
habitations are not unfrequently observable. On the cleared farms,
also, may often be seen three or four different clumps of aged
fruit-trees, scattered about in the nooks and corners of the lot, and
sometimes extending into the woods, in such a manner as to preclude
the idea that they could have been planted under any thing like the
present arrangements of the farm and its buildings. Near these old
relics of former orchards may likewise generally be perceived some
levelled spot, remains of old chimneys, traces of cellars, or other
marks of dwellings long since removed, or fallen to decay. These, with
many other peculiarities, give to the whole town an aspect nowhere
else to be seen in Vermont, nor even, perhaps, in any part of New
England. And if the traveller be of a fanciful turn, he will associate
the place with the idea of some deserted country, resettled by a new
race of men; and even if he be a mere matter-of-fact man, he cannot
fail to perceive that the town must have been originally tenanted
under a division of lands and an order of things quite different from
those now existing. And either of these suppositions would be far
better justified by the facts than most of the speculations of modern
tourists made in their flying visits through the land, as will be seen
by a recurrence to the early annals of this town, of which, for the
purpose of insuring a full understanding of some scenes here about to
be described, we must be permitted to give a brief outline.

The events connected with the first settlement of the town of
Guilford, which afterwards became so noted as the stronghold of
toryism and adherence to the New York supremacy, form a curious
anomaly even in the anomalous history of Vermont. The territory
comprising this township appears to have been granted, as early as
1754, to a company of about fifty persons, by a charter, which, unlike
that of any other town, empowered the proprietors, in express terms,
to govern themselves and regulate the concerns of their little
community, by such laws as the majority should be pleased to enact,
without being made amenable to any power under heaven, save that which
might be exercised by the British Parliament. Being thus constituted a
band of freemen and legislators, at the outset, they soon took
possession of their chartered piece of wilderness, organized by the
election of the proper officers of state, and assumed the title of an
independent republic, which their charter, in fact, created, any
control of the Parliament of England being as little to be
apprehended, in their secluded retreat among the wilds of the Green
Mountains, as that of the Great Mogul of Tartary. And as novel as was
the idea of a republic at that early period, when "the divine right of
kings" to govern all men was as little questioned as the divine right
of Satan to afflict the pious Job of old, this enterprising little
band of settlers, for many years, appear to have well sustained the
character they had assumed, not only by carrying out, in all their
public doings, that essential principle of a republic which makes the
will of the majority supreme, but by the simplicity of their tastes
and habits in private life, and their beautiful exemplification of the
great law of love, that can only be fulfilled towards our neighbors by
according to them equal rights and privileges with ourselves. At
length, however, new doctrines began to prevail, and the independent
character of our little republic was soon, in a good degree,
forfeited; and that, too, by the very means, it would seem, which had
been taken to make it flourish and increase. It had been one of the
conditions of the charter that every grantee should become an actual
settler, and, within five years, clear and cultivate five acres of
land, for every fifty purchased. And in accordance with this cunning
policy for insuring the actual and rapid settlement of the place, the
township had been laid out in fifty and one hundred acre lots, except
the governor's right of five hundred acres, which his excellency of
New Hampshire, in granting Vermont lands, never forgot to reserve for
his own use, in every township, but which the proprietors generally
contrived, as in this instance, to have set off on the highest
mountain in town, considering it but respectful and fitting, as they
used waggishly to observe, that so elevated a personage should be
honored with the most elevated location. And the effect of this
policy, together with the low prices at which the lands were put, and
other inducements held out to draw in settlers, soon became visible in
the rapid increase of the population, and consequent improvement of
the town. So unexampled in these new settlements was its progress,
indeed, in both the particulars we have just named, that within twenty
years from the time when the sound of the axe was first heard in its
woody limits, the inhabitants were found to number nearly three
thousand; while fields were every where opened in the wilderness, and
buildings raised in such neighborly contiguity, that the whole town
presented the appearance of a continuous village. It is not very
surprising, therefore, that, through such an influx of settlers,
coming from all parts of the country, and including many interested
and active partisans of the York jurisdiction, a majority should soon
be obtained, who were induced to depart from the views of the first
settlers respecting the independence of their community, and adopt the
more fashionable form of subordinate government, which prevailed in
all the towns around them. And accordingly we find them, at their
annual meeting in 1772, voting the district of Guilford, as they
termed it, to belong to the county of Cumberland and province of New
York, and thereupon proceeding to reorganize the town, agreeably to
the laws of that province. This change, however, does not appear to
have been followed by any material alteration of their internal
polity, or to have been productive of any great civil discord, till
about the time of the opening of the American revolution; when the
town became the prey of contending factions, of so fierce and lawless
a character as to convert this once Arcadian abode of virtue,
simplicity, and rural happiness, into a theatre of violence and social
disorganization, which never, perhaps, found a parallel within the
limits of order-loving New England. Sometimes the York party and
tories,--for, in this town, it so happened that the two were
identical,--and sometimes the whigs and friends of the new state of
Vermont, were in the ascendant; while scenes of such disorder and
outrage were constantly occurring between the belligerent parties,
that his honor, Judge Lynch, for many years, appears to have been not
the least among the potentates of this notable republic. Nor was order
restored to the ill-starred town till after the close of the war; when
every refractory spirit, whether tory or Yorker, was punished or awed
into submission by the fiery energy of the iron-heeled Ethan Allen,
who, then being relieved from the pursuit of more important game, came
thundering down upon the town with his hundred Green Mountain Boys,
proclaiming to the disaffected, with demonstrations which they well
knew how to interpret, that the peaceable and instant submission of
the place to the new authorities of the land should alone save it from
being "_made as desolate as the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah_".

It was a dark and gloomy day in April, and the sleety storm was
beating, in fitful gusts, against the broken and creaking casements,
and the disjointed, loose, and leaky covering of an old, dilapidated
log-house, standing by the road-side, in one of the thousand little
dales, which, with their corresponding hills, so beautifully diversify
the face of the town we have been describing. But as comfortless as
this miserable hut was, and as poor and insufficient a protection from
the elements as it afforded, even for the healthy and robust, it was
now the only shelter of a sick and destitute woman, the widowed mother
of Harry Woodburn. The hand of her son's persecutor, as it not
unfrequently is seen to occur in the history of human oppression, was
destined to fall even more heavily on her than on him for whom the
blow was designed. The minion officer, selected by Peters for the
purpose, had no sooner received his warrants, than, faithful to the
cruel instructions of his employer, he had repaired post-haste to the
residence of the absent Woodburn, of which he was authorized to take
possession, and, with insults and abuse, rudely thrust the lone and
unprotected occupant out of doors, in despite of all her entreaties
for mercy, or delay till her son should return, or even for one day,
to give her an opportunity to find some shelter for her now houseless
head. He then, with the aid of the three or four ruffian assistants
enlisted to accompany him, threw all the furniture out of the windows
or doors into the mud and snow beneath where the whole, consisting of
crockery and glasses, now half broken by the fall, and beds, linen,
kettles, chairs, tables, and the like, soon lay piled promiscuously
together. Having thus driven the terrified and distressed woman from
the comfortable abode which had formerly cost her and her deceased
husband so many years of toil to erect and furnish, and having, to add
to the wrong, either injured or destroyed the greater part of her
little stock of goods, by the wanton or careless manner in which they
had been removed, this brutal officer next proceeded to the barn, and
by virtue of his _copias_ for costs, seized the cow and oxen, the last
remaining property of the wronged and ruined young man, which, after
intrusting the present keeping and defence of the premises to two of
his band, he drove away to another part of the town, to be sold at the
post, as soon as the forms of the law, respecting notice of the sale,
could be complied with. The poor widow, half distracted at being thus
suddenly bereft of house and home, spent the remainder of the day in
vainly endeavoring to procure some tenement into which she could
remove with her furniture, or with so much of it as might yet be
saved. On the next day, however, as a last resort, she obtained and
accepted the present use of the deserted cabin we have described,
situated but a short distance from the house from which she had been
ejected. And into this comfortless place, after several days of
incessant toil and exposure, she succeeded in getting her damaged
furniture, but not till her exertions, combined with her anxieties and
grief, had given rise to a malady which, though not at first very
threatening, became, each subsequent day, more and more alarmingly
developed in her overtasked system. In this situation she was found by
her son, who, being entirely ignorant that any judgment had passed
against him, and, consequently, little dreaming what was taking place
at home, had remained at Westminster nearly a week after the massacre,
attending the public meetings, which, as we have before intimated,
followed that event; when he returned to Guilford, and, with feelings
bordering on desperation, learned the extent of his misfortunes. But
the bitterness of his feelings, as great as it was, at being stripped
of all his property through such a series of wrongs, soon became
wholly merged in anxiety and grief for his sick and sorrow-stricken
parent, and in the exasperating thought that her sickness and
suffering proceeded from the same source with his other injuries. And
close and unremitting had been his attentions to her, until the day
previous to the one on which we have introduced her to the reader;
when he had been induced to leave for Brattleborough, or other more
distant towns, to try to obtain money to redeem his stock, which was
now about to be sold, and which was worth more than double the amount,
as he had recently ascertained, of the execution on which it had been
seized. On the morning after his departure, she had become so much
worse that she was compelled to take to her bed, and despatch her only
attendant for a doctor. That attendant was Barty Burt, who had come
down from Westminster with Woodburn, and had been engaged by the
latter to remain with his mother during his absence. Having thus
glanced over the events which had occurred previously to the opening
of this new scene of our story, we will now return to the point we
left to make the digression.

Slowly, to the suffering invalid, rolled the sad hours away, as with
thick and labored breathing, she lay tossing upon her rude couch,
standing behind a blanket-screen, in one corner of her cheerless
abode. Occasionally she would raise her fevered head from the pillow,
and seem to listen to catch the sounds of expected footsteps, and her
languid eye would turn anxiously towards the door; when, after thus
exerting her senses in vain a few moments, she would sink back upon
her bed, with a long-drawn, sighing groan, which told alike of
disappointment and bodily anguish. At length, however, footsteps were
heard approaching, the door opened, and Barty Burt stilly glided into
the apartment, and approached the bedside of the sufferer.

"You have come at last, then," said she, lifting her dim eyes to meet
the face of the other. "It seemed as if you never would arrive. But
where is the doctor?"

"He will be on afore long, mistress; but I've had a time on't in
getting round, I tell ye!" replied Bart.

"I am very sorry, if you have had any unexpected trouble on my
account," meekly observed the invalid; "but what has befallen you?"

"O, nothin," answered the former--"nothin, at least, but what I was
willing to bear for Harry's sake, who invited me home here till I got
business, or for yours, who let me be. Though to be stopped and
bothered, when one is going for the doctor, is worse than I ever
thought of humans before. But it shows their character--dum 'em!"

"Did they really stop you, knowing your errand?"

"Yes, that they did, mistress. As I was going by the tavern, a mile or
two up the road yonder, three or four of them torified Yorkers came
out, and told me I couldn't go for the doctor, nor nowhere else,
without a pass from one of their committee. So I had to post back more
than half way, to Squire Ashcrafts, and there had to be questioned a
long while before he would give me any pass at all. And then again,
when I got to the doctor's, he said he wanted a pass, too; for he
darsent go to see a whig woman without one, which I must go and get
him from Squire Evans, another committee man. Well, finding there was
no other way to get him started, I went, feeling all the time just
between crying and fighting. And as soon as I got the bit of paper
into the doctor's hands, I put for home, leaving him fixing to come
horseback, which is the reason of my getting here first."

"These are, indeed dreadful times," sighed the widow. "But they cannot
always remain; for, though God may chastise us a while for our sins,
yet the rods of the oppressors will surely be broken."

"I'd rather see their necks broken," responded Bart, dryly "When we
left Westminster, I thought, as much as could be, the tories were all
used up; but I find 'em down here thicker than ever now, and as sarcy
and spiteful as a nest of yellow jackets that, like them, have been
routed in one place and got fixed in another. Blast their picturs, how
I hate 'em!"

"That is not right, Barty. You should love your enemies. Evil wishes,
towards those who injure us, are both wicked and foolish."

"I don't understand, mistress."

"Why, Barty, to love is to be happy, as far as circumstances will
permit; and to hate is but to feel disquieted and miserable. So when
we keep the command to love our enemies, we obtain a reward which
often outbalances the evil they inflict on us, or, at least, enables
us the better to bear it; while, on the contrary, when we hate those
who injure us, we receive a double evil--the wrong they inflict, and
the unhappiness created by the exercise of our revengeful passions.
Did you ever think of that, Barty?"

"No, mum; Harry talks kinder that way, sometimes; but I can't
understand it, no how."

"With your means of moral instruction, perhaps it is not surprising
that you should not; so I will drop the subject, and ask you if you
heard any thing of Harry, while you were gone."

"No, mistress; didn't see nobody that knew he was gone."

"O, when will he return? He has now been gone two long, long days; but
I must not repine."

"Why, mistress, I kinder guess he'll be along to-night, unless so be
he's met with considerable bother to get the money, or somethin. He
must be here afore to-morrow afternoon, when the sale is, you know."

"Yes, I knew the sale was delayed till town meeting day, which is
to-morrow, I believe; though for what reason they put it off I never
heard. Harry felt so bitter about the affair, that I thought I would
not disturb his feelings by making any allusions to the subject. But
there appeared to be something about it that I didn't understand. Why
didn't the sale take place last week, as first appointed?"

"For as good a reason as ever a tory officer had for doing any
thing--or not doing any thing, may be, I should say--in the world,"
replied Bart with a knowing look.

"What was it?"

"Why, when the day come, he couldn't find any cattle to sell."

"What had become of them?"

"Well, mistress, I don't know how much it is best to say about that,
considering. But I shouldn't be surprised," continued the speaker,
while a sly, roguish expression stole over his usually grave,
impenetrable countenance, "that is, not much surprised, if it turned
out that two or three of Harry's friends got the cattle out of the
barn where they were keeping, one dark night, and driv 'em off into
the woods, near the top of Governor's Mountain, and then backed up hay
enough to keep 'em a spell; while the company took turns, for a few
days, in going a hunting over the mountain, so as to come round, once
in a while, to fodder and see to the creters, for which old Bug-Horn
paid in milk, on the spot. Now, mind, I haven't said I _knew_ this was
so, but was only kinder guessing at it; for all that's really known
about it--that is, out loud--is, that Fitch and his men found the
cattle up there; and the way they found them was by following up the
trail made by the hay straws that some one, after a while, grew
careless enough to scatter from his back-load along the path."

"Did my son have any hand in this affair?" asked the widow, anxiously.

"No, mistress; Harry is so kinder notional about some things, that we
thought--that is, I guess some thought--it wasn't best to say any
thing to him about the plan till his cattle were fairly saved."

"I am glad to hear it. I should rather see him deprived of his last
penny than do a questionable act. We should never do wrong because
others have done wrong to us."

"There is a differ between your think and mine, I see, mistress. If
they did wrong in getting away Harry's cattle so, as every body knows
they did, then the tother of that--getting them back again--must be
right. But you needn't tell any body what I've said, mistress; for
they might, perhaps, have Bill Piper and me up, and try to make
barglary out of it--or simony, I don't know but the law folks would
call it--the breaking into a log-barn. But hush! Somebody's coming. It
is the doctor."

Doctor Soper, who now entered, was a small, pug-nosed, chubby man, of
ostentatious manners, and high pretensions to skill and knowledge in
his profession; though, in fact, he was but a quack, and of that most
dangerous class, too, who dip into books rather to acquire learned
terms than to study principles, and who, consequently, as often as
otherwise, are found "doctoring to a name," which chance has
suggested, but which has little connection with the case which is
engaging their attention.

"Ah, how do you find yourself, madam?" said the doctor, throwing off
his dripping overcoat, and drawing up a chair towards the head of the
patient's bed.

"Very ill, doctor," replied the other. "Not so much on account of the
loss of strength, as yet, as the deeply-seated pain in the chest,
which, for the last twenty-four hours, has caused me great suffering;
though, for the last half hour, not so severe."

"Indeed, madam! Well, now for the _diagnosis_ of your disease. I pride
myself on _diagnostics_. Your wrist, madam, if you please," said the
doctor, proceeding to feel the pulse of his patient, with an air
intended for a very professional one. "Tense--frequent--this pulse of
yours, madam; showing great irritability. Your tongue, now.
Ay--rubric--dry and streaked; usual _prognostics_ of neuralgy. Pretty
much made up my mind about your complaint coming along, madam, having
learned from your lad here something of your troubles and fright on
losing your home. And I was right, I see. It is _neuralgy_--decidedly
a _neuralgy_."

"What is that, doctor?"

"Always happy to explain, madam, so as to bring my meaning within the
comprehension of common minds. _Neuralgy_ madam, is a derangement of
the nerves. Your disease, precisely."

"Why, I am not at all nervous, sir," responded the patient, looking up
in surprise.

"You may not think so, madam. Few do, in your case."

"And then, doctor, I have an intense inward fever," persisted the
other, "and my lungs seem much affected."

"Nervous fever, madam," returned the doctor, too wise to be
instructed, "and lungs sympathetically affected--that's all. Quiet and
strengthen the nerves, and all will be right in a short time. I shall
prescribe _Radix Rhei_, in small doses, _assafoetida, quinine_, and
brandy bitters of my own pieparing. These, with nourishing food, as
soon as you can bear it, will speedily restore you, madam."

Having dealt out the prescribed medicines, calculated rather to
increase than check the poor woman's malady, which was inflammation of
the lungs, the self-satisfied doctor, swelling with his own
importance, departed, leaving his patient now to contend with two
evils, instead of one--a dangerous disease, and the more dangerous
effects of a quack's prescription.

"What time is it now, Barty?" asked the invalid, with a deep sigh, as
she awoke from a troubled slumber, into which she had fallen after the
doctor's departure.

"Why, don't know exactly, mistress," answered Bart, rousing himself
from the dreamy abstraction in which he had been indulging, as he sat
looking into the decaying fire--"don't know, exactly; but it has got a
considerable piece into the night. About nine o'clock, guess; may be
more."

"Nine o'clock at night, and Harry not yet returned!" sighed the
invalid. "Well, well, I will complain no more."

"Can I do any thing for you, mistress?" asked her untutored attendant,
touched at the sad and despondent tone of the other.

"You may bring me in a pitcher of fresh, cold water, with some ice in
it, if you will, Barty," replied the former. "It seems to me as if
this inward heat was consuming my vitals, since I took the doctor's
medicines."

The youth, with noiseless step, then disappeared with his pitcher,
and, in a few moments, returned with it filled with water and several
pieces of clear, pure ice, which were heard dashing against its sides.

"How grateful!" said the sick woman, as she took from her lips the
wooden cup which had been filled and handed her by her attendant, and
from which she had eagerly drained nearly a pint of the cooling
beverage at a single draught. "There, now, set the pitcher on the
table yonder, and raise the largest piece of ice up in sight, so, as I
lie here, I can look at it. The mere sight of it seems to do me good."

Another dreary hour rolled away in silence, which was broken only by
the restless motions and occasional suppressed groans of the invalid
within, and the wailing of the winds and the pattering of the rain
against the windows without, when a slow, heavy step was heard coming
up to the house.

"That is he--that is his step!" faintly exclaimed the sick woman,
partially raising herself in bed, and gazing eagerly towards the door;
while her pain-contracted features were, for the moment, smoothed by
the smile of affection and pleasure that now broke over them, like the
faint electric illumining of a weeping cloud.

The quick ears of the afflicted mother had not deceived her. The next
instant Harry Woodburn entered the room, and, with a gloomy,
abstracted air, proceeded to divest himself of his wet coat and muddy
boots, without uttering a word, or bestowing any thing more than a
casual glance towards the bed, to which he supposed his mother had
just retired, as was usual with her, about this hour, and not
suspecting that she was more indisposed than when he left her. But as
he now turned and approached the fire, his eyes fell, for the first
time, on her haggard features when, stopping short, with a look of
surprise and lively concern, he exclaimed,--

"Mother! are you worse, mother?"

"Yes, Harry, I am very, very sick; and O, how glad I am that you are
come."

For several moments he said nothing, but stood gazing at her with the
distressed and stupefied air of one struggling to shut out painful
apprehensions. At length, however, he aroused himself, and made a few
hasty inquiries relative to her disorder, and what had been done for
her; and, having been informed of all that had occurred in his
absence, and now appearing fully to comprehend the danger of her
situation, he sat down by her bedside, when his lip soon began to
quiver, and his strong bosom heave with tumultuous emotions, while
bitter tears flowed down his manly cheeks, as this crowning blow to
his misfortunes was brought home to his feelings.

"Had they been content," he said, struggling hard, but vainly, to
master his feelings--"had they but been content with robbing me of my
property, I could have borne it; but to be the means, also, of
murdering my only parent, is more than I can endure. God help me, or I
shall go mad!"

"Do not--do not be so distressed, my son," said the mother deeply
touched at this exhibition of feeling, accompanied as it was with such
a proof of filial affection in her idolized son, and anxious to soothe
and divert his mind. "I shall recover, if God wills it. Let us, then,
bow in resignation to his dispensations, and not disturb our feelings
with unavailing regrets. Come, my dear son, cheer up, and tell me how
you have succeeded in the object of your journey."

"No success," he replied, gloomily. "No; I have been running from town
to town since yesterday morning, and have not been able to obtain a
single dollar. So the cattle must go to satisfy the stolen judgment of
that insatiable Peters."

At this moment the conversation was arrested by a low rap at the door,
when, after the customary walk in had been pronounced by Woodburn, the
door was gently opened, and a tall robust young man, with a frank,
open countenance, hesitatingly entered.

"Good evening, folks," he said, in a suppressed tone. "I didn't
exactly know what to do about calling to-night, on account of
disturbing your mother, Harry; but wishing to know whether you had got
home, and hear the news if you had, I thought I would venture to rap.
What is going on up country?"

"Nothing very new, I believe, Mr. Piper."

"Well, what luck about the money, Harry?"

"None--none whatever."

"I am sorry for that. No, I won't lie, now; I am not sorry, Harry; and
I will tell you why, hereafter. All I wanted to know to-night was,
whether you had got the wherewith to redeem the cattle, to-morrow
being the last chance for doing it, you know."

"Yes, I was aware of it, friend Piper; and many thanks for the
interest you take in my misfortunes. But I cannot redeem the stock. It
must go: nothing more can be done to save it."

"Well, I don't quite know about that, Harry. I don't know about
standing by, and seeing a neighbor's property snatched away from him
on such smuggled papers. But let that turn as it may, the subject
brings to mind a certain circumstance, which I will name, after first
asking a question; and that is, whether Peters has not been hung?"

"Peters hung? Why, no; the prisoners are not to be tried till the new
court we have been appointing at Westminster holds its first session,
some weeks hence. But why do you ask so strange a question?"

"Well, Harry, by way of answer, I will tell you the circumstance I
alluded to, which was this: Last night, as I was crossing about town
drumming up friends to attend the meeting tomorrow, seeing we are
expecting a hard tussle, I met a man that I could have sworn was John
Peters, if I had not known the fellow was close in Northampton jail;
and as it was, I could swear it was his exact shape and appearance.
Well, knowing it could not be him bodily, it soon struck me that they
had been hanging off a parcel of them there, Peters among the rest,
and that this was his ghost, kinder hovering about here to see if his
affairs were fixed up to his liking."

"Your notion of a ghost, Piper, if you are serious about it, is a11
nonsense," said Woodburn, who had listened with lively interest to the
singular story of the other. "Yes, that is nonsense; but it has
brought to mind a rumor which reached Brattleborough yesterday, that
all the prisoners at Northampton had been liberated by _habeas corpus_
from the chief justice of New York, and were now at large. Although
this was not credited, yet, if you saw Peters here last night, as I
begin to fear, the story must have been true. And he appears here, at
this time, for the double purpose of seeing, as you said, whether his
orders have been carried into execution, and of being present to use
his corrupting influence at town meeting to-morrow."

"Well, Harry, that's about what I meant; for I saw him sure enough,
and knew, at once, that we had got to have him against us at town
meeting, which makes our case rather doubtful. We felt quite sure,
before this, of being able to carry a majority; and in that case, some
of us counted on getting a vote to rescue your cattle, or, at least,
putting them into the hands of our sheriff. [Footnote: During the
period of anarchy, change, and discord, in this distracted town, each
of the belligerent parties had their sheriff, or constable, and other
town officers, and would yield obedience to the officers of their
opponents only on compulsion, though the officers of the majority were
not generally resisted, except, perhaps, in matters purely political.]
And either of these ways would be the means, we thought, of saving
your property, and, at the same time, be a plaguy sight more lawful
than any authority they have for selling them. But now there's no
saying how it will go. I expect hot work there to-morrow; and that
minds me to ask if you heard whether help from the towns up the river
is coming down to join us on the occasion?"

"Yes, Tom Dunning came down with me, and he informed me that several
others were on the way."

"Good. Tom himself, in matter of managing, will be almost a match for
Peters, whether ghost or no ghost. But where is he?"

"He stopped back at the Liberty Pole tavern."

"All happens right, then. I am bound there myself. We are going to
hold a little meeting at the Pole, after folks are to bed, to make up
our plans and arrangements for to-morrow. You can't go, I suppose."

"No, I must not think of it."

"But you will be at town meeting to-morrow?"

"Quite uncertain. In the first place, I ought not to leave my sick
mother; and in the next, my feelings are in such a state of
bitterness, that I dare hardly trust myself in such a scene, lest I
should do that which would cost me months of painful regret. No,
Piper, in mercy to a desperate man, let me keep away. But here is Bart
to go, if he choose, both to-night and tomorrow."

"Bart is agreeable to that, if Harry and mistress don't want him,"
said the person just named, rousing up from the long-silent reverie in
which he had been sitting before the fire apparently inattentive to
the conversation of the others, which had been carried on in a low
tone, at the opposite side of the room. "So here goes for the Pole
to-night, and meeting to-morrow," he added, taking down his gun from
the pegs on which it was suspended, near the ceiling above,

"What do you want to do with that, Bart?" asked Woodburn.

"I want it for lining to my coat," replied Bart. "If our coats had all
been lined in that fashion, the first night there, at Westminster, we
needn't have had to attend French's funeral, nor you been troubled
about the papers they got out when you was in jail."

"Bravo, Bart. You see that my coat is not wanting of that kind of
lining, don't you?" said Piper, throwing open his greatcoat and
displaying a rifle, as the two now left the house together, on their
way to the rendezvous of the liberty party.




CHAPTER X.

  "Agreed in nothing, but t' abolish,
   Subvert, extirpate, and demolish."


"Hurrah for Vermont! hurrah for the new state of Vermont! The victory
is won, and the town is redeemed! hurrah! hurrah!"

Such were the sounds that rose and rung among the rafters of the
crowded old log Town House of Guilford, as, for the first time for
several years, a New Statesman and whig moderator was declared elected
by a majority of the suffrages of the freemen. The next moment, the
door was seen vomiting forth its throng of excited victors, who, as
they reached the open air, joined the crowd eagerly awaiting the
result at the entrance, and, with them, renewed and reiterated the
glad shout, till the distant hills responded in loud echoes to the
roar of the stentorian voices of the triumphant party.

After a fortnight's active exertions on the part of each of the
opposing parties, in mustering and drilling their respective forces,
preparatory to the approaching contest, in which both were equally
confident of victory, though too sensible of the danger of losing it
to remit any effort, the voters had assembled at one o'clock in the
afternoon. After spending several hours in a disorderly and wrangling
debate, in relation to the qualification of voters, which at last
resulted in rejecting the test required by the charter,--that of being
a freeholder,-and in permitting every resident to vote, the ballots
had been taken for moderator, or chairman of the meeting, when, as
much to the dismay of the tories as the joy of their opponents, it was
found that victory, in a majority of three, had declared for the
latter, who thereupon testified their exultation in the uproarious
manner we have described.

After a while, the noise and tumult within the house was suddenly
hushed, and the clear, deliberate tones of some new speaker addressing
the assembly, became audible to those without the building; while the
attent and eager looks of those who stood listening in the crowded
pass-way, plainly evinced that some important and exciting subject had
been introduced. At length the voice ceased, and a new commotion
ensued within.

"What new movement is that? what is going on in there now, Piper?"
asked one standing near the door, as one young man came elbowing his
way out of the house.

"Why, they are on Colonel Carpenter's resolution. Haven't none of you
here been in there to hear it?" said Piper, turning to the querist and
other political associates, standing near by.

"No; what is it about?" inquired several of the latter, with interest.

"The York Rule," answered Piper, with an animated air. "The colonel
offered a resolve that we shake off the York government now,
henceforth and forever. And this he backed with a speech which would
have done you good to hear. He went into them, I tell you, like a
thousand of brick; and not a single tory tongue of 'em all dare wag in
trying to answer it. They are now beginning to vote on the resolution,
which, if carried, the colonel intends to follow up by another,
cutting up all British authority root and branch."

At this moment, they were joined by Tom Dunning, who came hurrying out
of the house, and, taking Piper aside, said,--

"Do you ditter understand the plan of what's going on there, Piper,
and the importance to you here, in Guilford, of carrying it?"

"Not fully, perhaps," answered Piper. "I didn't have a chance to talk
with Carpenter and the other committee before this move was made, and
don't understand why they did not urge on the election of the other
town officers, as usual, after making a moderator, instead of getting
up these resolutions."

"Der well, this is it; they are afraid to ditter try any of the town
officers on so slim a majority, lest the tory candidates should have
got some of our voters under their thumbs, by way of debts or other
obligations, which they will der make use of to get their votes for
them personally, but won't have 'em pledged for this."

"That is well thought of," responded Piper. "They have indeed got the
screws on some I know of, and would so threaten 'em with prosecutions,
that I'm fearful they would get 'em, sure enough. But what's the
prospect about the resolutions?"

"Well, the colonel thinks, after what has ditter taken place at
Westminster, that we can carry them; and if we can, it will pretty
effectually tie 'em up, even if they got their officers. But we der
don't mean to let 'em. For the plan is, that as soon as we've ditter
carried the resolves, to dissolve the meeting without making any town
officers at all, which we think can be carried by the same voters, and
which if we can ditter do it, with the resolves, will kill Fitch and
his papers as dead as a ditter dum smelt, and so save the property of
Harry, and that of all others in the same der situation."

"Good!" exclaimed Piper, with animation; "I see through the move now;
and we'll go at 'em, and whip 'em out on it; and then if Fitch don't
give up the cattle, we'll make him, by the course we thought of
taking, last night, in case we failed electing our officers to-day, or
of getting any vote on Harry's affair."

"Yes; but we must be ditter lively in getting in the voters. You and
Bart go in and vote; and I will beat about the bush, here, for more
help, before I go in; for as they have just admitted some to vote on a
twenty hours' residence,--as I can ditter swear they did,--I intend to
vote myself, this time, and have all those from my way der do the
same," said the hunter, bustling off to muster his forces.

Just as Dunning, who had collected a band of voters, without much
regard to their qualifications, was pushing into the house at the head
of his recruits, an outcry was raised within; and, the next moment,
Bart Burt was seen hastily emerging from the crowd, followed by the
kicks and cudgel-blows of the tories, through whom he had been
compelled, to save himself from a rougher handling, to run the
gauntlet to the door.

"What, in the name of der Tophet, is the meaning of that ditter
treatment, ye shameless lubbers?" sternly demanded the hunter, shaking
his stout beech cane over the heads of the fore most of his opponents.

"He deserves it! He is an impostor! He tried to get in his vote when
he aint over eighteen years old!" shouted several tory voices in reply.

"They let me vote last time without a word," said Bart, facing round
upon his foes, with a grin of spite and pain; "and so they did John
Stubbs and Jo Snelling, then and now too; and they aint a day older
than I be."

"Then we will der have you in, and vote too, if the ditter divil
stands at the door!" fiercely exclaimed the hunter.

"Let them prove he aint one and twenty," said one of the same party.
"He wasn't born in these parts, nor does he know himself, I
understand, where he was born, or how old he is; and until they can
prove him under age, I motion, blow high or blow low, that we make
them receive his vote."

"Aye, he shall vote! he shall vote!" shouted a dozen others. "They
have admitted others under age, and they shall him, whether or no! Let
them live up to their own rules! Sauce for goose is sauce for gander,
the world over; they shall take him, they shall take him!"

A hasty consultation was now held, and a plan of operations for
compelling the opposite party to admit Bart to the polls was soon
digested. And, in pursuance of this plan, Bart, who was short and
light of weight, was mounted astride the brawny shoulders of Dunning,
while Piper, with his burly frame, was placed in front, with a stiff
cudgel in hand, to act as the battering-ram or entering wedge to the
crowd of tories, who had closed up the way with their bodies,
obviously to prevent Bart, or any other whig, indeed, from again
entering till the ballot-box was turned. Eight or ten stout, resolute
young men were then selected and formed in column to bring up the
rear, and give such an impetus to those before them as to force them
forward in spite of all opposing obstacles, till they reached the
voters' stand in the house.

"Ditter ready, boys?" now cried Dunning, firmly grasping Bart's legs,
and glancing over his shoulders to his lusty little band of backers.
"All ready there, behind, boys? Then go ahead, as if ditter Belzebub
kicked ye an end!"

At the word, Piper, gathering himself up like a ram for a butting
match, made a lunge head foremost into the recoiling ranks of the
tories, and, borne irresistibly forward by the force of the rushing
phalanx behind, overthrew, prostrated, and shoved aside, all before
him, till the whole column gained the interior, and came to a halt
before the ballot-box.

"I protest against that fellow's voting!" exclaimed Peters, approaching
the stand as Bart, from his lofty seat on Dunning's shoulders, was about
to put in his vote, which was a simple _yea_ written on a slip of paper,
and handed up to him by some one stationed near the box to furnish the
unsupplied. "I protest against such a glaring outrage! He is under age,
and was very properly driven from the house."

"Prove it! prove it!" shouted several of Bart's friends.

"You can't do it," cried another, "and if you could, two of your party,
who are under age, have voted already; 'tis a fact; deny it if you can!"

"In with it, Bart!" said Dunning, bending down to give the other a chance.

"Yes, in with it; for he shall vote!" responded the rest.

"He shall not vote!" vociferated Peters; "and if he attempts to do it;
I'll blow his brains out!" he added, pulling out and levelling a
pistol. Quick as thought, Bart threw open his over-coat, and, drawing
from beneath it the light short gun there concealed, cocked, and
brought it to his shoulder; while the threatening weapon of his foe
was seen flying to a distant part of the room, from a sudden blow of
Piper's cudgel, and its disarmed and nonplused owner slinking away out
of the range of the suspicious-looking barrel still kept aimed at his
head.

Amidst the loud cries of order, and the heated vociferations of both
parties, now raised to condemn or defend the transaction, through the
house, Bart, Dunning, and others of their company, who had not voted,
now hastily deposited their votes, and retired unmolested.

Although the portion of the revolutionary party, whose movements we
have been more particularly describing, acting on the supposed and
probably actual frauds of their opponents, had thus secured Bart's
vote, and the votes of two or three others, perhaps equally illegal,
yet the event soon showed that their policy in so doing was a mistaken
one, and calculated to defeat the very object they intended to
promote; for, as will always be the result where one party attempts to
adopt the wrongful measures of their opponents, the tories, now armed
with the fact that they had detected the other party in a wrong more
glaring, because more public, than any they had perpetrated, made use
of the advantage with such effect as to bring over several, intending
to support the resolutions, to change their intention, and go against
them. And, in addition to this, by way of retaliating, and of making
good at least all the ground lost by the questionable votes forced
upon them, they brought forward every minor they could find
approximating the size of a man, and boldly demanded their admittance
to the polls. An opposition was, indeed, attempted to a measure so
manifestly illegal, by the leaders of the other party; but they had
become too much disarmed by the acts of their own partisans to produce
any sensible effect; and their voices were soon drowned by the clamors
of the tories, who now admitted the boys by acclamation. This, as will
be anticipated, decided the contest. On counting the votes, the
resolution was found to have been rejected by more than a dozen
majority-a victory which the tories failed not to announce by shouts
of exultation, which out-thundered those of their opponents in their
late short-lived triumph. The friends of freedom, being thus caught in
their own trap, or, at least, worsted by the indiscretion of their own
friends, now pretty much yielded the contest: while the victorious
Yorkers and tories had everything in their own way, electing their
town officers, passing denunciatory and royal resolutions, and
continuing their discussions unopposed till it was nearly dark, when
the meeting broke up in noisy confusion.

"Oyez! Oyez! Oyez!" was now heard crying the well-known voice of
Constable Fitch, as he mounted a stump in the yard; while near by
stood a gang of his confederates, hedging in Woodburn's cow and oxen,
which the former had found the means to have on the spot, in readiness
for the sale, the moment the assembly broke up. "Oyez! A cow and oxen,
taken on execution, now about to be sold to the highest bidder,
gentlemen. We will take the oxen first; as fine a yoke as ever drew
plough Who will give us the first bid? Shan't dwell three minutes. Who
bids, I say? One pound bid, gentlemen; one pound ten! one pound ten!
and on Mr. Peters. Who bids higher?"

But, as rapid as had been the constable's movements, he did not, as he
intended, take the friends of Woodburn by surprise. They had withdrawn
from the meeting a short time before it dissolved, and met for
consultation in the rear of the house, where, having arranged their
plan of operations, they stood awaiting for the proper time to carry
it into execution.

"There!" exclaimed Dunning, as the constable began to cry the sale in
the manner we have just described--"there, that is ditter Fitch; he is
at it! All ready, boys? You, Piper and Bart, with your vials of oil of
vitriol in your sleeves, ready to uncork on to their ditter tails?"

"Ay, ay!"

"And your ditter snuff to throw into their eyes?"

"Yes, that, too."

"And your guns ditter cocked, and safe under your coats you that are
to fire?"

"Ay, all right and ready--lead on!"

"Der well, but remember we ditter separate here, so as to come up on
different sides of the crowd; and mind, don't let off your guns till
the creatures begin to ditter grow uneasy and der snort and blow."

While Fitch was repeating the bids he had received for the oxen, and
was about to knock them off to the highest bidder, which still chanced
to be Peters, he was suddenly told to hold on, by several persons who
had just at that moment made their appearance in different parts of
the crowd, and who expressed their wish to bid, as soon as they could
get up to examine the cattle. Owing to the duskiness, the faces of the
new comers did not seem to be recognized by the tories, who
unsuspectingly opened and admitted them to the stand. Quickly availing
themselves of the opportunity, the former, among the foremost of whom
were Piper and Bart, now crowded eagerly round the cattle, and, after
rapidly passing their hands over the cow and each of the oxen a
moment, and then stepping back, began to banter and bid. Not much
time, however, was allowed them to do either; for the cattle, all at
once, became unaccountably restless, at first backing and wheeling
about in their confined space, and then wildly tossing up their heads,
snuffing, and assuming the startled and furious appearance generally
exhibited by this class of animals when about to make a desperate
effort to break away.

At this critical juncture, the fierce flashes and stunning reports of
a half dozen muskets burst over the heads of the startled and
astonished company from various points on the outer edge of the crowd;
and the next instant the already maddened cattle, with loud snorts,
leaping over or trampling down all in their way, broke through the
living hedge of tories around them, and bounded off, with their tails
thrown aloft, and bellowing in wild affright, in different directions,
towards the woods, leaving the amazed and broken crowd jostling and
pitching about with exclamations of surprise, groans of pain, volleys
of oaths, and shouts of laughter, all mingled in Babel-like confusion.

"'Tis all the work of the cursed rebels!" exclaimed Peters, the first
to rally and comprehend the affair. "Fitch!" he added, pointing after
the runaway cattle, "where the devil are your wits, that you don't
order a pursuit?"

"Yes, pursue and bring 'em back, instantly!" screamed the constable,
awaking from the stupor and confusion of ideas into which he seemed to
have been thrown by the strange and unexpected occurrence. "Yes,'tis
an unlawful rescue--it's a conspiracy! bring back the cattle! seize
the offenders, every one of 'em! in the king's name I command ye."

Obedient to the call, the obsequious tories instantly rallied for the
pursuit, and, breaking off into three distinct bands, eagerly set
forward in the different directions taken by the fugitive cattle, then
just disappearing over the distant swells, or in the borders of the
woods. Dunning, Piper and Bart, who, in the mean while, had, unknown
and unsuspected in the darkness and confusion, stood in the throng,
keenly watching the result of their plan, no sooner heard the expected
order of pursuit given, than, separating, like their opponents, and
each joining a different band of the pursuers, they sprang in before
the rest, and, by their superior alacrity and speed, soon succeeded in
taking the lead and finally in completely distancing all others in the
promiscuous chase. The tories, now soon wholly losing sight of their
fleet and, as they still supposed, trusty guides in the pursuit,
became, in a short time, confused and at fault respecting the courses
to be taken; and, after hallooing and running about the woods and
pastures at random, nearly an hour, without discovering any traces
either of the lost cattle or the missing pursuers, at length came
straggling back to the Town House, and, by way of saving their own
credit, reported to Fitch, Peters, and the small party remaining
there, that their swiftest runners were last seen nearly up with the
cattle, and would soon be in with them, or that the creatures had been
headed, and were on their way back, in another direction. On this, the
company waited another hour; when, neither the cattle nor the expected
pursuers appearing, they began to suspect something amiss; and the
inquiries and investigations then put afoot soon resulted in the
mortifying conviction, that the cattle had been overtaken and driven
off by the same persons who previously had caused them to break away.
Prompted by the enraged Peters, Fitch then offered a reward for the
recovery of the cattle and the detection of those who had abducted
them; when the company separated, to resume the search the next day.
But although this was done, and the country scoured in every direction
for several days, yet the search proved wholly fruitless. Not one of
the cattle was to be found. Nor were the actors in the transaction,
with any certainty, identified, though the absence of Piper and Bart,
for some days after the event, caused them to be suspected and marked
for punishment, when they should again appear abroad.


CHAPTER XI.

  "Vital spark of heavenly flame!
   Quit, O quit this mortal frame!
   Trembling, hoping, lingering, flying,
   O the pain, the bliss of dying!
   Cease, fond nature! cease thy strife,
   And let me languish into life."


Perhaps the nearest and dearest, as well as the most interesting tie
of consanguity, is that existing between mother and son. Who has not
witnessed the unfailing and unconquerable strength of a mother's love
for the son of her heart and her vows, cleaving to its object through
prosperity and through adversity, through honor and through shame,
with a constancy which never wavers? And what son, especially after
the thoughtlessness of youth has given place to the reflection of
maturer years, and experience has taught him the insincerity and
selfishness of the world--what son has not turned back and lingered,
with the most grateful emotions, over the pleasing memories of a
mother's care; pondered with the most heart-felt admiration over the
deep, pure, and undying nature of a mother's love; realized more and
more the priceless value of a sentiment so fraught with moral beauty,
so exalted, so proof against all those considerations of self, those
temptations of interest, before which all other ties are seen to give
way, and, while thus realizing, found his yearning bosom oftener and
oftener prompting him to exclaim with the poet,--

  "Where'er I roam, whatever realms I see,
   My heart, untravelled, fondly turns to thee."

While the scenes of disorder and tumult we last described, and the
similar ones that followed, were being enacted among the belligerent
parties of this misgoverned town, the dutiful and sorrowing Woodburn
was continuing his attendance on his sick mother, from whose bedside
no call of business or of pleasure was suffered for a single hour to
lure him. And well might he have done so, aside even from the dictates
of filial duty; for she was a woman not only of unaffected piety, but
of education and intellect; and to her he had been mainly indebted for
all that was good and elevated in his character. She had emigrated
with her husband to this town, at an early period of its settlement
from the vicinity of Boston, where the latter had become so much
straitened in his pecuniary circumstances, in consequence of being
surety for an improvident and luckless brother, that he was induced,
with the hope of bettering his fortunes, to gather up the poor remnant
of his property, and, with it, remove to the New Hampshire Grant's, at
that time the Eldorado most in vogue among those seeking new
countries. Here, having purchased one of the best tracts of land in
the place, he commenced the slow and laborious process of clearing up
a new farm. And this Herculean task, which may well be considered the
work of a man's life, he had, after years of incessant toil and
privation, nearly succeeded in accomplishing, and begun to catch
glimpses of easier and brighter days; when he was taken away by
disease, leaving his property to his wife and son, an only child, then
drawing towards manhood. And nobly had that son discharged the double
duty which now devolved upon him,--that of becoming the stay and
comforter of his widowed mother, and the sole manager of the farm,
their only dependence. For, while discharging his filial duties in
such a manner as to gain him the reputation of being a pattern of a
son, he not only kept good, but, by his industry and enterprise, even
improved, the property to which he had thus succeeded. And he was fast
surmounting the difficulties of his situation, and making hopeful
advances towards a competence, when, in an evil hour, his flourishing
little establishment attracted the coveting eye of the unconscionable
Peters, who, owning an adjoining farm, which would be rendered much
more salable by being united with Woodburn's, undertook, at first, to
wheedle the young man into a sale, or rather an exchange of his
valuable farm for another, or wild lands, at false valuations and of
doubtful titles. But, finding himself wholly mistaken in the character
of the person whom he thus endeavored to overreach, and consequently
failing in his attempt, he next began to think of the quibbles of the
law, as the means of accomplishing his purpose. And having discovered
some slight irregularity in Woodburn's deed, to begin upon, he then
resorted to a trick quite fashionable among the corrupt speculators of
those unsettled times--that of purchasing from some unprincipled
person, ready, for a small sum, to enter into the fraud, a deed of
prior date to that of the one to be defeated, with descriptions of
premises and references to suit the purchaser the worthless assumed
owner neither knowing nor caring what his deed might convey. Having
secretly procured a prior deed of Woodburn's farm in this manner,
Peters could see but one obstacle now in the way of his success, which
was the town records, embracing that of Woodburn's deed. How was this
to be disposed of? A bold measure, which could be executed by his
minions under political pretences, occurred to him; and the result
was, that part of the town record soon disappeared. Peters then
commenced an action against Woodburn, to eject him from his farm, the
course and consequences of which are already known to the reader.

Spring had now come; but its bland and balmy breath brought no relief
to the suffering widow. From the hour she had been compelled to take
to her bed, her disease, though sometimes lulled, or raging less
fiercely than at other times, had never for a moment loosened its
tenacious grasp. And although her cheerful words, and meek,
uncomplaining looks, had often misled her anxious son, or, at least,
prevented him from despairing of her recovery, yet the dry, parched,
red tongue, the daily return of the bright hectic spot, and the tense,
hurrying and unvarying beat of the strained pulses, might have told
him how certainly and rapidly the work of destruction was going on at
the citadel of life, and better prepared him for the agonizing scene
which was now to follow.

It was a calm and pleasant evening towards the close of April, and the
low descending sun was shedding the mellow light of his parting beams
over the joyful face of reanimating nature. The invalid, during all
the fore part of the day, had suffered greatly from pain--that general
and undefinable distress which is so frequently found to be the
precursor of approaching dissolution. To this had succeeded a sort of
lethargic sleep, from which it was not easy to arouse her, so that she
could be made to take any notice of what was passing around her. But
now she awoke, clear and collected; and, glancing round the room, with
a sort of pensive animation, met and answered the inquiring and
solicitous look of her son with an affectionate smile. Presently her
wandering eye rested on some objects of the landscape, glimpses of
which she had caught through one of the small patched windows of the
room, and she faintly observed,--

"How pleasant it appears without! Harry," she continued after a
thoughtful pause, "could you take out that window before me? I feel a
desire to look out once more on the green earth and breathe the sweet
air of spring."

"Yes, mother," said the other, approaching the bed, with a surprised
and hesitating air; "yes, I could easily do it, I presume; but would
it be quite safe for you to be exposed to the evening air?"

"Yes, Harry; the time for the exercise of such cares is gone by. You
need fear no more for me, now, my son," she replied in accents of
tender sadness.

The son then, with a doubtful and troubled look, proceeded in silence
to comply with the unexpected request; after which, he gently raised
the head of the invalid, who, thereupon, gazed long and thoughtfully
on the variegated landscape, which lay spread out in tranquil beauty
beneath her dimly-kindling eye.

"How beautiful!" she at length feebly exclaimed, in a tone of
melancholy rapture--"beautiful of itself, but more beautiful as the
type of man's destiny after his body has mingled with the dust. The
scene we here behold, my son, exhibits the resurrection of nature. In
summer the foliage and blossom expands, in autumn the fruit is
perfected, and in winter the visible part falls back to earth and
perishes, leaving the hidden seed or germ to spring forth again into
another life. So it has been, so it will be, with me. I have had my
brief summer of life, my still briefer autumn, and now my winter of
death is at hand, from which I trust to come forth into the more
glorious spring of life eternal."

"Do not talk thus, mother," responded the son, greatly moved--"do not
talk thus: you distress me. I trust you may yet recover. You certainly
look brighter this evening; and I hope another day will find you still
better."

"No, Harry, not better, as you mean. If I appear brighter, it is but
the brightness of the last flashing up of the expiring taper. I feel
that my time is come, and thanks to _Him_ who has prepared my heart to
hail the event as a relief and a blessing."

"O, my mother, my mother, how can I part with you?"

"My longer sojourn here, my son, would be of little benefit to
others--even to you: my blessing is worth more than would be my
further abiding: come and receive it."

The weeping son then knelt down at the bedside, and the mother laying
her hand on his head, pronounced her blessing and a brief prayer for
his earthly prosperity and eternal happiness.

For several minutes, the son, overcome by his emotions, remained
kneeling, with his head, on which still languidly rested the emaciated
hand of his dying mother, bowed upon the bed-clothes, while the
latter, sinking back exhausted on her pillow, closed her eyes, and
seemed to be silently communing with herself. She soon, however,
aroused herself, and observed,--

"My work is not yet quite done. I have a little more to say before the
scene closes."

"Say on, mother," said the other, making an effort to calm himself, as
he now rose, and, taking a seat near, wistfully rivetted his gaze on
her pallid face. "If you are, indeed, about to leave me forever,
withhold nothing you feel inclined to communicate; for your dying
counsels, my dear parent, will be received with pleasure and
gratitude, and treasured up in heart and memory as the last, best
lesson of one to whom I am under such countless obligations."

"You have ever acted the part of a dutiful son towards me, Harry; and
that is always a mother's best reward for her care and affection for
her offspring. And I know not that I have aught now to say to you, by
way of counsel for your future guidance, being willing to leave you to
practise upon the principles I have endeavored to inculcate, and be to
others what you have been to me. But it was not of that I intended to
speak. I was about to name some facts connected with our early
reverses, which, it being always unpleasant to recur to those scenes
of trial, I think I have never told you, but which, I thought, it
might, perhaps, some day avail you something to know. You have heard
us casually speak, I presume, of your uncle Charles Woodburn?"

"I have, mother."

"And you may also be aware that, through his misconduct, we were
suddenly reduced from the easy competence we once enjoyed to poverty
and distress."

"I have so understood it, but never knew what kind of misconduct it
was that led to our misfortunes."

"It was imprudence in speculations, and profligacy in living, and not
dishonesty, or any intentional wrong to us, as I ever believed; though
your father, in his desperation when the blow came, would listen to no
extenuation, but drove him from his presence with bitter reproaches
and accusations. But your uncle, before leaving the country, as he
soon after did, sought an interview with me; and, after deploring the
misfortunes he had brought on my family as well as himself, solemnly
pledged himself that he would, some day or other, more than compensate
me or mine for all the losses he had occasioned us. And this is the
circumstance I wished to tell you; for, though we never received any
certain information of him, yet something tells me he still is alive,
and has the means and disposition to fulfil his promise to you
whenever you may find him, and he recognizes you as the representative
of his brother's family, of whose location here he probably was never
apprised. I would suggest to you therefore, the expediency of trying
to trace him out, and, if you succeed in doing so, make yourself and
your situation known to him; and, without preferring any claim, leave
the result with Providence."

"Your suggestion, mother, shall not pass from me unheeded, nor shall I
fail, in due time, to act upon it; but, at present, I know not if the
last tie that binds me to this place should be severed--I know not but
our down-trodden country may have the first claim on my services. Ever
since the startling news of the massacre of Lexington reached us, a
sense of the duty of devoting myself to her defence has pressed
heavily and constantly on my mind. And but for the stronger claim
which nature and my own feelings have given you, in your situation, to
my presence and attention, I might, before this, have been with my
shouldered musket on my way to the scene of action. But even in the
event of your death, I should hesitate to obey the call if I knew I
must do it without your sanction."

"I thank you, my son, for your affectionate deference; but you shall
not go without my sanction. Having conjectured what might be your
feelings at this dark hour of our country's peril, I was about to
speak to you on the subject. Yes, Harry, if you think duty calls you
to the field, in defence of a cause so just and righteous as ours, go.
You will be under the care of the same Providence there as elsewhere.
Go, and with a dying mother's blessing, and a prayer of faith for your
safety and success, do battle manfully for the Heaven-favored side,
till the oppressor be cast down, and the oppressed go free."

With a heart swelling with conflicting emotions, the young man looked
up to reply, when his words were arrested on his lips, by the evident
change that the countenance of the other had suddenly undergone. The
unnatural animation, which she had exhibited during the conversation,
had faded away. She lay listless and exhausted, with her eyes nearly
closed, and her lips slightly moving in secret prayer.

"And now, Lord, what wait I for?" she at length audibly uttered. "But
I am not to wait," she continued, in a firmer tone after a short
pause. "The final moment is at hand! Farewell earth! farewell, my son!
May Heaven's blessings rest on you--on all, and be the offences of all
forgiven. Ah! the light of day is fading; but O, that brighter light
which opens those angel forms, with smiling faces, which beckon me
away! Ready! I come!--I come!"

And thus,--

  "--blessing and blest,
   In death she went smiling away
   To the heavenly bosom of rest."




CHAPTER XII.

  "Whene'er your case can be no worse,
   The desperate is the wiser course."


Late in the afternoon, several days subsequent to the melancholy event
described in the preceding chapter, a mingled company, of some dozens
of persons, including several town officials, were seen, assembling at
the Tory Tavern, in Guilford; the object of which appearances seemed
to indicate to be the holding of a magistrates' court, to try an
offender who had that morning been arrested, and who now, in custody
of Constable Fitch, was demurely sitting on a rude bench under an open
window of the room in which the trial was to be had, and in which the
two justices composing the court had already seated themselves at a
table, in readiness, on their part, to commence proceedings. That
offender was no other than our humble friend, Barty Burt, who had
lucklessly fallen into one of the snares which had been set for him
and his suspected companions, round the country, in consequence of the
part they had acted in spiriting away, in so strange a manner,
Woodburn's cattle, when about to be sold on town meeting day. He and
Piper, during the night following that affair, after meeting Dunning
at an appointed place, and giving him charge of the cattle, which had
been successfully pursued and there collected, to be driven out of
that part of the country by the hunter, left town in different
directions, to avoid the arrest they anticipated, in case they
remained; Piper going down the river in quest of some temporary
employment till the storm blew over, and Bart setting off on a fishing
excursion to Marlboro' Pond, situated in a then nearly unsettled
section, about ten miles to the north. Here Bart had pursued his sport
unmolested, many days, occasionally going out to Brattleborough to
sell his fish and buy provisions, and considering himself in this
secluded situation perfectly safe from any search which might be made
for him by the officers of Guilford. But the reward offered by the
constable for the apprehension of the offenders, who had been soon
pretty well identified, had put all the tories in the town and
vicinity on the watch and the result was, that Bart had been seen,
traced to his retreat, seized and brought back for trial.

Although Bart's general demeanor seemed to show a perfect indifference
to the fate that now threatened him, yet the quick keen glances with
which, under that show of indifference, he noted every movement of
those into whose power he had fallen and the restlesness he exhibited
when their eyes were not upon him, gave token of no little inward
perturbation. And it was not without reason that his apprehensions
were excited; he knew the character and disposition of the two tory
justices whom he saw taking their seats to try him, and he rightly
judged that he need not expect either mercy or justice at their hands.
He had also detected one of the constable's minions, who had been
despatched to the woods for the purpose, stealing slyly round into the
horse-shed, on his return, with a half dozen formidable looking green
beech rods; and he was at no loss to decide for whose back they were
intended, or by whose ruthless hand they were to be applied.

"You can't go that, Bart," he mentally exclaimed. "You must get away;
so now put your best contrivances in motion, for I tell you it won't
do for you to think of standing that pickle."

And as hopeless as, to all appearance, was any attempt to escape his
captors, who stood round him with loaded pistols in their hands, Bart
yet confidently counted on being able, in some way or other, to slip
through their fingers, and avoid the fearful punishment which he knew
was in store for him, if he remained many hours longer in their hands.
To effect this, he looked for no aid from others; for experience had
taught him the value of self-reliance. The whole life of this singular
being, indeed, had been one which was peculiarly calculated to throw
him on his own resources, sharpen his wits, and render him fertile in
expedients. He had been a foundling, and knew no more of his parentage
than a young ostrich, that springs from the deserted egg in the sand.
He was left, when an infant, at the door of a poor mechanic, in
Boston, by the name of Burt, and by him transferred to the almshouse,
where he was called after the name of his finder, with the pet name of
Barty, given him by his nurse. Here he was kept till he was four or
five years old, when he was given to the Shakers, from whom he ran
away at ten or twelve. From that time, the poor friendless boy became
a wanderer through the interior country, generally remaining but a few
months in a place, being driven from each successive home by misusage,
or for want of profitable work for him to do, or, what was still
oftener the case, perhaps, for playing off some trick to avenge the
fancied or real insult he had received, till, after having been kicked
about the world like a foot-ball, cheated, abused cowed in feeling,
and become, in consequence, abject, uncouth and singular in manner and
appearance, he at length reached the situation in the family of the
haughty loyalist where we found him.

While Bart was thus uneasily revolving the matter of his present
concern in his mind, and beginning to cast about him for some means of
escape, the constable was called aside by those who had undertaken to
manage the prosecution, for the purpose of holding with them a
consultation, the purport of which, though carried on in a low tone,
and at some distance, was soon gathered by the quick and practised
ears of the prisoner. It appeared that the trial was being delayed in
consequence of the absence of Peters, who was an important witness,
and who unaccountably failed to make his appearance. And it being
feared that he might have been waylaid, and detained on the road, by
some band of the other party, to prevent him from testifying, as all
knew he was anxious to do, it was settled that Fitch should start
immediately in search of him to the house which he usually made his
temporary quarters in another part of the town. Accordingly the
constable, after putting the prisoner in charge of two stout fellows
who were in his interest, with orders to guard him closely, and shoot
him down the instant he should attempt to escape, set forth on his
mission after Peters. Bart's countenance brightened when he saw the
savage officer depart, for he believed the absence of the latter would
greatly increase his chances of escape; and in spite of all the
threats he had received of being shot, he resolved to improve that
absence in making the attempt, though the manner of doing so yet
remained to be decided, by the circumstances which might occur.

In the mean time a trotting-match had been got up in the road in front
of the tavern, by a small party who had been boasting of the speed and
other qualities of their horses; and it being now understood that the
trial was to be delayed till the constable's return, the whole company
left the house, and went out to the road to witness the performance.
Bart's keepers not being able, where they stood, to see and hear what
was going on very distinctly, and being equally desirous with the rest
to get a favorable stand for that purpose, after renewing the threat
of shooting him, if lie attempted to run away, took him along with
them, and entered the line of spectators extended along the road.
After a few trials among those who began the contest, several new
competitors led on their horses and entered the lists. By this time
most of the company began to take a lively interest in the
performance, taking sides, and betting on the success of the different
horses now put into the contest. The prisoner having, by this time,
through dint of persevering in good humor and sociability, in return
for the abusive epithets, by which all his attempts to converse were,
for a while, received, succeeded, in a great measure, in disarming his
keepers of the stern reserve and jealous distrust they at first
exhibited towards him, he was soon permitted to talk freely, and
offer, unrebuked, his opinions of the success of the various horses
about to make a trial, which his previous observation and acquaintance
with many of them, made during his residence in town the preceding
year, enabled him to do with considerable sagacity. And his
predictions being luckily fulfilled in several instances, and
especially in one in which his most rigid keeper had been saved from
losing, in a bet, which would have been made but for his timely
cautions, Bart at length found himself on such a footing of confidence
and good will with those whom he wished to conciliate, that he thought
it would now do to commence operations for himself.

"I don't think much of such trotting, myself," said Bart, carelessly,
as one of the contests afoot had just terminated; "but there is one
animal I notice here to-day, I should like to bet on."

"What horse is that?" asked the keeper above designated,

"That dapple gray mare hitched over there in the corner of the
cow-yard yonder," replied Bart, pointing to a small, long tailed pony,
whose shabby coat of shedding and neglected hair greatly disguised the
remarkable make of her limbs and other indications of strength and
activity.

"That creature!" exclaimed the other, contemptuously; "why she aint
bigger than a good-sized sheep. You may bet if you want to, and lose;
for there's not a horse on the ground but would beat her."

"Well, for all that, Mr. Sturges," responded Bart, banteringly, "I'll
not take back what I've said about the nag. And to prove my earnest,
I'll make you an offer; I'll bet my gun, which you saw me hand the
landlord for safe keeping when they brought me in--I'll bet my gun
against your hat, I'll take that creature and out-trot you, with any
hoss you may choose to bring on."

"Done!" exclaimed Sturges; "but you are contriving this up for a
chance to get away, you scamp."

"What should I want to get away for?" I haint done nothin: and there's
a witness here that will swear to a thing or two for me, when the
trial comes on, guess you'll find; besides, aint you young to ride by
my side, with a loaded pistol in your hand?"

"Yes, and that aint all; I'll put a bullet through you the instant you
make the least move to be off."

"I'm agreed to that."

"Well, but will they let you take the colt for the march?"

"Guess so; I'll venture to take her. The boy that rode her here has
cleared out down to the brook a fishing; but I know him, and think he
wouldn't object."

"Who owns the colt?"

"Old Turner did, last year, when I lived with him; and the boy is from
that way, and borrowed her, likely."

"Then you have rode her, have you?" asked Sturges, doubtfully.

"Never rid her with any other boss, but know she can trot faster than
any thing you can find here; so you may as well back out at once,"
answered Bart, with apparent indifference.

"Not by a jug-full, sir; but I must look me up a horse, and fix matters
a little first; and then, if it is thought safe for me to trust you to
ride, I'll go it," returned the other, with some hesitation.

Sturges then stepped aside with the other keeper, and, after
consulting with him a few moments, went forward and announced to the
company the bet offered by the prisoner, and his own intention of
accepting it, and indulging the fellow in a trial, if they thought
best, and would assist in measures to prevent the possibility of his
escape. The proposal was received with shouts of laughter by the
tories; and eager for the fun they expected to see in so queer a
contest, they agreed to be answerable for the prisoner's safety, and
urged on the performance.

The two keepers, now calling in others to take charge of the prisoner,
while they made their preparations, proceeded to arrange the company
on both sides of the road, placing men at short intervals along the
whole line of the course, commencing back about two hundred yards
south of the tavern, and extending to the sign-post, which, standing
on the edge of the beaten path in front of the house, had been agreed
on as the goal. And not satisfied with this precaution, they then
procured four long, heavy, spruce poles, and, extending them from
fence to fence across the enclosed road leading from the tavern yard
northward, formed a barricade five or six feet high, which, with the
strong, high fences on each side of the whole course, except at the
starting-point, where no danger was apprehended, seemed to cut off the
prisoner, even without being guarded, from all possible chance to
escape on horseback, as it was most feared he would do, after being
allowed control of the reins.

"There, Bixby!" exclaimed Sturges, exultingly turning to his
fellow-keeper, as they completed the barricade across the road beyond
the goal--"there! I would defy the devil to jump over this barrier, or
any of the fences on the way, as to that matter. So the little rebel
will hardly escape us by running his horse from the ground, I fancy.
But we must look out that he don't jump off at the end of the race, or
before, and cut into the fields. You may therefore station yourself
somewhere between this and the sign-post; and if he attempts to leap
from his horse and run, as we fetch up here, shoot him down as you
would a dog, and charge the blame to me or Fitch; either of us will
bear it."

Having thus arranged every thing to his satisfaction, Sturges,
ordering the pony we have described, and the horse he had selected for
himself, to be brought on, then took charge of his prisoner and rival,
and conducted him, with great show of mock dignity, and amidst a noisy
and jeering troop of attendants, to the ground marked off for the
place of starting, and now designated by the close line of men that
had been stationed across the road to guard against the prisoner's
escape in that direction. Bart, in the mean time, seemed perfectly
indifferent to all these precautions of the tories, as well as the
gibes and laughter which constantly greeted him on the way, and, on
reaching the prescribed limit, quietly dropped down on the grass among
the company, and awaited the coming of the horses with the greatest
unconcern. The latter soon made their appearance on the ground, and
were immediately led up and presented to their respective riders.

"Lightfoot!" exclaimed Bart, springing up to receive his chosen pony;
"do you know me, Lightfoot?"

The animal instantly pricked up her ears, and responded by a sort of
low, chuckling whinny, by rubbing her nose against his arm, and by
other demonstrations of recognition and pleasure, which plainly showed
the two to have been old acquaintances and friends. Bart then,
stripping off the saddle and handing it to a boy to be carried back to
the tavern, again went to the head of the pony, and, after patting her
on her neck, repeated certain words in her ear, which seemed to produce
the instant effect of arousing her spirit, and making her restless and
impatient for a start. After going through these and other ceremonies
of the kind, which seemed greatly to amuse the company, he mounted,
reined up and announced himself ready for the signal.

After another delay, to indulge the company in the renewed shouts of
laughter which were called forth by the ludicrous contrast now
presented in the appearance of the oddly matched competitors, as the
diminutive and shabby looking prisoner sat awkwardly mounted on his no
less diminutive and shabby pony, by the side of the portly Sturges and
his large and finely built horse, the signal was given, and the
parties set forth amidst the encouraging hurrahs of the crowd. Their
progress, for a while was nearly equal; and the pony, though very
unskilfully managed by her seemingly raw and timid rider, continued to
maintain her place by the side of the horse so fully, as to render the
result of the contest extremely doubtful. But as they drew near the
end of the coarse, and the horse, by the renewed incentives of his
rider, began to gain on her, she suddenly flounced, broke into a
gallop, shot by the horse, giving him a staggering kick in the chops
as she passed, and, in spite of the apparent efforts of her rider, to
bring her up at the goal, plunged on directly towards the fence that
had been thrown across the road.

"Whoa! whoa!" cried Bart, in tones of distress and affright, still
appearing to strain every nerve to hold in the ungovernable
animal--"whoa! whoa! help, or I shall be thrown!"

"Help him there! stop her! seize her by the bits!" shouted Sturges,
now riding up to the goal to claim the bet.

But the perverse pony, veering about among those approaching on either
side to seize, or head her, with sundry monitory kicks thrown out
sidewise towards them as she went, the next moment reached, and, with
a tremendous leap, cleared the barricade, and landed safely with her
rider in the open road on the other side. Here Bart hastily made
another apparent attempt to rein her up; but rearing and spinning
round on her heels, she again made a plunge forward, and set out in a
keen run, making the ground smoke beneath her feet as she flew, with
astonishing speed along the road; while her rider, grasping her mane
with both hands, and swaying from side to side, as if hardly able to
keep his seat at that, continued to bawl and screech, at every step,
"Whoa! whoa! stop her! stop her!" with all his might.

The tories were so completely taken by surprise by these manoeuvres,
and the unexpected feat of leaping the barricade that Bart and his
fleet pony were nearly a quarter of a mile off, before they
sufficiently rallied from their astonishment and confusion to realize
what had passed; and when they did, hearing his piteous cries for
help, and expecting every moment to see him hurled headlong from his
horse, they stood doubtfully looking at him and each other, several
seconds longer, before they thought of following him. Sturges,
however, now took the alarm, and, ordering the barricade to be thrown
down, started off, with those who, like himself, happened to be
mounted, in pursuit. By this time, the fugitive had passed over an
intervening swell, which hid him from the view of the pursuers; and
though their progress was rapid, yet, when they gained the top of the
swell, which commanded a view of the road till it entered the woods,
almost a half mile beyond, he was nowhere to be seen. But believing he
must have gained the woods, they pushed on, in the vain pursuit, about
a mile farther; when, meeting some townsmen, they ascertained that he
had not passed in that direction. They then retraced their steps,
carefully examining every bypath and open spot by the road-side, where
any ordinary horse could be made to go; but making no discoveries,
they concluded to return to the tavern for consultation; for they grew
more and more puzzled to know what to make of the prisoner, or how to
account for his mysterious escape, some affirming "he must have been
in league with the devil, as no horse, in a natural state, could have
leaped that barricade, or have gone off so like a streak of lightning
after he was over it; and his strange doings with the pony, when he
first met her, and the bluish appearance that attended him along the
road as he went off, with such unnatural swiftness," were cited in
confirmation. But when they reached the tavern, the prisoner, and
every thing attending his escape, were for the time forgotten in the
excitement occasioned by the more startling tidings just received. The
constable had just arrived in great haste announcing that Peters had
been waylaid, and found murdered in the road, and calling on all to
turn out to arrest the unknown but suspected perpetrators of the
horrid deed.




CHAPTER XIII.

  ----"despair itself grew strong
  And vengeance fed its torch from wrong"


On the same day, and near the same hour, on which Bart so singularly
and luckily effected his escape from his vindictive enemies, the
bereft Woodburn left his lonely residence and walked to the graveyard,
to shed another tear over the freshly-laid turf that covered the
remains of his sainted mother. Here, as, standing over her grave, he
reflected on the many excellences of her character, recalled the many
acts of her kindness and love towards him, never before justly
appreciated, and, at the same time, thought of the circumstances under
which she had sickened and died, his tears flowed fast and bitterly.
While he was still lingering near the sacred spot, immersed in these
painful reflections, two ladies, from a neighboring cottage, came,
unperceived by him, along the road leading by the graveyard; when the
younger of the two, wholly unconscious that any one was within the
enclosure, left the other to pass on to the next house, and entered
the yard to amuse herself there till her companion returned. Now
pausing to read an inscription, and now to pluck a wild violet, she
slowly wandered towards that part of the yard where Woodburn, still
screened from her view by a clump of intervening evergreens, was
pensively reclining against a tomb stone in the vicinity of his
mother's grave. And here, taking a turn round the shrubbery, she came
suddenly upon him; and, stopping short in her course, she stood mute
and confused before him, while her cheeks were mantled with a deep
blush at the awkwardness of the position in which she unexpectedly
found herself.

"Miss Haviland!" exclaimed Woodburn, looking up in equal surprise.
"Excuse me if I am wrong, but, as little as I was expecting it, I
think it is Miss Haviland whom I am addressing?"

"It is, sir," she replied, in a slightly tremulous voice; "but trust
you will not think this an intentional intrusion."

"No intrusion, fair lady. You do not rightly interpret my expression,
which was one of surprise at seeing you here, when I had supposed you
to be in another part of the country. When I last saw you, I supposed
you on your return to Bennington."

"I was so at that time. But having recently come over with my father,
who was journeying to Connecticut, I am now tarrying with a sister in
this neighborhood till he returns. Your allusion to our parting,
however, cannot but bring to mind the circumstances connected with our
meeting, nor fail to admonish me of my great obligations to you, sir,
which I have never before found a suitable opportunity of personally
acknowledging. But be assured, Mr. Woodburn, I shall never forget that
fearful hour; yet sooner far the hour, than the hand that snatched me
from my seemingly inevitable doom."

"We both may have cause to remember the incidents attendant on that
journey to Westminster, Miss Haviland; and I, though I did but a
common duty in assisting you, shall remember them, on more accounts
than one, I fear but too long."

"If you allude to your difficulties on that journey, and subsequently
with one with whom we were in company, I can only say, sir, that I
have heard of them, and all your consequent misfortunes, with the
deepest regret, scarcely less on account of the author than the victim."

"I could have submitted to my pecuniary losses with a good degree of
resignation; but, when I think of the crowning act, and the
consequences that followed it--when I look on that grave," continued
the speaker, pointing to the fresh mound, with an effort to master his
emotions, "it is hard to endure."

"Such misfortunes," responded Miss Haviland, visibly touched at his
distress; "such misfortunes,--injuries, perhaps, I should call
them,--I am sensible, are not easily forgotten; and I have sometimes
feared that it too often might be my fate to be associated with them
in your mind."

"O, no, lady, no," said Woodburn, promptly; "though it were better for
my happiness, perhaps, if I could," he added, more gloomily; "for who
will care what may be the feelings of one who is now an outcast,
without property, family, or friends?"

"Think not thus of yourself, Mr. Woodburn," replied the other, while a
scarcely perceptible tinge appeared on her fair cheek; "feel not thus.
You do to yourself, and I doubt not to many others, great injustice;
certainly to one who can only think of you with the warmest gratitude."

"O, if all were like you, Miss Haviland!" returned Woodburn, with much
feeling; "so just, so generous, so pure, so beautiful! But I have
already said too much," he continued checking himself. "I intended not
to have intimated aught of the thoughts and feelings which have
obtruded themselves upon me, even before I heard these kind
expressions. And though what I have said cannot be recalled, yet I
have no thought of pressing any questions upon you under the
accidental advantage which your gratitude--other things being the
same--might give me. I ask for no corresponding impressions--I expect
none. Being aware of your position, as well as my own, I shall not
drive you to the unpleasant task of repulsing me. I will repulse my
self. I will conquer this new enemy, though planted in my own bosom,
lest it prove more dangerous to my peace than the one with whom I have
so vainly contended in another rivalry."

She raised her eyes with a look full of maidenly embarrassment,
indeed, but with an expression more resembling that of sorrow than
resentment, as she gently replied,--

"I feel additionally grateful to you, Mr. Woodburn, for your delicate
and generous course under the circumstances in which, as you seem to
be aware, I am placed. But as I now perceive my companion approaching
in the road, you will excuse my departure."

"Certainly," said Woodburn; "and you will forgive what has been said
by one who is so truly the prey of conflicting emotions?"

"O, yes, sir," she answered, looking up with a witching smile, as she
bowed her adieu; "that is, I will when you do any thing _worthy_ of my
forgiveness."

Woodburn stood mutely gazing after his lovely visitor till her small
and graceful figure, floating on in its devious course through the
diversified grounds in almost fairy lightness, receded from his
enraptured sight; when he turned away with a sigh to commune with
himself, try to analyze his feelings, weigh consequences, give Reason
her rightful sway, and follow her dictates. After a long and deep
struggle with his feelings, he appeared to come to some determination,
and, resolutely bringing down a foot on the ground, he exclaimed,--

"No, never! I will not give way to feelings which can only end in
disappointment and mortification. Begone, enticing vision, begone! I
will harbor you no longer." And under the impulse of his
freshly-formed resolution, he abruptly left the spot, and hastened
through the enclosure to take his way homeward. As he was about to
pass out into the road, his attention was attracted by the barking of
a small dog, that, having followed the ladies, and tarried behind on
their return, seemed to be intent on dragging out something from under
a broad, flat stone, lying in one corner of the graveyard. Feeling
some inclination to know what discoveries the dog was making in a spot
so unpromising of any game that would be likely to attract him,
Woodbury walked to the spot; when he perceived the animal to be
eagerly tugging away at some object, which presented the appearance of
the corners of some old leather-bound book, buried beneath the stone.
His curiosity being now excited, he stood by and patiently waited to
see the result. In a few minutes the dog succeeded in dragging out the
object in question, which proved to be an old record-book, or rather
the remains of one, for a part of it had been converted by the mice
into a nest, and the rest was mutilated and falling to pieces. Leaving
the dog to pursue his object, which was now sufficiently explained,
Woodburn gathered up the remains of the book and stepped aside to
examine them. On beating off the dirt and opening the unmutilated
parts, he soon, and to his great surprise, discovered it to be a
volume of the town records; the very volume, the loss of which, as he
believed, had caused his defeat in his lawsuit with Peters. And
hurriedly running over the leaves, his eye, the next moment, fell on
the record of his own deed, with the dates precisely as he had contended,
and standing in a connection which would have proved the priority of his
title, furnished him a complete defence, and saved him from ruin!

The previous suspicions of Woodburn, respecting the disappearance of
these records through the agency of Peters, were now confirmed in the
mind of the former, as certainly as if he had witnessed the act; and
this aggravating discovery, coming as it did too late to be of any
benefit to him, and at a moment, too, when his feelings,
notwithstanding his recent declarations to Miss Haviland, and his
subsequent resolves, were sore from the insidious workings of
jealousy, and the revolting thought of the pretensions of his hated
foe to her hand--this discovery, we say, wrought up his mind, already
embittered to the last degree of endurance, to a state little short of
absolute frenzy. And clinching the fragments of the book, which
contained the proof of the black transaction, in one hand, and
flourishing the heavy oak cane he had with him in the other, he rushed
out of the enclosure, and, with a disturbed air and hurrying step,
took his way towards his desolate home, resolved, that in case he
found, as he feared, that all chance of legal redress had passed by,
he would, at least, unsparingly make use of the means, now in his
power, in trumpeting the villainy of Peters to the world.

In this state of exasperation, after proceeding a short distance he
unexpectedly and unfortunately encountered the very object of his pent
indignation, the haughty and hated Peters, who, on horseback, was
coming up a cross-road on his way to the Tory Tavern, where, as the
reader has been already apprised, his tools and partisans were
anxiously awaiting his arrival.

"Ha! here? Then he shall be the first to hear it," muttered Woodburn,
as with a flashing eye he suddenly turned and sternly confronted the
other in his path.

"What now, sir?" said Peters, reigning up with a look of surprise not
unmingled with uneasiness.

"I will tell you what, now, sir," replied Woodburn, in a voice
quivering with suppressed passion; "your frauds are exposed! Here are
the remains of those very records you or your tools purloined to
enable you to accomplish your unhallowed triumph over me, and now just
found buried in yonder graveyard!"

"Away, sir!" exclaimed Peters, recovering his usual assurance. "I know
nothing of your crazy jargon: stand aside and let me pass."

"Not till you have looked at the proof of what I assert, or
acknowledged its correctness," persisted the other, extending his cane
before the horse with his right hand, and thrusting forward the open
book with his left. "Here it is; here is the record of my deed--dates
and all, as I and you, too, sir, well knew them to be. Look at it,
sir, and restore me my property, or confess yourself a villain!"

At this juncture Peters, who had covertly reversed the loaded whip he
carried in his hand that he might strike more effectually, suddenly
rose in his stirrups, and aimed a furious blow at the head of his
accuser. But as sudden and unexpected as was the dastardly movement,
Woodburn threw up his cane in time to arrest and parry the descending
implement, when, quick as thought, he paid back the intended blow with
a force, of which, in the madness of the moment, he was little
conscious, full on the exposed head of his antagonist, who, curling
like a struck bullock beneath the fearful stroke, rolled heavily from
his saddle to the ground. The exclamation of triumph that rose to the
lips of the victor died in his throat, as he took a second glance at
the motionless form and corpse-like aspect of the victim; and,
recoiling a step, he stood aghast at the thought of what he had done.
After standing a minute with his eyes rivetted on the face of his
prostrate foe Woodburn, arousing himself, hurried forward, and,
raising the head, chafed the temples and wrists a moment, and then
felt for the pulse, when, finding no signs of life, he suddenly
relinquished his hold, and with a look of horror and unutterable
distress, hastily fled from the spot, muttering as he went, "A
murderer!--to crown the host of misfortunes--a murderer!"

Soon striking off into a deep glade, diverging from the public way, he
continued his course, with a rapid step and troubled brow, on through
the woods and back pastures, till he gained, unobserved, the rear of
his own cabin, when, entering, he threw himself into a chair, and,
burying his face in his hands, sat many minutes motionless and silent,
apparently engaged in deep and anxious thought, At length, he arose
with a more composed look, and proceeded to make up a pack of his
wardrobe, with such valuables as could be conveniently carried,
including his mother's Bible. He then fitted his pack to his
shoulders, took down his gun and ammunition, and, throwing a sorrowful
farewell glance round the lonely apartment, left the house, and bent
his course for the woods, in a northerly direction.

After travelling in the woods and unfrequented fields about two miles,
he came in sight of the point of intersection between the road near
which he had been holding his course, and a road coming into it from
the central parts of the town. Here, concluding to pause till the
approaching darkness should more perfectly screen him, before going
out into the main thoroughfare leading up the Connecticut, he sat down
on a log within the border of the woods, and again gave way to the
remorseful feelings and moody reflections that still painfully
oppressed him. His meditations, however, were soon disturbed by the
quick, heavy tread of some animal, which seemed to be approaching in
the woods, at no great distance behind him. Instantly peering out
through the thicket in which he had ensconced himself, he soon, to his
great surprise, descried a horseman descending a difficult ledge,
leaping old windfalls, and making his way through all the opposing
obstacles of the forest with wonderful facility, directly towards the
spot where he stood concealed in the thicket. Knowing that whatever
might be the object of the person approaching, it would be his wisest
course to remain in his covert, from which he could not move
unobserved, and his curiosity being excited by the appearance of a
horseman in a spot that would have scarcely been deemed passable for a
wild deer, he kept his stand; and continued to regard the advancing
figure with the most lively interest. But owing to the thickness of
the now full-leaved undergrowth, and the duskiness that by this time
had gathered in the forest, he could only catch occasional glimpses of
either horse or rider, which enabled him to ascertain nothing more
than that they both were quite diminutive, and as it struck him,
rather oddly accoutred. They continued to advance directly towards him
till within fifty yards of his covert, when the horse, in emerging
from a clump of bushes, which still enveloped the rider, stopped short,
and, looking keenly into the thicket, gave a quick, significant snort.

"What's in the wind now, Lightfoot?" said the rider to his horse, as,
parting the obstructing foliage with his hands, he thrust out his
head, and disclosed to the surprised and gratified Woodburn the
well-known visage of his trusty friend, Barty Burt.

"This is, indeed, unexpected, Bart," said Woodburn, stepping out into
plain view.

"Harry!" exclaimed the other, agreeably surprised in turn; "but are
you sure there are no more of you there in the bush?" he added, with a
cautious glance at the thicket.

"Yes, I am alone here," answered the former.

"Well, I vags now!" resumed Bart, drawing a long breath, and riding
forward--"I vags, if I didn't begin to feel rather ticklish when
Lightfoot give me that hint to look out for snakes, just now. But the
case aint quite what it might have been, considering."

"Considering what?"

"I know."

"Of course you do, as well as what brought you here with a horse, in
so strange a place for a horseback excursion."

"Just so, Harry; same as you know what brought _you_ here with a
_pack_ on your back, in so queer a route for a journey, when a smooth
road is so near you."

Well knowing Bart's peculiarities, and that it would be useless to try
to draw from him the secret of his appearance here until he chose to
reveal it, Woodburn, while the other dismounted and told his pony to
be cropping the bushes in the mean time, related all that had
transpired between himself and the victim of his deeply regretted
paroxysm of passion, adding, at the close of his gloomy and
self-accusing recital,--

"I first thought, after reaching my house, that I would return and
give myself up to the authorities; but knowing, whether Peters should
live or die, that I should be a doomed man in this part of the
country, I at length brought myself, perhaps wrongly, to try to get
out of it undiscovered. And I have now set my course for Boston, to
join those there gathering for the approaching struggle for liberty.
And Heaven knows with what pleasure I shall now sacrifice my life in
her battles."

"Good! that's grand!" warmly responded Bart, who had listened to the
other with many a _whew_! of surprise at his accompanying expressions
of self-condemnation for killing an antagonist who struck the first
blow--"that's grand! Here is what goes with you, Harry; for, between us
here, I and Lightfoot are clipping it from a predicament, as well as you."

"So I suspected. But what is it? Let us have _your_ story now."

"Well, Harry, in the first place, do you know this critter I call
Lightfoot?"

"No; at least I don't now remember to have noticed the animal before."

"Well, it is the colt old skin-flint Turner cheated me out of, last year."

"I think you told me something about it, but don't recollect the
particulars; though I had then no doubt, I believe, but the old man
wronged you, as I understood you worked very hard for him through the
season."

"I did, like a niggar--cause he promised to give me this colt, then a
little snubby three-year-old, for my summer's work, if I would stay
and work well for him, which I did, as I said. Well, supposing the
colt was to be mine, without any mistake, I made a sight of her, named
her Lightfoot, fed her, got her as tame as a dog, then trained her to
understand certain words and signs, which I at last got her to obey;
and whether it was to trot, run, or jump fences, she would do it as no
other critter could. But just as I had got her to mind and love _me_,
as I did _her_, my time was out; and I went to settle off matters with
the old man, and tell him I was going to take her off with me,
when--rot his pictur!--he pretended he had forgot all about his
promise to let me have her, and forbid my touching her, saying he had
paid me all I earnt in the old clothes which he urged on to me,
against my will, and which were not worth one week's work, as true as
the book, Harry. Well, I couldn't help crying, to be cheated so, and,
what was worse, to lose Lightfoot. But it did no good. I had to come
away without her, or any other pay; and, from that time, I haven't
seen her till to-day."

"But you have not now stole and run away with her, I trust Bart?"

"No; she run away with me," replied Bart, roguishly, as I can prove;
for I hollered _whoa_ all the time, as loud as I could yell."

"But how came you mounted upon her at all?"

"Well, Harry, that brings me to the worst and best part of my story,
all in one; and here goes for it."

Bart, in his own peculiar manner, then related, with great accuracy,
the particulars of his arrest and escape from the tories, as we have
already described them in the preceding chapter, merely explaining, in
addition, that Lightfoot well understood the game, and knew she was to
obey the signs he secretly gave her with his feet and hands, however
loud he, or others, might cry _whoa_ or any of the terms usually
addressed to horses. He then proceeded:--

"Well, you see, as soon as I got over the hill, out of sight, I looked
out for a hard, stony place, where Lightfoot couldn't be tracked; and,
soon finding one, I leaped her over the fence, and made full speed for
the woods, which I luckily reached jest in time to wheel round in
safety, and see them thundering along by, in the road, after me. I
then took it leisurely off in this direction, contriving to keep
mostly in the woods, where I had learnt Lightfoot, in riding after the
cows, last summer, to be as much at home in as in the road."

"And what do you propose to do with this horse now?" asked Woodburn.

"Take her along with me, to be sure, Harry."

"And so make yourself, in law, a horse-thief, eh? Do you expect me to
join company with such a character?"

"Well, now, Harry, I didn't expect the like of that from you, any
how," observed Bart, evidently touched at the remark. "The creature is
honestly mine; and I supposed I had a right to get what was mine away,
if I could, without going to law, which would help me about as much as
it has you, I reckon. But supposing that to be law which aint right
and justice, and so make me out a thief, as you say, how much boot
could I afford to give you, Harry, to swap predicaments with me? You
have just called yourself a murderer, which you aint, and me a
horse-thief, which _I_ aint, any more than you the other. Now, how
will you swap characters?"

"Bart, you have silenced me. Injustice and oppression have made us
both outlaws, but not intentionally wrong-doers. Let us still abstain
from all intentional wrong, however trifling. And that leads me to
observe, that whatever justification you may have for taking away the
horse, you probably have none for carrying off the bridle."

"There you are out again, Harry. That bridle, which queerly happened
to be put on Lightfoot to-day, (as if it was kinder ordered I should
get the beast,) is the very one I bought last fall, to take her off
with; but being so worked up, when I left, I forgot to bring it away."

"Upon my word, Bart, you are successful to-day in making defences."

"Always mean to be able to do so, Harry. Nobody has any honest claims
on me in Guilford, now, nor I any on them. I leave 'em with every
thing squared, according to my religion.

"Except in the matter of your gun, which you leave--not exactly won by
your opponent--behind you; do you not?"

"They are welcome to it; much good may it do 'em. It has gone pretty
much where I calkerlated to get it off--among those who used me the
worst; though I'd some rather it had gone to Fitch, who hunts some,
and would be sure to try it."

"That is queer reasoning, Bart."

"Well, there is a head and tail to it, for all that, Harry."

"What are they?"

"Why, the head, or cause, is, that the last time I shot the piece, I
overloaded it, being for black ducks, and the charge raised a seam, in
a flaw underside the barrel, which I could blow through. And the tail,
or consequence, is, that the next man who shoots it will wish he'd
never seen it, I reckon."

"Ah, Bart, Bart, your religion, as you term it, is a strange one! But
let us now dismiss the past, and think of the future. If you join me
for the army, what do you propose to do with your horse--sell her?"

"Sell her? why, I'd as soon sell my daddy, if I had one. No, we'll
keep her between us. You, and Tom Dunning, and Lightfoot are the only
friends I have in the world, Harry; and I want we should kinder stick
together. So I've been thinking up the plan, that we ride and tie, or
keep along together and foot it by turns, to-night, till we get to
Westminster, when we will beat up Dunning, and leave Lightfoot with
him, who can take her to some of his sly places over the mountain, and
have her kept for us. Then, if one of us gets killed, or any thing, so
as never to come back, let the other take her; and if both fail to
come, then let Tom have her for his own."

And Bart's plan being adopted, our two humble, friendless, and nearly
penniless adventurers left the wood, and entering the northern road,
set forth on their destination, Woodburn first mounting the pony and
keeping some hundred yards in advance, and Bart forming the
rear-guard, under the agreement that the latter, on hearing any bounds
of pursuit, should utter the cry of the raccoon, when both were to
plunge into the woods, and remain till the danger had passed by.

After travelling in this manner, and at a rapid rate, about two hours,
without encountering any thing to excite their apprehension or delay
their progress, they entered a long reach of unbroken forest, which
neither of them remembered ever to have passed through. But not being
able to conceive where they could have turned off from the river road,
which was their intended route, they continued to move doubtingly
onwards some miles farther, till the increasing obstructions and
narrowness of the path, together with the absence of the settlements
which they knew they must have found before this time on the road up
the Connecticut, fully convinced Woodburn they had lost their way. And
he was on the point of proposing to retrace their steps, when,
descrying a light some distance ahead, emanating, as he supposed, from
the hut of a new settler, he at once concluded to push on towards it,
for the purpose of making inquiries of the occupants to ascertain
their situation. In making for the light, of which, for a while, only
feeble and occasional glimmerings could be obtained through the dense
foliage that overhung the devious path, they at length came to an
apparently well-cultivated opening, containing about a dozen acres, on
one side of which stood a small, snug-looking stone house, built
against or near a boldly projecting ledge of rocks. As they approached
the house, their attention was arrested by the loud and earnest voice
of a man within, engaged, evidently, in prayer. Concluding that the
man was at his family evening devotions, which they had no thought of
disturbing, they left the horse at a little distance from the house,
and silently drawing near to the door, paused and reverently listened.
A confused recollection of the supplicant's voice, together with his
deep and fervid tones, his bold language, and especially the subject
that seemed then mostly to engross his thoughts, at once awakened the
interest and rivetted the attention of Woodburn. The great burden of
his soul was, obviously, the political condition of his country. And,
after vividly painting the many wrongs she had suffered from her
haughty oppressors, and warmly setting forth her claims to divine
assistance, he broke forth, in conclusion,--

"My country! O my injured, oppressed, and down-trodden country! shall
the cry of thy wrongs go up in vain to Heaven? Will not the God of
battles hear and help thee, in this the hour of thy peril and of thy
need? O, wilt thou not, Lord, extend Thy mighty arm in her defence? O,
teach the proud Britons, now thronging our shores--teach them,
scoffing Goliahs as they are, that there are young Davids in our land!
O, bring their counsels to nought! Scatter their fleets by thy
tempests at sea, and destroy their armies on land! Sweep them off by
bullet and plague! and--and"--suddenly checking himself, he meekly
added, "and save their souls; and this, Lord, is all that in
conscience I can ask for them. Amen."

Woodburn now gently rapped at the door, which, after a slight pause,
was opened, and Herriot, the late prisoner of the royal court, stood
before him.

"If this is Harry Woodburn," he said, after scrutinizing the other's
features a moment, "he is very welcome to my hut. But you are not
alone?" he added, glancing towards Bart, who stood several paces in
the background.

"No," replied Woodburn; "I have in company a young man whom you may,
perhaps, recollect as the messenger that appeared several times at the
grate of our prison at Westminster, to bring us news of the progress
of the rising."

"Ah, yes, well do I recollect that goodly youth, and have ever since
taken a peculiar interest in him. Invite him in. All this is
opportune, very--very," said Herriot, leading the way into the house.

After the recluse had ushered his guests into the principal room of
his very simply furnished house, of which he and a servant boy, of
perhaps fifteen, were the only inmates, he turned to Woodburn, and
said,--

"As my retreat here in the woods, and the road that leads to it, are
known to so few, I conclude that your young friend here, Mr. Woodburn,
acted as your guide on the occasion."

"O, no," replied the other; "we had lost our way, having left the
river road inadvertently, and were about to turn back, when, catching
a glimpse of your light, we came on to make inquiries. We neither of
us knew when we struck into the road leading hither."

"Do you agree to that statement, without any qualification, master
Bart?" asked the recluse, with a doubting and slightly puzzled air.

"Well, some of it, I reckon," answered Bart, with a look of droll gravity.

"Why, you told me, sir," responded Woodburn, rather sharply "that you
had never travelled this road before."

"No more I hadn't," replied Bart, composedly; "but I didn't say I
didn't know where it turned off, for Tom Dunning told me that."

"Bart," said Woodburn, seriously, "though I am not sorry to have
fallen in with father Herriot, yet, as between you and me, this needs
explanation. It looks as if you purposely led me astray."

"Well now, Harry, no offence, I hope. The thing was kinder agreed on,
somehow, that you should come this way, when you left Guilford, which
was understood would happen soon. If I hadn't fell in with you as I
did, it was my notion to take Lightfoot here, or at Dunning's, and
then go back and skulk there somewheres till you was ready to come;
but finding you and things all coming so handy like, when we got to
where the road turned off, I thought I'd let you follow me into it, if
you would, and say nothing till we got here."

"I am still perfectly at a loss how to understand all this, Bart and I
still wish you would more fully explain it."

"I will take that task upon myself; for I suppose I am somewhat in the
secret respecting the little plot of your friends," said Herriot,
going to a chest, and bringing forward a small bag of money. "This has
been deposited with me for your use and benefit. It is the price of
your cow and oxen, sold by Dunning to a drover from Rhode Island. The
sum is, I believe, about fifty dollars, which I now deliver you, as
your own unquestionable property."

In the explanation that now ensued, it appeared that the cattle, which
had been rescued by the friends of Woodburn, without his privity, lest
the scruples it was feared he might entertain should lead him to
interfere with the plan, were taken that night to the retreat of
Herriot, who was made acquainted with the whole transaction; and that
the next day, while Dunning went up the river in search of a
purchaser, the other, who was not without his scruples, also, about
sanctioning the procedure, repaired to lawyer Knights for his opinion
on the subject. And the latter, having been confidentially let into
the secret, and given it as his decided opinion that the judgment, to
satisfy which the cattle had been seized, was an illegal and void one,
and that the cattle so seized might rightfully be taken for the owner,
without legal process if found out of the hands of the officer, the
recluse returned and actively cooperated with the hunter; the result
of which was, that a purchaser was soon found, who paid the money for
the stock and immediately drove it from the country.

This, to Woodburn, was an unexpected development. And now, after
hearing the explanation of Herriot, being satisfied of the propriety
of the course so generously taken by his friends in his behalf, he
gratefully received the money; and, in turn, while Bart and the
servant were out caring for the pony, he confidentially disclosed to
the recluse the painful occurrence of the afternoon which had led to
his sudden flight from home, and his determination of immediately
joining the army, concluding by giving the particulars of Bart's
arrest and singular escape from the tories.

"You have acted wisely, Mr. Woodburn," observed Herriot after
listening with deep interest to the recital. "Peters may yet recover;
but should he not, I do not view the act in so criminal a light as
that in which you yourself have placed it. And in the absence of all
intention of killing the man, I feel very clear that it is not a deed
meriting the punishment you would be likely to receive, if you had put
your fate into the hands of the corrupted witnesses who would probably
have been brought against you. Yes, you have acted wisely in leaving
that wicked Babel of toryism, and nobly in devoting yourself to the
cause of your bleeding country. My blessing and prayers will attend
you and your young friend, to whom, I trust, you will act the friend
and adviser he will doubtless need. But come, Harry," he added, taking
up a light, and making a sign for the other to follow him, "some new
notions have come into my head since I became acquainted with you and
your young friend, at Westminster, and knowing of no two persons in
whom I take greater interest, I have concluded to impart something to
you in confidence."

So saying, he led the way into the cellar, the bottom of which was
flagged over with stones of various shapes and sizes; when pointing to
a broad, flat stone lying near the centre of the room, he asked
Woodburn to raise it. Wondering what could be the object of so
unexpected a request, the latter, with considerable effort, succeeded
in raising the stone to an upright position, and in so doing brought
to view two small iron-bound casks, standing in a cavity beneath, and
labelled, in large inky letters, "_Printers Type_."

"Printing, then, was formerly your trade?" said Woodburn, inquiringly,
perceiving the other not inclined to be the first to speak.

"Well, that is a respectable calling, is it not?" said the other,
evasively.

"Certainly," replied Woodburn; "but I had not looked for any immediate
use for such implements in this new settlement."

"The contents of those casks, nevertheless, are of more value than you
may think them, Harry, and may soon be needed for the public, in the
times now at hand. But what I wish to say to you is, in the first
place, that you are not to divulge what you have seen to any one but
your young friend, and not to him unless you are satisfied he can be
trusted, or you are about to die. And, in the second place, if you
hear of my death, both of you are to come here, take possession of
these casks, and divide the contents equally between you as your own.
I have now no relative that will appear to claim them. You will also
find, enclosed in one of the casks, certain documents, which I have
recently deposited there, explaining my wishes, as well as some
secrets of my life connected with discoveries lately made by me, that
interest others besides myself. This you, or the survivor of you two,
if one should die, will do in case I am taken away. And even if I
continue to live, my designs will probably not be altered and I shall
wish to see you both again when you are permitted to return to your
old homes. And still further, I would say, that should you be in want
at any time, and will apply to me, I will dispose of enough of this
property to supply your necessities. Now replace the stone, and let us
return to the room above."

Woodburn knew not what to make of all this mystery, or affected
mystery, as he believed it. But knowing the singularities of the man,
he forebore to ask any questions, and they left the cellar in silence.
Soon after they had returned, Bart and the servant came in; when a
frugal meal was set before the travellers. And while the latter were
occupied in partaking their repast, the recluse procured his writing
materials, and penning a brief letter, presented it to Woodburn,
saying, "There is a letter of introduction to a former friend of mine,
who, I understand, is appointed to an important command in the army
now mustering at Cambridge. It may be of service to you. And now," he
added, as his guests rose to depart--"now, my young friends and
fellow-sufferers from oppression, go--deserve well of your country,
and desert her not till the British Dagons are all leveled to the
dust, which may God speedily grant. Amen."

In a few minutes more, our adventurers were on their way. And being
now invigorated, both in body and mind, by what had occurred during
their call at the retreat of their mysterious friend they pressed on
so rapidly, for the next three or four hours, that they arrived at
Dunning's cabin, in Westminster, just as the first faint flush of
daylight appeared in the east. Here luckily finding the hunter already
astir, cooking his breakfast, preparatory to any early start on some
new excursion, they joined him in his delicious meal, which consisted
of the rich steaks of a salmon caught the preceding evening. And
having finished their breakfast, and made the contemplated arrangement
with Dunning, to take charge of Lightfoot, their now common favorite,
the last-named person set them across the Connecticut in his log
canoe; when, looking back from the woody shore of the New Hampshire
side, they bade a long farewell to the Green Mountains, whose tall,
blue peaks were then beginning to grow bright in the rays of the
rising sun, and resolutely plunged into the dark recesses before them.






VOLUME II.






THE RANGERS;

OR,

THE TORY'S DAUGHTER.




CHAPTER I.

  "We owe no allegiance, we bow to no throne;
   Our ruler is law, and the law is our own;
   Our leaders themselves are our own fellow-men,
   Who can handle the sword, the scythe, or the pen."


Vermont was ushered into political existence midst storm and tempest.
We speak both metaphorically and literally; for it is a curious
historical fact, that her constitution, the result of the first
regular movement ever made by her people towards an independent civil
government, was adopted during the darkest period of the revolution,
at an hour of commotion and alarm, when the tempest of war was
actually bursting over her borders and threatening her entire
subversion. And, as if to make the event the more remarkable, the
adoption took place amidst a memorable thunder-storm, but for the
happening of which, at that particular juncture, as will soon appear,
that important political measure must have been postponed to a future
period, and a period, too, when the measure, probably, would have been
defeated, and the blessings of an independent government forever lost,
owing to the dissensions, which, as soon as the common danger was
over, New York and New Hampshire combined to scatter among her people.
The whole history of the settlement and organization of the state,
indeed, exhibits a striking anomaly when viewed with that of any other
state in the Union. She may emphatically be called the offspring of
war and controversy. The long and fierce dispute for her territory
between the colonies above named had sown her soil with dragon teeth,
which at length sprang up in a crop of hardy, determined, and
liberty-loving men, who, instead of joining either of the contending
parties, soon resolved to take a stand for themselves against both.
And that stand, when taken, they maintained with a spirit and success,
to which, considering the discouragements, difficulties, and dangers
they were constantly compelled to encounter, history furnishes but few
parallels. But although every step of her progress, from the felling
of the first tree in her dark wilderness to her final reception into
the sisterhood of the states, was marked by the severest trials, yet
the summer of 1777--the period to which the remainder of our tale
refers--was, for her, far the most gloomy and portentous. And still it
was a period in which she filled the brightest page of her history,
and, at the same time, did more than in any other year towards
insuring her subsequent happy destiny.

In the beginning of this eventful year, the people of Vermont, by
their delegates in formal convention assembled, had declared
themselves independent--

  "Independent of all save the mercies of God,"

as the poet, who has furnished us the heading of this chapter, and who
has so strikingly embodied the feelings of those he describes, has
significantly expressed it. And having taken measures for publishing
their declaration to the world, the convention closed their
proceedings by appointing a committee, selected as combining the most
happily an acquaintance with form and precedent with a knowledge of
the ways and wants of the people, to draft a constitution to be
submitted to a new convention, which the people were invited to call
for that purpose. In response to that call, a new convention assembled
at Windsor, in the month of July following, and proceeded, with that
diligence and scrupulous regard to the employment of their time for
which the early public bodies of this state were so noted, to take
into consideration the important instrument now submitted to them as a
proper basis on which to erect the superstructure of a civil
government, suited to the genius and necessities of an industrious and
frugal people--a people who, though keenly jealous of their individual
rights, and exceedingly restive under all foreign authority, had yet
declared their willingness, and even their wish, to receive and obey a
system of legal restraints, if it could be one of their own imposing.
For five days, from rising to setting sun, this convention employed
the best energies of their practical and enlightened minds in
discussing and amending the document before them. But their labors for
the present, if not forever, had well nigh been lost, for, soon after
they had assembled, on the sixth day of their session, and while they
were intently listening to the reading of the instrument for the last
time before taking a final vote on its adoption their proceedings were
suddenly brought to a stand by the alarming news, loudly proclaimed by
a herald, who appeared on his foam-covered horse before their open
door, that Ticonderoga, the supposed impregnable barrier of frontier
defence, had fallen, and our scattered troops were flying in every
direction before a formidable British army, that was sweeping,
unopposed, along the western border of the state, flanked by a horde
of merciless savages, from whose fearful irruptions not a dwelling on
that side of the mountains would probably be spared!

This intelligence, so unexpected and so startling, too nearly
concerned the members of the convention, not only as patriots, but as
men, to permit their entire exemption from the general consternation
and dismay which were every where spreading around them; and many a
staid heart among them secretly trembled for the fate of the near and
dear ones left at homes in which the red tomahawk might, even at that
very moment, be busy at its work of death; while the bosoms of all
were burning to be freed from their present duties, that they might
seize the sword or musket and fly to the relief of their endangered
families, or mingle in the common defence against the haughty invaders
of their soil. Any further proceedings with the subject on hand, at
such a moment, were soon perceived to be utterly impossible; and a
majority f the members began to press eagerly for an immediate
adjournment. But while a few of their number, sharing less than the
rest in the general agitation, or being more deeply impressed with the
importance of accomplishing, at this time, an object now so nearly
attained, were attempting to resist the current, and prevent any
action on the motion to adjourn, till time was gained for reflection,
an unwonted darkness, as if by the special interposition of
Providence, suddenly fell upon the earth. The lightnings began to
gleam through the dark and threatening masses of cloud that had
enveloped the sky, and the long, deep roll of thunder was heard in
different quarters of the heavens, giving warning of the severe and
protracted tempest which soon burst over them with a fury that
precluded all thought of venturing abroad, The prospect of being thus
confined to the place for some hours, and perhaps the whole day,
taking from those moving it all inducement for an immediate
adjournment, they now began to take a cooler view of their situation;
and soon, by common consent the business on hand was resumed. The
reading of the constitution was finished; and, while the storm was
still howling around, and the thunders breaking over them, that
instrument was adopted, and became the supreme law of the land.
[Footnote: Through inadvertence arising out of the unsettled state of
the times, or design among the leaders who might have fears for the
result, the constitution was never submitted to the people for their
ratification or rejection; but, no questions ever being raised on
account of this informality it was acquiesced in as valid and
binding.]

One thing more remained to be done; and that was, to constitute a
provisional government to act till the one pointed out by the
constitution just adopted could be established. This was now effected
by the appointment of that small body of men since known as the _Old
Council of Safety _of Vermont, and noted alike for the remarkable
powers with which they were clothed, and the remarkable manner in
which those powers were exercised; for, from the nature of the case,
and the emergency in which these men were called to act, they were
almost necessarily invested with the extraordinary combination of
legislative, judicial, and executive power. But this power, absolute
and dictatorial as it was, they never abused or exercised but for the
public good; and in this they were cheerfully sustained by the people,
who felt that they were thus not only sustaining the cause of freedom,
but the laws which were of their own providing, and which they were
anxious should be obeyed.

To that unique assembly, of whose origin we have been speaking, we
propose next to introduce the reader. In obedience to an order of the
convention, issued at the moment of its hasty dissolution, near the
close of the memorable day before described, the different members of
this newly-appointed body, many of whom, it is believed, were also
members of the one just dissolved, had promptly convened at Arlington.
But finding themselves here endangered by the near vicinity of the
enemy, they had adjourned into the more interior town of Manchester,
within whose barricade of mountains they could proceed with their
deliberations with little fear of interruption. And here, conscious
that the eyes of all were turned anxiously upon them, in the
expectation that they would provide for the safety of the infant
state, whose destinies had been committed to their hands, they
commenced the worse than Egyptian task devolving on them--that of
making adequate provisions for the public defence, while the means
were almost wholly wanting; for with scarcely the visible means in the
whole settlements in its then exhausted and unsettled condition, of
raising and supporting a single company of soldiers, they were
expected to raise an army. Without the shadow of a public treasury,
without any credit as a state, and without the power of taxing the
people,--which, by the constitution just adopted, could only be done
by the legislature not yet called,--they were required to do that for
which half a million of money might be needed. Such were the
difficulties by which they were met at the outset--difficulties which,
to men of ordinary stamina and mental resources, would have been
insurmountable. But these were not men of ordinary stamina, either
moral or mental. They had been selected by the representatives of the
people for the qualities which would fit them to guide the helm of
state in this difficult and alarming crisis. And, unshrinkingly
proceeding to the discharge of their high responsibilities, they soon
evinced, by their conduct, that the confidence reposed in them had not
been misplaced; for the glorious results of the field of Bennington,
and the incessant and harassing warfare on the flanks of the enemy
which both preceded and followed that event, and which drew forth from
its despairing leader his best apology for his defeat and surrender,
were, far more than is generally supposed, the fruits of the combined
energy and talents of that unequalled little band of patriots and
statesmen. [Footnote: A finer tribute of praise to the Green Mountain
Boys could scarcely have been given, than the one involved in
Burgoyne's letter to Lord Germain, written about the time of the
battle of Bennington, in which he says, "The Hampshire Grants, a
country unpeopled, and almost unknown, in the last war, now abounds in
the most active and the most rebellious race of men on the continent,
and hangs like a gathering storm on my left."] But the particular time
we have chosen for lifting the curtain from their secret proceedings
was at the darkest and most disheartening hour they were doomed to
experience, and before the united mind of their body had been brought
to bear on any measure which afforded a reasonable promise of
auspicious results. The army of Burgoyne was then hovering on their
borders in its most menacing attitude. Marauding parties were daily
penetrating the interior, and plundering and capturing the defenceless
inhabitants, while each day brought the unwelcome news of the
defection of individuals who had openly gone off to swell the ranks of
the victorious enemy to whose alarming progress scarcely a show of
resistance had yet been interposed. Nor was this the end of the
chapter of trials and discouragements that awaited the council.
Another blow was to be added, more calculated than all to test their
firmness and bring home to their bosoms a sense of the perils of the
crisis, and the necessity of immediate action, unless they should
conclude to yield at once to the current of destiny which seemed to be
setting so strongly against them. But let us present the mortifying
and disgraceful event, to which we last alluded, in another form, in
which the historic pen, that thus far in this chapter has only been
employed, may be legitimately aided by the pencil of fancy, while we
bring the leading individuals of this body to view, and sketch the
details of a scene as truthful in outline as it was important in result.

The long summer day was drawing to a close. It had been thus far spent
by the council, as had been the several preceding days of their
session, in discussing the subject of the ways and means of doing
something to avert the doom that hung over their seemingly devoted
state. But up to this hour their deliberations had been wholly
fruitless. Project after project for the means of raising military
forces had been brought forward and discussed; and each in turn had
been thought to be impracticable, and had been consequently abandoned,
till, wearied with their unavailing labors, and discouraged at the
dubious prospect before them, they now began to think of giving up
business for the day, when the door-keeper, with unwonted haste and an
agitated manner, entered the room, and announced to the astonished
members of the council the alarming tidings that one of their own
body, and, until that day, an active participator in their
discussions, had proved a Judas, and was now, with a band of his
recreant neighbors, on his way to the British camp. The news fell like
a thunder-clap on the council, producing, at first, a sensation not
often witnessed in so grave an assemblage. But no formal comments were
offered; and, after the commotion had subsided, all sunk into a
thoughtful silence, which we will improve by our promised introduction
to the reader of the leading members of the council.

Separated from the rest by a sort of enclosure composed of tables
strung across one end of the apartment, which was a large upper room
of an inn, hastily fitted up for the occasion, conspicuously sat the
president of the council, the venerable Thomas Chittenden, the wise,
the prudent, and the good, who was to Vermont what Washington was to
the Union; and who, though not possessing dazzling greatness, had yet
that rare combination of moral and intellectual qualities which was
more fortunate for him--good sense, great discretion, firmness,
honesty of purpose, benevolence, and unvarying equanimity of temper,
united with a modest and pleasing address. And by the long and
continued exercise of this golden mean of qualities, he was destined
to leave behind him an honest, enduring fame--a memorial of good deeds
and useful every-day examples, to be remembered and quoted, both in
the domestic circle and in the public assembly, when the far superior
brilliancy of many a contemporary had passed away and been forgotten.
He was now something over fifty; but so fine were his physical
endowments, and so temperate and regular had been his habits, that
time had scarcely left a trace on his manly brow; and his fair and
well-moulded features had almost the freshness of youth. And
notwithstanding the unpretending simplicity of his deportment, and the
extreme plainness of his dress, the large arm-chair, in which he now
reclined, furnished probably by some considerate matron of the
neighborhood for his special convenience, could not have found, in the
broad land, an occupant who would have filled it with more native
dignity, or one better fitted to restrain by courteous firmness, and
by tact guide into safe and appropriate fields of action, the less
disciplined and more fiery spirits of the body over which he presided.

Let us now take a glance at the more prominent members of this notable
little band of public conservators. Here, immersed in thought, sat,
side by side, like brothers, as they were, the two Fays, those
intelligent, enterprising, and persevering friends of freedom and
state independence. And there sat the two Robinsons, alike patriotic,
and active, or able, according to the different spheres of action in
which they were about to be distinguished--one in the tented field,
and the other on the bench and in the national councils. In another
place was seen the short, thick-set form of the uncompromising Matthew
Lyon, the Irish refugee, who was willing to be sold to pay his passage
to America, for the sake of getting out of the despotic moral
atmosphere of the old world, into one where his broad chest, as he was
wont to say, could expand freely, and where his bold spirit could soar
unclogged by the trammels of legitimacy. In his eagle eye, in every
lineament of his clear, ardent, and fearless countenance, indeed,
might be read the promise of what he was to become--the stern
democrat, and the well-known champion of the whole right and the
largest liberty. In contrast to him, near by was seen the tall,
commanding form, and the firm and thoughtful countenance, of Benjamin
Carpenter, who had just arrived, with pack and cane, from Guilford,
from which he had that day come on foot by a route designated by
marked trees, through the mountain wilderness, nearly thirty miles in
extent. Farther on, and seated before an open window, was Thomas
Rowley, the first poet of the Green Mountains. He was here because he
was a public favorite, a trusty patriot, and something of a statesman.
But, like most other poets, he was not without his peculiarities of
temperament, as might have been seen by his manner and movements even
in this staid assembly; for, as if disgusted with a tedious and
profitless debate, and determined also not long to be troubled by the
disconcerting news just announced, he had now evidently cast these
cares from his mind, to indulge in the more congenial employment of
gazing out upon the landscape, over which his kindling eye might have
been seen to wander, till it rested, in rapture, on the broad
empurpled side and bright summit of the lofty Equinox Mountain, whose
contrasted magnificence was growing every moment more striking and
beautiful in the beams of the low-descending sun. On the opposite side
of the room stood the mild and gentlemanly Nathan Clark, the future
speaker of the first legislature of Vermont; and by his side, the dark
and rough-featured Gideon Olin, an embryo member of Congress, was
leaning against the wall, with a countenance of mingled sternness and
gloom.

By the side of one of the tables, in front of the president, might
also have been seen the stout, burly frame, and the matter-of-fact and
business-like countenance, of Paul Spooner, engaged in writing a
despatch. And as the last, though not as the least, among the
strongly-contrasted characters of this assembly of whom we propose to
take note, let us turn to the youthful secretary of the council, Ira
Allen. So much the junior of his colleagues was he, indeed, that a
spectator might well have wondered how he came to be selected as one
of such a sage and elderly body of councillors. But those who procured
his appointment knew full well why they had done so; and his history
thenceforward was destined to prove a continued justification of their
high opinion of him. He was of an active, mercurial turn, and, as
might have been seen, was not inclined to remain long in one place or
posture. He had now thrown aside his rapid pen, and, with a quick,
light step and deeply-cogitating air, was traversing back and forth
the open space between his table, in front of the president, and the
closed door of the apartment. Both in form and feature, he was one of
the handsomest men of his day; while a mind at once versatile, clear,
and penetrating, with perceptions as quick as light, was stamped on
his Grecian brow, or found a livelier expression in his lucid black
eyes and other lineaments of his strikingly intellectual countenance.
Such as he appeared for the first time on the stage of public action
was the noted Ira Allen, whose true history, when written, will show
him to have been, either secretly or openly, the originator, or
successful prosecutor, of more important political measures, affecting
the interests and independence of the state, and the issue of the war
in the Northern Department, than any other individual in Vermont,
making him, with the many peculiar traits of character he possessed,
one of the most remarkable men of the times in which he so
conspicuously figured.

"I have finished, Mr. President," said Spooner, now breaking the
gloomy silence which had, for an unusual interval, pervaded the
assembly--"I have finished the despatch, suggested by your honor,
requiring the attendance of the absent member from the east side of
the mountain--General Bayley. And having put it into the form of a
familiar letter, I have ventured to enlarge somewhat on our perplexing
situation, especially in the matter of the miserable Squire Spencer,
whose treasonable desertion I little dreamed, when I commenced
writing, I should have the mortification of announcing." [Footnote:
The original letter from Paul Spooner to General Jacob Bayley, of
Newbury, written in council, requiring the attendance of the latter,
and informing him of Spencer's defection, and the gloomy situation of
affairs, is still preserved, and affords, notwithstanding the
disheartening news it communicates, a striking proof of the
determination of that body to struggle on to the last against the
mountain of difficulties which, at this dark crisis, seemed to lie
before them.]

"That is well," responded the president; "and we must look up some
suitable messenger to convey it to its destination. But I had hoped to
forward, by the same hand, the despatch requesting the aid and
co-operation of New Hampshire, which has been deferred till some
definite action of our own should enable us to inform the council of
that state what we of the Grants propose to do ourselves towards the
object for which we invoke their assistance. This they will doubtless
consider essential to be known, before listening to our call, as
otherwise they will not know whether they will find among us more
friends to assist than enemies to impede them. But what can we now
tell them? I will submit to you, gentlemen of the council," he
continued, in a kindly expostulating tone--"I will submit to your good
sense and patriotism, whether it is not now time to adopt some decided
course to be pursued. We must not be disheartened by a few untoward
circumstances. Providence not unfrequently frowns on us for our own
good. And who shall say, in the present instance, that our
deliberations have not been wisely and kindly rendered of no effect
till after Spencer's desertion, since, had we adopted a plan of
operations while he was here, the whole of it, by this time, had been
in the possession of the British general? But be that as it may, the
event of this man's apostasy, of itself, instead of making us timid
and irresolute in action, should but render us more prompt and
decided. The people, as we all feel painfully conscious, I presume,
expect much from us. Shall we disappoint them in every thing? Because
we cannot consistently do all that may be expected, shall we resolve
to do nothing? I have listened to your objections to levying a general
tax upon the people, as the means of raising a military force; and,
with you, I consider them valid; for to infringe the constitution,
just adopted, by an arbitrary taxation, would be setting a dangerous
precedent, and one which would come with a bad grace from those of us
here who helped to adopt it. No; we must resort to other means. We
can, if we will, borrow, pledging ourselves as individuals, with such
others as we may find willing to stand sponsors with us, that the
state shall hereafter pay the debt; or we may resort to voluntary
contributions. I am aware the people are unable to contribute much. I
am aware that a great portion of the inhabitants have been driven from
their homes, and are now living on the hospitality of the rest. But
for all this, the people can and will cheerfully contribute
something--more, I think, than we should be willing to require of
them. I have ten head of cattle, which can be spared for the
emergency. But am I more patriotic than you, and hundreds of others in
the settlement? My wife has a valuable gold necklace. Hint to her
to-day that it is needed for the public service, and, my word for it,
to-morrow you will find it in the treasury of freedom. But is my wife
any more public-spirited than yours and many others among us?
Gentlemen, I await your propositions."

During this moderate, but really well-timed and effective appeal of
the president, drooping heads began to be raised, perplexed and
desponding countenances grew brighter, and by the time he had closed,
several speakers were on their feet, eager to respond.

"Mr. Carpenter has the floor, I think, gentlemen," said the president.

"I rose," said Carpenter, "but to give my hearty response to the
sentiments of the chair. It _is_ time, _high_ time, for some definite
and decided action. Less talking and more action shall henceforth be
_my_ motto. I have not now, it is true, any digested proposition to
present to the council; but I soon will have one, unless others are
offered; for, in this emergency, it is little short of a crime to
dally any longer."

"Ay, action! action!" responded several voices.

"Action let it be, then," said Rowley, the next rising to speak. "If
it be true, as has been urged, Mr. President, that we cannot raise
money by general assessment without exceeding our power; and
disaffecting the people, and that we must depend on voluntary
contribution, which receivers, appointed for the purpose, may more
appropriately gather in than ourselves, why are we needed here? I
will, therefore, make a proposition, which, while it will be obnoxious
to none of the objections brought against other plans of defence, will
give gentlemen as much action as they want. I propose, Mr. President,
that each of us here, before any more of us run away to the enemy,
seize a standard, repair singly to the different hamlets among our
mountains, cause the summoning drum to beat for volunteers, and lead
them, when obtained, to do battle in person with this Jupiter Olympus
of a British general, who has so nearly annihilated the country by
proclamation."

"Tom Rowley all over! but a gallant push nevertheless," vivaciously
exclaimed Samuel Robinson, in an under tone. "And yet, Mr. President,"
he continued, dropping the jocose, and now rising to speak in
form--"and yet, if our colleague's spirited proposal could be carried
into effect, and men be found to volunteer under such military leaders
as most of us would make,--or if the different towns, as has been
suggested by others, would order out the militia on our
requisition,--even then, it appears to me, we should raise a permanent
and regularly enlisted force, to serve a rallying point or nucleus for
the militia, or our patriotic friend's army of volunteers. I therefore
move, as I was about to do when others claimed the floor--I move the
raising of a regular force, however small our means may compel us to
make it; and as the smallest to be thought of, I will name one company
of one hundred men, to be raised and supported by one of the methods
suggested by the president."

"And I," said Clark, promptly rising--"and I, believing we may venture
to go a little higher than that, I propose, we have to raise two
companies of sixty men each."

"No, No!" cried several voices; "one company. Means can be found for
no more than one."

"Yes, yes! the larger number first, Mr. President! I go for two
companies," cried others.

"And I go for neither, Mr. President" said Ira Allen stopping short in
his walk, and turning to the chair. "For I believe the council, on a
little reflection, will conclude to do something more worthy of the
character of the Green Mountain Boys, than the raising of the paltry
force which even the bes' of these propositions involves. And I doubt
not the means of so doing may be soon and abundantly supplied, without
infringing the constitution or distressing the people. And I therefore
move, sir, that this council resolve to raise a full regiment of men,
forthwith appoint their officers, and take such prompt and speedy
measures for their enlistment, that, within one week every glen in
Vermont shall resound with the stir of military preparation."

"Chimerical!" said one, who, in common with the rest of the council,
seemed to hear, with much surprise, a proposition of this magnitude so
confidently offered, when the doubt appeared to be whether even the
comparatively trifling one of Clark would be adopted.

"Impossible, utterly impossible to raise pay for half of them,"
responded several others.

"Don't let us say that till we are compelled to do so," said the
patriotic Carpenter, in an encouraging tone. "This proposition jumps
so well with my wishes, that I would not see it hastily abandoned.
For, although I confess I do not pretend to see where the requisite
means are to come from, yet some new light, in this respect, may break
in upon us by another day. And could we but see our way clear to
sustain this proposition, we should feel like men again."

"Amen to all that," responded Clark. And as the hour for adjournment
has now arrived, I move that our young colleague, who offered this
proposition with so much confidence in the discovery of a way to carry
it into execution, and who is said to be very fertile in expedients,
be appointed a committee to devise the ways and means of paying the
bounties and wages of the regiment he proposes to raise; and that he
make his report to the council by sunrise to-morrow morning."

"Second that motion, Mr. President" cried Lyon, in his usual full,
determined tone of voice and strong Irish accent. "I go for the whole
of Mr. Allen's proposition, means or no means. But the means can,
must, and shall be found, sir! We will put the gentleman's brains
under the screws to-night," he continued, jocosely turning to Allen;
"and if he appears here in the morning empty-handed, he ought to be
expelled from the council. Ay, and I'll move it, too, by the two bulls
that redeemed me!" [Footnote: Matthew Lyon, who very soon became much
noted as a leading partisan in the legislature of Vermont, and
subsequently more so as member of congress from Kentucky, having, as
before intimated, been sold to pay his passage from Ireland to
Connecticut, where he landed, was afterwards redeemed by the payment
of a pair of bulls to the purchaser, by a gentleman of that state, for
whom he was permitted to labor, at liberal wages, till this novel kind
of indebtedness was cancelled. And as this bold and singular man
entered upon the scenes of life as a successful freeman, he was fond
of boasting of the romantic manner in which he became one, while the
expression, "By the two bulls that redeemed me," became his favorite
oath on all occasions.]

"I accept the terms," replied Allen, bowing pleasantly to the former.
"Give me a room by myself, pen, ink, paper, and a lamp, and I will
abide the condition."

"For your lamp, Mr. Allen, as your task is to discover money where
there is none, I advise you to borrow the wonderful lamp of Aladin,"
gayly added Rowley, as the question was put, and carried; and the
council, in a half-serious, half-sportive mood, broke up, and
separated for the night.

At sunrise, the next morning, as had been proposed, the council
punctually assembled to receive the promised report of their
committee. Most of them, from having lodged in the same house, were
aware that Allen had spent the whole of the intervening time on the
business which had been committed to his charge; for, hour after hour,
during that important night, they had heard the sound of his
footsteps, as he continued to walk his solitary chamber, intensely
revolving in his teeming mind the vexed question, upon the decision of
which he felt the last chance of making a successful stand against the
invaders of the state would probably depend. And this and the
expectation, which had somehow been generally raised, that he would
present some feasible plan for carrying out his proposals, the
character of which no one could conjecture, caused his appearance to
be awaited with no little curiosity and solicitude. They were not left
long in suspense; for scarcely had the president called the council to
order, before Allen came in, holding in his hand an open sheet of
paper, to which, as the yet undried ink showed, he had just committed
the result of his night's labor.

"Is the committee, appointed at adjournment last evening prepared to
make his report?" asked the president.

"Fully, your honor," promptly responded Allen, who accordingly then
rose and said,--

"My report, Mr. President, consists of two parts. The first comprises
the nomination of a list of officers, from colonel to subaltern, for a
regiment, to be styled _The Rangers_. The second part involves the
subject more particularly committed to me, and proposes the means of
raising and supporting them. As the first will be useless unless the
second is adopted, I will submit it without present reading, and
proceed at once with the second and more important proposition, which,
after a long and patient consideration of every argument for and
against the measure, I have concluded to recommend to the council, as
the best and most effectual means of securing the desired end. And
that proposition, for the sake of convenience, as regards the action
of the council on the principle involved, I have thrown into the form
of the following resolution:--

"Resolved, That by specific decree of this council, and under
regulations hereafter to be made, the estates, both real and personal,
of all those who have been, or hereafter may be, identified as tories,
aiders and abettors of the enemy, within this state, be confiscated
for the military defence thereof; and that so much of said estates as
may be needed for the payment of the bounties and wages of the
regiment now proposed to be raised, be forthwith seized, and within
ten days sold at the post, for that purpose, by the officers appointed
by this council to execute its orders and decrees in that behalf."

The speaker, without offering any further remark in explanation or
defence of the measure he had reported, resumed his seat, and calmly
awaited the expression of the council. But they were taken by such
complete surprise by a proposition at that time so entirely new in the
colonies, so bold and so startling in its character, that, for many
minutes, not a word or whisper was heard through the hushed assembly,
whose bowed heads and working countenances showed how deeply their
minds were engaged in trying to grapple with the momentous subject,
upon which their action was thus unexpectedly required. At length,
nowever, low murmurs of doubt or disapproval began to be heard; and
soon the expressions, "_unprecedented step!_"--"_doubtful policy!_"
and "_injury to the cause_" became distinguishable among the
over-prudent in different parts of the room when Matthew Lyon sprang
to his feet, and, bringing his broad palms together with a loud slap,
exultingly exclaimed,--

"The child is born, Mr, President! My head has been in a continual
fog, every hour since we convened, till the present moment; and I
could see no way by which we could even begin to do all that the
exigency required, without running against law, or distressing the
people. But now, thank God, I can see my way out. I can now see, at a
glance, how all can be speedily and righteously accomplished. I can
already see a regiment of our brave mountaineers in arms before me, as
the certain fruits of this bold, bright thought of our sagacious and
intrepid young colleague. Unprecedented step is it? It may be so with
us timid republicans but is it so with our enemies, who are this
moment threatening to crush us, because we object to receive their law
and precedent? How were they to obtain the lands of the half of
Vermont, which, it is said, they recently offered the lion-hearted
Ethan Allen, if he would join them, but by confiscating _our_ estates?
What has become of the estates of those in their own country, who,
like ourselves, have rebelled against their government? From time
immemorial they have been confiscated. Can they complain then, at our
following a precedent of their own setting? Can they complain because
_we_ adopt a measure, which, in case we are vanquished, they will not
be slow to visit on _our_ estates, to say nothing of our necks? Can
these recreant rascals themselves, who have left their property among
us, and gone off to help fasten this very government upon us, complain
at our doing what they will be the first to recommend to be done to
us, if their side prevails? Where, then, is the doubtful policy of our
anticipating them in this measure, any more than in seizing one of
their loaded guns in battle, and turning it against them? Injury to
the cause, will it be?--Will it injure our cause here, where men are
daily deserting to the British, in belief that we shall not dare touch
their property to strike a blow that will deter _all_ the wavering,
and most others of any property, from leaving us hereafter? Will it
injure our cause here to have a regiment of regular troops, who will,
perhaps, draw into the field four times their number, in volunteers?
If this be an injury, Mr. President, I only wish we may have a few
more of them; for, with a half dozen such injuries, by the two bulls,
we would rout Burgoyne's whole army in a fortnight. Yes, Mr.
President, this measure must go; for it promises every thing to cause,
and threatens nothing that honest patriots need fear, and had I a
hundred tongues, they should all wag a good stiff ay for its
adoption."

"A bold measure, boldly advocated!" next spoke Carpenter. "But as bold
as it is, Mr. President, I rise not to condemn it, but rather to say,
that I am determined to meet it fairly, and without fear; and if, when
I get cool enough to trust myself to make a decision, the objections
to it appear no more formidable than they now do, I will give it my
hearty support."

"If the public should call this a desperate remedy, they must recollect
that it is almost our only one," remarked Olin, in his cool, quiet
manner. "Nothing venture, nothing have;--let us go for it who dare!"

"Let us _oppose_ it who dare!" warmly responded Lyon. "The measure
will be a popular one; and let it once be known among the people, as I
promise gentlemen it shall be, that this proposition was considerately
recommended to us by a committee we appointed for the purpose--let
this be known, and who among us has nerve enough to stem the storm of
popular indignation that will burst on his head, for the timid and
cowardly policy which led him to go against it?"

"Vermont," added Rowley--"Vermont was the first to show her sister
states the way to take a British fort; let her also be the first to
teach them the secret of making tories bear their proportion of the
burdens of the war. I am already prepared to give the measure my
support, Mr. President."

Almost every member, in turn, now threw in a few observations. The
doubts and fears of the more cautious and wavering gradually gave way;
and it soon became evident that the measure had found too much favor
with the council to be resisted. Lyon, with his rough and pithy
eloquence, had broken the ice of timidity at the right moment; and he
and the originator of the measure, at first the only unhesitating
members of the assembly, perceiving the gathering current in its
favor, now warmly followed up their advantage; and, within two hours
from its introduction, the resolution was adopted. This was
immediately followed by the passage of the decree named in the
resolution, specifying the names of those thus far fairly identified
as openly espousing the British cause in Vermont, and declaring their
estates forfeited to its use. Allen's proposal to raise a regiment of
rangers was then, as a matter of course, unanimously carried, and the
officers he had nominated were, with a few alterations, as unanimously
appointed. All were now animated with a new spirit. Hope and
confidence had taken the place of doubt and despondency in their
bosoms and the remainder of the day was spent in carrying out the
details of their plan, which all agreed should now be put into
execution with the greatest possible promptitude and secrecy. In this,
as soon as the different appointments, made necessary for the
execution of the decree, were completed by the united action of the
council, all the members, individually, took an active part. And for
many hours, they might have been seen sitting round the tables,
silently and intently engaged with their pens; some in drafting
despatches to be sent to New Hampshire and Massachusetts, some in
writing confidential letters, unfolding their plans and asking the
co-operation of the leading men in the different parts of their own
state, and some in making out commissions for the military officers,
or the commissioners and other officers of confiscation, while others
were out, scattering themselves about town, warily and cautiously
inquiring out prompt and trusty messengers, to be despatched, as soon
as it was dark, simultaneously and post-haste, to convey these
important missives to their different destinations round the country.
And all being accomplished,--the blow struck, and the machinery put in
motion,--the council concluded to adjourn, to meet again in a few days
at Bennington, the interim to be spent by them in repairing to their
respective spheres of influence among the people, and there taking an
active part in defending and explaining their measures, and assisting
to carry them into operation.

Such was the origin of those temporary tribunals in Vermont,
subsequently termed courts of confiscation, which formed a prominent
feature in her early history, and which furnished, it is believed, the
first example of the exercise of this extraordinary power ever known
in the United Colonies during the revolutionary struggle. And whatever
may have been the effects of this retributive policy in other states,
its results here were salutary and important. It put an immediate stop
to any further espousing of British interests, especially among men of
property, while, within the astonishingly short space of fifteen days,
it brought a regiment of men into the field, well armed and prepared
for instant service,--thus securing those advantages to the defenders
of liberty, in the peculiar posture of their affairs in which it was
introduced, and giving that impetus to their military operations,
without which the brilliant successes that marked the ensuing campaign
in Vermont could never have been obtained. Of this there can scarcely
be a doubt. And scarcely less doubt can there be, that the important
measure in question would not have been brought forward and adopted at
the crisis, in which alone the advantages it then secured could have
been denied from us but for its sole projector, the sagacious,
scheming, and fearless Ira Allen.

Speculative writers have often amused themselves in tracing great
events to small causes. And in this they have oftentimes so
wonderfully succeeded, as to show, beyond the power of man to refute,
some of the most trivial circumstances of life, considered by
themselves, to have caused the revolutions of empires. Were we to make
out an instance of this character, to be added to the many other
remarkable ones which have been noted by the curious, it should be
done by tracing the independence of America to the measure which Allen
so boldly projected, as he walked his lonely chamber, on the eventful
night we have described. The independence of the colonies was, at that
dark crisis, balancing, as on a pivot; and the success of Burgoyne
must seemingly have turned the scale against us. The success of
Burgoyne, at the same time, hung on a pivot also; and the victory of
Bennington, with all its numberless direct and indirect consequences,
as now seems generally conceded, turned the scale of his fortunes when
his success, otherwise, could scarcely have been doubtful. But the
victory of Bennington would never have been achieved but for the
decided and energetic movement of Vermont, which alone secured the
cooperation of New Hampshire, or, at least insured victory, when,
otherwise, no battle would have been rewarded. And that essential
movement of Vermont would never have been made but for the bold and
characteristic project of Ira Allen.

All this, to be sure, is but supposition; but who can gainsay its
truthfulness?




CHAPTER II.

  "Say what is woman's heart?--a thing
   Where all the deepest feelings spring;
   And what its love?--a ceaseless stream,
   A changeless star--an endless dream--
   A smiling flower, that will not die--
   A beauty and a mystery!"


While the scenes last described were occurring at Manchester, in the
Council of Safety, whose secret and unforeseen action was about to be
felt in the remotest corners of the state, an athletic, well-formed,
though plainly-dressed young man, whose fortunes, in common with those
of hundreds around him, were suddenly and unexpectedly to be affected
by the movements of that body, might have been seen, in the evening
twilight, moving, with slow and apparently hesitating steps, across a
new-mown field, towards a neat and commodious dwelling, situated on
the main road leading from the town just named, to the south, and near
where it entered the then fast increasing little village of
Bennington. Though he wore no regular military uniform, or arms that
were visible, yet there was that in his gait, manner, and general
appearance, which indicated the recent occupation of a soldier, while
the natural cast of his bold, manly features, and the clear, calm, and
steady expression of his fine countenance, all combined to show him a
man of coolness and courage; and that, consequently, the seeming
timidity and indecision of his present movements were attributable to
some passing doubts respecting the issue of the business on hand, or
other causes of a similar character, rather than any general want of
firmness and resolution. After advancing within a stone's throw of the
house, he turned into a clump of small trees, which, extending along
the outer border of an unenclosed garden to the north of the
establishment, had concealed his approach; and here taking a position
that commanded a view of the front and rear entrances of the house, he
seemed to await some expected event, with manifestations of
considerable uneasiness and solicitude. In a few moments, a slight
stir, as of company taking leave, was heard in the front part of the
house; and very soon a fashionably-dressed personage of a somewhat
swaggering deportment, accompanied with many of those supercilious
airs with which the colonial loyalists of the times often thought to
dignify their carriage among despised republicans, made his appearance
in the yard, where, equipped for riding, stood a stout,
well-conditioned horse, which he approached and led out some distance
into the road, preparatory to mounting. He then paused, and, with a
hasty glance around him, covertly drew forth, from a concealed girdle
apparently, a pair of good-sized pistols, and carefully examined their
flints and priming; after which he replaced them, and, vaulting into
his saddle, rode leisurely away along the road leading northward. In
the mean time, the person first described retained his position within
his leafy concealment, where, unseen himself, he had seen and watched
from the first, with keen interest, all the movements of the other,
whom, at length, he seemed to recognize, with recollections which
caused him to recoil, and his whole countenance to contract and darken
with angry and disquieting emotions. He was not allowed much time,
however, for indulging his disturbed feelings; for scarcely had the
object of his annoyance disappeared, before his attention was
attracted by a slight rustling sound somewhere within the garden;
when, turning his head, the frown that had gathered on his brow
suddenly gave place to a look of joyful animation, as his eager eye
caught a glimpse of the light, fluttering drapery of a female, who,
with soft, rapid tread, was gliding along the outer edge of the
screening shrubbery towards him. The next instant he was at her side,
ardently grasping her half-proffered hand, and tenderly gazing into
her sweetly-confused countenance.

"How grateful," he began, after a broken salutation--"how grateful I
should be for this obliging attention to the note I sent you,
soliciting a meeting which--"

"Which my gallant preserver of old will be pretty sure to misconstrue,
I fear me," interrupted the maiden, with a half-murmured, sportive laugh.

"No, Miss Haviland," he replied, too intent on a serious demonstration
of his feelings to respond in the same spirit--"no, I am not so
presuming; nor do I wish to count on the former service, which you so
magnify, and which has induced you, perhaps, to grant this interview."

"In part, I confess," was the answer to this implied question.

"I suspected--I feared so," he rejoined, despondingly. "Would to
Heaven you could have acted entirely aside from that motive, and then
I might have found cause to hope. But now," he added, with suppressed
emotion--"now--But O, how can I harbor the chilling thought of being
doomed to love without a return! Say, fairest and best, must this
indeed be so?"

The downcast look and the quick-heaving bosom were the only reply; and
the impassioned lover, gathering courage even from these uncertain
indications, proceeded:--

"Years, eventful years, have passed away, my dear Miss Haviland, since
your face, like some unexpected vision, first greeted my sight, and
its image, at the same moment, as a thing not to be resisted, sunk
deep into my heart. And there, from that hour to this, it has
constantly remained--remained in spite of all my attempts to exclude
it; for I struggled hard to banish it, as I had so much reason to do.
You were the daughter of wealth and prosperity--I the son of poverty
and misfortune; and, what was more revolting to my pride, you were
found with my political opponents--my oppressors--nay, in the closest
connection, apparently, with my bitterest foe. But with all the aid
which these thoughts and associations were calculated to lend me, I
struggled in vain. And when I was driven, poor, sorrowing, and
desperate, from my home, by the wrongs and insults of this same man,
of whose position towards you I was not left in doubt, I carried that
image with me. It would not be eradicated; it would not even fade; but
became more deeply impressed, and grew more and more vivid with time
and change. In the stirring scenes of military life into which I then
entered,--in the hour of battle, the exhausting march, the horrors of
a prisonship, the perilous escape, and the lone wanderings through the
wilderness, till I again reached the soil of freedom,--in all these,
the impress remained unweakened, constantly presenting itself to my
thoughts by day, and shaping my dreams by night. And it was this,
when, on my return, I came into this quarter, where I had learned our
scattered troops were rallying, and where I found myself near you--it
was this that brought me to your father's dwelling--it was this,
which, in spite of the coldness of my reception by all but yourself,
urged me to the repeated visit, in which I was driven with insults
from your house."

"Not by me, Mr. Woodburn," interposed the fair listener, in kindly and
earnest tones--"not by me, nor by my consent or sanctioning. And it
was mainly to show you this that I was induced to grant your request
for this, on my part, I fear, imprudent meeting. No! O, no, sir, I
have never forgotten--I can never forget--to whom I am indebted for my
life; and gratitude as well as respect for his general character, will
ever forbid aught but kind and courteous treatment at my hands. And I
hope you will make some allowance for my father, who feels so strongly
that the people, whose cause you espouse, are criminally wrong."

"I do make an allowance," responded Woodburn--"great allowance for his
imbittered state of mind towards the defenders of the American cause;
but does that fully account for the course he pursues towards me?"

"To be frank with you, sir, it does not," she replied, after some
hesitation. "There are those often with my father, who are not
backward in fanning his prejudices, and perhaps in instigating the
undeserved treatment you have received. I may be unwise in saying
this; but justice to all, it appears to me, requires that you should
be apprised of it. You will not surely make use of this to embroil us?"

"Certainly not; but what you communicate is hardly news to me. I well
understand that the principal one of those to whom you allude is no
other than the person who just rode away from your house."

"You saw him, then? I am thankful you did not come in collision with
him; for he is a man you must avoid. Yes, that was indeed Colonel Peters."

_Colonel_ Peters! _Colonel_, did you call him? Has he, then, actually
joined the British forces, and received a commission for such a post
in their army?"

"Yes; but I had supposed this was known, else I might have hesitated
to disclose it, lest his frequent visits here might implicate my
father, who, I hope, may be induced to remain neutral in this unhappy
contest."

"Fear not, fair friend. No advantage shall be taken of this, through
my means, to the injury of your father. But, tell me, does that
officious adviser of your father still urge a suit, and plead an
engagement, of which, I have inferred, you would not be sorry to be
relieved?"

"He does," answered the maiden, sadly--"he does urge a suit, and
insist on an engagement, of which he knows I wish to be relieved."

"Why should he do this?"

"Perhaps he counts on the effect of events to reconcile me--events
which he seems to expect will shortly happen--the complete triumph of
his cause, the disgrace, banishment, or death of its cpposers, and his
own elevation thereby to stations which, he thinks no woman will
refuse to share with him. He counts much also, probably, on the aiding
influence of my father, who feels warmly interested in his success,
and believes with the other that he, who is so loyal, while so many of
his standing are otherwise, cannot fail of reaping a brilliant harvest
of rewards, which, with the connection they propose, will reflect
lustre on our family."

"Then it does not occur to them," said Woodburn, with a smile at this
specimen of that loyal air-castle building in which the tories of the
revolution seemed to have so extravagantly indulged--"it does not
occur to them that it is even _possible_ these splendid schemes may
fail, in the failure of their cause in this country, which has thus,
in anticipation, been parcelled out into dukedoms and lordships, to
reward its sanguine adherents?"

"One would think not, from their conversation on the subject," replied
the other.

"And what thinks _she_, whom they would have so much _interested_ in
this great issue?" asked Woodburn, encouraged to the question by the
manner and tone of her last remark. "Has it never occurred to _her_
mind that their cause, as strong as they deem it, is destined to fail;
that even this vaunting army, which hangs so menacingly on our
borders, may be swept away by the vengeance of a wronged, an insulted,
and now aroused people; and that this despised people have right and
Heaven on their side; and by the blessings of that Heaven, while they
do battle in the consciousness of that right, will yet triumph, and
become an independent nation, to which even her present haughty foe
will do reverence?"

"It has," replied the maiden, warmly and with emphasis--"it has, Mr.
Woodburn; and--why should I attempt to conceal it?--and I have
wished--for I could not help it, though against the feelings, and,
perhaps, the best interests of a generally kind parent--I have long
secretly wished, and even prayed, for your success; because I could
not stifle the conviction of the truth of what you assert respecting
the wrongs of the American people, and the justice of their cause."

"Sabrey Haviland," exclaimed the surprised and delighted lover, "as
long as I have respected and loved you, I have never till this moment,
known you--never half appreciated the worth of your character!"

"What you may appreciate highly, sir, others may as highly condemn,"
she meekly responded. "I have said more to you than I have ever
expressed to human being; and I may be wrong--wrong in saying it to
you--wrong in saying it or believing it at all." "Wrong? O, no, no,
noble girl!" he rejoined, with increasing animation; "no, you are not
wrong; you are right--right in your convictions, right in the wish,
the prayer, and the declaration. Men will honor your honest
independence, exercised against so much to bias and prejudice, so much
to tempt and dazzle you; and Heaven will approve and bless you. But
with such sentiments," he added, in tenderly expostulating
accents--"with such sentiments, dear lady, will you doom me to plead
my heart's cause in vain? Will you still adhere to a lover active in
the work of oppression which you condemn, and reject his rival,
equally active in the cause you approve and pray for?"

"I see my error, Mr. Woodburn," she replied, with an air of
self-reproach and of slightly-offended pride, which, however, gave way
to kindly tones, as she proceeded; "I have unintentionally helped you
to an argument, while I am constrained to decide that no argument, so
long as I stand in my present position, must prevail with me. Do not,
then, O, do not press me with questions like these. You know not the
extent of my perplexities, and I may not explain. Besides, are these
the times to engage in such affairs, when the next hour may lead to an
eternal separation, or place our respective destinies as wide as the
poles asunder?"

"But will you not allow me even to hope for the future?" still
persisted the lover.

"Why should I bid you tantalize yourself with hopes so likely to prove
futile, when nobler thoughts should engross you? Look, Mr. Woodburn,"
she said, pointing, with charming enthusiasm, towards the distant
summits of Manchester, then beginning to be dimly visible in the rays
of the rising moon, "cast your eyes northward! Beneath yon blue
mountains is gathered the council of your people. There also rolls the
recruiting drum of your brave Warner, who needs men like you; or if,
as you intimated, you are waiting to engage in a different corps,
which your council is expected to raise, would not your attendance
there be more worthily bestowed, than in adding to the perplexities of
one already so thickly surrounded with difficulties, and one who, to
your suit, cannot say yea, while she would be pained to say nay?"

"Cruel girl, but noble in your cruelty!" exclaimed Woodburn, with
mingled disappointment and admiration. "I will forbear to press my
suit for the present, but not forever. I will heed the lesson of
patriotism you have given me, but only to remember my fair prompter
with deeper devotion."

"Hark!" said the other, starting; "I hear my father's chiding voice in
the house inquiring for me. I must go. Adieu, Mr. Woodburn. With this
tendered hand of friendship and gratitude, adieu."

"If it must be so, my precious, my beautiful one, farewell to you, also."

Lips uttered no more, but the mute pause that followed, while eye met
eye, and hand lingered in hand, was not meaningless. The fond lover
was not permitted, however, to prolong the entrancing moment, which,
as the slightly-returned pressure of the small white hand, closely
imprisoned in his own, told him, had not been reluctantly vouchsafed
him; for, quickly arousing herself, the maiden broke from his clinging
grasp, and tripped silenty away, leaving him gazing after her
retreating form, and listening to the soft and decreasing sounds of
her light footsteps upon the grass, till the jar of the closing door,
to which she had directed her devious course, made him feel that he
was alone, and that the charm of the place was gone.

With a sigh, he turned from the spot, and soon gained the highway;
when, taking the direction in which his rival and foe had departed, he
walked musingly onward, heedless alike of the cool and balmly air of
the evening, or the quietly reposing beauties which the light of a
full moon, now beginning to peer over the eastern hills, was gradually
unfolding around him, and intent only on the dreamy images with which
love and his new-fledged hope seemed conspiring for a while to amuse
his willing mind. At length, however, a quickened pace, a firmer
tread, and a prouder bearing, showed that a different and less
peaceful train of thought was springing up within.

"So this evil genius of mine, it seems," he muttered, "who forever
appears in my path to snatch from me every prize I set my heart on, is
secretly an officer in the British service, commissioned, probably, to
head a regiment of tories, whom he is now by his false statements and
delusive promises, attempting to gather from the weak and wavering of
our overawed people. This must be instantly made known. Heavens! what
effrontery!--to be playing the spy under the garb of pretended
neutrality, and seducing away the deluded men under our very noses, to
lead them back to fall with fire and sword on their kindred and
neighbors! And I am to be the particular object of his vengeance, I
presume, from the significant hint she gave me to avoid him. Avoid
him! He shall be spared much trouble to find me if that is what he
wants. He is now the country's foe, and lawful game with me. I would
that I could meet him tonight--yes, this night; and if I thought I
could overtake him--stay, why can't this be done?--only three miles
start, probably, and on a moderate trot; while my horse is a fleet
one, and--and--we will try it."

By this time he had reached a log house, and barn of the same
materials, which formed a small opening on the left side of the road,
and which was the residence of a recently-married and here settled
friend, in whose care he had left his horse before proceeding, as on
the lady's account he did, through the adjoining wood and Haviland's
broad fields beyond, to the clandestine interview with her that we
have described. And now turning in towards this rude establishment, he
hastily proceeded, without calling at the house, directly to the barn,
that was partially enclosed by one of those close-laid, high, pole
fences which the settlers usually constructed round their barns to
protect their flocks against the depredations of wild beasts. Within
this strong enclosure, the owner's cattle, consisting of a pair of
oxen, cow, and two or three young creatures of the same species, were
now quietly chewing their cuds, with those occasional wheezing grunts,
which with them seem so indicative of animal enjoyment; while in one
corner stood the horse of which Woodburn was in quest--a little model
of a creature, of a lively, attent appearance, as now particularly
manifested by a low, earnest, recognizing whinny, and by instantly
starting off, in a sort of half trot towards the bars of the
enclosure, as her master came up on the other side.

"Yes, yes, Lightfoot, you shall go now, and as fast as you desire,
this time," responded the latter, throwing himself over the bars, and
patting the animal on the neck, as he passed on to the barn for his
saddle and bridle.

To equip his willing steed, examine the trusty pistols, which, like
his foe, he carried about his person, let down, pass through, and
replace the bars, occupied him but a moment, and he was about
springing into his saddle, when he was hailed from the house.

"Halloo, there, Woodburn, is that you?" exclaimed a cheerly voice, as
a stout-built, crank, honest-looking young man, without hat or coat,
came out of the door, and with a free and careless air made his way
towards the other; "but what is your hurry? Nothing unpleasant has
befallen you in your affair over yonder that makes you feel like being
off in this sly and hasty manner, has there?"

"No, Risdon, not quite so bad as that yet," replied Woodburn, taking
all in good part.

"How much better, then? Come, Harry, I have taken stones enough out of
your path, and thrown them into that of your rival there, to earn a
candid answer to such a question."

"True, sir; but you ask more than I am permitted to know myself. I can
neither get accepted nor rejected. She, however has given me fresh
reason to admire her. She is no common girl, friend Risdon."

"There is not a finer or fairer in all the Green Mountains; but what
is that fresh reason you name?"

"The discovery that at heart she is warmly with us in the good cause."

"That is, you hope, and therefore believe so, eh?"

"I have a much better reason than that, sir, for my assertion. She
has, within this hour, told me so herself."

"Ah! Well, then, it is indeed so; for Sabrey Haviland never uttered
aught but perfect truth and sincerity in all her life. Why, God bless
her for her spunk and independence, living and visiting, as she mostly
has, from a child, in that circle of high-toned and bitter tories. And
it argues well for your suit, too, Woodburn, which till now I have
considered rather an unpromising one; for it tells me that she will
struggle hard to get free from the fetters which Peters and her father
have fastened on her, and by which, counting on her high sense of the
sacredness of all promises and contracts, they suppose have secured
her beyond the least fear of escape."

"Do you allude to any thing other than the mere consent which she
formerly gave to Peters's proposals of marriage, and which, I had
supposed, constituted the only engagement existing between them?"

"Yes, a far stronger case, which I have learned by way of my wife,
since I last conversed with you on the subject."

"Ah! What is it?" eagerly demanded the lover.

"Why as I gathered it, the case was this," answered the other. "The
old man, as well as Peters, you know, must always do things, if
possible, after the English custom; and both thinking more of property
than women, they got up a regularly-written marriage contract, or
settlement, by which one bound himself to give the other his daughter,
with such and such a dowry, and the other to marry the daughter, and
settle such and such sums on her and her heirs, all to be void in case
the marriage fell through by fault of the girl. But to provide against
this, they made another part to the instrument for her to sign, in
which they made her solemnly promise and covenant to marry Peters, and
none else; otherwise she was to forfeit her birthright in her father's
estate. This they somehow or other at last induced her to sign and
seal thus binding herself hand and foot forever, with but one single
advantage, which, it seems, she had the wit to get added to the
contract before she would sign it; and that was, that the time of
fulfilling the contract, or day of the marriage, was to be left to her."

"What a detestable conspiracy for a father to enter into against the
rightful liberty and happiness of a daughter!" exclaimed Woodburn,
after a pause, during which surprise and indignation kept him silent.
"That, then, explains the hints she has several times thrown out to me
respecting some peculiar trials and difficulties to which she was
subjected. But was she of age when she signed that paper?"

"No; but she probably, in her great scrupulousness, would long
hesitate to break the engagement on account of that, or the fraudulent
means they doubtless used to draw her into the shameful affair.
Nevertheless, I would persevere. Her right to stave off the fellow,
with her known wish to get rid of him, may yet procure her an
honorable release; or she may be brought to take a different view
about the binding nature of a promise obtained under such
circumstances; or, as a last resort, that paper may be got out of his
possession by some scheme or other. So I think you will worst him in
the long run, in spite of his present advantages of the father's help,
his own wealth, and----"

"And his recent promotion," interrupted Woodburn, "which is to be the
stepping-stone to the dukedom of Vermont, the reward for betraying his
country, and the glittering bait, which, in anticipation, is already
held out to this besieged, but bravely resisting, girl!"

"What do you mean, Woodburn?" bluntly said the other, in surprise.

"I mean," replied the former, "that Peters has lately received a
colonel's commission in the British service, and is even now secretly
but actively engaged, I suspect, in trying to seduce the people with
British gold, and raise troops among us to co-operate with Burgoyne."

"You astonish me. Why, the hypocritical rascal has been giving out
word about here, that, as he had friends and interests on both sides,
he had concluded to remain neutral! Are you sure you have been
correctly informed?"

"Quite sure. But while you may conjecture the source of my information,
remember that it is to work no injury to the family of my informer."

"Ay, I understand, now--'tis true, then; and you are correct, too, in
your suspicions about his present movements. That will account for the
existence of the hard dollars that have so strangely made their
appearance about here within a few days. But will he be suffered to
prosecute his plans here among us? What better is he than a spy?"

"Nothing."

"He must be nabbed, then; and we will let him find his duke's coronet
in a crow's nest, on the limb of some old hemlock, to which we will
soon have him dangling in the air, unless our authorities wish to give
him a more respectable gallows. What say you to that, Harry?"

"That you are not the first to think of it--that is, so far as to have
him captured. He rode away from Haviland's in this direction, and at a
moderate pace, just as I, unperceived by him, reached there, about an
hour ago, on his way, doubtless, to one of the tory haunts in
Manchester. My mare has a fleet foot, Risdon; so you now understand
why I was in a hurry to be off, don't you?"

"I do; but Heavens! Woodburn, you are not going to give chase alone?"

"Yes; no horse but mine probably could overtake him before he reaches
his associates; besides, since it was hinted to me that he would seek
my life I am willing to give him a chance to take it, where neither he
nor I shall have help or witness."

"Are you armed?"

"With dirk and pistols, as he only is."

"A rather hazardous push, Harry. But go, and God prosper you to take
him, and with him that mischievous document. And one thing more: if
you live to reach Manchester, tell that Council of Safety, that if
they don't do something soon, we, the people, will set up for
ourselves in war-making. I, for one, don't believe I can keep my hands
off my rifle three days longer."

"Ay, ay," said Woodburn, springing into his saddle. "And now,
Lightfoot, here is a loose rein for you. Go!" he added, striking with
his heels the body, and with his hands the mane of the impatient
animal, that, at these well-understood signs, gave an irregular plunge
or two ahead, and then shot off like an arrow up the road.




CHAPTER III.

  "What heroes from the woodland sprung,
     When, through the fresh-awakened land,
   The thrilling cry of freedom rung.
   And to the work of warfare strung
     The yeoman's iron hand!"


Leaving Woodburn to the hot and eager pursuit that patriotism and
private animosity had prompted him to undertake, we will now precede
him a few miles on the road, for the purpose of introducing and
accompanying another old acquaintance, who was also destined to become
an actor in the wild and stirring adventures of the night.

Near the southern confines of Manchester, about nine o'clock, the same
evening, a youth of the probable age of twenty, of a sandy complexion,
and of a rather slight, but evidently tough, wiry frame, with a short
rifle on his shoulder, and powder-horn and ball-pouch slung at his
back, was making his solitary way on foot along the main road towards
the town just mentioned. As he now reached the Batenkill, where the
stream, here first beginning to find a more peaceful flow, after its
headlong descent from the Green Mountains, intersected the road, he
suddenly paused and began to muse, with the air of one who has been
struck by some new thought tending to divert him from his settled
purposes; and, slowly passing on to the bridge, which, after the rude
construction of the times, had been thrown across the river at this
place, he took a seat on one of the side-timbers, or binders, as they
were usually termed, and, in accordance with an old and inveterate
habit, generated probably by the peculiar circumstances of his early
life, began to commune with himself aloud.

"I wonder what this new business is they want you should do Bart?
Harry said it was a secret matter when he handed over the paper," he
continued, pulling out and abstractedly unrolling a small wad of white
paper, "a kinder private commission, or something, which he would
explain about, after I had gone and got his letter to the girl, as he
met me on my way back. But why don't he meet me fore this time? It's
pesky strange he should hang back in a woman affair so! Why, he would
go--like enough has gone--but then how could he miss me? O Lord, Bart,
what a stupid pup! He passed you when you was napping it in the bushes
at that cool spring! I'll bet my old hat on't! Well, we shan't see
much more of him to-night, likely, seeing it is love he's doing, and
such a moon as this holds the candle; and we may as well be trying to
find out this business without him. So let's be digging out what the
paper says. Harry and the rest of 'em don't know I can read writing;
but I can, when driv to it; though I think we won't let 'em know that,
Bart; for no knowing what cunning things we may find out if they don't
mistrust it. Now let's look. Why, I can see as plain as day!' he
added, holding up the writing to the bright moonlight, and beginning
to spell out the well-known bold and distinct characters of the
secretary of the council, as follows:--

"TO BARTHOLOMEW BURT:--

"You are hereby appointed by the Council of Safety to go through this
and the neighboring towns, bordering on the British line of march; to
spy out the resorts of the tories; to mark and identify all inimical
persons; to gain all the information that can be obtained respecting
the movements of the enemy at large; and make report, from time t