his mornin's mail."

"I see.  My mistake.  Well, I'm obliged to her in a way.  If the
news has been broken to you, I shan't have to break it and we can
get down to brass tacks just so much sooner.  The surprise being
over--I take it, it WAS a surprise, Captain?"

"You take it right.  Just as much of a surprise to me as you."

"Of course.  Well, the surprise being over for both of us, we can
talk of the affair--calmly and coolly.  What do you think about it,
Captain?"

"Oh, I don't know as I know exactly what to think.  What do YOU
think about it, Mr. Fosdick?"

"I think--I imagine I think very much as you do."

"I shouldn't he surprised.  And--er--what's your notion of what I
think?"

Captain Zelotes' gray eye twinkled as he asked the question, and
the Fosdick blue eye twinkled in return.  Both men laughed.

"We aren't getting very far this way, Captain," observed the
visitor.  "There's no use dodging, I suppose.  I, for one, am not
very well pleased.  Mrs. Fosdick, for another, isn't pleased at
all; she is absolutely and entirely opposed to the whole affair.
She won't hear of it, that's all, and she said so much that I
thought perhaps I had better come down here at once, see you, and--
and the young fellow with the queer name--"

"My grandson."

"Why yes.  He is your grandson, isn't he?  I beg your pardon."

"That's all right.  I shan't fight with you because you don't like
his name.  Go ahead.  You decided to come and see him--and me--?"

"Yes, I did.  I decided to come because it has been my experience
that a frank, straight talk is better, in cases like this, than a
hundred letters.  And that the time to talk was now, before matters
between the young foo--the young people went any further.  Don't
you agree with me?"

Captain Zelotes nodded.

"That now is a good time to talk?  Yes, I do," he said.

"Good!  Then suppose we talk."

"All right."

There was another interval of silence.  Then Fosdick broke it with
a chuckle.  "And I'm the one to do the talking, eh?" he said.

Captain Lote's eye twinkled.  "We-ll, you came all the way from New
York on purpose, you know," he observed.  Then he added:  "But
there, Mr. Fosdick, I don't want you to think I ain't polite or
won't talk, myself.  I'll do my share when the time comes.  But it
does seem to me that you ought to do yours first as it's your
family so far that's done the objectin'. . . .  Your cigar's gone
out.  Have another light, won't you?"

The visitor shook his head.  "No, thank you, not now," he said
hastily, placing the defunct cigar carefully on the captain's desk.
"I won't smoke for the minute.  So you want me to begin the
talking, do you?  It seems to me I have begun it.  I told you that
I do not like the idea of my daughter's being engaged to--to say
nothing of marrying--your grandson.  My wife likes it even less
than I do.  That is enough of a statement to begin with, isn't it?"

"Why, no, not exactly, if you'll excuse my sayin' so.  Your
daughter herself--how does she feel about it?"

"Oh, she is enthusiastic, naturally.  She appears to be suffering
from temporary insanity on the subject."

"She don't seem to think it's quite as--er--preposterous, and
ridiculous and outrageous--and Lord knows what all--as your wife
does, eh?"

"No.  I say, Snow, I hope you're not too deeply offended by what
my wife wrote you.  I judge you are quoting from her letter and
apparently she piled it on red-hot.  You'll have to excuse her; she
was almost wild all day yesterday.  I'll ask your pardon on her
behalf."

"Sho, sho!  No need, Mr. Fosdick, no need at all.  I know what
women are, even the easy-goin' kind, when they've got steam up.
I've got a wife--and I had a daughter.  But, gettin' back on the
course again, you think your daughter's crazy because she wants to
marry my grandson.  Is that it?"

"Why, no, I wouldn't say that, exactly.  Of course, I wouldn't say
that."

"But, you see, you did say it.  However, we'll leave that to one
side for a spell.  What objection--what real objection is there to
those two marryin'--my grandson and your daughter--provided that
they care for each other as they'd ought to?"

Mr. Fosdick's expression changed slightly.  His tone, as he replied
to the question, was colder and his manner less cordial.

"I don't know that it is worth while answering that in detail," he
said, after an instant's pause.  "Frankly, Captain Snow, I had
rather hoped you would see, for yourself, the reasons why such a
marriage wouldn't be desirable.  If you don't see them, if you are
backing up your grandson in his business, why--well, there is no
use in our discussing the matter any further, is there?  We should
only lose our tempers and not gain much.  So we had better end it
now, I think."

He rose to his feet.  Captain Zelotes, leaning forward, held up a
protesting hand.

"Now--now, Mr. Fosdick," he said earnestly, "I don't want you to
misunderstand me.  And I'm sorry if what I said has made you mad."

Fosdick smiled.  "Oh, I'm not mad," he answered cheerfully.  "I
make it a rule in all my business dealings not to get mad, or, more
especially, not to let the other fellow know that I'm getting that
way.  My temper hasn't a ruffle in it just now, and I am leaving
merely because I want it to remain smooth.  I judge that you and I
aren't going to agree.  All right, then we'll differ, but we'll
differ without a fight, that's all.  Good afternoon, Captain."

But Captain Lote's hand still remained uplifted.

"Mr. Fosdick," he said.  "just a minute now--just a minute.  You
never have met Albert, my grandson, have you?  Never even seen him,
maybe?"

"No, but I intend to meet him and talk with him before I leave
South Harniss.  He was one of the two people I came here to meet."

"And I was the other, eh?  Um-hm. . . .  I see.  You think you've
found out where I stand and now you'll size him up.  Honest, Mr.
Fosdick, I . . .  Humph!  Mind if I tell you a little story?
'Twon't take long.  When I was a little shaver, me and my granddad,
the first Cap'n Lote Snow--there's been two since--were great
chums.  When he was home from sea he and I stuck together like hot
pitch and oakum.  One day we were sittin' out in the front yard of
his house--it's mine, now--watchin' a hoptoad catch flies.  You've
seen a toad catch flies, haven't you, Mr. Fosdick?  Mr. Toad sits
there, lookin' half asleep and as pious and demure as a pickpocket
at camp-meetin', until a fly comes along and gets too near.  Then,
Zip! out shoots about six inches of toad tongue and that fly's been
asked in to dinner.  Well, granddad and I sat lookin' at our
particular toad when along came a bumble-bee and lighted on a
honeysuckle blossom right in front of the critter.  The toad didn't
take time to think it over, all he saw was a square meal, and his
tongue flashed out and nailed that bumble-bee and snapped it into
the pantry.  In about a half second, though, there was a change.
The pantry had been emptied, the bumble-bee was on his way again,
and Mr. Toad was on his, hoppin' lively and huntin' for--well, for
ice water or somethin' coolin', I guess likely.  Granddad tapped me
on the shoulder.  'Sonny,' says he, 'there's a lesson for you.
That hoptoad didn't wait to make sure that bumble-bee was good to
eat; he took it for granted, and was sorry afterward.  It don't pay
to jump at conclusions, son,' he says.  'Some conclusions are like
that bumble-bee's, they have stings in 'em.'"

Captain Lote, having finished his story, felt in his pocket for
a match.  Fosdick, for an instant, appeared puzzled.  Then he
laughed.

"I see," he said.  "You think I made too quick a jump when I
concluded you were backing your grandson in this affair.  All
right, I'm glad to hear it.  What do you want me to do, sit down
again and listen?"

He resumed his seat as he asked the question.  Captain Zelotes
nodded.

"If you don't mind," he answered.  "You see, you misunderstood me,
Mr. Fosdick.  I didn't mean any more than what I said when I asked
you what real objection there was, in your opinion to Albert's
marryin' your--er--Madeline, that's her name, I believe.  Seems to
me the way for us to get to an understandin'--you and I--is to find
out just how the situation looks to each of us.  When we've found
out that, we'll know how nigh we come to agreein' or disagreein'
and can act accordin'.  Sounds reasonable, don't it?"

Fosdick nodded in his turn.  "Perfectly," he admitted.  "Well, ask
your questions, and I'll answer them.  After that perhaps I'll ask
some myself.  Go ahead."

"I have gone ahead.  I've asked one already."

"Yes, but it is such a general question.  There may be so many
objections."

"I see.  All right, then I'll ask some:  What do the lawyers call
'em?--Atlantic?  Pacific?  I've got it--I'll ask some specific
questions.  Here's one.  Do you object to Al personally?  To his
character?"

"Not at all.  We know nothing about his character.  Very likely he
may be a young saint."

"Well, he ain't, so we'll let that slide.  He's a good boy, though,
so far as I've ever been able to find out.  Is it his looks?
You've never seen him, but your wife has.  Don't she like his
looks?"

"She hasn't mentioned his looks to me."

"Is it his money?  He hasn't got any of his own."

"We-ell, of course that does count a little bit.  Madeline is our
only child, and naturally we should prefer to have her pick out a
husband with a dollar or so in reserve."

"Um-hm.  Al's twenty-one, Mr. Fosdick.  When I was twenty-one I had
some put by, but not much.  I presume likely 'twas different with
you, maybe.  Probably you were pretty well fixed."

Fosdick laughed aloud.  "You make a good cross-examiner, Snow," he
observed.  "As a matter of fact, when I was twenty-one I was
assistant bookkeeper in a New Haven broker's office.  I didn't have
a cent except my salary, and I had that only for the first five
days in the week."

"However, you got married?"

"Yes, I did.  More fool I!  If I had known anything, I should have
waited five years at least.  I didn't have any one to tell me so.
My father and mother were both dead."

"Think you'd have listened to 'em if they had been alive and had
told you?  However, however, that's all to one side.  Well,
Albert's havin' no money to speak of is an objection--and a good
honest one from your point of view.  His prospects here in this
business of mine are fair, and he is doin' better at it than he
was, so he may make a comf'table livin'--a comf'table South Harniss
livin', that is--by and by."

"Oh, he is with you, then?  Oh, yes, I remember my wife said he
worked in your office.  But she said more about his being some sort
of a--a poet, wasn't it?"

For the first time since the interview began the captain looked ill
at ease and embarrassed.

"Thunderation!" he exclaimed testily, "you mustn't pay attention to
that.  He does make up poetry' pieces--er--on the side, as you
might say, but I keep hopin' all the time he'll grow out of it,
give him time.  It 'ain't his regular job, you mustn't think 'tis."

The visitor laughed again.  "I'm glad of that," he said, "both for
your sake and mine.  I judge that you and I, Snow, are in complete
agreement as far as our opinion of poetry and that sort of stuff is
concerned.  Of course I'm not condemning all poetry, you understand.
Longfellow and Tennyson and the regular poets are all right.  You
understand what I'm getting at?"

"Sartin.  I used to know 'Down went the R'yal George with all her
crew complete,' and a lot more.  Used to say 'em over to myself
when I first went to sea and stood watch alone nights.  But they
were different, you know; they--they--"

"Sure!  My wife--why, I give you my word that my own wife and her
set go perfectly daffy over chaps who write stuff that rhymes and
that the papers are printing columns about.  Snow, if this grandson
of yours was a genuine press-touted, women's club poet instead of a
would-be--well, I don't know what might happen.  In that case she
might be as strong FOR this engagement as she is now against it."

He paused, seeming a bit ashamed of his own heat.  Captain Zelotes,
however, regarded him with more approval than he had yet shown.

"It's been my observation that women are likely to get off the
course chasin' false signals like that," he observed.  "When a man
begins lettin' his hair and his mouth run wild together seems as if
the combination had an attraction for a good many women folks.  Al
keeps his hair cut, though, I'll say that for him," he added.  "It
curls some, but it ain't long.  I wouldn't have him in the office
if 'twas."

"Well, Mr. Fosdick," he continued, "what other objections are they?
Manners?  Family and relations?  Education?  Any objections along
that line?"

"No-o, no; I--well, I don't know; you see, I don't know much about
the young fellow."

"Perhaps I can help you out.  As to manners--well, you can judge
them for yourself when you see him.  He seems to be in about every
kind of social doin's there is down here, and he's as much or more
popular with the summer folks than with the year-'rounders.
Education?  Well, that's fair to middlin', as I see it.  He spent
nine or ten years in a mighty expensive boardin' school up in New
York State."

"Did he?  What school?"

The captain gave the name of the school.  Fosdick looked surprised.

"Humph!  That IS a good school," he said.

"Is it?  Depends on what you call good, I cal'late.  Al learned a
good deal of this and that, a little bit of foreign language, some
that they call dead and some that ought to be dead--and buried,
'cordin' to my notion.  When he came to me he couldn't add up a
column of ten figgers without makin' a mistake, and as for
business--well, what he knew about business was about equal to what
Noah knew about a gas engine."

He paused to chuckle, and Fosdick chuckled with him.

"As to family," went on Captain Lote, "he's a Snow on his mother's
side, and there's been seven generations of Snow's in this part of
the Cape since the first one landed here.  So far as I know,
they've all managed to keep out of jail, which may have been more
good luck than deservin' in some cases."

"His father?" queried Fosdick.

The captain's heavy brows drew together.  "His father was a
Portygee--or Spaniard, I believe is right--and he was a play-actor,
one of those--what do you call 'em?--opera singers."

Fosdick seemed surprised and interested.  "Oh, indeed," he
exclaimed, "an opera singer? . . .  Why, he wasn't Speranza, the
baritone, was he?"

"Maybe; I believe he was.  He married my daughter and--well, we
won't talk about him, if you don't mind."

"But Speranza was a--"

"IF you don't mind, Mr. Fosdick."

Captain Lote lapsed into silence, drumming the desk with his big
fingers.  His visitor waited for a few moments.  At length he said:

"Well, Captain Snow, I have answered your questions and you have
answered mine.  Do you think we are any nearer an agreement now?"

Captain Zelotes seemed to awake with a start.  "Eh?" he queried.
"Agreement?  Oh, I don't know.  Did you find any--er--what you
might call vital objections in the boy's record?"

"No-o.  No, all that is all right.  His family and his education
and all the rest are good enough, I'm sure.  But, nevertheless--"

"You still object to the young folks gettin' married."

"Yes, I do.  Hang it all, Snow, this isn't a thing one can reason
out, exactly.  Madeline is our only child; she is our pet, our
baby.  Naturally her mother and I have planned for her, hoped for
her, figured that some day, when we had to give her up, it would
be to--to--"

"To somebody that wasn't Albert Speranza of South Harniss,
Mass. . . .  Eh?"

"Yes.  Not that your grandson isn't all right.  I have no doubt he
is a tip-top young fellow.  But, you see--"

Captain Lote suddenly leaned forward.  "Course I see, Mr. Fosdick,"
he interrupted.  "Course I see.  You object, and the objection
ain't a mite weaker on account of your not bein' able to say
exactly what 'tis."

"That's the idea.  Thank you, Captain."

"You're welcome.  I can understand.  I know just how you feel,
because I've been feelin' the same way myself."

"Oh, you have?  Good!  Then you can sympathize with Mrs. Fosdick
and with me.  You see--you understand why we had rather our
daughter did not marry your grandson."

"Sartin.  You see, I've had just the same sort of general kind of
objection to Al's marryin' your daughter."

Mr. Fletcher Fosdick leaned slowly backward in his chair.  His
appearance was suggestive of one who has received an unexpected
thump between the eyes.

"Oh, you have!" he said again, but not with the same expression.

"Um-hm," said Captain Zelotes gravely.  "I'm like you in one way;
I've never met your Madeline any more than you have met Al.  I've
seen her once or twice, and she is real pretty and nice-lookin'.
But I don't know her at all.  Now I don't doubt for a minute but
that she's a real nice girl and it might be that she'd make Al a
fairly good wife."

"Er--well,--thanks."

"Oh, that's all right, I mean it.  It might be she would.  And I
ain't got a thing against you or your folks."

"Humph,--er--thanks again."

"That's all right; you don't need to thank me.  But it's this way
with me--I live in South Harniss all the year round.  I want to
live here till I die, and--after I die I'd like first-rate to have
Al take up the Z. Snow and Co. business and the Snow house and land
and keep them goin' till HE dies.  Mind, I ain't at all sure that
he'll do it, or be capable of doin' it, but that's what I'd like.
Now you're in New York most of the year, and so's your wife and
daughter.  New York is all right--I ain't sayin' a word against it--
but New York and South Harniss are different."

The Fosdick lip twitched.  "Somewhat different," he admitted.

"Um-hm.  That sounds like a joke, I know; but I don't mean it so,
not now.  What I mean is that I know South Harniss and South
Harniss folks.  I don't know New York--not so very well, though
I've been there plenty of times--and I don't know New York ways.
But I do know South Harniss ways, and they suit me.  Would they
suit your daughter--not just for summer, but as a reg'lar thing
right straight along year in and out?  I doubt it, Mr. Fosdick, I
doubt it consid'able.  Course I don't know your daughter--"

"I do--and I share your doubts."

"Um-hm.  But whether she liked it or not she'd have to come here if
she married my grandson.  Either that or he'd have to go to New
York.  And if he went to New York, how would he earn his livin'?
Get a new bookkeepin' job and start all over again, or live on
poetry?"

Mr. Fosdick opened his mouth as if to speak, seemed to change his
mind and closed it again, without speaking.  Captain Zelotes,
looking keenly at him, seemed to guess his thoughts.

"Of course," he said deliberately, but with a firmness which
permitted no misunderstanding of his meaning, "of course you
mustn't get it into your head for one minute that the boy is
figgerin' on your daughter's bein' a rich girl.  He hasn't given
that a thought.  You take my word for that, Mr. Fosdick.  He
doesn't know how much money she or you have got and he doesn't
care.  He doesn't care a continental darn."

His visitor smiled slightly.  "Nevertheless," he began.  The
captain interrupted him.

"No, there ain't any nevertheless," he said.  "Albert has been with
me enough years now so that I know a little about him.  And I know
that all he wants is your daughter.  As to how much she's worth in
money or how they're goin' to live after he's got her--I know that
he hasn't given it one thought.  I don't imagine she has, either.
For one reason," he added, with a smile, "he is too poor a business
man to think of marriage as a business, bill-payin' contract, and
for another,--for another--why, good Lord, Fosdick!" he exclaimed,
leaning forward, "don't you know what this thing means to those two
young folks?  It means just moonshine and mush and lookin' into
each other's eyes, that's about all.  THEY haven't thought any
practical thoughts about it.  Why, think what their ages are!
Think of yourself at that age!  Can't you remember. . . .  Humph!
Well, I'm talkin' fifty revolutions to the second.  I beg your
pardon."

"That's all right, Snow.  And I believe you have the situation
sized up as it is.  Still--"

"Excuse me, Mr. Fosdick, but don't you think it's about time you
had a look at the boy himself?  I'm goin' to ask him to come in
here and meet you."

Fosdick looked troubled.  "Think it is good policy?" he asked
doubtfully.  "I want to see him and speak with him, but I do hate a
scene."

"There won't be any scene.  You just meet him face to face and talk
enough with him to get a little idea of what your first impression
is.  Don't contradict or commit yourself or anything.  And I'll
send him out at the end of two or three minutes."

Without waiting for a reply, he rose, opened the door to the outer
office and called, "Al, come in here!"  When Albert had obeyed the
order he closed the door behind him and turning to the gentleman in
the visitor's chair, said:  "Mr. Fosdick, this is my grandson,
Albert Speranza.  Al, shake hands with Mr. Fosdick from New York."

While awaiting the summons to meet the father of his adored, Albert
had been rehearsing and re-rehearsing the speeches he intended
making when that meeting took place.  Sitting at his desk, pen in
hand and pretending to be busy with the bookkeeping of Z. Snow and
Company, he had seen, not the ruled page of the day book, but the
parental countenance of the Honorable Fletcher Fosdick.  And, to
his mind's eye, that countenance was as rugged and stern as the
rock-bound coast upon which the Pilgrims landed, and about as
unyielding and impregnable as the door of the office safe.  So,
when his grandfather called him, he descended from the tall desk
stool and crossed the threshold of the inner room, a trifle pale, a
little shaky at the knees, but with the set chin and erect head of
one who, facing almost hopeless odds, intends fighting to the last
gasp.

To his astonishment the Fosdick countenance was not as his
imagination had pictured it.  The blue eyes met his, not with a
glare or a glower, but with a look of interest and inquiry.  The
Fosdick hand shook his with politeness, and the Fosdick manner was,
if not genial, at least quiet and matter of fact.  He was taken
aback.  What did it mean?  Was it possible that Madeline's father
was inclined to regard her engagement to him with favor?  A great
throb of joy accompanied the thought.  Then he remembered the
letter he had just read, the letter from Madeline's mother, and the
hope subsided.

"Albert," said Captain Zelotes, "Mr. Fosdick has come on here to
talk with us; that is, with me and you, about your affairs.  He and
I have talked up to the point where it seemed to me you ought to
come in for a spell.  I've told him that the news that you and his
daughter were--er--favorably disposed toward each other was as
sudden and as big a surprise to me as 'twas to him.  Even your
grandma don't know it yet.  Now I presume likely he'd like to ask
you a few questions.  Heave ahead, Mr. Fosdick."

He relit his cigar stump and leaned back in his chair.  Mr. Fosdick
leaned forward in his.  Albert stood very straight, his shoulders
braced for the encounter.  The quizzical twinkle shone in Captain
Lote's eye as he regarded his grandson.  Fosdick also smiled
momentarily as he caught the expression of the youth's face.

"Well, Speranza," he began, in so cheerful a tone that Albert's
astonishment grew even greater, "your grandfather has been kind
enough to get us through the preliminaries, so we'll come at once
to the essentials.  You and my daughter consider yourselves engaged
to marry?"

"Yes, sir.  We ARE engaged."

"I see.  How long have you--um--been that way, so to speak?"

"Since last August."

"Why haven't you said anything about it to us--to Mrs. Fosdick or
me or your people here?  You must excuse these personal questions.
As I have just said to Captain Snow, Madeline is our only child,
and her happiness and welfare mean about all there is in life to
her mother and me.  So, naturally, the man she is going to marry is
an important consideration.  You and I have never met before, so
the quickest way of reaching an understanding between us is by the
question route.  You get my meaning?"

"Yes, sir, I guess I do."

"Good!  Then we'll go ahead.  Why have you two kept it a secret so
long?"

"Because--well, because we knew we couldn't marry yet a while, so
we thought we had better not announce it for the present."

"Oh! . . .  And the idea that perhaps Mrs. Fosdick and I might be
slightly interested didn't occur to you?"

"Why, yes, sir, it did.  But,--but we thought it best not to tell
you until later."

"Perhaps the suspicion that we might not be overjoyed by the news
had a little weight with you, eh?  Possibly that helped to delay
the--er--announcement?"

"No, sir, I--I don't think it did."

"Oh, don't you!  Perhaps you thought we WOULD be overjoyed?"

"No, sir.  We didn't think so very much about it.  Well, that's not
quite true.  Madeline felt that her mother--and you, too, sir, I
suppose, although she didn't speak as often of you in that way--she
felt that her mother would disapprove at first, and so we had
better wait."

"Until when?"

"Until--until by and by.  Until I had gone ahead further, you
know."

"I'm not sure that I do know.  Gone ahead how?  Until you had a
better position, more salary?"

"No, not exactly.  Until my writings were better known.  Until I
was a little more successful."

"Successful?  Until you wrote more poetry, do you mean?"

"Yes, sir.  Poetry and other things, stories and plays, perhaps."

"Do you mean--  Did you figure that you and Madeline were to live
on what you made by writing poetry and the other stuff?"

"Yes, sir, of course."

Fosdick looked across at Captain Zelotes.  The Captain's face was
worth looking at.

"Here, here, hold on!" he exclaimed, jumping into the conversation.
"Al, what are you talkin' about?  You're bookkeeper for me, ain't
you; for this concern right here where you are?  What do you mean
by talkin' as if your job was makin' up poetry pieces?  That's only
what you do on the side, and you know it.  Eh, ain't that so?"

Albert hesitated.  He had, momentarily, forgotten his grandfather
and the latter's prejudices.  After all, what was the use of
stirring up additional trouble.

"Yes, Grandfather," he said.

"Course it's so.  It's in this office that you draw your wages."

"Yes, Grandfather."

"All right.  Excuse me for nosin' in, Mr. Fosdick, but I knew the
boy wasn't puttin' the thing as plain as it ought to be, and I
didn't want you to get the wrong notion.  Heave ahead."

Fosdick smiled slightly.  "All right, Captain," he said.  "I get
it, I think.  Well, then," turning again to Albert, "your plan for
supporting my daughter was to wait until your position here, plus
the poetry, should bring in sufficient revenue.  It didn't occur to
you that--well, that there might be a possibility of getting money--
elsewhere?"

Albert plainly did not understand, but it was just as plain that
his grandfather did.  Captain Zelotes spoke sharply.

"Mr. Fosdick," he said, "I just answered that question for you."

"Yes, I know.  But if you were in my place you might like to have
him answer it.  I don't mean to be offensive, but business is
business, and, after all, this is a business talk.  So--"

The Captain interrupted.  "So we'll talk it in a business way, eh?"
he snapped.  "All right.  Al, what Mr. Fosdick means is had you
cal'lated that, if you married his daughter, maybe her dad's money
might help you and her to keep goin'?  To put it even plainer: had
you planned some on her bein' a rich girl?"

Fosdick looked annoyed.  "Oh, I say, Snow!" he cried.  "That's too
strong, altogether."

"Not a mite.  It's what you've had in the back of your head all
along.  I'm just helpin' it to come out of the front.  Well, Al?"

The red spots were burning in the Speranza cheeks.  He choked as he
answered.

"No," he cried fiercely.  "Of course I haven't planned on any such
thing.  I don't know how rich she is.  I don't care.  I wish she
was as poor as--as I am.  I want HER, that's all.  And she wants
me.  We don't either of us care about money.  I wouldn't take a
cent of your money, Mr. Fosdick.  But I--I want Madeline and--and--
I shall have her."

"In spite of her parents, eh?"

"Yes. . . .  I'm sorry to speak so, Mr. Fosdick, but it is true.
We--we love each other.  We--we've agreed to wait for each other,
no matter--no matter if it is years and years.  And as for the
money and all that, if you disinherit her, or--or whatever it is
they do--we don't care.  I--I hope you will.  I--she--"

Captain Zelotes' voice broke in upon the impassioned outburst.

"Steady, Al; steady, son," he cautioned quietly.  "I cal'late
you've said enough.  I don't think any more's necessary.  You'd
better go back to your desk now."

"But, Grandfather, I want him to understand--"

"I guess likely he does.  I should say you'd made it real plain.
Go now, Al."

Albert turned, but, with a shaking hand upon the doorknob, turned
back again.

"I'm--I--I'm sorry, Mr. Fosdick," he faltered.  "I--I didn't mean
to say anything to hurt your feelings.  But--but, you see,
Madeline--she and I--we--"

He could not go on.  Fosdick's nod and answer were not unkindly.
"All right, Speranza," he said, "I'm not offended.  Hope I wasn't
too blunt, myself.  Good-day."

When the door had closed behind the young man he turned to Captain
Lote.

"Sorry if I offended you, Snow," he observed.  "I threw in that
hint about marrying just to see what effect it would have, that's
all."

"Um-hm.  So I judged.  Well, you saw, didn't you?"

"I did.  Say, Captain, except as a prospective son-in-law, and then
only because I don't see him in that light--I rather like that
grandson of yours.  He's a fine, upstanding young chap."

The captain made no reply.  He merely pulled at his beard.
However, he did not look displeased.

"He's a handsome specimen, isn't he?" went on Fosdick.  "No wonder
Madeline fell for his looks.  Those and the poetry together are a
combination hard to resist--at her age.  And he's a gentleman.  He
handled himself mighty well while I was stringing him just now."

The beard tugging continued.  "Um-hm," observed Captain Zelotes
dryly; "he does pretty well for a--South Harniss gentleman.  But
we're kind of wastin' time, ain't we, Mr. Fosdick?  In spite of his
looks and his manners and all the rest, now that you've seen him
you still object to that engagement, I take it."

"Why, yes, I do.  The boy is all right, I'm sure, but--"

"Sartin, I understand.  I feel the same way about your girl.  She's
all right, I'm sure, but--"

"We're agreed on everything, includin' the 'but.'  And the 'but' is
that New York is one place and South Harniss is another."

"Exactly."

"So we don't want 'em to marry.  Fine.  First rate!  Only now we
come to the most important 'but' of all.  What are we going to do
about it?  Suppose we say no and they say yes and keep on sayin'
it?  Suppose they decide to get married no matter what we say.  How
are we goin' to stop it?"

His visitor regarded him for a moment and then broke into a hearty
laugh.

"Snow," he declared, "you're all right.  You surely have the
faculty of putting your finger on the weak spots.  Of course we
can't stop it.  If these two young idiots have a mind to marry and
keep that mind, they WILL marry and we can't prevent it any more
than we could prevent the tide coming in to-morrow morning.  _I_
realized that this was a sort of fool's errand, my coming down
here.  I know that this isn't the age when parents can forbid
marriages and get away with it, as they used to on the stage in the
old plays.  Boys and girls nowadays have a way of going their own
gait in such matters.  But my wife doesn't see it in exactly that
way, and she was so insistent on my coming down here to stop the
thing if I could that--well, I came."

"I'm glad you did, Mr. Fosdick, real glad.  And, although I agree
with you that the very worst thing to do, if we want to stop this
team from pullin' together, is to haul back on the bits and holler
'Whoa,' still I'm kind of hopeful that, maybe . . . humph!  I
declare, it looks as if I'd have to tell you another story.  I'm
gettin' as bad as Cap'n Hannibal Doane used to be, and they used to
call him 'The Rope Walk' 'cause he spun so many yarns."

Fosdick laughed again.  "You may go as far as you like with your
stories, Captain," he said.  "I can grow fat on them."

"Thanks.  Well, this ain't a story exactly; it just kind of makes
the point I'm tryin' to get at.  Calvin Bangs had a white mare one
time and the critter had a habit of runnin' away.  Once his wife,
Hannah J., was in the buggy all by herself, over to the Ostable
Fair, Calvin havin' got out to buy some peanuts or somethin'.  The
mare got scared of the noise and crowd and bolted.  As luck would
have it, she went right through the fence and out onto the trottin'
track.  And around that track she went, hell bent for election.
All hands was runnin' alongside hollerin' 'Stop her!  Stop her!
'but not Calvin--no SIR!  He waited till the mare was abreast of
him, the mare on two legs and the buggy on two wheels and Hannah
'most anywheres between the dasher and the next world, and then he
sung out:  'Give her her head, Hannah!  Give her her head.  She'll
stop when she runs down.'"

He laughed and his visitor laughed with him.

"I gather," observed the New Yorker, "that you believe it the
better policy to give our young people their heads."

"In reason--yes, I do.  It's my judgment that an affair like this
will hurry more and more if you try too hard to stop it.  If you
don't try at all so any one would notice it, it may run down and
stop of itself, the way Calvin's mare did."

Fosdick nodded reflectively.  "I'm inclined to agree with you," he
said.  "But does that mean that they're to correspond, write love
letters, and all that?"

"Why, in reason, maybe.  If we say no to that, they'll write
anyhow, won't they?"

"Of course. . . .  How would it do to get them to promise to write
nothing that their parents might not see?  Of course I don't mean
for your grandson to show you his letters before he sends them to
Madeline.  He's too old for that, and he would refuse.  But suppose
you asked him to agree to write nothing that Madeline would not be
willing to show her mother--or me.  Do you think he would?"

"Maybe.  I'll ask him. . . .  Yes, I guess likely he'd do that."

"My reason for suggesting it is, frankly, not so much on account of
the young people as to pacify my wife.  I am not afraid--not very
much afraid of this love affair.  They are young, both of them.
Give them time, and--as you say, Snow, the thing may run down,
peter out."

"I'm in hopes 'twill.  It's calf love, as I see it, and I believe
'twill pay to give the calves rope enough."

"So do I.  No, I'm not much troubled about the young people.  But
Mrs. Fosdick--well, my trouble will be with her.  She'll want to
have your boy shot or jailed or hanged or something."

"I presume likely.  I guess you'll have to handle her the way
another feller who used to live here in South Harniss said he
handled his wife.  'We don't never have any trouble at all,' says
he.  'Whenever she says yes or no, I say the same thing.  Later on,
when it comes to doin', I do what I feel like.' . . .  Eh?  You're
not goin', are you, Mr. Fosdick?"

His visitor had risen and was reaching for his coat.  Captain
Zelotes also rose.

"Don't hurry, don't hurry," he begged.

"Sorry, but I must.  I want to be back in New York tomorrow
morning."

"But you can't, can you?  To do that you'll have to get up to
Boston or Fall River, and the afternoon train's gone.  You'd better
stay and have supper along with my wife and me, stay at our house
over night, and take the early train after breakfast to-morrow."

"I wish I could; I'd like nothing better.  But I can't."

"Sure?"  Then, with a smile, he added:  "Al needn't eat with us,
you know, if his bein' there makes either of you feel nervous."

Fosdick laughed again.  "I think I should be willing to risk the
nervousness," he replied.  "But I must go, really.  I've hired a
chap at the garage here to drive me to Boston in his car and I'll
take the midnight train over."

"Humph!  Well, if you must, you must.  Hope you have a comf'table
trip, Mr. Fosdick.  Better wrap up warm; it's pretty nigh a five-
hour run to Boston and there's some cool wind over the Ostable
marshes this time of year.  Good-by, sir.  Glad to have had this
talk with you."

His visitor held out his hand.  "So am I, Snow," he said heartily.
"Mighty glad."

"I hope I wasn't too short and brisk at the beginnin'.  You see,
I'd just read your wife's letter, and--er--well, of course, I
didn't know--just--you see, you and I had never met, and so--"

"Certainly, certainly.  I quite understand.  And, fool's errand or
not, I'm very glad I came here.  If you'll pardon my saying so, it
was worth the trip to get acquainted with you.  I hope, whatever
comes of the other thing, that our acquaintanceship will continue."

"Same here, same here.  Go right out the side door, Mr. Fosdick,
saves goin' through the office.  Good day, sir."

He watched the bulky figure of the New York banker tramping across
the yard between the piles of lumber.  A moment later he entered
the outer office.  Albert and Keeler were at their desks.  Captain
Zelotes approached the little bookkeeper.

"Labe," he queried, "there isn't anything particular you want me to
talk about just now, is there?"

Lahan looked up in surprise from his figuring.

"Why--why, no, Cap'n Lote, don't know's there is," he said.  "Don't
know's there is, not now, no, no, no."

His employer nodded.  "Good!" he exclaimed.  "Then I'm goin' back
inside there and sit down and rest my chin for an hour, anyhow.
I've talked so much to-day that my jaws squeak.  Don't disturb me
for anything short of a fire or a mutiny."



CHAPTER XII


He was not disturbed and that evening, after supper was over, he
was ready to talk again.  He and Albert sat together in the sitting
room--Mrs. Snow and Rachel were in the kitchen washing dishes--and
Captain Zelotes told his grandson as much as he thought advisable
to tell of his conversation with the Honorable Fletcher Fosdick.
At first Albert was inclined to rebel at the idea of permitting his
letters to Madeline to be read by the latter's parents, but at
length he agreed.

"I'll do it because it may make it easier for her," he said.
"She'll have a dreadful time, I suppose, with that unreasonable
mother of hers.  But, by George, Grandfather," he exclaimed, "isn't
she splendid, though!"

"Who?  Mrs. Fosdick?"

"No, of course not," indignantly.  "Madeline.  Isn't she splendid
and fine and loyal!  I want you to know her, Grandfather, you and
Grandmother."

"Um-hm.  Well, we'll hope to, some day.  Now, son, I'm goin' to ask
for another promise.  It may seem a hard one to make, but I'm
askin' you to make it.  I want you to give me your word that, no
matter what happens or how long you have to wait, you and Madeline
won't get married without tellin' her folks and yours beforehand.
You won't run away and marry.  Will you promise me that?"

Albert looked at him.  This WAS a hard promise to make.  In their
talks beneath the rainbows, whenever he and Madeline had referred
to the future and its doubts, they had always pushed those doubts
aside with vague hints of an elopement.  If the unreasonableness of
parents and grandparents should crowd them too far, they had always
as a last resort, the solution of their problem by way of a runaway
marriage.  And now Captain Zelotes was asking him to give up this
last resort.

The captain, watching him keenly, divined what was in his
grandson's mind.

"Think it over, Al," he said kindly.  "Don't answer me now, but
think it over, and to-morrow mornin' tell me how you feel about
it."  He hesitated a moment and then added:  "You know your
grandmother and I, we--well, we have maybe cause to be a little
mite prejudiced against this elopin' business."

So Albert thought, and the next morning, as the pair were walking
together to the office, he spoke his thought.  Captain Zelotes had
not mentioned the subject.

"Grandfather," said Albert, with some embarrassment, "I'm going to
give you that promise."

His grandfather, who had been striding along, his heavy brows drawn
together and his glance fixed upon the frozen ground beneath his
feet, looked up.

"Eh?" he queried, uncomprehendingly.

"You asked me last night to promise you something, you know. . . .
You asked me to think it over.  I have, and I'm going to promise
you that--Madeline and I won't marry without first telling you."

Captain Zelotes stopped in his stride; then he walked on again.

"Thank you, Al," he said quietly.  "I hoped you'd see it that way."

"Yes--yes, I--I do.  I don't want to bring any more--trouble of
that kind to you and Grandmother. . . .  It seems to me that you--
that you have had too much already."

"Thank you, son. . . .  Much obliged."

The captain's tone was almost gruff and that was his only reference
to the subject of the promise; but somehow Albert felt that at that
moment he and his grandfather were closer together, were nearer to
a mutual understanding and mutual appreciation than they had ever
been before.

To promise, however, is one thing, to fulfill the obligation
another.  As the days passed Albert found his promise concerning
letter-writing very, very hard to keep.  When, each evening he sat
down at the table in his room to pour out his soul upon paper it
was a most unsatisfactory outpouring.  The constantly enforced
recollection that whatever he wrote would be subject to the
chilling glance of the eye of Fosdick mater was of itself a check
upon the flow.  To write a love letter to Madeline had hitherto
been a joy, a rapture, to fill pages and pages a delight.  Now,
somehow, these pages were hard to fill.  Omitting the very things
you were dying to say, the precious, the intimate things--what was
there left?  He and she had, at their meetings and in their former
correspondence, invented many delightful little pet names for each
other.  Now those names were taboo; or, at any rate, they might as
well be.  The thought of Mrs. Fosdick's sniff of indignant disgust
at finding her daughter referred to as some one's ownest little
rosebud withered that bud before it reached the paper.

And Madeline's letters to him were quite as unsatisfactory.  They
were lengthy, but oh, so matter of fact!  Saharas of fact without
one oasis of sentiment.  She was well and she had done this and
that and had been to see such and such plays and operas.  Father
was well and very busy.  Mother, too, was well, so was Googoo--but
these last two bits of news failed to comfort him as they perhaps
should.  He could only try to glean between the lines, and as Mrs.
Fosdick had raked between those lines before him, the gleaning was
scant picking indeed.

He found himself growing disconsolate and despondent.  Summer
seemed ages away.  And when at last it should come--what would
happen then?  He could see her only when properly chaperoned, only
when Mother, and probably Googoo, were present.  He flew for
consolation to the Muse and the Muse refused to console.  The poems
he wrote were "blue" and despairing likewise.  Consequently they
did not sell.  He was growing desperate, ready for anything.  And
something came.  Germany delivered to our Government its arrogant
mandate concerning unlimited submarine warfare.  A long-suffering
President threw patience overboard and answered that mandate in
unmistakable terms.  Congress stood at his back and behind them a
united and indignant people.  The United States declared war upon
the Hun.

South Harniss, like every other community, became wildly excited.
Captain Zelotes Snow's gray eyes flashed fiery satisfaction.  The
flags at the Snow place and at the lumber yard flew high night and
day.  He bought newspapers galore and read from them aloud at
meals, in the evenings, and before breakfast.  Issachar, as usual,
talked much and said little.  Laban Keeler's comments were pithy
and dryly pointed.  Albert was very quiet.

But one forenoon he spoke.  Captain Lote was in the inner office,
the morning newspaper in his hand, when his grandson entered and
closed the door behind him.  The captain looked up.

"Well, Al, what is it?" he asked.

Albert came over and stood beside the desk.  The captain, after a
moment's scrutiny of the young man's face, put down his newspaper.

"Well, Al?" he said, again.

Albert seemed to find it hard to speak.

"Grandfather," he began, "I--I--Grandfather, I have come to ask a
favor of you."

The captain nodded, slowly, his gaze fixed upon his grandson's
face.

"All right; heave ahead," he said quietly.

"Grandfather, you and I have had a four years' agreement to work
together in this office.  It isn't up yet, but--but I want to break
it.  I want you to let me off."

"Humph! . . .  Let you off, eh? . . .  What for?"

"That's what I came here to tell you.  Grandfather, I can't stay
here--now.  I want to enlist."

Captain Zelotes did not answer.  His hand moved upward and pulled
at his beard.

"I want to enlist," repeated Albert.  "I can't stand it another
minute.  I must.  If it hadn't been for you and our promise and--
and Madeline, I think I should have joined the Canadian Army a year
or more ago.  But now that we have gone into the war, I CAN'T stay
out.  Grandfather, you don't want me to, do you?  Of course you
don't."

His grandfather appeared to ponder.

"If you can wait a spell," he said slowly, "I might be able to fix
it so's you can get a chance for an officer's commission.  I'd
ought to have some pull somewheres, seems so."

Albert sniffed impatient disgust.  "I don't want to get a
commission--in that way," he declared.

"Humph!  You'll find there's plenty that do, I shouldn't wonder."

"Perhaps, but I'm not one of them.  And I don't care so much for a
commission, unless I can earn it.  And I don't want to stay here
and study for it.  I want to go now.  I want to get into the thing.
I don't want to wait."

Captain Lote leaned forward.  His gray eyes snapped.

"Want to fight, do you?" he queried.

"You bet I do!"

"All right, my boy, then go--and fight.  I'd be ashamed of myself
if I held you back a minute.  Go and fight--and fight hard.  I only
wish to God I was young enough to go with you."



CHAPTER XIII


And so, in this unexpected fashion, came prematurely the end of the
four year trial agreement between Albert Speranza and Z. Snow and
Co.  Of course neither Captain Zelotes nor Albert admitted that it
had ended.  Each professed to regard the break as merely temporary.

"You'll be back at that desk in a little while, Al," said the
captain, "addin' up figgers and tormentin' Issy."  And Albert's
reply was invariably, "Why, of course, Grandfather."

He had dreaded his grandmother's reception of the news of his
intended enlistment.  Olive worshiped her daughter's boy and,
although an ardent patriot, was by no means as fiercely belligerent
as her husband.  She prayed each night for the defeat of the Hun,
whereas Captain Lote was for licking him first and praying
afterwards.  Albert feared a scene; he feared that she might be
prostrated when she learned that he was to go to war.  But she bore
it wonderfully well, and as for the dreaded "scene," there was
none.

"Zelotes says he thinks it's the right thing for you to do, Albert,"
she said, "so I suppose I ought to think so, too.  But, oh, my dear,
DO you really feel that you must?  I--it don't seem as I could bear
to . . . but there, I mustn't talk so.  It ain't a mite harder for
me than it is for thousands of women all over this world. . . .  And
perhaps the government folks won't take you, anyway.  Rachel said
she read in the Item about some young man over in Bayport who was
rejected because he had fat feet.  She meant flat feet, I suppose,
poor thing.  Oh, dear me, I'm laughin', and it seems wicked to laugh
a time like this.  And when I think of you goin', Albert, I--I . . .
but there, I promised Zelotes I wouldn't. . . .  And they MAY not
take you. . . .  But oh, of course they will, of course they
will! . . .  I'm goin' to make you a chicken pie for dinner to-day;
I know how you like it. . . .  If only they MIGHT reject you! . . .
But there, I said I wouldn't and I won't."

Rachel Ellis's opinion on the subject and her way of expressing
that opinion were distinctly her own.  Albert arose early in the
morning following the announcement of his decision to enter the
service.  He had not slept well; his mind was too busy with
problems and speculations to resign itself to sleep.  He had tossed
about until dawn and had then risen and sat down at the table in
his bedroom to write Madeline of the step he had determined to
take.  He had not written her while he was considering that step.
He felt, somehow, that he alone with no pressure from without
should make the decision.  Now that it was made, and irrevocably
made, she must of course be told.  Telling her, however, was not an
easy task.  He was sure she would agree that he had done the right
thing, the only thing, but--

"It is going to be very hard for you, dear," he wrote, heedless of
the fact that Mrs. Fosdick's censorious eye would see and condemn
the "dear."  "It is going to be hard for both of us.  But I am sure
you will feel as I do that I COULDN'T do anything else.  I am young
and strong and fit and I am an American.  I MUST go.  You see it,
don't you, Madeline.  I can hardly wait until your letter comes
telling me that you feel I did just the thing you would wish me to
do."

He hesitated and then, even more regardless of the censor, added
the quotation which countless young lovers were finding so apt just
then:


     "I could not love thee, dear, so much,
        Loved I not honor more."


So when, fresh from the intimacy of this communication with his
adored and with the letter in his hand, he entered the sitting-room
at that early hour he was not overjoyed to find the housekeeper
there ahead of him.  And her first sentence showed that she had
been awaiting his coming.

"Good mornin', Albert," she said.  "I heard you stirrin' 'round up
in your room and I came down here so's you and I could talk
together for a minute without anybody's disturbin' us. . . .
Humph!  I guess likely you didn't sleep any too well last night,
did you?"

Albert shook his head.  "Not too well, Rachel," he replied.

"I shouldn't wonder.  Well, I doubt if there was too much sleep
anywheres in this house last night.  So you're really goin' to war,
are you, Albert?"

"Yes.  If the war will let me I certainly am."

"Dear, dear! . . .  Well, I--I think it's what Robert Penfold would
have done if he was in your place.  I've been goin' over it and
goin' over it half the night, myself, and I've come to that
conclusion.  It's goin' to be awful hard on your grandma and
grandfather and me and Labe, all us folks here at home, but I guess
it's the thing you'd ought to do, the Penfold kind of thing."

Albert smiled.  "I'm glad you think so, Rachel," he said.

"Well, I do, and if I'm goin' to tell the truth I might as well say
I tried terrible hard to find some good reasons for thinkin'
'twan't.  I did SO!  But the only good reasons I could scare up for
makin' you stay to home was because home was safe and comf'table
and where you was goin' wan't.  And that kind of reasonin' might do
fust-rate for a passel of clams out on the flats, but it wouldn't
be much credit to decent, self-respectin' humans.  When General
Rolleson came to that island and found his daughter and Robert
Penfold livin' there in that house made out of pearls he'd built
for her--  Wan't that him all over!  Another man, the common run
of man, would have been satisfied to build her a house out of wood
and lucky to get that, but no, nothin' would do him but pearls,
and if they'd have been di'monds he'd have been better satisfied.
Well. . . .  Where was I? . . .  Oh yes!  When General Rolleson came
there and says to his daughter, 'Helen, you come home along of me,'
and she says, 'No, I shan't leave him,' meanin' Robert Penfold, you
understand--  When she says that did Robert Penfold say, 'That's the
talk!  Put that in your pipe, old man, and smoke it?'  No, SIR, he
didn't!  He says, 'Helen, you go straight home along with your pa
and work like fury till you find out who forged that note and laid
it onto me.  You find that out,' he says, 'and then you can come
fetch me and not afore.'  That's the kind of man HE was!  And they
sailed off and left him behind."

Albert shook his head.  He had heard only about half of the
housekeeper's story.  "Pretty rough on him, I should say," he
commented, absently.

"I GUESS 'twas rough on him, poor thing!  But 'twas his duty and so
he done it.  It was rough on Helen, havin' to go and leave him, but
'twas rougher still on him.  It's always roughest, seems to me,"
she added, "on the ones that's left behind.  Those that go have
somethin' to take up their minds and keep 'em from thinkin' too
much.  The ones that stay to home don't have much to do EXCEPT
think.  I hope you don't get the notion that I feel your part of it
is easy, Al.  Only a poor, crazy idiot could read the papers these
days and feel that any part of this war was EASY!  It's awful, but--
but it WILL keep you too busy to think, maybe."

"I shouldn't wonder, Rachel.  I understand what you mean."

"We're all goin' to miss you, Albert.  This house is goin' to be
a pretty lonesome place, I cal'late.  Your grandma'll miss you
dreadful and so will I, but--but I have a notion that your
grandpa's goin' to miss you more'n anybody else."

He shook his head.  "Oh, not as much as all that, Rachel," he said.
"He and I have been getting on much better than we used to and we
have come to understand each other better, but he is still
disappointed in me.  I'm afraid I don't count for much as a
business man, you see; and, besides, Grandfather can never quite
forget that I am the son of what he calls a Portygee play actor."

Mrs. Ellis looked at him earnestly.  "He's forgettin' it better
every day, Albert," she said.  "I do declare I never believed
Capt'n Lote Snow could forget it the way he's doin'.  And you--
well, you've forgot a whole lot, too.  Memory's a good thing, the
land knows," she added, sagely, "but a nice healthy forgetery is
worth consider'ble--some times and in some cases."

Issachar Price's comments on his fellow employee's decision to
become a soldier were pointed.  Issy was disgusted.

"For thunder sakes, Al," he demanded, "'tain't true that you've
enlisted to go to war and fight them Germans, is it?"

Albert smiled.  "I guess it is, Issy," he replied.

"Well, by crimus!"

"Somebody had to go, you see, Is."

"Well, by crimustee!"

"What's the matter, Issy?  Don't you approve?"

"Approve!  No, by crimus, I don't approve!  I think it's a divil of
a note, that's what I think."

"Why?"

"WHY?  Who's goin' to do the work in this office while you're gone?
Labe and me, that's who; and I'll do the heft of it.  Slavin'
myself half to death as 'tis and now--  Oh, by crimustee!  This war
is a darned nuisance.  It hadn't ought to be allowed.  There'd
ought to be a law against it."

But of all the interviews which followed Albert's decision the most
surprising and that which he was the least likely to forget was his
interview with Laban Keeler.  It took place on the evening of the
third day following the announcement of his intention to enlist.
All that day, and indeed for several days, Albert had noted in the
little bookkeeper certain symptoms, familiar symptoms they were and
from experience the young man knew what they portended.  Laban was
very nervous, his fingers twitched as he wrote, occasionally he
rose from his chair and walked up and down the room, he ran his
hand through his scanty hair, he was inclined to be irritable--that
is, irritable for him.  Albert had noted the symptoms and was
sorry.  Captain Zelotes noted them and frowned and pulled his
beard.

"Al," he said to his grandson, "if you can put off goin' up to
enlist for a little spell, a few days, I wish you would.  Labe's
gettin' ready to go on one of his vacations."

Albert nodded.  "I'm afraid he is," he said.

"Oh, it's as sartin as two and two makes four.  I've lived with him
too many years not to know the signs.  And I did hope," he added,
regretfully, "that maybe he was tryin' to break off.  It's been a
good long spell, an extry long spell, since he had his last spree.
Ah hum! it's a pity a good man should have that weak spot in him,
ain't it?  But if you could hang around a few more days, while the
vacation's goin' on, I'd appreciate it, Al.  I kind of hate to be
left here alone with nobody but Issachar to lean on.  Issy's a good
deal like a post in some ways, especially in the makeup of his
head, but he's too ricketty to lean on for any length of time."

That evening Albert went to the post-office for the mail.  On his
way back as he passed the dark corner by the now closed and
shuttered moving-picture theater he was hailed in a whisper.

"Al," said a voice, "Al."

Albert turned and peered into the deep shadow of the theater
doorway.  In the summer this doorway was a blaze of light and
gaiety; now it was cold and bleak and black enough.  From the
shadow a small figure emerged on tiptoe.

"Al," whispered Mr. Keeler.  "That's you, ain't it?  Yes, yes--yes,
yes, yes--I thought 'twas, I thought so."

Albert was surprised.  For one thing it was most unusual to see the
little bookkeeper abroad after nine-thirty.  His usual evening
procedure, when not on a vacation, was to call upon Rachel Ellis at
the Snow place for an hour or so and then to return to his room
over Simond's shoe store, which room he had occupied ever since the
building was erected.

There he read, so people said, until eleven sharp, when his lamp was
extinguished.  During or at the beginning of the vacation periods he
usually departed for some unknown destination, destinations which,
apparently, varied.  He had been seen, hopelessly intoxicated, in
Bayport, in Ostable, in Boston, once in Providence.  When he
returned he never seemed to remember exactly where he had been.
And, as most people were fond of and pitied him, few questions were
asked.

"Why, Labe!" exclaimed Albert.  "Is that you?  What's the matter?"

"Busy, are you, Al?" queried Laban.  "In a hurry, eh?  Are you?  In
a hurry, Al, eh?"

"Why no, not especially."

"Could you--could you spare me two or three minutes?  Two or three
minutes--yes, yes?  Come up to my room, could you--could you, Al?"

"Yes indeed.  But what is it, Labe?"

"I want to talk.  Want to talk, I do.  Yes, yes, yes.  Saw you go
by and I've been waitin' for you.  Waitin'--yes, I have--yes."

He seized his assistant by the arm and led him across the road
toward the shoe store.  Albert felt the hand on his arm tremble
violently.

"Are you cold, Labe?" he asked.  "What makes you shiver so?"

"Eh?  Cold?  No, I ain't cold--no, no, no.  Come, Al, come."

Albert sniffed suspiciously, but no odor of alcohol rewarded the
sniff.  Neither was there any perfume of peppermint, Mr. Keeler's
transparent camouflage at a vacation's beginning.  And Laban was
not humming the refrain glorifying his "darling hanky-panky."
Apparently he had not yet embarked upon the spree which Captain
Lote had pronounced imminent.  But why did he behave so queerly?

"I ain't the way you think, Al," declared the little man, divining
his thought.  "I'm just kind of shaky and nervous, that's all.
That's all, that's all, that's all.  Yes, yes.  Come, come!  COME!"

The last "come" burst from him in an agony of impatience.  Albert
hastened up the narrow stairs, Laban leading the way.  The latter
fumbled with a key, his companion heard it rattling against the
keyhole plate.  Then the door opened.  There was a lamp, its wick
turned low, burning upon the table in the room.  Mr. Keeler turned
it up, making a trembly job of the turning.  Albert looked about
him; he had never been in that room before.

It was a small room and there was not much furniture in it.  And it
was a neat room, for the room of an old bachelor who was his own
chambermaid.  Most things seemed to have places where they belonged
and most of them appeared to be in those places.  What impressed
Albert even more was the number of books.  There were books
everywhere, in the cheap bookcase, on the pine shelf between the
windows, piled in the corners, heaped on the table beside the lamp.
They were worn and shabby volumes for the most part, some with but
half a cover remaining, some with none.  He picked up one of the
latter.  It was Locke on The Human Understanding; and next it, to
his astonishment, was Alice's Adventures in Wonderland.

Mr. Keeler looked over his shoulder and, for an instant, the
whimsical smile which was characteristic of him curved his lip.

"Philosophy, Al," he observed.  "If Locke don't suit you try the
'mad hatter' feller.  I get consider'ble comfort out of the hatter,
myself.  Do you remember when the mouse was tellin' the story about
the three sisters that lived in the well?  He said they lived on
everything that began with M.  Alice says 'Why with an M?'  And the
hatter, or the March hare, I forget which 'twas, says prompt, 'Why
not?' . . .  Yes, yes, why not? that's what he said. . . .  There's
some philosophy in that, Al.  Why does a hen go across the road?
Why not?  Why is Labe Keeler a disgrace to all his friends and the
town he lives in?  Why not? . . .  Eh? . . .  Yes, yes.  That's it--
why not?"

He smiled again, but there was bitterness and not humor in the
smile.  Albert put a hand on his shoulder.

"Why, Labe," he asked, in concern, "what is it?"

Laban turned away.

"Don't mind, me, Al," he said, hurriedly.  "I mean don't mind if I
act funny.  I'm--I'm kind of--of--  Oh, good Lord A'mighty, DON'T
look at me like that! . . .  I beg your pardon, Al.  I didn't mean
to bark like a dog at you.  No, I didn't--no, no.  Forgive me, will
you?  Will you, Al, eh?"

"Of course I will.  But what is the matter, Labe?  Sit down and
tell me about it."

Instead of sitting the little bookkeeper began to walk up and down.

"Don't mind me, Al," he said, hurriedly.  "Don't mind me.  Let me
go my own gait.  My own gait--yes, yes.  You see, Al, I--I'm tryin'
to enlist, same as you're goin' to do, and--and MY fight's begun
already.  Yes indeed--yes, yes--it has so."

Albert was more astonished than ever.  There was no smell of
alcohol, and Keeler had declared that he had not been drinking;
but--

"You're going to ENLIST?" repeated Albert.  "YOU?  Why, Labe, what--"

Laban laughed nervously.  "Not to kill the Kaiser," he replied.
"No, no, not that--not exactly.  I'd like to, only I wouldn't be
much help that way.  But--but Al, I--I want to do somethin'.  I--
I'd like to try to show--I'd like to be an American, a decent
American, and the best way to begin, seems to me, is to try and be
a man, a decent man.  Eh?  You understand, I--I--  Oh, Lord, what a
mess I am makin' of this!  I--I--  Al," turning and desperately
waving his hands, "I'm goin' to try to swear off.  Will you help
me?"

Albert's answer was enthusiastic.  "You bet I will!" he exclaimed.
Keeler smiled pathetically.

"It's goin' to be some job, I cal'late," he said.  "Some job, yes,
yes.  But I'm goin' to try it, Al.  I read in the papers 'tother
day that America needed every man.  Then you enlisted, Al,--or
you're goin' to enlist.  It set me to thinkin' I'd try to enlist,
too.  For the duration of the war, eh?  Yes, yes."

"Good for you, Labe!  Bully!"

Laban held up a protesting hand.  "Don't hurrah yet, Al," he said.
"This ain't the first time I've tried it.  I've swore off a dozen
times in the last fifteen years.  I've promised Rachel and broke
the promise over and over again.  Broke my promise to her, the best
woman in the world.  Shows what I am, what sort I am, don't it, Al?
Yes, it does,--yes, yes.  And she's stuck by me, too, Lord knows
why.  Last time I broke it I said I'd never promise her again.  Bad
enough to be a common drunk without bein' a liar--yes, yes.  But
this is a little different.  Seems to me--seems so."

He began his pacing up and down again.

"Seems different, somehow," he went on.  "Seems like a new chance.
I want to do somethin' for Uncle Sam.  I--I'd like to try and
enlist for the duration of the war--swear off for that long,
anyhow.  Then, maybe, I'd be able to keep on for life, you know--
duration of Labe Keeler, eh?  Yes, yes, yes.  But I could begin for
just the war, couldn't I?  Maybe, 'twould fool me into thinkin'
that was easier."

"Of course, Labe.  It's a good idea."

"Maybe; and maybe it's a fool one.  But I'm goin' to try it.  I AM
tryin' it, have been all day."

He paused, drew a shaking hand across his forehead and then asked,
"Al, will you help me?  I asked you up here hopin' you would.  Will
you, Al, eh?  Will you?"

Albert could not understand how he could possibly help another man
keep the pledge, but his promise was eagerly given.

"Certainly, Labe," he said.

"Thanks . . . thank you, Al. . . .  And now will you do something
for me--a favor?"

"Gladly.  What is it?"

Laban did not answer at once.  He appeared to be on the point of
doing so, but to be struggling either to find words or to overcome
a tremendous reluctance.  When he did speak the words came in a
burst.

"Go down stairs," he cried.  "Down those stairs you came up.  At
the foot of 'em, in a kind of cupboard place, under 'em, there's--
there probably is a jug, a full jug.  It was due to come by express
to-day and I cal'late it did, cal'late Jim Young fetched it down
this afternoon.  I--I could have looked for myself and seen if
'twas there," he added, after a momentary hesitation, "but--but I
didn't dare to.  I was afraid I'd--I'd--"

"All right, Labe.  I understand.  What do you want me to do with it
if it is there?"

"I want you--I want you to--to--"  The little bookkeeper seemed to
be fighting another internal battle between inclination and
resolution.  The latter won, for he finished with, "I want you to
take it out back of the buildin' and--and empty it.  That's what I
want you to do, empty it, Al, every drop. . . .  And, for the
Almighty's sake, go quick," he ordered, desperately, "or I'll tell
you not to before you start.  Go!"

Albert went.  He fumbled in the cupboard under the stairs, found
the jug--a large one and heavy--and hastened out into the night
with it in his hands.  Behind the shoe store, amid a heap of old
packing boxes and other rubbish, he emptied it.  The process was
rather lengthy and decidedly fragrant.  As a finish he smashed the
jug with a stone.  Then he climbed the stairs again.

Laban was waiting for him, drops of perspiration upon his forehead.

"Was--was it there?" he demanded.

Albert nodded.

"Yes, yes.  'Twas there, eh?  And did you--did you--?"

"Yes, I did, jug and all."

"Thank you, Al . . . thank you . . .  I--I've been trying to muster
up spunk enough to do it myself, but--but I swan I couldn't.  I
didn't dast to go nigh it . . .  I'm a fine specimen, ain't I,
now?" he added, with a twisted smile.  "Some coward, eh?  Yes, yes.
Some coward."

Albert, realizing a little of the fight the man was making, was
affected by it.  "You're a brick, Labe," he declared, heartily.
"And as for being a coward--  Well, if I am half as brave when my
turn comes I shall be satisfied."

Laban shook his head.  "I don't know how scared I'd be of a German
bombshell," he said, "but I'm everlastin' sure I wouldn't run from
it for fear of runnin' towards it, and that's how I felt about that
jug. . . .  Yes, yes, yes.  I did so . . .  I'm much obliged to
you, Al.  I shan't forget it--no, no.  I cal'late you can trot
along home now, if you want to.  I'm pretty safe--for to-night,
anyhow.  Guess likely the new recruit won't desert afore morning."

But Albert, watching him intently, refused to go.

"I'm going to stay for a while, Labe," he said.  "I'm not a bit
sleepy, really.  Let's have a smoke and talk together.  That is, of
course, unless you want to go to bed."

Mr. Keeler smiled his twisted smile.  "I ain't crazy to," he said.
"The way I feel now I'd get to sleep about week after next.  But I
hadn't ought to keep you up, Al."

"Rubbish! I'm not sleepy, I tell you.  Sit down.  Have a cigar.
Now what shall we talk about?  How would books do?  What have you
been reading lately, Labe?"

They smoked and talked books until nearly two.  Then Laban insisted
upon his guest departing.  "I'm all right, Al" he declared,
earnestly.  "I am honest--yes, yes, I am.  I'll go to sleep like a
lamb, yes indeed."

"You'll be at the office in the morning, won't you, Labe?"

The little bookkeeper nodded.  "I'll be there," he said.  "Got to
answer roll call the first mornin' after enlistment.  Yes, yes.
I'll be there, Al."

He was there, but he did not look as if his indulgence in the lamb-
like sleep had been excessive.  He was so pale and haggard that his
assistant was alarmed.

"You're not sick, are you, Labe?" he asked, anxiously.  Laban shook
his head.

"No," he said.  "No, I ain't sick.  Been doin' picket duty up and
down the room since half past three, that's all.  Um-hm, that's
all.  Say, Al, if General what's-his-name--er--von Hindenburg--is
any harder scrapper than old Field Marshal Barleycorn he's a pretty
tough one.  Say, Al, you didn't say anything about--about my--er--
enlistin' to Cap'n Lote, did you?  I meant to ask you not to."

"I didn't, Labe.  I thought you might want it kept a secret."

"Um-hm.  Better keep it in the ranks until we know how this first--
er--skirmish is comin' out.  Yes, yes.  Better keep it that way.
Um-hm."

All day he stuck manfully at his task and that evening, immediately
after supper, Albert went to the room over the shoe store, found
him there and insisted upon his coming over to call upon Rachel.
He had not intended doing so.

"You see, Al," he explained, "I'm--I'm kind of--er--shaky and
Rachel will be worried, I'm afraid.  She knows me pretty well and
she'll cal'late I'm just gettin' ready to--to bust loose again."

Albert interrupted.  "No, she won't, Laban," he said.  "We'll show
her that you're not."

"You won't say anything to her about my--er--enlistin', Al?  Don't.
No, no.  I've promised her too many times--and broke the promises.
If anything should come of this fight of mine I'd rather she'd find
it out for herself.  Better to surprise her than to disapp'int her.
Yes, yes, lots better."

Albert promised not to tell Rachel and so Laban made his call.
When it was over the young man walked home with him and the pair
sat and talked until after midnight, just as on the previous night.
The following evening it was much the same, except that, as Mr.
Keeler pronounced himself more than usually "shaky" and expressed a
desire to "keep movin'," they walked half way to Orham and back
before parting.  By the end of the week Laban declared the fight
won--for the time.

"You've pulled me through the fust tussle, Al," he said.  "I shan't
desert now, not till the next break-out, anyhow.  I cal'late it'll
get me harder than ever then.  Harder than ever--yes, yes.  And you
won't be here to help me, neither."

"Never mind; I shall be thinking of you, Labe.  And I know you're
going to win.  I feel it in my bones."

"Um-hm. . . .  Yes, yes, yes. . .  In your bones, eh?  Well, MY
bones don't seem to feel much, except rheumatics once in a while.
I hope yours are better prophets, but I wouldn't want to bet too
high on it.  No, I wouldn't--no, no.  However, we'll do our best,
and they say angels can't do any more--though they'd probably do it
in a different way . . . some different. . . .  Um-hm. . . .  Yes,
indeed."

Two letters came to Albert before that week ended.  The first was
from Madeline.  He had written her of his intention to enlist and
this was her reply.  The letter had evidently been smuggled past
the censor, for it contained much which Mrs. Fosdick would have
blue-penciled.  Its contents were a blend of praise and blame, of
exaltation and depression.  He was a hero, and so brave, and she
was so proud of him.  It was wonderful his daring to go, and just
what she would have expected of her hero.  If only she might see
him in his uniform.  So many of the fellows she knew had enlisted.
They were wonderfully brave, too, although of course nothing like
as wonderful as her own etcetera, etcetera.  She had seen some of
THEM in their uniforms and they were PERFECTLY SPLENDID.  But they
were officers, or they were going to be.  Why wasn't he going to be
an officer?  It was so much nicer to be an officer.  And if he were
one he might not have to go away to fight nearly so soon.  Officers
stayed here longer and studied, you know.  Mother had said
something about "a common private," and she did not like it.  But
never mind, she would be just as proud no matter what he was.  And
she should dream of him and think of him always and always.  And
perhaps he might be so brave and wonderful that he would be given
one of those war crosses, the Croix de Guerre or something.  She
was sure he would.  But oh, no matter what happened, he must not go
where it was TOO dangerous.  Suppose he should be wounded.  Oh,
suppose, SUPPOSE he should be killed.  What would she do then?
What would become of her?  MUST he go, after all?  Couldn't he stay
at home and study or something, for a while, you know?  She should
be so lonely after he was gone.  And so frightened and so anxious.
And he wouldn't forget her, would he, no matter where he went?
Because she never, never, never would forget him for a moment.  And
he must write every day.  And--

The letter was fourteen pages long.

The other letter was a surprise.  It was from Helen.  The Reverend
Mr. Kendall had been told of Albert's intended enlistment and had
written his daughter.


So you are going into the war, Albert (she wrote).  I am not
surprised because I expected you would do just that.  It is what
all of us would like to do, I'm sure, and you were always anxious
to go, even before the United States came in.  So I am writing this
merely to congratulate you and to wish you the very best of good
luck.  Father says you are not going to try for a commission but
intend enlisting as a private.  I suppose that is because you think
you may get to the actual fighting sooner.  I think I understand
and appreciate that feeling too, but are you sure it is the best
plan?  You want to be of the greatest service to the country and
with your education and brains--  This ISN'T flattery, because it
is true--don't you think you might help more if you were in command
of men?  Of course I don't know, being only a girl, but I have been
wondering.  No doubt you know best and probably it is settled
before this; at any rate, please don't think that I intend butting
in.  "Butting in" is not at all a proper expression for a
schoolmarm to use but it is a relief to be human occasionally.
Whatever you do I am sure will be the right thing and I know all
your friends are going to be very, very proud of you.  I shall hear
of you through the people at home, I know, and I shall be anxious
to hear.  I don't know what I shall do to help the cause, but I
hope to do something.  A musket is prohibitive to females but the
knitting needle is ours and I CAN handle that, if I do say it.  And
I MAY go in for Red Cross work altogether.  But I don't count much,
and you men do, and this is your day.  Please, for the sake of your
grandparents and all your friends, don't take unnecessary chances.
I can see your face as you read that and think that I am a silly
idiot.  I'm not and I mean what I say.  You see I know YOU and I
know you will not be content to do the ordinary thing.  We want you
to distinguish yourself, but also we want you to come back whole
and sound, if it is possible.  We shall think of you a great deal.
And please, in the midst of the excitement of the BIG work you are
doing, don't forget us home folk, including your friend,

HELEN KENDALL.


Albert's feelings when he read this letter were divided.  He
enjoyed hearing from Helen.  The letter was just like herself,
sensible and good-humored and friendly.  There were no hysterics in
it and no heroics but he knew that no one except his grandparents
and Rachel and Laban--and, of course, his own Madeline--would think
of him oftener or be more anxious for his safety and welfare than
Helen.  He was glad she was his friend, very glad.  But he almost
wished she had not written.  He felt a bit guilty at having
received the letter.  He was pretty sure that Madeline would not
like the idea.  He was tempted to say nothing concerning it in his
next letter to his affianced, but that seemed underhanded and
cowardly, so he told her.  And in her next letter to him Madeline
made no reference at all to Helen or her epistle, so he knew she
was displeased.  And he was miserable in consequence.

But his misery did not last long.  The happenings which followed
crowded it from his mind, and from Madeline's also, for that
matter.  One morning, having told no one except his grandfather
of his intention, he took the morning train to Boston.  When he
returned the next day he was Uncle Sam's man, sworn in and
accepted.  He had passed the physical examination with flying
colors and the recruiting officers expressed themselves as being
glad to get him.  He was home for but one day leave, then he must
go to stay.  He had debated the question of going in for a
commission, but those were the early days of our participation in
the war and a Plattsburg training or at least some sort of military
education was almost an essential.  He did not want to wait; as he
had told his grandfather, he wanted to fight.  So he enlisted as a
private.

And when the brief leave was over he took the train for Boston,
no longer Alberto Miguel Carlos Speranza, South Harniss's Beau
Brummel, poet and Portygee, but Private Speranza, U.S.A.  The
farewells were brief and no one cried--much.  His grandmother
hugged and kissed him, Rachel looked very much as if she wanted to.
Laban and Issachar shook hands with him.

"Good luck to you, boy," said Mr. Keeler.  "All the luck there is."

"Same to you, old man," replied Albert.  Then, in a lower tone, he
added, "We'll fight it out together, eh?"

"We'll try.  Yes, yes.  We'll try.  So long, Al."

Issachar struck the reassuring note.  "Don't fret about things in
the office," he said.  "I'll look out for 'em long's I keep my
health."

"Be sure and keep that, Issy."

"You bet you!  Only thing that's liable to break it down is over-
work."

Captain Zelotes said very little.  "Write us when you can, Al," he
said.  "And come home whenever you get leave."

"You may be sure of that, Grandfather.  And after I get to camp
perhaps you can come and see me."

"Maybe so.  Will if I can. . . .  Well, Al, I . . . I. . . .  Good
luck to you, son."

"Thank you, Grandfather."

They shook hands.  Each looked as if there was more he would have
liked to say but found the saying hard.  Then the engine bell rang
and the hands fell apart.  The little group on the station platform
watched the train disappear.  Mrs. Snow and Rachel wiped their eyes
with their handkerchiefs.  Captain Zelotes gently patted his wife's
shoulder.

"The team's waitin', Mother," he said.  "Labe'll drive you and
Rachel home."

"But--but ain't you comin', too, Zelotes?" faltered Olive.  Her
husband shook his head.

"Not now, Mother," he answered.  "Got to go back to the office."

He stood for an instant looking at the faint smear of smoke above
the curve in the track.  Then, without another word, he strode off
in the direction of Z. Snow and Co.'s buildings.  Issachar Price
sniffed.

"Crimus," he whispered to Laban, as the latter passed him on the
way to where Jessamine, the Snow horse, was tied, "the old man
takes it cool, don't he!  I kind of imagined he'd be sort of shook
up by Al's goin' off to war, but he don't seem to feel it a mite."

Keeler looked at him in wonder.  Then he drew a long breath.

"Is," he said, slowly, "it is a mighty good thing for the Seven
Wise Men of Greece that they ain't alive now."

It was Issachar's turn to stare.  "Eh?" he queried.  "The Seven
Wise Men of Which?  Good thing for 'em they ain't alive?  What kind
of talk's that?  Why is it a good thing?"

Laban spoke over his shoulder.  "Because," he drawled, "if they was
alive now they'd be so jealous of you they'd commit suicide.  Yes,
they would. . . .  Yes, yes."

With which enigmatical remark he left Mr. Price and turned his
attention to the tethered Jessamine.

And then began a new period, a new life at the Snow place and in
the office of Z. Snow and Co.  Or, rather, life in the old house
and at the lumber and hardware office slumped back into the groove
in which it had run before the opera singer's son was summoned
from the New York school to the home and into the lives of his
grandparents.  Three people instead of four sat down at the breakfast
table and at dinner and at supper.  Captain Zelotes walked alone to
and from the office.  Olive Snow no longer baked and iced large
chocolate layer cakes because a certain inmate of her household was
so fond of them.  Rachel Ellis discussed Foul Play and Robert
Penfold with no one.  The house was emptier, more old-fashioned and
behind the times, more lonely--surprisingly empty and behind the
times and lonely.

The daily mails became matters of intense interest and expectation.
Albert wrote regularly and of course well and entertainingly.  He
described the life at the camp where he and the other recruits were
training, a camp vastly different from the enormous military towns
built later on for housing and training the drafted men.  He liked
the life pretty well, he wrote, although it was hard and a fellow
had precious little opportunity to be lazy.  Mistakes, too, were
unprofitable for the maker.  Captain Lote's eye twinkled when he
read that.

Later on he wrote that he had been made a corporal and his
grandmother, to whom a major general and a corporal were of equal
rank, rejoiced much both at home and in church after meeting was
over and friends came to hear the news.  Mrs. Ellis declared
herself not surprised.  It was the Robert Penfold in him coming
out, so she said.

A month or two later one of Albert's letters contained an
interesting item of news.  In the little spare time which military
life afforded him he continued to write verse and stories.  Now a
New York publisher, not one of the most prominent but a reputable
and enterprising one, had written him suggesting the collecting of
his poems and their publication in book form.  The poet himself
was, naturally, elated.

"Isn't it splendid!" he wrote.  "The best part of it, of course, is
that he asked to publish, I did not ask him.  Please send me my
scrapbook and all loose manuscript.  When the book will come out
I'm sure I don't know.  In fact it may never come out, we have not
gotten as far as terms and contracts yet, but I feel we shall.
Send the scrapbook and manuscript right away, PLEASE."

They were sent.  In his next letter Albert was still enthusiastic.

"I have been looking over my stuff," he wrote, "and some of it is
pretty good, if you don't mind my saying so.  Tell Grandfather that
when this book of mine is out and selling I may be able to show him
that poetry making isn't a pauper's job, after all.  Of course I
don't know how much it will sell--perhaps not more than five or ten
thousand at first--but even at ten thousand at, say, twenty-five
cents royalty each, would be twenty-five hundred dollars, and
that's something.  Why, Ben Hur, the novel, you know, has sold a
million, I believe."

Mrs. Snow and Rachel were duly impressed by this prophecy of
affluence, but Captain Zelotes still played the skeptic.

"A million at twenty-five cents a piece!" exclaimed Olive.  "Why,
Zelotes, that's--that's an awful sight of money."

Mental arithmetic failing her, she set to work with a pencil and
paper and after a strenuous struggle triumphantly announced that it
came to two hundred and fifty thousand dollars.

"My soul and body!" she cried.  "Two hundred and fifty thousand
DOLLARS!  My SOUL, Zelotes!  Suppose--only suppose Albert's book
brought him in as much as that!"

Her husband shook his head.  "I can't, Olive," he said, without
looking up from his newspaper.  "My supposer wouldn't stand the
strain."

"But it might, Zelotes, it MIGHT.  Suppose it did, what would you
say then?"

The captain regarded her over the top of the Transcript.  "I
shouldn't say a word, Olive," he answered, solemnly.  "I should be
down sick by the time it got up as far as a thousand, and anything
past two thousand you could use to buy my tombstone with. . . .
There, there, Mother," he added, noticing the hurt look on her
face, "don't feel bad.  I'm only jokin'.  One of these days Al's
goin' to make a nice, comf'table livin' sellin' lumber and hardware
right here in South Harniss.  I can SEE that money in the offin'.
All this million or two that's comin' from poetry and such is out
of sight in the fog.  It may be there but--humph! well, I KNOW
where Z. Snow and Co. is located."

Olive was not entirely placated.  "I must say I think you're awful
discouragin' to the poor boy, Zelotes," she said.  Her husband put
down his paper.

"No, no, I ain't, Mother," he replied, earnestly.  "At least I
don't mean to be.  Way I look at it, this poetry-makin' and writin'
yarns and that sort of stuff is just part of the youngster's--er--
growin' up, as you might say.  Give him time he'll grow out of it,
same as I cal'late he will out of this girl business, this--er--
Madel--humph--er--ahem. . . .  Looks like a good day to-morrow,
don't it."

He pulled up suddenly, and with considerable confusion.  He had
kept the news of his grandson's infatuation and engagement even
from his wife.  No one in South Harniss knew of it, no one except
the captain.  Helen Kendall knew, but she was in Boston.

Rachel Ellis picked up the half knitted Red Cross mitten in her
lap.  "Well, I don't know whether he's right or you are, Cap'n
Lote," she said, with a sigh, "but this I do know--I wish this
awful war was over and he was back home again."

That remark ended the conversation.  Olive resumed her own knitting,
seeing it but indistinctly.  Her husband did not continue his
newspaper reading.  Instead he rose and, saying something about
cal'latin' he would go for a little walk before turning in, went out
into the yard.

But the war did not end, it went on; so too did the enlisting and
training.  In the early summer Albert came home for a two days'
leave.  He was broader and straighter and browner.  His uniform
became him and, more than ever, the eyes of South Harniss's
youthful femininity, native or imported, followed him as he walked
the village streets.  But the glances were not returned, not in
kind, that is.  The new Fosdick home, although completed, was not
occupied.  Mrs. Fosdick had, that summer, decided that her duties
as mover in goodness knows how many war work activities prevented
her taking her "usual summer rest."  Instead she and Madeline
occupied a rented villa at Greenwich, Connecticut, coming into town
for meetings of all sorts.  Captain Zelotes had his own suspicions
as to whether war work alone was the cause of the Fosdicks'
shunning of what was to have been their summer home, but he kept
those suspicions to himself.  Albert may have suspected also, but
he, too, said nothing.  The censored correspondence between
Greenwich and the training camp traveled regularly, and South
Harniss damsels looked and longed in vain.  He saw them, he bowed
to them, he even addressed them pleasantly and charmingly, but to
him they were merely incidents in his walks to and from the post-
office.  In his mind's eye he saw but one, and she, alas, was not
present in the flesh.

Then he returned to the camp where, later on, Captain Zelotes and
Olive visited him.  As they came away the captain and his grandson
exchanged a few significant words.

"It is likely to be almost any time, Grandfather," said Albert,
quietly.  "They are beginning to send them now, as you know by the
papers, and we have had the tip that our turn will be soon.  So--"

Captain Lote grasped the significance of the uncompleted sentence.

"I see, Al," he answered, "I see.  Well, boy, I--I--  Good luck."

"Good luck, Grandfather."

That was all, that and one more handclasp.  Our Anglo-Saxon
inheritance descends upon us in times like these.  The captain was
silent for most of the ride to the railroad station.

Then followed a long, significant interval during which there were
no letters from the young soldier.  After this a short reassuring
cablegram from "Somewhere in France."  "Safe.  Well," it read and
Olive Snow carried it about with her, in the bosom of her gown, all
that afternoon and put it upon retiring on her bureau top so that
she might see it the first thing in the morning.

Another long interval, then letters, the reassuring but so
tantalizingly unsatisfactory letters we American families were,
just at that time, beginning to receive.  Reading the newspapers
now had a personal interest, a terrifying, dreadful interest.  Then
the packing and sending of holiday boxes, over the contents of
which Olive and Rachel spent much careful planning and anxious
preparation.  Then another interval of more letters, letters which
hinted vaguely at big things just ahead.

Then no letter for more than a month.

And then, one noon, as Captain Zelotes returned to his desk after
the walk from home and dinner, Laban Keeler came in and stood
beside that desk.

The captain, looking up, saw the little bookkeeper's face.  "What
is it, Labe?" he asked, sharply.

Laban held a yellow envelope in his hand.

"It came while you were gone to dinner, Cap'n," he said.  "Ben
Kelley fetched it from the telegraph office himself.  He--he said
he didn't hardly want to take it to the house.  He cal'lated you'd
better have it here, to read to yourself, fust.  That's what he
said--yes, yes--that's what 'twas, Cap'n."

Slowly Captain Zelotes extended his hand for the envelope.  He did
not take his eyes from the bookkeeper's face.

"Ben--Ben, he told me what was in it, Cap'n Lote," faltered Laban.
"I--I don't know what to say to you, I don't--no, no."

Without a word the captain took the envelope from Keeler's fingers,
and tore it open.  He read the words upon the form within.

Laban leaned forward.

"For the Lord sakes, Lote Snow," he cried, in a burst of agony,
"why couldn't it have been some darn good-for-nothin' like me
instead--instead of him?  Oh, my God A'mighty, what a world this
is!  WHAT a world!"

Still Captain Zelotes said nothing.  His eyes were fixed upon the
yellow sheet of paper on the desk before him.  After a long minute
he spoke.

"Well," he said, very slowly, "well, Labe, there goes--there goes
Z. Snow and Company."



CHAPTER XIV


The telegram from the War Department was brief, as all such
telegrams were perforce obliged to be.  The Secretary of War,
through his representative, regretted to inform Captain Zelotes
Snow that Sergeant Albert Speranza had been killed in action upon a
certain day.  It was enough, however--for the time quite enough.
It was not until later that the little group of South Harniss
recovered sufficiently from the stunning effect of those few words
to think of seeking particulars.  Albert was dead; what did it
matter, then, to know how he died?

Olive bore the shock surprisingly well.  Her husband's fears for
her seemed quite unnecessary.  The Captain, knowing how she had
idolized her daughter's boy, had dreaded the effect which the news
might have upon her.  She was broken down by it, it is true, but
she was quiet and brave--astonishingly, wonderfully quiet and
brave.  And it was she, rather than her husband, who played the
part of the comforter in those black hours.

"He's gone, Zelotes," she said.  "It don't seem possible, I know,
but he's gone.  And he died doin' his duty, same as he would have
wanted to die if he'd known 'twas comin', poor boy.  So--so we must
do ours, I suppose, and bear up under it the very best we can.  It
won't be very long, Zelotes," she added.  "We're both gettin' old."

Captain Lote made no reply.  He was standing by the window of the
sitting-room looking out into the wet backyard across which the
wind-driven rain was beating in stormy gusts.

"We must be brave, Zelotes," whispered Olive, tremulously.  "He'd
want us to be and we MUST be."

He put his arm about her in a sudden heat of admiration.  "I'd be
ashamed not to be after seein' you, Mother," he exclaimed.

He went out to the barn a few moments later and Rachel, entering
the sitting-room, found Olive crumpled down in the big rocker in an
agony of grief.

"Oh, don't, Mrs. Snow, don't," she begged, the tears streaming down
her own cheeks.  "You mustn't give way to it like this; you mustn't."

Olive nodded.

"I know it, I know it," she admitted, chokingly, wiping her eyes
with a soaked handkerchief.  "I shan't, Rachel, only this once, I
promise you.  You see I can't.  I just can't on Zelotes's account.
I've got to bear up for his sake."

The housekeeper was surprised and a little indignant.

"For his sake!" she repeated.  "For mercy sakes why for his sake?
Is it any worse for him than 'tis for you."

"Oh, yes, yes, lots worse.  He won't say much, of course, bein'
Zelotes Snow, but you and I know how he's planned, especially these
last years, and how he's begun to count on--on Albert. . . .  No,
no, I ain't goin' to cry, Rachel, I ain't--I WON'T--but sayin' his
name, you know, kind of--"

"I know, I know.  Land sakes, DON'T I know!  Ain't I doin' it
myself?"

"Course you are, Rachel.  But we mustn't when Zelotes is around.
We women, we--well, times like these women HAVE to keep up.  What
would become of the men if we didn't?"

So she and Rachel "kept up" in public and when the captain was
present, and he for his part made no show of grief nor asked for
pity.  He was silent, talked little and to the callers who came
either at the house or office was uncomplaining.

"He died like a man," he told the Reverend Mr. Kendall when the
latter called.  "He took his chance, knowin' what that meant--"

"He was glad to take it," interrupted the minister.  "Proud and
glad to take it."

"Sartin.  Why not?  Wouldn't you or I have been glad to take ours,
if we could?"

"Well, Captain Snow, I am glad to find you so resigned."

Captain Zelotes looked at him.  "Resigned?" he repeated.  "What do
you mean by resigned?  Not to sit around and whimper is one thing--
any decent man or woman ought to be able to do that in these days;
but if by bein' resigned you mean I'm contented to have it so--
well, you're mistaken, that's all."

Only on one occasion, and then to Laban Keeler, did he open his
shell sufficiently to give a glimpse of what was inside.  Laban
entered the inner office that morning to find his employer sitting
in the desk chair, both hands jammed in his trousers' pockets and
his gaze fixed, apparently, upon the row of pigeon-holes.  When the
bookkeeper spoke to him he seemed to wake from a dream, for he
started and looked up.

"Cap'n Lote," began Keeler, "I'm sorry to bother you, but that last
carload of pine was--"

Captain Zelotes waved his hand, brushing the carload of pine out of
the conversation.

"Labe," he said, slowly, "did it seem to you that I was too hard on
him?"

Laban did not understand.  "Hard on him?" he repeated.  "I don't
know's I just get--"

"Hard on Al.  Did it seem to you as if I was a little too much of
the bucko mate to the boy?  Did I drive him too hard?  Was I
unreasonable?"

The answer was prompt.  "No, Cap'n Lote," replied Keeler.

"You mean that? . . .  Um-hm. . . .  Well, sometimes seems as if I
might have been.  You see, Labe, when he first come I--  Well, I
cal'late I was consider'ble prejudiced against him.  Account of his
father, you understand."

"Sartin.  Sure.  I understand."

"It took me a good while to get reconciled to the Portygee streak
in him.  It chafed me consider'ble to think there was a foreign
streak in our family.  The Snows have been straight Yankee for a
good long while. . . .  Fact is, I--I never got really reconciled
to it.  I kept bein' fearful all the time that that streak, his
father's streak, would break out in him.  It never did, except of
course in his poetry and that sort of foolishness, but I was always
scared 'twould, you see.  And now--now that this has happened I--I
kind of fret for fear that I may have let my notions get ahead of
my fair play.  You think I did give the boy a square deal, Labe?"

"Sure thing, Cap'n."

"I'm glad of that. . . .  And--and you cal'late he wasn't--wasn't
too prejudiced against me?  I don't mean along at first, I mean
this last year or two."

Laban hesitated.  He wished his answer to be not an overstatement,
but the exact truth.

"I think," he said, with emphasis, "that Al was comin' to understand
you better every day he lived, Cap'n.  Yes, and to think more and
more of you, too.  He was gettin' older, for one thing--older, more
of a man--yes, yes."

Captain Zelotes smiled sadly.  "He was more boy than man by a good
deal yet," he observed.  "Well, Labe, he's gone and I'm just
beginnin' to realize how much of life for me has gone along with
him.  He'd been doin' better here in the office for the last two or
three years, seemed to be catchin' on to business better.  Didn't
you think so, Labe?"

"Sartin.  Yes indeed.  Fust-rate, fust-rate."

"No, not first-rate.  He was a long ways from a business man yet,
but I did think he was doin' a lot better.  I could begin to see
him pilotin' this craft after I was called ashore.  Now he's gone
and . . . well, I don't see much use in my fightin' to keep it
afloat.  I'm gettin' along in years--and what's the use?"

It was the first time Laban had ever heard Captain Zelotes refer to
himself as an old man.  It shocked him into sharp expostulation.

"Nonsense!" he exclaimed.  "You ain't old enough for the scrap heap
by a big stretch.  And besides, he made his fight, didn't he?  He
didn't quit, Al didn't, and he wouldn't want us to.  No sir-ee, he
wouldn't!  No, sir, no! . . .  I--I hope you'll excuse me, Cap'n
Lote.  I--declare it must seem to you as if I was talkin' pretty
fresh.  I swan I'm sorry.  I am so . . . sorry; yes, yes, I be."

The captain was not offended.  He waved the apologies aside.

"So you think it's worth while my fightin' it out, do you, Labe?"
he asked, reflectively.

"I--I think it's what you ought to do anyhow, whether it's worth
while or not.  The whole world's fightin'.  Uncle Sam's fightin'.
Al was fightin'.  You're fightin'.  I'm fightin'.  It's a darn
sight easier to quit, a darn sight, but--but Al didn't quit.  And--
and we mustn't--not if we can help it," he added, drawing a hand
across his forehead.

His agitation seemed to surprise Captain Zelotes.  "So all hands
are fightin', are they, Labe," he observed.  "Well, I presume
likely there's some truth in that.  What's your particular fight,
for instance?"

The little bookkeeper looked at him for an instant before replying.
The captain's question was kindly asked, but there was, or so Laban
imagined, the faintest trace of sarcasm in its tone.  That trace
decided him.  He leaned across the desk.

"My particular fight?" he repeated.  "You--you want to know what
'tis, Cap'n Lote?  All right, all right, I'll tell you."

And without waiting for further questioning and with, for him,
surprisingly few repetitions, he told of his "enlistment" to fight
John Barleycorn for the duration of the war.  Captain Zelotes
listened to the very end in silence.  Laban mopped his forehead
with a hand which shook much as it had done during the interview
with Albert in the room above the shoe store.

"There--there," he declared, in conclusion, "that's my fight, Cap'n
Lote.  Al and I, we--we kind of went into it together, as you might
say, though his enlistin' was consider'ble more heroic than mine--
yes indeed, I should say so . . . yes, yes, yes.  But I'm fightin'
too . . . er . . . I'm fightin' too."

Captain Zelotes pulled his beard.

"How's the fight goin', Labe?" he asked, quietly.

"Well--well, it's kind of--kind of spotty, as you might say.
There's spots when I get along fairly smooth and others when--well,
when it's pretty rough goin'.  I've had four hard spots since Al
went away, but there's two that was the hardest.  One was along
Christmas and New Year time; you know I 'most generally had one of
my--er--spells along about then.  And t'other is just now; I mean
since we got word about--about Al.  I don't suppose likely you
surmised it, Cap'n, but--but I'd come to think a lot of that boy--
yes, I had.  Seems funny to you, I don't doubt, but it's so.  And
since the word come, you know--I--I--well, I've had some fight,
some fight.  I--I don't cal'late I've slept more'n four hours in
the last four nights--not more'n that, no.  Walkin' helps me most,
seems so.  Last night I walked to West Orham."

"To West Orham!  You WALKED there?  Last NIGHT?"

"Um-hm.  Long's I can keep walkin' I--I seem to part way forget--to
forget the stuff, you know.  When I'm alone in my room I go 'most
crazy--pretty nigh loony. . . .  But there!  I don't know why I got
to talkin' like this to you, Cap'n Lote.  You've got your troubles
and--"

"Hold on, Labe.  Does Rachel know about your fight?"

"No.  No, no.  Course she must notice how long I've been--been
straight, but I haven't told her.  I want to be sure I'm goin' to
win before I tell her.  She's been disappointed times enough
before, poor woman. . . .  There, Cap'n Lote, don't let's talk
about it any more.  Please don't get the notion that I'm askin' for
pity or anything like that.  And don't think I'm comparin' what I
call my fight to the real one like Al's.  There's nothin' much
heroic about me, eh?  No, no, I guess not.  Tell that to look at
me, eh?"

Captain Zelotes rose and laid his big hand on his bookkeeper's
shoulder.

"Don't you believe it, Labe," he said.  "I'm proud of you. . . .
And, I declare, I'm ashamed of myself. . . .  Humph! . . .  Well,
to-night you come home with me and have supper at the house."

"Now, now, Cap'n Lote--"

"You do as I tell you.  After supper, if there's any walkin' to be
done--if you take a notion to frog it to Orham or San Francisco or
somewheres--maybe I'll go with you.  Walkin' may be good for my
fight, too; you can't tell till you try. . . .  There, don't argue,
Labe.  I'm skipper of this craft yet and you'll obey my orders;
d'you hear?"

The day following the receipt of the fateful telegram the captain
wrote a brief note to Fletcher Fosdick.  A day or two later he
received a reply.  Fosdick's letter was kindly and deeply
sympathetic.  He had been greatly shocked and grieved by the news.


Young Speranza seemed to me, (he wrote) in my one short interview
with him, to be a fine young fellow.  Madeline, poor girl, is
almost frantic.  She will recover by and by, recovery is easier at
her age, but it will be very, very hard for you and Mrs. Snow.  You
and I little thought when we discussed the problem of our young
people that it would be solved in this way.  To you and your wife
my sincerest sympathy.  When you hear particulars concerning your
grandson's death, please write me.  Madeline is anxious to know and
keeps asking for them.  Mrs. Fosdick is too much concerned with her
daughter's health to write just now, but she joins me in sympathetic
regards.


Captain Zelotes took Mrs. Fosdick's sympathy with a grain of salt.
When he showed this letter to his wife he, for the first time, told
her of the engagement, explaining that his previous silence had
been due to Albert's request that the affair be kept a secret for
the present.  Olive, even in the depth of her sorrow, was greatly
impressed by the grandeur of the alliance.

"Just think, Zelotes," she exclaimed, "the Fosdick girl--and our
Albert engaged to marry her!  Why, the Fosdicks are awful rich,
everybody says so.  Mrs. Fosdick is head of I don't know how many
societies and clubs and things in New York; her name is in the
paper almost every day, so another New York woman told me at Red
Cross meetin' last summer.  And Mr. Fosdick has been in politics,
way up in politics."

"Um-hm.  Well, he's reformed lately, I understand, so we mustn't
hold that against him."

"Why, Zelotes, what DO you mean?  How can you talk so?  Just think
what it would have meant to have our Albert marry a girl like
Madeline Fosdick."

The captain put his arm about her and gently patted her shoulder.

"There, there, Mother," he said, gently, "don't let that part of it
fret you."

"But, Zelotes," tearfully, "I don't understand.  It would have been
such a great thing for Albert."

"Would it?  Well, maybe.  Anyhow, there's no use worryin' about it
now.  It's done with--ended and done with . . . same as a good many
other plans that's been made in the world."

"Zelotes, don't speak like that, dear, so discouraged.  It makes me
feel worse than ever to hear you.  And--and he wouldn't want you
to, I'm sure."

"Wouldn't he?  No, I cal'late you're right, Mother.  We'll try not
to."

Other letters came, including one from Helen.  It was not long.
Mrs. Snow was a little inclined to feel hurt at its brevity.  Her
husband, however, did not share this feeling.

"Have you read it carefully, Mother?" he asked.

"Of course I have, Zelotes.  What do you mean?"

"I mean--well, I tell you, Mother, I've read it three time.  The
first time I was like you; seemed to me as good a friend of Al and
of us as Helen Kendall ought to have written more than that.  The
second time I read it I begun to wonder if--if--"

"If what, Zelotes?"

"Oh, nothin', Mother, nothin'.  She says she's comin' to see us
just as soon as she can get away for a day or two.  She'll come,
and when she does I cal'late both you and I are goin' to be
satisfied."

"But why didn't she WRITE more, Zelotes?  That's what I can't
understand."

Captain Zelotes tugged at his beard reflectively.  "When I wrote
Fosdick the other day," he said, "I couldn't write more than a
couple of pages.  I was too upset to do it.  I couldn't, that's
all."

"Yes, but you are Albert's grandfather."

"I know.  And Helen's always . . .  But there, Mother, don't you
worry about Helen Kendall.  I've known her since she was born,
pretty nigh, and _I_ tell you she's all RIGHT."

Fosdick, in his letter, had asked for particulars concerning
Albert's death.  Those particulars were slow in coming.  Captain
Zelotes wrote at once to the War Department, but received little
satisfaction.  The Department would inform him as soon as it
obtained the information.  The name of Sergeant Albert Speranza had
been cabled as one of a list of fatalities, that was all.

"And to think," as Rachel Ellis put it, "that we never knew that
he'd been made a sergeant until after he was gone.  He never had
time to write it, I expect likely, poor boy."

The first bit of additional information was furnished by the press.
A correspondent of one of the Boston dailies sent a brief dispatch
to his paper describing the fighting at a certain point on the
Allied front.  A small detachment of American troops had taken
part, with the French, in an attack on a village held by the enemy.
The enthusiastic reporter declared it to be one of the smartest
little actions in which our soldiers had so far taken part and was
eloquent concerning the bravery and dash of his fellow countrymen.
"They proved themselves," he went on, "and French officers with
whom I have talked are enthusiastic.  Our losses, considering the
number engaged, are said to be heavy.  Among those reported as
killed is Sergeant Albert Speranza, a Massachusetts boy whom
American readers will remember as a writer of poetry and magazine
fiction.  Sergeant Speranza is said to have led his company in the
capture of the village and to have acted with distinguished
bravery."  The editor of the Boston paper who first read this
dispatch turned to his associate at the next desk.

"Speranza? . . . Speranza?" he said aloud.  "Say, Jim, wasn't it
Albert Speranza who wrote that corking poem we published after the
Lusitania was sunk?"

Jim looked up.  "Yes," he said.  "He has written a lot of pretty
good stuff since, too.  Why?"

"He's just been killed in action over there, so Conway says in this
dispatch."

"So? . . .  Humph! . . .  Any particulars?"

"Not yet.  'Distinguished bravery,' according to Conway.  Couldn't
we have something done in the way of a Sunday special?  He was a
Massachusetts fellow."

"We might.  We haven't a photograph, have we?  If we haven't,
perhaps we can get one."

The photograph was obtained--bribery and corruption of the Orham
photographer--and, accompanied by a reprint of the Lusitania poem,
appeared in the "Magazine Section" of the Sunday newspaper.  With
these also appeared a short notice of the young poet's death in the
service of his country.

That was the beginning.  At the middle of that week Conway sent
another dispatch.  The editor who received it took it into the
office of the Sunday editor.

"Say," he said, "here are more particulars about that young chap
Speranza, the one we printed the special about last Sunday.  He
must have been a corker.  When his lieutenant was put out of
business by a shrapnel this Speranza chap rallied the men and
jammed 'em through the Huns like a hot knife through butter.
Killed the German officer and took three prisoners all by himself.
Carried his wounded lieutenant to the rear on his shoulders, too.
Then he went back into the ruins to get another wounded man and was
blown to slivers by a hand grenade.  He's been cited in orders and
will probably be decorated by the French--that is, his memory will
be.  Pretty good for a poet, I'd say.  No 'lilies and languors'
about that, eh?"

The Sunday editor nodded approval.

"Great stuff!" he exclaimed.  "Let me have that dispatch, will you,
when you've finished.  I've just discovered that this young
Speranza's father was Speranza, the opera baritone.  You remember
him?  And his mother was the daughter of a Cape Cod sea captain.
How's that?  Spain, Cape Cod, opera, poetry and the Croix de
Guerre.  And have you looked at the young fellow's photograph?
Combination of Adonis and 'Romeo, where art thou.'  I've had no
less than twenty letters about him and his poetry already.  Next
Sunday we'll have a special "as is."  Where can I get hold of a lot
of his poems?"

The "special as was" occupied an entire page.  A reporter had
visited South Harniss and had taken photographs of the Snow place
and some of its occupants.  Captain Zelotes had refused to pose,
but there was a view of the building and yards of "Z. Snow and Co."
with the picturesque figure of Mr. Issachar Price tastefully draped
against a pile of boards in the right foreground.  Issy had been a
find for the reporter; he supplied the latter with every fact
concerning Albert which he could remember and some that he invented
on the spur of the moment.  According to Issy, Albert was "a fine,
fust-class young feller.  Him and me was like brothers, as you
might say.  When he got into trouble, or was undecided or anything,
he'd come to me for advice and I always gave it to him.  Land, yes!
I always give to Albert.  No matter how busy I was I always stopped
work to help HIM out."  The reporter added that Mr. Price stopped
work even while speaking of it.

The special attracted the notice of other newspaper editors.  This
skirmish in which Albert had taken so gallant part was among the
first in which our soldiers had participated.  So the story was
copied and recopied.  The tale of the death of the young poet, the
"happy warrior," as some writer called him, was spread from the
Atlantic to the Pacific and from Canada to the Gulf.  And just at
this psychological moment the New York publisher brought out the
long deferred volume.  The Lances of Dawn, Being the Collected
Poems of Albert M. C. Speranza, such was its title.

Meanwhile, or, rather, within the week when the Lances of Dawn
flashed upon the public, Captain Zelotes received a letter from the
captain of Albert's regiment in France.  It was not a long letter,
for the captain was a busy man, but it was the kindly, sympathetic
letter of one who was, literally, that well-advertised combination,
an officer and a gentleman.  It told of Albert's promotion to the
rank of sergeant, "a promotion which, had the boy been spared,
would, I am sure, have been the forerunner of others."  It told of
that last fight, the struggle for the village, of Sergeant
Speranza's coolness and daring and of his rush back into the throat
of death to save a wounded comrade.


The men tell me they tried to stop him (wrote the captain).  He was
himself slightly wounded, he had just brought Lieutenant Stacey
back to safety and the enemy at that moment was again advancing
through the village.  But he insisted upon going.  The man he was
trying to rescue was a private in his company and the pair were
great friends.  So he started back alone, although several followed
him a moment later.  They saw him enter the ruined cottage where
his friend lay.  Then a party of the enemy appeared at the corner
and flung grenades.  The entire side of the cottage which he had
just entered was blown in and the Germans passed on over it,
causing our men to fall back temporarily.  We retook the place
within half an hour.  Private Kelly's body--it was Private Kelly
whom Sergeant Speranza was attempting to rescue--was found and
another, badly disfigured, which was at first supposed to be that
of your grandson.  But this body was subsequently identified as
that of a private named Hamlin who was killed when the enemy first
charged.  Sergeant Speranza's body is still missing, but is thought
to be buried beneath the ruins of the cottage.  These ruins were
subsequently blown into further chaos by a high explosive shell.


Then followed more expressions of regret and sympathy and
confirmation of the report concerning citation and the war cross.
Captain Lote read the letter at first alone in his private office.
Then he brought it home and gave it to his wife to read.  Afterward
he read it aloud to Mrs. Ellis and to Laban, who was making his
usual call in the Snow kitchen.

When the reading was ended Labe was the first to speak.  His eyes
were shining.

"Godfreys!" he exclaimed.  Godfreys, Cap'n Lote!"

The captain seemed to understand.

"You're right, Labe," he said.  "The boy's made us proud of
him. . . .  Prouder than some of us are of ourselves, I cal'late,"
he added, rising and moving toward the door.

"Sho, sho, Cap'n, you mustn't feel that way.  No, no."

"Humph! . . .  Labe, I presume likely if I was a pious man, one of
the old-fashioned kind of pious, and believed the Almighty went out
of his way to get square with any human bein' that made a mistake
or didn't do the right thing--if I believed that I might figger all
this was a sort of special judgment on me for my prejudices, eh?"

Mr. Keeler was much disturbed.

"Nonsense, nonsense, Cap'n Lote!" he protested.  "You ain't fair to
yourself.  You never treated Al anyhow but just honest and fair and
square.  If he was here now instead of layin' dead over there in
France, poor feller, he'd say so, too.  Yes, he would.  Course he
would."

The captain made no reply, but walked from the room.  Laban turned
to Mrs. Ellis.

"The old man broods over that," he said.  "I wish. . . .  Eh?
What's the matter, Rachel?  What are you lookin' at me like that
for?"

The housekeeper was leaning forward in her chair, her cheeks
flushed and her hands clenched.

"How do you know he's dead?" she asked, in a mysterious whisper.

"Eh?  How do I know who's dead?"

"Albert.  How do you know he's dead?"

Laban stared at her.

"How do I know he's DEAD!" he repeated.  "How do I know--"

"Yes, yes, yes," impatiently; "that's what I said.  Don't run it
over three or four times more.  How do you know Albert's dead?"

"Why, Rachel, what kind of talk's that?  I know he's dead because
the newspapers say so, and the War Department folks say so, and
this cap'n man in France that was right there at the time, HE says
so.  All hands say so--yes, yes.  So don't--"

"Sh!  I don't care if they all say so ten times over.  How do they
KNOW?  They ain't found him dead, have they?  The report from the
War Department folks was sent when they thought that other body was
Albert's.  Now they know that wasn't him.  Where is he?"

"Why, under the ruins of that cottage.  'Twas all blown to pieces
and most likely--"

"Um-hm.  There you are!  'Most likely!'  Well, I ain't satisfied
with most likelys.  I want to KNOW."

"But--but--"

"Laban Keeler, until they find his body I shan't believe Albert's
dead."

"But, Rachel, you mustn't try to deceive yourself that way.  Don't
you see--"

"No, I don't see.  Labe, when Robert Penfold was lost and gone for
all them months all hands thought he was dead, didn't they?  But he
wasn't; he was on that island lost in the middle of all creation.
What's to hinder Albert bein' took prisoner by those Germans?  They
came back to that cottage place after Albert was left there, the
cap'n says so in that letter Cap'n Lote just read.  What's to
hinder their carryin' Al off with 'em?  Eh?  What's to hinder?"

"Why--why, nothin', I suppose, in one way.  But nine chances out of
ten--"

"That leaves one chance, don't it.  I ain't goin' to give up that
chance for--for my boy.  I--I--  Oh, Labe, I did think SO much of
him."

"I know, Rachel, I know.  Don't cry any more than you can help.
And if it helps you any to make believe--I mean to keep on hopin'
he's alive somewheres--why, do it.  It won't do any harm, I
suppose.  Only I wouldn't hint such a thing to Cap'n Lote or
Olive."

"Of course not," indignantly.  "I ain't quite a fool, I hope. . . .
And I presume likely you're right, Laban.  The poor boy is dead,
probably.  But I--I'm goin' to hope he isn't, anyhow, just to get
what comfort I can from it.  And Robert Penfold did come back, you
know."

For some time Laban found himself, against all reason, asking the
very question Rachel had asked:  Did they actually KNOW that Albert
was dead?  But as the months passed and no news came he ceased to
ask it.  Whenever he mentioned the subject to the housekeeper her
invariable reply was:  "But they haven't found his body, have
they?"  She would not give up that tenth chance.  As she seemed to
find some comfort in it he did not attempt to convince her of its
futility.

And, meanwhile The Lances of Dawn, Being the Collected Poems of
Albert M. C. Speranza was making a mild sensation.  The critics
were surprisingly kind to it.  The story of the young author's
recent and romantic death, of his gallantry, his handsome features
displayed in newspapers everywhere, all these helped toward the
generous welcome accorded the little volume.  If the verses were
not inspired--why, they were at least entertaining and pleasant.
And youth, high-hearted youth sang on every page.  So the reviewers
were kind and forbearing to the poems themselves, and, for the sake
of the dead soldier-poet, were often enthusiastic.  The book sold,
for a volume of poems it sold very well indeed.

At the Snow place in South Harniss pride and tears mingled.  Olive
read the verses over and over again, and wept as she read.  Rachel
Ellis learned many of them by heart, but she, too, wept as she
recited them to herself or to Laban.  In the little bookkeeper's
room above Simond's shoe store The Lances of Dawn lay under the
lamp upon the center table as before a shrine.  Captain Zelotes
read the verses.  Also he read all the newspaper notices which,
sent to the family by Helen Kendall, were promptly held before his
eyes by Olive and Rachel.  He read the publisher's advertisements,
he read the reviews.  And the more he read the more puzzled and
bewildered he became.

"I can't understand it, Laban," he confided in deep distress to Mr.
Keeler.  "I give in I don't know anything at all about this.  I'm
clean off soundin's.  If all this newspaper stuff is so Albert was
right all the time and I was plumb wrong.  Here's this feller,"
picking up a clipping from the desk, "callin' him a genius and 'a
gifted youth' and the land knows what.  And every day or so I get a
letter from somebody I never heard of tellin' me what a comfort to
'em those poetry pieces of his are.  I don't understand it, Labe.
It worries me.  If all this is true then--then I was all wrong.  I
tried to keep him from makin' up poetry, Labe--TRIED to, I did.  If
what these folks say is so somethin' ought to be done to me.  I--I--
by thunder, I don't know's I hadn't ought to be hung! . . .  And
yet--and yet, I did what I thought was right and did it for the
boy's sake . . .  And--and even now I--I ain't sartin I was wrong.
But if I wasn't wrong then this is . . .  Oh, I don't know, I don't
know!"

And not only in South Harniss were there changes of heart.  In New
York City and at Greenwich where Mrs. Fosdick was more than ever
busy with war work, there were changes.  When the newspaper
accounts of young Speranza's heroic death were first published the
lady paid little attention to them.  Her daughter needed all her
care just then--all the care, that is, which she could spare from
her duties as president of this society and corresponding secretary
of that.  If her feelings upon hearing the news could have been
analyzed it is probable that their larger proportion would have
been a huge sense of relief.  THAT problem was solved, at all
events.  She was sorry for poor Madeline, of course, but the dear
child was but a child and would recover.

But as with more and more intensity the limelight of publicity was
turned upon Albert Speranza's life and death and writing, the wife
of the Honorable Fletcher Fosdick could not but be impressed.  As
head of several so-called literary societies, societies rather
neglected since the outbreak of hostilities, she had made it her
business to hunt literary lions.  Recently it was true that
military lions--Major Vermicelli of the Roumanian light cavalry,
or Private Drinkwater of the Tank Corps--were more in demand than
Tagores, but, as Mrs. Fosdick read of Sergeant Speranza's perils
and poems, it could not help occurring to her that here was a lion
both literary and martial.  Decidedly she had not approved of her
daughter's engagement to that lion, but now the said lion was dead,
which rendered him a perfectly harmless yet not the less fascinating
animal.  And then appeared The Lances of Dawn and Mrs. Fosdick's
friends among the elect began to read and talk about it.

It was then that the change came.  Those friends, one by one,
individuals judiciously chosen, were told in strict confidence of
poor Madeline's romantic love affair and its tragic ending.  These
individuals, chosen judiciously as has been stated, whispered, also
in strict confidence, the tale to other friends and acquaintances.
Mrs. Fosdick began to receive condolences on her daughter's account
and on her own.  Soon she began to speak publicly of "My poor, dear
daughter's dead fiance.  Such a loss to American literature.  Sheer
genius.  Have you read the article in the Timepiece?  Madeline,
poor girl, is heartbroken, naturally, but very proud, even in the
midst of her grief.  So are we all, I assure you."

She quoted liberally from The Lances of Dawn.  A copy specially
bound, lay upon her library table.  Albert's photograph in uniform,
obtained from the Snows by Mr. Fosdick, who wrote for it at his
wife's request, stood beside it.  To callers and sister war workers
Mrs. Fosdick gave details of the hero's genius, his bravery, his
devotion to her daughter.  It was all so romantic and pleasantly
self-advertising--and perfectly safe.

Summer came again, the summer of 1918.  The newspapers now were
gravely personal reading to millions of Americans.  Our new army
was trying its metal on the French front and with the British
against the vaunted Hindenburg Line.  The transports were carrying
thousands on every trip to join those already "over there."  In
South Harniss and in Greenwich and New York, as in every town and
city, the ordinary summer vacations and playtime occupations were
forgotten or neglected and war charities and war labors took their
place.  Other soldiers than Sergeant Speranza were the newspaper
heroes now, other books than The Lances of Dawn talked about.

As on the previous summer the new Fosdick cottage was not occupied
by its owners.  Mrs. Fosdick was absorbed by her multitudinous war
duties and her husband was at Washington giving his counsel and
labor to the cause.  Captain Zelotes bought to his last spare
dollar of each successive issue of Liberty Bonds, and gave that
dollar to the Red Cross or the Y. M. C. A.; Laban and Rachel did
likewise.  Even Issachar Price bought Thrift Stamps and exhibited
them to anyone who would stop long enough to look.

"By crimus," declared Issy, "I'm makin' myself poor helpin' out the
gov'ment, but let 'er go and darn the Kaiser, that's my motto.  But
they ain't all like me.  I was down to the drug store yesterday and
old man Burgess had the cheek to tell me I owed him for some cigars
I bought--er--last fall, seems to me 'twas.  I turned right around
and looked at him--'I've got my opinion,' says I, 'of a man that
thinks of cigars and such luxuries when the country needs every
cent.  What have you got that gov'ment poster stuck up on your wall
for?' says I.  'Read it,' I says.  'It says' '"Save!  Save!
Save!"' don't it?  All right.  That's what I'M doin'.  I AM
savin'.'  Then when he was thinkin' of somethin' to answer back I
walked right out and left him.  Yes sir, by crimustee, I left him
right where he stood!"

August came; September--the Hindenburg Line was broken.  Each day
the triumphant headlines in the papers were big and black and also,
alas, the casualty lists on the inside pages long and longer.  Then
October.  The armistice was signed.  It was the end.  The Allied
world went wild, cheered, danced, celebrated.  Then it sat back,
thinking, thanking God, solemnly trying to realize that the killing
days, the frightful days of waiting and awful anxiety, were over.

And early in November another telegram came to the office of Z.
Snow and Co.  This time it came, not from the War Department
direct, but from the Boston headquarters of the American Red Cross.

And this time, just as on the day when the other fateful telegram
came, Laban Keeler was the first of the office regulars to learn
its contents.  Ben Kelley himself brought this message, just as he
had brought that telling of Albert Speranza's death.  And the
usually stolid Ben was greatly excited.  He strode straight from
the door to the bookkeeper's desk.

"Is the old man in, Labe?" he whispered, jerking his head toward
the private office, the door of which happened to be shut.

Laban looked at him over his spectacles.  "Cap'n Lote, you mean?"
he asked.  "Yes, he's in.  But he don't want to be disturbed--no,
no.  Goin' to write a couple of important letters, he said.
Important ones. . . .  Um-hm.  What is it, Ben?  Anything I can do
for you?"

Kelley did not answer that question.  Instead he took a telegram
from his pocket.

"Read it, Labe," he whispered.  "Read it.  It's the darndest news--
the--the darnedest good news ever you heard in your life.  It don't
seem as if it could he, but, by time, I guess 'tis.  Anyhow, it's
from the Red Cross folks and they'd ought to know."

Laban stared at the telegram.  It was not in the usual envelope;
Kelley had been too anxious to bring it to its destination to
bother with an envelope.

"Read it," commanded the operator again.  "See if you think Cap'n
Lote ought to have it broke easy to him or--or what?  Read it, I
tell you.  Lord sakes, it's no secret!  I hollered it right out
loud when it come in over the wire and the gang at the depot heard
it.  They know it and it'll be all over town in ten minutes.  READ
IT."

Keeler read the telegram.  His florid cheeks turned pale.

"Good Lord above!" he exclaimed, under his breath.

"Eh?  I bet you!  Shall I take it to the cap'n?  Eh?  What do you
think?"

"Wait. . . .  Wait . . .  I--I--  My soul!  My soul!  Why . . .
It's--it's true. . . .  And Rachel always said . . .  Why, she was
right . . . I . . ."

From without came the sound of running feet and a series of yells.

"Labe!  Labe!" shrieked Issy.  "Oh, my crimus! . . .  Labe!"

He burst into the office, his eyes and mouth wide open and his
hands waving wildly.

"Labe!  Labe!" he shouted again.  "Have you heard it?  Have you?
It's true, too.  He's alive!  He's alive!  He's alive!"

Laban sprang from his stool.  "Shut up, Is!" he commanded.  "Shut
up!  Hold on!  Don't--"

"But he's alive, I tell you!  He ain't dead!  He ain't never been
dead!  Oh, my crimus! . . .  Hey, Cap'n Lote!  HE'S ALIVE!"

Captain Zelotes was standing in the doorway of the private office.
The noise had aroused him from his letter writing.

"Who's alive?  What's the matter with you this time, Is?" he
demanded.

"Shut up, Issy," ordered Laban, seizing the frantic Mr. Price by
the collar.  "Be still!  Wait a minute."

"Be still?  What do I want to be still for?  I cal'late Cap'n
Lote'll holler some, too, when he hears.  He's alive, Cap'n Lote, I
tell ye.  Let go of me, Labe Keeler!  He's alive!"

"Who's alive?  What is it?  Labe, YOU answer me.  Who's alive?"

Laban's thoughts were still in a whirl.  He was still shaking from
the news the telegraph operator had brought.  Rachel Ellis was at
that moment in his mind and he answered as she might have done.

"Er--er--Robert Penfold," he said.

"Robert PENFOLD!  What--"

Issachar could hold in no longer.

"Robert Penfold nawthin'!" he shouted.  "Who in thunder's he?
'Tain't Robert Penfold nor Robert Penholder neither.  It's Al
Speranza, that's who 'tis.  He ain't killed, Cap'n Lote.  He's
alive and he's been alive all the time."

Kelley stepped forward.

"Looks as if 'twas so, Cap'n Snow," he said.  "Here's the telegram
from the Red Cross."



CHAPTER XV


There was nothing miraculous about it.  That is to say, it was no
more of a miracle than hundreds of similar cases in the World War.
The papers of those years were constantly printing stories of men
over whose supposed graves funeral sermons had been preached, to
whose heirs insurance payments had been made, in whose memory
grateful communities had made speeches and delivered eulogiums--
the papers were telling of instance after instance of those men
being discovered alive and in the flesh, as casuals in some French
hospital or as inmates of German prison camps.

Rachel Ellis had asked what was to hinder Albert's having been
taken prisoner by the Germans and carried off by them.  As a matter
of fact nothing had hindered and that was exactly what had
happened.  Sergeant Speranza, wounded by machine gun fire and again
by the explosion of the grenade, was found in the ruins of the
cottage when the detachment of the enemy captured it.  He was
conscious and able to speak, so instead of being bayonetted was
carried to the rear where he might be questioned concerning the
American forces.  The questioning was most unsatisfactory to the
Prussian officers who conducted it.  Albert fainted, recovered
consciousness and fainted again.  So at last the Yankee swine was
left to die or get well and his Prussian interrogators went about
other business, the business of escaping capture themselves.  But
when they retreated the few prisoners, mostly wounded men, were
taken with them.

Albert's recollections of the next few days were hazy and very
doubtful.  Pain, pain and more pain.  Hours and hours--they seemed
like years--of jolting over rough roads.  Pawing-over by a fat,
bearded surgeon, who may not have been intentionally brutal, but
quite as likely may.  A great desire to die, punctuated by
occasional feeble spurts of wishing to live.  Then more surgical
man-handling, more jolting--in freight cars this time--a slow,
miserable recovery, nurses who hated their patients and treated
them as if they did, then, a prison camp, a German prison camp.
Then horrors and starvation and brutality lasting many months.
Then fever.

He was wandering in that misty land between this world and the next
when, the armistice having been signed, an American Red Cross
representative found him.  In the interval between fits of delirium
he told this man his name and regiment and, later, the name of his
grandparents.  When it seemed sure that he was to recover the Red
Cross representative cabled the facts to this country.  And, still
later, those facts, or the all-important fact that Sergeant Albert
M. C. Speranza was not dead but alive, came by telegraph to Captain
Zelotes Snow of South Harniss.  And, two months after that, Captain
Zelotes himself, standing on the wharf in Boston and peering up at
a crowded deck above him, saw the face of his grandson, that face
which he had never expected to see again, looking eagerly down upon
him.

A few more weeks and it was over.  The brief interval of camp life
and the mustering out were things of the past.  Captain Lote and
Albert, seated in the train, were on their way down the Cape, bound
home.  Home!  The word had a significance now which it never had
before.  Home!

Albert drew a long breath.  "By George!" he exclaimed.  "By George,
Grandfather, this looks good to me!"

It might not have looked as good to another person.  It was
raining, the long stretches of salt marsh were windswept and brown
and bleak.  In the distance Cape Cod Bay showed gray and white
against a leaden sky.  The drops ran down the dingy car windows.

Captain Zelotes understood, however.  He nodded.

"It used to look good to me when I was bound home after a v'yage,"
he observed.  "Well, son, I cal'late your grandma and Rachel are up
to the depot by this time waitin' for you.  We ain't due for pretty
nigh an hour yet, but I'd be willin' to bet they're there."

Albert smiled.  "My, I do want to see them!" he said.

"Shouldn't wonder a mite if they wanted to see you, boy.  Well, I'm
kind of glad I shooed that reception committee out of the way.  I
presumed likely you'd rather have your first day home to yourself--
and us."

"I should say so!  Newspaper reporters are a lot of mighty good
fellows, but I hope I never see another one. . . .  That's rather
ungrateful, I know," he added, with a smile, "but I mean it--just
now."

He had some excuse for meaning it.  The death of Albert Speranza,
poet and warrior, had made a newspaper sensation.  His resurrection
and return furnished material for another.  Captain Zelotes was not
the only person to meet the transport at the pier; a delegation of
reporters was there also.  Photographs of Sergeant Speranza
appeared once more in print.  This time, however, they were
snapshots showing him in uniform, likenesses of a still handsome,
but less boyish young man, thinner, a scar upon his right cheek,
and the look in his eyes more serious, and infinitely older, the
look of one who had borne much and seen more.  The reporters found
it difficult to get a story from the returned hero.  He seemed to
shun the limelight and to be almost unduly modest and retiring,
which was of itself, had they but known it, a transformation
sufficiently marvelous to have warranted a special "Sunday
special."

"Will not talk about himself," so one writer headed his article.
Gertie Kendrick, with a brand-new ring upon her engagement finger,
sniffed as she read that headline to Sam Thatcher, who had
purchased the ring.  "Al Speranza won't talk about himself!"
exclaimed Gertie.  "Well, it's the FIRST time, then.  No wonder
they put it in the paper."

But Albert would not talk, claiming that he had done nothing worth
talking about, except to get himself taken prisoner in almost his
first engagement.  "Go and ask some of the other fellows aboard
here," he urged.  "They have been all through it."  As he would not
talk the newspaper men were obliged to talk for him, which they did
by describing his appearance and his manner, and by rehashing the
story of the fight in the French village.  Also, of course, they
republished some of his verses.  The Lances of Dawn appeared in a
special edition in honor of its author's reappearance on this
earth.

"Yes sir," continued Captain Zelotes, "the reception committee was
consider'ble disappointed.  They'd have met you with the Orham band
if they'd had their way.  I told 'em you'd heard all the band music
you wanted in camp, I guessed likely, and you'd rather come home
quiet.  There was goin' to be some speeches, too, but I had them
put off."

"Thanks, Grandfather."

"Um-hm.  I had a notion you wouldn't hanker for speeches.  If you
do Issy'll make one for you 'most any time.  Ever since you got
into the papers Issy's been swellin' up like a hot pop-over with
pride because you and he was what he calls chummies.  All last
summer Issachar spent his evenin's hangin' around the hotel waitin'
for the next boarder to mention your name.  Sure as one did Is was
ready for him.  'Know him?' he'd sing out.  'Did I know Al
Speranza?  ME?  Well, now say!--'  And so on, long as the feller
would listen.  I asked him once if he ever told any of 'em how you
ducked him with the bucket of water.  He didn't think I knew about
that and it kind of surprised him, I judged."

Albert smiled.  "Laban told you about it, I suppose," he said.
"What a kid trick that was, wasn't it?"

The captain turned his head and regarded him for an instant.  The
old twinkle was in his eye when he spoke.

"Wouldn't do a thing like that now, Al, I presume likely?" he said.
"Feel a good deal older now, eh?"

Albert's answer was seriously given.

"Sometimes I feel at least a hundred and fifty," he replied.

"Humph! . . .  Well, I wouldn't feel like that.  If you're a
hundred and fifty I must be a little older than Methuselah was in
his last years.  I'm feelin' younger to-day, younger than I have
for quite a spell.  Yes, for quite a spell."

His grandson put a hand on his knee.  "Good for you, Grandfather,"
he said.  "Now tell me more about Labe.  Do you know I think the
old chap's sticking by his pledge is the bulliest thing I've heard
since I've been home."

So they talked of Laban and of Rachel and of South Harniss
happenings until the train drew up at the platform of that station.
And upon that platform stepped Albert to feel his grandmother's
arms about him and her voice, tremulous with happiness, at his ear.
And behind her loomed Mrs. Ellis, her ample face a combination of
smiles and tears, "all sunshine and fair weather down below but
rainin' steady up aloft," as Captain Lote described it afterwards.
And behind her, like a foothill in the shadow of a mountain, was
Laban.  And behind Laban--  No, that is a mistake--in front of
Laban and beside Laban and in front of and beside everyone else
when opportunity presented was Issachar.  And Issachar's expression
and bearings were wonderful to see.  A stranger, and there were
several strangers amid the group at the station, might have gained
the impression that Mr. Price, with of course a very little help
from the Almighty, was responsible for everything.

"Why, Issy!" exclaimed Albert, when they shook hands.  "You're
here, too, eh?"

Mr. Price's already protuberant chest swelled still further.  His
reply had the calmness of finality.

"Yes, sir," said Issy, "I'm here.  'Who's goin' to look out for Z.
Snow and Co. if all hands walks out and leaves 'em?' Labe says.  'I
don't know,' says I, 'and I don't care.  I'm goin' to that depot to
meet Al Speranzy and if Z. Snow and Co. goes to pot while I'm gone
I can't help it.  I have sacrificed,' I says, 'and I stand ready to
sacrifice pretty nigh everything for my business, but there's
limits and this is one of 'em.  I'm goin' acrost to that depot to
meet him,' says I, 'and don't you try to stop me, Labe Keeler.'"

"Great stuff, Is!" said Albert, with a laugh.  "What did Labe say
to that?"

"What was there for him to say?  He could see I meant it.  Course
he hove out some of his cheap talk, but it didn't amount to
nothin'.  Asked if I wan't goin' to put up a sign sayin' when I'd
be back, so's to ease the customers' minds.  'I don't know when
I'll be back,' I says.  'All right,' says he, 'put that on the
sign.  That'll ease 'em still more.'  Just cheap talk 'twas.  He
thinks he's funny, but I don't pay no attention to him."

Others came to shake hands and voice a welcome.  The formal
reception, that with the band, had been called off at Captain
Zelotes's request, but the informal one was, in spite of the rain,
which was now much less heavy, quite a sizable gathering.

The Reverend Mr. Kendall held his hand for a long time and talked
much, it seemed to Albert that he had aged greatly since they last
met.  He wandered a bit in his remarks and repeated himself several
times.

"The poor old gentleman's failin' a good deal, Albert," said Mrs.
Snow, as they drove home together, he and his grandparents, three
on the seat of the buggy behind Jessamine.  "His sermons are pretty
tiresome nowadays, but we put up with 'em because he's been with us
so long. . . .  Ain't you squeezed 'most to death, Albert?  You two
big men and me all mashed together on this narrow seat.  It's lucky
I'm small.  Zelotes ought to get a two-seated carriage, but he
won't."

"Next thing I get, Mother," observed the captain, "will be an
automobile.  I'll stick to the old mare here as long as she's able
to navigate, but when she has to be hauled out of commission I'm
goin' to buy a car.  I believe I'm pretty nigh the last man in this
county to drive a horse, as 'tis.  Makes me feel like what Sol
Dadgett calls a cracked teapot--a 'genuine antique.'  One of these
city women will be collectin' me some of these days.  Better look
out, mother."

Olive sighed happily.  "It does me good to hear you joke again,
Zelotes," she said.  "He didn't joke much, Albert, while--when we
thought you--you--"

Albert interrupted in time to prevent the threatened shower.

"So Mr. Kendall is not well," he said.  "I'm very sorry to hear
it."

"Of course you would be.  You and he used to be so friendly when
Helen was home.  Oh, speakin' of Helen, she IS comin' home in a
fortni't or three weeks, so I hear.  She's goin' to give up her
teachin' and come back to be company for her father.  I suppose she
realizes he needs her, but it must be a big sacrifice for her,
givin' up the good position she's got now.  She's such a smart girl
and such a nice one.  Why, she came to see us after the news came--
the bad news--and she was so kind and so good.  I don't know what
we should have done without her.  Zelotes says so too, don't you,
Zelotes?"

Her husband did not answer.  Instead he said:  "Well, there's home,
Al.  Rachel's there ahead of us and dinner's on the way, judgin' by
the smoke from the kitchen chimney.  How does the old place look to
you, boy?"

Albert merely shook his head and drew a long breath, but his
grandparents seemed to be quite satisfied.

There were letters and telegrams awaiting him on the table in the
sitting-room.  Two of the letters were postmarked from a town on
the Florida coast.  The telegram also was from that same town.

"_I_ had one of those things," observed Captain Zelotes, alluding
to the telegram.  "Fosdick sent me one of those long ones, night-
letters I believe they call 'em.  He wants me to tell you that Mrs.
Fosdick is better and that they cal'late to be in New York before
very long and shall expect you there.  Of course you knew that, Al,
but I presume likely the main idea of the telegram was to help say,
'Welcome home' to you, that's all."

Albert nodded.  Madeline and her mother had been in Florida all
winter.  Mrs. Fosdick's health was not good.  She declared that her
nerves had given way under her frightful responsibilities during
the war.  There was, although it seems almost sacrilege to make
such a statement, a certain similarity between Mrs. Fletcher
Fosdick and Issachar Price.  The telegram was, as his grandfather
surmised, an expression of welcome and of regret that the senders
could not be there to share in the reception.  The two letters
which accompanied it he put in his pocket to read later on, when
alone.  Somehow he felt that the first hours in the old house
belonged exclusively to his grandparents.  Everything else, even
Madeline's letters, must take second place for that period.

Dinner was, to say the least, an ample meal.  Rachel and Olive had,
as Captain Lote said, "laid themselves out" on that dinner.  It
began well and continued well and ended best of all, for the
dessert was one of which Albert was especially fond.  They kept
pressing him to eat until Laban, who was an invited guest, was
moved to comment.

"Humph!" observed Mr. Keeler.  "I knew 'twas the reg'lar program to
kill the fatted calf when the prodigal got home, but I see now it's
the proper caper to fat up the prodigal to take the critter's place.
No, no, Rachel, I'd like fust-rate to eat another bushel or so to
please you, but somethin'--that still, small voice we're always
readin' about, or somethin'--seems to tell me 'twouldn't be good
jedgment. . . .  Um-hm. . . .  'Twouldn't be good jedgment. . . .
Cal'late it's right, too. . . .  Yes, yes, yes."

"Now, Cap'n Lote," he added, as they rose from the table, "you stay
right to home here for the rest of the day.  I'll hustle back to
the office and see if Issy's importance has bust his b'iler for
him.  So-long, Al.  See you pretty soon.  Got some things to talk
about, you and I have. . . .  Yes, yes."

Later, when Rachel was in the kitchen with the dishes, Olive left
the sitting room and reappeared with triumph written large upon her
face.  In one hand she held a mysterious envelope and in the other
a book.  Albert recognized that book.  It was his own, The Lances
of Dawn.  It was no novelty to him.  When first the outside world
and he had reopened communication, copies of that book had been
sent him.  His publisher had sent them, Madeline had sent them, his
grandparents had sent them, comrades had sent them, nurses and
doctors and newspaper men had brought them.  No, The Lances of Dawn
was not a novelty to its author.  But he wondered what was in the
envelope.

Mrs. Snow enlightened him.  "You sit right down now, Albert," she
said.  "Sit right down and listen because I've got somethin' to
tell you.  Yes, and somethin' to show you, too.  Here!  Stop now,
Zelotes!  You can't run away.  You've got to sit down and look on
and listen, too."

Captain Zelotes smiled resignedly.  There was, or so it seemed to
his grandson, an odd expression on his face.  He looked pleased,
but not altogether pleased.  However, he obeyed his wife's orders
and sat.

"Stop, look and listen," he observed.  "Mother, you sound like a
railroad crossin'.  All right, here I am.  Al, the society of 'What
did I tell you' is goin' to have a meetin'."

His wife nodded.  "Well," she said, triumphantly, "what DID I tell
you?  Wasn't I right?"

The captain pulled his beard and nodded.

"Right as right could be, Mother," he admitted.  "Your figgers was
a few hundred thousand out of the way, maybe, but barrin' that you
was perfectly right."

"Well, I'm glad to hear you say so for once in your life.  Albert,"
holding up the envelope, "do you know what this is?"

Albert, much puzzled, admitted that he did not.  His grandmother
put down the book, opened the envelope and took from it a slip of
paper.

"And can you guess what THIS is?" she asked.  Albert could not
guess.

"It's a check, that's what it is.  It's the first six months'
royalties, that's what they call 'em, on that beautiful book of
yours.  And how much do you suppose 'tis?"

Albert shook his head.  "Twenty-five dollars?" he suggested
jokingly.

"Twenty-five dollars!  It's over twenty-five HUNDRED dollars.  It's
twenty-eight hundred and forty-three dollars and sixty-five cents,
that's what it is.  Think of it!  Almost three thousand dollars!
And Zelotes prophesied that 'twouldn't be more than--"

Her husband held up his hand.  "Sh-sh!  Sh-sh, Mother," he said.
"Don't get started on what I prophesied or we won't be through till
doomsday.  I'll give in right off that I'm the worst prophet since
the feller that h'isted the 'Fair and Dry' signal the day afore
Noah's flood begun.  You see," he explained, turning to Albert,
"your grandma figgered out that you'd probably clear about half a
million on that book of poetry, Al.  I cal'lated 'twan't likely to
be much more'n a couple of hundred thousand, so--"

"Why, Zelotes Snow!  You said--"

"Yes, yes.  So I did, Mother, so I did.  You was right and I was
wrong.  Twenty-eight hundred ain't exactly a million, Al, but it's
a darn sight more than I ever cal'lated you'd make from that book.
Or 'most anybody else ever made from any book, fur's that goes," he
added, with a shake of the head.  "I declare, I--I don't understand
it yet.  And a poetry book, too!  Who in time BUYS 'em all?  Eh?"

Albert was looking at the check and the royalty statement.

"So this is why I couldn't get any satisfaction from the publisher,"
he observed.  "I wrote him two or three times about my royalties,
and he put me off each time.  I began to think there weren't any."

Captain Zelotes smiled.  "That's your grandma's doin's," he
observed.  "The check came to us a good while ago, when we thought
you was--was--well, when we thought--"

"Yes.  Surely, I understand," put in Albert, to help him out.

"Yes.  That's when 'twas.  And Mother, she was so proud of it,
because you'd earned it, Al, that she kept it and kept it, showin'
it to all hands and--and so on.  And then when we found out you
wasn't--that you'd be home some time or other--why, then she
wouldn't let me put it in the bank for you because she wanted to
give it to you herself.  That's what she said was the reason.  I
presume likely the real one was that she wanted to flap it in my
face every time she crowed over my bad prophesyin', which was about
three times a day and four on Sundays."

"Zelotes Snow, the idea!"

"All right, Mother, all right.  Anyhow, she got me to write your
publisher man and ask him not to give you any satisfaction about
those royalties, so's she could be the fust one to paralyze you
with 'em.  And," with a frank outburst, "if you ain't paralyzed,
Al, I own up that _I_ am.  Three thousand poetry profits beats me.
_I_ don't understand it."

His wife sniffed.  "Of course you don't," she declared.  "But
Albert does.  And so do I, only I think it ought to have been ever
and ever so much more.  Don't you, yourself, Albert?"

The author of The Lances of Dawn was still looking at the statement
of its earnings.

"Approximately eighteen thousand sold at fifteen cents royalty," he
observed.  "Humph!  Well, I'll be hanged!"

"But you said it would be twenty-five cents, not fifteen,"
protested Olive.  "In your letter when the book was first talked
about you said so."

Albert smiled.  "Did I?" he observed.  "Well, I said a good many
things in those days, I'm afraid.  Fifteen cents for a first book,
especially a book of verse, is fair enough, I guess.  But eighteen
thousand SOLD!  That is what gets me."

"You mean you think it ought to be a lot more.  So do I, Albert,
and so does Rachel.  Why, we like it a lot better than we do David
Harum.  That was a nice book, but it wasn't lovely poetry like
yours.  And David Harum sold a million.  Why shouldn't yours sell
as many?  Only eighteen thousand--why are you lookin' at me so
funny?"

Her grandson rose to his feet.  "Let's let well enough alone,
Grandmother," he said.  "Eighteen thousand will do, thank you.
I'm like Grandfather, I'm wondering who on earth bought them."

Mrs. Snow was surprised and a little troubled.

"Why, Albert," she said, "you act kind of--kind of queer, seems to
me.  You talk as if your poetry wasn't beautiful.  You know it is.
You used to say it was, yourself."

He interrupted her.  "Did I, Grandmother?" he said.  "All right,
then, probably I did.  Let's walk about the old place a little.  I
want to see it all.  By George, I've been dreaming about it long
enough!"

There were callers that afternoon, friends among the townsfolk, and
more still after supper.  It was late--late for South Harniss, that
is--when Albert, standing in the doorway of the bedroom he nor they
had ever expected he would occupy again, bade his grandparents good
night.  Olive kissed him again and again and, speech failing her,
hastened away down the hall.  Captain Zelotes shook his hand,
opened his mouth to speak, shut it again, repeated both operations,
and at last with a brief, "Well, good night, Al," hurried after his
wife.  Albert closed the door, put his lamp upon the bureau, and
sat down in the big rocker.

In a way the night was similar to that upon which he had first
entered that room.  It had ceased raining, but the wind, as on that
first night, was howling and whining about the eaves, the shutters
rattled and the old house creaked and groaned rheumatically.  It
was not as cold as on that occasion, though by no means warm.  He
remembered how bare and comfortless he had thought the room.  Now
it looked almost luxurious.  And he had been homesick, or fancied
himself in that condition.  Compared to the homesickness he had
known during the past eighteen months that youthful seizure seemed
contemptible and quite without excuse.  He looked about the room
again, looked long and lovingly.  Then, with a sigh of content,
drew from his pocket the two letters which had lain upon the
sitting-room table when he arrived, opened them and began to read.

Madeline wrote, as always, vivaciously and at length.  The maternal
censorship having been removed, she wrote exactly as she felt.  She
could scarcely believe he was really going to be at home when he
received this, at home in dear, quaint, queer old South Harniss.
Just think, she had not seen the place for ever and ever so long,
not for over two years.  How were all the funny, odd people who
lived there all the time?  Did he remember how he and she used to
go to church every Sunday and sit through those dreadful, DREADFUL
sermons by that prosy old minister just as an excuse for meeting
each other afterward?  She was SO sorry she could not have been
there to welcome her hero when he stepped from the train.  If it
hadn't been for Mother's poor nerves she surely would have been.
He knew it, didn't he?  Of course he did.  But she should see him
soon "because Mother is planning already to come back to New York
in a few weeks and then you are to run over immediately and make us
a LONG visit.  And I shall be so PROUD of you.  There are lots of
Army fellows down here now, officers for the most part.  So we
dance and are very gay--that is, the other girls are; I, being an
engaged young lady, am very circumspect and demure, of course.
Mother carries The Lances about with her wherever she goes, to teas
and such things, and reads aloud from it often.  Captain Blanchard,
he is one of the family's officer friends, is crazy about your
poetry, dear.  He thinks it WONDERFUL.  You know what _I_ think of
it, don't you, and when I think that _I_ actually helped you, or
played at helping you write some of it!

"And I am WILD to see your war cross.  Some of the officers here
have them--the crosses, I mean--but not many.  Captain Blanchard
has the military medal, and he is almost as modest about it as you
are about your decoration.  I don't see how you CAN be so modest.
If _I_ had a Croix de Guerre I should want EVERY ONE to know about
it.  At the tea dance the other afternoon there was a British major
who--"

And so on.  The second letter was really a continuation of the
first.  Albert read them both and, after the reading was finished,
sat for some time in the rocking chair, quite regardless of the
time and the cold, thinking.  He took from his pocketbook a
photograph, one which Madeline had sent him months before, which
had reached him while he lay in the French hospital after his
removal from the German camp.  He looked at the pretty face in the
photograph.  She looked just as he remembered her, almost exactly
as she had looked more than two years before, smiling, charming,
carefree.  She had not, apparently, grown older, those age-long
months had not changed her.  He rose and regarded his own
reflection in the mirror of the bureau.  He was surprised, as he
was constantly being surprised, to see that he, too, had not
changed greatly in personal appearance.

He walked about the room.  His grandmother had told him that his
room was just as he had left it.  "I wouldn't change it, Albert,"
she said, "even when we thought you--you wasn't comin' back.  I
couldn't touch it, somehow.  I kept thinkin', 'Some day I will.
Pretty soon I MUST.'  But I never did, and now I'm so glad."

He wandered back to the bureau and pulled open the upper drawers.
In those drawers were so many things, things which he had kept
there, either deliberately or because he was too indolent to
destroy them.  Old dance cards, invitations, and a bundle of
photographs, snapshots.  He removed the rubber band from the bundle
and stood looking them over.  Photographs of school fellows, of
picnic groups, of girls.  Sam Thatcher, Gertie Kendrick--and Helen
Kendall.  There were at least a dozen of Helen.

One in particular was very good.  From that photograph the face of
Helen as he had known it four years before looked straight up into
his--clear-eyed, honest, a hint of humor and understanding and
common-sense in the gaze and at the corners of the lips.  He looked
at the photograph, and the photograph looked up at him.  He had not
seen her for so long a time.  He wondered if the war had changed
her as it had changed him.  Somehow he hoped it had not.  Change
did not seem necessary in her case.

There had been no correspondence between them since her letter
written when she heard of his enlistment.  He had not replied to
that because he knew Madeline would not wish him to do so.  He
wondered if she ever thought of him now, if she remembered their
adventure at High Point light.  He had thought of her often enough.
In those days and nights of horror in the prison camp and hospital
he had found a little relief, a little solace in lying with closed
eyes and summoning back from memory the things of home and the
faces of home.  And her face had been one of these.  Her face and
those of his grandparents and Rachel and Laban, and visions of the
old house and the rooms--they were the substantial things to cling
to and he had clung to them.  They WERE home.  Madeline--ah! yes,
he had longed for her and dreamed of her, God knew, but Madeline,
of course, was different.

He snapped the rubber band once more about the bundle of photographs,
closed the drawer and prepared for bed.

For the two weeks following his return home he had a thoroughly
good time.  It was a tremendous comfort to get up when he pleased,
to eat the things he liked, to do much or little or nothing at his
own sweet will.  He walked a good deal, tramping along the beach in
the blustering wind and chilly sunshine and enjoying every breath
of the clean salt air.  He thought much during those solitary
walks, and at times, at home in the evenings, he would fall to
musing and sit silent for long periods.  His grandmother was
troubled.

"Don't it seem to you, Zelotes," she asked her husband, "as if
Albert was kind of discontented or unsatisfied these days?  He's
so--so sort of fidgety.  Talks like the very mischief for ten
minutes and then don't speak for half an hour.  Sits still for a
long stretch and then jumps up and starts off walkin' as if he was
crazy.  What makes him act so?  He's kind of changed from what he
used to be.  Don't you think so?"

The captain patted her shoulder.  "Don't worry, Mother," he said.
"Al's older than he was and what he's been through has made him
older still.  As for the fidgety part of it, the settin' down and
jumpin' up and all that, that's the way they all act, so far as I
can learn.  Elisha Warren, over to South Denboro, tells me his
nephew has been that way ever since he got back.  Don't fret,
Mother, Al will come round all right."

"I didn't know but he might be anxious to see--to see her, you
know."

"Her?  Oh, you mean the Fosdick girl.  Well, he'll be goin' to see
her pretty soon, I presume likely.  They're due back in New York
'most any time now, I believe. . . .  Oh, hum!  Why in time
couldn't he--"

"Couldn't he what, Zelotes?"

"Oh, nothin', nothin'."

The summons came only a day after this conversation.  It came in
the form of another letter from Madeline and one from Mrs. Fosdick.
They were, so the latter wrote, back once more in their city home,
her nerves, thank Heaven, were quite strong again, and they were
expecting him, Albert, to come on at once.  "We are all dying to
see you," wrote Mrs. Fosdick.  "And poor, dear Madeline, of course,
is counting the moments."

"Stay as long as you feel like, Al," said the captain, when told of
the proposed visit.  "It's the dull season at the office, anyhow,
and Labe and I can get along first-rate, with Issy to superintend.
Stay as long as you want to, only--"

"Only what, Grandfather?"

"Only don't want to stay too long.  That is, don't fall in love
with New York so hard that you forget there is such a place as
South Harniss."

Albert smiled.  "I've been in places farther away than New York,"
he said, "and I never forgot South Harniss."

"Um-hm. . . .  Well, I shouldn't be surprised if that was so.  But
you'll have better company in New York than you did in some of
those places.  Give my regards to Fosdick.  So-long, Al."



CHAPTER XVI


The Fosdick car was at the Grand Central Station when the
Knickerbocker Limited pulled in.  And Madeline, a wonderfully
furred and veiled and hatted Madeline, was waiting there behind the
rail as he came up the runway from the train.  It was amazing the
fact that it was really she.  It was more amazing still to kiss her
there in public, to hold her hand without fear that some one might
see.  To--

"Shall I take your bags, sir?"

It was the Fosdick footman who asked it.  Albert started guiltily.
Then he laughed, realizing that the hand-holding and the rest were
no longer criminal offenses.  He surrendered his luggage to the
man.  A few minutes later he and Madeline were in the limousine,
which was moving rapidly up the Avenue.  And Madeline was asking
questions and he was answering and--and still it was all a dream.
It COULDN'T be real.

It was even more like a dream when the limousine drew up before the
door of the Fosdick home and they entered that home together.  For
there was Mrs. Fosdick, as ever majestic, commanding, awe-inspiring,
the same Mrs. Fosdick who had, in her letter to his grandfather,
written him down a despicable, underhanded sneak, here was that same
Mrs. Fosdick--but not at all the same.  For this lady was smiling
and gracious, welcoming him to her home, addressing him by his
Christian name, treating him kindly, with almost motherly tenderness.
Madeline's letters and Mrs. Fosdick's own letters received during
his convalescence abroad had prepared him, or so he had thought, for
some such change.  Now he realized that he had not been prepared at
all.  The reality was so much more revolutionary than the
anticipation that he simply could not believe it.

But it was not so very wonderful if he had known all the facts and
had been in a frame of mind to calmly analyze them.  Mrs. Fletcher
Fosdick was a seasoned veteran, a general who had planned and
fought many hard campaigns upon the political battlegrounds of
women's clubs and societies of various sorts.  From the majority of
those campaigns she had emerged victorious, but her experiences in
defeat had taught her that the next best thing to winning is to
lose gracefully, because by so doing much which appears to be lost
may be regained.  For Albert Speranza, bookkeeper and would-be poet
of South Harniss, Cape Cod, she had had no use whatever as a
prospective son-in-law.  Even toward a living Albert Speranza, hero
and newspaper-made genius, she might have been cold.  But when that
hero and genius was, as she and every one else supposed, safely and
satisfactorily dead and out of the way, she had seized the
opportunity to bask in the radiance of his memory.  She had talked
Albert Speranza and read Albert Speranza and boasted of Albert
Speranza's engagement to her daughter before the world.  Now that
the said Albert Speranza had been inconsiderate enough to "come
alive again," there was but one thing for her to do--that is, to
make the best of it.  And when Mrs. Fletcher Fosdick made the best
of anything she made the very best.

"It doesn't make any difference," she told her husband, "whether he
really is a genius or whether he isn't.  We have said he is and now
we must keep on saying it.  And if he can't earn his salt by his
writings--which he probably can't--then you must fix it in some way
so that he can make-believe earn it by something else.  He is
engaged to Madeline, and we have told every one that he is, so he
will have to marry her; at least, I see no way to prevent it."

"Humph!" grunted Fosdick.  "And after that I'll have to support
them, I suppose."

"Probably--unless you want your only child to starve."

"Well, I must say, Henrietta--"

"You needn't, for there is nothing more TO say.  We're in it and,
whether we like it or not, we must make the best of it.  To do
anything now except appear joyful about it would be to make
ourselves perfectly ridiculous.  We can't do that, and you know
it."

Her husband still looked everything but contented.

"So far as the young fellow himself goes," he said, "I like him,
rather.  I've talked with him only once, of course, and then he and
I weren't agreeing exactly.  But I liked him, nevertheless.  If he
were anything but a fool poet I should be more reconciled."

He was snubbed immediately.  "THAT," declared Mrs. Fosdick, with
decision, "is the only thing that makes him possible."

So Mrs. Fosdick's welcome was whole-handed if not whole-hearted.
And her husband's also was cordial and intimate.  The only member
of the Fosdick household who did not regard the guest with favor
was Googoo.  That aristocratic bull-pup was still irreconcilably
hostile.  When Albert attempted to pet him he appeared to be
planning to devour the caressing hand, and when rebuked by his
mistress retired beneath a davenport, growling ominously.  Even
when ignominiously expelled from the room he growled and cast
longing backward glances at the Speranza ankles.  No, Googoo did
not dissemble; Albert was perfectly sure of his standing in
Googoo's estimation.

Dinner that evening was a trifle more formal than he had expected,
and he was obliged to apologize for the limitations of his
wardrobe.  His dress suit of former days he had found much too
dilapidated for use.  Besides, he had outgrown it.

"I thought I was thinner," he said, "and I think I am.  But I must
have broadened a bit.  At any rate, all the coats I left behind
won't do at all.  I shall have to do what Captain Snow, my
grandfather, calls 'refit' here in New York.  In a day or two I
hope to be more presentable."

Mrs. Fosdick assured him that it was quite all right, really.
Madeline asked why he didn't wear his uniform.  "I was dying to see
you in it," she said.  "Just think, I never have."

Albert laughed.  "You have been spared," he told her.  "Mine was
not a triumph, so far as fit was concerned.  Of course, I had a
complete new rig when I came out of the hospital, but even that was
not beautiful.  It puckered where it should have bulged and bulged
where it should have been smooth."

Madeline professed not to believe him.

"Nonsense!" she declared.  "I don't believe it.  Why, almost all
the fellows I know have been in uniform for the past two years and
theirs fitted beautifully."

"But they were officers, weren't they, and their uniforms were
custom made."

"Why, I suppose so.  Aren't all uniforms custom made?"

Her father laughed.  "Scarcely, Maddie," he said.  "The privates
have their custom-made by the mile and cut off in chunks for the
individual.  That was about it, wasn't it, Speranza?"

"Just about, sir."

Mrs. Fosdick evidently thought that the conversation was taking a
rather low tone.  She elevated it by asking what his thoughts were
when taken prisoner by the Germans.  He looked puzzled.

"Thoughts, Mrs. Fosdick?" he repeated.  "I don't know that I
understand, exactly.  I was only partly conscious and in a good
deal of pain and my thoughts were rather incoherent, I'm afraid."

"But when you regained consciousness, you know.  What were your
thoughts then?  Did you realize that you had made the great
sacrifice for your country?  Risked your life and forfeited your
liberty and all that for the cause?  Wasn't it a great satisfaction
to feel that you had done that?"

Albert's laugh was hearty and unaffected.  "Why, no," he said.  "I
think what I was realizing most just then was that I had made a
miserable mess of the whole business.  Failed in doing what I set
out to do and been taken prisoner besides.  I remember thinking,
when I was clear-headed enough to think anything, 'You fool, you
spent months getting into this war, and then got yourself out of it
in fifteen minutes.'  And it WAS a silly trick, too."

Madeline was horrified.

"What DO you mean?" she cried.  "Your going back there to rescue
your comrade a silly trick!  The very thing that won you your Croix
de Guerre?"

"Why, yes, in a way.  I didn't save Mike, poor fellow--"

"Mike!  Was his name Mike?"

"Yes; Michael Francis Xavier Kelly.  A South Boston Mick he was,
and one of the finest, squarest boys that ever drew breath.  Well,
poor Mike was dead when I got to him, so my trip had been for
nothing, and if he had been alive I could not have prevented his
being taken.  As it was, he was dead and I was a prisoner.  So
nothing was gained and, for me, personally, a good deal was lost.
It wasn't a brilliant thing to do.  But," he added apologetically,
"a chap doesn't have time to think collectively in such a scrape.
And it was my first real scrap and I was frightened half to death,
besides."

"Frightened!  Why, I never heard anything so ridiculous!  What--"

"One moment, Madeline."  It was Mrs. Fosdick who interrupted.  "I
want to ask--er--Albert a question.  I want to ask him if during
his long imprisonment he composed--wrote, you know.  I should have
thought the sights and experiences would have forced one to express
one's self--that is, one to whom the gift of expression was so
generously granted," she added, with a gracious nod.

Albert hesitated.

"Why, at first I did," he said.  "When I first was well enough to
think, I used to try to write--verses.  I wrote a good many.
Afterwards I tore them up."

"Tore them up!"  Both Mrs. and Miss Fosdick uttered this exclamation.

"Why, yes.  You see, they were such rot.  The things I wanted to
write about, the things _I_ had seen and was seeing, the--the
fellows like Mike and their pluck and all that--well, it was all
too big for me to tackle.  My jingles sounded, when I read them
over, like tunes on a street piano. _I_ couldn't do it.  A genius
might have been equal to the job, but I wasn't."

Mrs. Fosdick glanced at her husband.  There was something of
alarmed apprehension in the glance.  Madeline's next remark covered
the situation.  It expressed the absolute truth, so much more of
the truth than even the young lady herself realized at the time.

"Why, Albert Speranza," she exclaimed, "I never heard you speak of
yourself and your work in that way before.  Always--ALWAYS you have
had such complete, such splendid confidence in yourself.  You were
never afraid to attempt ANYTHING.  You MUST not talk so.  Don't you
intend to write any more?"

Albert looked at her.  "Oh, yes, indeed," he said simply.  "That is
just what I do intend to do--or try to do."

That evening, alone in the library, he and Madeline had their first
long, intimate talk, the first since those days--to him they seemed
as far away as the last century--when they walked the South Harniss
beach together, walked beneath the rainbows and dreamed.  And now
here was their dream coming true.

Madeline, he was realizing it as he looked at her, was prettier
than ever.  She had grown a little older, of course, a little more
mature, but surprisingly little.  She was still a girl, a very,
very pretty girl and a charming girl.  And he--

"What are you thinking about?" she demanded suddenly.

He came to himself.  "I was thinking about you," he said.  "You are
just as you used to be, just as charming and just as sweet.  You
haven't changed."

She smiled and then pouted.

"I don't know whether to like that or not," she said.  "Did you
expect to find me less--charming and the rest?"

"Why, no, of course not.  That was clumsy on my part.  What I meant
was that--well, it seems ages, centuries, since we were together
there on the Cape--and yet you have not changed."

She regarded him reflectively.

"You have," she said.

"Have what?"

"Changed.  You have changed a good deal.  I don't know whether I
like it or not.  Perhaps I shall be more certain by and by.  Now
show me your war cross.  At least you have brought that, even if
you haven't brought your uniform."

He had the cross in his pocket-book and he showed it to her.  She
enthused over it, of course, and wished he might wear it even when
in citizen's clothes.  She didn't see why he couldn't.  And it was
SUCH a pity he could not be in uniform.  Captain Blanchard had
called the evening before, to see Mother about some war charities
she was interested in, and he was still in uniform and wearing his
decorations, too.  Albert suggested that probably Blanchard was
still in service.  Yes, she believed he was, but she could not see
why that should make the difference.  Albert had BEEN in service.

He laughed at this and attempted to explain.  She seemed to resent
the attempt or the tone.

"I do wish," she said almost pettishly, "that you wouldn't be so
superior."

He was surprised.  "Superior!" he repeated.  "Superior!  I?
Superiority is the very least of my feelings.  I--superior!  That's
a joke."

And, oddly enough, she resented that even more.  "Why is it a
joke?" she demanded.  "I should think you had the right to feel
superior to almost any one.  A hero--and a genius!  You ARE
superior."

However, the little flurry was but momentary, and she was all
sweetness and smiles when she kissed him good night.  He was shown
to his room by a servant and amid its array of comforts--to him,
fresh from France and the camp and his old room at South Harniss,
it was luxuriously magnificent--he sat for some time thinking.  His
thoughts should have been happy ones, yet they were not entirely
so.  This is a curiously unsatisfactory world, sometimes.

The next day he went shopping.  Fosdick had given him a card to his
own tailor and Madeline had given him the names of several shops
where, so she declared, he could buy the right sort of ties and
things.  From the tailor's Albert emerged looking a trifle dazed;
after a visit to two of the shops the dazed expression was even
more pronounced.  His next visits were at establishments farther
downtown and not as exclusive.  He returned to the Fosdick home
feeling fairly well satisfied with the results achieved.  Madeline,
however, did not share his satisfaction.

"But Dad sent you to his tailor," she said.  "Why in the world
didn't you order your evening clothes there?  And Brett has the
most stunning ties.  Every one says so.  Instead you buy yours at a
department store.  Now why?"

He smiled.  "My dear girl," he said, "your father's tailor
estimated that he might make me a very passable dress suit for one
hundred and seventy-five dollars.  Brett's ties were stunning, just
as you say, but the prices ranged from five to eight dollars, which
was more stunning still.  For a young person from the country out
of a job, which is my condition at present, such things may be
looked at but not handled.  I can't afford them."

She tossed her head.  "What nonsense!" she exclaimed.  "You're not
out of a job, as you call it.  You are a writer and a famous
writer.  You have written one book and you are going to write more.
Besides, you must have made heaps of money from The Lances.  Every
one has been reading it."

When he told her the amount of his royalty check she expressed the
opinion that the publisher must have cheated.  It ought to have
been ever and ever so much more than that.  Such wonderful poems!

The next day she went to Brett's and purchased a half dozen of the
most expensive ties, which she presented to him forthwith.

"There!" she demanded.  "Aren't those nicer than the ones you
bought at that old department store?  Well, then!"

"But, Madeline, I must not let you buy my ties."

"Why not?  It isn't such an unheard-of thing for an engaged girl to
give her fiance a necktie."

"That isn't the idea.  I should have bought ties like those myself,
but I couldn't afford them.  Now for you to--"

"Nonsense!  You talk as if you were a beggar.  Don't be so silly."

"But, Madeline--"

"Stop!  I don't want to hear it."

She rose and went out of the room.  She looked as if she were on
the verge of tears.  He felt obliged to accept the gift, but he
disliked the principle of the things as much as ever.  When she
returned she was very talkative and gay and chatted all through
luncheon.  The subject of the ties was not mentioned again by
either of them.  He was glad he had not told her that his new dress
suit was ready-made.

While in France, awaiting his return home, he had purchased a ring
and sent it to her.  She was wearing it, of course.  Compared with
other articles of jewelry which she wore from time to time, his
ring made an extremely modest showing.  She seemed quite unaware of
the discrepancy, but he was aware of it.

On an evening later in the week Mrs. Fosdick gave a reception.
"Quite an informal affair," she said, in announcing her intention.
"Just a few intimate friends to meet Mr. Speranza, that is all.
Mostly lovers of literature--discerning people, if I may say so."

The quite informal affair looked quite formidably formal to Albert.
The few intimate friends were many, so it seemed to him.  There was
still enough of the former Albert Speranza left in his make-up to
prevent his appearing in the least distressed or ill at ease.  He
was, as he had always been when in the public eye, even as far back
as the school dancing-classes with the Misses Bradshaw's young
ladies, perfectly self-possessed, charmingly polite, absolutely
self-assured.  And his good looks had not suffered during his years
of imprisonment and suffering.  He was no longer a handsome boy,
but he was an extraordinarily attractive and distinguished man.

Mrs. Fosdick marked his manner and appearance and breathed a sigh
of satisfaction.  Madeline noted them.  Her young friends of the
sex noted them and whispered and looked approval.  What the young
men thought does not matter so much, perhaps.  One of these was the
Captain Blanchard, of whom Madeline had written and spoken.  He was
a tall, athletic chap, who looked well in his uniform, and whose
face was that of a healthy, clean-living and clean-thinking young
American.  He and Albert shook hands and looked each other over.
Albert decided he should like Blanchard if he knew him better.  The
captain was not talkative; in fact, he seemed rather taciturn.
Maids and matrons gushed when presented to the lion of the evening.
It scarcely seemed possible that they were actually meeting the
author of The Lances of Dawn.  That wonderful book!  Those wonderful
poems!  "How CAN you write them, Mr. Speranza?"  "When do your best
inspirations come, Mr. Speranza?"  "Oh, if I could write as you do I
should walk on air."  The matron who breathed the last-quoted
ecstasy was distinctly weighty; the mental picture of her pedestrian
trip through the atmosphere was interesting.  Albert's hand was
patted by the elderly spinsters, young women's eyes lifted soulful
glances to his.

It was the sort of thing he would have revelled in three or four
years earlier.  Exactly the sort of thing he had dreamed of when
the majority of the poems they gushed over were written.  It was
much the same thing he remembered having seen his father undergo
in the days when he and the opera singer were together.  And his
father had, apparently, rather enjoyed it.  He realized all this--
and he realized, too, with a queer feeling that it should be so,
that he did not like it at all.  It was silly.  Nothing he had
written warranted such extravagances.  Hadn't these people any
sense of proportion?  They bored him to desperation.  The sole
relief was the behavior of the men, particularly the middle-aged or
elderly men, obviously present through feminine compulsion.  They
seized his hand, moved it up and down with a pumping motion,
uttered some stereotyped prevarications about their pleasure at
meeting him and their having enjoyed his poems very much, and then
slid on in the direction of the refreshment room.

And Albert, as he shook hands, bowed and smiled and was charmingly
affable, found his thoughts wandering until they settled upon
Private Mike Kelly and the picturesque language of the latter when
he, as sergeant, routed him out for guard duty.  Mike had not
gushed over him nor called him a genius.  He had called him many
things, but not that.

He was glad indeed when he could slip away for a dance with
Madeline.  He found her chatting gaily with Captain Blanchard, who
had been her most recent partner.  He claimed her from the captain
and as he led her out to the dance floor she whispered that she was
very proud of him.  "But I DO wish YOU could wear your war cross,"
she added.

The quite informal affair was the first of many quite as informally
formal.  Also Mrs. Fosdick's satellites and friends of the literary
clubs and the war work societies seized the opportunity to make
much of the heroic author of The Lances of Dawn.  His society was
requested at teas, at afternoon as well as evening gatherings.  He
would have refused most of these invitations, but Madeline and her
mother seemed to take his acceptance for granted; in fact, they
accepted for him.  A ghastly habit developed of asking him to read
a few of his own poems on these occasions.  "PLEASE, Mr. Speranza.
It will be such a treat, and such an HONOR."  Usually a particular
request was made that he read "The Greater Love."  Now "The Greater
Love" was the poem which, written in those rapturous days when he
and Madeline first became aware of their mutual adoration, was
refused by one editor as a "trifle too syrupy."  To read that
sticky effusion over and over again became a torment.  There were
occasions when if a man had referred to "The Greater Love," its
author might have howled profanely and offered bodily violence.
But no men ever did refer to "The Greater Love."

On one occasion when a sentimental matron and her gushing daughter
had begged to know if he did not himself adore that poem, if he did
not consider it the best he had ever written, he had answered
frankly.  He was satiated with cake and tea and compliments that
evening and recklessly truthful.  "You really wish to know my
opinion of that poem?" he asked.  Indeed and indeed they really
wished to knew just that thing.  "Well, then, I think it's rot," he
declared.  "I loathe it."

Of course mother and daughter were indignant.  Their comments
reached Madeline's ear.  She took him to task.

"But why did you say it?" she demanded.  "You know you don't mean
it."

"Yes, I do mean it.  It IS rot.  Lots of the stuff in that book of
mine is rot.  I did not think so once, but I do now.  If I had the
book to make over again, that sort wouldn't be included."

She looked at him for a moment as if studying a problem.

"I don't understand you sometimes," she said slowly.  "You are
different.  And I think what you said to Mrs. Bacon and Marian was
very rude."

Later when he went to look for her he found her seated with Captain
Blanchard in a corner.  They were eating ices and, apparently,
enjoying themselves.  He did not disturb them.  Instead he hunted
up the offended Bacons and apologized for his outbreak.  The
apology, although graciously accepted, had rather wearisome
consequences.  Mrs. Bacon declared she knew that he had not really
meant what he said.

"I realize how it must be," she declared.  "You people of
temperament, of genius, of aspirations, are never quite satisfied,
you cannot be.  You are always trying, always seeking the higher
attainment.  Achievements of the past, though to the rest of us
wonderful and sublime, are to you--as you say, 'rot.'  That is it,
is it not?"  Albert said he guessed it was, and wandered away,
seeking seclusion and solitude.  When the affair broke up he found
Madeline and Blanchard still enjoying each other's society.  Both
were surprised when told the hour.



CHAPTER XVII


So the first three weeks of his proposed month's visit passed and
the fourth began.  And more and more his feelings of dissatisfaction
and uneasiness increased.  The reasons for those feelings he found
hard to define.  The Fosdicks were most certainly doing their best
to make him comfortable and happy.  They were kind--yes, more than
kind.  Mr. Fosdick he really began to like.  Mrs. Fosdick's manner
had a trace of condescension in it, but as the lady treated all
creation with much the same measure of condescension, he was more
amused than resentful.  And Madeline--Madeline was sweet and
charming and beautiful.  There was in her manner toward him, or so
he fancied, a slight change, perhaps a change a trifle more marked
since the evening when his expressed opinion of "The Greater Love"
had offended her and the Bacons.  It seemed to him that she was more
impatient, more capricious, sometimes almost overwhelming him with
attention and tenderness and then appearing to forget him entirely
and to be quite indifferent to his thoughts and opinions.  Her moods
varied greatly and there were occasions when he found it almost
impossible to please her.  At these times she took offense when no
offense was intended and he found himself apologizing when, to say
the least, the fault, if there was any, was not more than half his.
But she always followed those moods with others of contrition and
penitence and then he was petted and fondled and his forgiveness
implored.

These slight changes in her he noticed, but they troubled him
little, principally because he was coming to realize the great
change in himself.  More and more that change was forcing itself
upon him.  The stories and novels he had read during the first
years of the war, the stories by English writers in which young
men, frivolous and inconsequential, had enlisted and fought and
emerged from the ordeal strong, purposeful and "made-over"--those
stories recurred to him now.  He had paid little attention to the
"making-over" idea when he read those tales, but now he was forced
to believe there might be something in it.  Certainly something,
the three years or the discipline and training and suffering, or
all combined, had changed him.  He was not as he used to be.
Things he liked very much he no longer liked at all.  And where,
oh where, was the serene self-satisfaction which once was his?

The change must be quite individual, he decided.  All soldiers were
not so affected.  Take Blanchard, for instance.  Blanchard had seen
service, more and quite as hard fighting as he had seen, but
Blanchard was, to all appearances, as light-hearted and serene and
confident as ever.  Blanchard was like Madeline; he was much the
same now as he had been before the war.  Blanchard could dance and
talk small talk and laugh and enjoy himself.  Well, so could he, on
occasions, for that matter, if that had been all.  But it was not
all, or if it was why was he at other times so discontented and
uncomfortable?  What was the matter with him, anyway?

He drew more and more into his shell and became more quiet and less
talkative.  Madeline, in one of her moods, reproached him for it.

"I do wish you wouldn't be grumpy," she said.

They had been sitting in the library and he had lapsed into a fit
of musing, answering her questions with absentminded monosyllables.
Now he looked up.

"Grumpy?" he repeated.  "Was I grumpy?  I beg your pardon."

"You should.  You answered every word I spoke to you with a grunt
or a growl.  I might as well have been talking to a bear."

"I'm awfully sorry, dear.  I didn't feel grumpy.  I was thinking, I
suppose."

"Thinking!  You are always thinking.  Why think, pray? . . .  If I
permitted myself to think, I should go insane."

"Madeline, what do you mean?"

"Oh, nothing.  I'm partially insane now, perhaps.  Come, let's go
to the piano.  I feel like playing.  You don't mind, do you?"

That evening Mrs. Fosdick made a suggestion to her husband.

"Fletcher," she said, "I am inclined to think it is time you and
Albert had a talk concerning the future.  A business talk, I mean.
I am a little uneasy about him.  From some things he has said to me
recently I gather that he is planning to earn his living with his
pen."

"Well, how else did you expect him to earn it; as bookkeeper for
the South Harniss lumber concern?"

"Don't be absurd.  What I mean is that he is thinking of devoting
himself to literature exclusively.  Don't interrupt me, please.
That is very beautiful and very idealistic, and I honor him for it,
but I cannot see Madeline as an attic poet's wife, can you?"

"I can't, and I told you so in the beginning."

"No.  Therefore I should take him to one side and tell him of the
opening in your firm.  With that as a means of keeping his feet on
the ground his brain may soar as it likes, the higher the better."

Mr. Fosdick, as usual, obeyed orders and that afternoon Albert and
he had the "business talk."  Conversation at dinner was somewhat
strained.  Mr. Fosdick was quietly observant and seemed rather
amused about something.  His wife was dignified and her manner
toward her guest was inclined to be abrupt.  Albert's appetite was
poor.  As for Madeline, she did not come down to dinner, having a
headache.

She came down later, however.  Albert, alone in the library, was
sitting, a book upon his knees and his eyes fixed upon nothing in
particular, when she came in.

"You are thinking again, I see," she said.

He had not heard her enter.  Now he rose, the book falling to the
floor.

"Why--why, yes," he stammered.  "How are you feeling?  How is your
head?"

"It is no worse.  And no better.  I have been thinking, too, which
perhaps explains it.  Sit down, Albert, please.  I want to talk
with you.  That is what I have been thinking about, that you and I
must talk."

She seated herself upon the davenport and he pulled forward a chair
and sat facing her.  For a moment she was silent.  When she did
speak, however, her question was very much to the point.

"Why did you say 'No' to Father's offer?" she asked.  He had been
expecting this very question, or one leading up to it.  Nevertheless,
he found answering difficult.  He hesitated, and she watched him,
her impatience growing.

"Well?" she asked.

He sighed.  "Madeline," he said, "I am afraid you think me very
unreasonable, certainly very ungrateful."

"I don't know what to think about you.  That is why I feel we must
have this talk.  Tell me, please, just what Father said to you this
afternoon."

"He said--well, the substance of what he said was to offer me a
position in his office, in his firm."

"What sort of a position?"

"Well, I--I scarcely know.  I was to have a desk there and--and be
generally--ornamental, I suppose.  It was not very definite, the
details of the position, but--"

"The salary was good, wasn't it?"

"Yes; more than good.  Much too good for the return I could make
for it, so it seemed to me."

"And your prospects for the future?  Wasn't the offer what people
call a good opportunity?"

"Why, yes, I suppose it was.  For the right sort of man it would
have been a wonderful opportunity.  Your father was most kind, most
generous, Madeline.  Please don't think I am not appreciative.  I
am, but--"

"Don't.  I want to understand it all.  He offered you this
opportunity, this partnership in his firm, and you would not
accept it?  Why?  Don't you like my father?"

"Yes, I like him very much."

"Didn't you," with the slightest possible curl of the lip, "think
the offer worthy of you? . . .  Oh, I don't mean that!  Please
forgive me.  I am trying not to be disagreeable.  I--I just want to
understand, Albert, that's all."

He nodded.  "I know, Madeline," he said.  "You have the right to
ask.  It wasn't so much a question of the offer being worthy of me
as of my being worthy the offer.  Oh, Madeline, why should you and
I pretend?  You know why Mr. Fosdick made me that offer.  It wasn't
because I was likely to be worth ten dollars a year to his firm.
In Heaven's name, what use would I be in a stockbroker's office,
with my make-up, with my lack of business ability?  He would be
making a place for me there and paying me a high salary for one
reason only, and you know what that is.  Now don't you?"

She hesitated now, but only for an instant.  She colored a little,
but she answered bravely.

"I suppose I do," she said, "but what of it?  It is not unheard of,
is it, the taking one's prospective son-in-law into partnership?"

"No, but--  We're dodging the issue again, Madeline.  If I were
likely to be of any help to your father's business, instead of a
hindrance, I might perhaps see it differently.  As it is, I
couldn't accept unless I were willing to be an object of charity."

"Did you tell Father that?"

"Yes."

"What did he say?"

"He said a good deal.  He was frank enough to say that he did not
expect me to be of great assistance to the firm.  But I might be of
SOME use--he didn't put it as baldly as that, of course--and at all
times I could keep on with my writing, with my poetry, you know.
The brokerage business should not interfere with my poetry, he
said; your mother would scalp him if it did that."

She smiled faintly.  "That sounds like dad," she commented.

"Yes.  Well, we talked and argued for some time on the subject.
He asked me what, supposing I did not accept this offer of his,
my plans for the future might be.  I told him they were pretty
unsettled as yet.  I meant to write, of course.  Not poetry
altogether.  I realized, I told him, that I was not a great poet, a
poet of genius."

Madeline interrupted.  Her eyes flashed.

"Why do you say that?" she demanded.  "I have heard you say it
before.  That is, recently.  In the old days you were as sure as
I that you were a real poet, or should be some day.  You never
doubted it.  You used to tell me so and I loved to hear you."

Albert shook his head.  "I was sure of so many things then," he
said.  "I must have been an insufferable kid."

She stamped her foot.  "It was less than three years ago that you
said it," she declared.  "You are not so frightfully ancient
now. . . .  Well, go on, go on.  How did it end, the talk with
Father, I mean?"

"I told him," he continued, "that I meant to write and to earn my
living by writing.  I meant to try magazine work--stories, you
know--and, soon, a novel.  He asked if earning enough to support a
wife on would not be a long job at that time.  I said I was afraid
it might, but that that seemed to me my particular game,
nevertheless."

She interrupted again.  "Did it occur to you to question whether or
not that determination of yours was quite fair to me?" she asked.

"Why--why, yes, it did.  And I don't know that it IS exactly fair
to you.  I--"

"Never mind.  Go on.  Tell me the rest.  How did it end?"

"Well, it ended in a sort of flare-up.  Mr. Fosdick was just a
little bit sarcastic, and I expressed my feelings rather freely--
too freely, I'm afraid."

"Never mind.  I want to know what you said."

"To be absolutely truthful, then, this is what I said:  I said that
I appreciated his kindness and was grateful for the offer.  But my
mind was made up.  I would not live upon his charity and draw a
large salary for doing nothing except be a little, damned tame
house-poet led around in leash and exhibited at his wife's club
meetings. . . .  That was about all, I think.  We shook hands at
the end.  He didn't seem to like me any the less for . . .  Why,
Madeline, have I offended you?  My language was pretty strong, I
know, but--"

She had bowed her head upon her arms amid the sofa cushions and was
crying.  He sprang to his feet and bent over her.

"Why, Madeline," he said again, "I beg your pardon.  I'm sorry--"

"Oh, it isn't that," she sobbed.  "It isn't that.  I don't care
what you said."

"What is it, then?"

She raised her head and looked at him.

"It is you," she cried.  "It is myself.  It is everything.  It is
all wrong.  I--I was so happy and--and now I am miserable.  Oh--oh,
I wish I were dead!"

She threw herself upon the cushions again and wept hysterically.
He stood above her, stroking her hair, trying to soothe her, to
comfort her, and all the time he felt like a brute, a heartless
beast.  At last she ceased crying, sat up and wiped her eyes with
her handkerchief.

"There!" she exclaimed.  "I will not be silly any longer.  I won't
be!  I WON'T! . . .  Now tell me:  Why have you changed so?"

He looked down at her and shook his head.  He was conscience-
stricken and fully as miserable as she professed to be.

"I don't know," he said.  "I am older and--and--and I DON'T see
things as I used to.  If that book of mine had appeared three years
ago I have no doubt I should have believed it to be the greatest
thing ever printed.  Now, when people tell me it is and I read what
the reviewers said and all that, I--I DON'T believe, I KNOW it
isn't great--that is, the most of it isn't.  There is some pretty
good stuff, of course, but--  You see, I think it wasn't the poems
themselves that made it sell; I think it was all the fool tommyrot
the papers printed about me, about my being a hero and all that
rubbish, when they thought I was dead, you know.  That--"

She interrupted.  "Oh, don't!" she cried.  "Don't!  I don't care
about the old book.  I'm not thinking about that.  I'm thinking
about you.  YOU aren't the same--the same toward me."

"Toward you, Madeline?  I don't understand what you mean."

"Yes, you do.  Of course you do.  If you were the same as you used
to be, you would let Father help you.  We used to talk about that
very thing and--and you didn't resent it then."

"Didn't I?  Well, perhaps I didn't.  But I think I remember our
speaking sometimes of sacrificing everything for each other.  We
were to live in poverty, if necessary, and I was to write, you
know, and--"

"Stop!  All that was nonsense, nonsense! you know it."

"Yes, I'm afraid it was."

"You know it was.  And if you were as you used to be, if you--"

"Madeline!"

"What?  Why did you interrupt me?"

"Because I wanted to ask you a question.  Do you think YOU are
exactly the same--as you used to be?"

"What do you mean?"

"Haven't YOU changed a little?  Are you as sure as you were then--
as sure of your feeling toward me?"

She gazed at him, wide-eyed.  "WHAT do you mean?"

"I mean ARE you sure?  It has seemed to me that perhaps--I was out
of your life for a long time, you know, and during a good deal of
that time it seemed certain that I had gone forev