as!

An extract or two will sufficiently exhibit Brewster in his lunes.
Sending back some alchemistic book to Winthrop, he tells him that if his
name be kept secret, "I will write as clear a light, as far as I dare to,
in finding the first ingredience.... The first figure in Flamonell doth
plainly resemble the first ingredience, what it is, & from whence it
comes, & how gotten, as there you may plainly see set forth by 2
resemblances held in a man's hand; for the confections there named is a
delusion, for they are but the operations of the work after some time
set, as the scum of the Red Sea, which is the Virgin's Milk upon the top
of the vessel, white. Red Sea is the sun & moon calcinated & brought &
reduced into water mineral which in some time, & most of the whole time,
is red. 2ndly, the fat of mercurial wind, that is the fat or quintessence
of sun & moon, earth & water, drawn out from them both, & flies aloft &
bore up by the operation of our mercury, that is our fire which is our
air or wind." This is as satisfactory as Lepidus's account of the
generation of the crocodile: "Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your
mud by the operation of your sun: so is your crocodile." After describing
the three kinds of fire, that of the lamp, that of ashes, and that
against nature, which last "is the fire of fire, that is the secret fire
drawn up, being the quintessence of the sun & moon, with the other
mercurial water joined with & together, which is fire elemental," he
tells us that "these fires are & doth contain the whole mystery of the
work." The reader, perhaps, thinks that he has nothing to do but
forthwith to turn all the lead he can lay his hands on into gold. But no:
"If you had the first ingredience & the proportion of each, yet all were
nothing if you had not the certain times & seasons of the planets &
signs, when to give more or less of this fire, namely a hot & dry, a cold
& moist fire which you must use in the mercurial water before it comes to
black & after into white & then red, which is only done by these fires,
which when you practise you will easily see & perceive, that you shall
stand amazed, & admire at the great & admirable wisdom of God, that can
produce such a wonderful, efficacious, powerful thing as this is to
convert all metallic bodies to its own nature, which may be well called a
first essence. I say by such weak simple means of so little value & so
little & easy labor & skill, that I may say with Artephus, 200 page, it
is of a worke so easy & short, fitter for women & young children than
sage & grave men.... I thank the Lord, I understand the matter perfectly
in the said book, yet I could desire to have it again 12 months hence,
for about that time I shall have occasion to peruse, whenas I come to the
second working which is most difficult, which will be some three or [4]
months before the perfect white, & afterwards, as Artephus saith, I may
burn my books, for he saith it is one regiment as well for the red as for
the white. The Lord in mercy give me life to see the end of it!"--an
exclamation I more than once made in the course of some of Brewster's
periods.

Again, under pledge of profound secrecy, he sends Winthrop a manuscript,
which he may communicate to the owner of the volume formerly lent,
because "it gave me such light in the second work as I should not readily
have found out by study, also & especially how to work the elixir fit for
medicine & healing all maladies which is clean another way of working
than we held formerly. Also a light given how to dissolve any hard
substance into the elixir, which is also another work. And many other
things which in Ribley [Ripley?] I could not find out. More works of the
same I would gladly see ... for, Sir, so it is that any book of this
subject, I can understand it, though never so darkly written, having both
knowledge & experience of the world,[144] that now easily I may
understand their envious carriages to hide it.... You may marvel why I
should give any light to others in this thing before I have perfected my
own. This know, that my work being true thus far by all their writings,
it cannot fail ... for if &c &c you cannot miss if you would, except you
break your glass." He confesses he is mistaken as to the time required,
which he now, as well as I can make out, reckons at about ten years. "I
fear I shall not live to see it finished, in regard partly of the
Indians, who, I fear, will raise wars, as also I have a conceit that God
sees me not worthy of such a blessing, by reason of my manifold
miscarriages." Therefore he "will shortly write all the whole work in few
words plainly which may be done in 20 lines from the first to the last &
seal it up in a little box & subscribe it to yourself ... & will so write
it that neither wife nor children shall know thereof." If Winthrop should
succeed in bringing the work to perfection, Brewster begs him to remember
his wife and children. "I mean if this my work should miscarry by wars of
the Indians, for I may not remove it till it be perfected, otherwise I
should so unsettle the body by removing sun & moon out of their settled
places, that there would then be no other afterworking." Once more he
inculcates secrecy, and for a most comical reason: "For it is such a
secret as is not fit for every one either for secrecy or for parts to use
it, as God's secret for his glory, to do good there with, or else they
may do a great deal of hurt, spending & employing it to satisfy sinful
lusts. Therefore, I intreat you, sir, spare to use my name, & let my
letters I send either be safely kept or burned that I write about it, for
indeed, sir, I am more than before sensible of the evil effects that will
arise by the publishing of it. I should never be at quiet, neither at
home nor abroad, for one or other that would be enquiring & seeking after
knowledge thereof, that I should be tired out & forced to leave the
place: nay, it would be blazed abroad into Europe." How much more comic
is nature than any comedy! _Mutato nomine de te_. Take heart, ambitious
youth, the sun and moon will be no more disconcerted by any effort of
yours than by the pots and pans of Jonathan Brewster. It is a curious
proof of the duality so common (yet so often overlooked) in human
character, that Brewster was all this while manager of the Plymouth
trading-post, near what is now New London. The only professors of the
transmutation of metals who still impose on mankind are to be found in
what is styled the critical department of literature. Their _materia
prima_, or universal solvent, serves equally for the lead of Tupper or
the brass of Swinburne.

In a letter of Sir Kenelm Digby to J. Winthrop, Jr., we find some odd
prescriptions. "For all sorts of agues, I have of late tried the
following magnetical experiment with infallible success. Pare the
patient's nails when the fit is coming on, & put the parings into a
little bag of fine linen or sarsenet, & tie that about a live eel's neck
in a tub of water. The eel will die & the patient will recover. And if a
dog or hog eat that eel, they will also die."

  "The man recovered of the bite,
      The dog it was that died!"

"I have known one that cured all deliriums & frenzies whatsoever, & at
once taking, with an elixir made of dew, nothing but dew purified &
nipped up in a glass & digested 15 months till all of it was become a
gray powder, not one drop of humidity remaining. This I know to be true,
& that first it was as black as ink, then green then gray, & at 22
months' end it was as white & lustrous as any oriental pearl. But it
cured manias at 15 months' end." Poor Brewster would have been the better
for a dose of it, as well as some in our day, who expect to cure men of
being men by act of Congress. In the same letter Digby boasts of having
made known the properties of _quinquina_, and also of the sympathetic
powder, with which latter he wrought a "famous cure" of pleasant James
Howell, author of the "Letters." I do not recollect that Howell anywhere
alludes to it. In the same letter, Digby speaks of the books he had sent
to Harvard College, and promises to send more. In all Paris he cannot
find a copy of Blaise Viginere _Des Chiffres_. "I had it in my library in
England, but at the plundering of my house I lost it with many other good
books. I have _laid out_ in all places for it." The words we have
underscored would be called a Yankeeism now. The house was Gatehurst, a
fine Elizabethan dwelling, still, or lately, standing. Digby made his
peace with Cromwell, and professes his readiness to spend his blood for
him. He kept well with both sides, and we are not surprised to find Hooke
saying that he hears no good of him from any.

The early colonists found it needful to bring over a few trained
soldiers, both as drillmasters and engineers. Underhill, Patrick, and
Gardner had served in the Low Countries, probably also Mason. As Paris
has been said to be not precisely the place for a deacon, so the camp of
the Prince of Orange could hardly have been the best training-school for
Puritans in practice, however it may have been for masters of casuistic
theology. The position of these rough warriors among a people like those
of the first emigration must have been a droll one. That of Captain
Underhill certainly was. In all our early history, there is no figure so
comic. Full of the pedantry of his profession and fond of noble phrases,
he is a kind of cross between Dugald Dalgetty and Ancient Pistol, with a
slight relish of the _miles gloriosus_. Underhill had taken side with Mr.
Wheelwright in his heretical opinions, and there is every reason why he
should have maintained, with all the ardor of personal interest, the
efficiency of a covenant of grace without reference to the works of the
subject of it. Coming back from a visit to England in 1638, he "was
questioned for some speeches uttered by him in the ship, viz: that they
at Boston were zealous as the scribes and pharisees were and as Paul was
before his conversion, which he denying, they were proved to his face by
a sober woman whom he had seduced in the ship and drawn to his opinion;
but she was afterwards better informed in the truth. Among other
passages, he told her how he came by his assurance, saying that, having
long lain under a spirit of bondage, and continued in a legal way near
five years, he could get no assurance, till at length, as he was taking a
pipe of the good creature tobacco, the spirit fell home upon his heart,
an absolute promise of free grace, with such assurance and joy, as he
never doubted since of his good estate, neither should he, whatsoever sin
he should fall into,--a good preparative for such motions as he
familiarly used to make to some of that sex.... The next day he was
called again and banished. The Lord's day after, he made a speech in the
assembly, showing that as the Lord was pleased to convert Paul as he was
persecuting &c, so he might manifest himself to him as he was making
moderate use of the good creature called tobacco." A week later "he was
privately dealt with upon suspicion of incontinency ... but his excuse
was that the woman was in great trouble of mind, and some temptations,
and that he resorted to her to comfort her." He went to the Eastward,
and, having run himself out there, thought it best to come back to Boston
and reinstate himself by eating his leek. "He came in his worst clothes
(being accustomed to take great pride in his bravery and neatness)
without a band, in a foul linen cap pulled close to his eyes, and,
standing upon a form, he did, with many deep sighs and abundance of
tears, lay open his wicked course, his adultery, his hypocrisy &c. He
spake well, save that his blubbering &c. interrupted him." We hope he was
a sincere penitent, but men of his complexion are apt to be pleased with
such a tragi-comedy of self-abasement, if only they can be chief actors
and conspicuous enough therein. In the correspondence before us Underhill
appears in full turkey-cock proportions. Not having been advanced
according to his own opinion of his merits, he writes to Governor
Winthrop, with an oblique threat that must have amused him somewhat: "I
profess, sir, till I know the cause, I shall not be satisfied, but I hope
God will subdue me to his will; yet this I say that such handling of
officers in foreign parts hath so far subverted some of them as to cause
them turn public rebels against their state & kingdom, which God forbid
should ever be found once so much as to appear in my breast." Why, then
the world's mine oyster, which I with sword will open! Next we hear him
on a point of military discipline at Salem. "It is this: how they have of
their own appointment made them a captain, lieutenant & ensign, & after
such a manner as was never heard of in any school of war, nor in no
kingdom under heaven.... For my part, if there should not be a
reformation in this disordered practise, I would not acknowledge such
officers. If officers should be of no better esteem than for constables
to place them, & martial discipline to proceed disorderly, I would rather
lay down my command than to shame so noble a prince from whom we came."
Again: "Whereas it is somewhat questionable whether the three months I
was absent, as well in the service of the country as of other particular
persons, my request therefore is that this honored Court would be pleased
to decide this controversy, myself alleging it to be the custom of
Nations that, if a Commander be lent to another State, by that State to
whom he is a servant, both his place & means is not detained from him, so
long as he doth not refuse the call of his own State to which he is a
servant, in case they shall call him home." Then bringing up again his
"ancient suit" for a grant of land, he throws in a neat touch of piety:
"& if the honored Court shall vouchsafe to make some addition, that which
hath not been deserved, by the same power of God, may be in due season."
In a postscript, he gives a fine philosophical reason for this desired
addition which will go to the hearts of many in these days of high prices
and wasteful taxation. "The time was when a little went far; then much
was not known nor desired; the reason of the difference lieth only in the
error of judgment, for nature requires no more to uphold it now than when
it was satisfied with less." The valiant Captain interprets the law of
nations, as sovereign powers are wont to do, to suit his advantage in the
special case. We find a parallel case in a letter of Bryan Rosseter to
John Winthrop, Jr., pleading for a remission of taxes. "The lawes of
nations exempt allowed phisitians from personall services, & their
estates from rates & assessments." In the Declaration of the town of
Southampton on Long Island (1673), the dignity of constable is valued at
a juster rate than Underhill was inclined to put upon it. The Dutch, it
seems, demanded of them "to deliver up to them the badge of Civil &
Military power; namely, the Constable's staffe & the Colonel's." Mayor
Munroe of New Orleans did not more effectually magnify his office when he
surrendered the city to General Butler.

Underhill's style is always of the finest. His spelling was under the
purest covenant of grace. I must give a single specimen of it from a
letter whose high moral tone is all the more diverting that it was
written while he was under excommunication for the sin which he
afterwards confessed. It is addressed to Winthrop and Dudley. "Honnored
in the Lord. Youer silenc one more admirse me. I youse chrischan
playnnes. I know you love it. Silenc can not reduce the hart of youer
love'g brother: I would the rightchous would smite me, espeschali youer
slfe & the honnored Depoti to whom I also dereckt this letter together
with youer honnored slfe. Jesos Christ did wayt; & God his Father did dig
and telfe bout the barren figtre before he would cast it of: I would to
God you would tender my soule so as to youse playnnes with me." (As if
anything could be plainer than excommunication and banishment!) "I wrot
to you both, but now [no] answer; & here I am dayli abused by malischous
tongse: John Baker I here hath rot to the honnored depoti how as I was
dronck & like to be cild, & both falc, upon okachon I delt with Wanuerton
for intrushon, & findding them resolutli bent to rout out all gud a mong
us & advanc there superstischous waye, & by boystrous words indeferd to
fritten men to acomplish his end, & he abusing me to my face, dru upon
him with intent to corb his insolent and dasterdli sperrite, but now [no]
danger of my life, although it might hafe bin just with God to hafe
giffen me in the hanse of youer enemise & mine, for they hat the wayse of
the Lord & them that profes them, & therfore layes trapes to cachte the
pore into there deboyst corses, as ister daye on Pickeren their Chorch
Warden caim up to us with intent to mak some of ourse dronc, as is
sospeckted, but the Lord soferd him so to misdemen himslfe as he is likli
to li by the hielse this too month.... My hombel request is that you will
be charitabel of me.... Let justies and merci be goyned.... You may plese
to soggest youer will to this barrer, you will find him tracktabel." The
concluding phrase seems admirably chosen, when we consider the means of
making people "tractable" which the magistrates of the Bay had in their
hands, and were not slow to exercise, as Underhill himself had
experienced.

I cannot deny myself the pleasure of giving one more specimen of the
Captain's "grand-delinquent" style, as I once heard such fine writing
called by a person who little dreamed what a hit he had made. So far as I
have observed, our public defaulters, and others who have nothing to say
for themselves, always rise in style as they sink in self-respect. He is
speaking of one Scott, who had laid claim to certain lands, and had been
called on to show his title. "If he break the comand of the Asembli &
bring not in the counterfit portreture of the King imprest in yello waxe,
anext to his false perpetuiti of 20 mile square, where by he did chet the
Town of Brouckhaven, he is to induer the sentance of the Court of
Asisies." Pistol would have been charmed with that splendid amplification
of the Great Seal. We have seen nothing like it in our day, except in a
speech made to Mr. George Peabody at Danvers, if I recollect, while that
gentleman was so elaborately concealing from his left hand what his right
had been doing. As examples of Captain Underhill's adroitness in phonetic
spelling, I offer _fafarabel_ and _poseschonse_, and  reluctantly leave
him.

Another very entertaining fellow for those who are willing to work
through a pretty thick husk of tiresomeness for a genuine kernel of humor
underneath is Coddington. The elder Winthrop endured many trials, but I
doubt if any were sharper than those which his son had to undergo in the
correspondence of this excellently tiresome man. _Tantae molis Romanam
condere gentem!_ The dulness of Coddington, always that of no ordinary
man, became irritable and aggressive after being stung by the gadfly of
Quakerism. Running counter to its proper nature, it made him morbidly
uneasy. Already an Anabaptist, his brain does not seem to have been large
enough to lodge two maggots at once with any comfort to himself. Fancy
John Winthrop, Jr., with all the affairs of the Connecticut Colony on his
back, expected to prescribe alike for the spiritual and bodily ailments
of all the hypochondriacs in his government, and with Philip's war
impending,--fancy him exposed also to perpetual trials like this: "G.F.
[George Fox] hath sent thee a book of his by Jere: Bull, & two more now
which thou mayest communicate to thy Council & officers. Also I remember
before thy last being in England, I sent thee a book written by Francis
Howgall against persecution, by Joseph Nicallson which book thou lovingly
accepted and communicated to the Commissioners of the United Colonies (as
I desired) also J.N. thou entertained with a loving respect which
encouraged me" (fatal hospitality!)--"As a token of that ancient love
that for this 42 years I have had for thee, I have sent thee three
Manuscripts, one of 5 queries, other is of 15, about the love of Jesus
&c. The 3d is why we cannot come to the worship which was not set up by
Christ Jesus, which I desire thee to communicate to the priests to answer
in thy jurisdiction, the Massachusetts, New Plymouth, or elsewhere, &
send their answer in writing to me. Also two printed papers to set up in
thy house. It's reported in Barbadoes that thy brother Sammuell shall be
sent Governour to Antego." What a mere dust of sugar in the last sentence
for such a portentous pill! In his next letter he has other writings of
G. F., "not yet copied, which if thou desireth, when I hear from thee, I
may convey them unto thee. Also sence G. Ffox departure William Edmondson
is arrived at this Island, who having given out a paper to all in
authority, which, my wife having copied, I have here inclosed presented
thee therewith." Books and manuscripts were not all. Coddington was also
glad to bestow on Winthrop any wandering tediousness in the flesh that
came to hand. "I now understand of John Stubbs freedom to visit thee
(with the said Jo: B.) he is a larned man, as witness the battle
door[145] on 35 languages,"--a terrible man this, capable of inflicting
himself on three dozen different kindreds of men. It will be observed
that Coddington, with his "thou desireths," is not quite so well up in
the grammar of his thee-and-thouing as my Lord Coke. Indeed, it is rather
pleasant to see that in his alarm about "the enemy," in 1673, he
backslides into the second person plural. If Winthrop ever looked over
his father's correspondence, he would have read in a letter of Henry
Jacie the following dreadful example of retribution: "The last news we
heard was that the Bores in Bavaria slew about 300 of the Swedish forces
& took about 200 prisoners, of which they put out the eyes of some & cut
out the tonges of others & so sent them to the King of Sweden, which
caused him to lament bytterly for an hour. Then he sent an army &
destroyed those Bores, about 200 or 300 of their towns. Thus we hear."
Think of that, Master Coddington! Could the sinful heart of man always
suppress the wish that a Gustavus might arise to do judgment on the Bores
of Rhode Island? The unkindest part of it was that, on Coddington's own
statement, Winthrop had never persecuted the Quakers, and had even
endeavored to save Robinson and Stevenson in 1659.

Speaking of the execution of these two martyrs to the bee in their
bonnets, John Davenport gives us a capital example of the way in which
Divine "judgments" may be made to work both ways at the pleasure of the
interpreter. As the crowd was going home from the hanging, a drawbridge
gave way, and some lives were lost. The Quakers, of course, made the most
of this lesson to the _pontifices_ in the bearing power of timber,
claiming it as a proof of God's wrath against the persecutors. This was
rather hard, since none of the magistrates perished, and the popular
feeling was strongly in favor of the victims of their severity. But
Davenport gallantly captures these Quaker guns, and turns them against
the enemy himself. "Sir, the hurt that befell so many, by their own
rashness, at the Draw Bridge in Boston, being on the day that the Quakers
were executed, was not without God's special providence in judgment &
wrath, I fear, against the Quakers & their abettors, who will be much
hardened thereby." This is admirable, especially as his parenthesis about
"their own rashness" assumes that the whole thing was owing to natural
causes. The pity for the Quakers, too, implied in the "I fear," is a nice
touch. It is always noticeable how much more liberal those who deal in
God's command without his power are of his wrath than of his mercy. But
we should never understand the Puritans if we did not bear in mind that
they were still prisoners in that religion of Fear which casts out Love.
The nearness of God was oftener a terror than a comfort to them. Yet
perhaps in them was the last apparition of Faith as a wonder-worker in
human affairs. Take away from them what you will, you cannot deny them
_that_, and its constant presence made them great in a way and measure of
which this generation, it is to be feared, can have but a very inadequate
conception. If men now-a-days find their tone antipathetic, it would be
modest at least to consider whether the fault be wholly theirs,--whether
it was they who lacked, or we who have lost. Whether they were right or
wrong in their dealing with the Quakers is not a question to be decided
glibly after two centuries' struggle toward a conception of toleration
very imperfect even yet, perhaps impossible to human nature. If they did
not choose what seems to us the wisest way of keeping the Devil out of
their household, they certainly had a very honest will to keep him out,
which we might emulate with advantage. However it be in other cases,
historic toleration must include intolerance among things to be
tolerated.

The false notion which the first settlers had of the savages by whom the
continent was beflead rather than inhabited, arose in part from what they
had heard of Mexico and Peru, in part from the splendid exaggerations of
the early travellers, who could give their readers an El Dorado at the
cheap cost of a good lie. Hence the kings, dukes, and earls who were so
plenty among the red men. Pride of descent takes many odd shapes, none
odder than when it hugs itself in an ancestry of filthy barbarians, who
daubed themselves for ornament with a mixture of bear's-grease and soot,
or colored clay, and were called emperors by Captain John Smith and his
compeers. The droll contrast between this imaginary royalty and the
squalid reality is nowhere exposed with more ludicrous unconsciousness
than in the following passage of a letter from Fitz-John Winthrop to his
father, November, 1674: "The bearer hereof, Mr. Danyell, one of the Royal
Indian blood ... does desire me to give an account to yourself of the
late unhappy accident which has happened to him. A little time since, a
careless girl playing with fire at the door, it immediately took hold of
the mats, & in an instant consumed it to ashes, with all the common as
well as his lady's chamber furniture, & his own wardrobe & armory, Indian
plate, & money to the value (as is credibly reported in his estimation)
of more than an hundred pounds Indian.... The Indians have handsomely
already built him a good house & brought him in several necessaries for
his present supply, but that which takes deepest melancholy impression
upon him is the loss of an excellent Masathuset cloth cloak & hat, which
was only seen upon holy days & their general sessions. His journey at
this time is only to intreat your favor & the gentlemen there for a kind
relief in his necessity, having no kind of garment but a short jerkin
which was charitably given him by one of his Common-Councilmen. He
principally aims at a cloak & hat."

  "King Stephen was a worthy peer,
  His breeches cost him but a crown."

But it will be observed that there is no allusion to any such article of
dress in the costume of this prince of Pequot. Some light is perhaps
thrown on this deficiency by a line or two in one of Williams's letters,
where he says: "I have long had scruples of selling the Natives ought but
what may tend or bring to civilizing: I therefore neither brought nor
shall sell them loose coats nor breeches." Precisely the opposite course
was deemed effectual with the Highland Scotch, between whom and our
Indians there was a very close analogy. They were compelled by law to
adopt the usages of _Gallia Braccata_, and sansculottism made a penal
offence. What impediment to civilization Williams had discovered in the
offending garment it is hard to say. It is a question for Herr
Teufelsdroeck. Royalty, at any rate, in our day, is dependent for much of
its success on the tailor. Williams's opportunities of studying the
Indian character were perhaps greater than those of any other man of his
time. He was always an advocate for justice toward them. But he seems to
have had no better opinion of them than Mr. Parkman,[146] calling them
shortly and sharply, "wolves endowed with men's brains." The same change
of feeling has followed the same causes in their case as in that of the
Highlanders,--they have become romantic in proportion as they ceased to
be dangerous.

As exhibitions of the writer's character, no letters in the collection
have interested us more than those of John Tinker, who for many years was
a kind of steward for John Winthrop and his son. They show him to have
been a thoroughly faithful, grateful, and unselfish servant. He does not
seem to have prospered except in winning respect, for when he died his
funeral charges were paid by the public. We learn from one of his letters
that John Winthrop, Jr., had a negro (presumably a slave) at Paquanet,
for he says that a mad cow there "had almost spoiled the neger & made him
ferfull to tend the rest of the cattell." That such slaves must have been
rare, however, is plain from his constant complaints about the difficulty
of procuring "help," some of which we have already quoted. His spelling
of the word "ferfull" shows that the New England pronunciation of that
word had been brought from the old country. He also uses the word
"creatures" for kine, and the like, precisely as our farmers do now.
There is one very comical passage in a letter of the 2nd of August, 1660,
where he says: "There hath been a motion by some, the chief of the town,
(New London) for my keeping an ordinary, or rather under the notion of a
tavern which, _though it suits not with my genius_, yet am almost
persuaded to accept for some good grounds." Tinker's modesty is most
creditable to him, and we wish it were more common now. No people on the
face of the earth suffer so much as we from impostors who keep
inconveniences, "under the notion of a tavern," without any call of
natural genius thereto; none endure with such unexemplary patience the
superb indifference of inn-keepers, and the condescending inattention of
their gentlemanly deputies. We are the thralls of our railroads and
hotels, and we deserve it.

Richard Saltonstall writes to John Winthrop, Jr., in 1636: "The best
thing that I have to beg your thoughts for at this present is a motto or
two that Mr. Prynne hath writ upon his chamber walls in the Tower." We
copy a few phrases, chiefly for the contrast they make with Lovelace's
famous verses to Althea. Nothing could mark more sharply the different
habits of mind in Puritan and Cavalier. Lovelace is very charming, but he
sings

  "The sweetness, mercy, majesty,
    And glories of _his_ King,"

to wit, Charles I. To him "stone walls do not a prison make," so long as
he has "freedom in his love, and in his soul is free." Prynne's King was
of another and higher kind: "_Carcer excludit mundum, includit Deum. Deus
est turris etiam in turre: turris libertatis in turre angustiae: Turris
quietis in turre molestice.... Arctari non potest qui in ipsa Dei
infinitate incarceratus spatiatur.... Nil crus sentit in nervo si animus
sit in coelo: nil corpus patitur in ergastulo, si anima sit in Christo_."
If Lovelace has the advantage in fancy, Prynne has it as clearly in depth
of sentiment. There could be little doubt which of the parties
represented by these men would have the better if it came to a
death-grapple.

There is curiously little sentiment in these volumes. Most of the
letters, except where some point of doctrine is concerned, are those of
shrewd, practical men, busy about the affairs of this world, and earnest
to build their New Jerusalem on something more solid than cloud. The
truth is, that men anxious about their souls have not been by any means
the least skilful in providing for the wants of the body. It was far less
the enthusiasm than the common sense of the Puritans which made them what
they were in politics and religion. That a great change should be wrought
in the settlers by the circumstances of their position was inevitable;
that this change should have had some disillusion in it, that it should
have weaned them from the ideal and wonted them to the actual, was
equally so. In 1664, not much more than a generation after the
settlement, Williams prophesies: "When we that have been the eldest are
rotting (to-morrow or next day) a generation will act, I fear, far unlike
the first Winthrops and their models of love. I fear that the common
trinity of the world (profit, preferment, pleasure) will here be the
_tria omnia_ as in all the world beside, that Prelacy and Papacy too will
in this wilderness predominate, that god Land will be (as now it is) as
great a god with us English as god Gold was with the Spaniards. While we
are here, noble sir, let us _viriliter hoc agere, rem agere humanam,
divinam, Christianam_, which, I believe, is all of a most public genius,"
or, as we should now say, true patriotism. If Williams means no play on
the word _humanam_ and _divinam_, the order of precedence in which he
marshals them is noticeable. A generation later, what Williams had
predicted was in a great measure verified. But what made New England
Puritanism narrow was what made Scotch Cameronianism narrow,--its being
secluded from the great movement of the nation. Till 1660 the colony was
ruled and mostly inhabited by Englishmen closely connected with the party
dominant in the mother country, and with their minds broadened by having
to deal with questions of state and European policy. After that time they
sank rapidly into provincials, narrow in thought, in culture, in creed.
Such a pedantic portent as Cotton Mather would have been impossible in
the first generation; he was the natural growth of the third,--the
manifest judgment of God on a generation who thought Words a saving
substitute for Things. Perhaps some injustice has been done to men like
the second Governor Dudley, and it should be counted to them rather as a
merit than a fault, that they wished to bring New England back within
reach of the invigorating influence of national sympathies, and to rescue
it from a tradition which had become empty formalism. Puritanism was
dead, and its profession had become a wearisome cant before the
Revolution of 1688 gave it that vital force in politics which it had lost
in religion.

I have gleaned all I could of what is morally picturesque or
characteristic from these volumes, but New England history has rather a
gregarious than a personal interest. Here, by inherent necessity rather
than design, was made the first experiment in practical democracy, and
accordingly hence began that reaction of the New World upon the Old whose
result can hardly yet be estimated. There is here no temptation to make a
hero, who shall sum up in his own individuality and carry forward by his
own will that purpose of which we seem to catch such bewitching glances
in history, which reveals itself more clearly and constantly, perhaps, in
the annals of New England than elsewhere, and which yet, at best, is but
tentative, doubtful of itself, turned this way and that by chance, made
up of instinct, and modified by circumstance quite as much as it is
directed by deliberate forethought. Such a purpose, or natural craving,
or result of temporary influences, may be misguided by a powerful
character to his own ends, or, if he be strongly in sympathy with it, may
be hastened toward its own fulfilment; but there is no such heroic
element in our drama, and what is remarkable is, that, under whatever
government, democracy grew with the growth of the New England Colonies,
and was at last potent enough to wrench them, and the better part of the
continent with them, from the mother country. It is true that Jefferson
embodied in the Declaration of Independence the speculative theories he
had learned in France, but the impulse to separation came from New
England; and those theories had been long since embodied there in the
practice of the people, if they had never been formulated in distinct
propositions.

I have little sympathy with declaimers about the Pilgrim Fathers, who
look upon them all as men of grand conceptions and superhuman foresight.
An entire ship's company of Columbuses is what the world never saw. It is
not wise to form any theory and fit our facts to it, as a man in a hurry
is apt to cram his travelling-bag, with a total disregard of shape or
texture. But perhaps it may be found that the facts will only fit
comfortably together on a single plan, namely, that the fathers did have
a conception (which those will call grand who regard simplicity as a
necessary element of grandeur) of founding here a commonwealth on those
two eternal bases of Faith and Work; that they had, indeed, no
revolutionary ideas of universal liberty, but yet, what answered the
purpose quite as well, an abiding faith in the brotherhood of man and the
fatherhood of God; and that they did not so much propose to make all
things new, as to develop the latent possibilities of English law and
English character, by clearing away the fences by which the abuse of the
one was gradually discommoning the other from the broad fields of natural
right. They were not in advance of their age, as it is called, for no one
who is so can ever work profitably in it; but they were alive to the
highest and most earnest thinking of their time.




Footnotes:

    [135] Written in December, 1864.


    [136] It is curious, that, when Cromwell proposed to transfer a
    colony from New England to Ireland, one of the conditions insisted on
    in Massachusetts was that a college should be established.


    [137] State Trials, II. 409. One would not reckon too closely with a
    man on trial for his life, but there is something pitiful in Peter's
    representing himself as coming back to England "out of the West
    Indias," in order to evade any complicity with suspected New England.


    [138] Waller put this into verse:--

      "Let the rich ore forthwith be melted down
       And the state fixed by making him a crown."


    [139] The _third_ in Carlyle, 1654.


    [140] Collections, Third Series, Vol I. p. 183.


    [141] This speech may be found in the Annual Register of 1762.


    [142] Collection of Voyages, &c., from the Library of the Earl of
    Oxford, Vol. I. p. 151.


    [143] Howes writes the word symbolically.


    [144] "World" here should clearly be "work."


    [145] The title-page of which our learned Marsh has cited for the
    etymology of the word.


    [146] In his Jesuits in North America.




LESSING[147]

When Burns's humor gave its last pathetic flicker in his "John, don't let
the awkward squad fire over me," was he thinking of actual
brother-volunteers, or of possible biographers? Did his words betray only
the rhythmic sensitiveness of poetic nerves, or were they a foreboding of
that helpless future, when the poet lies at the mercy of the plodder,--of
that bi-voluminous shape in which dulness overtakes and revenges itself
on genius at last? Certainly Burns has suffered as much as most
large-natured creatures from well-meaning efforts to account for him, to
explain him away, to bring him into harmony with those well-regulated
minds which, during a good part of the last century, found out a way,
through rhyme, to snatch a prosiness beyond the reach of prose. Nay, he
has been wronged also by that other want of true appreciation, which
deals in panegyric, and would put asunder those two things which God has
joined,--the poet and the man,--as if it were not the same rash
improvidence that was the happiness of the verse and the misfortune of
the gauger. But his death-bed was at least not haunted by the
unappeasable apprehension of a German for his biographer; and that the
fame of Lessing should have four times survived this cunningest assault
of oblivion is proof enough that its base is broad and deep-set.

There seems to be, in the average German mind, an inability or a
disinclination to see a thing as it really is, unless it be a matter of
science. It finds its keenest pleasure in divining a profound
significance in the most trifling things, and the number of mare's-nests
that have been stared into by the German _Gelehrter_ through his
spectacles passes calculation. They are the one object of contemplation
that makes that singular being perfectly happy, and they seem to be as
common as those of the stork. In the dark forest of aesthetics,
particularly, he finds them at every turn,--"fanno tutto il loco varo."
If the greater part of our English criticism is apt only to skim the
surface, the German, by way of being profound, too often burrows in
delighted darkness quite beneath its subject, till the reader feels the
ground hollow beneath him, and is fearful of caving into unknown depths
of stagnant metaphysic air at every step. The Commentary on Shakespeare
of Gervinus, a really superior man, reminds one of the Roman Campagna,
penetrated underground in all directions by strange winding caverns, the
work of human borers in search of we know not what. Above are the divine
poet's larks and daisies, his incommunicable skies, his broad prospects
of life and nature; and meanwhile our Teutonic _teredo_ worms his way
below, and offers to be our guide into an obscurity of his own
contriving. The reaction of language upon style, and even upon thought,
by its limitations on the one hand, and its suggestions on the other, is
so apparent to any one who has made even a slight study of comparative
literature, that we have sometimes thought the German tongue at least an
accessory before the fact, if nothing more, in the offences of German
literature. The language has such a fatal genius for going
stern-foremost, for yawing, and for not minding the helm without some ten
minutes' notice in advance, that he must be a great sailor indeed who can
safely make it the vehicle for anything but imperishable commodities.
Vischer's _Aesthetik_, the best treatise on the subject, ancient or
modern, is such a book as none but a German could write, and it is
written as none but a German could have written it. The abstracts of its
sections are sometimes nearly as long as the sections themselves, and it
is as hard to make out which head belongs to which tail, as in a knot of
snakes thawing themselves into sluggish individuality under a spring sun.
The average German professor spends his life in making lanterns fit to
guide us through the obscurest passages of all the _ologies_ and _ysics_,
and there are none in the world of such honest workmanship. They are
durable, they have intensifying glasses, reflectors of the most
scientific make, capital sockets in which to set a light, and a handsome
lump of potentially illuminating tallow is thrown in. But, in order to
_see_ by them, the explorer must make his own candle, supply his own
cohesive wick of common-sense, and light it himself. And yet the
admirable thoroughness of the German intellect! We should be ungrateful
indeed if we did not acknowledge that it has supplied the raw material in
almost every branch of science for the defter wits of other nations to
work on; yet we have a suspicion that there are certain lighter
departments of literature in which it may be misapplied, and turn into
something very like clumsiness. Delightful as Jean Paul's humor is, how
much more so would it be if he only knew when to stop! Ethereally deep as
is his sentiment, should we not feel it more if he sometimes gave us a
little less of it,--if he would only not always deal out his wine by
beer-measure? So thorough is the German mind, that might it not seem now
and then to work quite through its subject, and expatiate in cheerful
unconsciousness on the other side thereof?

With all its merits of a higher and deeper kind, it yet seems to us that
German literature has not quite satisfactorily answered that so
long-standing question of the French Abbe about _esprit_. Hard as it is
for a German to be clear, still harder to be light, he is more than ever
awkward in his attempts to produce that quality of style, so peculiarly
French, which is neither wit nor liveliness taken singly, but a mixture
of the two that must be drunk while the effervescence lasts, and will not
bear exportation into any other language. German criticism, excellent in
other respects, and immeasurably superior to that of any other nation in
its constructive faculty, in its instinct for getting at whatever
principle of life lies at the heart of a work of genius, is seldom lucid,
almost never entertaining. It may turn its light, if we have patience,
into every obscurest cranny of its subject, one after another, but it
never flashes light _out_ of the subject itself, as Sainte-Beuve, for
example, so often does, and with such unexpected charm. We should be
inclined to put Julian Schmidt at the head of living critics in all the
more essential elements of his outfit; but with him is not one conscious
at too frequent intervals of the professorial grind,--of that German
tendency to bear on too heavily, where a French critic would touch and go
with such exquisite measure? The Great Nation, as  it cheerfully calls
itself, is in nothing greater than its talent for saying little things
agreeably, which is perhaps the very top of mere culture, and in
literature is the next best thing to the power of saying great things as
easily as if they were little German learning, like the elephants of
Pyrrhus, is always in danger of turning upon what it was intended to
adorn and reinforce, and trampling it ponderously to death. And yet what
do we not owe it? Mastering all languages, all records of intellectual
man, it has been able, or has enabled others, to strip away the husks of
nationality and conventionalism from the literatures of many races, and
to disengage that kernel of human truth which is the germinating
principle of them all. Nay, it has taught us to recognize also a certain
value in those very husks, whether as shelter for the unripe or food for
the fallen seed.

That the general want of style in German authors is not wholly the fault
of the language is shown by Heine (a man of mixed blood), who can be
daintily light in German; that it is not altogether a matter of race, is
clear from the graceful airiness of Erasmus and Reuchlin in Latin, and of
Grimm in French. The sense of heaviness which creeps over the reader from
so many German books is mainly due, we suspect to the language, which
seems wellnigh incapable of that aerial perspective so delightful in
first-rate French, and even English, writing. But there must also be in
the national character an insensibility to proportion, a want of that
instinctive discretion which we call tact. Nothing short of this will
account for the perpetual groping of German imaginative literature after
some foreign mould in which to cast its thought or feeling, now trying a
Louis Quatorze pattern, then something supposed to be Shakespearian, and
at last going back to ancient Greece, or even Persia. Goethe himself,
limpidly perfect as are many of his shorter poems, often fails in giving
artistic coherence to his longer works. Leaving deeper qualities wholly
out of the question, Wilhelm Meister seems a mere aggregation of episodes
if compared with such a masterpiece as Paul and Virginia, or even with a
happy improvisation like the Vicar of Wakefield. The second part of
Faust, too, is rather a reflection of Goethe's own changed view of life
and man's relation to it, than an harmonious completion of the original
conception. Full of placid wisdom and exquisite poetry it certainly is;
but if we look at it as a poem, it seems more as if the author had
striven to get in all he could, than to leave out all he might. We cannot
help asking what business have paper money and political economy and
geognosy here? We confess that Thales and the Homunculus weary us not a
little, unless, indeed, a poem be nothing, after all, but a prolonged
conundrum. Many of Schiller's lyrical poems--though the best of them find
no match in modern verse for rapid energy, the very axles of language
kindling with swiftness--seem disproportionately long in parts, and the
thought too often has the life wellnigh squeezed out of it in the
sevenfold coils of diction, dappled though it be with splendid imagery.

In German sentiment, which runs over so easily into sentimentalism, a
foreigner cannot help being struck with a certain incongruousness. What
can be odder, for example, than the mixture of sensibility and sausages
in some of Goethe's earlier notes to Frau von Stein, unless, to be sure,
the publishing them? It would appear that Germans were less sensible to
the ludicrous--and we are far from saying that this may not have its
compensatory advantages--than either the English or the French. And what
is the source of this sensibility, if it be not an instinctive perception
of the incongruous and disproportionate? Among all races, the English has
ever shown itself most keenly alive to the fear of making itself
ridiculous; and among all, none has produced so many humorists, only one
of them, indeed, so profound as Cervantes, yet all masters in their
several ways. What English-speaking man, except Boswell, could have
arrived at Weimar, as Goethe did, in that absurd _Werthermontirung_? And
where, out of Germany, could he have found a reigning Grand Duke to put
his whole court into the same sentimental livery of blue and yellow,
leather breeches, boots, and all, excepting only Herder, and that not on
account of his clerical profession, but of his age? To be sure, it might
be asked also where else in Europe was a prince to be met with capable of
manly friendship with a man whose only decoration was his genius? But the
comicality of the other fact no less remains. Certainly the German
character is in no way so little remarkable as for its humor. If we were
to trust the evidence of Herr Hub's dreary _Deutsche komische und
humoristische Dichtung_, we should believe that no German had even so
much as a suspicion of what humor meant, unless the book itself, as we
are half inclined to suspect, be a joke in three volumes, the _want_ of
fun being the real point thereof. If German patriotism can be induced to
find a grave delight in it, we congratulate Herr Hub's publishers, and
for ourselves advise any sober-minded man who may hereafter "be merry,"
not to "sing psalms," but to read Hub as the more serious amusement of
the two. There are epigrams there that make life more solemn, and, if
taken in sufficient doses, would make it more precarious. Even Jean Paul,
the greatest of German humorous authors, and never surpassed in comic
conception or in the pathetic quality of humor, is not to be named with
his master, Sterne, as a creative humorist. What are Siebenkaes, Fixlein,
Schmelzle, and Fibel, (a single lay-figure to be draped at will with
whimsical sentiment and reflection, and put in various attitudes,)
compared with the living reality of Walter Shandy and his brother Toby,
characters which we do not see merely as puppets in the author's mind,
but poetically projected from it in an independent being of their own?
Heine himself, the most graceful, sometimes the most touching, of modern
poets, and clearly the most easy of German humorists, seems to me wanting
in a refined perception of that inward propriety which is only another
name for poetic proportion, and shocks us sometimes with an
_Unflaethigkeit_, as at the end of his _Deutschland_, which, if it make
Germans laugh, as we should be sorry to believe, makes other people hold
their noses. Such things have not been possible in English since Swift,
and the _persifleur_ Heine cannot offer the same excuse of savage
cynicism that might be pleaded for the Irishman.

I have hinted that Herr Stahr's Life of Lessing is not precisely the kind
of biography that would have been most pleasing to the man who could not
conceive that an author should be satisfied with anything more than truth
in praise, or anything less in criticism. My respect for what Lessing
was, and for what he did, is profound. In the history of literature it
would be hard to find a man so stalwart, so kindly, so sincere,[148] so
capable of great ideas, whether in their influence on the intellect or
the life, so unswervingly true to the truth, so free from the common
weaknesses of his class. Since Luther, Germany has given birth to no such
intellectual athlete,--to no son so German to the core. Greater poets she
has had, but no greater writer; no nature more finely tempered. Nay, may
we not say that great character is as rare a thing as great genius, if it
be not even a nobler form of it? For surely it is easier to embody fine
thinking, or delicate sentiment, or lofty aspiration, in a book than in a
life. The written leaf, if it be, as some few are, a safe-keeper and
conductor of celestial fire, is secure. Poverty cannot pinch, passion
swerve, or trial shake it. But the man Lessing, harassed and striving
life-long, always poor and always hopeful, with no patron but his own
right-hand, the very shuttlecock of fortune, who saw ruin's ploughshare
drive through the hearth on which his first home-fire was hardly kindled,
and who, through all, was faithful to himself, to his friend, to his
duty, and to his ideal, is something more inspiring for us than the most
glorious utterance of merely intellectual power. The figure of Goethe is
grand, it is rightfully pre-eminent, it has something of the calm, and
something of the coldness, of the immortals; but the Valhalla of German
letters can show one form, in its simple manhood, statelier even than
his.

Manliness and simplicity, if they are not necessary coefficients in
producing character of the purest tone, were certainly leading elements
in the Lessing who is still so noteworthy and lovable to us when
eighty-six years have passed since his bodily presence vanished from
among men. He loved clearness, he hated exaggeration in all its forms. He
was the first German who had any conception of style, and who could be
full without spilling over on all sides. Herr Stahr, we think, is not
just the biographer he would have chosen for himself. His book is rather
a panegyric than a biography. There is sometimes an almost comic
disproportion between the matter and the manner, especially in the epic
details of Lessing's onslaughts on the nameless herd of German authors.
It is as if Sophocles should have given a strophe to every bullock slain
by Ajax in his mad foray upon the Grecian commissary stores. He is too
fond of striking an attitude, and his tone rises unpleasantly near a
scream, as he calls the personal attention of heaven and earth to
something which Lessing himself would have thought a very
matter-of-course affair. He who lays it down as an axiom, that "genius
loves simplicity," would hardly have been pleased to hear the "Letters on
Literature" called the "burning thunderbolts of his annihilating
criticism," or the Anti-Goetze pamphlets, "the hurtling arrows that sped
from the bow of the immortal hero." Nor would he with whom accuracy was a
matter of conscience have heard patiently that the Letters "appeared in a
period distinguished for its lofty tone of mind, and in their own
towering boldness they are a true picture of the intrepid character of
the age."[149] If the age was what Herr Stahr represents it to have been,
where is the great merit of Lessing? He would have smiled, we suspect, a
little contemptuously, at Herr Stahr's repeatedly quoting a certificate
from the "historian of the proud Britons," that he was "the first critic
in Europe." Whether we admit or not Lord Macaulay's competence in the
matter, we are sure that Lessing would not have thanked his biographer
for this soup-ticket to a ladleful of fame. If ever a man stood firmly on
his own feet, and asked help of none, that man was Gotthold Ephraim
Lessing.

Herr Stahr's desire to _make_ a hero of his subject, and his love for
sonorous sentences like those we have quoted above, are apt to stand
somewhat in the way of our chance at taking a fair measure of the man,
and seeing in what his heroism really lay. He furnishes little material
for a comparative estimate of Lessing, or for judging of the foreign
influences which helped from time to time in making him what he was.
Nothing is harder than to worry out a date from Herr Stahr's haystacks of
praise and quotation. Yet dates are of special value in tracing the
progress of an intellect like Lessing's, which, little actuated by an
inward creative energy, was commonly stirred to motion by the impulse of
other minds, and struck out its brightest flashes by collision with them.
He himself tells us that a critic should "first seek out some one with
whom he can contend," and quotes in justification from one of Aristotle's
commentators, _Solet Aristoteles quaerere pugnam in suis libris_. This
Lessing was always wont to do. He could only feel his own strength, and
make others feel it,--could only call it into full play in an
intellectual wrestling-bout. He was always anointed and ready for the
ring, but with this distinction, that he was no mere prize-fighter, or
bully for the side that would pay him best, nor even a contender for mere
sentiment, but a self-forgetful champion for the truth as he saw it. Nor
is this true of him only as a critic. His more purely imaginative
works--his Minna, his Emilia, his Nathan--were all written, not to
satisfy the craving of a poetic instinct, nor to rid head and heart of
troublous guests by building them a lodging outside himself, as Goethe
used to do, but to prove some thesis of criticism or morals by which
Truth could be served. His zeal for her was perfectly unselfish. "Does
one write, then, for the sake of being always in the right? I think I
have been as serviceable to Truth," he says, "when I miss her, and my
failure is the occasion of another's discovering her, as if I had
discovered her myself."[150] One would almost be inclined to think, from
Herr Stahr's account of the matter, that Lessing had been an
autochthonous birth of the German soil, without intellectual ancestry or
helpful kindred. That this is the sufficient natural history of no
original mind we need hardly say, since originality consists quite as
much in the power of using to purpose what it finds ready to its hand, as
in that of producing what is absolutely new. Perhaps we might say that it
was nothing more than the faculty of combining the separate, and
therefore ineffectual, conceptions of others, and making them into living
thought by the breath of its own organizing spirit. A great man without a
past, if he be not an impossibility, will certainly have no future. He
would be like those conjectural Miltons and Cromwells of Gray's imaginary
Hamlet. The only privilege of the original man is, that, like other
sovereign princes, he has the right to call in the current coin and
reissue it stamped with his own image, as was the practice of Lessing.

Herr Stahr's over-intensity of phrase is less offensive than amusing when
applied to Lessing's early efforts in criticism. Speaking of poor old
Gottsched, he says: "Lessing assailed him sometimes with cutting
criticism, and again with exquisite humor. In the notice of Gottsched's
poems, he says, among other things, 'The exterior of the volume is so
handsome that it will do great credit to the bookstores, and it is to be
hoped that it will continue to do so for a long time. But to give a
satisfactory idea of the interior surpasses our powers.' And in
conclusion he adds, 'These poems cost two thalers and four groschen. The
two thalers pay for the ridiculous, and the four groschen pretty much for
the useful.'" Again, he tells us that Lessing concludes his notice of
Klopstock's Ode to God "with these inimitably roguish words: 'What
presumption to beg thus earnestly for a woman!' Does not a whole book of
criticism lie in these nine words?" For a young man of twenty-two,
Lessing's criticisms show a great deal of independence and maturity of
thought; but humor he never had, and his wit was always of the
bluntest,--crushing rather than cutting. The mace, and not the scymitar,
was his weapon. Let Herr Stahr put all Lessing's "inimitably roguish
words" together, and compare them with these few intranslatable lines
from Voltaire's letter to Rousseau, thanking him for his _Discours sur
l'Inegalite_: "On n'a jamais employe tant d'esprit a vouloir nous rendre
betes; il prend enviede marcher a quatre pattes quand on lit votre
ouvrage." Lessing from the first was something far better than a wit.
Force was always much more characteristic of him than cleverness.
Sometimes Herr Stahr's hero-worship leads him into positive misstatement.
For example, speaking of Lessing's Preface to the "Contributions to the
History and Reform of the Theatre," he tells us that "his eye was
directed chiefly to the English theatre and Shakespeare." Lessing at that
time (1749) was only twenty, and knew little more than the names of any
foreign dramatists except the French. In this very Preface his English
list skips from Shakespeare to Dryden, and in the Spanish he omits
Calderon, Tirso de Molina, and Alarcon. Accordingly, we suspect that the
date is wrongly assigned to Lessing's translation of _Toda la Vida es
Sueno_. His mind was hardly yet ready to feel the strange charm of this
most imaginative of Calderon's dramas.

Even where Herr Stahr undertakes to give us light on the _sources_ of
Lessing, it is something of the dimmest. He attributes "Miss Sara
Sampson" to the influence of the "Merchant of London," as Mr. Evans
translates it literally from the German, meaning our old friend, "George
Barnwell." But we are strongly inclined to suspect from internal evidence
that Moore's more recent "Gamester" gave the prevailing impulse. And if
Herr Stahr must needs tell us anything of the Tragedy of Middle-Class
Life, he ought to have known that on the English stage it preceded Lillo
by more than a century,--witness the "Yorkshire Tragedy,"--and that
something very like it was even much older in France. We are inclined to
complain, also, that he does not bring out more clearly how much Lessing
owed to Diderot both as dramatist and critic, nor give us so much as a
hint of what already existing English criticism did for him in the way of
suggestion and guidance. But though we feel it to be our duty to say so
much of Herr Stahr's positive faults and negative short-comings, yet we
leave him in very good humor. While he is altogether too full upon
certain points of merely transitory importance,--such as the quarrel with
Klotz,--yet we are bound to thank him both for the abundance of his
extracts from Lessing, and for the judgment he has shown in the choice of
them. Any one not familiar with his writings will be able to get a very
good notion of the quality of his mind, and the amount of his literary
performance, from these volumes; and that, after all, is the chief
matter. As to the absolute merit of his works other than critical, Herr
Stahr's judgment is too much at the mercy of his partiality to be of
great value.

Of Mr. Evans's translation we can speak for the most part with high
commendation. There are great difficulties in translating German prose;
and whatever other good things Herr Stahr may have learned from Lessing,
terseness and clearness are not among them. We have seldom seen a
translation which read more easily, or was generally more faithful. That
Mr. Evans should nod now and then we do not wonder, nor that he should
sometimes choose the wrong word. We have only compared him with the
original where we saw reason for suspecting a slip; but, though we have
not found much to complain of, we have found enough to satisfy us that
his book will gain by a careful revision. We select a few oversights,
mainly from the first volume, as examples. On page 34, comparing Lessing
with Goethe on arriving at the University, Mr. Evans, we think, obscures,
if he does not wholly lose the meaning, when he translates _Leben_ by
"social relations," and is altogether wrong in rendering _Patrizier_ by
"aristocrat." At the top of the next page, too, "suspicious" is not the
word for _bedenklich_. Had he been writing English, he would surely have
said "questionable." On page 47, "overtrodden shoes" is hardly so good as
the idiomatic "down at the heel." On page 104, "A very humorous
representation" is oddly made to "confirm the documentary evidence." The
reverse is meant. On page 115, the sentence beginning "the tendency in
both" needs revising. On page 138, Mr. Evans speaks of the "Poetical
Village-younker of Destouches." This, we think, is hardly the English of
_Le Poete Campagnard_, and almost recalls Lieberkuehn's theory of
translation, toward which Lessing was so unrelenting,--"When I do not
understand a passage, why, I translate it word for word." On page 149,
"Miss Sara Sampson" is called "the first social tragedy of the German
Drama." All tragedies surely are _social_, except the "Prometheus."
_Buergerliche Tragoedie_ means a tragedy in which the protagonist is taken
from common life, and perhaps cannot be translated clearly into English
except by "tragedy of middle-class life." So on page 170 we find Emilia
Galotti called a "Virginia _bourgeoise_," and on page 172 a hospital
becomes a _lazaretto_. On page 190 we have a sentence ending in this
strange fashion: "in an episode of the English original, which Wieland
omitted entirely, one of its characters nevertheless appeared in the
German tragedy." On page 205 we have the Seven Years' War called "a
bloody _process_." This is mere carelessness, for Mr. Evans, in the
second volume, translates it rightly "_lawsuit_." What English reader
would know what "You are intriguing me" means, on page 228? On page 264,
Vol. II., we find a passage inaccurately rendered, which we consider of
more consequence, because it is a quotation from Lessing. "O, out upon
the man who claims, Almighty God, to be a preacher of Thy word, and yet
so impudently asserts that, in order to attain Thy purposes, there was
only one way in which it pleased _Thee_ to make _Thyself_ known to him!"
This is very far from _nur den einzigen Weg gehabt den Du Dir gefallen
lassen ihm kund zu machen!_ The _ihm_ is scornfully emphatic. We hope
Professor Evans will go over his version for a second edition much more
carefully than we have had any occasion to do. He has done an excellent
service to our literature, for which we heartily thank him, in choosing a
book of this kind to translate, and translating it so well. We would not
look such a gift horse too narrowly in the mouth.

Let us now endeavor to sum up the result of Lessing's life and labor with
what success we may.

Gotthold Ephraim Lessing was born (January 22, 1729) at Camenz, in Upper
Lusatia, the second child and eldest son of John Gottfried Lessing, a
Lutheran clergyman. Those who believe in the persistent qualities of
race, or the cumulative property of culture, will find something to their
purpose in his Saxon blood and his clerical and juristic ancestry. It is
worth mentioning, that his grandfather, in the thesis for his doctor's
degree, defended the right to entire freedom of religious belief. The
name first comes to the surface in Parson Clement Lessigk, nearly three
centuries ago, and survives to the present day in a painter of some
distinction. It has almost passed into a proverb, that the mothers of
remarkable children have been something beyond the common. If there be
any truth in the theory, the case of Lessing was an exception, as might
have been inferred, perhaps, from the peculiarly masculine type of his
character and intellect. His mother was in no wise superior, but his
father seems to have been a man somewhat above the pedantic average of
the provincial clergymen of his day, and to have been a scholar in the
ampler meaning of the word. Besides the classics, he had possessed
himself of French and English, and was somewhat versed in the Oriental
languages. The temper of his theology may be guessed from his having
been, as his son tells us with some pride, one of "the earliest
translators of Tillotson." We can only conjecture him from the letters
which Lessing wrote to him, from which we should fancy him as on the
whole a decided and even choleric old gentleman, in whom the wig, though
not a predominant, was yet a notable feature, and who was, like many
other fathers, permanently astonished at the fruit of his loins. He would
have preferred one of the so-called learned professions for his
son,--theology above all,--and would seem to have never quite reconciled
himself to his son's distinction, as being in none of the three careers
which alone were legitimate. Lessing's bearing towards him, always
independent, is really beautiful in its union of respectful tenderness
with unswerving self-assertion. When he wished to evade the maternal eye,
Gotthold used in his letters to set up a screen of Latin between himself
and her; and we conjecture the worthy Pastor Primarius playing over again
in his study at Camenz, with some scruples of conscience, the old trick
of Chaucer's fox:--

  "Mulier est hominis confusio;
  Madam, the sentence of this Latin is.
  Woman is mannes joy and mannes bliss."

He appears to have snatched a fearful and but ill-concealed joy from the
sight of the first collected edition of his son's works, unlike Tillotson
as they certainly were. Ah, had they only been _Opera_! Yet were they not
volumes, after all, and able to stand on their own edges beside the
immortals, if nothing more?

After grinding with private-tutor Mylius the requisite time, Lessing
entered the school of Camenz, and in his thirteenth year was sent to the
higher institution at Meissen. We learn little of his career there,
except that Theophrastus, Plautus, and Terence were already his favorite
authors, that he once characteristically distinguished himself by a
courageous truthfulness, and that he wrote a Latin poem on the valor of
the Saxon soldiers, which his father very sensibly advised him to
shorten. In 1750, four years after leaving the school, he writes to his
father: "I believed even when I was at Meissen that one must learn much
there which he cannot make the least use of in real life (_der Welt_),
and I now [after trying Leipzig and Wittenberg] see it all the more
clearly,"--a melancholy observation which many other young men have made
under similar circumstances. Sent to Leipzig in his seventeenth year, he
finds himself an awkward, ungainly lad, and sets diligently to perfecting
himself in the somewhat unscholastic accomplishments of riding, dancing,
and fencing. He also sedulously frequents the theatre, and wrote a play,
"The Young Scholar," which attained the honor of representation.
Meanwhile his most intimate companion was a younger brother of his
old tutor Mylius, a young man of more than questionable morals,
and who had even written a satire on the elders of Camenz, for
which--over-confidently trusting himself in the outraged city--he had
been fined and imprisoned; so little could the German Muse, celebrated by
Klopstock for her swiftness of foot, protect her son. With this
scandalous person and with play-actors, more than probably of both sexes,
did the young Lessing share a Christmas cake sent him by his mother. Such
news was not long in reaching Camenz, and we can easily fancy how tragic
it seemed in the little parsonage there, to what cabinet councils it gave
rise in the paternal study, to what ominous shaking of the clerical wig
in that domestic Olympus. A pious fraud is practised on the boy, who
hurries home thinly clad through the winter weather, his ill-eaten
Christmas cake wringing him with remorseful indigestion, to receive the
last blessing, if such a prodigal might hope for it, of a broken-hearted
mother. He finds the good dame in excellent health, and softened toward
him by a cold he has taken on his pious journey. He remains at home
several months, now writing Anacreontics of such warmth that his sister
(as volunteer representative of the common hangman) burns them in the
family stove; now composing sermons to convince his mother that "he could
be a preacher any day,"--a theory of that sacred office unhappily not yet
extinct. At Easter, 1747, he gets back to Leipzig again, with some scant
supply of money in his pocket, but is obliged to make his escape thence
between two days somewhere toward the middle of the next year, leaving
behind him some histrionic debts (chiefly, we fear, of a certain
Mademoiselle Lorenz) for which he had confidingly made himself security.
Stranded, by want of floating or other capital, at Wittenberg, he enters
himself, with help from home, as a student there, but soon migrates again
to Berlin, which had been his goal when making his hegira from Leipzig.
In Berlin he remained three years, applying himself to his chosen calling
of author at all work, by doing whatever honest job offered
itself,--verse, criticism, or translation,--and profitably studious in a
very wide range of languages and their literature. Above all, he learned
the great secret, which his stalwart English contemporary, Johnson, also
acquired, of being able to "dine heartily" for threepence.

Meanwhile he continues in a kind of colonial dependence on the parsonage
at Camenz, the bonds gradually slackening, sometimes shaken a little
rudely, and always giving alarming hints of approaching and inevitable
autonomy. From the few home letters of Lessing which remain, (covering
the period before 1753, there are only eight in all,) we are able to
surmise that a pretty constant maternal cluck and shrill paternal warning
were kept up from the home coop. We find Lessing defending the morality
of the stage and his own private morals against charges and suspicions of
his parents, and even making the awful confession that he does not
consider the Christian religion itself as a thing "to be taken on trust,"
nor a Christian by mere tradition so valuable a member of society as "one
who has _prudently_ doubted, and by the way of examination has arrived at
conviction, or at least striven to arrive." Boyish scepticism of the
superficial sort is a common phenomenon enough, but the Lessing variety
of it seems to us sufficiently rare in a youth of twenty. What strikes us
mainly in the letters of these years is not merely the maturity they
show, though that is remarkable, but the tone. We see already in them the
cheerful and never overweening self-confidence which always so pleasantly
distinguished Lessing, and that strength of tackle, so seldom found in
literary men, which brings the mind well home to its anchor, enabling it
to find holding ground and secure riding in any sea. "What care I to live
in plenty," he asks gayly, "if I only live?" Indeed, Lessing learned
early, and never forgot, that whoever would be life's master, and not its
drudge, must make it a means, and never allow it to become an end. He
could say more truly than Goethe, _Mein Acker ist die Zeit_, since he not
only sowed in it the seed of thought for other men and other times, but
cropped it for his daily bread. Above all, we find Lessing even thus
early endowed with the power of keeping his eyes wide open to what he was
after, to what would help or hinder him,--a much more singular gift than
is commonly supposed. Among other jobs of this first Berlin period, he
had undertaken to arrange the library of a certain Herr Ruediger, getting
therefor his meals and "other receipts," whatever they may have been. His
father seems to have heard with anxiety that this arrangement had ceased,
and Lessing writes to him: "I never wished to have anything to do with
this old man longer than _until I had made myself thoroughly acquainted
with his great library_. This is now accomplished, and we have
accordingly parted." This was in his twenty-first year, and we have no
doubt, from the _range_ of scholarship which Lessing had at command so
young, that it was perfectly true. All through his life he was thoroughly
German in this respect also, that he never _quite_ smelted his knowledge
clear from some slag of learning.

In the early part of the first Berlin residence, Pastor Primarius
Lessing, hearing that his son meditated a movement on Vienna, was much
exercised with fears of the temptation to Popery he would be exposed to
in that capital. We suspect that the attraction thitherward had its
source in a perhaps equally catholic, but less theological magnet,--the
Mademoiselle Lorenz above mentioned. Let us remember the perfectly
innocent passion of Mozart for an actress, and be comforted. There is not
the slightest evidence that Lessing's life at this time, or any other,
though careless, was in any way debauched. No scandal was ever coupled
with his name, nor is any biographic chemistry needed to bleach spots out
of his reputation. What cannot be said of Wieland, of Goethe, of
Schiller, of Jean Paul, may be safely affirmed of this busy and
single-minded man. The parental fear of Popery brought him a seasonable
supply of money from home, which enabled him to clothe himself decently
enough to push his literary fortunes, and put on a bold front with
publishers. Poor enough he often was, but never in so shabby a pass that
he was forced to write behind a screen, like Johnson.

It was during this first stay in Berlin that Lessing was brought into
personal relations with Voltaire. Through an acquaintance with the great
man's secretary, Richier, he was employed as translator in the scandalous
Hirschel lawsuit, so dramatically set forth by Carlyle in his Life of
Frederick, though Lessing's share in it seems to have been unknown to
him. The service could hardly have been other than distasteful to him;
but it must have been with some thrill of the _anche io!_ kind that the
poor youth, just fleshing his maiden pen in criticism, stood face to face
with the famous author, with whose name all Europe rang from side to
side. This was in February, 1751. Young as he was, we fancy those cool
eyes of his making some strange discoveries as to the real nature of that
lean nightmare of Jesuits and dunces. Afterwards the same secretary lent
him the manuscript of the _Siecle de Louis XIV._, and Lessing
thoughtlessly taking it into the country with him, it was not forthcoming
when called for by the author. Voltaire naturally enough danced with
rage, screamed all manner of unpleasant things about robbery and the
like, cashiered the secretary, and was, we see no reason to doubt, really
afraid of a pirated edition. _This_ time his cry of wolf must have had a
quaver of sincerity in it. Herr Stahr, who can never keep separate the
Lessing as he then was and the Lessing as he afterwards became, takes
fire at what he chooses to consider an unworthy suspicion of the
Frenchman, and treats himself to some rather cheap indignation on the
subject. For ourselves, we think Voltaire altogether in the right, and we
respect Lessing's honesty too much to suppose, with his biographer, that
it was this which led him, years afterwards, to do such severe justice to
_Merope_, and other tragedies of the same author. The affair happened in
December, 1751, and a year later Lessing calls Voltaire a "great man,"
and says of his _Amalie_, that "it has not only beautiful passages, it is
beautiful throughout, and the tears of a reader of feeling will justify
our judgment." Surely there is no resentment here. Our only wonder would
be at its being written after the Hirschel business. At any rate, we
cannot allow Herr Stahr to shake our faith in the sincerity of Lessing's
motives in criticism,--he could not in the soundness of the criticism
itself,--by tracing it up to a spring at once so petty and so personal.

During a part of 1752,[151] Lessing was at Wittenberg again as student of
medicine, the parental notion of a strictly professional career of some
kind not having yet been abandoned. We must give his father the credit of
having done his best, in a well-meaning paternal fashion, to make his son
over again in his own image, and to thwart the design of nature by
coaxing or driving him into the pinfold of a prosperous obscurity. But
Gotthold, with all his gifts, had no talent whatever for contented
routine. His was a mind always in solution, which the divine order of
things, as it is called, could not precipitate into any of the
traditional forms of crystallization, and in which the time to come was
already fermenting. The principle of growth was in the young literary
hack, and he must obey it or die. His was to the last a _natura
naturans_, never a _naturata_. Lessing seems to have done what he could
to be a dutiful failure. But there was something in him stronger and more
sacred than even filial piety; and the good old pastor is remembered now
only as the father of a son who would have shared the benign oblivion of
his own theological works, if he could only have had his wise way with
him. Even after never so many biographies and review articles, genius
continues to be a marvellous and inspiring thing. At the same time,
considering the then condition of what was pleasantly called literature
in Germany, there was not a little to be said on the paternal side of the
question, though it may not seem now a very heavy mulct to give up one
son out of ten to immortality,--at least the Fates seldom decimate in
_this_ way. Lessing had now, if we accept the common standard in such
matters, "completed his education," and the result may be summed up in
his own words to Michaelis, 16th October, 1754: "I have studied at the
Fuerstenschule at Meissen, and after that at Leipzig and Wittenberg. But I
should be greatly embarrassed if I were asked to tell _what_." As early
as his twentieth year he had arrived at some singular notions as to the
uses of learning. On the 20th of January, 1749, he writes to his mother:
"I found out that books, indeed, would make me learned, _but never make
me a man_." Like most men of great knowledge, as distinguished from mere
scholars, he seems to have been always a rather indiscriminate reader,
and to have been fond, as Johnson was, of "browsing" in libraries.
Johnson neither in amplitude of literature nor exactness of scholarship
could be deemed a match for Lessing; but they were alike in the power of
readily applying whatever they had learned, whether for purposes of
illustration or argument. They resemble each other, also, in a kind of
absolute common-sense, and in the force with which they could plant a
direct blow with the whole weight both of their training and their
temperament behind it. As a critic, Johnson ends where Lessing begins.
The one is happy in the lower region of the understanding: the other can
breathe freely in the ampler air of reason alone. Johnson acquired
learning, and stopped short from indolence at a certain point. Lessing
assimilated it, and accordingly his education ceased only with his life.
Both had something of the intellectual sluggishness that is apt to go
with great strength; and both had to be baited by the antagonism of
circumstances or opinions, not only into the exhibition, but into the
possession of their entire force. Both may be more properly called
original men than, in the highest sense, original writers.

From 1752 to 1760, with an interval of something over two years spent in
Leipzig to be near a good theatre, Lessing was settled in Berlin, and
gave himself wholly and earnestly to the life of a man of letters. A
thoroughly healthy, cheerful nature he most surely had, with something at
first of the careless light-heartedness of youth. Healthy he was not
always to be, not always cheerful, often very far from light-hearted, but
manly from first to last he eminently was. Downcast he could never be,
for his strongest instinct, invaluable to him also as a critic, was to
see things as they really are. And this not in the sense of a cynic, but
of one who measures himself as well as his circumstances,--who loves
truth as the most beautiful of all things and the only permanent
possession, as being of one substance with the soul. In a man like
Lessing, whose character is even more interesting than his works, the
tone and turn of thought are what we like to get glimpses of. And for
this his letters are more helpful than those of most authors, as might be
expected of one who said of himself, that, in his more serious work, "he
must profit by his first heat to accomplish anything." He began, we say,
light-heartedly. He did not believe that "one should thank God only for
good things." "He who is only in good health, and is willing to work, has
nothing to fear in the world." "What another man would call want, I call
comfort." "Must not one often act thoughtlessly, if one would provoke
Fortune to do something for him?" In his first inexperience, the life of
"the sparrow on the house-top" (which we find oddly translated "roof")
was the one he would choose for himself. Later in life, when he wished to
marry, he was of another mind, and perhaps discovered that there was
something in the old father's notion of a fixed position. "The life of
the sparrow on the house-top is only right good if one need not expect
any end to it. If it cannot always last, every day it lasts too
long,"--he writes to Ebert in 1770. Yet even then he takes the manly
view. "Everything in the world has its time, everything may be overlived
and overlooked, if one only have health." Nor let any one suppose that
Lessing, full of courage as he was, found professional authorship a
garden of Alcinoues. From creative literature he continually sought
refuge, and even repose, in the driest drudgery of mere scholarship. On
the 26th of April, 1768, he writes to his brother with something of his
old gayety: "Thank God, the time will soon come when I cannot call a
penny in the world my own but I must first earn it. I am unhappy if it
must be by writing." And again in May, 1771: "Among all the wretched, I
think him the most wretched who must work with his head, even if he is
not conscious of having one. But what is the good of complaining?"
Lessing's life, if it is a noble example, so far as it concerned himself
alone, is also a warning when another is to be asked to share it. He too
would have profited had he earlier learned and more constantly borne in
mind the profound wisdom of that old saying, _Si sit prudentia_. Let the
young poet, however he may believe of his art that "all other pleasures
are not worth its pains," consider well what it is to call down fire from
heaven to keep the pot boiling, before he commit himself to a life of
authorship as something fine and easy. That fire will not condescend to
such office, though it come without asking on ceremonial days to the free
service of the altar.

Lessing, however, never would, even if he could, have so desecrated his
better powers. For a bare livelihood, he always went sturdily to the
market of hack-work, where his learning would fetch him a price. But it
was only in extremest need that he would claim that benefit of clergy. "I
am worried," he writes to his brother Karl, 8th April, 1773, "and work
because working is the only means to cease being so. But you and Vess are
very much mistaken if you think that it could ever be indifferent to me,
under such circumstances, on what I work. Nothing less true, whether as
respects the work itself or the principal object wherefor I work. I have
been in my life before now in very wretched circumstances, yet never in
such that I would have written for bread in the true meaning of the word.
I have begun my 'Contributions' because this work helps me ... to live
from one day to another." It is plain that he does not call this kind of
thing in any high sense writing. Of that he had far other notions; for
though he honestly disclaimed the title, yet his dream was always to be a
poet. But he _was_ willing to work, as he claimed to be, because he had
one ideal higher than that of being a poet, namely, to be thoroughly a
man. To Nicolai he writes in 1758: "All ways of earning his bread are
alike becoming to an honest man, whether to split wood or to sit at the
helm of state. It does not concern his conscience how useful he is, but
how useful he would be." Goethe's poetic sense was the Minotaur to which
he sacrificed everything. To make a study, he would soil the maiden
petals of a woman's soul; to get the delicious sensation of a reflex
sorrow, he would wring a heart. All that saves his egoism from being
hateful is, that, with its immense reaches, it cheats the sense into a
feeling of something like sublimity. A patch of sand is unpleasing; a
desert has all the awe of ocean. Lessing also felt the duty of
self-culture; but it was not so much for the sake of feeding fat this or
that faculty as of strengthening character,--the only soil in which real
mental power can root itself and find sustenance. His advice to his
brother Karl, who was beginning to write for the stage, is two parts
moral to one literary. "Study ethics diligently, learn to express
yourself well and correctly, and cultivate your own character. Without
that I cannot conceive a good dramatic author." Marvellous counsel this
will seem to those who think that wisdom is only to be found in the
fool's paradise of Bohemia!

We said that Lessing's dream was to be a poet. In comparison with success
as a dramatist, he looked on all other achievement as inferior in kind.
In. 1767 he writes to Gleim (speaking of his call to Hamburg): "Such
circumstances were needed to rekindle in me an almost extinguished love
for the theatre. I was just beginning to lose myself in other studies
which would have made me unfit for any work of genius. My _Laocoon_ is
now a secondary labor." And yet he never fell into the mistake of
overvaluing what he valued so highly. His unflinching common-sense would
have saved him from that, as it afterwards enabled him to see that
something was wanting in him which must enter into the making of true
poetry, whose distinction from prose is an inward one of nature, and not
an outward one of form. While yet under thirty, he assures Mendelssohn
that he was quite right in neglecting poetry for philosophy, because
"only a part of our youth should be given up to the arts of the
beautiful. We must practise ourselves in weightier things before we die.
An old man, who lifelong has done nothing but rhyme, and an old man who
lifelong has done nothing but pass his breath through a stick with holes
in it,--I doubt much whether such an old man has arrived at what he was
meant for."

This period of Lessing's life was a productive one, though none of its
printed results can be counted of permanent value, except his share in
the "Letters on German Literature." And even these must be reckoned as
belonging to the years of his apprenticeship and training for the
master-workman he afterwards became. The small fry of authors and
translators were hardly fitted to call out his full strength, but his
vivisection of them taught him the value of certain structural
principles. "To one dissection of the fore quarter of an ass," says
Haydon in his diary, "I owe my information." Yet even in his earliest
criticisms we are struck with the same penetration and steadiness of
judgment, the same firm grasp of the essential and permanent, that were
afterwards to make his opinions law in the courts of taste. For example,
he says of Thomson, that, "as a dramatic poet, he had the fault of never
knowing when to leave off; he lets every character talk so long as
anything can be said; accordingly, during these prolonged conversations,
the action stands still, and the story becomes tedious." Of "Roderick
Random," he says that "its author is neither a Richardson nor a Fielding;
he is one of those writers of whom there are plenty among the Germans and
French." We cite these merely because their firmness of tone seems to us
uncommon in a youth of twenty-four. In the "Letters," the range is much
wider, and the application of principles more consequent. He had already
secured for himself a position among the literary men of that day, and
was beginning to be feared for the inexorable justice of his criticisms.
His "Fables" and his "Miss Sara Sampson" had been translated into French,
and had attracted the attention of Grimm, who says of them (December,
1754): "These Fables commonly contain in a few lines a new and profound
moral meaning. M. Lessing has much wit, genius, and invention; the
dissertations which follow the Fables prove moreover that he is an
excellent critic." In Berlin, Lessing made friendships, especially with
Mendelssohn, Von Kleist, Nicolai, Gleim, and Ramler. For Mendelssohn and
Von Kleist he seems to have felt a real love; for the others at most a
liking, as the best material that could be had. It certainly was not of
the juiciest. He seems to have worked hard and played hard, equally at
home in his study and Baumann's wine-cellar. He was busy, poor, and
happy.

But he was restless. We suspect that the necessity of forever picking up
crumbs, and their occasional scarcity, made the life of the sparrow on
the house-top less agreeable than he had expected. The imagined freedom
was not quite so free after all, for necessity is as short a tether as
dependence, or official duty, or what not, and the regular occupation of
grub-hunting is as tame and wearisome as another. Moreover, Lessing had
probably by this time sucked his friends dry of any intellectual stimulus
they could yield him; and when friendship reaches that pass, it is apt to
be anything but inspiring. Except Mendelssohn and Von Kleist, they were
not men capable of rating him at his true value; and Lessing was one of
those who always burn up the fuel of life at a fearful rate. Admirably
dry as the supplies of Ramler and the rest no doubt were, they had not
substance enough to keep his mind at the high temperature it needed, and
he would soon be driven to the cutting of green stuff from his own
wood-lot, more rich in smoke than fire. Besides this, he could hardly
have been at ease among intimates most of whom could not even conceive of
that intellectual honesty, that total disregard of all personal interests
where truth was concerned, which was an innate quality of Lessing's mind.
Their theory of criticism was, Truth, or even worse if possible, for all
who do not belong to our set; for us, that delicious falsehood which is
no doubt a slow poison, but then so _very_ slow. Their nerves were
unbraced by that fierce democracy of thought, trampling on all
prescription, all tradition, in which Lessing loved to shoulder his way
and advance his insupportable foot. "What is called a heretic," he says
in his Preface to _Berengarius_, "has a very good side. It is a man who
at least _wishes_ to see with his own eyes." And again, "I know not if it
be a duty to offer up fortune and life to the truth; ... but I know it
_is_ a duty, if one undertake to teach the truth, to teach the whole of
it, or none at all." Such men as Gleim and Ramler were mere _dilettanti_,
and could have no notion how sacred his convictions are to a militant
thinker like Lessing. His creed as to the rights of friendship in
criticism might be put in the words of Selden, the firm tread of whose
mind was like his own: "Opinion and affection extremely differ. Opinion
is something wherein I go about to give reason why all the world should
think as I think. Affection is a thing wherein I look after the pleasing
of myself." How little his friends were capable of appreciating this view
of the matter is plain from a letter of Ramler to Gleim, cited by Herr
Stahr. Lessing had shown up the weaknesses of a certain work by the Abbe
Batteux (long ago gathered to his literary fathers as conclusively as
poor old Ramler himself), without regard to the important fact that the
Abbe's book had been translated by a friend. Horrible to think of at
best, thrice horrible when the friend's name was Ramler! The impression
thereby made on the friendly heart may be conceived. A ray of light
penetrated the rather opaque substance of Herr Ramler's mind, and
revealed to him the dangerous character of Lessing. "I know well," he
says, "that Herr Lessing means to speak his own opinion, and"--what is
the dreadful inference?--"and, by suppressing others, to gain air, and
make room for himself. This disposition is not to be overcome."[152]
Fortunately not, for Lessing's opinion always meant something, and was
worth having. Gleim no doubt sympathized deeply with the sufferer by this
treason, for he too had been shocked at some disrespect for La Fontaine,
as a disciple of whom he had announced himself.

Berlin was hardly the place for Lessing, if he could not take a step in
any direction without risk of treading on somebody's gouty foot. This was
not the last time that he was to have experience of the fact that the
critic's pen, the more it has of truth's celestial temper, the more it is
apt to reverse the miracle of the archangel's spear, and to bring out
whatever is toadlike in the nature of him it touches. We can well
understand the sadness with which he said,

              "Der Blick des Forscher's fand
  Nicht selten mehr als er zu finden wuenschte."

Here, better than anywhere, we may cite something which he wrote of
himself to a friend of Klotz. Lessing, it will be remembered, had
literally "suppressed" Klotz. "What do you apprehend, then, from me? The
more faults and errors you point out to me, so much the more I shall
learn of you; the more I learn of you, the more thankful shall I be....I
wish you knew me more thoroughly. If the opinion you have of my learning
and genius (_Geist_) should perhaps suffer thereby, yet I am sure the
idea I would like you to form of my character would gain. I am not the
insufferable, unmannerly, proud, slanderous man Herr Klotz proclaims me.
It cost me a great deal of trouble and compulsion to be a little bitter
against him."[153] Ramler and the rest had contrived a nice little
society for mutual admiration, much like that described by Goldsmith, if,
indeed, he did not convey it from the French, as was not uncommon with
him. "'What, have you never heard of the admirable Brandellius or the
ingenious Mogusius, one the eye and the other the heart of our
University, known all over the world?' 'Never,' cried the traveller; 'but
pray inform me what Brandellius is particularly remarkable for.' 'You
must be little acquainted with the republic of letters,' said the other,
'to ask such a question. Brandellius has written a most sublime panegyric
on Mogusius.' 'And, prithee, what has Mogusius done to deserve so great a
favor?' 'He has written an excellent poem in praise of Brandellius.'"
Lessing was not the man who could narrow himself to the proportions of a
clique; lifelong he was the terror of the Brandellii and Mogusii, and, at
the signal given by him,

              "They, but now who seemed
  In bigness to surpass Earth's giant sons,
  Now less than smallest dwarfs in narrow room
  Throng numberless."

Besides whatever other reasons Leasing may have had for leaving Berlin,
we fancy that his having exhausted whatever means it had of helping his
spiritual growth was the chief. Nine years later, he gave as a reason for
not wishing to stay long in Brunswick, "Not that I do not like Brunswick,
but because nothing comes of being long in a place which one likes."[154]
Whatever the reason, Leasing, in 1760, left Berlin for Breslau, where the
post of secretary had been offered him under Frederick's tough old
General Tauentzien. "I will spin myself in for a while like an ugly worm,
that I may be able to come to light again as a brilliant winged
creature," says his diary. Shortly after his leaving Berlin, he was
chosen a member of the Academy of Sciences there. Herr Stahr, who has no
little fondness for the foot-light style of phrase, says, "It may easily
be imagined that he himself regarded his appointment as an insult rather
than as an honor." Lessing himself merely says that it was a matter of
indifference to him, which is much more in keeping with his character and
with the value of the intended honor.

The Seven Years' War began four years before Lessing took up his abode in
Breslau, and it may be asked how he, as a Saxon, was affected by it. We
might answer, hardly at all. His position was that of armed neutrality.
Long ago at Leipzig he had been accused of Prussian leanings; now in
Berlin he was thought too Saxon. Though he disclaimed any such sentiment
as patriotism, and called himself a cosmopolite, it is plain enough that
his position was simply that of a German. Love of country, except in a
very narrow parochial way, was as impossible in Germany then as in
America during the Colonial period. Lessing himself, in the latter years
of his life, was librarian of one of those petty princelets who sold
their subjects to be shot at in America,--creatures strong enough to
oppress, too weak to protect their people. Whoever would have found a
Germany to love must have pieced it together as painfully as Isis did the
scattered bits of Osiris. Yet he says that "the true patriot is by no
means extinguished" in him. It was the noisy ones that he could not
abide; and, writing to Gleim about his "Grenadier" verses, he advises him
to soften the tone of them a little, he himself being a "declared enemy
of imprecations," which he would leave altogether to the clergy. We think
Herr Stahr makes too much of these anti-patriot flings of Lessing, which,
with a single exception, occur in his letters to Gleim, and with
reference to a kind of verse that could not but be distasteful to him, as
needing no more brains than a drum, nor other inspiration than serves a
trumpet. Lessing undoubtedly had better uses for his breath than to spend
it in shouting for either side in this "bloody lawsuit," as he called it,
in which he was not concerned. He showed himself German enough, and in
the right way, in his persistent warfare against the tyranny of French
taste.

He remained in Breslau the better part of five years, studying life in
new phases, gathering a library, which, as commonly happens, he
afterwards sold at great loss, and writing his _Minna_ and his _Laocooen_.
He accompanied Tauentzien to the siege of Schweidnitz, where Frederick
was present in person. He seems to have lived a rather free-and-easy life
during his term of office, kept shockingly late hours, and learned, among
other things, to gamble,--a fact for which Herr Stahr thinks it needful
to account in a high philosophical fashion. We prefer to think that there
are _some_ motives to which remarkable men are liable in common with the
rest of mankind, and that they may occasionally do a thing merely because
it is pleasant, without forethought of medicinal benefit to the mind.
Lessing's friends (whose names were _not_, as the reader might be tempted
to suppose, Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar) expected him to make something
handsome out of his office; but the pitiful result of those five years of
opportunity was nothing more than an immortal book. Unthrifty Lessing, to
have been so nice about your fingers, (and so near the mint, too,) when
your general was wise enough to make his fortune! As if ink-stains were
the only ones that would wash out, and no others had ever been covered
with white kid from the sight of all reasonable men! In July, 1764, he
had a violent fever, which he turned to account in his usual cheerful
way: "The serious epoch of my life is drawing nigh. I am beginning to
become a man, and flatter myself that in this burning fever I have raved
away the last remains of my youthful follies. Fortunate illness!" He had
never intended to bind himself to an official career. To his father he
writes: "I have more than once declared that my present engagement could
not continue long, that I have not given up my old plan of living, and
that I am more than ever resolved to withdraw from any service that is
not wholly to my mind. I have passed the middle of my life, and can think
of nothing that could compel me to make myself a slave for the poor
remainder of it. I write you this, dearest father, and must write you
this, in order that you may not be astonished if, before long, you should
see me once more very far removed from all hopes of, or claims to, a
settled prosperity, as it is called." Before the middle of the next year
he was back in Berlin again.

There he remained for nearly two years, trying the house-top way of life
again, but with indifferent success, as we have reason to think. Indeed,
when the metaphor resolves itself into the plain fact of living just on
the other side of the roof,--in the garret, namely,--and that from hand
to mouth, as was Lessing's case, we need not be surprised to find him
gradually beginning to see something more agreeable in a _fixirtes Glueck_
than he had once been willing to allow. At any rate, he was willing, and
even heartily desirous, that his friends should succeed in getting for
him the place of royal librarian. But Frederick, for some unexplained
reason, would not appoint him. Herr Stahr thinks it had something to do
with the old _Siecle_ manuscript business. But this seems improbable, for
Voltaire's wrath was not directed against Lessing; and even if it had
been, the great king could hardly have carried the name of an obscure
German author in his memory through all those anxious and war-like years.
Whatever the cause, Lessing early in 1767 accepts the position of
Theatrical Manager at Hamburg, as usual not too much vexed with
disappointment, but quoting gayly

    "Quod non dant proceres, dabit histrio."

Like Burns, he was always "contented wi' little and canty wi' mair." In
connection with his place as Manager he was to write a series of dramatic
essays and criticisms. It is to this we owe the _Dramaturgie_,--next to
the _Laocooen_ the most valuable of his works. But Lessing--though it is
plain that he made his hand as light as he could, and wrapped his lash in
velvet--soon found that actors had no more taste for truth than authors.
He was obliged to drop his remarks on the special merits or demerits of
players, and to confine himself to those of the pieces represented. By
this his work gained in value; and the latter part of it, written without
reference to a particular stage, and devoted to the discussion of those
general principles of dramatic art on which he had meditated long and
deeply, is far weightier than the rest. There are few men who can put
forth all their muscle in a losing race, and it is characteristic of
Lessing that what he wrote under the dispiritment of failure should be
the most lively and vigorous. Circumstances might be against him, but he
was incapable of believing that a cause could be lost which had once
enlisted his conviction.

The theatrical enterprise did not prosper long; but Lessing had meanwhile
involved himself as partner in a publishing business which harassed him
while it lasted, and when it failed, as was inevitable, left him hampered
with debt. Help came in his appointment (1770) to take charge of the Duke
of Brunswick's library at Wolfenbuettel, with a salary of six hundred
thalers a year. This was the more welcome, as he soon after was betrothed
with Eva Koenig, widow of a rich manufacturer.[155] Her husband's affairs,
however, had been left in confusion, and this, with Lessing's own
embarrassments, prevented their being married till October, 1776. Eva
Koenig was every way worthy of him. Clever, womanly, discreet, with just
enough coyness of the will to be charming when it is joined with
sweetness and good sense, she was the true helpmate of such a man,--the
serious companion of his mind and the playfellow of his affections. There
is something infinitely refreshing to me in the love-letters of these two
persons. Without wanting sentiment, there is such a bracing air about
them as breathes from the higher levels and strong-holds of the soul.
They show that self-possession which can alone reserve to love the power
of new self-surrender,--of never cloying, because never wholly possessed.
Here is no invasion and conquest of the weaker nature by the stronger,
but an equal league of souls, each in its own realm still sovereign. Turn
from such letters as these to those of St. Preux and Julie, and you are
stifled with the heavy perfume of a demirep's boudoir,--to those of
Herder to his Caroline, and you sniff no doubtful odor of professional
unction from the sermon-case. Manly old Dr. Johnson, who could be tender
and true to a plain woman, knew very well what he meant when he wrote
that single poetic sentence of his,--"The shepherd in Virgil grew at last
acquainted with Love, and found him to be a native of the rocks."

In January, 1778, Lessing's wife died from the effects of a difficult
childbirth. The child, a boy, hardly survived its birth. The few words
wrung out of Lessing by this double sorrow are to me as deeply moving as
anything in tragedy. "I wished for once to be as happy (_es so gut
haben_) as other men. But it has gone ill with me!" "And I was so loath
to lose him, this son!" "My wife is dead; and I have had this experience
also. I rejoice that I have not many more such experiences left to make,
and am quite cheerful." "If you had known her! But they say that to
praise one's wife is self-praise. Well, then, I say no more of her! But
if you had known her!" _Quite cheerful!_ On the 10th of August he writes
to Elise Reimarus,--he is writing to a woman now, an old friend of his
and his wife, and will be less restrained: "I am left here all alone. I
have not a single friend to whom I can wholly confide myself.... How
often must I curse my ever wishing to be for once as happy as other men!
How often have I wished myself back again in my old, isolated
condition,--to be nothing, to wish nothing, to do nothing, but what the
present moment brings with it!... Yet I am too proud to think myself
unhappy. I just grind my teeth, and let the boat go as pleases wind and
waves. Enough that I will not overset it myself." It is plain from this
letter that suicide had been in his mind, and, with his antique way of
thinking on many subjects, he would hardly have looked on it as a crime.
But he was too brave a man to throw up the sponge to fate, and had work
to do yet. Within a few days of his wife's death he wrote to Eschenburg:
"I am right heartily ashamed if my letter betrayed the least despair.
Despair is not nearly so much my failing as levity, which often expresses
itself with a little bitterness and misanthropy." A stoic, not from
insensibility or cowardice, as so many are, but from stoutness of heart,
he blushes at a moment's abdication of self-command. And he will not roil
the clear memory of his love with any tinge of the sentimentality so much
the fashion, and to be had so cheap, in that generation. There is a
moderation of sincerity peculiar to Lessing in the epithet of the
following sentence: "How dearly must I pay for the single year I have
lived with a _sensible_ wife!" Werther had then been published four
years. Lessing's grief has that pathos which he praised in sculpture,--he
may writhe, but he must not scream. Nor is this a new thing with him. On
the death of a younger brother, he wrote to his father, fourteen years
before: "Why should those who grieve communicate their grief to each
other purposely to increase it?... Many mourn in death what they loved
not living. I will love in life what nature bids me love, and after death
strive to bewail it as little as I can."

We think Herr Stahr is on his stilts again when he speaks of Lessing's
position at Wolfenbuettel. He calls it an "assuming the chains of feudal
service, being buried in a corner, a martyrdom that consumed the best
powers of his mind and crushed him in body and spirit forever." To crush
_forever_ is rather a strong phrase, Herr Stahr, to apply to the spirit,
if one must ever give heed to the sense as well as the sound of what one
is writing. But eloquence has no bowels for its victims. We have no doubt
the Duke of Brunswick meant well by Lessing, and the salary he paid him
was as large as he would have got from the frugal Frederick. But one
whose trade it was to be a Duke could hardly have had much sympathy with
his librarian after he had once found out what he really was. For even if
he was not, as Herr Stahr affirms, a republican, and we doubt very much
if he was, yet he was not a man who could play with ideas in the light
French fashion. At the ardent touch of his sincerity, they took fire, and
grew dangerous to what is called the social fabric. The logic of wit,
with its momentary flash, is a very different thing from that consequent
logic of thought, pushing forward its deliberate sap day and night with a
fixed object, which belonged to Lessing. The men who attack abuses are
not so much to be dreaded by the reigning house of Superstition as those
who, as Dante says, syllogize hateful truths. As for "the chains of
feudal service," they might serve a Fenian Head-Centre on a pinch, but
are wholly out of place here. The slavery that Lessing had really taken
on him was that of a great library, an Alcina that could always too
easily witch him away from the more serious duty of his genius. That a
mind like his could be buried in a corner is mere twaddle, and of a kind
that has done great wrong to the dignity of letters. Where-ever Lessing
sat, was the head of the table. That he suffered at Wolfenbuettel is true;
but was it nothing to be in love and in debt at the same time, and to
feel that his fruition of the one must be postponed for uncertain years
by his own folly in incurring the other? If the sparrow-life must end,
surely a wee bush is better than nae beild. One cause of Lessing's
occasional restlessness and discontent Herr Stahr has failed to notice.
It is evident from many passages in his letters that he had his share of
the hypochondria which goes with an imaginative temperament. But in him
it only serves to bring out in stronger relief his deep-rooted manliness.
He spent no breath in that melodious whining which, beginning with
Rousseau, has hardly yet gone out of fashion. Work of some kind was his
medicine for the blues,--if not always of the kind he would have chosen,
then the best that was to be had; for the useful, too, had for him a
sweetness of its own. Sometimes he found a congenial labor in rescuing,
as he called it, the memory of some dead scholar or thinker from the
wrongs of ignorance or prejudice or falsehood; sometimes in fishing a
manuscript out of the ooze of oblivion, and giving it, after a critical
cleansing, to the world. Now and then he warmed himself and kept his
muscle in trim with buffeting soundly the champions of that shallow
artificiality and unctuous wordiness, one of which passed for orthodox in
literature, and the other in theology. True religion and creative genius
were both so beautiful to him that he could never abide the mediocre
counterfeit of either, and he who put so much of his own life into all he
wrote could not but hold all scripture sacred in which a divine soul had
recorded itself. It would be doing Lessing great wrong to confound his
controversial writing with the paltry quarrels of authors. His own
personal relations enter into them surprisingly little, for his quarrel
was never with men, but with falsehood, cant, and misleading tradition,
in whomsoever incarnated. Save for this, they were no longer readable,
and might be relegated to that herbarium of Billingsgate gathered by the
elder Disraeli.

So far from being "crushed in spirit" at Wolfenbuettel, the years he spent
there were among the most productive of his life. "Emilia Galotti," begun
in 1758, was finished there and published in 1771. The controversy with
Goetze, by far the most important he was engaged in, and the one in which
he put forth his maturest powers, was carried on thence. His "Nathan the
Wise" (1779), by which almost alone he is known as a poet outside of
Germany, was conceived and composed there. The last few years of his life
were darkened by ill-health and the depression which it brings. His
Nathan had not the success he hoped. It is sad to see the strong,
self-sufficing man casting about for a little sympathy, even for a little
praise. "It is really needful to me that you should have some small good
opinion of it [Nathan], in order to make me once more contented with
myself," he writes to Elise Reimarus in May, 1779. That he was weary of
polemics, and dissatisfied with himself for letting them distract him
from better things, appears from his last pathetic letter to the old
friend he loved and valued most,--Mendelssohn. "And in truth, dear
friend, I sorely need a letter like yours from time to time, if I am not
to become wholly out of humor. I think you do not know me as a man that
has a very hot hunger for praise. But the coldness with which the world
is wont to convince certain people that they do not suit it, if not
deadly, yet stiffens one with chill. I am not astonished that _all_ I
have written lately does not please _you_.... At best, a passage here and
there may have cheated you by recalling our better days. I, too, was then
a sound, slim sapling, and am now such a rotten, gnarled trunk!" This was
written on the 19th of December, 1780; and on the 15th of February, 1781,
Lessing died, not quite fifty-two years old. Goethe was then in his
thirty-second year, and Schiller ten years younger.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of Lessing's relation to metaphysics the reader will find ample
discussion in Herr Stahr's volumes. We are not particularly concerned
with them, because his interest in such questions was purely speculative,
and because he was more concerned to exercise the powers of his mind than
to analyze them. His chief business, his master impulse always, was to be
a man of letters in the narrower sense of the term. Even into theology he
only made occasional raids across the border, as it were, and that not so
much with a purpose of reform as in defence of principles which applied
equally to the whole domain of thought. He had even less sympathy with
heterodoxy than with orthodoxy, and, so far from joining a party or
wishing to form one, would have left belief a matter of choice to the
individual conscience. "From the bottom of my heart I hate all those
people who wish to found sects. For it is not error, but sectarian error,
yes, even sectarian truth, that makes men unhappy, or would do so if
truth would found a sect."[156] Again he says, that in his theological
controversies he is "much less concerned about theology than about sound
common-sense, and only therefore prefer the old orthodox (at bottom
_tolerant_) theology to the new (at bottom _intolerant_), because the
former openly conflicts with sound common-sense, while the latter would
fain corrupt it. I reconcile myself with my open enemies in order the
better to be on my guard against my secret ones."[157] At another time he
tells his brother that he has a wholly false notion of his (Lessing's)
relation to orthodoxy. "Do you suppose I grudge the world that anybody
should seek to enlighten it?--that I do not heartily wish that every one
should think rationally about religion? I should loathe myself if even in
my scribblings I had any other end than to help forward those great
views. But let me choose my own way, which I think best for this purpose.
And what is simpler than this way? I would not have the impure water,
which has long been unfit to use, preserved; but I would not have it
thrown away before we know whence to get purer.... Orthodoxy, thank God,
we were pretty well done with; a partition-wall had been built between it
and Philosophy, behind which each could go her own way without troubling
the other. But what are they doing now? They are tearing down this wall,
and, under the pretext of making us rational Christians, are making us
very irrational philosophers.... We are agreed that our old religious
system is false; but I cannot say with you that it is a patchwork of
bunglers and half-philosophers. I know nothing in the world in which
human acuteness has been more displayed or exercised than in that."[158]
Lessing was always for freedom, never for looseness, of thought, still
less for laxity of principle. But it must be a real freedom, and not that
vain struggle to become a majority, which, if it succeed, escapes from
heresy only to make heretics of the other side. _Abire ad plures_ would
with him have meant, not bodily but spiritual death. He did not love the
fanaticism of innovation a whit better than that of conservatism. To his
sane understanding, both were equally hateful, as different masks of the
same selfish bully. Coleridge said that toleration was impossible till
indifference made it worthless. Lessing did not wish for toleration,
because that implies authority, nor could his earnest temper have
conceived of indifference. But he thought it as absurd to regulate
opinion as the color of the hair. Here, too, he would have agreed with
Selden, that "it is a vain thing to talk of an heretic, for a man for his
heart cannot think any otherwise than he does think." Herr Stahr's
chapters on this point, bating a little exaltation of tone, are very
satisfactory; though, in his desire to make a leader of Lessing, he
almost represents him as being what he shunned,--the founder of a sect.
The fact is, that Lessing only formulated in his own way a general
movement of thought, and what mainly interests us is that in him we see a
layman, alike indifferent to clerisy and heresy, giving energetic and
pointed utterance to those opinions of his class which the clergy are
content to ignore so long as they remain esoteric. At present the world
has advanced to where Lessing stood, while the Church has done its best
to stand stock-still; and it would be a curious were it not a melancholy
spectacle, to see the indifference with which the laity look on while
theologians thrash their wheatless straw, utterly unconscious that there
is no longer any common term possible that could bring their creeds again
to any point of bearing on the practical life of men. Fielding never made
a profounder stroke of satire than in Squire Western's indignant "Art not
in the pulpit now! When art got up there, I never mind what dost say."

As an author, Lessing began his career at a period when we cannot say
that German literature was at its lowest ebb, only because there had not
yet been any flood-tide. That may be said to have begun with him. When we
say German literature, we mean so much of it as has any interest outside
of Germany. That part of the literary histories which treats of the dead
waste and middle of the eighteenth century reads like a collection of
obituaries, and were better reduced to the conciseness of epitaph, though
the authors of them seem to find a melancholy pleasure, much like that of
undertakers, in the task by which they live. Gottsched reigned supreme on
the legitimate throne of dulness. In Switzerland, Bodmer essayed a more
republican form of the same authority. At that time a traveller reports
eight hundred authors in Zuerich alone! Young aspirant for lettered fame,
in imagination clear away the lichens from their forgotten headstones,
and read humbly the "As I am, so thou must be," on all! Everybody
remembers how Goethe, in the seventh book of his autobiography, tells the
story of his visit to Gottsched. He enters by mistake an inner room at
the moment when a frightened servant brings the discrowned potentate a
periwig large enough to reach to the elbows. That awful emblem of
pretentious sham seems to be the best type of the literature then
predominant. We always fancy it set upon a pole, like Gessler's hat, with
nothing in it that was not wooden, for all men to bow down before. The
periwig style had its natural place in the age of Louis XIV., and there
were certainly brains under it. But it had run out in France, as the
tie-wig style of Pope had in England. In Germany it was the mere
imitation of an imitation. Will it be believed that Gottsched recommends
his Art of Poetry to beginners, in preference to Breitinger's, because it
"_will enable them to produce every species of poem in a correct style_,
while out of that no one can learn to make an ode or a cantata"?
"Whoever," he says, "buys Breitinger's book _in order to learn how to
make poems_, will too late regret his money."[159] Gottsched, perhaps,
did some service even by his advocacy of French models, by calling
attention to the fact that there _was_ such a thing as style, and that it
was of some consequence. But not one of the authors of that time can be
said to survive, nor to be known even by name except to Germans, unless
it be Klopstock, Herder, Wieland, and Gellert. And the latter's
immortality, such as it is, reminds us somewhat of that Lady Gosling's,
whose obituary stated that she was "mentioned by Mrs. Barbauld in her
Life of Richardson 'under the name of Miss M., afterwards Lady G.'"
Klopstock himself is rather remembered for what he was than what he
is,--an immortality of unreadableness; and we much doubt if many Germans
put the "Oberon" in their trunks when they start on a journey. Herder
alone survives, if not as a contributor to literature, strictly so
called, yet as a thinker and as part of the intellectual impulse of the
day. But at the time, though there were two parties, yet within the lines
of each there was a loyal reciprocity of what is called on such occasions
appreciation. Wig ducked to wig, each blockhead had a brother, and there
was a universal apotheosis of the mediocrity of our set. If the greatest
happiness of the greatest number be the true theory, this was all that
could be desired. Even Lessing at one time looked up to Hagedorn as the
German Horace. If Hagedorn were pleased, what mattered it to Horace?
Worse almost than this was the universal pedantry. The solemn bray of one
pedagogue was taken up and prolonged in a thousand echoes. There was not
only no originality, but no desire for it,--perhaps even a dread of it,
as something that would break the _entente cordiale_ of placid mutual
assurance. No great writer had given that tone of good-breeding to the
language which would gain it entrance to the society of European
literature. No man of genius had made it a necessity of polite culture.
It was still as rudely provincial as the Scotch of Allan Ramsay.
Frederick the Great was to be forgiven if, with his practical turn, he
gave himself wholly to French, which had replaced Latin as a cosmopolitan
tongue. It had lightness, ease, fluency, elegance,--in short, all the
good qualities that German lacked. The study of French models was perhaps
the best thing for German literature before it got out of long-clothes.
It was bad only when it became a tradition and a tyranny. Lessing did
more than any other man to overthrow this foreign usurpation when it had
done its work.

The same battle had to be fought on English soil also, and indeed is
hardly over yet. For the renewed outbreak of the old quarrel between
Classical and Romantic grew out of nothing more than an attempt of the
modern spirit to free itself from laws of taste laid down by the _Grand
Siecle_. But we must not forget the debt which all modern prose
literature owes to France. It is true that Machiavelli was the first to
write with classic pith and point in a living language; but he is, for
all that, properly an ancient. Montaigne is really the first modern
writer,--the first who assimilated his Greek and Latin, and showed that
an author might be original and charming, even classical, if he did not
try too hard. He is also the first modern critic, and his judgments of
the writers of antiquity are those of an equal. He made the ancients his
servants, to help him think in Gascon French; and, in spite of his
endless quotations, began the crusade against pedantry. It was not,
however, till a century later, that the reform became complete in France,
and then crossed the Channel. Milton is still a pedant in his prose, and
not seldom even in his great poem. Dryden was the first Englishman who
wrote perfectly easy prose, and he owed his style and turn of thought to
his French reading. His learning sits easily on him, and has a modern
cut. So far, the French influence was one of unmixed good, for it rescued
us from pedantry. It must have done something for Germany in the same
direction. For its effect on poetry we cannot say as much; and its
traditions had themselves become pedantry in another shape when Lessing
made an end of it. He himself certainly learned to write prose of
Diderot; and whatever Herr Stahr may think of it, his share in the
"Letters on German Literature" got its chief inspiration from France.

It is in the _Dramaturgie_ that Lessing first properly enters as an
influence into European literature. He may be said to have begun the
revolt from pseudo-classicism in poetry, and to have been thus
unconsciously the founder of romanticism. Wieland's translation of
Shakespeare had, it is true, appeared in 1762; but Lessing was the first
critic whose profound knowledge of the Greek drama and apprehension of
its principles gave weight to his judgment, who recognized in what the
true greatness of the poet consisted, and found him to be really nearer
the Greeks than any other modern. This was because Lessing looked always
more to the life than the form,--because he knew the classics, and did
not merely cant about them. But if the authority of Lessing, by making
people feel easy in their admiration for Shakespeare, perhaps increased
the influence of his works, and if his discussions of Aristotle have
given a new starting-point to modern criticism, it may be doubted whether
the immediate effect on literature of his own critical essays was so
great as Herr Stahr supposes. Surely "Goetz" and "The Robbers" are nothing
like what he would have called Shakespearian, and the whole _Sturm und
Drang_ tendency would have roused in him nothing but antipathy. Fixed
principles in criticism are useful in helping us to form a judgment of
works already produced, but it is questionable whether they are not
rather a hindrance than a help to living production. Ben Jonson was a
fine critic, intimate with the classics as few men have either the
leisure or the strength of mind to be in this age of many books, and
built regular plays long before they were heard of in France. But he
continually trips and falls flat over his metewand of classical
propriety, his personages are abstractions, and fortunately neither his
precepts nor his practice influenced any one of his greater coevals.[160]
In breadth of understanding, and the gravity of purpose that comes of it,
he was far above Fletcher or Webster, but how far below either in the
subtler, the incalculable, qualities of a dramatic poet! Yet Ben, with
his principles off, could soar and sing with the best of them; and there
are strains in his lyrics which Herrick, the most Catullian of poets
since Catullus, could imitate, but never match. A constant reference to
the statutes which taste has codified would only bewilder the creative
instinct. Criticism can at best teach writers without genius what is to
be avoided or imitated. It cannot communicate life; and its effect, when
reduced to rules, has commonly been to produce that correctness which is
so praiseworthy and so intolerable. It cannot give taste, it can only
demonstrate who has had it. Lessing's essays in this kind were of service
to German literature by their manliness of style, whose example was worth
a hundred treatises, and by the stimulus there is in all original
thinking. Could he have written such a poem as he was capable of
conceiving, his influence would have been far greater. It is the living
soul, and not the metaphysical abstraction of it, that is genetic in
literature. If to do were as easy as to know what were good to be done!
It was out of his own failures to reach the ideal he saw so clearly, that
Lessing drew the wisdom which made him so admirable a critic. Even here,
too, genius can profit by no experience but its own.

For, in spite of Herr Stahr's protest, we must acknowledge the truth of
Lessing's own characteristic confession, that he was no poet. A man of
genius he unquestionably was, if genius may be claimed no less for force
than fineness of mind,--for the intensity of conviction that inspires the
understanding as much as for that apprehension of beauty which gives
energy of will to imagination,--but a poetic genius he was not. His mind
kindled by friction in the process of thinking, not in the flash of
conception, and its delight is in demonstration, not in bodying forth.
His prose can leap and run, his verse is always thinking of its feet. Yet
in his "Minna" and his "Emilia"[161] he shows one faculty of the
dramatist, that of construction, in a higher degree than any other
German.[162] Here his critical deductions served him to some purpose. The
action moves rapidly, there is no speechifying, and the parts are
coherent. Both plays act better than anything of Goethe or Schiller. But
it is the story that interests us, and not the characters. These are not,
it is true, the incorporation of certain ideas, or, still worse, of
certain dogmas, but they certainly seem something like machines by which
the motive of the play is carried on; and there is nothing of that
interplay of plot and character which makes Shakespeare more real in the
closet than other dramatists with all the helps of the theatre. It is a
striking illustration at once of the futility of mere critical insight
and of Lessing's want of imagination, that in the Emilia he should have
thought a Roman motive consistent with modern habits of thought, and that
in Nathan he should have been guilty of anachronisms which violate not
only the accidental truth of fact, but the essential truth of character.
Even if we allowed him imagination, it must be only on the lower plane of
prose; for of verse as anything more than so many metrical feet he had
not the faintest notion. Of that exquisite sympathy with the movement of
the mind, with every swifter or slower pulse of passion, which proves it
another species from prose, the very [Greek: aphroditae kai lura] of
speech, and not merely a higher one, he wanted the fineness of sense to
conceive. If we compare the prose of Dante or Milton, though both were
eloquent, with their verse, we see at once which was the most congenial
to them. Lessing has passages of freer and more harmonious utterance in
some of his most careless prose essays, than can be found in his Nathan
from the first line to the last. In the _numeris lege solutis_ he is
often snatched beyond himself, and becomes truly dithyrambic; in his
pentameters the march of the thought is comparatively hampered and
irresolute. His best things are not poetically delicate, but have the
tougher fibre of proverbs. Is it not enough, then, to be a great
prose-writer? They are as rare as great poets, and if Lessing have the
gift to stir and to dilate that something deeper than the mind which
genius only can reach, what matter if it be not done to music? Of his
minor poems we need say little. Verse was always more or less mechanical
with him, and his epigrams are almost all stiff, as if they were bad
translations from the Latin. Many of them are shockingly coarse, and in
liveliness are on a level with those of our Elizabethan period. Herr
Stahr, of course, cannot bear to give them up, even though Gervinus be
willing. The prettiest of his shorter poems (_Die Namen_)has been
appropriated by Coleridge, who has given it a grace which it wants in the
original. His Nathan, by a poor translation of which he is chiefly known
to English readers, is an Essay on Toleration in the form of a dialogue.
As a play, it has not the interest of Minna or Emilia, though the
Germans, who have a praiseworthy national stoicism where one of their
great writers is concerned, find in seeing it represented a grave
satisfaction, like that of subscribing to a monument. There is a sober
lustre of reflection in it that makes it very good reading; but it wants
the molten interfusion of thought and phrase which only imagination can
achieve.

As Lessing's mind was continually advancing,--always open to new
impressions, and capable, as very few are, of apprehending the
many-sidedness of truth,--as he had the rare quality of being honest with
himself,--his works seem fragmentary, and give at first an impression of
incompleteness. But one learns at length to recognize and value this very
incompleteness as characteristic of the man who was growing lifelong, and
to whom the selfish thought that any share of truth could be exclusively
_his_ was an impossibility. At the end of the ninety-fifth number of the
_Dramaturgie_ he says: "I remind my readers here, that these pages are by
no means intended to contain a dramatic system. I am accordingly not
bound to solve all the difficulties which I raise. I am quite willing
that my thoughts should seem to want connection,--nay, even to contradict
each other,--if only there are thoughts in which they [my readers] find
material for thinking themselves. I wish to do nothing more than scatter
the _fermenta cognitionis_." That is Lessing's great praise, and gives
its chief value to his works,--a value, indeed, imperishable, and of the
noblest kind. No writer can leave a more precious legacy to posterity
than this; and beside this shining merit, all mere literary splendors
look pale and cold. There is that life in Lessing's thought which
engenders life, and not only thinks for us, but makes us think. Not
sceptical, but forever testing and inquiring, it is out of the cloud of
his own doubt that the flash comes at last with sudden and vivid
illumination. Flashes they indeed are, his finest intuitions, and of very
different quality from the equable north-light of the artist. He felt it,
and said it of himself, "Ever so many flashes of lightning do not make
daylight." We speak now of those more rememberable passages where his
highest individuality reveals itself in what may truly be called a
passion of thought. In the "Laocooen" there is daylight of the serenest
temper, and never was there a better example of the discourse of reason,
though even that is also a fragment.

But it is as a nobly original man, even more than as an original thinker,
that Lessing is precious to us, and that he is so considerable in German
literature. In a higher sense, but in the same kind, he is to Germans
what Dr. Johnson is to us,--admirable for what he was. Like Johnson's,
too, but still from a loftier plane, a great deal of his thought has a
direct bearing on the immediate life and interests of men. His genius was
not a St. Elmo's fire, as it so often is with mere poets,--as it was in
Shelley, for example, playing in ineffectual flame about the points of
his thought,--but was interfused with his whole nature and made a part of
his very being. To the Germans, with their weak nerve of sentimentalism,
his brave common-sense is a far wholesomer tonic than the cynicism of
Heine, which is, after all, only sentimentalism soured. His jealousy for
maintaining the just boundaries whether of art or speculation may warn
them to check with timely dikes the tendency of their thought to diffuse
inundation. Their fondness in aesthetic discussion for a nomenclature
subtile enough to split a hair at which even a Thomist would have
despaired, is rebuked by the clear simplicity of his style.[163] But he
is no exclusive property of Germany. As a complete man, constant,
generous, full of honest courage, as a hardy follower of Thought wherever
she might lead him, above all, as a confessor of that Truth which is
forever revealing itself to the seeker, and is the more loved because
never wholly revealable, he is an ennobling possession of mankind. Let
his own striking words characterize him:--

"Not the truth of which any one is, or supposes himself to be, possessed,
but the upright endeavor he has made to arrive at truth, makes the worth
of the man. For not by the possession, but by the investigation, of truth
are his powers expanded, wherein alone his ever-growing perfection
consists. Possession makes us easy, indolent, proud.

"If God held all truth shut in his right hand, and in his left nothing
but the ever-restless instinct for truth, though with the condition of
for ever and ever erring, and should say to me, Choose! I should bow
humbly to his left hand, and say, Father, give! pure truth is for Thee
alone!"

It is not without reason that fame is awarded only after death. The
dust-cloud of notoriety which follows and envelopes the men who drive
with the wind bewilders contemporary judgment. Lessing, while he lived,
had little reward for his labor but the satisfaction inherent in all work
faithfully done; the highest, no doubt, of which human nature is capable,
and yet perhaps not so sweet as that sympathy of which the world's praise
is but an index. But if to perpetuate herself beyond the grave in healthy
and ennobling influences be the noblest aspiration of the mind, and its
fruition the only reward she would have deemed worthy of herself, then is
Lessing to be counted thrice fortunate. Every year since he was laid
prematurely in the earth has seen his power for good increase, and made
him more precious to the hearts and intellects of men. "Lessing," said
Goethe, "would have declined the lofty title of a Genius; but his
enduring influence testifies against himself. On the other hand, we have
in literature other and indeed important names of men who, while they
lived, were esteemed great geniuses, but whose influence ended with their
lives, and who, accordingly, were less than they and others thought. For,
as I have said, there is no genius without a productive power that
continues forever operative."[164]




Footnotes:

    [147] G. E. Lessing. _Sein Leben und seine Werke_. Von Adolf Stahr.
    Vermehrte und verbesserte Volks-Ausgabe. Dritte Auflage Berlin. 1864.

    _The Same_. Translated by E. P. Evans, Ph. D., Professor, &c. in the
    University of Michigan. Boston: W. V. Spencer. 1866. 2 vols.

    G. E. Lessing's Saemmtliche Schriften, herausgegeben von Karl
    Lachmann. 1853-57. 12 Baende.


    [148] "If I write at all, it is not possible for me to write
    otherwise than just as I think and feel."--Lessing to his father,
    21st December, 1767.


    [149] "I am sure that Kleist would rather have taken another wound
    with him into his grave than have such stuff jabbered over him (_sich
    solch Zeug nachschwatzen lassen_)." Lessing to Gleim, 6th September
    1759.


    [150] Letter to Klotz, 9th June, 1766.


    [151] Herr Stahr heads the fifth chapter of his Second Book, "Lessing
    at Wittenberg. December, 1751, to November, 1752." But we never feel
    quite sure of his dates. The Richier affair puts Lessing in Berlin in
    December, 1751, and he took his Master's degree at Wittenberg, 29th
    April, 1752. We are told that he finally left Wittenberg "toward the
    end" of that year. He himself, writing from Berlin in 1754, says that
    he has been absent from that city _nur ein halbes Jahr_ since 1748.
    There is only one letter for 1762, dated at Wittenberg, 9th June.


    [152] "Ramler," writes Georg Forster, "ist die Ziererei, die
    Eigenliebe die Eitelkeit in eigener Person."


    [153] Lessing to Von Murr, 25th November, 1768. The whole letter is
    well worth reading.


    [154] A favorite phrase of his, which Egbert has preserved for us
    with its Saxon accent, was, _Es kommt doch nischt dabey heraus_,
    implying that one might do something better for a constancy than
    shearing twine.


    [155] I find surprisingly little about Lessing in such of the
    contemporary correspondence of German literary men as I have read. A
    letter of Boie to Merck (10 April, 1775) gives us a glimpse of him.
    "Do you know that Lessing will probably marry Reiske's widow and come
    to Dresden in place of Hagedorn? The restless spirit! How he will get
    along with the artists, half of them, too, Italians, is to be
    seen.... Liffert and he have met and parted good friends. He has worn
    ever since on his finger the ring with the skeleton and butterfly
    which Liffert gave him. He is reported to be much dissatisfied with
    the theatrical filibustering of Goethe and Lenz, especially with the
    remarks on the drama in which so little respect is shown for his
    Aristotle, and the Leipzig folks are said to be greatly rejoiced at
    getting such an ally."


    [156] To his brother Karl, 20th April, 1774.


    [157] To the same, 20th March, 1777.


    [158] To the same, 2d February, 1774.


    [159] Gervinus, IV. 62.


    [160] It should be considered, by those sagacious persons who think
    that the most marvellous intellect of which we have any record could
    not master so much Latin and Greek as would serve a sophomore, that
    Shakespeare must through conversation have possessed himself of
    whatever principles of art Ben Jonson and the other university men
    had been able to deduce from their study of the classics. That they
    should not have discussed these matters over their sack at the
    Mermaid is incredible; that Shakespeare, who left not a drop in any
    orange he squeezed, could not also have got all the juice out of this
    one, is even more so.


    [161] In "Minna" and "Emilia" Lessing followed the lead of Diderot.
    In the Preface to the second edition of Diderot's _Theatre_, he says:
    "I am very conscious that my taste, without Diderot's example and
    teaching, would have taken quite another direction. Perhaps one more
    my own, yet hardly one with which my understanding would in the long
    run have been so well content." Diderot's choice of prose was
    dictated and justified by the accentual poverty of his mother-tongue,
    Lessing certainly revised his judgment on this point (for it was not
    equally applicable to German), and wrote his maturer "Nathan" in what
    he took for blank verse. There was much kindred between the minds of
    the two men. Diderot always seems to us a kind of deboshed Lessing.
    Lessing was also indebted to Burke, Hume, the two Wartons, and Hurd,
    among other English writers. Not that he borrowed anything of them
    but the quickening of his own thought. It should be remembered that
    Rousseau was seventeen, Diderot and Sterne sixteen, and Winckelmann
    twelve years older than Lessing. Wieland was four years younger.


    [162] Goethe's appreciation of Lessing grew with his years. He writes
    to Lavater, 18th March, 1781: "Lessing's death has greatly depressed
    me. I had much pleasure in him and much hope of him." This is a
    little patronizing in tone. But in the last year of his life, talking
    with Eckermann, he naturally antedates his admiration, as
    reminiscence is wont to do: "You can conceive what an effect this
    piece (_Minna_)had upon us young people. It was, in fact, a shining
    meteor. It made us aware that something higher existed than anything
    whereof that feeble literary epoch had a notion. The first two acts
    are truly a masterpiece of exposition, from which one learned much
    and can always learn."


    [163] Nothing can be droller than the occasional translation by
    Vischer of a sentence of Lessing into his own jargon.


    [164] Eckermann, Gespraeche mit Goethe, III. 229.




ROUSSEAU AND THE SENTIMENTALISTS.[165]

"We have had the great professor and founder of the philosophy of Vanity
in England. As I had good opportunities of knowing his proceedings almost
from day to day, he left no doubt in my mind that he entertained no
principle either to influence his heart or to guide his understanding but
vanity; with this vice he was possessed to a degree little short of
madness. Benevolence to the whole species, and want of feeling for every
individual with whom the professors come in contact, form the character
of the new philosophy. Setting up for an unsocial independence, this
their hero of vanity refuses the just price of common labor, as well as
the tribute which opulence owes to genius, and which, when paid, honors
the giver and the receiver, and then pleads his beggary as an excuse for
his crimes. He melts with tenderness for those only who touch him by the
remotest relation, and then, without one natural pang, casts away, as a
sort of offal and excrement, the spawn of his disgustful amours, and
sends his children to the hospital of foundlings. The bear loves, licks,
and forms her young, but bears are not philosophers."

This was Burke's opinion of the only contemporary who can be said to
rival him in fervid and sustained eloquence, to surpass him in grace and
persuasiveness of style. Perhaps we should have been more thankful to him
if he had left us instead a record of those "proceedings almost from day
to day" which he had such "good opportunities of knowing," but it
probably never entered his head that posterity might care as much about
the doings of the citizen of Geneva as about the sayings of even a
British Right Honorable. Vanity eludes recognition by its victims in more
shapes, and more pleasing, than any other passion, and perhaps had Mr.
Burke been able imaginatively to translate Swiss Jean Jacques into Irish
Edmund, he would have found no juster equivalent for the obnoxious
trisyllable than "righteous self-esteem." For Burke was himself also, in
the subtler sense of the word, a sentimentalist, that is, a man who took
what would now be called an aesthetic view of morals and politics. No man
who ever wrote English, except perhaps Mr. Ruskin, more habitually
mistook his own personal likes and dislikes, tastes and distastes, for
general principles, and this, it may be suspected, is the secret of all
merely eloquent writing. He hints at madness as an explanation of
Rousseau, and it is curious enough that Mr. Buckle was fain to explain
_him_ in the same way. It is not, we confess, a solution that we find
very satisfactory in this latter case. Burke's fury against the French
Revolution was nothing more than was natural to a desperate man in
self-defence. It was his own life, or, at least, all that made life dear
to him, that was in danger. He had all that abstract political wisdom
which may be naturally secreted by a magnanimous nature and a sensitive
temperament, absolutely none of that rough-and-tumble kind which is so
needful for the conduct of affairs. Fastidiousness is only another form
of egotism; and all men who know not where to look for truth save in the
narrow well of self will find their own image at the bottom, and mistake
it for what they are seeking. Burke's hatred of Rousseau was genuine and
instinctive. It was so genuine and so instinctive as no hatred can be but
that of self, of our own weaknesses as we see them in another man. But
there was also something deeper in it than this. There was mixed with it
the natural dread in the political diviner of the political logician,--in
the empirical, of the theoretic statesman. Burke, confounding the idea of
society with the form of it then existing, would have preserved that as
the only specific against anarchy. Rousseau, assuming that society as it
then existed was but another name for anarchy, would have reconstituted
it on an ideal basis. The one has left behind him some of the profoundest
aphorisms of political wisdom; the other, some of the clearest principles
of political science. The one, clinging to Divine right, found in the
fact that things were, a reason that they ought to be; the other, aiming
to solve the problem of the Divine order, would deduce from that
abstraction alone the claim of anything to be at all. There seems a mere
oppugnancy of nature between the two, and yet both were, in different
ways, the dupes of their own imaginations.

Now let us hear the opinion of a philosopher who _was_ a bear, whether
bears be philosophers or not. Boswell had a genuine relish for what was
superior in any way, from genius to claret, and of course he did not let
Rousseau escape him. "One evening at the Mitre, Johnson said
sarcastically to me, 'It seems, sir, you have kept very good company
abroad,--Rousseau and Wilkes!' I answered with a smile, 'My dear sir, you
don't call Rousseau bad company; do you really think _him_ a bad man?'
Johnson: 'Sir, if you are talking jestingly of this, I don't talk with
you. If you mean to be serious, I think him one of the worst of men, a
rascal who ought to be hunted out of society, as he has been. Three or
four nations have expelled him, and it is a shame that he is protected in
this country. Rousseau, sir, is a very bad man. I would sooner sign a
sentence for his transportation, than that of any felon who has gone from
the Old Bailey these many years. Yes, I should like to have him work in
the plantations.'" _We_ were the plantations then, and Rousseau was
destined to work there in another and much more wonderful fashion than
the gruff old Ursa Major imagined. However, there is always a refreshing
heartiness in his growl, a masculine bass with no snarl in it. The
Doctor's logic is of that fine old crusted Port sort, the native
manufacture of the British conservative mind. Three or four nations
_have_, therefore England ought. A few years later, had the Doctor been
living, if three or four nations had treated their kings as France did
hers, would he have thought the _ergo_ a very stringent one for England?

Mr. Burke, who could speak with studied respect of the Prince of Wales,
and of his vices with that charity which thinketh no evil and can afford
to think no evil of so important a living member of the British
Constitution, surely could have had no unmixed moral repugnance for
Rousseau's "disgustful amours." It was because they were _his_ that they
were so loathsome. Mr. Burke was a snob, though an inspired one. Dr.
Johnson, the friend of that wretchedest of lewd fellows, Richard Savage,
and of that gay man about town, Topham Beauclerk,--himself sprung from an
amour that would have been disgustful had it not been royal,--must also
have felt something more in respect of Rousseau than the mere repugnance
of virtue for vice. We must sometimes allow to personal temperament its
right of peremptory challenge. Johnson had not that fine sensitiveness to
the political atmosphere which made Burke presageful of coming tempest,
but both of them felt that there was something dangerous in this man.
Their dislike has in it somewhat of the energy of fear. Neither of them
had the same feeling toward Voltaire, the man of supreme talent, but both
felt that what Rousseau was possessed by was genius, with its terrible
force either to attract or repel.

  "By the pricking of my thumbs,
  Something wicked this way comes."

Burke and Johnson were both of them sincere men, both of them men of
character as well as of intellectual force; and we cite their opinions of
Rousseau with the respect which is due to an honest conviction which has
apparent grounds for its adoption, whether we agree with it or no. But it
strikes us as a little singular that one whose life was so full of moral
inconsistency, whose character is so contemptible in many ways, in some
we might almost say so revolting, should yet have exercised so deep and
lasting an influence, and on minds so various, should still be an object
of minute and earnest discussion,--that he should have had such vigor in
his intellectual loins as to have been the father of Chateaubriand,
Byron, Lamartine, George Sand, and many more in literature, in politics
of Jefferson and Thomas Paine,--that the spots he had haunted should draw
pilgrims so unlike as Gibbon and Napoleon, nay, should draw them still,
after the lapse of near a century. Surely there must have been a basis of
sincerity in this man seldom matched, if it can prevail against so many
reasons for repugnance, aversion, and even disgust. He could not have
been the mere sentimentalist and rhetorician for which the
rough-and-ready understanding would at first glance be inclined to
condemn him. In a certain sense he was both of these, but he was
something more. It will bring us a little nearer the point we are aiming
at if we quote one other and more recent English opinion of him.

Mr. Thomas Moore, returning pleasantly in a travelling-carriage from a
trip to Italy, in which he had never forgotten the poetical shop at home,
but had carefully noted down all the pretty images that occurred to him
for future use,--Mr. Thomas Moore, on his way back from a visit to his
noble friend Byron, at Venice, who had there been leading a life so gross
as to be talked about, even amid the crash of Napoleon's fall, and who
was just writing "Don Juan" for the improvement of the world,--Mr. Thomas
Moore, fresh from the reading of Byron's Memoirs, which were so
scandalous that, by some hocus-pocus, three thousand guineas afterward
found their way into his own pocket for consenting to suppress them,--Mr.
Thomas Moore, the _ci-devant_ friend of the Prince Regent, and the author
of Little's Poems, among other objects of pilgrimage visits _Les
Charmettes_, where Rousseau had lived with Madame de Warens. So good an
opportunity for occasional verses was not to be lost, so good a text for
a little virtuous moralizing not to be thrown away; and accordingly Mr.
Moore pours out several pages of octosyllabic disgust at the sensuality
of the dead man of genius. There was no horror for Byron. Toward him all
was suavity and decorous _bienseance_. That lively sense of benefits to
be received made the Irish Anacreon wink with both his little eyes. In
the judgment of a liberal like Mr. Moore, were not the errors of a lord
excusable? But with poor Rousseau the case was very different. The son of
a watchmaker, an outcast from boyhood up, always on the perilous edge of
poverty,--what right had he to indulge himself in any immoralities? So it
is always with the sentimentalists. It is never the thing in itself that
is bad or good, but the thing in its relation to some conventional and
mostly selfish standard. Moore could be a moralist, in this case, without
any trouble, and with the advantage of winning Lord Lansdowne's approval;
he could write some graceful verses which everybody would buy, and for
the rest it is not hard to be a stoic in eight-syllable measure and a
travelling-carriage. The next dinner at Bowood will taste none the worse.
Accordingly he speaks of

                "The mire, the strife
  And vanities of this man's life,
  Who more than all that e'er have glowed
  With fancy's flame (and it was his
  In fullest warmth and radiance) showed
  What an impostor Genius is;
  How, with that strong mimetic art
  Which forms its life and soul, it takes
  All shapes of thought, all hues of heart,
  Nor feels itself one throb it wakes;
  How, like a gem, its light may shine,
  O'er the dark path by mortals trod,
  Itself as mean a worm the while
  As crawls at midnight o'er the sod;
         *       *       *       *       *
  How, with the pencil hardly dry
  From coloring up such scenes of love
  And beauty as make young hearts sigh,
  And dream and think through heaven they rove," &c., &c.

Very spirited, is it not? One has only to overlook a little
threadbareness in the similes, and it is very good oratorical verse. But
would we believe in it, we must never read Mr. Moore's own journal, and
find out how thin a piece of veneering his own life was,--how he lived in
sham till his very nature had become subdued to it, till he could
persuade himself that a sham could be written into a reality, and
actually made experiment thereof in his Diary.

One verse in this diatribe deserves a special comment,--

  "What an impostor Genius is!"

In two respects there is nothing to be objected to in it. It is of eight
syllables, and "is" rhymes unexceptionably with "his." But is there the
least filament of truth in it? We venture to assert, not the least. It
was not Rousseau's genius that was an impostor. It was the one thing in
him that was always true. We grant that, in allowing that a man has
genius. Talent is that which is in a man's power; genius is that in whose
power a man is. That is the very difference between them. We might turn
the tables on Moore, the man of talent, and say truly enough, What an
impostor talent is! Moore talks of the mimetic power with a total
misapprehension of what it really is. The mimetic power had nothing
whatever to do with the affair. Rousseau had none of it; Shakespeare had
it in excess; but what difference would it make in our judgment of Hamlet
or Othello if a manuscript of Shakespeare's memoirs should turn up, and
we should find out that he had been a pitiful fellow? None in the world;
for he is not a professed moralist, and his life does not give the
warrant to his words. But if Demosthenes, after all his Philippies,
throws away his shield and runs, we feel the contemptibleness of the
contradiction. With genius itself we never find any fault. It would be an
over-nicety that would do that. We do not get invited to nectar and
ambrosia so often that we think of grumbling and saying we have better at
home. No; the same genius that mastered him who wrote the poem masters us
in reading it, and we care for nothing outside the poem itself. How the
author lived, what he wore, how he looked,--all that is mere gossip,
about which we need not trouble ourselves. Whatever he was or did,
somehow or other God let him be worthy to write _this_, and that is
enough for us. We forgive everything to the genius; we are inexorable to
the man. Shakespeare, Goethe, Burns,--what have their biographies to do
with us? Genius is not a question of character. It may be sordid, like
the lamp of Aladdin, in its externals; what care we, while the touch of
it builds palaces for us, makes us rich as only men in dream-land are
rich, and lords to the utmost bound of imagination? So, when people talk
of the ungrateful way in which the world treats its geniuses, they speak
unwisely. There is no work of genius which has not been the delight of
mankind, no word of genius to which the human heart and soul have not,
sooner or later, responded. But the man whom the genius takes possession
of for its pen, for its trowel, for its pencil, for its chisel, _him_ the
world treats according to his deserts. Does Burns drink? It sets him to
gauging casks of gin. For, remember, it is not to the practical world
that the genius appeals; it _is_ the practical world which judges of the
man's fitness for its uses, and has a right so to judge. No amount of
patronage could have made distilled liquors less toothsome to Robbie
Burns, as no amount of them could make a Burns of the Ettrick Shepherd.

There is an old story in the _Gesta Romanorum_ of a priest who was found
fault with by one of his parishioners because his life was in painful
discordance with his teaching. So one day he takes his critic out to a
stream, and, giving him to drink of it, asks him if he does not find it
sweet and pure water. The parishioner, having answered that it was, is
taken to the source, and finds that what had so refreshed him flowed from
between the jaws of a dead dog. "Let this teach thee," said the priest,
"that the very best doctrine may take its rise in a very impure and
disgustful spring, and that excellent morals may be taught by a man who
has no morals at all." It is easy enough to see the fallacy here. Had the
man known beforehand from what a carrion fountain-head the stream issued,
he could not have drunk of it without loathing. Had the priest merely
bidden him to _look_ at the stream and see how beautiful it was, instead
of tasting it, it would have been quite another matter. And this is
precisely the difference between what appeals to our aesthetic and to our
moral sense, between what is judged of by the taste and the conscience.

It is when the sentimentalist turns preacher of morals that we
investigate his character, and are justified in so doing. He may express
as many and as delicate shades of feeling as he likes,--for this the
sensibility of his organization perfectly fits him, no other person could
do it so well,--but the moment he undertakes to establish his feeling as
a rule of conduct, we ask at once how far are his own life and deed in
accordance with what he preaches? For every man feels instinctively that
all the beautiful sentiments in the world weigh less than a single lovely
action; and that while tenderness of feeling and susceptibility to
generous emotions are accidents of temperament, goodness is an
achievement of the will and a quality of the life. Fine words, says our
homely old proverb, butter no parsnips; and if the question be how to
render those vegetables palatable, an ounce of butter would be worth more
than all the orations of Cicero. The only conclusive evidence of a man's
sincerity is that he give _himself_ for a principle. Words, money, all
things else, are comparatively easy to give away; but when a man makes a
gift of his daily life and practice, it is plain that the truth, whatever
it may be, has taken possession of him. From that sincerity his words
gain the force and pertinency of deeds, and his money is no longer the
pale drudge 'twixt man and man, but, by a beautiful magic, what erewhile
bore the image and superscription of Caesar seems now to bear the image
and superscription of God. It is thus that there is a genius for
goodness, for magnanimity, for self-sacrifice, as well as for creative
art; and it is thus that by a more refined sort of Platonism the Infinite
Beauty dwells in and shapes to its own likeness the soul which gives it
body and individuality. But when Moore charges genius with being an
impostor, the confusion of his ideas is pitiable. There is nothing so
true, so sincere, so downright and forthright, as genius. It is always
truer than the man himself is, greater than he. If Shakespeare the man
had been as marvellous a creature as the genius that wrote his plays,
that genius so comprehensive in its intelligence, so wise even in its
play, that its clowns are moralists and philosophers, so penetrative that
a single one of its phrases reveals to us the secret of our own
character, would his contemporaries have left us so wholly without record
of him as they have done, distinguishing him in no wise from his
fellow-players?

Rousseau, no doubt, was weak, nay, more than that, was sometimes
despicable, but yet is not fairly to be reckoned among the herd of
sentimentalists. It is shocking that a man whose preaching made it
fashionable for women of rank to nurse their own children should have
sent his own, as soon as born, to the foundling hospital, still more
shocking that, in a note to his _Discours sur l'Inegalite_, he should
speak of this crime as one of the consequences of our social system. But
for all that there was a faith and an ardor of conviction in him that
distinguish him from most of the writers of his time. Nor were his
practice and his preaching always inconsistent. He contrived to pay
regularly, whatever his own circumstances were, a pension of one hundred
_livres_ a year to a maternal aunt who had been kind to him in childhood.
Nor was his asceticism a sham. He might have turned his gift into laced
coats and _chateaux_ as easily as Voltaire, had he not held it too sacred
to be bartered away in any such losing exchange.

But what is worthy of especial remark is this,--that in nearly all that
he wrote his leading object was the good of his kind, and that through
all the vicissitudes of a life which illness, sensibility of temperament,
and the approaches of insanity rendered wretched,--the associate of
infidels, the foundling child, as it were, of an age without belief,
least of all in itself,--he professed and evidently felt deeply a faith
in the goodness both of man and of God. There is no such thing as
scoffing in his writings. On the other hand, there is no stereotyped
morality. He does not ignore the existence of scepticism; he recognizes
its existence in his own nature, meets it frankly face to face, and makes
it confess that there are things in the teaching of Christ that are
deeper than its doubt. The influence of his early education at Geneva is
apparent here. An intellect so acute as his, trained in the school of
Calvin in a republic where theological discussion was as much the
amusement of the people as the opera was at Paris, could not fail to be a
good logician. He had the fortitude to follow his logic wherever it led
him. If the very impressibility of character which quickened his
perception of the beauties of nature, and made him alive to the charm of
music and musical expression, prevented him from being in the highest
sense an original writer, and if his ideas were mostly suggested to him
by books, yet the clearness, consecutiveness, and eloquence with which he
stated and enforced them made them his own. There was at least that
original fire in him which could fuse them and run them in a novel mould.
His power lay in this very ability of manipulating the thoughts of
others. Fond of paradox he doubtless was, but he had a way of putting
things that arrested attention and excited thought. It was, perhaps, this
very sensibility of the surrounding atmosphere of feeling and
speculation, which made Rousseau more directly influential on
contemporary thought (or perhaps we should say sentiment) than any writer
of his time. And this is rarely consistent with enduring greatness in
literature. It forces us to remember, against our will, the oratorical
character of his works. They were all pleas, and he a great advocate,
with Europe in the jury-box. Enthusiasm begets enthusiasm, eloquence
produces conviction for the moment, but it is only by truth to nature and
the everlasting intuitions of mankind that those abiding influences are
won that enlarge from generation to generation. Rousseau was in many
respects--as great pleaders always are--a man of the day, who must needs
become a mere name to posterity, yet he could not but have had in him
some not inconsiderable share of that principle by which man eternizes
himself. For it is only to such that the night cometh not in which no man
shall work, and he is still operative both in politics and literature by
the principles he formulated or the emotions to which he gave a voice so
piercing and so sympathetic.

In judging Rousseau, it would be unfair not to take note of the malarious
atmosphere in which he grew up. The constitution of his mind was thus
early infected with a feverish taint that made him shiveringly sensitive
to a temperature which hardier natures found bracing. To him this rough
world was but too literally a rack. Good-humored Mother Nature commonly
imbeds the nerves of her children in a padding of self-conceit that
serves as a buffer against the ordinary shocks to which even a life of
routine is liable, and it would seem at first sight as if Rousseau had
been better cared for than usual in this regard. But as his self-conceit
was enormous, so was the reaction from it proportionate, and the fretting
suspiciousness of temper, sure mark of an unsound mind, which rendered
him incapable of intimate friendship, while passionately longing for it,
became inevitably, when turned inward, a tormenting self-distrust. To
dwell in unrealities is the doom of the sentimentalist; but it should not
be forgotten that the same fitful intensity of emotion which makes them
real as the means of elation, gives them substance also for torture. Too
irritably jealous to endure the rude society of men, he steeped his
senses in the enervating incense that women are only too ready to burn.
If their friendship be a safeguard to the other sex, their homage is
fatal to all but the strongest, and Rousseau was weak both by inheritance
and early training. His father was one of those feeble creatures for whom
a fine phrase could always satisfactorily fill the void that
non-performance leaves behind it. If he neglected duty, he made up for it
by that cultivation of the finer sentiments of our common nature which
waters flowers of speech with the brineless tears of a flabby remorse,
without one fibre of resolve in it, and which impoverishes the character
in proportion as it enriches the vocabulary. He was a very Apicius in
that digestible kind of woe which makes no man leaner, and had a favorite
receipt for cooking you up a sorrow _a la douleur inassouvie_ that had
just enough delicious sharpness in it to bring tears into the eyes by
tickling the palate. "When he said to me, 'Jean Jacques, let us speak of
thy mother,' I said to him, 'Well, father, we are going to weep, then,'
and this word alone drew tears from him. 'Ah !' said he, groaning, 'give
her back to me, console me for her, fill the void she has left in my
soul!'" Alas! in such cases, the void she leaves is only that she found.
The grief that seeks any other than its own society will erelong want an
object. This admirable parent allowed his son to become an outcast at
sixteen, without any attempt to reclaim him, in order to enjoy unmolested
a petty inheritance to which the boy was entitled in right of his mother.
"This conduct," Rousseau tells us, "of a father whose tenderness and
virtue were so well known to me, caused me to make reflections on myself
which have not a little contributed to make my heart sound. I drew from
it this great maxim of morals, the only one perhaps serviceable in
practice, to avoid situations which put our duties in opposition to our
interest, and which show us our own advantage in the wrong of another,
sure that in such situations, _however sincere may be one's love of
virtue_, it sooner or later grows weak without our perceiving it, _and
that we become unjust and wicked in action without having ceased to be
just and good in soul_."

This maxim may do for that "fugitive and cloistered virtue, unexercised
and unbreathed, that never sallies out and seeks its adversary," which
Milton could not praise,--that is, for a manhood whose distinction it is
not to be manly,--but it is chiefly worth notice as being the
characteristic doctrine of sentimentalism. This disjoining of deed from
will, of practice from theory, is to put asunder what God has joined by
an indissoluble sacrament. The soul must be tainted before the action
become corrupt; and there is no self-delusion more fatal than that which
makes the conscience dreamy with the anodyne of lofty sentiments, while
the life is grovelling and sensual,--witness Coleridge. In his case we
feel something like disgust. But where, as in his son Hartley, there is
hereditary infirmity, where the man sees the principle that might rescue
him slip from the clutch of a nerveless will, like a rope through the
fingers of a drowning man, and the confession of faith is the moan of
despair, there is room for no harsher feeling than pity. Rousseau showed
through life a singular proneness for being convinced by his own
eloquence; he was always his own first convert; and this reconciles his
power as a writer with his weakness as a man. He and all like him mistake
emotion for conviction, velleity for resolve, the brief eddy of sentiment
for the midcurrent of ever-gathering faith in duty that draws to itself
all the affluents of conscience and will, and gives continuity of purpose
to life. They are like men who love the stimulus of being under
conviction, as it is called, who, forever getting religion, never get
capital enough to retire upon and spend for their own need and the common
service.

The sentimentalist is the spiritual hypochondriac, with whom fancies
become facts, while facts are a discomfort because they will not be
evaporated into fancy. In his eyes, Theory is too fine a dame to confess
even a country-cousinship with coarse handed Practice, whose homely ways
would disconcert her artificial world. The very susceptibility that makes
him quick to feel, makes him also incapable of deep and durable feeling.
He loves to think he suffers, and keeps a pet sorrow, a blue-devil
familiar, that goes with him everywhere, like Paracelsus's black dog. He
takes good care, however, that it shall not be the true sulphurous
article that sometimes takes a fancy to fly away with his conjurer. Rene
says: "In my madness I had gone so far as even to wish I might experience
a misfortune, so that my suffering might at least have a real object."
But no; selfishness is only active egotism, and there is nothing and
nobody, with a single exception, which this sort of creature will not
sacrifice, rather than give any other than an imaginary pang to his idol.
Vicarious pain he is not unwilling to endure, nay, will even commit
suicide by proxy, like the German poet who let his wife kill herself to
give him a sensation. Had young Jerusalem been anything like Goethe's
portrait of him in Werther, he would have taken very good care not to
blow out the brains which he would have thought only too precious. Real
sorrows are uncomfortable things, but purely aesthetic ones are by no
means unpleasant, and I have always fancied the handsome young Wolfgang
writing those distracted letters to Auguste Stolberg with a looking-glass
in front of him to give back an image of his desolation, and finding it
rather pleasant than otherwise to shed the tear of sympathy with self
that would seem so bitter to his fair correspondent. The tears that have
real salt in them will keep; they are the difficult, manly tears that are
shed in secret; but the pathos soon evaporates from that fresh-water with
which a man can bedew a dead donkey in public, while his wife is having a
good cry over his neglect of her at home. We do not think the worse of
Goethe for hypothetically desolating himself in the fashion aforesaid,
for with many constitutions it is as purely natural a crisis as
dentition, which the stronger worry through, and turn out very sensible,
agreeable fellows. But where there is an arrest of development, and the
heartbreak of the patient is audibly prolonged through life, we have a
spectacle which the toughest heart would wish to get as far away from as
possible.

We would not be supposed to overlook the distinction, too often lost
sight of, between sentimentalism and sentiment, the latter being a very
excellent thing in its way, as genuine things are apt to be. Sentiment is
intellectualized emotion, emotion precipitated, as it were, in pretty
crystals by the fancy. This is the delightful staple of the poets of
social life like Horace and Beranger, or Thackeray, when he too rarely
played with verse. It puts into words for us that decorous average of
feeling to the expression of which society can consent without danger of
being indiscreetly moved. It is excellent for people who are willing to
save their souls alive to any extent that shall not be discomposing. It
is even satisfying till some deeper experience has given us a hunger
which what we so glibly call "the world" cannot sate, just as a water-ice
is nourishment enough to a man who has had his dinner. It is the
sufficing lyrical interpreter of those lighter hours that should make
part of every healthy man's day, and is noxious only when it palls men's
appetite for the truly profound poetry which is very passion of very soul
sobered by afterthought and embodied in eternal types by imagination.
True sentiment is emotion ripened by a slow ferment of the mind and
qualified to an agreeable temperance by that taste which is the
conscience of polite society. But the sentimentalist always insists on
taking his emotion neat, and, as his sense gradually deadens to the
stimulus, increases his dose till he ends in a kind of moral deliquium.
At first the debaucher, he becomes at last the victim of his sensations.

Among the ancients we find no trace of sentimentalism. Their masculine
mood both of body and mind left no room for it, and hence the bracing
quality of their literature compared with that of recent times, its tonic
property, that seems almost too astringent to palates relaxed by a
daintier diet. The first great example of the degenerate modern tendency
was Petrarch, who may be said to have given it impulse and direction. A
more perfect specimen of the type has not since appeared. An intellectual
voluptuary, a moral _dilettante_, the first instance of that character,
since too common, the gentleman in search of a sensation, seeking a
solitude at Vaucluse because it made him more likely to be in demand at
Avignon, praising philosophic poverty with a sharp eye to the next rich
benefice in the gift of his patron, commending a good life but careful
first of a good living, happy only in seclusion but making a dangerous
journey to enjoy the theatrical show of a coronation in the Capitol,
cherishing a fruitless passion which broke his heart three or four times
a year and yet could not make an end of him till he had reached the ripe
age of seventy and survived his mistress a quarter of a century,--surely
a more exquisite perfection of inconsistency would be hard to find.

When Petrarch returned from his journey into the North of Europe in 1332,
he balanced the books of his unrequited passion, and, finding that he had
now been in love seven years, thought the time had at last come to call
deliberately on Death. Had Death taken him at his word, he would have
protested that he was only in fun. For we find him always taking good
care of an excellent constitution, avoiding the plague with commendable
assiduity, and in the very year when he declares it absolutely essential
to his peace of mind to die for good and all, taking refuge in the
fortress of Capranica, from a wholesome dread of having his throat cut by
robbers. There is such a difference between dying in a sonnet with a
cambric handkerchief at one's eyes, and the prosaic reality of demise
certified in the parish register! Practically it is inconvenient to be
dead. Among other things, it puts an end to the manufacture of sonnets.
But there seems to have been an excellent understanding between Petrarch
and Death, for he was brought to that grisly monarch's door so often,
that, otherwise, nothing short of a miracle or the nine lives of that
animal whom love also makes lyrical could have saved him. "I consent," he
cries, "to live and die in Africa among its serpents, upon Caucasus, or
Atlas, if, while I live, to breathe a pure air, and after my death a
little corner of earth where to bestow my body, may be allowed me. This
is all I ask, but this I cannot obtain. Doomed always to wander, and to
be a stranger everywhere, O Fortune, Fortune, fix me at last to some one
spot! I do not covet thy favors. Let me enjoy a tranquil poverty, let me
pass in this retreat the few days that remain to me!"  The pathetic stop
of Petrarch's poetical organ was one he could pull out at pleasure,--and
indeed we soon learn to distrust literary tears, as the cheap subterfuge
for want of real feeling with natures of this quality. Solitude with him
was but the pseudonyme of notoriety. Poverty was the archdeaconry of
Parma, with other ecclesiastical pickings. During his retreat at
Vaucluse, in the very height of that divine sonneteering love of Laura,
of that sensitive purity which called Avignon Babylon, and rebuked the
sinfulness of Clement, he was himself begetting that kind of children
which we spell with a _b_. We believe that, if Messer Francesco had been
present when the woman was taken in adultery, he would have flung the
first stone without the slightest feeling of inconsistency, nay, with a
sublime sense of virtue. The truth is, that it made very little
difference to him what sort of proper sentiment he expressed, provided he
could do it elegantly and with unction.

Would any one feel the difference between his faint abstractions and the
Platonism of a powerful nature fitted alike for the withdrawal of ideal
contemplation and for breasting the storms of life,--would any one know
how wide a depth divides a noble friendship based on sympathy of pursuit
and aspiration, on that mutual help which souls capable of
self-sustainment are the readiest to give or to take, and a simulated
passion, true neither to the spiritual nor the sensual part of man,--let
him compare the sonnets of Petrarch with those which Michel Angelo
addressed to Vittoria Colonna. In them the airiest pinnacles of sentiment
and speculation are buttressed with solid mason-work of thought, and of
an actual, not fancied experience, and the depth of feeling is measured
by the sobriety and reserve of expression, while in Petrarch's all
ingenuousness is frittered away into ingenuity. Both are cold, but the
coldness of the one is self-restraint, while the other chills with
pretence of warmth. In Michel Angelo's, you feel the great architect; in
Petrarch's the artist who can best realize his conception in the limits
of a cherry-stone. And yet this man influenced literature longer and more
widely than almost any other in modern times. So great is the charm of
elegance, so unreal is the larger part of what is written!

Certainly I do not mean to say that a work of art should be looked at by
the light of the artist's biography, or measured by our standard of his
character. Nor do I reckon what was genuine in Petrarch--his love of
letters, his refinement, his skill in the superficial graces of language,
that rhetorical art by which the music of words supplants their meaning,
and the verse moulds the thought instead of being plastic to it--after
any such fashion. I have no ambition for that character of _valet de
chambre_ which is said to disenchant the most heroic figures into mere
every-day personages, for it implies a mean soul no less than a servile
condition. But we have a right to demand a certain amount of reality,
however small, in the emotion of a man who makes it his business to
endeavor at exciting our own. We have a privilege of nature to shiver
before a painted flame, how cunningly soever the colors be laid on. Yet
our love of minute biographical detail, our desire to make ourselves
spies upon the men of the past, seems so much of an instinct in us, that
we must look for the spring of it in human nature, and that somewhat
deeper than mere curiosity or love of gossip. It should seem to arise
from what must be considered on the whole a creditable feeling, namely,
that we value character more than any amount of talent,--the skill to
_be_ something, above that of doing anything but the best of its kind.
The highest creative genius, and that only, is privileged from arrest by
this personality, for there the thing produced is altogether disengaged
from the producer. But in natures incapable of this escape from
themselves, the author is inevitably mixed with his work, and we have a
feeling that the amount of his sterling character is the security for the
notes he issues. Especially we feel so when truth to self, which is
always self-forgetful, and not truth to nature, makes an essential part
of the value of what is offered us; as where a man undertakes to narrate
personal experience or to enforce a dogma. This is particularly true as
respects sentimentalists, because of their intrusive self-consciousness;
for there is no more universal characteristic of human nature than the
instinct of men to apologize to themselves for themselves, and to justify
personal failings by generalizing them into universal laws. A man would
be the keenest devil's advocate against himself, were it not that he has
always taken a retaining fee for the defence; for we think that the
indirect and mostly unconscious pleas in abatement which we read between
the lines in the works of many authors are oftener written to set
themselves right in their own eyes than in those of the world. And in the
real life of the sentimentalist it is the same. He is under the wretched
necessity of keeping up, at least in public, the character he has
assumed, till he at last reaches that last shift of bankrupt
self-respect, to play the hypocrite with himself. Lamartine, after
passing round the hat in Europe and America, takes to his bed from
wounded pride when the French Senate votes him a subsidy, and sheds tears
of humiliation. Ideally, he resents it; in practical coin, he will accept
the shame without a wry face.

George Sand, speaking of Rousseau's "Confessions," says that an
autobiographer always makes himself the hero of his own novel, and cannot
help idealizing, even if he would. But the weak point of all
sentimentalists is that they always have been, and always continue under
every conceivable circumstance to be, their own ideals, whether they are
writing their own lives or no. Rousseau opens his book with the
statement: "I am not made like any of those I have seen; I venture to
believe myself unlike any that exists. If I am not worth more, at least I
am different." O exquisite cunning of self-flattery! It is this very
imagined difference that makes us worth more in our own foolish sight.
For while all men are apt to think, or to persuade themselves that they
think, all other men their accomplices in vice or weakness, they are not
difficult of belief that they are singular in any quality or talent on
which they hug themselves. More than this; people who are truly original
are the last to find it out, for the moment we become conscious of a
virtue it has left us or is getting ready to go. Originality does not
consist in a fidgety assertion of selfhood, but in the faculty of getting
rid of it altogether, that the truer genius of the man, which commerces
with universal nature and with other souls through a common sympathy with
that, may take all his powers wholly to itself,--and the truly original
man could no more be jealous of his peculiar gift, than the grass could
take credit to itself for being green. What is the reason that all
children are geniuses, (though they contrive so soon to outgrow that
dangerous quality,) except that they never cross-examine themselves on
the subject? The moment that process begins, their speech loses its gift
of unexpectedness, and they become as tediously impertinent as the rest
of us.

If there never was any one like him, if he constituted a genus in
himself, to what end write confessions in which no other human being
could ever be in a condition to take the least possible interest? All men
are interested in Montaigne in proportion as all men find more of
themselves in him, and all men see but one image in the glass which the
greatest of poets holds up to nature, an image which at once startles and
charms them with its familiarity. Fabulists always endow their animals
with the passions and desires of men. But if an ox could dictate his
confessions, what glimmer of understanding should we find in those bovine
confidences, unless on some theory of pre existence, some blank misgiving
of a creature moving about in worlds not realized? The truth is, that we
recognize the common humanity of Rousseau in the very weakness that
betrayed him into this conceit of himself; we find he is just like the
rest of us in this very assumption of essential difference, for among all
animals man is the only one who tries to pass for more than he is, and so
involves himself in the condemnation of seeming less.

But it would be sheer waste of time to hunt Rousseau through all his
doublings of inconsistency, and run him to earth in every new paradox.
His first two books attacked, one of them literature, and the other
society. But this did not prevent him from being diligent with his pen,
nor from availing himself of his credit with persons who enjoyed all the
advantages of that inequality whose evils he had so pointedly exposed.
Indeed, it is curious how little practical communism there has been, how
few professors it has had who would not have gained by a general
dividend. It is perhaps no frantic effort of generosity in a philosopher
with ten crowns in his pocket when he offers to make common stock with a
neighbor who has ten thousand of yearly income, nor is it an uncommon
thing to see such theories knocked clean out of a man's head by the
descent of a thumping legacy. But, consistent or not, Rousseau remains
permanently interesting as the highest and most perfect type of the
sentimentalist of genius. His was perhaps the acutest mind that was ever
mated with an organization so diseased, the brain most far-reaching in
speculation that ever kept itself steady and worked out its problems amid
such disordered tumult of the nerves.[166] His letter to the Archbishop
of Paris, admirable for its lucid power and soberness of tone, and his
_Rousseau juge de Jean Jacques_, which no man can read and believe him to
have been sane, show him to us in his strength and weakness, and give us
a more charitable, let us hope therefore a truer, notion of him than his
own apology for himself. That he was a man of genius appears unmistakably
in his impressibility by the deeper meaning of the epoch in which he
lived. Before an eruption, clouds steeped through and through with
electric life gather over the crater, as if in sympathy and expectation.
As the mountain heaves and cracks, these vapory masses are seamed with
fire, as if they felt and answered the dumb agony that is struggling for
utterance below. Just such flashes of eager sympathetic fire break
continually from the cloudy volumes of Rousseau, the result at once and
the warning of that convulsion of which Paris was to be the crater and
all Europe to feel the spasm. There are symptoms enough elsewhere of that
want of faith in the existing order which made the Revolution
inevitable,--even so shallow an observer as Horace Walpole could forebode
it so early as 1765,--but Rousseau more than all others is the
unconscious expression of the groping after something radically new, the
instinct for a change that should be organic and pervade every fibre of
the social and political body. Freedom of thought owes far more to the
jester Voltaire, who also had his solid kernel of earnest, than to the
sombre Genevese, whose earnestness is of the deadly kind. Yet, for good
or evil, the latter was the father of modern democracy, and with out him
our Declaration of Independence would have wanted some of those sentences
in which the immemorial longings of the poor and the dreams of solitary
enthusiasts were at last affirmed as axioms in the manifesto of a nation,
so that all the world might hear.

Though Rousseau, like many other fanatics, had a remarkable vein of
common sense in him, (witness his remarks on duelling, on
landscape-gardening, on French poetry, and much of his thought on
education,) we cannot trace many practical results to his teaching, least
of all in politics. For the great difficulty with his system, if system
it may be called, is, that, while it professes to follow nature, it not
only assumes as a starting-point that the individual man may be made over
again, but proceeds to the conclusion that man himself, that human
nature, must be made over again, and governments remodelled on a purely
theoretic basis. But when something like an experiment in this direction
was made in 1789, not only did it fail as regarded man in general, but
even as regards the particular variety of man that inhabited France. The
Revolution accomplished many changes, and beneficent ones, yet it left
France peopled, not by a new race without traditions, but by Frenchmen.
Still, there could not but be a wonderful force in the words of a man
who, above all others, had the secret of making abstractions glow with
his own fervor; and his ideas--dispersed now in the atmosphere of thought
--have influenced, perhaps still continue to influence, speculative
minds, which prefer swift and sure generalization to hesitating and
doubtful experience.

Rousseau has, in one respect, been utterly misrepresented and
misunderstood. Even Chateaubriand most unfilially classes him and
Voltaire together. It appears to me that the inmost core of his being was
religious. Had he remained in the Catholic Church he might have been a
saint. Had he come earlier, he might have founded an order. His was
precisely the nature on which religious enthusiasm takes the strongest
hold,--a temperament which finds a sensuous delight in spiritual things,
and satisfies its craving for excitement with celestial debauch. He had
not the iron temper of a great reformer and organizer like Knox, who,
true Scotchman that he was, found a way to weld this world and the other
together in a cast-iron creed; but he had as much as any man ever had
that gift of a great preacher to make the oratorical fervor which
persuades himself while it lasts into the abiding conviction of his
hearers. That very persuasion of his that the soul could remain pure
while the life was corrupt, is not unexampled among men who have left
holier names than he. His "Confessions," also, would assign him to that
class with whom the religious sentiment is strong, and the moral nature
weak. They are apt to believe that they may, as special pleaders say,
confess and avoid. Hawthorne has admirably illustrated this in the
penance of Mr. Dimmesdale. With all the soil that is upon Rousseau, I
cannot help looking on him as one capable beyond any in his generation of
being divinely possessed; and if it happened otherwise, when we remember
the much that hindered and the little that helped in a life and time like
his, we shall be much readier to pity than to condemn. It was his very
fitness for being something better that makes him able to shock us so
with what in too many respects he unhappily was. Less gifted, he had been
less hardly judged. More than any other of the sentimentalists, except
possibly Sterne, he had in him a staple of sincerity. Compared with
Chateaubriand, he is honesty, compared with Lamartine, he is manliness
itself. His nearest congener in our own tongue is Cowper.

In the whole school there is a sickly taint. The strongest mark which
Rousseau has left upon literature is a sensibility to the picturesque in
Nature, not with Nature as a strengthener and consoler, a wholesome tonic
for a mind ill at ease with itself, but with Nature as a kind of feminine
echo to the mood, flattering it with sympathy rather than correcting it
with rebuke or lifting it away from its unmanly depression, as in the
wholesomer fellow-feeling of Wordsworth. They seek in her an accessary,
and not a reproof. It is less a sympathy with Nature than a sympathy with
ourselves as we compel her to reflect us. It is solitude, Nature for her
estrangement from man, not for her companionship with him,--it is
desolation and ruin, Nature as she has triumphed over man,--with which
this order of mind seeks communion and in which it finds solace. It is
with the hostile and destructive power of matter, and not with the spirit
of life and renewal that dwells in it, that they ally themselves. And in
human character it is the same. St. Preux, Rene, Werther, Manfred,
Quasimodo, they are all anomalies, distortions, ruins,--so much easier is
it to caricature life from our own sickly conception of it, than to paint
it in its noble simplicity; so much cheaper is unreality than truth.

Every man is conscious that he leads two lives,--the one trivial and
ordinary, the other sacred and recluse; one which he carries to society
and the dinner-table, the other in which his youth and aspiration survive
for him, and which is a confidence between himself and God. Both may be
equally sincere, and there need be no contradiction between them, any
more than in a healthy man between soul and body. If the higher life be
real and earnest, its result, whether in literature or affairs, will be
real and earnest too. But no man can produce great things who is not
thoroughly sincere in dealing with himself, who would not exchange the
finest show for the poorest reality, who does not so love his work that
he is not only glad to give himself for it, but finds rather a gain than
a sacrifice in the surrender. The sentimentalist does not think of what
he does so much as of what the world will think of what he does. He
translates should into would, looks upon the spheres of duty and beauty
as alien to each other, and can never learn how life rounds itself to a
noble completeness between these two opposite but mutually sustaining
poles of what we long for and what we must.

Did Rousseau, then, lead a life of this quality? Perhaps, when we
consider the contrast which every man who looks backward must feel
between the life he planned and the life which circumstance within him
and without him has made for him, we should rather ask, Was this the life
he meant to lead? Perhaps, when we take into account his faculty of
self-deception,--it may be no greater than our own,--we should ask, Was
this the life he believed he led? Have we any right to judge this man
after our blunt English fashion, and condemn him, as we are wont to do,
on the finding of a jury of average householders? Is French reality
precisely our reality? Could we tolerate tragedy in rhymed alexandrines,
instead of blank verse? The whole life of Rousseau is pitched on this
heroic key, and for the most trivial occasion he must be ready with the
sublime sentiments that are supposed to suit him rather than it. It is
one of the most curious features of the sentimental ailment, that, while
it shuns the contact of men, it courts publicity. In proportion as
solitude and communion with self lead the sentimentalist to exaggerate
the importance of his own personality, he comes to think that the least
event connected with it is of consequence to his fellow-men. If he change
his shirt, he would have mankind aware of it. Victor Hugo, the greatest
living representative of the class, considers it necessary to let the
world know by letter from time to time his opinions on every conceivable
subject about which it is not asked nor is of the least value unless we
concede to him an immediate inspiration. We men of colder blood, in whom
self-consciousness takes the form of pride, and who have deified
_mauvaise honte_ as if our defect were our virtue, find it especially
hard to understand that artistic impulse of more southern races to _pose_
themselves properly on every occasion, and not even to die without some
tribute of deference to the taste of the world they are leaving. Was not
even mighty Caesar's last thought of his drapery? Let us not condemn
Rousseau for what seems to us the indecent exposure of himself in his
"Confessions."

Those who allow an oratorical and purely conventional side disconnected
with our private understanding of the facts, and with life, in which
everything has a wholly parliamentary sense where truth is made
subservient to the momentary exigencies of eloquence, should be
charitable to Rousseau. While we encourage a distinction which
establishes two kinds of truth, one for the world, and another for the
conscience, while we take pleasure in a kind of speech that has no
relation to the real thought of speaker or hearer, but to the rostrum
only, we must not be hasty to condemn a sentimentalism which we do our
best to foster. We listen in public with the gravity or augurs to what we
smile at when we meet a brother adept. France is the native land of
eulogy, of truth padded out to the size and shape demanded by
_comme-il-faut_. The French Academy has, perhaps, done more harm by the
vogue it has given to this style, than it has done good by its literary
purism; for the best purity of a language depends on the limpidity of its
source in veracity of thought. Rousseau was in many respects a typical
Frenchman, and it is not to be wondered at if he too often fell in with
the fashion of saying what was expected of him, and what he thought due
to the situation, rather than what would have been true to his inmost
consciousness. Perhaps we should allow something also to the influence of
a Calvinistic training, which certainly helps men who have the least
natural tendency towards it to set faith above works, and to persuade
themselves of the efficacy of an inward grace to offset an outward and
visible defection from it.

As the sentimentalist always takes a fanciful, sometimes an unreal, life
for an ideal one, it would be too much to say that Rousseau was a man of
earnest convictions. But he was a man of fitfully intense ones, as suited
so mobile a temperament, and his writings, more than those of any other
of his tribe, carry with them that persuasion that was in him while he
wrote. In them at least he is as consistent as a man who admits new ideas
can ever be. The children of his brain he never abandoned, but clung to
them with paternal fidelity. Intellectually he was true and fearless;
constitutionally, timid, contradictory, and weak; but never, if we
understand him rightly, false. He was a little too credulous of sonorous
sentiment, but he was never, like Chateaubriand or Lamartine, the lackey
of fine phrases. If, as some fanciful physiologists have assumed, there
be a masculine and feminine lobe of the brain, it would seem that in men
of sentimental turn the masculine half fell in love with and made an idol
of the other, obeying and admiring all the pretty whims of this _folle du
logis_. In Rousseau the mistress had some noble elements of character,
and less taint of the _demi-monde_ than is visible in more recent cases
of the same illicit relation.




Footnotes:

    [165] _Histoire des Idees Morales et Politiques en France au XVIIIme
    Siecle._ Par M. Jules Barni, Professeur a l'Academie de Geneve, Tome
    II. Paris, 1867.


    [166] Perhaps we should except Newton.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Among My Books, by James Russell Lowell






THE MAGNIFICENT AMBERSONS

By Booth Tarkington



Chapter I


Major Amberson had "made a fortune" in 1873, when other people were
losing fortunes, and the magnificence of the Ambersons began then.
Magnificence, like the size of a fortune, is always comparative, as
even Magnificent Lorenzo may now perceive, if he has happened to haunt
New York in 1916; and the Ambersons were magnificent in their day and
place.  Their splendour lasted throughout all the years that saw their
Midland town spread and darken into a city, but reached its topmost
during the period when every prosperous family with children kept a
Newfoundland dog.

In that town, in those days, all the women who wore silk or velvet
knew all the other women who wore silk or velvet, and when there was a
new purchase of sealskin, sick people were got to windows to see it go
by.  Trotters were out, in the winter afternoons, racing light sleighs
on National Avenue and Tennessee Street; everybody recognized both the
trotters and the drivers; and again knew them as well on summer
evenings, when slim buggies whizzed by in renewals of the snow-time
rivalry.  For that matter, everybody knew everybody else's family
horse-and-carriage, could identify such a silhouette half a mile down
the street, and thereby was sure who was going to market, or to a
reception, or coming home from office or store to noon dinner or
evening supper.

During the earlier years of this period, elegance of personal
appearance was believed to rest more upon the texture of garments than
upon their shaping.  A silk dress needed no remodelling when it was a
year or so old; it remained distinguished by merely remaining silk.
Old men and governors wore broadcloth; "full dress" was broadcloth
with "doeskin" trousers; and there were seen men of all ages to whom a
hat meant only that rigid, tall silk thing known to impudence as a
"stove-pipe."  In town and country these men would wear no other hat,
and, without self-consciousness, they went rowing in such hats.

Shifting fashions of shape replaced aristocracy of texture:
dressmakers, shoemakers, hatmakers, and tailors, increasing in cunning
and in power, found means to make new clothes old.  The long contagion
of the "Derby" hat arrived: one season the crown of this hat would be
a bucket; the next it would be a spoon.  Every house still kept its
bootjack, but high-topped boots gave way to shoes and "congress
gaiters"; and these were played through fashions that shaped them now
with toes like box-ends and now with toes like the prows of racing
shells.

Trousers with a crease were considered plebeian; the crease proved
that the garment had lain upon a shelf, and hence was "ready-made";
these betraying trousers were called "hand-me-downs," in allusion to
the shelf.  In the early 'eighties, while bangs and bustles were
having their way with women, that variation of dandy known as the
"dude" was invented: he wore trousers as tight as stockings, dagger-
pointed shoes, a spoon "Derby," a single-breasted coat called a
"Chesterfield," with short flaring skirts, a torturing cylindrical
collar, laundered to a polish and three inches high, while his other
neckgear might be a heavy, puffed cravat or a tiny bow fit for a
doll's braids.  With evening dress he wore a tan overcoat so short
that his black coat-tails hung visible, five inches below the over-
coat; but after a season or two he lengthened his overcoat till it
touched his heels, and he passed out of his tight trousers into
trousers like great bags.  Then, presently, he was seen no more,
though the word that had been coined for him remained in the
vocabularies of the impertinent.

It was a hairier day than this.  Beards were to the wearers' fancy,
and things as strange as the Kaiserliche boar-tusk moustache were
commonplace.  "Side-burns" found nourishment upon childlike profiles;
great Dundreary whiskers blew like tippets over young shoulders;
moustaches were trained as lambrequins over forgotten mouths; and it
was possible for a Senator of the United States to wear a mist of
white whisker upon his throat only, not a newspaper in the land
finding the ornament distinguished enough to warrant a lampoon.
Surely no more is needed to prove that so short a time ago we were
living in another age!

At the beginning of the Ambersons' great period most of the houses of
the Midland town were of a pleasant architecture.  They lacked style,
but also lacked pretentiousness, and whatever does not pretend at all
has style enough.  They stood in commodious yards, well shaded by
leftover forest trees, elm and walnut and beech, with here and there a
line of tall sycamores where the land had been made by filling bayous
from the creek.  The house of a "prominent resident," facing Military
Square, or National Avenue, or Tennessee Street, was built of brick
upon a stone foundation, or of wood upon a brick foundation.  Usually
it had a "front porch" and a "back porch"; often a "side porch," too.
There was a "front hall"; there was a "side hall"; and sometimes a
"back hall."  From the "front hall" opened three rooms, the "parlour,"
the "sitting room," and the "library"; and the library could show
warrant to its title--for some reason these people bought books.
Commonly, the family sat more in the library than in the "sitting
room," while callers, when they came formally, were kept to the
"parlour," a place of formidable polish and discomfort.  The
upholstery of the library furniture was a little shabby; but the
hostile chairs and sofa of the "parlour" always looked new.  For all
the wear and tear they got they should have lasted a thousand years.

Upstairs were the bedrooms; "mother-and-father's room" the largest; a
smaller room for one or two sons another for one or two daughters;
each of these rooms containing a double bed, a "washstand," a
"bureau," a wardrobe, a little table, a rocking-chair, and often a
chair or two that had been slightly damaged downstairs, but not enough
to justify either the expense of repair or decisive abandonment in the
attic.  And there was always a "spare-room," for visitors (where the
sewing-machine usually was kept), and during the 'seventies there
developed an appreciation of the necessity for a bathroom.  Therefore
the architects placed bathrooms in the new houses, and the older
houses tore out a cupboard or two, set up a boiler beside the kitchen
stove, and sought a new godliness, each with its own bathroom.  The
great American plumber joke, that many-branched evergreen, was planted
at this time.

At the rear of the house, upstairs was a bleak little chamber, called
"the girl's room," and in the stable there was another bedroom,
adjoining the hayloft, and called "the hired man's room."  House and
stable cost seven or eight thousand dollars to build, and people with
that much money to invest in such comforts were classified as the
Rich.  They paid the inhabitant of "the girl's room" two dollars a
week, and, in the latter part of this period, two dollars and a half,
and finally three dollars a week.  She was Irish, ordinarily, or
German or it might be Scandinavian, but never native to the land
unless she happened to be a person of colour.  The man or youth who
lived in the stable had like wages, and sometimes he, too, was lately
a steerage voyager, but much oftener he was coloured.

After sunrise, on pleasant mornings, the alleys behind the stables
were gay; laughter and shouting went up and down their dusty lengths,
with a lively accompaniment of curry-combs knocking against back
fences and stable walls, for the darkies loved to curry their horses
in the alley.  Darkies always prefer to gossip in shouts instead of
whispers; and they feel that profanity, unless it be vociferous, is
almost worthless.  Horrible phrases were caught by early rising
children and carried to older people for definition, sometimes at
inopportune moments; while less investigative children would often
merely repeat the phrases in some subsequent flurry of agitation, and
yet bring about consequences so emphatic as to be recalled with ease
in middle life.

They have passed, those darky hired-men of the Midland town; and the
introspective horses they curried and brushed and whacked and amiably
cursed--those good old horses switch their tails at flies no more.
For all their seeming permanence they might as well have been
buffaloes--or the buffalo laprobes that grew bald in patches and used
to slide from the careless drivers' knees and hang unconcerned, half
way to the ground.  The stables have been transformed into other
likenesses, or swept away, like the woodsheds where were kept the
stove-wood and kindling that the "girl" and the "hired-man" always
quarrelled over: who should fetch it.  Horse and stable and woodshed,
and the whole tribe of the "hired-man," all are gone.  They went
quickly, yet so silently that we whom they served have not yet really
noticed that they are vanished.

So with other vanishings.  There were the little bunty street-cars on
the long, single track that went its troubled way among the
cobblestones.  At the rear door of the car there was no platform, but
a step where passengers clung in wet clumps when the weather was bad
and the car crowded.  The patrons--if not too absent-minded--put their
fares into a slot; and no conductor paced the heaving floor, but the
driver would rap remindingly with his elbow upon the glass of the door
to his little open platform if the nickels and the passengers did not
appear to coincide in number.  A lone mule drew the car, and sometimes
drew it off the track, when the passengers would get out and push it
on again.  They really owed it courtesies like this, for the car was
genially accommodating: a lady could whistle to it from an upstairs
window, and the car would halt at once and wait for her while she shut
the window, put on her hat and cloak, went downstairs, found an
umbrella, told the "girl" what to have for dinner, and came forth from
the house.

The previous passengers made little objection to such gallantry on the
part of the car: they were wont to expect as much for themselves on
like occasion.  In good weather the mule pulled the car a mile in a
little less than twenty minutes, unless the stops were too long; but
when the trolley-car came, doing its mile in five minutes and better,
it would wait for nobody.  Nor could its passengers have endured such
a thing, because the faster they were carried the less time they had
to spare!  In the days before deathly contrivances hustled them
through their lives, and when they had no telephones--another ancient
vacancy profoundly responsible for leisure--they had time for
everything: time to think, to talk, time to read, time to wait for a
lady!

They even had time to dance "square dances," quadrilles, and
"lancers"; they also danced the "racquette," and schottisches and
polkas, and such whims as the "Portland Fancy."  They pushed back the
sliding doors between the "parlour" and the "sitting room," tacked
down crash over the carpets, hired a few palms in green tubs,
stationed three or four Italian musicians under the stairway in the
"front hall"--and had great nights!

But these people were gayest on New Year's Day; they made it a true
festival--something no longer known.  The women gathered to "assist"
the hostesses who kept "Open House"; and the carefree men, dandified
and perfumed, went about in sleighs, or in carriages and ponderous
"hacks," going from Open House to Open House, leaving fantastic cards
in fancy baskets as they entered each doorway, and emerging a little
later, more carefree than ever, if the punch had been to their liking.
It always was, and, as the afternoon wore on, pedestrians saw great
gesturing and waving of skin-tight lemon gloves, while ruinous
fragments of song were dropped behind as the carriages rolled up and
down the streets.

"Keeping Open House" was a merry custom; it has gone, like the all-day
picnic in the woods, and like that prettiest of all vanished customs,
the serenade.  When a lively girl visited the town she did not long go
unserenaded, though a visitor was not indeed needed to excuse a
serenade.  Of a summer night, young men would bring an orchestra under
a pretty girl's window--or, it might be, her father's, or that of an
ailing maiden aunt--and flute, harp, fiddle, 'cello, cornet, and bass
viol would presently release to the dulcet stars such melodies as sing
through "You'll Remember Me," "I Dreamt That I Dwelt in Marble Halls,"
"Silver Threads Among the Gold," "Kathleen Mavourneen," or "The
Soldier's Farewell."

They had other music to offer, too, for these were the happy days of
"Olivette" and "The Macotte" and "The Chimes of Normandy" and
"Girofle-Girofla". and "Fra Diavola."  Better than that, these were
the days of "Pinafore" and "The Pirates of Penzance" and of
"Patience."  This last was needed in the Midland town, as elsewhere,
for the "aesthetic movement" had reached thus far from London, and
terrible things were being done to honest old furniture.  Maidens
sawed what-nots in two, and gilded the remains.  They took the rockers
from rocking-chairs and gilded the inadequate legs; they gilded the
easels that supported the crayon portraits of their deceased uncles.
In the new spirit of art they sold old clocks for new, and threw wax
flowers and wax fruit, and the protecting glass domes, out upon the
trash-heap.  They filled vases with peacock feathers, or cattails, or
sumac, or sunflowers, and set the vases upon mantelpieces and marble-
topped tables.  They embroidered daisies (which they called
"marguerites") and sunflowers and sumac and cat-tails and owls and
peacock feathers upon plush screens and upon heavy cushions, then
strewed these cushions upon floors where fathers fell over them in the
dark.  In the teeth of sinful oratory, the daughters went on
embroidering: they embroidered daisies and sunflowers and sumac and
cat-tails and owls and peacock feathers upon "throws" which they had
the courage to drape upon horsehair sofas; they painted owls and
daisies and sunflowers and sumac and cat-tails and peacock feathers
upon tambourines.  They hung Chinese umbrellas of paper to the
chandeliers; they nailed paper fans to the walls.  They "studied"
painting on china, these girls; they sang Tosti's new songs; they
sometimes still practiced the old, genteel habit of lady-fainting, and
were most charming of all when they drove forth, three or four in a
basket phaeton, on a spring morning.

Croquet and the mildest archery ever known were the sports of people
still young and active enough for so much exertion; middle-age played
euchre.  There was a theatre, next door to the Amberson Hotel, and
when Edwin Booth came for a night, everybody who could afford to buy a
ticket was there, and all the "hacks" in town were hired.  "The Black
Crook" also filled the theatre, but the audience then was almost
entirely of men who looked uneasy as they left for home when the final
curtain fell upon the shocking girls dressed as fairies.  But the
theatre did not often do so well; the people of the town were still
too thrifty.

They were thrifty because they were the sons or grandsons of the
"early settlers," who had opened the wilderness and had reached it
from the East and the South with wagons and axes and guns, but with no
money at all.  The pioneers were thrifty or they would have perished:
they had to store away food for the winter, or goods to trade for
food, and they often feared they had not stored enough--they left
traces of that fear in their sons and grandsons.  In the minds of most
of these, indeed, their thrift was next to their religion: to save,
even for the sake of saving, was their earliest lesson and discipline.
No matter how prosperous they were, they could not spend money either
upon "art," or upon mere luxury and entertainment, without a sense of
sin.

Against so homespun a background the magnificence of the Ambersons was
as conspicuous as a brass band at a funeral.  Major Amberson bought
two hundred acres of land at the end of National Avenue; and through
this tract he built broad streets and cross-streets; paved them with
cedar block, and curbed them with stone.  He set up fountains, here
and there, where the streets intersected, and at symmetrical intervals
placed cast-iron statues, painted white, with their titles clear upon
the pedestals:  Minerva, Mercury, Hercules, Venus, Gladiator, Emperor
Augustus, Fisher Boy, Stag-hound, Mastiff, Greyhound, Fawn, Antelope,
Wounded Doe, and Wounded Lion.  Most of the forest trees had been left
to flourish still, and, at some distance, or by moonlight, the place
was in truth beautiful; but the ardent citizen, loving to see his city
grow, wanted neither distance nor moonlight.  He had not seen
Versailles, but, standing before the Fountain of Neptune in Amberson
Addition, at bright noon, and quoting the favourite comparison of the
local newspapers, he declared Versailles outdone.  All this Art showed
a profit from the start, for the lots sold well and there was
something like a rush to build in the new Addition.  Its main
thoroughfare, an oblique continuation of National Avenue, was called
Amberson Boulevard, and here, at the juncture of the new Boulevard and
the Avenue, Major Amberson reserved four acres for himself, and built
his new house--the Amberson Mansion, of course.

This house was the pride of the town. Faced with stone as far back as
the dining-room windows, it was a house of arches and turrets and
girdling stone porches: it had the first porte-cochere seen in that
town.  There was a central "front hall" with a great black walnut
stairway, and open to a green glass skylight called the "dome," three
stories above the ground floor.  A ballroom occupied most of the third
story; and at one end of it was a carved walnut gallery for the
musicians.  Citizens told strangers that the cost of all this black
walnut and wood-carving was sixty thousand dollars.  "Sixty thousand
dollars for the wood-work alone!  Yes, sir, and hardwood floors all
over the house!  Turkish rugs and no carpets at all, except a Brussels
carpet in the front parlour--I hear they call it the 'reception-room.'
Hot and cold water upstairs and down, and stationary washstands in
every last bedroom in the place!  Their sideboard's built right into
the house and goes all the way across one end of the dining room.  It
isn't walnut, it's solid mahogany!  Not veneering--solid mahogany!
Well, sir, I presume the President of the United States would be
tickled to swap the White House for the new Amberson Mansion, if the
Major'd give him the chance--but by the Almighty Dollar, you bet your
sweet life the Major wouldn't!"

The visitor to the town was certain to receive further enlightenment,
for there was one form of entertainment never omitted: he was always
patriotically taken for "a little drive around our city," even if his
host had to hire a hack, and the climax of the display was the
Amberson Mansion.  "Look at that greenhouse they've put up there in
the side yard," the escort would continue.  "And look at that brick
stable!  Most folks would think that stable plenty big enough and good
enough to live in; it's got running water and four rooms upstairs for
two hired men and one of 'em's family to live in.  They keep one hired
man loafin' in the house, and they got a married hired man out in the
stable, and his wife does the washing.  They got box-stalls for four
horses, and they keep a coupay, and some new kinds of fancy rigs you
never saw the beat of!  'Carts' they call two of 'em--'way up in the
air they are--too high for me!  I guess they got every new kind of
fancy rig in there that's been invented.  And harness--well, everybody
in town can tell when Ambersons are out driving after dark, by the
jingle.  This town never did see so much style as Ambersons are
putting on, these days; and I guess it's going to be expensive,
because a lot of other folks'll try to keep up with 'em.  The Major's
wife and the daughter's been to Europe, and my wife tells me since
they got back they make tea there every afternoon about five o'clock,
and drink it.  Seems to me it would go against a person's stomach,
just before supper like that, and anyway tea isn't fit for much--not
unless you're sick or something.  My wife says Ambersons don't make
lettuce salad the way other people do; they don't chop it up with
sugar and vinegar at all.  They pour olive oil on it with their
vinegar, and they have it separate--not along with the rest of the
meal.  And they eat these olives, too: green things they are,
something like a hard plum, but a friend of mine told me they tasted a
good deal like a bad hickory-nut.  My wife says she's going to buy
some; you got to eat nine and then you get to like 'em, she says.
Well, I wouldn't eat nine bad hickory-nuts to get to like them, and
I'm going to let these olives alone.  Kind of a woman's dish, anyway,
I suspect, but most everybody'll be makin' a stagger to worm through
nine of 'em, now Ambersons brought 'em to town.  Yes, sir, the rest'll
eat 'em, whether they get sick or not!  Looks to me like some people
in this city'd be willing to go crazy if they thought that would help
'em to be as high-toned as Ambersons.  Old Aleck Minafer--he's about
the closest old codger we got--he come in my office the other day, and
he pretty near had a stroke tellin' me about his daughter Fanny.
Seems Miss Isabel Amberson's got some kind of a dog--they call it a
Saint Bernard--and Fanny was bound to have one, too.  Well, old Aleck
told her he didn't like dogs except rat-terriers, because a rat-
terrier cleans up the mice, but she kept on at him, and finally he
said all right she could have one.  Then, by George! she says
Ambersons bought their dog, and you can't get one without paying for
it: they cost from fifty to a hundred dollars up!  Old Aleck wanted to
know if I ever heard of anybody buyin' a dog before, because, of
course, even a Newfoundland or a setter you can usually get somebody
to give you one.  He says he saw some sense in payin' a nigger a dime,
or even a quarter, to drown a dog for you, but to pay out fifty
dollars and maybe more--well, sir, he like to choked himself to death,
right there in my office!  Of course everybody realizes that Major
Amberson is a fine business man, but what with throwin' money around
for dogs, and every which and what, some think all this style's bound
to break him up, if his family don't quit!"

One citizen, having thus discoursed to a visitor, came to a thoughtful
pause, and then added, "Does seem pretty much like squandering, yet
when you see that dog out walking with this Miss Isabel, he seems
worth the money."

"What's she look like?"

"Well, sir," said the citizen, "she's not more than just about
eighteen or maybe nineteen years old, and I don't know as I know just
how to put it--but she's kind of a delightful lookin' young lady!"




Chapter II


Another citizen said an eloquent thing about Miss Isabel Amberson's
looks.  This was Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster, the foremost literary
authority and intellectual leader of the community---for both the
daily newspapers thus described Mrs. Foster when she founded the
Women's Tennyson Club; and her word upon art, letters, and the drama
was accepted more as law than as opinion.  Naturally, when "Hazel
Kirke" finally reached the town, after its long triumph in larger
places, many people waited to hear what Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster
thought of it before they felt warranted in expressing any estimate of
the play.  In fact, some of them waited in the lobby of the theatre,
as they came out, and formed an inquiring group about her.

"I didn't see the play," she informed them.

"What!  Why, we saw you, right in the middle of the fourth row!"

"Yes," she said, smiling, "but I was sitting just behind Isabelle
Amberson.  I couldn't look at anything except her wavy brown hair and
the wonderful back of her neck."

The ineligible young men of the town (they were all ineligible) were
unable to content themselves with the view that had so charmed Mrs.
Henry Franklin Foster: they spent their time struggling to keep Miss
Amberson's face turned toward them.  She turned it most often,
observers said, toward two: one excelling in the general struggle by
his sparkle, and the other by that winning if not winsome old trait,
persistence.  The sparkling gentleman "led germans" with her, and sent
sonnets to her with his bouquets--sonnets lacking neither music nor
wit.  He was generous, poor, well-dressed, and his amazing
persuasiveness was one reason why he was always in debt.  No one
doubted that he would be able to persuade Isabel, but he unfortunately
joined too merry a party one night, and, during a moonlight serenade
upon the lawn before the Amberson Mansion, was easily identified from
the windows as the person who stepped through the bass viol and had to
be assisted to a waiting carriage.  One of Miss Amberson's brothers
was among the serenaders, and, when the party had dispersed, remained
propped against the front door in a state of helpless liveliness; the
Major going down in a dressing-gown and slippers to bring him in, and
scolding mildly, while imperfectly concealing strong impulses to
laughter.  Miss Amberson also laughed at this brother, the next day,
but for the suitor it was a different matter: she refused to see him
when he called to apologize.  "You seem to care a great deal about
bass viols!" he wrote her.  "I promise never to break another."  She
made no response to the note, unless it was an answer, two weeks
later, when her engagement was announced.  She took the persistent
one, Wilbur Minafer, no breaker of bass viols or of hearts, no
serenader at all.

A few people, who always foresaw everything, claimed that they were
not surprised, because though Wilbur Minafer "might not be an Apollo,
as it were," he was "a steady young business man, and a good church-
goer," and Isabel Amberson was "pretty sensible--for such a showy
girl."  But the engagement astounded the young people, and most of
their fathers and mothers, too; and as a topic it supplanted
literature at the next meeting of the "Women's Tennyson Club."

"Wilbur Minafer!" a member cried, her inflection seeming to imply that
Wilbur's crime was explained by his surname.  "Wilbur Minafer!  It's
the queerest thing I ever heard!  To think of her taking Wilbur
Minafer, just because a man any woman would like a thousand times
better was a little wild one night at a serenade!"

"No," said Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster.  "It isn't that.  It isn't even
because she's afraid he'd be a dissipated husband and she wants to be
safe.  It isn't because she's religious or hates wildness; it isn't
even because she hates wildness in him."

"Well, but look how she's thrown him over for it."

"No, that wasn't her reason," said the wise Mrs. Henry Franklin
Foster.  "If men only knew it--and it's a good thing they don't--a
woman doesn't really care much about whether a man's wild or not, if
it doesn't affect herself, and Isabel Amberson doesn't care a thing!

"Mrs. Foster!"

"No, she doesn't.  What she minds is his making a clown of himself in
her front yard!  It made her think he didn't care much about her.
She's probably mistaken, but that's what she thinks, and it's too late
for her to think anything else now, because she's going to be married
right away--the invitations will be out next week.  It'll be a big
Amberson-style thing, raw oysters floating in scooped-out blocks of
ice and a band from out-of-town--champagne, showy presents; a colossal
present from the Major.  Then Wilbur will take Isabel on the
carefulest little wedding trip he can manage, and she'll be a good
wife to him, but they'll have the worst spoiled lot of children this
town will ever see."

"How on earth do you make that out, Mrs. Foster?"

"She couldn't love Wilbur, could she?"  Mrs. Foster demanded, with no
challengers.  "Well, it will all go to her children, and she'll ruin
'em!"

The prophetess proved to be mistaken in a single detail merely: except
for that, her foresight was accurate.  The wedding was of Ambersonian
magnificence, even to the floating oysters; and the Major's colossal
present was a set of architect's designs for a house almost as
elaborate and impressive as the Mansion, the house to be built in
Amberson Addition by the Major.  The orchestra was certainly not that
local one which had suffered the loss of a bass viol; the musicians
came, according to the prophecy and next morning's paper, from afar;
and at midnight the bride was still being toasted in champagne, though
she had departed upon her wedding journey at ten.  Four days later the
pair had returned to town, which promptness seemed fairly to
demonstrate that Wilbur had indeed taken Isabel upon the carefulest
little trip he could manage.  According to every report, she was from
the start "a good wife to him," but here in a final detail the
prophecy proved inaccurate.  Wilbur and Isabel did not have children;
they had only one.

"Only one," Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster admitted.  "But I'd like to
know if he isn't spoiled enough for a whole carload!"

Again she found none to challenge her.

At the age of nine, George Amberson Minafer, the Major's one
grandchild, was a princely terror, dreaded not only in Amberson
Addition but in many other quarters through which he galloped on his
white pony.  "By golly, I guess you think you own this town!" an
embittered labourer complained, one day, as Georgie rode the pony
straight through a pile of sand the man was sieving.  "I will when I
grow up," the undisturbed child replied.  "I guess my grandpa owns it
now, you bet!"  And the baffled workman, having no means to controvert
what seemed a mere exaggeration of the facts could only mutter "Oh,
pull down your vest!

"Don't haf to!  Doctor says it ain't healthy!" the boy returned
promptly.  "But I'll tell you what I'll do: I'll pull down my vest if
you'll wipe off your chin!"

This was stock and stencil: the accustomed argot of street badinage of
the period; and in such matters Georgie was an expert.  He had no vest
to pull down; the incongruous fact was that a fringed sash girdled the
juncture of his velvet blouse and breeches, for the Fauntleroy period
had set in, and Georgie's mother had so poor an eye for appropriate
things, where Georgie was concerned, that she dressed him according to
the doctrine of that school in boy decoration. Not only did he wear a
silk sash, and silk stockings, and a broad lace collar, with his
little black velvet suit: he had long brown curls, and often came home
with burrs in them.

Except upon the surface (which was not his own work, but his mother's)
Georgie bore no vivid resemblance to the fabulous little Cedric.  The
storied boy's famous "Lean on me, grandfather," would have been
difficult to imagine upon the lips of Georgie.  A month after his
ninth birthday anniversary, when the Major gave him his pony, he had
already become acquainted with the toughest boys in various distant
parts of the town, and had convinced them that the toughness of a rich
little boy with long curls might be considered in many respects
superior to their own.  He fought them, learning how to go berserk at
a certain point in a fight, bursting into tears of anger, reaching for
rocks, uttering wailed threats of murder and attempting to fulfil
them.  Fights often led to intimacies, and he acquired the art of
saying things more exciting than "Don't haf to!" and "Doctor says it
ain't healthy!'  Thus, on a summer afternoon, a strange boy, sitting
bored upon the gate-post of the Reverend Malloch Smith, beheld George
Amberson Minafer rapidly approaching on his white pony, and was
impelled by bitterness to shout: "Shoot the ole jackass!  Look at the
girly curls!  Say, bub, where'd you steal your mother's ole sash!"

"Your sister stole it for me!"  Georgie instantly replied, checking
the pony.  "She stole it off our clo'es-line an' gave it to me."

"You go get your hair cut!" said the stranger hotly.  "Yah! I haven't
got any sister!

"I know you haven't at home," Georgie responded.  "I mean the one
that's in jail."

"I dare you to get down off that pony!"

Georgie jumped to the ground, and the other boy descended from the
Reverend Mr. Smith's gatepost--but he descended inside the gate.  "I
dare you outside that gate," said Georgie.

"Yah! I dare you half way here.  I dare you--"

But these were luckless challenges, for Georgie immediately vaulted
the fence--and four minutes later Mrs. Malloch Smith, hearing strange
noises, looked forth from a window; then screamed, and dashed for the
pastor's study.  Mr. Malloch Smith, that grim-bearded Methodist, came
to the front yard and found his visiting nephew being rapidly prepared
by Master Minafer to serve as a principal figure in a pageant of
massacre.  It was with great physical difficulty that Mr. Smith
managed to give his nephew a chance to escape into the house, for
Georgie was hard and quick, and, in such matters, remarkably intense;
but the minister, after a grotesque tussle, got him separated from his
opponent, and shook him.

"You stop that, you!"  Georgie cried fiercely; and wrenched himself
away.  "I guess you don't know who I am!"

"Yes, I do know!" the angered Mr. Smith retorted.  "I know who you
are, and you're a disgrace to your mother!  Your mother ought to be
ashamed of herself to allow--"

"Shut up about my mother bein' ashamed of herself!"

Mr. Smith, exasperated, was unable to close the dialogue with dignity.
"She ought to be ashamed," he repeated.  "A woman that lets a bad boy
like you--"

But Georgie had reached his pony and mounted.  Before setting off at
his accustomed gallop, he paused to interrupt the Reverend Malloch
Smith again.  "You pull down your vest, you ole Billygoat, you!" he
shouted, distinctly.  "Pull down your vest, wipe off your chin--an' go
to hell!"

Such precocity is less unusual, even in children of the Rich, than
most grown people imagine.  However, it was a new experience for the
Reverend Malloch Smith, and left him in a state of excitement.  He at
once wrote a note to Georgie's mother, describing the crime according
to his nephew's testimony; and the note reached Mrs. Minafer before
Georgie did.  When he got home she read it to him sorrowfully.

Dear Madam:
Your son has caused a painful distress in my household.  He made an
unprovoked attack upon a little nephew of mine who is visiting in my
household, insulted him by calling him vicious names and falsehoods,
stating that ladies of his family were in jail.  He then tried to make
his pony kick him, and when the child, who is only eleven years old,
while your son is much older and stronger, endeavoured to avoid his
indignities and withdraw quietly, he pursued him into the enclosure of
my property and brutally assaulted him.  When I appeared upon this
scene he deliberately called insulting words to me, concluding with
profanity, such as "go to hell," which was heard not only by myself
but by my wife and the lady who lives next door.  I trust such a state
of undisciplined behaviour may be remedied for the sake of the
reputation for propriety, if nothing higher, of the family to which
this unruly child belongs.


Georgie had muttered various interruptions, and as she concluded the
reading he said: "He's an ole liar!"

"Georgie, you mustn't say 'liar.'  Isn't this letter the truth?"

"Well," said Georgie, "how old am I?"

"Ten."

"Well, look how he says I'm older than a boy eleven years old."

"That's true," said Isabel.  "He does.  But isn't some of it true,
Georgie?"

Georgie felt himself to be in a difficulty here, and he was silent.

"Georgie, did you say what he says you did?

"Which one?"

"Did you tell him to--to--Did you say, 'Go to hell?"

Georgie looked worried for a moment longer; then he brightened.
"Listen here, mamma; grandpa wouldn't wipe his shoe on that ole story-
teller, would he?"

"Georgie, you mustn't--"

"I mean: none of the Ambersons wouldn't have anything to do with him,
would they?  He doesn't even know you, does he, mamma?"

"That hasn't anything to do with it."

"Yes, it has!  I mean: none of the Amberson family go to see him, and
they never have him come in their house; they wouldn't ask him to, and
they prob'ly wouldn't even let him."

"That isn't what we're talking about."

"I bet," said Georgie emphatically, "I bet if he wanted to see any of
'em, he'd haf to go around to the side door!"

"No, dear, they--"

"Yes, they would, mamma!  So what does it matter if I did say somep'm'
to him he didn't like?  That kind o' people, I don't see why you can't
say anything you want to, to 'em!"

"No, Georgie.  And you haven't answered me whether you said that
dreadful thing he says you did."

"Well--" said Georgie.  "Anyway, he said somep'm' to me that made me
mad."  And upon this point he offered no further details; he would not
explain to his mother that what had made him "mad" was Mr. Smith's
hasty condemnation of herself:  "Your mother ought to be ashamed,"
and, "A woman that lets a bad boy like you--" Georgie did not even
consider excusing himself by quoting these insolences.

Isabel stroked his head.  "They were terrible words for you to use,
dear.  From his letter he doesn't seem a very tactful person, but--"

"He's just riffraff," said Georgie.

"You mustn't say so," his mother gently agreed "Where did you learn
those bad words he speaks of?  Where did you hear any one use them?"

"Well, I've heard 'em several places.  I guess Uncle George Amberson
was the first I ever heard say 'em.  Uncle George Amberson said 'em to
papa once.  Papa didn't like it, but Uncle George was just laughin' at
papa, an' then he said 'em while he was laughin'."

"That was wrong of him," she said, but almost instinctively he
detected the lack of conviction in her tone.  It was Isabel's great
failing that whatever an Amberson did seemed right to her, especially
if the Amberson was either her brother George, or her son George.  She
knew that she should be more severe with the latter now, but severity
with him was beyond her power; and the Reverend Malloch Smith had
succeeded only in rousing her resentment against himself.  Georgie's
symmetrical face--altogether an Amberson face--had looked never more
beautiful to her.  It always looked unusually beautiful when she tried
to be severe with him.  "You must promise me," she said feebly, "never
to use those bad words again."

"I promise not to," he said promptly--and he whispered an immediate
codicil under his breath: "Unless I get mad at somebody !"  This
satisfied a code according to which, in his own sincere belief, he
never told lies.

"That's a good boy," she said, and he ran out to the yard, his
punishment over.  Some admiring friends were gathered there; they had
heard of his adventure, knew of the note, and were waiting to see what
was going to "happen" to him.  They hoped for an account of things,
and also that he would allow them to "take turns" riding his pony to
the end of the alley and back.

They were really his henchmen:  Georgie was a lord among boys.  In
fact, he was a personage among certain sorts of grown people, and was
often fawned upon; the alley negroes delighted in him, chuckled over
him, flattered him slavishly.  For that matter, he often heard well-
dressed people speaking of him admiringly: a group of ladies once
gathered about him on the pavement where he was spinning a top.  "I
know this is Georgie!" one exclaimed, and turned to the others with
the impressiveness of a showman. "Major Amberson's only grandchild!"
The others said, "It is?" and made clicking sounds with their mouths;
two of them loudly whispering, "So handsome!"

Georgie, annoyed because they kept standing upon the circle he had
chalked for his top, looked at them coldly and offered a suggestion:

"Oh, go hire a hall!"

As an Amberson, he was already a public character, and the story of
his adventure in the Reverend Malloch Smith's front yard became a town
topic.  Many people glanced at him with great distaste, thereafter,
when they chanced to encounter him, which meant nothing to Georgie,
because he innocently believed most grown people to be necessarily
cross-looking as a normal phenomenon resulting from the adult state;
and he failed to comprehend that the distasteful glances had any
personal bearing upon himself.  If he had perceived such a bearing, he
would have been affected only so far, probably, as to mutter,
"Riffraff!"  Possibly he would have shouted it; and, certainly, most
people believed a story that went round the town just after Mrs.
Amberson's funeral, when Georgie was eleven.  Georgie was reported to
have differed with the undertaker about the seating of the family; his
indignant voice had become audible: "Well, who is the most important
person at my own grandmother's funeral?"  And later he had projected
his head from the window of the foremost mourners' carriage, as the
undertaker happened to pass.

"Riffraff!"

There were people--grown people they were--who expressed themselves
longingly: they did hope to live to see the day, they said, when that
boy would get his come-upance! (They used that honest word, so much
better than "deserts," and not until many years later to be more
clumsily rendered as "what is coming to him.")  Something was bound to
take him down, some day, and they only wanted to be there!  But
Georgie heard nothing of this, and the yearners for his taking down
went unsatisfied, while their yearning grew the greater as the happy
day of fulfilment was longer and longer postponed.  His grandeur was
not diminished by the Malloch Smith story; the rather it was
increased, and among other children (especially among little girls)
there was added to the prestige of his gilded position that diabolical
glamour which must inevitably attend a boy who has told a minister to
go to hell.




Chapter III



Until he reached the age of twelve, Georgie's education was a domestic
process; tutors came to the house; and those citizens who yearned for
his taking down often said: "Just wait till he has to go to public
school; then he'll get it!"  But at twelve Georgie was sent to a
private school in the town, and there came from this small and
dependent institution no report, or even rumour, of Georgie's getting
anything that he was thought to deserve; therefore the yearning still
persisted, though growing gaunt with feeding upon itself.  For,
although Georgie's pomposities and impudence in the little school were
often almost unbearable, the teachers were fascinated by him.  They
did not like him--he was too arrogant for that--but he kept them in
such a state of emotion that they thought more about him than they did
about all of the other ten pupils.  The emotion he kept them in was
usually one resulting from injured self-respect, but sometimes it was
dazzled admiration.  So far as their conscientious observation went,
he "studied" his lessons sparingly; but sometimes, in class, he
flashed an admirable answer, with a comprehension not often shown by
the pupils they taught; and he passed his examinations easily.  In
all, without discernible effort, he acquired at this school some
rudiments of a liberal education and learned nothing whatever about
himself.

The yearners were still yearning when Georgie, at sixteen, was sent
away to a great "Prep School."  "Now," they said brightly, "he'll get
it!  He'll find himself among boys just as important in their home
towns as he is, and they'll knock the stuffing out of him when he puts
on his airs with them!  Oh, but that would he worth something to see!"
They were mistaken, it appeared, for when Georgie returned, a few
months later, he still seemed to have the same stuffing.  He had been
deported by the authorities, the offense being stated as "insolence
and profanity"; in fact, he had given the principal of the school
instructions almost identical with those formerly objected to by the
Reverend Malloch Smith.

But he had not got his come-upance, and those who counted upon it were
embittered by his appearance upon the down-town streets driving a dog-
cart at criminal speed, making pedestrians retreat from the crossings,
and behaving generally as if he "owned the earth."  A disgusted
hardware dealer of middle age, one of those who hungered for Georgie's
downfall, was thus driven back upon the sidewalk to avoid being run
over, and so far forgot himself as to make use of the pet street
insult of the year:  "Got 'ny sense!  See here, bub, does your mother
know you're out?"

Georgie, without even seeming to look at him, flicked the long lash of
his whip dexterously, and a little spurt of dust came from the
hardware man's trousers, not far below the waist.  He was not made of
hardware: he raved, looking for a missile; then, finding none,
commanded himself sufficiently to shout after the rapid dog-cart:
"Turn down your pants, you would-be dude!  Raining in dear ole Lunnon!
Git off the earth!"

Georgie gave him no encouragement to think that he was heard.  The
dog-cart turned the next corner, causing indignation there, likewise,
and, having proceeded some distance farther, halted in front of the
"Amberson Block"--an old-fashioned four-story brick warren of lawyers
offices, insurance and realestate offices, with a "drygoods store"
occupying the ground floor.  Georgie tied his lathered trotter to a
telegraph pole, and stood for a moment looking at the building
critically: it seemed shabby, and he thought his grandfather ought to
replace it with a fourteen-story skyscraper, or even a higher one,
such as he had lately seen in New York--when he stopped there for a
few days of recreation and rest on his way home from the bereaved
school.  About the entryway to the stairs were various tin signs,
announcing the occupation and location of upper-floor tenants, and
Georgie decided to take some of these with him if he should ever go to
college.  However, he did not stop to collect them at this time, but
climbed the worn stairs--there was no elevator--to the fourth floor,
went down a dark corridor, and rapped three times upon a door.  It was
a mysterious door, its upper half, of opaque glass, bearing no sign to
state the business or profession of the occupants within; but
overhead, upon the lintel, four letters had been smearingly inscribed,
partly with purple ink and partly with a soft lead pencil, "F. O. T.
A." and upon the plaster wall, above the lintel, there was a drawing
dear to male adolescence: a skull and crossbones.

Three raps, similar to Georgie's, sounded from within the room.
Georgie then rapped four times the rapper within the room rapped
twice, and Georgie rapped seven times.  This ended precautionary
measures; and a well-dressed boy of sixteen opened the door; whereupon
Georgie entered quickly, and the door was closed behind him.  Seven
boys of congenial age were seated in a semicircular row of damaged
office chairs, facing a platform whereon stood a solemn, red-haired
young personage with a table before him.  At one end of the room there
was a battered sideboard, and upon it were some empty beer bottles, a
tobacco can about two-thirds full, with a web of mold over the surface
of the tobacco, a dusty cabinet photograph (not inscribed) of Miss
Lillian Russell, several withered old pickles, a caseknife, and a
half-petrified section of icing-cake on a sooty plate.  At the other
end of the room were two rickety card-tables and a stand of
bookshelves where were displayed under dust four or five small volumes
of M. Guy de Maupassant's stories, "Robinson Crusoe," "Sappho," "Mr.
Barnes of New York," a work by Giovanni Boccaccio, a Bible, "The
Arabian Nights' Entertainment," "Studies of the Human Form Divine,"
"The Little Minister," and a clutter of monthly magazines and
illustrated weeklies of about that crispness one finds in such
articles upon a doctor's ante-room table.  Upon the wall, above the
sideboard, was an old framed lithograph of Miss Della Fox in "Wang";
over the bookshelves there was another lithograph purporting to
represent Mr. John L. Sullivan in a boxing costume, and beside it a
halftone reproduction of "A Reading From Horner."  The final
decoration consisted of damaged papiermache--a round shield with two
battle-axes and two cross-hilted swords, upon the wall over the little
platform where stood the red-haired presiding officer.  He addressed
Georgie in a serious voice:

"Welcome, Friend of the Ace."

"Welcome, Friend of the Ace," Georgie responded, and all of the other
boys repeated the words, "Welcome, Friend of the Ace."

"Take your seat in the secret semicircle," said the presiding officer.
"We will now proceed to--"

But Georgie was disposed to be informal.  He interrupted, turning to
the boy who had admitted him:  "Look here, Charlie Johnson, what's
Fred Kinney doing in the president's chair?  That's my place, isn't
it?  What you men been up to here, anyhow?  Didn't you all agree I was
to be president just the same, even if I was away at school?"

"Well--" said Charlie Johnson uneasily.  "Listen! I didn't have much
to do with it.  Some of the other members thought that long as you
weren't in town or anything, and Fred gave the sideboard, why--"

Mr. Kinney, presiding, held in his hand, in lieu of a gavel, and
considered much more impressive, a Civil War relic known as a "horse-
pistol."  He rapped loudly for order.  "All Friends of the Ace will
take their seats!" he said sharply.  "I'm president of the F. O. T. A.
now, George Minafer, and don't you forget it!  You and Charlie Johnson
sit down, because I was elected perfectly fair, and we're goin' to
hold a meeting here."

"Oh, you are, are you?" said George skeptically.

Charlie Johnson thought to mollify him.  "Well, didn't we call this
meeting just especially because you told us to?  You said yourself we
ought to have a kind of celebration because you've got back to town,
George, and that's what we're here for now, and everything.  What do
you care about being president?  All it amounts to is just calling the
roll and--"

The president de facto hammered the table.  "This meeting will now
proceed to--"

"No, it won't," said George, and he advanced to the desk, laughing
contemptuously.  "Get off that platform."

"This meeting will come to order!"  Mr. Kinney commanded fiercely.

"You put down that gavel," said George. "Whose is it, I'd like to
know?  It belongs to my grandfather, and you quit hammering it that
way or you'll break it, and I'll have to knock your head off."

"This meeting will come to order!  I was legally elected here, and I'm
not going to be bulldozed!"

"All right," said Georgie.  "You're president.  Now we'll hold another
election."

"We will not!" Fred Kinney shouted.  "We'll have our reg'lar meeting,
and then we'll play euchre & nickel a corner, what we're here for.
This meeting will now come to ord--"

Georgie addressed the members.  "I'd like to know who got up this
thing in the first place," he said.  "Who's the founder of the
F.O.T.A., if you please?  Who got this room rent free?  Who got the
janitor to let us have most of this furniture?  You suppose you could
keep this clubroom a minute if I told my grandfather I didn't want it
for a literary club any more?  I'd like to say a word on how you
members been acting, too!  When I went away I said I didn't care if
you had a vice-president or something while I was gone, but here I
hardly turned my back and you had to go and elect Fred Kinney
president!  Well, if that's what you want, you can have it.  I was
going to have a little celebration down here some night pretty soon,
and bring some port wine, like we drink at school in our crowd there,
and I was going to get my grandfather to give the club an extra room
across the hall, and prob'ly I could get my Uncle George to give us
his old billiard table, because he's got a new one, and the club could
put it in the other room.  Well, you got a new president now!"  Here
Georgie moved toward the door and his tone became plaintive, though
undeniably there was disdain beneath his sorrow.  "I guess all I
better do is--resign!"

And he opened the door, apparently intending to withdraw.

"All in favour of having a new election," Charlie Johnson shouted
hastily, "say, 'Aye'!"

"Aye" was said by everyone present except Mr. Kinney, who began a hot
protest, but it was immediately smothered.

"All in favour of me being president instead of Fred Kinney," shouted
Georgie, "say 'Aye.'  The 'Ayes' have it!"

 "I resign," said the red-headed boy, gulping as he descended from the
platform.  "I resign from the club!"

Hot-eyed, he found his hat and departed, jeers echoing after him as he
plunged down the corridor.  Georgie stepped upon the platform, and
took up the emblem of office.

"Ole red-head Fred'll be around next week," said the new chairman.
"He'll be around boot-lickin' to get us to take him back in again, but
I guess we don't want him: that fellow always was a trouble-maker.  We
will now proceed with our meeting.  Well, fellows, I suppose you want
to hear from your president.  I don't know that I have much to say, as
I have already seen most of you a few times since I got back.  I had a
good time at the old school, back East, but had a little trouble with
the faculty and came on home.  My family stood by me as well as I
could ask, and I expect to stay right here in the old town until
whenever I decide to enter college.  Now, I don't suppose there's any
more business before the meeting.  I guess we might as well play
cards.  Anybody that's game for a little quarter-limit poker or any
limit they say, why I'd like to have 'em sit at the president's card-
table."

When the diversions of the Friends of the Ace were concluded for that
afternoon, Georgie invited his chief supporter, Mr. Charlie Johnson,
to drive home with him to dinner, and as they jingled up National
Avenue in the dog-cart, Charlie asked:

"What sort of men did you run up against at that school, George?"

"Best crowd there: finest set of men I ever met."

"How'd you get in with 'em?"

Georgie laughed. "I let them get in with me, Charlie," he said in a
tone of gentle explanation.  "It's vulgar to do any other way.  Did I
tell you the nickname they gave me--'King'?  That was what they called
me at that school, 'King Minafer."

"How'd they happen to do that?" his friend asked innocently.

"Oh, different things," George answered lightly.  "Of course, any of
'em that came from anywhere out in this part the country knew about
the family and all that, and so I suppose it was a good deal on
account of--oh, on account of the family and the way I do things, most
likely."




CHAPTER IV


When Mr. George Amberson Minafer came home for the holidays at
Christmastide, in his sophomore year, probably no great change had
taken place inside him, but his exterior was visibly altered.  Nothing
about him encouraged any hope that he had received his come-upance; on
the contrary, the yearners for that stroke of justice must yearn even
more itchingly: the gilded youth's manner had become polite, but his
politeness was of a kind which democratic people found hard to bear.
In a word, M. le Due had returned from the gay life of the capital to
show himself for a week among the loyal peasants belonging to the old
chateau, and their quaint habits and costumes afforded him a mild
amusement.

Cards were out for a ball in his honour, and this pageant of the
tenantry was held in the ballroom of the Amberson Mansion the night
after his arrival.  It was, as Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster said of
Isabel's wedding, "a big Amberson-style thing," though that wise Mrs.
Henry Franklin Foster had long ago gone the way of all wisdom, having
stepped out of the Midland town, unquestionably into heaven--a long
step, but not beyond her powers.  She had successors, but no
successor; the town having grown too large to confess that it was
intellectually led and literarily authoritated by one person; and some
of these successors were not invited to the ball, for dimensions were
now so metropolitan that intellectual leaders and literary authorities
loomed in outlying regions unfamiliar to the Ambersons.  However, all
"old citizens" recognizable as gentry received cards, and of course so
did their dancing descendants.

The orchestra and the caterer were brought from away, in the Amberson
manner, though this was really a gesture--perhaps one more of habit
than of ostentation--for servitors of gaiety as proficient as these
importations were nowadays to be found in the town.  Even flowers and
plants and roped vines were brought from afar--not, however, until the
stock of the local florists proved insufficient to obliterate the
interior structure of the big house, in the Amberson way.  It was the
last of the great, long remembered dances that "everybody talked
about"--there were getting to be so many people in town that no later
than the next year there were too many for "everybody" to hear of even
such a ball as the Ambersons'.

George, white-gloved, with a gardenia in his buttonhole, stood with
his mother and the Major, embowered in the big red and gold drawing
room downstairs, to "receive" the guests; and, standing thus together,
the trio offered a picturesque example of good looks persistent
through three generations.  The Major, his daughter, and his grandson
were of a type all Amberson: tall, straight, and regular, with dark
eyes, short noses, good chins; and the grandfather's expression, no
less than the grandson's, was one of faintly amused condescension.
There was a difference, however.  The grandson's unlined young face
had nothing to offer except this condescension; the grandfather's had
other things to say.  It was a handsome, worldly old face, conscious
of its importance, but persuasive rather than arrogant, and not
without tokens of sufferings withstood.  The Major's short white hair
was parted in the middle, like his grandson's, and in all he stood as
briskly equipped to the fashion as exquisite young George.

Isabel, standing between her father and her son caused a vague
amazement in the mind of the latter.  Her age, just under forty, was
for George a thought of something as remote as the moons of Jupiter:
he could not possibly have conceived such an age ever coming to be
his own: five years was the limit of his thinking in time.  Five years
ago he had been a child not yet fourteen; and those five years were an
abyss.  Five years hence he would be almost twenty-four; what the
girls he knew called "one of the older men."  He could imagine himself
at twenty-four, but beyond that, his powers staggered and refused the
task.  He saw little essential difference between thirty-eight and
eighty-eight, and his mother was to him not a woman but wholly a
mother.  He had no perception of her other than as an adjunct to
himself, his mother; nor could he imagine her thinking or doing
anything--falling in love, walking with a friend, or reading a book--
as a woman, and not as his mother.  The woman, Isabel, was a stranger
to her son; as completely a stranger as if he had never in his life
seen her or heard her voice.  And it was to-night, while he stood with
her, "receiving," that he caught a disquieting glimpse of this
stranger whom he thus fleetingly encountered for the first time.

Youth cannot imagine romance apart from youth.  That is why the roles
of the heroes and heroines of plays are given by the managers to the
most youthful actors they can find among the competent.  Both middle-
aged people and young people enjoy a play about young lovers; but only
middle-aged people will tolerate a play about middle-aged lovers;
young people will not come to see such a play, because, for them,
middle-aged lovers are a joke--not a very funny one.  Therefore, to
bring both the middle-aged people and the young people into his house,
the manager makes his romance as young as he can.  Youth will indeed
be served, and its profound instinct is to be not only scornfully
amused but vaguely angered by middle-age romance.  So, standing beside
his mother, George was disturbed by a sudden impression, corning upon
him out of nowhere, so far as he could detect, that her eyes were
brilliant, that she was graceful and youthful--in a word, that she was
romantically lovely.

He had one of those curious moments that seem to have neither a cause
nor any connection with actual things.  While it lasted, he was
disquieted not by thoughts--for he had no definite thoughts--but by a
slight emotion like that caused in a dream by the presence of
something invisible soundless, and yet fantastic.  There was nothing
different or new about his mother, except her new black and silver
dress: she was standing there beside him, bending her head a little in
her greetings, smiling the same smile she had worn for the half-hour
that people had been passing the "receiving" group.  Her face was
flushed, but the room was warm; and shaking hands with so many people
easily accounted for the pretty glow that was upon her.  At any time
she could have "passed" for twenty-five or twenty-six--a man of fifty
would have honestly guessed her to be about thirty but possibly two or
three years younger--and though extraordinary in this, she had been
extraordinary in it for years.  There was nothing in either her looks
or her manner to explain George's uncomfortable feeling; and yet it
increased, becoming suddenly a vague resentment, as if she had done
something unmotherly to him.

The fantastic moment passed; and even while it lasted, he was doing
his duty, greeting two pretty girls with whom he had grown up, as
people say, and warmly assuring them that he remembered them very
well--an assurance which might have surprised them "in anybody but
Georgie Minafer!"  It seemed unnecessary, since he had spent many
hours with them no longer ago than the preceding August,  They had
with them their parents and an uncle from out of town; and George
negligently gave the parents the same assurance he had given the
daughters, but murmured another form of greeting to the out-of-town
uncle, whom he had never seen before.  This person George absently
took note of as a "queer-looking duck."  Undergraduates had not yet
adopted "bird."  It was a period previous to that in which a sophomore
would have thought of the Sharon girls' uncle as a "queer-looking
bird," or, perhaps a "funny-face bird."  In George's time, every human
male was to be defined, at pleasure, as a "duck"; but "duck" was not
spoken with admiring affection, as in its former feminine use to
signify a "dear"--on the contrary, "duck" implied the speaker's
personal detachment and humorous superiority.  An indifferent
amusement was what George felt when his mother, with a gentle
emphasis, interrupted his interchange of courtesies with the nieces to
present him to the queer-looking duck their uncle.  This emphasis of
Isabel's, though slight, enabled George to perceive that she
considered the queer-looking duck a person of some importance; but it
was far from enabling him to understand why.  The duck parted his
thick and longish black hair on the side; his tie was a forgetful
looking thing, and his coat, though it fitted a good enough middle-
aged figure, no product of this year, or of last year either.  One of
his eyebrows was noticeably higher than the other; and there were
whimsical lines between them, which gave him an apprehensive
expression; but his apprehensions were evidently more humorous than
profound, for his prevailing look was that of a genial man of affairs,
not much afraid of anything whatever  Nevertheless, observing only his
unfashionable hair, his eyebrows, his preoccupied tie and his old
coat, the olympic George set him down as a queer-looking duck, and
having thus completed his portrait, took no interest in him.

The Sharon girls passed on, taking the queer-looking duck with them,
and George became pink with mortification as his mother called his
attention to a white-bearded guest waiting to shake his hand.  This
was George's great-uncle, old John Minafer: it was old John's boast
that in spite of his connection by marriage with the Ambersons, he
never had worn and never would wear a swaller-tail coat. Members of
his family had exerted their influence uselessly--at eighty-nine
conservative people seldom form radical new habits, and old John wore
his "Sunday suit" of black broadcloth to the Amberson ball.  The coat
was square, with skirts to the knees; old John called it a "Prince
Albert" and was well enough pleased with it, but his great-nephew
considered it the next thing to an insult.  George's purpose had been
to ignore the man, but he had to take his hand for a moment; whereupon
old John began to tell George that he was looking well, though there
had been a time, during his fourth month, when he was so puny that
nobody thought he would live.  The great-nephew, in a fury of blushes,
dropped old John's hand with some vigour, and seized that of the next
person in the line.  "Member you v'ry well 'ndeed!" he said fiercely.

The large room had filled, and so had the broad hall and the rooms on
the other side of the hall, where there were tables for whist.  The
imported orchestra waited in the ballroom on the third floor, but a
local harp, 'cello, violin, and flute were playing airs from "The
Fencing Master" in the hall, and people were shouting over the music.
Old John Minafer's voice was louder and more penetrating than any
other, because he had been troubled with deafness for twenty-five
years, heard his own voice but faintly, and liked to hear it.  "Smell
o' flowers like this always puts me in mind o' funerals," he kept
telling his niece, Fanny Minafer, who was with him; and he seemed to
get a great deal of satisfaction out of this reminder.  His tremulous
yet strident voice cut through the voluminous sound that filled the
room, and he was heard everywhere: "Always got to think o' funerals
when I smell so many flowers!"  And, as the pressure of people forced
Fanny and himself against the white marble mantelpiece, he pursued
this train of cheery thought, shouting, "Right here's where the
Major's wife was laid out at her funeral.  They had her in a good
light from that big bow window."  He paused to chuckle mournfully.  "I
s'pose that's where they'll put the Major when his time comes."

Presently George's mortification was increased to hear this sawmill
droning harshly from the midst of the thickening crowd: "Ain't the
dancin' broke out yet, Fanny? Hoopla! Le's push through and go see the
young women-folks crack their heels!  Start the circus!  Hoopse-
daisy!"  Miss Fanny Minafer, in charge of the lively veteran, was
almost as distressed as her nephew George, but she did her duty and
managed to get old John through the press and out to the broad
stairway, which numbers of young people were now ascending to the
ballroom.  And here the sawmill voice still rose over all others:
"Solid black walnut every inch of it, balustrades and all.  Sixty
thousand dollars' worth o' carved woodwork in the house!  Like water!
Spent money like water!  Always did!  Still do!  Like water!  God
knows where it all comes from!"

He continued the ascent, barking and coughing among the gleaming young
heads, white shoulders, jewels, and chiffon, like an old dog slowly
swimming up the rapids of a sparkling river; while down below, in the
drawing room, George began to recover from the degradation into which
this relic of early settler days had dragged him.  What restored him
completely was a dark-eyed little beauty of nineteen, very knowing in
lustrous blue and jet; at sight of this dashing advent in the line of
guests before him, George was fully an Amberson again.

"Remember you very well indeed!" he said, his graciousness more
earnest than any he had heretofore displayed.  Isabel heard him and
laughed.

"But you don't, George!" she said.  "You don't remember her yet,
though of course you will!  Miss Morgan is from out of town, and I'm
afraid this is the first time you've ever seen her.  You might take
her up to the dancing; I think you've pretty well done your duty here."

"Be d'lighted," George responded formally, and offered his arm, not
with a flourish, certainly, but with an impressiveness inspired partly
by the appearance of the person to whom he offered it, partly by his
being the hero of this fete, and partly by his youthfulness--for when
manners are new they are apt to be elaborate.  The little beauty
entrusted her gloved fingers to his coat-sleeve, and they moved away
together.

Their progress was necessarily slow, and to George's mind it did not
lack stateliness.  How could it?  Musicians, hired especially for him,
were sitting in a grove of palms in the hall and now tenderly playing
"Oh, Promise Me" for his pleasuring; dozens and scores of flowers had
been brought to life and tended to this hour that they might sweeten
the air for him while they died; and the evanescent power that music
and floral scents hold over youth stirred his appreciation of strange,
beautiful qualities within his own bosom: he seemed to himself to be
mysteriously angelic, and about to do something which would overwhelm
the beautiful young stranger upon his arm.

Elderly people and middle-aged people moved away to let him pass with
his honoured fair beside him.  Worthy middle-class creatures, they
seemed, leading dull lives but appreciative of better things when they
saw them--and George's bosom was fleetingly touched with a pitying
kindness.  And since the primordial day when caste or heritage first
set one person, in his own esteem, above his fellow-beings, it is to
be doubted if anybody ever felt more illustrious, or more negligently
grand, than George Amberson Minafer felt at this party.

As he conducted Miss Morgan through the hall, toward the stairway,
they passed the open double doors of a card room, where some squadrons
of older people were preparing for action, and, leaning gracefully
upon the mantelpiece of this room, a tall man, handsome, high-
mannered, and sparklingly point-device, held laughing converse with
that queer-looking duck, the Sharon girls' uncle.  The tall gentleman
waved a gracious salutation to George, and Miss Morgan's curiosity was
stirred.  "Who is that?"

"I didn't catch his name when my mother presented him to me," said
George.  "You mean the queer-looking duck."

"I mean the aristocratic duck."

"That's my Uncle George  Honourable George Amberson.  I thought
everybody knew him."

"He looks as though everybody ought to know him," she said.  "It seems
to run in your family."

If she had any sly intention, it skipped over George harmlessly.
"Well, of course, I suppose most everybody does," he admitted--"out in
this part of the country especially.  Besides, Uncle George is in
Congress; the family like to have someone there."

"Why?"

"Well, it's sort of a good thing in one way.  For instance, my Uncle
Sydney Amberson and his wife, Aunt Amelia, they haven't got much of
anything to do with themselves--get bored to death around here, of
course.  Well, probably Uncle George'll have Uncle Sydney appointed
minister or ambassador, or something like that, to Russia or Italy or
somewhere, and that'll make it pleasant when any of the rest of the
family go travelling, or things like that.  I expect to do a good deal
of travelling myself when I get out of college."

On the stairway he pointed out this prospective ambassadorial couple,
Sydney and Amelia.  They were coming down, fronting the ascending
tide, and as conspicuous over it as a king and queen in a play.
Moreover, as the clear-eyed Miss Morgan remarked, the very least they
looked was ambassadorial.  Sydney was an Amberson exaggerated, more
pompous than gracious; too portly, flushed, starched to a shine, his
stately jowl furnished with an Edward the Seventh beard.  Amelia,
likewise full-bodied, showed glittering blond hair exuberantly
dressed; a pink, fat face cold under a white-hot tiara; a solid, cold
bosom under a white-hot necklace; great, cold, gloved arms, and the
rest of her beautifully upholstered.  Amelia was an Amberson born,
herself, Sydney's second-cousin: they had no children, and Sydney was
without a business or a profession; thus both found a great deal of
time to think about the appropriateness of their becoming
Excellencies.  And as George ascended the broad stairway, they were
precisely the aunt and uncle he was most pleased to point out, to a
girl from out of town, as his appurtenances in the way of relatives.
At sight of them the grandeur of the Amberson family was instantly
conspicuous as a permanent thing: it was impossible to doubt that the
Ambersons were entrenched, in their nobility and riches, behind
polished and glittering barriers which were as solid as they were
brilliant, and would last.




Chapter V



The hero of the fete, with the dark-eyed little beauty upon his arm,
reached the top of the second flight of stairs; and here, beyond a
spacious landing, where two proud-like darkies tended a crystalline
punch bowl, four wide archways in a rose-vine lattice framed gliding
silhouettes of waltzers, already smoothly at it to the castanets of
"La Paloma."  Old John Minafer, evidently surfeited, was in the act of
leaving these delights.  "D'want 'ny more o' that!" he barked.  "Just
slidin' around!  Call that dancin'?  Rather see a jig any day in the
world!  They ain't very modest, some of 'em.  I don't mind that,
though.  Not me!"

Miss Fanny Minafer was no longer in charge of him: he emerged from the
ballroom escorted by a middle-aged man of commonplace appearance.  The
escort had a dry, lined face upon which, not ornamentally but as a
matter of course, there grew a business man's short moustache; and his
thin neck showed an Adam's apple, but not conspicuously, for there was
nothing conspicuous about him.  Baldish, dim, quiet, he was an
unnoticeable part of this festival, and although there were a dozen or
more middle-aged men present, not casually to be distinguished from
him in general aspect, he was probably the last person in the big
house at whom a stranger would have glanced twice.  It did not enter
George's mind to mention to Miss Morgan that this was his father, or
to say anything whatever about him.

Mr. Minafer shook his son's hand unobtrusively in passing.

"I'll take Uncle John home," he said, in a low voice.  "Then I guess
I'll go on home myself--I'm not a great hand at parties, you know.
Good-night, George."

George murmured a friendly enough good-night without pausing.
Ordinarily he was not ashamed of the Minafers; he seldom thought about
them at all, for he belonged, as most American children do, to the
mother's family--but he was anxious not to linger with Miss Morgan in
the vicinity of old John, whom he felt to be a disgrace.

He pushed brusquely through the fringe of calculating youths who were
gathered in the arches, watching for chances to dance only with girls
who would soon be taken off their hands, and led his stranger lady out
upon the floor.  They caught the time instantly, and were away in the
waltz.

George danced well, and Miss Morgan seemed to float as part of the
music, the very dove itself of "La Paloma."  They said nothing as they
danced; her eyes were cast down all the while--the prettiest gesture
for a dancer--and there was left in the universe, for each, of them,
only their companionship in this waltz; while the faces of the other
dancers, swimming by, denoted not people but merely blurs of colour.
George became conscious of strange feelings within him: an exaltation
of soul, tender, but indefinite, and seemingly located in the upper
part of his diaphragm.

The stopping of the music came upon him like the waking to an alarm
clock; for instantly six or seven of the calculating persons about the
entry-ways bore down upon Miss Morgan to secure dances.  George had to
do with one already established as a belle, it seemed.

"Give me the next and the one after that," he said hurriedly,
recovering some presence of mind, just as the nearest applicant
reached them.  "And give me every third one the rest of the evening."

She laughed.  "Are you asking?"

"What do you mean, 'asking'?"

"It sounded as though you were just telling me to give you all those
dances."

"Well, I want 'em!"  George insisted.

"What about all the other girls it's your duty to dance with?"

"They'll have to go without," he said heartlessly; and then, with
surprising vehemence: "Here! I want to know: Are you going to give me
those--"

"Good gracious!" she laughed. "Yes!"

The applicants flocked round her, urging contracts for what remained,
but they did not dislodge George from her side, though he made it
evident that they succeeded in annoying him; and presently he
extricated her from an accumulating siege--she must have connived in
the extrication--and bore her off to sit beside him upon the stairway
that led to the musicians' gallery, where they were sufficiently
retired, yet had a view of the room.

"How'd all those ducks get to know you so quick?"  George inquired,
with little enthusiasm.

"Oh, I've been here a week."

"Looks as if you'd been pretty busy!" he said.  "Most of those ducks,
I don't know what my mother wanted to invite 'em here for."

"Oh, I used to see something of a few of 'em.  I was president of a
club we had here, and some of 'em belonged to it, but I don't care
much for that sort of thing any more.  I really don't see why my
mother invited 'em."

"Perhaps it was on account of their parents," Miss Morgan suggested
mildly.  "Maybe she didn't want to offend their fathers and mothers."

"Oh, hardly!  I don't think my mother need worry much about offending
anybody in this old town."

"It must be wonderful," said Miss Morgan.  "It must be wonderful, Mr.
Amberson--Mr. Minafer, I mean."

"What must be wonderful?"

"To be so important as that!"

"That isn't 'important," George assured her.  "Anybody that really is
anybody ought to be able to do about as they like in their own town, I
should think!"

She looked at him critically from under her shading lashes--but her
eyes grew gentler almost at once.  In truth, they became more
appreciative than critical.  George's imperious good looks were
altogether manly, yet approached actual beauty as closely as a boy's
good looks should dare; and dance-music and flowers have some effect
upon nineteen-year-old girls as well as upon eighteen-year-old boys.
Miss Morgan turned her eyes slowly from George, and pressed her face
among the lilies-of-the-valley and violets of the pretty bouquet she
carried, while, from the gallery above, the music of the next dance
carolled out merrily in a new two-step.  The musicians made the melody
gay for the Christmastime with chimes of sleighbells, and the entrance
to the shadowed stairway framed the passing flushed and lively
dancers, but neither George nor Miss Morgan suggested moving to join
the dance.

The stairway was draughty: the steps were narrow and uncomfortable; no
older person would have remained in such a place.  Moreover, these two
young people were strangers to each other; neither had said anything
in which the other had discovered the slightest intrinsic interest;
there had not arisen between them the beginnings of congeniality, or
even of friendliness--but stairways near ballrooms have more to answer
for than have moonlit lakes and mountain sunsets.  Some day the laws
of glamour must be discovered, because they are so important that the
world would be wiser now if Sir Isaac Newton had been hit on the head,
not by an apple, but by a young lady.

Age, confused by its own long accumulation of follies, is
everlastingly inquiring, "What does she see in him?" as if young love
came about through thinking--or through conduct.  Age wants to know:
"What on earth can they talk about?" as if talking had anything to do
with April rains!  At seventy, one gets up in the morning, finds the
air sweet under a bright sun, feels lively; thinks, "I am hearty,
today," and plans to go for a drive.  At eighteen, one goes to a
dance, sits with a stranger on a stairway, feels peculiar, thinks
nothing, and becomes incapable of any plan whatever.  Miss Morgan and
George stayed where they were.

They had agreed to this in silence and without knowing it; certainly
without exchanging glances of intelligence--they had exchanged no
glances at all.  Both sat staring vaguely out into the ballroom, and,
for a time, they did not speak.  Over their heads the music reached a
climax of vivacity: drums, cymbals, triangle, and sleighbells,
beating, clashing, tinkling.  Here and there were to be seen couples
so carried away that, ceasing to move at the decorous, even glide,
considered most knowing, they pranced and whirled through the throng,
from wall to wall, galloping bounteously in abandon.  George suffered
a shock of vague surprise when he perceived that his aunt, Fanny
Minafer, was the lady-half of one of these wild couples.

Fanny Minafer, who rouged a little, was like fruit which in some
climates dries with the bloom on.  Her features had remained prettily
childlike; so had her figure, and there were times when strangers,
seeing her across the street, took her to be about twenty; they were
other times when at the same distance they took her to be about sixty,
instead of forty, as she was.  She had old days and young days; old
hours and young hours; old minutes and young minutes; for the change
might be that quick.  An alteration in her expression, or a difference
in the attitude of her head, would cause astonishing indentations to
appear--and behold, Fanny was an old lady!  But she had been never
more childlike than she was tonight as she flew over the floor in the
capable arms of the queer-looking duck; for this person was her
partner.

The queer-looking duck had been a real dancer in his day, it appeared;
and evidently his day was not yet over.  In spite of the headlong, gay
rapidity with which he bore Miss Fanny about the big room, he danced
authoritatively, avoiding without effort the lightest collision with
other couples, maintaining sufficient grace throughout his wildest
moments, and all the while laughing and talking with his partner.
What was most remarkable to George, and a little irritating, this
stranger in the Amberson Mansion had no vestige of the air of
deference proper to a stranger in such a place: he seemed thoroughly
at home.  He seemed offensively so, indeed, when, passing the entrance
to the gallery stairway, he disengaged his hand from Miss Fanny's for
an instant, and not pausing in the dance, waved a laughing salutation
more than cordial, then capered lightly out of sight.

George gazed stonily at this manifestation, responding neither by word
nor sign.  "How's that for a bit of freshness?" he murmured.

"What was?"  Miss Morgan asked.

"That queer-looking duck waving his hand at me like that.  Except he's
the Sharon girls' uncle I don't know him from Adam."

"You don't need to," she said. "He wasn't waving his hand to you: he
meant me."

"Oh, he did?"  George was not mollified by the explanation.
"Everybody seems to mean you!  You certainly do seem to've been pretty
busy this week you've been here!"

She pressed her bouquet to her face again, and laughed into it, not
displeased.  She made no other comment, and for another period neither
spoke.  Meanwhile the music stopped; loud applause insisted upon its
renewal; an encore was danced; there was an interlude of voices; and
the changing of partners began.

"Well," said George finally, "I must say you don't seem to be much of
a prattler.  They say it's a great way to get a reputation for being
wise, never saying much.  Don't you ever talk any?"

"When people can understand," she answered.

He had been looking moodily out at the ballroom but he turned to her
quickly, at this, saw that her eyes were sunny and content, over the
top of her bouquet; and he consented to smile.

"Girls are usually pretty fresh!" he said.  "They ought to go to a
man's college about a year: they'd get taught a few things about
freshness!  What you got to do after two o'clock to-morrow afternoon?"

"A whole lot of things.  Every minute filled up."

"All right," said George.  "The snow's fine for sleighing: I'll come
for you in a cutter at ten minutes after two."

"I can't possibly go."

"If you don't," he said, "I'm going to sit in the cutter in front of
the gate, wherever you're visiting, all afternoon, and if you try to
go out with anybody else he's got to whip me before he gets you."  And
as she laughed--though she blushed a little, too--he continued,
seriously: "If you think I'm not in earnest you're at liberty to make
quite a big experiment!"

She laughed again. "I don't think I've often had so large a compliment
as that," she said, "especially on such short notice--and yet, I don't
think I'll go with you.

"You be ready at ten minutes after two."

"No, I won't."

"Yes, you will!"

"Yes," she said, "I will!"  And her partner for the next dance
arrived, breathless with searching.

"Don't forget I've got the third from now," George called after her.

"I won't."

"And every third one after that."

"I know!" she called, over her partner's shoulder, and her voice was
amused--but meek.

When "the third from now" came, George presented himself before her
without any greeting, like a brother, or a mannerless old friend.
Neither did she greet him, but moved away with him, concluding, as she
went, an exchange of badinage with the preceding partner: she had been
talkative enough with him, it appeared.  In fact, both George and Miss
Morgan talked much more to every one else that evening, than to each
other; and they said nothing at all at this time.  Both looked
preoccupied, as they began to dance, and preserved a gravity, of
expression to the end of the number.  And when "the third one after
that" came, they did not dance, but went back to the gallery stairway,
seeming to have reached an understanding without any verbal
consultation, that this suburb was again the place for them.

"Well," said George, coolly, when they were seated, "what did you say
your name was?"

"Morgan."

"Funny name!"

"Everybody else's name always is."

"I didn't mean it was really funny," George explained.  "That's just
one of my crowd's bits of horsing at college.  We always say 'funny
name' no matter what it is.  I guess we're pretty fresh sometimes; but
I knew your name was Morgan because my mother said so downstairs.  I
meant: what's the rest of it?"

"Lucy."

He was silent.

"Is 'Lucy' a funny name, too?" she inquired.

"No. Lucy's very much all right!" he said, and he went so far as to
smile.  Even his Aunt Fanny admitted that when George smiled "in a
certain way" he was charming.

"Thanks about letting my name be Lucy," she said.

"How old are you?" George asked.

"I don't really know, myself."

"What do you mean: you don't really know yourself?"

"I mean I only know what they tell me.  I believe them, of course, but
believing isn't really knowing.  You believe some certain day is your
birthday--at least, I suppose you do--but you don't really know it is
because you can't remember."

"Look here!" said George.  "Do you always talk like this?"

Miss Lucy Morgan laughed forgivingly, put her young head on one side,
like a bird, and responded cheerfully: "I'm willing to learn wisdom.
What are you studying in school?"

"College!"

"At the university!  Yes.  What are you studying there?"

George laughed.  "Lot o' useless guff!"

"Then why don't you study some useful guff?"

"What do you mean: 'useful'?"

"Something you'd use later, in your business or profession?"

George waved his hand impatiently.  "I don't expect to go into any
'business or profession."

"No?"

"Certainly not!"  George was emphatic, being sincerely annoyed by a
suggestion which showed how utterly she failed to comprehend the kind
of person he was.

"Why not?" she asked mildly.

"Just look at 'em!" he said, almost with bitterness, and he made a
gesture presumably intended to indicate the business and professional
men now dancing within range of vision.  "That's a fine career for a
man, isn't it!  Lawyers, bankers, politicians!  What do they get out
of life, I'd like to know!  What do they ever know about real things?
Where do they ever get?"

He was so earnest that she was surprised and impressed.  Evidently he
had deep-seated ambitions, for he seemed to speak with actual emotion
of these despised things which were so far beneath his planning for
the future.  She had a vague, momentary vision of Pitt, at twenty-one,
prime minister of England; and she spoke, involuntarily in a lowered
voice, with deference:

"What do you want to be?" she asked.

George answered promptly.

"A yachtsman," he said.




Chapter VI



Having thus, in a word, revealed his ambition for a career above
courts, marts, and polling booths, George breathed more deeply than
usual, and, turning his face from the lovely companion whom he had
just made his confidant, gazed out at the dancers with an expression
in which there was both sternness and a contempt for the squalid lives
of the unyachted Midlanders before him.  However, among them, he
marked his mother; and his sombre grandeur relaxed momentarily; a more
genial light came into his eyes.

Isabel was dancing with the queer-looking duck; and it was to be noted
that the lively gentleman's gait was more sedate than it had been with
Miss Fanny Minafer, but not less dexterous and authoritative.  He was
talking to Isabel as gaily as he had talked to Miss Fanny, though with
less laughter, and Isabel listened and answered eagerly: her colour
was high and her eyes had a look of delight.  She saw George and the
beautiful Lucy on the stairway, and nodded to them.  George waved his
hand vaguely: he had a momentary return of that inexplicable
uneasiness and resentment which had troubled him downstairs.

"How lovely your mother is!"  Lucy said

"I think she is," he agreed gently.

"She's the gracefulest woman in that ballroom.  She dances like a girl
of sixteen."

"Most girls of sixteen," said George, "are bum dancers.  Anyhow, I
wouldn't dance with one unless I had to."

"Well, you'd better dance with your mother!  I never saw anybody
lovelier.  How wonderfully they dance together!"

"Who?"

"Your mother and--and the queer-looking duck," said Lucy.  "I'm going
to dance with him pretty soon."

"I don't care--so long as you don't give him one of the numbers that
belong to me."

"I'll try to remember," she said, and thoughtfully lifted to her face
the bouquet of violets and lilies, a gesture which George noted
without approval.

"Look here!  Who sent you those flowers you keep makin' such a fuss
over?"

"He did."

"Who's 'he'?"

"The queer-looking duck."

George feared no such rival; he laughed loudly.  "I s'pose he's some
old widower!" he said, the object thus described seeming ignominious
enough to a person of eighteen, without additional characterization.
"Some old widower!"

Lucy became serious at once.  "Yes, he is a widower," she said.  "I
ought to have told you before; he's my father."

George stopped laughing abruptly.  "Well, that's a horse on me.  If
I'd known he was your father, of course I wouldn't have made fun of
him.  I'm sorry."

"Nobody could make fun of him," she said quietly.

"Why couldn't they?"

"It wouldn't make him funny: it would only make themselves silly."

Upon this, George had a gleam of intelligence.  "Well, I'm not going
to make myself silly any more, then; I don't want to take chances like
that with you.  But I thought he was the Sharon girls' uncle.  He came
with them--"

"Yes," she said, "I'm always late to everything: I wouldn't let them
wait for me.  We're visiting the Sharons."

"About time I knew that!  You forget my being so fresh about your
father, will you?  Of course he's a distinguished looking man, in a
way."

Lucy was still serious.  "In a way?'" she repeated.  "You mean, not in
your way, don't you?"

George was perplexed.  "How do you mean: not in my way?"

"People pretty often say 'in a way' and 'rather distinguished
looking,' or 'rather' so-and-so, or 'rather' anything, to show that
they're superior don't they?  In New York last month I overheard a
climber sort of woman speaking of me as 'little Miss Morgan,' but she
didn't mean my height; she meant that she was important.  Her husband
spoke of a friend of mine as 'little Mr. Pembroke' and 'little Mr.
Pembroke' is six-feet-three.  This husband and wife were really so
terribly unimportant that the only way they knew to pretend to be
important was calling people 'little' Miss or Mister so-and-so.  It's
a kind of snob slang, I think.  Of course people don't always say
'rather' or 'in a way' to be superior."

"I should say not!  I use both of 'em a great deal myself," said
George.  "One thing I don't see though: What's the use of a man being
six-feet-three? Men that size can't handle themselves as well as a man
about five-feet-eleven and a half can.  Those long, gangling men,
they're nearly always too kind of wormy to be any good in athletics,
and they're so awkward they keep falling over chairs or--"

"Mr. Pembroke is in the army," said Lucy primly.  "He's
extraordinarily graceful."

"In the army?  Oh, I suppose he's some old friend of your father's."

"They got on very well," she said, "after I introduced them."

George was a straightforward soul, at least.  "See here!" he said.
"Are you engaged to anybody?"

"No."

Not wholly mollified, he shrugged his shoulders.  "You seem to know a
good many people!  Do you live in New York?"

"No.  We don't live anywhere."

"What you mean: you don't live anywhere?"

"We've lived all over," she answered.  "Papa used to live here in this
town, but that was before I was born."

"What do you keep moving around so for?  Is he a promoter?"

"No.  He's an inventor."

"What's he invented?"

"Just lately," said Lucy, "he's been working on a new kind of
horseless carriage."

"Well, I'm sorry for him," George said, in no unkindly spirit.  "Those
things are never going to amount to anything.  People aren't going to
spend their lives lying on their backs in the road and letting grease
drip in their faces.  Horseless carriages are pretty much a failure,
and your father better not waste his time on 'em."

"Papa'd be so grateful," she returned, "if he could have your advice."

Instantly George's face became flushed.  "I don't know that I've done
anything to be insulted for!" he said.  "I don't see that what I said
was particularly fresh."

"No, indeed!"

"Then what do you--"

She laughed gaily.  "I don't!  And I don't mind your being such a
lofty person at all.  I think it's ever so interesting--but papa's a
great man!"

"Is he?"  George decided to be good-natured "Well, let us hope so. I
hope so, I'm sure."

Looking at him keenly, she saw that the magnificent youth was
incredibly sincere in this bit of graciousness.  He spoke as a
tolerant, elderly statesman might speak of a promising young
politician; and with her eyes still upon him, Lucy shook her head in
gentle wonder.  "I'm just beginning to understand," she said.

"Understand what?"

"What it means to be a real Amberson in this town.  Papa told me
something about it before we came, but I see he didn't say half
enough!"

George superbly took this all for tribute.  "Did your father say he
knew the family before he left here?"

"Yes. I believe he was particularly a friend of your Uncle George; and
he didn't say so, but I imagine he must have known your mother very
well, too.  He wasn't an inventor then; he was a young lawyer.  The
town was smaller in those days, and I believe he was quite well
known."

"I dare say.  I've no doubt the family are all very glad to see him
back, especially if they used to have him at the house a good deal, as
he told you."

"I don't think he meant to boast of it," she said: "He spoke of it
quite calmly."

George stared at her for a moment in perplexity, then perceiving that
her intention was satirical, "Girls really ought to go to a man's
college," he said--"just a month or two, anyhow; It'd take some of the
freshness out of 'em!"

"I can't believe it," she retorted, as her partner for the next dance
arrived.  "It would only make them a little politer on the surface--
they'd be really just as awful as ever, after you got to know them a
few minutes."

"What do you mean: 'after you got to know them a--'"

She was departing to the dance.  "Janie and Mary Sharon told me all
about what sort of a little boy you were," she said, over her
shoulder.  "You must think it out!"  She took wing away on the breeze
of the waltz, and George, having stared gloomily after her for a few
moments, postponed filling an engagement, and strolled round the
fluctuating outskirts of the dance to where his uncle, George
Amberson, stood smilingly watching, under one of the rose-vine arches
at the entrance to the room.

"Hello, young namesake," said the uncle.  "Why lingers the laggard
heel of the dancer?  Haven't you got a partner?"

"She's sitting around waiting for me somewhere," said George.  "See
here: Who is this fellow Morgan that Aunt Fanny Minafer was dancing
with a while?"

Amberson laughed.  "He's a man with a pretty daughter, Georgie.
Meseemed you've been spending the evening noticing something of that
sort--or do I err?"

"Never mind!  What sort is he?"

"I think we'll have to give him a character, Georgie.  He's an old
friend; used to practice law here--perhaps be had more debts than
cases, but he paid 'em all up before he left town.  Your question is
purely mercenary, I take it:  you want to know his true worth before
proceeding further with the daughter.  I cannot inform you, though I
notice signs of considerable prosperity in that becoming dress of
hers.  However, you never can tell, it is an age when every sacrifice
is made for the young, and how your own poor mother managed to provide
those genuine pearl studs for you out of her allowance from father, I
can't--"

"Oh, dry up!" said the nephew. "I understand this Morgan--"

"Mr. Eugene Morgan," his uncle suggested.  "Politeness requires that
the young should--"

"I guess the 'young' didn't know much about politeness in your day,"
George interrupted.  "I understand that Mr. Eugene Morgan used to be a
great friend of the family."

"Oh, the Minafers?" the uncle inquired, with apparent innocence.  "No,
I seem to recall that he and your father were not--"

"I mean the Ambersons," George said impatiently.  "I understand he was
a good deal around the house here."

"What is your objection to that, George?"

"What do you mean: my objection?"

"You seemed to speak with a certain crossness."

"Well," said George, "I meant he seems to feel awfully at home here.
The way he was dancing with Aunt Fanny--"

Amberson laughed.  "I'm afraid your Aunt Fanny's heart was stirred by
ancient recollections, Georgie."

"You mean she used to be silly about him?"

"She wasn't considered singular," said the uncle "He was--he was
popular.  Could you bear a question?"

"What do you mean: could I bear--"

"I only wanted to ask: Do you take this same passionate interest in
the parents of every girl you dance with?  Perhaps it's a new fashion
we old bachelors ought to take up.  Is it the thing this year to--"

"Oh, go on!" said George, moving away. "I only wanted to know--" He
left the sentence unfinished, and crossed the room to where a girl sat
waiting for his nobility to find time to fulfil his contract with her
for this dance.

"Pardon f' keep' wait," he muttered, as she rose brightly to meet him;
and she seemed pleased that he came at all--but George was used to
girls' looking radiant when he danced with them, and she had little
effect upon him.  He danced with her perfunctorily, thinking the while
of Mr. Eugene Morgan and his daughter.  Strangely enough, his thoughts
dwelt more upon the father than the daughter, though George could not
possibly have given a reason--even to himself--for this disturbing
preponderance.

By a coincidence, though not an odd one, the thoughts and conversation
of Mr. Eugene Morgan at this very time were concerned with George
Amberson Minafer, rather casually, it is true.  Mr. Morgan had retired
to a room set apart for smoking, on the second floor, and had found a
grizzled gentleman lounging in solitary possession.

"'Gene Morgan!" this person exclaimed, rising with great heartiness.
"I'd heard you were in town--I don't believe you know me!"

"Yes, I do, Fred Kinney!"  Mr. Morgan returned with equal
friendliness.  "Your real face-the one I used to know--it's just
underneath the one you're masquerading in to-night.  You ought to have
changed it more if you wanted a disguise."

"Twenty years!" said Mr. Kinney.  "It makes some difference in faces,
but more in behaviour!"

"It does sot" his friend agreed with explosive emphasis.  "My own
behaviour began to be different about that long ago--quite suddenly."

"I remember," said Mr. Kinney sympathetically, Well, life's odd enough
as we look back."

"Probably it's going to be odder still--if we could look forward."

"Probably."

They sat and smoked.

"However," Mr. Morgan remarked presently, "I still dance like an
Indian.  Don't you?"

"No.  I leave that to my boy Fred.  He does the dancing for the
family."

"I suppose he's upstairs hard at it?"

"No, he's not here."  Mr. Kinney glanced toward the open door and
lowered his voice. "He wouldn't come.  It seems that a couple of years
or so ago he had a row with young Georgie Minafer.  Fred was president
of a literary club they had, and he said this young Georgie got
himself elected instead, in an overbearing sort of way.  Fred's red-
headed, you know--I suppose you remember his mother?  You were at the
wedding--"

"I remember the wedding," said Mr. Morgan. 'And I remember your
bachelor dinner--most of it, that is."

"Well, my boy Fred's as red-headed now," Mr. Kinney went on, "as his
mother was then, and he's very bitter about his row with Georgie
Minafer.  He says he'd rather burn his foot off than set it inside any
Amberson house or any place else where young Georgie is.  Fact is, the
boy seemed to have so much feeling over it I had my doubts about
coming myself, but my wife said it was all nonsense; we mustn't
humour Fred in a grudge over such a little thing, and while she
despised that Georgie Minafer, herself, as much as any one else did,
she wasn't going to miss a big Amberson show just on account of a
boys' rumpus, and so on and so on; and so we came."

"Do people dislike young Minafer generally?"

"I don't know about 'generally.' I guess he gets plenty of toadying;
but there's certainly a lot of people that are glad to express their
opinions about him."

"What's the matter with him?"

"Too much Amberson, I suppose, for one thing.  And for another, his
mother just fell down and worshipped him from the day he was born
That's what beats me!  I don't have to tell you what Isabel Amberson
is, Eugene Morgan.  She's got a touch of the Amberson high stuff about
her, but you can't get anybody that ever knew her to deny that she's
just about the finest woman in the world."

"No," said Eugene Morgan.  "You can't get anybody to deny that."

"Then I can't see how she doesn't see the truth about that boy.  He
thinks he's a little tin god on wheels--and honestly, it makes some
people weak and sick just to think about him!  Yet that high-spirited,
intelligent woman, Isabel Amberson, actually sits and worships him!
You can hear it in her voice when she speaks to him or speaks of him.
You can see it in her eyes when she looks at him.  My Lord!  What does
she see when she looks at him?"

Morgan's odd expression of genial apprehension deepened whimsically,
though it denoted no actual apprehension whatever, and cleared away
from his face altogether when he smiled; he became surprisingly
winning and persuasive when he smiled.  He smiled now, after a moment,
at this question of his old friend.  "She sees something that we don't
see," he said.

"What does she see?"

"An angel."

Kinney laughed aloud.  "Well, if she sees an angel when she looks at
Georgie Minafer, she's a funnier woman than I thought she was!"

"Perhaps she is," said Morgan.  "But that's what she sees."

"My Lord!  It's easy to see you've only known him an hour or so.  In
that time have you looked at Georgie and seen an angel?"

"No.  All I saw was a remarkably good-looking fool-boy with the pride
of Satan and a set of nice new drawing-room manners that he probably
couldn't use more than half an hour at a time without busting."

"Then what--"

"Mothers are right," said Morgan.  "Do you think this young George is
the same sort of creature when he's with his mother that he is when
he's bulldozing your boy Fred?  Mothers see the angel in us because
the angel is there.  If it's shown to the mother, the son has got an
angel to show, hasn't he?  When a son cuts somebody's throat the
mother only sees it's possible for a misguided angel to act like a
devil--and she's entirely right about that!"

Kinney laughed, and put his hand on his friend's shoulder.  "I
remember what a fellow you always were to argue," he said.  "You mean
Georgie Minafer is as much of an angel as any murderer is, and that
Georgie's mother is always right."

"I'm afraid she always has been," Morgan said lightly.

The friendly hand remained upon his shoulder.  "She was wrong once,
old fellow.  At least, so it seemed to me."

"No," said Morgan, a little awkwardly.  "No--"

Kinney relieved the slight embarrassment that had come upon both of
them: he laughed again.  "Wait till you know young Georgie a little
better," he said.  "Something tells me you're going to change your
mind about his having an angel to show, if you see anything of him!"

"You mean beauty's in the eye of the beholder, and the angel is all in
the eye of the mother.  If you were a painter, Fred, you'd paint
mothers with angels' eyes holding imps in their laps.  Me.  I'll stick
to the Old Masters and the cherubs."

Mr. Kinney looked at him musingly.  "Somebody's eyes must have been
pretty angelic," he said, "if they've been persuading you that Georgie
Minnafer is a cherub!"

"They are," said Morgan heartily.  "They're more angelic than ever."
And as a new flourish of music sounded overhead he threw away his
cigarette, and jumped up briskly.  "Good-bye, I've got this dance with
her."

"With whom?"

"With Isabel!"

The grizzled Mr. Kinney affected to rub his eyes.  "It startles me,
your jumping up like that to go and dance with Isabel Amberson!
Twenty years seem to have passed--but have they?  Tell me, have you
danced with poor old Fanny, too, this evening?"

"Twice!"

"My Lord!" Kinney groaned, half in earnest.  "Old times starting all
over again!  My Lord!"

"Old times?"  Morgan laughed gaily from the doorway.  "Not a bit!
There aren't any old times.  When times are gone they're not old,
they're dead!  There aren't any times but new times!"

And he vanished in such a manner that he seemed already to have begun
dancing.




Chapter VII



The appearance of Miss Lucy Morgan the next day, as she sat in
George's fast cutter, proved so charming that her escort was stricken
to soft words instantly, and failed to control a poetic impulse.  Her
rich little hat was trimmed with black fur; her hair was almost as
dark as the fur; a great boa of black fur was about her shoulders; her
hands were vanished into a black muff; and George's laprobe was black.
"You look like--" he said.  "Your face looks like--it looks like a
snowflake on a lump of coal. I mean a--a snowflake that would be a
rose-leaf, too!"

"Perhaps you'd better look at the reins," she returned.  "We almost
upset just then."

George declined to heed this advice.  "Because there's too much pink
in your cheeks for a snowflake," he continued.  "What's that fairy
story about snow-white and rose-red--"

"We're going pretty fast, Mr. Minafer!"

"Well, you see, I'm only here for two weeks."

"I mean the sleigh!" she explained.  "We're not the only people on the
street, you know."

"Oh, they'll keep out of the way."

"That's very patrician charioteering, but it seems to me a horse like
this needs guidance.  I'm sure he's going almost twenty miles an
hour."

"That's nothing," said George; but he consented to look forward again.
"He can trot under three minutes, all right."  He laughed.  "I suppose
your father thinks he can build a horseless carriage to go that fast!"

"They go that fast already, sometimes."

"Yes," said George; "they do--for about a hundred feet!  Then they
give a yell and burn up."

Evidently she decided not to defend her father's faith in horseless
carriages, for she laughed, and said nothing.  The cold air was polka-
dotted with snowflakes, and trembled to the loud, continuous jingling
of sleighbells.  Boys and girls, all aglow and panting jets of vapour,
darted at the passing sleighs to ride on the runners, or sought to
rope their sleds to any vehicle whatever, but the fleetest no more
than just touched the flying cutter, though a hundred soggy mittens
grasped for it, then reeled and whirled till sometimes the wearers of
those daring mittens plunged flat in the snow and lay a-sprawl,
reflecting.  For this was the holiday time, and all the boys and girls
in town were out, most of them on National Avenue.

But there came panting and chugging up that flat thoroughfare a thing
which some day was to spoil all their sleigh-time merriment--save for
the rashest and most disobedient.  It was vaguely like a topless
surry, but cumbrous with unwholesome excrescences fore and aft, while
underneath were spinning leather belts and something that whirred and
howled and seemed to stagger.  The ride-stealers made no attempt to
fasten their sleds to a contrivance so nonsensical and yet so
fearsome.  Instead, they gave over their sport and concentrated all
their energies in their lungs, so that up and down the street the one
cry shrilled increasingly: "Git a hoss!  Git a hoss!  Git a hoss!
Mister, why don't you git a hoss?"  But the mahout in charge, sitting
solitary on the front seat, was unconcerned--he laughed, and now and
then ducked a snowball without losing any of his good-nature.  It was
Mr. Eugene Morgan who exhibited so cheerful a countenance between the
forward visor of a deer-stalker cap and the collar of a fuzzy gray
ulster.  "Git a hoss!" the children shrieked, and gruffer voices
joined them.  "Git a hoss!  Git a hoss!  Git a hoss!"

George Minafer was correct thus far: the twelve miles an hour of such
a machine would never over-take George's trotter.  The cutter was
already scurrying between the stone pillars at the entrance to
Amberson Addition.

"That's my grandfather's," said George, nodding toward the Amberson
Mansion.

"I ought to know that!"  Lucy exclaimed.  "We stayed there late enough
last night: papa and I were almost the last to go.  He and your mother
and Miss Fanny Minafer got the musicians to play another waltz when
everybody else had gone downstairs and the fiddles were being put away
in their cases.  Papa danced part of it with Miss Minafer and the rest
with your mother.  Miss Minafer's your aunt, isn't she?"

"Yes; she lives with us.  I tease her a good deal."

"What about?"

"Oh, anything handy--whatever's easy to tease an old maid about."

"Doesn't she mind?"

"She usually has sort of a grouch on me," laughed George.  "Nothing
much.  That's our house just beyond grandfather's."  He waved a
sealskin gaunt let to indicate the house Major Amberson had built for
Isabel as a wedding gift.  "It's almost the same as grandfather's,
only not as large and hasn't got a regular ballroom.  We gave the
dance, last night, at grandfather's on account of the ballroom, and
because I'm the only grandchild, you know.  Of course, some day
that'll be my house, though I expect my mother will most likely go on
living where she does now, with father and Aunt Fanny.  I suppose I'll
probably build a country house, too--somewhere East, I guess."  He
stopped speaking, and frowned as they passed a closed carriage and
pair.  The body of this comfortable vehicle sagged slightly to one
side; the paint was old and seamed with hundreds of minute cracks like
little rivers on a black map; the coachman, a fat and elderly darky,
seemed to drowse upon the box; but the open window afforded the
occupants of the cutter a glimpse of a tired, fine old face, a silk
hat, a pearl tie, and an astrachan collar, evidently out to take the
air.

"There's your grandfather now," said Lucy.  "Isn't it?"

George's frown was not relaxed.  "Yes, it is; and he ought to give
that rat-trap away and sell those old horses.  They're a disgrace, all
shaggy--not even clipped.  I suppose he doesn't notice it--people get
awful funny when they get old; they seem to lose their self-respect,
sort of."

"He seemed a real Brummell to me," she said.

"Oh, he keeps up about what he wears, well enough, but--well, look at
that!"  He pointed to a statue of Minerva, one of the cast-iron
sculptures Major Amberson had set up in opening the Addition years
before.  Minerva was intact, but a blackish streak descended
unpleasantly from her forehead to the point of her straight nose, and
a few other streaks were sketched in a repellent dinge upon the folds
of her drapery.

"That must be from soot," said Lucy.  "There are so many houses around
here."

"Anyhow, somebody ought to see that these statues are kept clean.  My
grandfather owns a good many of these houses, I guess, for renting.
Of course, he sold most of the lots--there aren't any vacant ones, and
there used to be heaps of 'em when I was a boy.  Another thing I don't
think he ought to allow a good many of these people bought big lots
and they built houses on 'em; then the price of the land kept getting
higher, and they'd sell part of their yards and let the people that
bought it build houses on it to live in, till they haven't hardly any
of 'em got big, open yards any more, and it's getting all too much
built up.  The way it used to be, it was like a gentleman's country
estate, and that's the way my grandfather ought to keep it.  He lets
these people take too many liberties: they do anything they want to."

"But how could he stop them?" Lucy asked, surely with reason.  "If he
sold them the land, it's theirs, isn't it?"

George remained serene in the face of this apparently difficult
question.  "He ought to have all the trades-people boycott the
families that sell part of their yards that way.  All he'd have to do
would be to tell the trades-people they wouldn't get any more orders
from the family if they didn't do it."

"From 'the family'?  What family?"

"Our family," said George, unperturbed.  "The Ambersons."

"I see!" she murmured, and evidently she did see something that he did
not, for, as she lifted her muff to her face, he asked:

"What are you laughing at now?"

"Why?"

"You always seem to have some little secret of your own to get happy
over!"

"Always!" she exclaimed.  "What a big word when we only met last
night!"

"That's another case of it," he said, with obvious sincerity.  "One of
the reasons I don't like you--much!--is you've got that way of seeming
quietly superior to everybody else."

"I!" she cried.  "I have?"

"Oh, you think you keep it sort of confidential to yourself, but it's
plain enough!  I don't believe in that kind of thing."

"You don't?"

"No," said George emphatically . "Not with me!  I think the world's
like this: there's a few people that their birth and position, and so
on, puts them at the top, and they ought to treat each other entirely
as equals."  His voice betrayed a little emotion as he added, "I
wouldn't speak like this to everybody."

"You mean you're confiding your deepest creed--or code, whatever it
is--to me?"

"Go on, make fun of it, then!"  George said bitterly.  "You do think
you're terribly clever!  It makes me tired!"

"Well, as you don't like my seeming 'quietly superior,' after this
I'll be noisily superior," she returned cheerfully.  "We aim to
please!"

"I had a notion before I came for you today that we were going to
quarrel," he said.

"No, we won't; it takes two!"  She laughed and waved her muff toward a
new house, not quite completed, standing in a field upon their right.
They had passed beyond Amberson Addition, and were leaving the
northern fringes of the town for the open country.  "Isn't that a
beautiful house!" she exclaimed.  "Papa and I call it our Beautiful
House."

George was not pleased.  "Does it belong to you?"

"Of course not!  Papa brought me out here the other day, driving in
his machine, and we both loved it.  It's so spacious and dignified and
plain."

"Yes, it's plain enough!"  George grunted.

"Yet it's lovely; the gray-green roof and shutters give just enough
colour, with the trees, for the long white walls.  It seems to me the
finest house I've seen in this part of the country."

George was outraged by an enthusiasm so ignorant--not ten minutes ago
they had passed the Amberson Mansion.  "Is that a sample of your taste
in architecture?" he asked.

"Yes.  Why?"

"Because it strikes me you better go somewhere and study the subject a
little!"

Lucy looked puzzled.  "What makes you have so much feeling about it?
Have I offended you?"

"Offended' nothing!"  George returned brusquely.  "Girls usually think
they know it all as soon as they've learned to dance and dress and
flirt a little.  They never know anything about things like
architecture, for instance.  That house is about as bum a house as any
house I ever saw!"

"Why?"

"Why?"  George repeated. "Did you ask me why?"

"Yes."

"Well, for one thing--" he paused--"for one thing--well, just look at
it!  I shouldn't think you'd have to do any more than look at it if
you'd ever given any attention to architecture."

"What is the matter with its architecture, Mr. Minafer?"

"Well, it's this way," said George.  "It's like this.  Well, for
instance, that house--well, it was built like a town house."  He spoke
of it in the past tense, because they had now left it far behind them
--a human habit of curious significance.  "It was like a house meant
for a street in the city.  What kind of a house was that for people of
any taste to build out here in the country?"

"But papa says it's built that way on purpose.  There are a lot of
other houses being built in this direction, and papa says the city's
coming out this way; and in a year or two that house will be right in
town."

"It was a bum house, anyhow," said George crossly.  "I don't even know
the people that are building it.  They say a lot of riffraff come to
town every year nowadays and there's other riffraff that have always
lived here, and have made a little money, and act as if they owned the
place.  Uncle Sydney was talking about it yesterday: he says he and
some of his friends are organizing a country club, and already some of
these riffraff are worming into it--people he never heard of at all!
Anyhow, I guess it's pretty clear you don't know a great deal about
architecture."

She demonstrated the completeness of her amiability by laughing.
"I'll know something about the North Pole before long," she said, "if
we keep going much farther in this direction!"

At this he was remorseful.  "All right, we'll turn, and drive south
awhile till you get warmed up again.  I expect we have been going
against the wind about long enough.  Indeed, I'm sorry!"

He said, "Indeed, I'm sorry," in a nice way, and looked very
strikingly handsome when he said it, she thought.  No doubt it is true
that there is more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner repented than
over all the saints who consistently remain holy, and the rare, sudden
gentlenesses of arrogant people have infinitely more effect than the
continual gentleness of gentle people.  Arrogance turned gentle melts
the heart; and Lucy gave her companion a little sidelong, sunny nod of
acknowledgment.  George was dazzled by the quick glow of her eyes, and
found himself at a loss for something to say.

Having turned about, he kept his horse to a walk, and at this gait the
sleighbells tinkled but intermittently.  Gleaming wanly through the
whitish vapour that kept rising from the trotter's body and flanks,
they were like tiny fog-bells, and made the only sounds in a great
winter silence.  The white road ran between lonesome rail fences; and
frozen barnyards beyond the fences showed sometimes a harrow left to
rust, with its iron seat half filled with stiffened snow, and
sometimes an old dead buggy, it's  wheels forever set, it seemed, in
the solid ice of deep ruts.  Chickens scratched the metallic earth
with an air of protest, and a masterless ragged colt looked up in
sudden horror at the mild tinkle of the passing bells, then blew
fierce clouds of steam at the sleigh.  The snow no longer fell, and
far ahead, in a grayish cloud that lay upon the land, was the town.

Lucy looked at this distant thickening reflection.  "When we get this
far out we can see there must be quite a little smoke hanging over the
town," she said.  "I suppose that's because it's growing.  As it grows
bigger it seems to get ashamed of itself, so it makes this cloud and
hides in it.  Papa says it used to be a bit nicer when he lived here:
he always speaks of it differently--he always has a gentle look, a
particular tone of voice, I've noticed.  He must have been very fond
of it.  It must have been a lovely place: everybody must have been so
jolly.  From the way he talks, you'd think life here then was just one
long midsummer serenade.  He declares it was always sunshine, that the
air wasn't like the air anywhere else--that, as he remembers it, there
always seemed to be gold-dust in the air.  I doubt it!  I think it
doesn't seem to be duller air to him now just on account of having a
little soot in it sometimes, but probably because he was twenty years
younger then.  It seems to me the gold-dust he thinks was here is just
his being young that he remembers.  I think it was just youth.  It is
pretty pleasant to be young, isn't it?"  She laughed absently, then
appeared to become wistful.  "I wonder if we really do enjoy it as
much as we'll look back and think we did!  I don't suppose so.
Anyhow, for my part I feel as if I must be missing something about it,
somehow, because I don't ever seem to be thinking about what's
happening at the present moment; I'm always looking forward to
something--thinking about things that will happen when I'm older."

"You're a funny girl," George said gently.  "But your voice sounds
pretty nice when you think and talk along together like that!"

The horse shook himself all over, and the impatient sleighbells made
his wish audible.  Accordingly, George tightened the reins, and the
cutter was off again at a three-minute trot, no despicable rate of
speed.  It was not long before they were again passing Lucy's
Beautiful House, and here George thought fit to put an appendix to his
remark.  "You're a funny girl, and you know a lot--but I don't believe
you know much about architecture!"

Coming toward them, black against the snowy road, was a strange
silhouette.  It approached moderately and without visible means of
progression, so the matter seemed from a distance; but as the cutter
shortened the distance, the silhouette was revealed to be Mr. Morgan's
horseless carriage, conveying four people atop: Mr. Morgan with
George's mother beside him, and, in the rear seat, Miss Fanny Minafer
and the Honorable George Amberson.  All four seemed to be in the
liveliest humour, like high-spirited people upon a new adventure; and
Isabel waved her handkerchief dashingly as the cutter flashed by them.

"For the Lord's sake!"  George gasped.

"Your mother's a dear," said Lucy.  "And she does wear the most
bewitching things!  She looked like a Russian princess, though I doubt
if they're that handsome."

George said nothing; he drove on till they had crossed Amberson
Addition and reached the stone pillars at the head of National Avenue.
There he turned.

"Let's go back and take another look at that old sewing-machine," he
said.  "It certainly is the weirdest, craziest--"

He left the sentence unfinished, and presently they were again in
sight of the old sewing-machine.  George shouted mockingly.

Alas! three figures stood in the road, and a pair of legs, with the
toes turned up, indicated that a fourth figure lay upon its back in
the snow, beneath a horseless carriage that had decided to need a
horse.

George became vociferous with laughter, and coming up at his trotter's
best gait, snow spraying from runners and every hoof, swerved to the
side of the road and shot by, shouting, "Git a hoss! Git a hoss! Git a
hoss!"

Three hundred yards away he turned and came back, racing; leaning out
as he passed, to wave jeeringly at the group about the disabled
machine: "Git a hoss! Git a hoss! Git a--"

The trotter had broken into a gallop, and Lucy cried a warning: "Be
careful!" she said.  "Look where you're driving!  There's a ditch on
that side.  Look--"

George turned too late; the cutter's right runner went into the ditch
and snapped off; the little sleigh upset, and, after dragging its
occupants some fifteen yards, left them lying together in a bank of
snow.  Then the vigorous young horse kicked himself free of all
annoyances, and disappeared down the road, galloping cheerfully.




Chapter VIII



When George regained some measure of his presence of mind, Miss Lucy
Morgan's cheek, snowy and cold, was pressing his nose slightly to one
side; his right arm was firmly about her neck; and a monstrous amount
of her fur boa seemed to mingle with an equally unplausible quantity
of snow in his mouth.  He was confused, but conscious of no objection
to any of these juxtapositions.  She was apparently uninjured, for she
sat up, hatless, her hair down, and said mildly:

"Good heavens!"

Though her father had been under his machine when they passed, he was
the first to reach them.  He threw himself on his knees beside his
daughter, but found her already laughing, and was reassured.  "They're
all right," he called to Isabel, who was running toward them, ahead of
her brother and Fanny Minafer.  "This snowbank's a feather bed--
nothing the matter with them at all.  Don't look so pale!"

"Georgie!" she gasped.  "Georgie!"

Georgie was on his feet, snow all over him.

"Don't make a fuss, mother!  Nothing's the matter.  That darned silly
horse--"

Sudden tears stood in Isabel's eyes.  "To see you down underneath--
dragging--oh--"  Then with shaking hands she began to brush the snow
from him.

"Let me alone," he protested.  "You'll ruin your gloves.  You're
getting snow all over you, and--"

"No, no!" she cried.  "You'll catch cold; you mustn't catch cold!"
And she continued to brush him.

Amberson had brought Lucy's hat; Miss Fanny acted as lady's-maid; and
both victims of the accident were presently restored to about their
usual appearance and condition of apparel.  In fact, encouraged by the
two older gentlemen, the entire party, with one exception, decided
that the episode was after all a merry one, and began to laugh about
it.  But George was glummer than the December twilight now swiftly
closing in.

"That darned horse!" he said.

"I wouldn't bother about Pendennis, Georgie," said his uncle.  "You
can send a man out for what's left of the cutter tomorrow, and
Pendennis will gallop straight home to his stable: he'll be there a
long while before we will, because all we've got to depend on to get
us home is Gene Morgan's broken-down chafing-dish yonder."

They were approaching the machine as he spoke, and his friend, again
underneath it, heard him.  He emerged, smiling.  "She'll go," he said.

"What!"

"All aboard!"

He offered his hand to Isabel.  She was smiling but still pale, and
her eyes, in spite of the smile, kept upon George in a shocked
anxiety.  Miss Fanny had already mounted to the rear seat, and George,
after helping Lucy Morgan to climb up beside his aunt, was following.
Isabel saw that his shoes were light things of patent leather, and
that snow was clinging to them.  She made a little rush toward him,
and, as one of his feet rested on the iron step of the machine, in
mounting, she began to clean the snow from his shoe with her almost
aerial lace handkerchief.  "You mustn't catch cold!" she cried.

"Stop that!"  George shouted, and furiously withdrew his foot.

"Then stamp the snow off," she begged.  "You mustn't ride with wet
feet."

"They're not!" George roared, thoroughly outraged.  "For heaven's
sake get in!  You're standing in the snow yourself.  Get in!"

Isabel consented, turning to Morgan, whose habitual expression of
apprehensiveness was somewhat accentuated.  He climbed up after her,
George Amberson having gone to the other side.  "You're the same
Isabel I used to know!" he said in a low voice.  "You're a divinely
ridiculous woman."

"Am I, Eugene?" she said, not displeased.  "'Divinely' and 'ridiculous'
just counterbalance each other, don't they?  Plus one and minus one
equal nothing; so you mean I'm nothing in particular?"

"No," he answered, tugging at a lever.  "That doesn't seem to be
precisely what I meant.  There!"  This exclamation referred to the
subterranean machinery, for dismaying sounds came from beneath the
floor, and the vehicle plunged, then rolled noisily forward.

"Behold!"  George Amberson exclaimed.  "She does move!  It must be
another accident."

"Accident?" Morgan shouted over the din.  "No!  She breathes, she
stirs; she seems to feel a thrill of life along her keel!"  And he
began to sing "The Star Spangled Banner."

Amberson joined him lustily, and sang on when Morgan stopped.  The
twilight sky cleared, discovering a round moon already risen; and the
musical congressman hailed this bright presence with the complete text
and melody of "The Danube River."

His nephew, behind, was gloomy.  He had overheard his mother's
conversation with the inventor: it seemed curious to him that this
Morgan, of whom be had never heard until last night, should be using
the name "Isabel" so easily; and George felt that it was not just the
thing for his mother to call Morgan "Eugene;" the resentment of the
previous night came upon George again.  Meanwhile, his mother and
Morgan continued their talk; but he could no longer hear what they
said; the noise of the car and his uncle's songful mood prevented.  He
marked how animated Isabel seemed; it was not strange to see his
mother so gay, but it was strange that a man not of the family should
be the cause of her gaiety.  And George sat frowning.

Fanny Minafer had begun to talk to Lucy.  "Your father wanted to prove
that his horseless carriage would run, even in the snow," she said.
"It really does, too."

"Of course!"

"It's so interesting!  He's been telling us how he's going to change
it.  He says he's going to have wheels all made of rubber and blown up
with air.  I don't understand what he means at all; I should think
they'd explode--but Eugene seems to be very confident.  He always was
confident, though.  It seems so like old times to hear him talk!"

She became thoughtful, and Lucy turned to George.  "You tried to swing
underneath me and break the fall for me when we went over," she said.
"I knew you were doing that, and--it was nice of you."

"Wasn't any fall to speak of," he returned brusquely.  "Couldn't have
hurt either of us."

"Still it was friendly of you--and awfully quick, too.  I'll not--I'll
not forget it!"

Her voice had a sound of genuineness, very pleasant; and George began
to forget his annoyance with her father.  This annoyance of his had
not been alleviated by the circumstance that neither of the seats of
the old sewing-machine was designed for three people, but when his
neighbour spoke thus gratefully, he no longer minded the crowding--in
fact, it pleased him so much that he began to wish the old sewing-
machine would go even slower.  And she had spoken no word of blame for
his letting that darned horse get the cutter into the ditch.  George
presently addressed her hurriedly, almost tremulously, speaking close
to her ear:

"I forgot to tell you something: you're pretty nice!  I thought so the
first second I saw you last night.  I'll come for you tonight and take
you to the Assembly at the Amberson Hotel.  You're going, aren't you?"

"Yes, but I'm going with papa and the Sharons I'll see you there."

"Looks to me as if you were awfully conventional," George grumbled;
and his disappointment was deeper than he was willing to let her see--
though she probably did see.  "Well, we'll dance the cotillion
together, anyhow."

"I'm afraid not. I promised Mr. Kinney."

"What!"  George's tone was shocked, as at incredible news.  "Well, you
could break that engagement, I guess, if you wanted to!  Girls always
can get out of things when they want to.  Won't you?"

"I don't think so."

"Why not?"

"Because I promised him.  Several days ago."

George gulped, and lowered his pride, "I don't--oh, look here!  I only
want to go to that thing tonight to get to see something of you; and
if you don't dance the cotillion with me, how can I?  I'll only be
here two weeks, and the others have got all the rest of your visit to
see you.  Won't you do it, please?"

"I couldn't."

"See here!" said the stricken George.  "If you're going to decline to
dance that cotillion with me simply because you've promised a--a--a
miserable red-headed outsider like Fred Kinney, why we might as well
quit!"

"Quit what?"

"You know perfectly well what I mean," he said huskily.

"I don't."

"Well, you ought to!"

"But I don't at all!"

George, thoroughly hurt, and not a little embittered, expressed
himself in a short outburst of laughter: "Well, I ought to have seen
it!"

"Seen what?"

"That you might turn out to be a girl who'd like a fellow of the red-
headed Kinney sort.  I ought to have seen it from the first!"

Lucy bore her disgrace lightly.  "Oh, dancing a cotillion with a
person doesn't mean that you like him--but I don't see anything in
particular the matter with Mr. Kinney.  What is?"

"If you don't see anything the matter with him for yourself," George
responded, icily, "I don't think pointing it out would help you.  You
probably wouldn't understand."

"You might try," she suggested.  "Of course I'm a stranger here, and
if people have done anything wrong or have something unpleasant about
them, I wouldn't have any way of knowing it, just at first.  If poor
Mr. Kinney--"

"I prefer not to discuss it," said George curtly.  "He's an enemy of
mine."

"Why?"

"I prefer not to discuss it."

"Well, but--"

"I prefer not to discuss it!"

"Very well."  She began to hum the air of the song which Mr. George
Amberson was now discoursing, "O moon of my delight that knows no
wane"--and there was no further conversation on the back seat.

They had entered Amberson Addition, and the moon of Mr. Amberson's
delight was overlaid by a slender Gothic filagree; the branches that
sprang from the shade trees lining the street.  Through the windows of
many of the houses rosy lights were flickering; and silver tinsel and
evergreen wreaths and brilliant little glass globes of silver and wine
colour could be seen, and glimpses were caught of Christmas trees,
with people decking them by firelight--reminders that this was
Christmas Eve.  The ride-stealers had disappeared from the highway,
though now and then, over the gasping and howling of the horseless
carriage, there came a shrill jeer from some young passer-by upon the
sidewalk:

"Mister, fer heaven's sake go an' git a hoss!  Git a hoss!  Git a
hoss!"

The contrivance stopped with a heart-shaking jerk before Isabel's
house.  The gentlemen jumped down, helping Isabel and Fanny to
descend; there were friendly leavetakings--and one that was not
precisely friendly.

"It's 'au revoir,' till to-night, isn't it?"  Lucy asked, laughing.

"Good afternoon!" said George, and he did not wait, as his relatives
did, to see the old sewing machine start briskly down the street,
toward the Sharons'; its lighter load consisting now of only Mr.
Morgan and his daughter.  George went into the house at once.

He found his father reading the evening paper in the library.  "Where
are your mother and your Aunt Fanny?"  Mr. Minafer inquired, not
looking up.

"They're coming," said his son; and, casting himself heavily into a
chair, stared at the fire.

His prediction was verified a few moments later; the two ladies came
in cheerfully, unfastening their fur cloaks.  "It's all right,
Georgie," said Isabel.  "Your Uncle George called to us that Pendennis
got home safely.  Put your shoes close to the fire, dear, or else go
and change them."  She went to her husband and patted him lightly on
the shoulder, an action which George watched with sombre moodiness.
"You might dress before long," she suggested.  "We're all going to the
Assembly, after dinner, aren't we?  Brother George said he'd go with
us."

"Look here," said George abruptly.  "How about this man Morgan and his
old sewing-machine?  Doesn't he want to get grandfather to put money
into it?  Isn't he trying to work Uncle George for that?  Isn't that
what he's up to?"

It was Miss Fanny who responded.  "You little silly!" she cried, with
surprising sharpness.  "What on earth are you talking about?  Eugene
Morgan's perfectly able to finance his own inventions these days."

"I'll bet he borrows money of Uncle George," the nephew insisted.

Isabel looked at him in grave perplexity.  "Why do you say such a
thing, George?" she asked.

"He strikes me as that sort of man," he answered doggedly.  "Isn't he,
father?"

Minafer set down his paper for the moment.  "He was a fairly wild
young fellow twenty years ago," he said, glancing at his wife
absently.  "He was like you in one thing, Georgie; he spent too much
money--only he didn't have any mother to get money out of a
grandfather for him, so he was usually in debt.  But I believe I've
heard he's done fairly well of late years.  No, I can't say I think
he's a swindler, and I doubt if he needs anybody else's money to back
his horseless carriage."

"Well, what's he brought the old thing here for, then?  People that
own elephants don't take them elephants around with 'em when they go
visiting.  What's he got it here for?"

"I'm sure I don't know," said Mr. Minafer, resuming his paper.  "You
might ask him."

Isabel laughed, and patted her husband's shoulder again.  "Aren't you
going to dress?  Aren't we all going to the dance?"

He groaned faintly.  "Aren't your brother and Georgie escorts enough
for you and Fanny?"

"Wouldn't you enjoy it at all?"

"You know I don't."

Isabel let her hand remain upon his shoulder a moment longer; she
stood behind him, looking into the fire, and George, watching her
broodingly, thought there was more colour in her face than the
reflection of the flames accounted for.  "Well, then," she said
indulgently, "stay at home and be happy.  We won't urge you if you'd
really rather not."

"I really wouldn't," he said contentedly.

Half an hour later, George was passing through the upper hall, in a
bath-robe stage of preparation for the evening's' gaieties, when he
encountered his Aunt Fanny.  He stopped her.  "Look here!" he said.

"What in the world is the matter with you?" she demanded, regarding
him with little amiability.  "You look as if you were rehearsing for a
villain in a play.  Do change your expression!"

His expression gave no sign of yielding to the request; on the
contrary, its somberness deepened.  "I suppose you don't know why
father doesn't want to go tonight," he said solemnly.  "You're his
only sister, and yet you don't know!"

"He never wants to go anywhere that I ever heard of," said Fanny.
"What is the matter with you?"

"He doesn't want to go because he doesn't like this man Morgan."

"Good gracious!" Fanny cried impatiently.  "Eugene Morgan isn't in
your father's thoughts at all, one way or the other.  Why should he
be?"

George hesitated. "Well--it strikes me--Look here, what makes you and
--and everybody--so excited over him?"

"Excited!" she jeered.  "Can't people be glad to see an old friend
without silly children like you having to make a to-do about it?  I've
just been in your mother's room suggesting that she might give a
little dinner for them--"

"For who?"

"For whom, Georgie!  For Mr. Morgan and his daughter."

"Look here!" George said quickly.  "Don't do that!  Mother mustn't do
that.  It wouldn't look well."

"Wouldn't look well!"  Fanny mocked him; and her suppressed vehemence
betrayed a surprising acerbity.  "See here, Georgie Minafer, I suggest
that you just march straight on into your room and finish your
dressing!  Sometimes you say things that show you have a pretty mean
little mind!"

George was so astounded by this outburst that his indignation was
delayed by his curiosity.  "Why, what upsets you this way?" he
inquired.

"I know what you mean," she said, her voice still lowered, but not
decreasing in sharpness.  "You're trying to insinuate that I'd get
your mother to invite Eugene Morgan here on my account because he's a
widower!"

"I am?"  George gasped, nonplussed.  "I'm trying to insinuate that
you're setting your cap at him and getting mother to help you?  Is
that what you mean?"

Beyond a doubt that was what Miss Fanny meant.  She gave him a white-
hot look.  "You attend to your own affairs!" she whispered fiercely,
and swept away.

George, dumfounded, returned to his room for meditation.

He had lived for years in the same house with his Aunt Fanny, and it
now appeared that during all those years he had been thus intimately
associating with a total stranger.  Never before had he met the
passionate lady with whom he had just held a conversation in the hall.
So she wanted to get married!  And wanted George's mother to help her
with this horseless-carriage widower!

"Well, I will be shot!" he muttered aloud.  "I will--I certainly will
be shot!"  And he began' to laugh. "Lord 'lmighty!"

But presently, at the thought of the horseless-carriage widower's
daughter, his grimness returned, and he resolved upon a line of
conduct for the evening.  He would nod to her carelessly when he
first saw her; and, after that, he would notice her no more: he would
not dance with her; he would not favour her in the cotillion--he would
not go near her!

He descended to dinner upon the third urgent summons of a coloured
butler, having spent two hours dressing--and rehearsing.




Chapter IX


The Honourable George Amberson was a congressman who led cotillions--
the sort of congressman an Amberson would be.  He did it negligently,
tonight, yet with infallible dexterity, now and then glancing
humorously at the spectators, people of his own age.  They were seated
in a tropical grove at one end of the room whither they had retired at
the beginning of the cotillion, which they surrendered entirely to the
twenties and the late 'teens.  And here, grouped with that stately
pair, Sydney and Amelia Amberson, sat Isabel with Fanny, while Eugene
Morgan appeared to bestow an amiable devotion impartially upon the
three sisters-in-law.  Fanny watched his face eagerly, laughing at
everything he said; Amelia smiled blandly, but rather because of
graciousness than because of interest; while Isabel, looking out at
the dancers, rhythmically moved a great fan of blue ostrich feathers,
listened to Eugene thoughtfully, yet all the while kept her shining
eyes on Georgie.

Georgie had carried out his rehearsed projects with precision, he had
given Miss Morgan a nod studied into perfection during his lengthy
toilet before dinner.  "Oh, yes, I do seem to remember that curious
little outsider!" this nod seemed to say.  Thereafter, all cognizance
of her evaporated: the curious little outsider was permitted no
further existence worth the struggle.  Nevertheless, she flashed in
the corner of his eye too often.  He was aware of her dancing
demurely, and of her viciously flirtatious habit of never looking up
at her partner, but keeping her eyes concealed beneath downcast
lashes; and he had over-sufficient consciousness of her between the
dances, though it was not possible to see her at these times, even if
he had cared to look frankly in her direction--she was invisible in a
thicket of young dresscoats.  The black thicket moved as she moved and
her location was hatefully apparent, even if he had not heard her
voice laughing from the thicket.  It was annoying how her voice,
though never loud, pursued him.  No matter how vociferous were other
voices, all about, he seemed unable to prevent himself from constantly
recognizing hers.  It had a quaver in it, not pathetic--rather
humorous than pathetic--a quality which annoyed him to the point of
rage, because it was so difficult to get away from.  She seemed to be
having a "wonderful time!"

An unbearable soreness accumulated in his chest: his dislike of the
girl and her conduct increased until he thought of leaving this
sickening Assembly and going home to bed.  That would show her!  But
just then he heard her laughing, and decided that it wouldn't show
her.  So he remained.

When the young couples seated themselves in chairs against the walls,
round three sides of the room, for the cotillion, George joined a
brazen-faced group clustering about the doorway--youths with no
partners, yet eligible to be "called out" and favoured.  He marked
that his uncle placed the infernal Kinney and Miss Morgan, as the
leading couple, in the first chairs at the head of the line upon the
leader's right; and this disloyalty on the part of Uncle George was
inexcusable, for in the family circle the nephew had often expressed
his opinion of Fred Kinney.  In his bitterness, George uttered a
significant monosyllable.

The music flourished; whereupon Mr. Kinney, Miss Morgan, and six of
their neighbours rose and waltzed knowingly.  Mr. Amberson's whistle
blew;' then the eight young people went to the favour-table and were
given toys and trinkets wherewith to delight the new partners it was
now their privilege to select.  Around the walls, the seated non-
participants in this ceremony looked rather conscious; some chattered,
endeavouring not to appear expectant; some tried not to look wistful;
and others were frankly solemn.  It was a trying moment; and whoever
secured a favour, this very first shot, might consider the portents
happy for a successful evening.

Holding their twinkling gewgaws in their hands, those about to bestow
honour came toward the seated lines, where expressions became
feverish.  Two of the approaching girls seemed to wander, not finding
a predetermined object in sight; and these two were Janie Sharon, and
her cousin, Lucy.  At this, George Amberson Minafer, conceiving that
he had little to anticipate from either, turned a proud back upon the
room and affected to converse with his friend, Mr. Charlie Johnson.

The next moment a quick little figure intervened between the two.  It
was Lucy, gaily offering a silver sleighbell decked with white ribbon.

"I almost couldn't find you!" she cried.

George stared, took her hand, led her forth in silence, danced with
her.  She seemed content not to talk; but as the whistle blew,
signalling that this episode was concluded, and he conducted her to
her seat, she lifted the little bell toward him.  "You haven't taken
your favour.  You're supposed to pin it on your coat," she said.
"Don't you want it?"

"If you insist!" said George stiffly.  And he bowed her into her
chair; then turned and walked away, dropping the sleighbell haughtily
into his trousers' pocket.

The figure proceeded to its conclusion, and George was given other
sleighbells, which he easily consented to wear upon his lapel; but, as
the next figure 'began, he strolled with a bored air to the tropical
grove, where sat his elders, and seated himself beside his Uncle
Sydney.  His mother leaned across Miss Fanny, raising her voice over
the music to speak to him.

"Georgie, nobody will be able to see you here.  You'll not be
favoured.  You ought to be where you can dance."

"Don't care to," he returned.  "Bore!

"But you ought--"  She stopped and laughed, waving her fan to direct
his attention behind him.  "Look!  Over your shoulder!"

He turned, and discovered Miss Lucy Morgan in the act of offering him
a purple toy balloon.

"I found you!" she laughed.

George was startled. "Well--" he said.

"Would you rather 'sit it out?'"  Lucy asked quickly, as he did not
move.  "I don't care to dance if you--"

"No," he said, rising.  "It would be better to dance."  His tone was
solemn, and solemnly he departed with her from the grove.  Solemnly he
danced with her.

Four times, with not the slightest encouragement, she brought him a
favour: 'four times in succession.  When the fourth came, "Look here!"
said George huskily.  "You going to keep this up all' night?  What do
you mean by it?"

For an instant she seemed confused.  "That's what cotillions are for,
aren't they?" she murmured.

"What do you mean: what they're for?"

"So that a girl can dance with a person she wants to?"

George's huskiness increased.  "Well, do you mean you--you want to
dance with me all the time--all evening?"

"Well, this much of it--evidently!" she laughed.

"Is it because you thought I tried to keep you from getting hurt this
afternoon when we upset?"

She shook her head.

"Was it because you want to even things up for making me angry--I
mean, for hurting my feelings on the way home?"

With her eyes averted--for girls of nineteen can be as shy as boys,
sometimes--she said, "Well--you only got angry because I couldn't
dance the cotillion with you.  I--I didn't feel terribly hurt with you
for getting angry about that!"

"Was there any other reason?  Did my telling you I liked you have
anything to do with it?"

She looked up gently, and, as George met her eyes, something
exquisitely touching, yet queerly delightful, gave him a catch in the
throat.  She looked instantly away, and, turning, ran out from the
palm grove, where they stood, to the dancing-floor.

"Come on!" she cried.  "Let's dance!"

He followed her.

"See here--I--I--" he stammered.  "You mean--Do you--"

"No, no!" she laughed.  "Let's dance!"

He put his arm about her almost tremulously, and they began to waltz.
It was a happy dance for both of them.

Christmas day is the children's, but the holidays are youth's dancing-
time.  The holidays belong to the early twenties and the 'teens, home
from school and college.  These years possess the holidays for a
little while, then possess them only in smiling, wistful memories of
holly and twinkling lights and dance-music, and charming faces all
aglow.  It is the liveliest time in life, the happiest of the
irresponsible times in life.  Mothers echo its happiness--nothing is
like a mother who has a son home from college, except another mother
with a son home from college.  Bloom does actually come upon these
mothers; it is a visible thing; and they run like girls, walk like
athletes, laugh like sycophants.  Yet they give up their sons to the
daughters of other mothers, and find it proud rapture enough to be
allowed to sit and watch.

Thus Isabel watched George and Lucy dancing, as together they danced
away the holidays of that year into the past.

"They seem to get along better than they did at first, those two
children," Fanny Minafer said sitting beside her at the Sharons'
dance, a week after the Assembly.  "They seemed to be always having
little quarrels of some sort, at first.  At least George did: he
seemed to be continually pecking at that lovely, dainty, little Lucy,
and being cross with her over nothing."

"Pecking?" Isabel laughed.  "What a word to use about Georgie!  I
think I never knew a more angelically amiable disposition in my life!"

Miss Fanny echoed her sister-in-law's laugh, but it was a rueful echo,
and not sweet.  "He's amiable to you!" she said.  "That's all the side
of him you ever happen to see.  And why wouldn't he be amiable to
anybody that simply fell down and worshipped him every minute of her
life?  Most of us would!"

"Isn't he worth worshipping?  Just look at him!  Isn't he charming
with Lucy!  See how hard he ran to get it when she dropped her
handkerchief back there."

"Oh, I'm not going to argue with you about George!" said Miss Fanny.
"I'm fond enough of him, for that matter.  He can be charming, and
he's certainly stunning looking, if only--"

"Let the 'if only' go, dear," Isabel suggested good-naturedly.  "Let's
talk about that dinner you thought I should--"

"I?"  Miss Fanny interrupted quickly.  "Didn't you want to give it
yourself?"

"Indeed, I did, my dear!" said Isabel heartily.  "I only meant that
unless you had proposed it, perhaps I wouldn't--"

But here Eugene came for her to dance, and she left the sentence
uncompleted.  Holiday dances can be happy for youth renewed as well as
for youth in bud--and yet it was not with the air of a rival that Miss
Fanny watched her brother's wife dancing with the widower.  Miss
Fanny's eyes narrowed a little, but only as if her mind engaged in a
hopeful calculation.  She looked pleased.




Chapter X



A few days after George's return to the university it became evident
that not quite everybody had gazed with complete benevolence upon the
various young collegians at their holiday sports.  The Sunday edition
of the principal morning paper even expressed some bitterness under
the heading, "Gilded Youths of the Fin-de-Siecle"--this was considered
the knowing phrase of the time, especially for Sunday supplements--and
there is no doubt that from certain references in this bit of writing
some people drew the conclusion that Mr. George Amberson Minafer had
not yet got his comeupance, a postponement still irritating.
Undeniably, Fanny Minafer was one of the people who drew this
conclusion, for she cut the article out and enclosed it in a letter to
her nephew, having written on the border of the clipping, "I wonder
whom it can mean!"

George read part of it.

We debate sometimes what is to be the future of this nation when we
think that in a few years public affairs may be in the hands of the
fin-de-siecle gilded youths we see about us during the Christmas
holidays.  Such foppery, such luxury, such insolence, was surely never
practised by the scented, overbearing patricians of the Palatine, even
in Rome's most decadent epoch.  In all the wild orgy of wastefulness
and luxury with which the nineteenth century reaches its close, the
gilded youth has been surely the worst symptom.  With his airs of
young milord, his fast horses, his gold and silver cigarette-cases,
his clothes from a New York tailor, his recklessness of money showered
upon him by indulgent mothers or doting grandfathers, he respects
nothing and nobody.  He is blase if you please.  Watch him at a social
function how condescendingly he deigns to select a partner for the
popular waltz or two step how carelessly he shoulders older people out
of his way, with what a blank stare he returns the salutation of some
old acquaintance whom he may choose in his royal whim to forget!  The
unpleasant part of all this is that the young women he so
condescendingly selects as partners for the dance greet him with
seeming rapture, though in their hearts they must feel humiliated by
his languid hauteur, and many older people beam upon him almost
fawningly if he unbends so far as to throw them a careless, disdainful
word!

One wonders what has come over the new generation.  Of such as these
the Republic was not made.  Let us pray that the future of our country
is not in the hands of these fin-de-siecle gilded youths, but rather
in the calloused palms of young men yet unknown, labouring upon the
farms of the land.  When we compare the young manhood of Abraham
Lincoln with the specimens we are now producing, we see too well that
it bodes ill for the twentieth century--

George yawned, and tossed the clipping into his waste-basket,
wondering why his aunt thought such dull nonsense worth the sending.
As for her insinuation, pencilled upon the border, he supposed she
meant to joke--a supposition which neither surprised him nor altered
his lifelong opinion of her wit.

He read her letter with more interest:

The dinner your mother gave for the Morgans was a lovely affair.  It
was last Monday evening, just ten days after you left.  It was
peculiarly appropriate that your mother should give this dinner,
because her brother George, your uncle, was Mr. Morgan's most intimate
friend before he left here a number of years ago, and it was a
pleasant occasion for the formal announcement of some news which you
heard from Lucy Morgan before you returned to college.  At least she
told me she had told you the night before you left that her father had
decided to return here to live.  It was appropriate that your mother,
herself an old friend, should assemble a representative selection of
Mr. Morgan's old friends around him at such a time.  He was in great
spirits and most entertaining.  As your time was so charmingly taken
up during your visit home with a younger member of his family, you
probably overlooked opportunities of hearing him talk, and do not know
what an interesting man he can be.

He will soon begin to build his factory here for the manufacture of
automobiles, which he says is a term he prefers to "horseless
carriages."  Your Uncle George told me he would like to invest in this
factory, as George thinks there is a future for automobiles; perhaps
not for general use, but as an interesting novelty, which people with
sufficient means would like to own for their amusement and the sake of
variety.  However, he said Mr. Morgan laughingly declined his offer,
as Mr. M. was fully able to finance this venture, though not starting
in a very large way.  Your uncle said other people are manufacturing
automobiles in different parts of the country with success.  Your
father is not very well, though he is not actually ill, and the doctor
tells him he ought not to be so much at his office, as the long years
of application indoors with no exercise are beginning to affect him
unfavourably, but I believe your father would die if he had to give up
his work, which is all that has ever interested him outside of his
family.  I never could understand it.  Mr. Morgan took your mother and
me with Lucy to see Modjeska in "Twelfth Night" yesterday evening, and
Lucy said she thought the Duke looked rather like you, only much more
democratic in his manner.  I suppose you will think I have written a
great deal about the Morgans in this letter, but thought you would be
interested because of your interest in a younger member of his family.
Hoping that you are finding college still as attractive as ever,
             Affectionately,
                        Aunt Fanny.

George read one sentence in this letter several times.  Then he
dropped the missive in his wastebasket to join the clipping, and
strolled down the corridor of his dormitory to borrow a copy of
"Twelfth Night."  Having secured one, he returned to his study and
refreshed his memory of the play--but received no enlightenment that
enabled him to comprehend Lucy's strange remark.  However, he found
himself impelled in the direction of correspondence, and presently
wrote a letter--not a reply to his Aunt Fanny.

Dear Lucy:
No doubt you will be surprised at hearing from me so soon again,
especially as this makes two in answer to the one received from you
since getting back to the old place.  I hear you have been making
comments about me at the theatre, that some actor was more democratic
in his manners than I am, which I do not understand.  You know my
theory of life because I explained it to you on our first drive
together, when I told you I would not talk to everybody about things I
feel like the way I spoke to you of my theory of life.  I believe
those who are able should have a true theory of life, and I developed
my theory of life long, long ago.

Well, here I sit smoking my faithful briar pipe, indulging in the
fragrance of my tobacco as I look out on the campus from my many-paned
window, and things are different with me from the way they were way
back in Freshman year.  I can see now how boyish in many ways I was
then.  I believe what has changed me as much as anything was my visit
home at the time I met you.  So I sit here with my faithful briar and
dream the old dreams over as it were, dreaming of the waltzes we
waltzed together and of that last night before we parted, and you told
me the good news you were going to live there, and I would find my
friend waiting for me, when I get home next summer.

I will be glad my friend will be waiting for me.  I am not capable of
friendship except for the very few, and, looking back over my life, I
remember there were times when I doubted if I could feel a great
friendship for anybody--especially girls.  I do not take a great
interest in many people, as you know, for I find most of them shallow.
Here in the old place I do not believe in being hail-fellow-well-met
with every Tom, Dick, and Harry just because he happens to be a
classmate, any more than I do at home, where I have always been
careful who I was seen with, largely on account of the family, but
also because my disposition ever since my boyhood has been to
encourage real intimacy from but the few.

What are you reading now?  I have finished both "Henry Esmond" and
"The Virginians."  I like Thackeray because he is not trashy, and
because he writes principally of nice people.  My theory of literature
is an author who does not indulge in trashiness--writes about people
you could introduce into your own home.  I agree with my Uncle Sydney,
as I once heard him say he did not care to read a book or go to a play
about people he would not care to meet at his own dinner table.  I
believe we should live by certain standards and ideals, as you know
from my telling you my theory of life.

Well, a letter is no place for deep discussions, so I will not go into
the subject.  From several letters from my mother, and one from Aunt
Fanny, I hear you are seeing a good deal of the family since I left.
I hope sometimes you think of the member who is absent.  I got a
silver frame for your photograph in New York, and I keep it on my
desk.  It is the only girl's photograph I ever took the trouble to
have framed, though, as I told you frankly, I have had any number of
other girls' photographs, yet all were only passing fancies, and
oftentimes I have questioned in years past if I was capable of much
friendship toward the feminine sex, which I usually found shallow
until our own friendship began.  When I look at your photograph, I say
to myself, "At last, at last here is one that will not prove shallow."

My faithful briar has gone out. I will have to rise and fill it, then
once more in the fragrance of My Lady Nicotine, I will sit and dream
the old dreams over, and think, too, of the true friend at home
awaiting my return in June for the summer vacation.
             Friend, this is from your friend,
                                            G.A.M.


George's anticipations were not disappointed.  When he came home in
June his friend was awaiting him; at least, she was so pleased to see
him again that for a few minutes after their first encounter she was a
little breathless, and a great deal glowing, and quiet withal.  Their
sentimental friendship continued, though sometimes he was irritated by
her making it less sentimental than be did, and sometimes by what he
called her "air of superiority."  Her air was usually, in truth, that
of a fond but amused older sister; and George did not believe such an
attitude was warranted by her eight months of seniority.

Lucy and her father were living at the Amberson Hotel, while Morgan
got his small machine-shops built in a western outskirt of the town;
and George grumbled about the shabbiness and the old-fashioned look of
the hotel, though it was "still the best in the place, of course."  He
remonstrated with his grandfather, declaring that the whole Amberson
Estate would be getting "run-down and out-at-heel, if things weren't
taken in hand pretty soon."  He urged the general need of rebuilding,
renovating, varnishing, and lawsuits.  But the Major, declining to
hear him out, interrupted querulously, saying that he had enough to
bother him without any advice from George; and retired to his library,
going so far as to lock the door audibly.

"Second childhood!"  George muttered, shaking his head; and he thought
sadly that the Major had not long to live.  However, this surmise
depressed him for only a moment or so.  Of course, people couldn't be
expected to live forever, and it would be a good thing to have someone
in charge of the Estate who wouldn't let it get to looking so rusty
that riffraff dared to make fun of it.  For George had lately
undergone the annoyance of calling upon the Morgans, in the rather
stuffy red velours and gilt parlour of their apartment at the hotel,
one evening when Mr. Frederick Kinney also was a caller, and Mr.
Kinney had not been tactful.  In fact, though he adopted a humorous
tone of voice, in expressing his, sympathy for people who, through the
city's poverty in hotels, were obliged to stay at the Amberson, Mr.
Kinney's intention was interpreted by the other visitor as not at all
humorous, but, on the contrary, personal and offensive.

George rose abruptly, his face the colour of wrath.  "Good-night, Miss
Morgan. Good-night, Mr. Morgan," he said.  "I shall take pleasure in
calling at some other time when a more courteous sort of people may be
present."

"Look here!" the hot-headed Fred burst out.  "Don't you try to make me
out a boor, George Minafer!  I wasn't hinting anything at you; I
simply forgot all about your grandfather owning this old building.
Don't you try to put me in the light of a boor!  I won't--"

But George walked out in the very course of this vehement protest, and
it was necessarily left unfinished.

Mr. Kinney remained only a few moments after George's departure; and
as the door closed upon him, the distressed Lucy turned to her father.
She was plaintively surprised to find him in a condition of immoderate
laughter.

"I didn't--I didn't think I could hold out!" he gasped, and, after
choking until tears came to his eyes, felt blindly for the chair from
which be had risen to wish Mr. Kinney an indistinct good-night.  His
hand found the arm of the chair; he collapsed feebly, and sat uttering
incoherent sounds.

"Papa!"

"It brings things back so!" he managed to explain, "This very Fred
Kinney's father and young George's father, Wilbur Minafer, used to do
just such things when they were at that age--and, for that matter, so
did George Amberson and I, and all the rest of us!"  And, in spite of
his exhaustion, he began to imitate: "Don't you try to put me in the
light of a boor!"  "I shall take pleasure in calling at some time when
a more courteous sort of people--"  He was unable to go on.

There is a mirth for every age, and Lucy failed to comprehend her
father's, but tolerated it a little ruefully.

"Papa, I think they were shocking.  Weren't they awful!"

"Just--just boys!" he moaned, wiping his eyes.  But Lucy could not
smile at all; she was beginning to look indignant.  "I can forgive
that poor Fred Kinney," she said.  "He's just blundering--but George--
oh, George behaved outrageously!"

"It's a difficult age," her father observed, his calmness somewhat
restored.  "Girls don't seem to have to pass through it quite as boys
do, or their savoir faire is instinctive--or something!"  And he gave
away to a return of his convulsion.

She came and sat upon the arm of his chair.  "Papa, why should George
behave like that?"

"He's sensitive."

"Rather!  But why is he?  He does anything he likes to, without any
regard for what people think.  Then why should he mind so furiously
when the least little thing reflects upon him, or on anything or
anybody connected with him?"

Eugene patted her hand.  "That's one of the greatest puzzles of human
vanity, dear; and I don't pretend to know the answer.  In all my life,
the most arrogant people that I've known have been the most sensitive.
The, people who have done the most in contempt of other people's
opinion, and who consider themselves the highest above it, have been
the most furious if it went against them.  Arrogant and domineering
people can't stand the least, lightest, faintest breath of criticism.
It just kills them."

"Papa, do you think George is arrogant and domineering?"

"Oh, he's still only a boy," said Eugene consolingly.  "There's plenty
of fine stuff in him--can't help but be, because he's Isabel
Amberson's son."

Lucy stroked his hair, which was still almost as dark as her own.
"You liked her pretty well once, I guess, papa."

"I do still," he said quietly.

"She's lovely--lovely!  Papa--" she paused, then continued--"I wonder
sometimes--"

"What?"

"I wonder just how she happened to marry Mr. Minafer."

"Oh, Minafer's all right," said Eugene.  "He's a quiet sort of man,
but he's a good man and a kind man.  He always was, and those things
count."

"But in a way--well, I've heard people say there wasn't anything to
him at all except business and saving money.  Miss Fanny Minafer
herself told me that everything George and his mother have of their
own--that is, just to spend as they like--she says it has always come
from Major Amberson."

"Thrift, Horatio!" said Eugene lightly.  "Thrift's an inheritance, and
a common enough one here.  The people who settled the country had to
save, so making and saving were taught as virtues, and the people, to
the third generation, haven't found out that making and saving are
only means to an end.  Minafer doesn't believe in money being spent.
He believes God made it to be invested and saved."

"But George isn't saving.  He's reckless, and even if he is arrogant
and conceited and bad-tempered, he's awfully generous."

"Oh, he's an Amberson," said her father.  "The Ambersons aren't
saving.  They're too much the other way, most of them."

"I don't think I should have called George bad-tempered," Lucy said
thoughtfully.  "No. I don't think he is."

"Only when he's cross about something?"  Morgan suggested, with a
semblance of sympathetic gravity.

"Yes," she said brightly, not perceiving that his intention was
humorous.  "All the rest of the time he's really very amiable.  Of
course, he's much more a perfect child, the whole time, than he
realizes!  He certainly behaved awfully to-night."  She jumped up, her
indignation returning.  "He did, indeed, and it won't do to encourage
him in it.  I think he'll find me pretty cool--for a week or so!"

Whereupon her father suffered a renewal of his attack of uproarious
laughter.




Chapter XI



In the matter of coolness, George met Lucy upon her own predetermined
ground; in fact, he was there first, and, at their next encounter,
proved loftier and more formal than she did.  Their estrangement
lasted three weeks, and then disappeared without any preliminary
treaty: it had worn itself out, and they forgot it.

At times, however, George found other disturbances to the friendship.
Lucy was "too much the village belle," he complained; and took a
satiric attitude toward his competitors, referring to them as her
"local swains and bumpkins," sulking for an afternoon when she
reminded him that he, too, was at least "local."  She was a belle with
older people as well; Isabel and Fanny were continually taking her
driving, bringing her home with them to lunch or dinner, and making a
hundred little engagements with her, and the Major had taken a great
fancy to her, insisting upon her presence and her father's at the
Amberson family dinner at the Mansion every Sunday evening.  She knew
how to flirt with old people, he said, as she sat next him at the
table on one of these Sunday occasions; and he had always liked her
father, even when Eugene was a "terror" long ago.  "Oh, yes, he was!"
the Major laughed, when she remonstrated.  "He came up here with my
son George and some others for a serenade one night, and Eugene
stepped into a bass fiddle, and the poor musicians just gave up!  I
had a pretty half-hour getting my son George upstairs. I remember!  It
was the last time Eugene ever touched a drop--but he'd touched plenty
before that, young lady, and he daren't deny it!  Well, well; there's
another thing that's changed: hardly anybody drinks nowadays.  Perhaps
it's just as well, but things used to be livelier.  That serenade was
just before Isabel was married--and don't you fret, Miss Lucy: your
father remembers it well enough!"  The old gentleman burst into
laughter, and shook his finger at Eugene across the table.  "The fact
is," the Major went on hilariously, "I believe if Eugene hadn't broken
that bass fiddle and given himself away, Isabel would never have taken
Wilbur!  I shouldn't be surprised if that was about all the reason
that Wilbur got her!  What do you think. Wilbur?

"I shouldn't be surprised," said Wilbur placidly.  "If your notion is
right, I'm glad 'Gene broke the fiddle.  He was giving me a hard run!"

The Major always drank three glasses of champagne at his Sunday
dinner, and he was finishing the third.  "What do you say about it,
Isabel?  By Jove!" he cried, pounding the table.  "She's blushing!"

Isabel did blush, but she laughed.  "Who wouldn't blush!" she cried,
and her sister-in-law came to her assistance.

"The important thing," said Fanny jovially, "is that Wilbur did get
her, and not only got her, but kept her!"

Eugene was as pink as Isabel, but he laughed without any sign of
embarrassment other than his heightened colour.  "There's another
important thing--that is, for me," he said.  "It's the only thing that
makes me forgive that bass viol for getting in my way."

"What is it?" the Major asked.

"Lucy," said Morgan gently.

Isabel gave him a quick glance, all warm approval, and there was a
murmur of friendliness round the table.

George was not one of those who joined in this applause.  He
considered his grandfather's nonsense indelicate, even for second
childhood, and he thought that the sooner the subject was dropped the
better.  However, he had only a slight recurrence of the resentment
which had assailed him during the winter at every sign of his mother's
interest in Morgan; though he was still ashamed of his aunt sometimes,
when it seemed to him that Fanny was almost publicly throwing herself
at the widower's head.  Fanny and he had one or two arguments in which
her fierceness again astonished and amused him.

"You drop your criticisms of your relatives," she bade him, hotly, one
day, "and begin thinking a little about your own behaviour!  You say
people will 'talk' about my--about my merely being pleasant to an old
friend!  What do I care how they talk?  I guess if people are talking
about anybody in this family they're talking about the impertinent
little snippet that hasn't any respect for anything, and doesn't even
know enough to attend to his own affairs!"

"Snippet,' Aunt Fanny!" George laughed.  "How elegant!  And 'little
snippet'--when I'm over five-feet-eleven?"

"I said it!" she snapped, departing.  "I don't see how Lucy can stand
you!"

"You'd make an amiable stepmother-in-law!" he called after her.  "I'll
be careful about proposing to Lucy!"

These were but roughish spots in a summer that glided by evenly and
quickly enough, for the most part, and, at the end, seemed to fly.  On
the last night before George went back to be a Junior, his mother
asked him confidently if it had not been a happy summer.

He hadn't thought about it, he answered.  "Oh,' I suppose so.  Why?"

"I just thought it would be: nice to hear you say so," she said,
smiling.  "I mean, it's pleasant for people of my age to know that
people of your age realize that they're happy."

"People of your age!" he repeated.  "You know you don't look precisely
like an old woman, mother.  Not precisely!"

"No," she said.  "And I suppose I feel about as young as you do,
inside, but it won't be many years before I must begin to look old.
It does come!"  She sighed, still smiling.  "It's seemed to me that,
it must have been a happy summer for you--a real 'summer of roses and
wine'--without the wine, perhaps.  'Gather ye roses while ye may'--or
was it primroses?  Time does really fly, or perhaps it's more like the
sky--and smoke--"

George was puzzled.  "What do you mean: time being like the sky and
smoke?"

"I mean the things that we have and that we think are so solid--
they're like smoke, and time is like the sky that the smoke disappears
into.  You know how wreath of smoke goes up from a chimney, and seems
all thick and black and busy against the sky, as if it were going to
do such important things and last forever, and you see it getting
thinner and thinner--and then, in such a little while, it isn't there
at all; nothing is left but the sky, and the sky keeps on being just
the same forever."

"It strikes me you're getting mixed up," said George cheerfully.  "I
don't see much resemblance between time and the sky, or between things
and smoke-wreaths; but I do see one reason you like 'Lucy Morgan so
much.  She talks that same kind of wistful, moony way sometimes--I
don't mean to say I mind it in either of you, because I rather like to
listen to it, and you've got a very good voice, mother.  It's nice to
listen to, no matter how much smoke and sky, and so on, you talk.
So's Lucy's for that matter; and I see why you're congenial.  She
talks that way to her father, too; and he's right there with the same
kind of guff.  Well, it's all right with me!"  He laughed, teasingly,
and allowed her to retain his hand, which she had fondly seized.
"I've got plenty to think about when people drool along!"

She pressed his hand to her cheek, and a tear made a tiny warm streak
across one of his knuckles.

"For heaven's sake!" he said.  "What's the matter? Isn't everything
all right?"

"You're going away!"

"Well, I'm coming back, don't you suppose?  Is that all that worries
you?"

She cheered up, and smiled again, but shook her head.  "I never can
bear to see you go--that's the most of it.  I'm a little bothered
about your father, too."

"Why?"

It seems to me he looks so badly.  Everybody thinks so."

"What nonsense!"  George laughed. "He's been looking that way all
summer.  He isn't much different from the way he's looked all his
life, that I can see.  What's the matter with him?"

"He never talks much about his business to me but I think he's been
worrying about some investments he made last year.  I think his worry
has affected his health."

"What investments?" George demanded.  "He hasn't gone into Mr.
Morgan's automobile concern, has he?"

"No," Isabel smiled.  "The 'automobile concern' is all Eugene's, and
it's so small I understand it's taken hardly anything.  No; your
father has always prided himself on making only the most absolutely
safe investments, but two or three years ago he and your Uncle George
both put a great deal--pretty much everything they could get together,
I think--into the stock of rolling-mills some friends of theirs owned,
and I'm afraid the mills haven't been doing well."

"What of that?  Father needn't worry.  You and I could take care of
him the rest of his life on what grandfather--"

"Of course," she agreed.  "But your father's always lived so for his
business and taken such pride in his sound investments; it's a passion
with him.  I--"

"Pshaw! He needn't worry!  You tell him we'll look after him: we'll
build him a little stone bank in the backyard, if he busts up, and he
can go and put his pennies in it every morning.  That'll keep him just
as happy as he ever was!"  He kissed her.  "Good-night, I'm going to
tell Lucy good-bye.  Don't sit up for me."

She walked to the front gate with him, still holding his hand, and he
told her again not to "sit up" for him.

"Yes, I will," she laughed.  "You won't be very late."

"Well--it's my last night."

"But I know Lucy, and she knows I want to see you, too, your last
night.  You'll see: she'll send you home promptly at eleven!"

But she was mistaken: Lucy sent him home promptly at ten.




Chapter XII



Isabel's uneasiness about her husbands health--sometimes reflected in
her letters to George during the winter that followed--had not been
alleviated when the accredited Senior returned for his next summer
vacation, and she confided to him in his room, soon after his arrival,
that "something" the doctor had said to her lately had made her more
uneasy than ever.

"Still worrying over his rolling-mills investments? George asked, not
seriously impressed.

"I'm afraid it's past that stage from what Dr Rainey says.  His
worries only aggravate his condition now.  Dr. Rainey says we ought to
get him away."

"Well, let's do it, then."

"He won't go."

"He's a man awfully set in his ways; that's true," said George.  "I
don't think there's anything much the matter with him, though, and he
looks just the same to me.  Have you seen Lucy lately?  How is she?"

"Hasn't she written you?"

"Oh, about once a month," he answered carelessly.  "Never says much
about herself.  How's she look?"

"She looks--pretty!" said Isabel.  "I suppose she wrote you they've
moved?"

"Yes; I've got her address.  She said they were building."

"They did. It's all finished, and they've been in it a month.  Lucy is
so capable; she keeps house exquisitely.  It's small, but oh, such a
pretty little house!"

"Well, that's fortunate," George said.  "One thing I've always felt
they didn't know a great deal about is architecture."

"Don't they?" asked Isabel, surprised.  "Anyhow, their house is
charming.  It's way out beyond the end of Amberson Boulevard; it's
quite near that big white house with a gray-green roof somebody built
out there a year or so ago.  There are any number of houses going up,
out that way; and the trolley-line runs within a block of them now, on
the next street, and the traction people are laying tracks more than
three miles beyond.  I suppose you'll be driving out to see Lucy to-
morrow."

"I thought--" George hesitated.  "I thought perhaps I'd go after dinner
this evening."

At this his mother laughed, not astonished.  "It was only my feeble
joke about 'to-morrow,' Georgie!  I was pretty sure you couldn't wait
that long.  Did Lucy write you about the factory?"

"No.  What factory?"

"The automobile shops.  They had rather a dubious time at first, I'm
afraid, and some of Eugene's experiments turned out badly, but this
spring they've finished eight automobiles and sold them all, and
they've got twelve more almost finished, and they're sold already!
Eugene's so gay over it!"

"What do his old sewing-machines look like?  Like that first one he
had when they came here?"

"No, indeed!  These have rubber tires blown up with air--pneumatic!
And they aren't so high; they're very easy to get into, and the
engine's in front--Eugene thinks that's a great improvement.  They're
very interesting to look at; behind the driver's seat there's a sort
of box where four people can sit, with a step and a little door in the
rear, and--"

"I know all about it," said George. "I've seen any number like that,
East.  You can see all you want of 'em, if you stand on Fifth Avenue
half an hour, any afternoon.  I've seen half-a-dozen go by almost at
the same time--within a few minutes, anyhow; and of course electric
hansoms are a common sight there any day.  I hired one, myself, the
last time I was there.  How fast do Mr. Morgan's machines go?"

"Much too fast!  It's very exhilarating--but rather frightening; and
they do make a fearful uproar.  He says, though, he thinks he sees a
way to get around the noisiness in time."

"I don't mind the noise," said George.  "Give me a horse, for mine,
though, any day.  I must get up a race with one of these things:
Pendennis'll leave it one mile behind in a two-mile run.  How's
grandfather?"

"He looks well, but he complains sometimes of his heart: I suppose
that's natural at his age--and it's an Amberson trouble."  Having
mentioned this, she looked anxious instantly.  "Did you ever feel any
weakness there, Georgie?"

"No!" he laughed.

"Are you sure, dear?"

"No!"  And he laughed again.  "Did you?"

"Oh, I think not--at least, the doctor told me he thought my heart was
about all right.  He said I needn't be alarmed."

"I should think not!  Women do seem to be always talking about health:
I suppose they haven't got enough else to think of!"

"That must be it," she said gayly.  "We're an idle lot!"

George had taken off his coat.  "I don't like to hint to a lady," he
said, "but I do want to dress before dinner."

"Don't be long; I've got to do a lot of looking at you, dear!"  She
kissed him and ran away singing.

But his Aunt Fanny was not so fond; and at the dinner-table there came
a spark of liveliness into her eye when George patronizingly asked her
what was the news in her own "particular line of sport."

"What do you mean, Georgie?" she asked quietly.

"Oh I mean:  What's the news in the fast set generally?  You been
causing any divorces lately?"

"No," said Fanny, the spark in her eye getting brighter.  "I haven't
been causing anything."

"Well, what's the gossip?  You usually hear pretty much everything
that goes on around the nooks and crannies in this town, I hear.
What's the last from the gossips' corner, auntie?"

Fanny dropped her eyes, and the spark was concealed, but a movement of
her lower lip betokened a tendency to laugh, as she replied.  "There
hasn't been much gossip lately, except the report that Lucy Morgan and
Fred Kinney are engaged--and that's quite old, by this time."

Undeniably, this bit of mischief was entirely successful, for there
was a clatter upon George's plate.  "What--what do you think you're
talking about?" he gasped.

Miss Fanny looked up innocently.  "About the report of Lucy Morgan's
engagement to Fred Kinney."

George turned dumbly to his mother, and Isabel shook her head
reassuringly.  "People are always starting rumours," she said.  "I
haven't paid any attention to this one."

"But you--you've heard it?" he stammered.

"Oh, one hears all sorts of nonsense, dear.  I haven't the slightest
idea that it's true."

"Then you have heard it!"

"I wouldn't let it take my appetite," his father suggested drily.
"There are plenty of girls in the world!"

George turned pale.

"Eat your dinner, Georgie," his aunt said sweetly.  "Food will do you
good. I didn't say I knew this rumour was true. I only said I'd heard
it."

"When?  When did you hear it!"

"Oh, months ago!"  And Fanny found any further postponement of
laughter impossible.

"Fanny, you're a hard-hearted creature," Isabel said gently.  "You
really are.  Don't pay any attention to her, George.  Fred Kinney's
only a clerk in his uncle's hardware place: he couldn't marry for
ages--even if anybody would accept him!"

George breathed tumultuously.  "I don't care anything about 'ages'!
What's that got to do with it?" he said, his thoughts appearing to be
somewhat disconnected.  "Ages,' don't mean anything!  I only want to
know--I want to know--I want--"  He stopped.

"What do you want?" his father asked crossly.

"Why don't you say it?  Don't make such a fuss."

"I'm not--not at all," George declared, pushing his chair back from
the table.

"You must finish your dinner, dear," his mother urged.  "Don't--"

"I have finished.  I've eaten all I want.  I don't want any more than
I wanted.  I don't want--I--"  He rose, still incoherent.  "I prefer--
I want--Please excuse me!"

He left the room, and a moment later the screens outside the open
front door were heard to slam:

"Fanny! You shouldn't--"

"Isabel, don't reproach me, he did have plenty of dinner, and I only
told the truth: everybody has been saying--"

"But there isn't any truth in it."

"We don't actually know there isn't," Miss Fanny insisted, giggling.
"We've never asked Lucy."

"I wouldn't ask her anything so absurd!"

"George would," George's father remarked.  "That's what he's gone to
do."

Mr. Minafer was not mistaken: that was what his son had gone to do.
Lucy and her father were just rising from their dinner table when the
stirred youth arrived at the front door of the new house.  It was a
cottage, however, rather than a house; and Lucy had taken a free hand
with the architect, achieving results in white and green, outside, and
white and blue, inside, to such effect of youth and daintiness that
her father complained of "too much spring-time!"  The whole place,
including his own bedroom, was a young damsel's boudoir, he said, so
that nowhere could he smoke a cigar without feeling like a ruffian.
However, he was smoking when George arrived, and he encouraged George
to join him in the pastime, but the caller, whose air was both tense
and preoccupied, declined with something like agitation.

"I never smoke--that is, I'm seldom--I mean, no thanks," he said.  "I
mean not at all.  I'd rather not."

"Aren't you well, George?"  Eugene asked, looking at him in
perplexity.  "Have you been overworking at college?  You do look rather
pa--"

"I don't work," said George.  "I mean I don't work.  I think, but I
don't work.  I only work at the end of the term.  There isn't much to
do."

Eugene's perplexity was little decreased, and a tinkle of the door-
bell afforded him obvious relief.  "It's my foreman," he said, looking
at his watch.  "I'll take him out in the yard to talk.  This is no
place for a foreman."  And he departed, leaving the "living room" to
Lucy and George.  It was a pretty room, white panelled and blue
curtained--and no place for a foreman, as Eugene said.  There was a
grand piano, and Lucy stood leaning back against it, looking intently
at George, while her fingers, behind her, absently struck a chord or
two.  And her dress was the dress for that room, being of blue and
white, too; and the high colour in her cheeks was far from interfering
with the general harmony of things--George saw with dismay that she
was prettier than ever, and naturally he missed the reassurance he
might have felt had he been able to guess that Lucy, on her part, was
finding him better looking than ever.  For, however unusual the scope
of George's pride, vanity of beauty was not included; he did not think
about his looks.

"What's wrong, George?" she asked softly.

"What do you mean: 'What's wrong?"

"You're awfully upset about something.  Didn't you get though your
examination all right?"

"Certainly I did.  What makes you think anything's 'wrong' with me?"

"You do look pale, as papa said, and it seemed to me that the way you
talked sounded--well, a little confused."

"Confused'! I said I didn't care to smoke.  What in the world is
confused about that?"

"Nothing.  But--"

"See here!"  George stepped close to her.  "Are you glad to see me?"

"You needn't be so fierce about it!"  Lucy protested, laughing at his
dramatic intensity.  "Of course I am!  How long have I been looking
forward to it?"

"I don't know," he said sharply, abating nothing of his fierceness.
"How long have you?"

"Why--ever since you went away!"

"Is that true?  Lucy, is that true?"

"You are funny!" she said.  "Of course it's true.  Do tell me what's
the matter with you, George!"

"I will!" he exclaimed.  "I was a boy when I saw you last.  I see that
now, though I didn't then.  Well, I'm not a boy any longer.  I'm a
man, and a man has a right to demand a totally different treatment."

"Why has he?"

"What?"

"I don't seem to be able to understand you at all, George.  Why
shouldn't a boy be treated just as well as a man?"

George seemed to find himself at a loss.  "Why shouldn't--Well, he
shouldn't, because a man has a right to certain explanations."

"What explanations?"

"Whether he's been made a toy of!"  George almost shouted.  "That's
what I want to know!"

Lucy shook her head despairingly.  "You are the queerest person!  You
say you're a man now, but you talk more like a boy than ever.  What
does make you so excited?"

"'Excited!'" he stormed.  "Do you dare to stand there and call me
'excited'?  I tell you, I never have been more calm or calmer in my
life!  I don't know that a person needs to be called 'excited' because
he demands explanations that are his simple due!"

"What in the world do you want me to explain?"

"Your conduct with Fred Kinney!" George shouted.

Lucy uttered a sudden cry of laughter; she was delighted.  "It's been
awful!" she said.  "I don't know that I ever heard of worse
misbehaviour!  Papa and I have been twice to dinner with his family,
and I've been three times to church with Fred--and once to the circus!
I don't know when they'll be here to arrest me!"

"Stop that!" George commanded fiercely.  "I want to know just one
thing, and I mean to know it, too!"

"Whether I enjoyed the circus?"

"I want to know if you're engaged to him!"

"No!" she cried and lifting her face close to his for the shortest
instant possible, she gave him a look half merry, half defiant, but
all fond.  It was an adorable look.

"Lucy!" he said huskily.

But she turned quickly from him, and ran to the other end of the room.
He followed awkwardly, stammering:

"Lucy, I want--I want to ask you.  Will you--will you--will you be
engaged to me?"

She stood at a window, seeming to look out into the summer darkness,
her back to him.

"Will you, Lucy?"

"No," she murmured, just audibly.

"Why not?"

"I'm older than you."

"Eight months!"

"You're too young."

"Is that--" he said, gulping--"is that the only reason you won't?"

She did not answer.

As she stood, persistently staring out of the window, with her back to
him, she did not see how humble his attitude had become; but his voice
was low, and it shook so that she could have no doubt of his emotion.
"Lucy, please forgive me for making such a row," he said, thus gently.
"I've been--I've been terribly upset--terribly!  You know how I feel
about you, and always have felt about you.  I've shown it in every
single thing I've done since the first time I met you, and I know you
know it.  Don't you?"

Still she did not move or speak.

"Is the only reason you won't be engaged to me you think I'm too
young, Lucy?"

"It's--it's reason enough," she said faintly.

At that he caught one of her hands, and she turned to him: there were
tears in her eyes, tears which he did not understand at all.

"Lucy, you little dear!" he cried.  "I knew you--"

"No, no!" she said, and she pushed him away, withdrawing her hand.
"George, let's not talk of solemn things."

"Solemn things!' Like what?"

"Like--being engaged."

But George had become altogether jubilant, and he laughed
triumphantly.  "Good gracious, that isn't solemn!"

"It is, too!" she said, wiping her eyes.  "It's too solemn for us."

"No, it isn't! I--"

"Let's sit down and be sensible, dear," she said.  "You sit over
there--"

"I will if you'll call me, 'dear' again."

"No," she said.  "I'll only call you that once again this summer--the
night before you go away."

"That will have to do, then," he laughed, 'so long as I know we're
engaged."

"But we're not!" she protested.  "And we never will be, if you don't
promise not to speak of it again until--until I tell you to!"

"I won't promise that," said the happy George.  "I'll only promise not
to speak of it till the next time you call me 'dear'; and you've
promised to call me that the night before I leave for my senior year."

"Oh, but I didn't!" she said earnestly, then hesitated.  "Did I?"

"Didn't you?"

"I don't think I meant it," she murmured, her wet lashes flickering
above troubled eyes.

"I know one thing about you," he said gayly, his triumph increasing.
"You never went back on anything you said, yet, and I'm not afraid of
this being the first time!"

"But we mustn't let--" she faltered; then went on tremulously,
"George, we've got on so well together, we won't let this make a
difference between us, will we?  And she joined in his laughter.

"It will all depend on what you tell me the night before I go away.
You agree we're going to settle things then, don't you, Lucy?"

"I don't promise."

"Yes, you do!  Don't you?"

"Well--"




Chapter  XIII



Tonight George began a jubilant warfare upon his Aunt Fanny, opening
the campaign upon his return home at about eleven o'clock.  Fanny had
retired, and was presumably asleep, but George, on the way to his own
room, paused before her door, and serenaded her in a full baritone:

     As I walk along the Boy de Balong
     With my independent air,
     The people all declare,
     'He must be a millionaire!'
     Oh, you hear them sigh, and wish to die,
     And see them wink the other eye.
     At the man that broke the bank at Monte Carlo!"

Isabel came from George's room, where she had been reading, waiting
for him.  "I'm afraid you'll disturb your father, dear. I wish you'd
sing more, though--in the daytime!  You have a splendid voice."

"Good-night, old lady!"

"I thought perhaps I--Didn't you want me to come in with you and
talk a little?"

"Not to-night.  You go to bed.  Good-night, old lady!"

He kissed her hilariously, entered his room with a skip, closed his
door noisily; and then he could be heard tossing things about, loudly
humming "The Man that Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo."

Smiling, his mother knelt outside his door to pray; then, with her
"Amen," pressed her lips to the bronze door-knob; and went silently to
her own apartment.

After breakfasting in bed, George spent the next morning at his
grandfather's and did not encounter his Aunt Fanny until lunch, when
she seemed to be ready for him.

"Thank you so much for the serenade, George!" she said.  "Your poor
father tells me he'd just got to sleep for the first time in two
nights, but after your kind attentions he lay awake the rest of last
night."

"Perfectly true," Mr. Minafer said grimly.

"Of course, I didn't know, sir," George hastened to assure him.  "I'm
awfully sorry.  But Aunt Fanny was so gloomy and excited before I went
out, last evening, I thought she needed cheering up."

"I!"  Fanny jeered.  "I was gloomy?  I was excited?  You mean about
that engagement?"

"Yes.  Weren't you?  I thought I heard you worrying over somebody's
being engaged.  Didn't I hear you say you'd heard Mr. Eugene Morgan
was engaged to marry some pretty little seventeen-year-old girl?"

Fanny was stung, but she made a brave effort.  "Did you ask Lucy?" she
said, her voice almost refusing the teasing laugh she tried to make it
utter.  "Did you ask her when Fred Kinney and she--"

"Yes.  That story wasn't true.  But the other one--"  Here he stared at
Fanny, and then affected dismay.  "Why, what's the matter with your
face, Aunt Fanny?  It seems agitated!"

"Agitated!"  Fanny said disdainfully, but her voice undeniably lacked
steadiness.  "Agitated!"

"Oh, come!"  Mr. Minafer interposed.  "Let's have a little peace!"

"I'm willing," said George.  "I don't want to see poor Aunt Fanny all
stirred up over a rumour I just this minute invented myself.  She's so
excitable--about certain subjects--it's hard to control her."  He
turned to his mother.  "What's the matter with grandfather?"

"Didn't you see him this morning?" Isabel asked.

"Yes.  He was glad to see me, and all that, but he seemed pretty
fidgety.  Has he been having trouble with his heart again?"

"Not lately.  No."

"Well, he's not himself.  I tried to talk to him about the estate; it's
disgraceful--it really is--the way things are looking.  He wouldn't
listen, and he seemed upset.  What's he upset over?"

Isabel looked serious; however, it was her husband who suggested
gloomily, "I suppose the Major's bothered about this Sydney and Amelia
business, most likely."

"What Sydney and Amelia business?" George asked.

"Your mother can tell you, if she wants to," Minafer said.  "It's not
my side of the family, so I keep off."

"It's rather disagreeable for all of us, Georgie," Isabel began.  "You
see, your Uncle Sydney wanted a diplomatic position, and he thought
brother George, being in Congress, could arrange it.  George did get
him the offer of a South American ministry, but Sydney wanted a
European ambassadorship, and he got quite indignant with poor George
for thinking he'd take anything smaller--and he believes George didn't
work hard enough for him.  George had done his best, of course, and
now he's out of Congress, and won't run again--so there's Sydney's
idea of a big diplomatic position gone for good.  Well, Sydney and
your Aunt Amelia are terribly disappointed, and they say they've been
thinking for years that this town isn't really fit to live in--'for a
gentleman,' Sydney says--and it is getting rather big and dirty.  So
they've sold their house and decided to go abroad to live permanently;
there's a villa near Florence they've often talked of buying. And they
want father to let them have their share of the estate now, instead of
waiting for him to leave it to them in his will."

"Well, I suppose that's fair enough," George said.  "That is, in case
he intended to leave them a certain amount in his will."

"Of course that's understood, Georgie.  Father explained his will to
us long ago; a third to them, and a third to brother George, and a
third to us."

Her son made a simple calculation in his mind. Uncle George was a
bachelor, and probably would never marry; Sydney and Amelia were
childless.  The Major's only grandchild appeared to remain the
eventual heir of the entire property, no matter if the Major did turn
over to Sydney a third of it now.  And George had a fragmentary vision
of himself, in mourning, arriving to take possession of a historic
Florentine villa--he saw himself walking up a cypress-bordered path,
with ancient carven stone balustrades in the distance, and servants in
mourning livery greeting the new signore.  "Well, I suppose it's
grandfather's own affair.  He can do it or not, just as he likes.  I
don't see why he'd mind much."

"He seemed rather confused and pained about it," Isabel said.  "I
think they oughtn't to urge it.  George says that the estate won't
stand taking out the third that Sydney wants, and that Sydney and
Amelia are behaving like a couple of pigs."  She laughed, continuing,
"Of course I don't know whether they are or not: I never have
understood any more about business myself than a little pig would!
But I'm on George's side, whether he's right or wrong; I always was
from the time we were children: and Sydney and Amelia are hurt with me
about it, I'm afraid.  They've stopped speaking to George entirely.
Poor father Family rows at his time of life."

George became thoughtful.  If Sydney and Amelia were behaving like
pigs, things might not be so simple as at first they seemed to be.
Uncle Sydney and Aunt Amelia might live an awful long while, he
thought; and besides, people didn't always leave their fortunes to
relatives.  Sydney might die first, leaving everything to his widow,
and some curly-haired Italian adventurer might get round her, over
there in Florence; she might be fool enough to marry again--or even
adopt somebody!

He became more and more thoughtful, forgetting entirely a plan he had
formed for the continued teasing of his Aunt Fanny; and, an hour after
lunch, he strolled over to his grandfather's, intending to apply for
further information, as a party rightfully interested.

He did not carry out this intention, however.  Going into the big
house by a side entrance, he was informed that the Major was upstairs
in his bedroom, that his sons Sydney and George were both with him,
and that a serious argument was in progress.  "You kin stan' right in
de middle dat big, sta'y-way," said Old Sam, the ancient negro, who
was his informant, "an' you kin heah all you a-mind to wivout goin' on
up no fudda.  Mist' Sydney an' Mist' Jawge talkin' louduh'n I evuh
heah nobody ca'y on in nish heah house! Quollin', honey, big
quollin'!"

"All right," said George shortly.  "You go on back to your own part of
the house, and don't make any talk.  Hear me?"

"Yessuh, yessuh," Sam chuckled, as he shuffled away.  "Plenty talkin'
wivout Sam!  Yessuh!"

George went to the foot of the great stairway.  He could hear angry
voices overhead--those of his two uncles--and a plaintive murmur, as
if the Major. tried to keep the peace.  Such sounds were far from
encouraging to callers, and George decided not to go upstairs until
this interview was over.  His decision was the result of no timidity,
nor of a too sensitive delicacy.  What he felt was, that if he
interrupted the scene in his grandfather's room, just at this time,
one of the three gentlemen engaging in it might speak to him in a
peremptory manner (in the heat of the moment) and George saw no reason
for exposing his dignity to such mischances.  Therefore he turned from
the stairway, and going quietly into the library, picked up a
magazine--but he did not open it, for his attention was instantly
arrested by his Aunt Amelia's voice, speaking in the next room.  The
door was open and George heard her distinctly.

"Isabel does?  Isabel!" she exclaimed, her tone high and shrewish.
"You needn't tell me anything about Isabel Minafer, I guess, my dear
old Frank Bronson!  I know her a little better than you do, don't you
think?"

George heard the voice of Mr. Bronson replying--a voice familiar to
him as that of his grandfather's attorney-in-chief and chief intimate
as well.  He was a contemporary of the Major's, being over seventy,
and they had been through three years of the War in the same regiment.
Amelia addressed him now, with an effect of angry mockery, as "my dear
old Frank Bronson"; but that (without the mockery) was how the
Amberson family almost always spoke of him: "dear old Frank Bronson."
He was a hale, thin old man, six feet three inches tall, and without a
stoop.

"I doubt your knowing Isabel," he said stiffly.  "You speak of her as
you do because she sides with her brother George, instead of with you
and Sydney."

"Pooh!"  Aunt Amelia was evidently in a passion.  "You know what's
been going on over there, well enough, Frank Bronson!"

"I don't even know what you're talking about."

"Oh, you don't?  You don't know that Isabel takes George's side simply
because he's Eugene Morgan's best friend?"

"It seems to me you're talking pure nonsense," said Bronson sharply.
"Not impure nonsense, I hope!"

Amelia became shrill.  "I thought you were a man of the world: don't
tell me you're blind!  For nearly two years Isabel's been pretending
to chaperone Fanny Minafer with Eugene, and all the time she's been
dragging that poor fool Fanny around to chaperone her and Eugene!
Under the circumstances, she knows people will get to thinking Fanny's
a pretty slim kind of chaperone, and Isabel wants to please George
because she thinks there'll be less talk if she can keep her own
brother around, seeming to approve.  'Talk!'  She'd better look out!
The whole town will be talking, the first thing she knows!  She--"

Amelia stopped, and stared at the doorway in a panic, for her nephew
stood there.

She kept her eyes upon his white face for a few strained moments,
then, regaining her nerve, looked away and shrugged her shoulders.

 "You weren't intended to hear what I've been saying, George," she
said quietly.  "But since you seem to--"

"Yes, I did."

"So!" She shrugged her shoulders again.  "After all, I don't know but
it's just as well, in the long run."

He walked up to where she sat.  "You--you--" he said thickly.  "It
seems--it seems to me you're--you're pretty common!"

Amelia tried to give the impression of an unconcerned person laughing
with complete indifference, but the sounds she produced were
disjointed and uneasy.  She fanned herself, looking out of the open
window near her.  "Of course, if you want to make more trouble in the
family than we've already got, George, with your eavesdropping, you
can go and repeat--"

Old Bronson had risen from his chair in great distress.  "Your aunt
was talking nonsense because she's piqued over a business matter,
George," he said.  "She doesn't mean what she said, and neither she
nor any one else gives the slightest credit to such foolishness--no
one in the world!"

George gulped, and wet lines shone suddenly along his lower eyelids.
"They--they'd better not!" he said, then stalked out of the room, and
out of the house.  He stamped fiercely across the stone slabs of the
front porch, descended the steps, and halted abruptly, blinking in the
strong sunshine.

In front of his own gate, beyond the Major's broad lawn, his mother
was just getting into her victoria, where sat already his Aunt Fanny
and Lucy Morgan.  It was a summer fashion-picture: the three ladies
charmingly dressed, delicate parasols aloft; the lines of the victoria
graceful as those of a violin; the trim pair of bays in glistening
harness picked out with silver, and the serious black driver whom
Isabel, being an Amberson, dared even in that town to put into a black
livery coat, boots, white breeches, and cockaded hat.  They jingled
smartly away, and, seeing George standing on the Major's lawn, Lucy
waved, and Isabel threw him a kiss.

But George shuddered, pretending not to see them, and stooped as if
searching for something lost in the grass, protracting that posture
until the victoria was out of hearing.  And ten minutes later, George
Amberson, somewhat in the semblance of an angry person plunging out of
the Mansion, found a pale nephew waiting to accost him.

"I haven't time to talk, Georgie."

"Yes, you have. You'd better!"

"What's the matter, then?"

His namesake drew him away from the vicinity of the house.  "I want to
tell you something I just heard Aunt Amelia say, in there."

"I don't want to hear it," said Amberson.  "I've been hearing entirely
too much of what 'Aunt Amelia, says, lately."

"She says my mother's on your side about this division of the property
because you're Eugene Morgan's best friend."

"What in the name of heaven has that got to do with your mother's
being on my side?"

"She said--" George paused to swallow.  "She said--"  He faltered.

"You look sick," said his uncle; and laughed shortly.  "If it's
because of anything Amelia's been saying, I don't blame you!  What
else did she say?"

George swallowed again, as with nausea, but under his uncle's
encouragement he was able to be explicit.  "She said my mother wanted
you to be friendly to her about Eugene Morgan.  She said my mother had
been using Aunt Fanny as a chaperone."

Amberson emitted a laugh of disgust.  "It's wonderful what tommy-rot a
woman in a state of spite can think of!  I suppose you don't doubt
that Amelia Amberson created this specimen of tommy-rot herself?"

"I know she did."

"Then what's the matter?"

"She said--"  George faltered again.  "She said--she implied people
were--were talking about it."

"Of all the damn nonsense!" his uncle exclaimed.  George looked at him
haggardly.  "You're sure they're not?"

"Rubbish!  Your mother's on my side about this division because she
knows Sydney's a pig and always has been a pig, and so has his
spiteful wife.  I'm trying to keep them from getting the better of
your mother as well as from getting the better of me, don't you
suppose?  Well, they're in a rage because Sydney always could do what
he liked with father unless your mother interfered, and they know I
got Isabel to ask him not to do what they wanted.  They're keeping up
the fight and they're sore--and Amelia's a woman who always says any
damn thing that comes into her head!  That's all there is to it."

"But she said," George persisted wretchedly; "she said there was talk.
She said--"

"Look here, young fellow!"  Amberson laughed good-naturedly.  "There
probably is some harmless talk about the way your Aunt Fanny goes
after poor Eugene, and I've no doubt I've abetted it myself.  People
can't help being amused by a thing like that.  Fanny was always
languishing at him, twenty-odd years ago, before he left here.  Well,
we can't blame the poor thing if she's got her hopes up again, and I
don't know that I blame her, myself, for using your mother the way she
does."

"How do you mean?"

Amberson put his hand on George's shoulder.  "You like to tease
Fanny," he said, "but I wouldn't tease her about this, if I were you.
Fanny hasn't got much in her life.  You know, Georgie, just being an
aunt isn't really the great career it may sometimes appear to you!  In
fact, I don't know of anything much that Fanny has got, except her
feeling about Eugene.  She's always had it--and what's funny to us is
pretty much life-and-death to her, I suspect.  Now, I'll not deny that
Eugene Morgan is attracted to your mother.  He is; and that's another
case of 'always was'; but I know him, and he's a knight, George--a
crazy one, perhaps, if you've read 'Don Quixote.'  And I think your
mother likes him better than she likes any man outside her own family,
and that he interests her more than anybody else--and 'always has.'
And that's all there is to it, except--"

"Except what?"  George asked quickly, as he paused.

"Except that I suspect--" Amberson chuckled, and began over: "I'll
tell you in confidence. I think Fanny's a fairly tricky customer, for
such an innocent old girl!  There isn't any real harm in her, but
she's a great diplomatist--lots of cards up her lace sleeves, Georgie!
By the way, did you ever notice how proud she is of her arms?  Always
flashing 'em at poor Eugene!"  And he stopped to laugh again.

"I don't see anything confidential about that," George complained.  "I
thought--"

"Wait a minute!  My idea is--don't forget it's a confidential one, but
I'm devilish right about it, young Georgie!--it's this: Fanny uses
your mother for a decoy duck.  She does everything in the world she
can to keep your mother's friendship with Eugene going, because she
thinks that's what keeps Eugene about the place, so to speak.  Fanny's
always with your mother, you see; and whenever he sees Isabel he sees
Fanny.  Fanny thinks he'll get used to the idea of her being around,
and some day her chance may come!  You see, she's probably afraid--
perhaps she even knows, poor thing!--that she wouldn't get to see much
of Eugene if it weren't for Isabel's being such a friend of his.
There!  D'you see?"

"Well--I suppose so."  George's brow was still dark, however.  "If
you're sure whatever talk there is, is about Aunt Fanny.  If that's
so--"

"Don't be an ass," his uncle advised him lightly, moving away.  "I'm
off for a week's fishing to forget that woman in there, and her pig of
a husband."  (His gesture toward the Mansion indicated Mr. and Mrs.
Sydney Amberson.)  "I recommend a like course to you, if you're silly
enough to pay any attention to such rubbishings!  Good-bye!"

George was partially reassured, but still troubled: a word haunted
him like the recollection of a nightmare.  "Talk!"

He stood looking at the houses across the street from the Mansion; and
though the sunshine was bright upon them, they seemed mysteriously
threatening.  He had always despised them, except the largest of them,
which was the home of his henchman, Charlie Johnson.  The Johnsons had
originally owned a lot three hundred feet wide, but they had sold all
of it except the meager frontage before the house itself, and five
houses were now crowded into the space where one used to squire it so
spaciously.  Up and down the street, the same transformation bad taken
place: every big, comfortable old brick house now had two or three
smaller frame neighbours crowding up to it on each side, cheap-looking
neighbours, most of them needing paint and not clean--and yet, though
they were cheap looking, they had cost as much to build as the big
brick houses, whose former ample yards they occupied.  Only where
George stood was there left a sward as of yore; the great, level,
green lawn that served for both the Major's house and his daughter's.
This serene domain--unbroken, except for the two gravelled carriage-
drives--alone remained as it had been during the early glories of the
Amberson Addition.

George stared at the ugly houses opposite, and hated them more than
ever; but he shivered.  Perhaps the riffraff living in those houses
sat at the windows to watch their betters; perhaps they dared to
gossip--

He uttered an exclamation, and walked rapidly toward his own front
gate.  The victoria had re turned with Miss Fanny alone; she jumped
out briskly and the victoria waited.

"Where's mother?"  George asked sharply, as he met her.

"At Lucy's.  I only came back to get some embroidery, because we found
the sun too hot for driving.  I'm in a hurry."

But, going into the house with her, he detained her when she would
have hastened upstairs.

"I haven't time to talk now, Georgie; I'm going right back.  I
promised your mother--"

"You listen!" said George.

"What on earth--"

He repeated what Amelia had said.  This time, however, he spoke
coldly, and without the emotion he had exhibited during the recital to
his uncle: Fanny was the one who showed agitation during this
interview, for she grew fiery red, and her eyes dilated.  "What on
earth do you want to bring such trash to me for?" she demanded,
breathing fast.

"I merely wished to know two things: whether it is your duty or mine
to speak to father of what Aunt Amelia--"

Fanny stamped her foot.  "You little fool!" she cried.  "You awful
little fool!"

"I decline--"

"Decline, my hat!  Your father's a sick man, and you--"

"He doesn't seem so to me."

"Well, he does to me!  And you want to go troubling him with an
Amberson family row!  It's just what that cat would love you to do!"

"Well, I--"

"Tell your father if you like!  It will only make him a little sicker
to think he's got a son silly enough to listen to such craziness!"

"Then you're sure there isn't any talk?"  Fanny disdained a reply in
words.  She made a hissing sound of utter contempt and snapped her
fingers.  Then she asked scornfully: "What's the other thing you
wanted to know?"

George's pallor increased.  "Whether it mightn't be better, under the
circumstances," he said, "if this family were not so intimate with the
Morgan family--at least for a time.  It might be better--"

Fanny stared at him incredulously.  "You mean you'd quit seeing Lucy?"

"I hadn't thought of that side of it, but if such a thing were
necessary on account of talk about my mother, I--I--"  He hesitated
unhappily.  "I suggested that if all of us--for a time--perhaps only
for a time--it might be better if--"

"See here," she interrupted.  "We'll settle this nonsense right now.
If Eugene Morgan comes to this house, for instance, to see me, your
mother can't get up and leave the place the minute he gets here, can
she?  What do you want her to do: insult him?  Or perhaps you'd prefer
she'd insult Lucy?  That would do just as well.  What is it you're up
to, anyhow?  Do you really love your Aunt Amelia so much that you want
to please her?  Or do you really hate your Aunt Fanny so much that you
want to--that you want to--"

She choked and sought for her handkerchief; suddenly she began to cry.

"Oh, see here," George said.  "I don't hate you," Aunt Fanny.  That's
silly.  I don't--"

"You do!  You do!   You want to--you want to destroy the only thing--
that I--that I ever--"  And, unable to continue, she became inaudible
in her handkerchief.

George felt remorseful, and his own troubles were lightened: all at
once it became clear to him that he had been worrying about nothing.
He perceived that his Aunt Amelia was indeed an old cat, and that to
give her scandalous meanderings another thought would be the height of
folly.  By no means unsusceptible to such pathos as that now exposed
before him, he did not lack pity for Fanny, whose almost spoken
confession was lamentable; and he was granted the vision to understand
that his mother also pitied Fanny infinitely more than he did.  This
seemed to explain everything.

He patted the unhappy lady awkwardly upon her shoulder.  "There,
there!" he said.  "I didn't mean anything.  Of course the only thing
to do about Aunt Amelia is to pay no attention to her.  It's all
right, Aunt Fanny.  Don't cry.  I feel a lot better now, myself.  Come
on; I'll drive back there with you.  It's all over, and nothing's the
matter.  Can't you cheer up?"

Fanny cheered up; and presently the customarily hostile aunt and
nephew were driving out Amberson Boulevard amiably together in the hot
sunshine.




Chapter XIV



"Almost" was Lucy's last word on the last night of George's vacation--
that vital evening which she had half consented to agree upon for
"settling things" between them.  "Almost engaged," she meant.  And
George, discontented with the "almost," but contented that she seemed
glad to wear a sapphire locket with a tiny photograph of George
Amberson Minafer inside it, found himself wonderful in a new world at
the final instant of their parting.  For, after declining to let him
kiss her "good-bye," as if his desire for such a ceremony were the
most preposterous absurdity in the world, she had leaned suddenly
close to him and left upon his cheek the veriest feather from a
fairy's wing.

She wrote him a month later:

No.  It must keep on being almost.

Isn't almost pretty pleasant?  You know well enough that I care for
you.  I did from the first minute I saw you, and I'm pretty sure you
knew it--I'm afraid you did.  I'm afraid you always knew it.  I'm not
conventional and cautious about being engaged, as you say I am, dear.
(I always read over the "dears" in your letters a time or two, as you
say you do in mine--only I read all of your letters a time or two!)
But it's such a solemn thing it scares me.  It means a good deal to a
lot of people besides you and me, and that scares me, too.  You write
that I take your feeling for me "too lightly" and that I "take the
whole affair too lightly."  Isn't that odd!  Because to myself I seem
to take it as something so much more solemn than you do.  I shouldn't
be a bit surprised to find myself an old lady, some day, still
thinking of you--while you'd be away and away with somebody else
perhaps, and me forgotten ages ago!  "Lucy Morgan," you'd say, when
you saw my obituary.  "Lucy Morgan? Let me see: I seem to remember the
name.  Didn't I know some Lucy Morgan or other, once upon a time?"
Then you'd shake your big white head and stroke your long white beard
--you'd have such a distinguished long white beard! and you'd say,
'No. I don't seem to remember any Lucy Morgan; I wonder what made me
think I did?'  And poor me!  I'd be deep in the ground, wondering if
you'd heard about it and what you were saying!  Good-bye for to-day.
Don't work too hard--dear!

George immediately seized pen and paper, plaintively but vigorously
requesting Lucy not to imagine him with a beard, distinguished or
otherwise, even in the extremities of age.  Then, after inscribing his
protest in the matter of this visioned beard, he concluded his missive
in a tone mollified to tenderness, and proceeded to read a letter from
his mother which had reached him simultaneously with Lucy's.  Isabel
wrote from Asheville, where she had just arrived with her husband.

I think your father looks better already, darling, though we've been
here only a few hours  It may be we've found just the place to build
him up.  The doctors said they hoped it would prove to be, and if it
is, it would be worth the long struggle we had with him to get him to
give up and come.  Poor dear man, he was so blue, not about his health
but about giving up the worries down at his office and forgetting them
for a time--if he only will forget them!  It took the pressure of the
family and all his best friends, to get him to come--but father and
brother George and Fanny and Eugene Morgan all kept at him so
constantly that he just had to give in.  I'm afraid that in my anxiety
to get him to do what the doctors wanted him to, I wasn't able to back
up brother George as I should in his difficulty with Sydney and
Amelia.  I'm so sorry!  George is more upset than I've ever seen him--
they've got what they wanted, and they're sailing before long,  I
hear, to live in Florence.  Father said he couldn't stand the constant
persuading--I'm afraid the word he used was "nagging."  I can't
understand people behaving like that.  George says they may be
Ambersons, but they're vulgar!  I'm afraid I almost agree with him.
At least, I think they were inconsiderate.  But I don't see why I'm
unburdening myself of all this to you, poor darling!  We'll have
forgotten all about it long before you come home for the holidays, and
it should mean little or nothing to you, anyway.  Forget that I've
been so foolish!

Your father is waiting for me to take a walk with him--that's a
splendid sign, because he hasn't felt he could walk much, at home,
lately. I mustn't keep him waiting.  Be careful to wear your
mackintosh and rubbers in rainy weather, and, as soon as it begins to
get colder, your ulster.  Wish you could see your father now. Looks so
much better!  We plan to stay six weeks if the place agrees with him.
It does really seem to already!  He's just called in the door to say
he's waiting.  Don't smoke too much, darling boy.

Devotedly, your mother
Isabel.

But she did not keep her husband there for the six weeks she
anticipated.  She did not keep him anywhere that long.  Three weeks
after writing this letter, she telegraphed suddenly to George that
they were leaving for home at once; and four days later, when he and a
friend came whistling into his study, from lunch at the club, he found
another telegram upon his desk.

He read it twice before he comprehended its import.

Papa left us at ten this morning, dearest.
Mother.

The friend saw the change in his face.  "Not bad news?"

George lifted utterly dumfounded eyes from the yellow paper.

"My father," he said weakly.  "She says--she says he's dead.  I've got
to go home."

His Uncle George and the Major met him at the station when he arrived
--the first time the Major had ever come to meet his grandson.  The old
gentleman sat in his closed carriage (which still needed paint) at the
entrance to the station, but he got out and advanced to grasp George's
hand tremulously, when the latter appeared.  "Poor fellow!" he said,
and patted him repeatedly upon the shoulder.  "Poor fellow!  Poor
Georgie!"

George had not yet come to a full realization of his loss: so far, his
condition was merely dazed; and as the Major continued to pat him,
murmuring "Poor fellow!" over and over, George was seized by an almost
irresistible impulse to tell his grandfather that he was not a poodle.
But he said "Thanks," in a low voice, and got into the carriage, his
two relatives following with deferential sympathy.  He noticed that
the Major's tremulousness did not disappear, as they drove up the
street, and that he seemed much feebler than during the summer.
Principally, however, George was concerned with his own emotion, or
rather, with his lack of emotion; and the anxious sympathy of his
grandfather and his uncle made him feel hypocritical.  He was not
grief-stricken; but he felt that he ought to be, and, with a secret
shame, concealed his callousness beneath an affectation of solemnity.

But when he was taken into the room where lay what was left of Wilbur
Minafer, George had no longer to pretend; his grief was sufficient.
It needed only the sight of that forever inert semblance of the quiet
man who had been always so quiet a part of his son's life--so quiet a
part that George had seldom been consciously aware that his father was
indeed a. part of his life.  As the figure lay there, its very
quietness was what was most lifelike; and suddenly it struck George
hard.  And in that unexpected, racking grief of his son, Wilbur
Minafer became more vividly George's father than he had ever been in
life.

When George left the room, his arm was about his black-robed mother,
his shoulders were still shaken with sobs.  He leaned upon his mother;
she gently comforted him; and presently he recovered his composure and
became self-conscious enough to wonder if he had not been making an
unmanly display of himself.  "I'm all right again, mother," he said
awkwardly.  "Don't worry about me: you'd better go lie down, or
something; you look pretty pale."

Isabel did look pretty pale, but not ghastly pale, as Fanny did.
Fanny's grief was overwhelming; she stayed in her room, and George did
not see her until the next day, a few minutes before the funeral, when
her haggard face appalled him.  But by this time he was quite himself
again, and during the short service in the cemetery his thoughts even
wandered so far as to permit him a feeling of regret not directly
connected with his father.  Beyond the open flower-walled grave was a
mound where new grass grew; and here lay his great-uncle, old John
Minafer, who had died the previous autumn; and beyond this were the
graves of George's grandfather and grandmother Minafer, and of his
grandfather Minafer's second wife, and her three sons, George's half-
uncles, who had been drowned together in a canoe accident when George
was a child--Fanny was the last of the family.  Next beyond was the
Amberson family lot, where lay the Major's wife and their sons Henry
and Milton, uncles whom George dimly remembered; and beside them lay
Isabel's older sister, his Aunt Estelle, who had died, in her
girlhood, long before George was born.  The Minafer monument was a
granite block, with the name chiseled upon its one polished side, and
the Amberson monument was a white marble shaft taller than any other
in that neighbourhood.  But farther on there was a newer section of
the cemetery, an addition which had been thrown open to occupancy only
a few years before, after dexterous modern treatment by a landscape
specialist.  There were some large new mausoleums here, and shafts
taller than the Ambersons', as well as a number of monuments of some
sculptural pretentiousness; and altogether the new section appeared to
be a more fashionable and important quarter than that older one which
contained the Amberson and Minafer lots.  This was what caused
George's regret, during the moment or two when his mind strayed from
his father and the reading of the service.

On the train, going back to college, ten days later, this regret
(though it was as much an annoyance as a regret) recurred to his mind,
and a feeling developed within him that the new quarter of the
cemetery was in bad taste--not architecturally or sculpturally
perhaps, but in presumption: it seemed to flaunt a kind of parvenu
ignorance, as if it were actually pleased to be unaware that all the
aristocratic and really important families were buried in the old
section.

The annoyance gave way before a recollection of the sweet mournfulness
of his mother's face, as she had said good-bye to him at the station,
and of how lovely she looked in her mourning.  He thought of Lucy,
whom he had seen only twice, and he could not help feeling that in
these quiet interviews he had appeared to her as tinged with heroism--
she had shown, rather than said, how brave she thought him in his
sorrow.  But what came most vividly to George's mind, during these
retrospections, was the despairing face of his Aunt Fanny.  Again and
again he thought of it; he could not avoid its haunting.  And for
days, after he got back to college, the stricken likeness of Fanny
would appear before him unexpectedly, and without a cause that he
could trace in his immediately previous thoughts.  Her grief had been
so silent, yet it had so amazed him.

George felt more and more compassion for this ancient antagonist of
his, and he wrote to his mother about her:

I'm afraid poor Aunt Fanny might think now father's gone we won't want
her to live with us any longer and because I always teased her so much
she might think I'd be for turning her out.  I don't know where on
earth she'd go or what she could live on if we did do something like
this, and of course we never would do such a thing, but I'm pretty
sure she had something of the kind on her mind.  She didn't say
anything, but the way she looked is what makes me think so.  Honestly,
to me she looked just scared sick.  You tell her there isn't any
danger in the world of my treating her like that.  Tell her everything
is to go on just as it always has.  Tell her to cheer up!




Chapter XV



Isabel did more for Fanny than telling her to cheer up. Everything
that Fanny inherited from her father, old Aleck Minafer, had been
invested in Wilbur's business; and Wilbur's business, after a period
of illness corresponding in dates to the illness of Wilbur's body, had
died just before Wilbur did.  George Amberson and Fanny were both
"wiped out to a miracle of precision," as Amberson said.  They "owned
not a penny and owed not a penny," he continued, explaining his
phrase.  "It's like the moment just before drowning: you're not under
water and you're not out of it.  All you know is that you're not dead
yet."

He spoke philosophically, having his "prospects" from his father to
fall back upon; but Fanny had neither "prospects" nor philosophy.
However, a legal survey of Wilbur's estate revealed the fact that his
life insurance was left clear of the wreck; and Isabel, with the
cheerful consent of her son, promptly turned this salvage over to her
sister-in-law.  Invested, it would yield something better than nine
hundred dollars a year, and thus she was assured of becoming neither a
pauper nor a dependent, but proved to be, as Amberson said, adding his
efforts to the cheering up of Fanny, "an heiress, after all, in spite
of rolling mills and the devil."  She was unable to smile, and he
continued his humane gayeties.  "See what a wonderfully desirable
income nine hundred dollars is, Fanny: a bachelor, to be in your
class, must have exactly forty-nine thousand one hundred a year.
Then, you see, all you need to do, in order to have fifty thousand a
year, is to be a little encouraging when some bachelor in your class
begins to show by his haberdashery what he wants you to think about
him!"

She looked at him wanly, murmured a desolate response--she had "sewing
to do"--and left the room; while Amberson shook his head ruefully at
his sister.  "I've often thought that humor was not my forte," he
sighed.  "Lord!  She doesn't 'cheer up' much!"

The collegian did not return to his home for the holidays.  Instead,
Isabel joined him, and they went South for the two weeks.  She was
proud of her stalwart, good-looking son at the hotel where they
stayed, and it was meat and drink to her when she saw how people
stared at him in the lobby and on the big verandas--indeed, her vanity
in him was so dominant that she was unaware of their staring at her
with more interest and an admiration friendlier than George evoked.
Happy to have him to herself for this fortnight, she loved to walk
with him, leaning upon his arm, to read with him, to watch the sea
with him--perhaps most of all she liked to enter the big dining room
with him.

Yet both of them felt constantly the difference between this
Christmastime and other Christmas-times of theirs--in all, it was a
sorrowful holiday.  But when Isabel came East for George's
commencement, in June, she brought Lucy with her--and things began to
seem different, especially when George Amberson arrived with Lucy's
father on Class Day.  Eugene had been in New York, on business;
Amberson easily persuaded him to this outing; and they made a cheerful
party of it, with the new graduate of course the hero and center of it
all.

His uncle was a fellow alumnus.  "Yonder was where I roomed when I was
here," he said, pointing out one of the university buildings to
Eugene.  "I don't know whether George would let my admirers place a
tablet to mark the spot, or not.  He owns all these buildings now, you
know."

"Didn't you, when you were here?  Like uncle, like nephew."

"Don't tell George you think he's like me.  Just at this time we
should be careful of the young gentleman's feelings."

"Yes," said Eugene.  "If we weren't he mightn't let us exist at all."

"I'm sure I didn't have it so badly at his age," Amberson said
reflectively, as they strolled on through the commencement crowd.
"For one thing, I had brothers and sisters, and my mother didn't just
sit at my feet as George's does; and I wasn't an only grandchild,
either.  Father's always spoiled Georgie a lot more than he did any of
his own' children."

Eugene laughed.  "You need only three things to explain all that's
good and bad about Georgie."

"Three?"

"He's Isabel's only child.  He's an Amberson.  He's a boy."

"Well, Mister Bones, of these three things which are the good ones and
which are the bad ones?"

"All of them," said Eugene.

It happened that just then they came in sight of the subject of their
discourse.  George was walking under the elms with Lucy, swinging a
stick and pointing out to her various objects and localities which had
attained historical value during the last four years.  The two older
men marked his gestures, careless and graceful; they observed his
attitude, unconsciously noble, his easy proprietorship of the ground
beneath his feet and round about, of the branches overhead, of the old
buildings beyond, and of Lucy.

"I don't know," Eugene said, smiling whimsically.  "I don't know.
When I spoke of his being a human being--I don't know.  Perhaps it's
more like deity."

"I wonder if I was like that!"  'Amberson groaned.'  "You don't
suppose every Amberson has had to go through it, do you?"

"Don't worry!  At least half of it is a combination of youth, good
looks, and college; and even the noblest Ambersons get over their
nobility and come to, be people in time.  It takes more than time,
though."

"I should say it did take more than time!" his friend agreed, shaking
a rueful head.

Then they walked over to join the loveliest Amberson, whom neither
time nor trouble seemed to have touched.  She stood alone, thoughtful
under the great trees, chaperoning George and Lucy at a distance; but,
seeing the two friends approaching, she came to meet them.

"It's charming, isn't it!" she said, moving her black-gloved hand to
indicate the summery dressed crowd strolling about them, or clustering
in groups, each with its own hero.  "They seem so eager and so
confident, all these boys--it's touching.  But of course youth doesn't
know it's touching."

Amberson coughed.  "No, it doesn't seem to take itself as pathetic,
precisely!  Eugene and I were just speaking of something like that.
Do you know what I think whenever I see these smooth, triumphal young
faces?  I always think:  'Oh, how you're going to catch it'!"

"George!"

"Oh, yes," he said.  "Life's most ingenious: it's got a special
walloping for every mother's son of 'em!"

"Maybe," said Isabel, troubled--"maybe some of the mothers can take
the walloping for them."

"Not one!" her brother assured her, with emphasis.  "Not any more than
she can take on her own face the lines that are bound to come on her
son's.  I suppose you know that all these young faces have got to get
lines on 'em?"

"Maybe they won't," she said, smiling wistfully.  "Maybe times will
change, and nobody will have to wear lines."

"Times have changed like that for only one person that I know," Eugene
said.  And as Isabel looked inquiring, he laughed, and she saw that
she was the "only one person."  His implication was justified,
moreover, and she knew it.  She blushed charmingly.

"Which is it puts the lines on the faces?"  Amberson asked.  "Is it
age or trouble?  Of course we can't decide that wisdom does it--we
must be polite to Isabel."

"I'll tell you what puts the lines there," Eugene said.  "Age puts
some, and trouble puts some, and work puts some, but the deepest are
carved by lack of faith.  The serenest brow is the one that believes
the most."

"In what?" Isabel asked gently.

"In everything!"

She looked at him inquiringly, and he laughed as he had a moment
before, when she looked at him that way.  "Oh, yes, you do!" he said.

She continued to look at him inquiringly a moment or two longer, and
there was an unconscious earnestness in her glance, something trustful
as well as inquiring, as if she knew that whatever he meant it was all
right.  Then her eyes drooped thoughtfully, and she seemed to address
some inquiries to herself.  She looked up suddenly.  "Why, I believe,"
she said, in a tone of surprise, "I believe I do!"

And at that both men laughed.  "Isabel!" her brother exclaimed.
"You're a foolish person!  There are times when you look exactly
fourteen years old!"

But this reminded her of her real affair in that part of the world.
"Good gracious!" she said.  "Where have the children got to?  We must
take Lucy pretty soon, so that George can go and sit with the Class.
We must catch up with them."

She took her brother's arm, and the three moved on, looking about them
in the crowd.

"Curious," Amberson remarked, as they did not immediately discover the
young people they sought.  "Even in such a concourse one would think
we couldn't fail to see the proprietor."

"Several hundred proprietors today," Eugene suggested.

"No; they're only proprietors of the university," said George's uncle.
"We're looking for the proprietor of the universe."

"There he is!" cried Isabel fondly, not minding this satire at all.
"And doesn't he look it!"

Her escorts were still laughing at her when they joined the proprietor
of the universe and his pretty friend, and though both Amberson and
Eugene declined to explain the cause of their mirth, even upon Lucy's
urgent request, the portents of the day were amiable, and the five
made a happy party--that is to say, four of them made a happy audience
for the fifth, and the mood of this fifth was gracious and cheerful.

George took no conspicuous part in either the academic or the social
celebrations of his class; he seemed to regard both sets of exercises
with a tolerant amusement, his own "crowd" "not going in much for
either of those sorts of things," as he explained to Lucy.  What his
crowd had gone in for remained ambiguous; some negligent testimony
indicating that, except for an astonishing reliability which they all
seemed to have attained in matters relating to musical comedy, they
had not gone in for anything.  Certainly the question one of them put
to Lucy, in response to investigations of hers, seemed to point that
way:  "Don't you think," he said, "really, don't you think that being
things is rather better than doing things?"

He said "rahthuh bettuh" for "rather better," and seemed to do it
deliberately, with perfect knowledge of what he was doing.  Later,
Lucy mocked him to George, and George refused to smile: he somewhat
inclined to such pronunciations, himself.  This inclination was one of
the things that he had acquired in the four years.

What else he had acquired, it might have puzzled him to state, had
anybody asked him and required a direct reply within a reasonable
space of time.  He had learned how to pass examinations by "cramming";
that is, in three or four days and nights he could get into his head
enough of a selected fragment of some scientific or philosophical or
literary or linguistic subject to reply plausibly to six questions out
of ten.  He could retain the information necessary for such a feat
just long enough to give a successful performance; then it would
evaporate utterly from his brain, and leave him undisturbed.  George,
like his "crowd," not only preferred "being things" to "doing things,"
but had contented himself with four years of "being things" as a
preparation for going on "being things."  And when Lucy rather shyly
pressed him for his friend's probable definition of the "things" it
seemed so superior and beautiful to be, George raised his eyebrows
slightly, meaning that she should have understood without explanation;
but he did explain:  "Oh, family and all that--being a gentleman, I
suppose."

Lucy gave the horizon a long look, but offered no comment.




Chapter XVI


"Aunt Fanny doesn't look much better," George said to his mother, a few
minutes after their arrival, on the night they got home.  He stood
with a towel in her doorway, concluding some sketchy ablutions before
going downstairs to a supper which Fanny was hastily preparing for
them.  Isabel had not telegraphed;  Fanny was taken by surprise when
they drove up in a station cab at eleven o'clock; and George instantly
demanded "a little decent food."  (Some criticisms of his had publicly
disturbed the composure of the dining-car steward four hours
previously.)  "I never saw anybody take things so hard as she seems
to," he observed, his voice muffled by the towel.  "Doesn't she get
over it at all?  I thought she'd feel better when we turned over the
insurance to her--gave it to her absolutely, without any strings to
it.  She looks about a thousand years old!"

"She looks quite girlish, sometimes, though," his mother said.

"Has she looked that way much since father--"

"Not so much," Isabel said thoughtfully.  "But she will, as times goes
on."

"Time'll have to hurry, then, it seems to me," George observed,
returning to his own room.

When they went down to the dining room, he pronounced acceptable the
salmon salad, cold beef, cheese, and cake which Fanny made ready for
them without disturbing the servants.  The journey had fatigued
Isabel, she ate nothing, but sat to observe with tired pleasure the
manifestations of her son's appetite, meanwhile giving her sister-in-
law a brief summary of the events of commencement.  But presently she
kissed them both good-night--taking care to kiss George lightly upon
the side of his head, so as not to disturb his eating--and left aunt
and nephew alone together.

"It never was becoming to her to look pale," Fanny said absently, a
few moments after Isabel's departure.

"Wha'd you say, Aunt Fanny?"

"Nothing. I suppose your mother's been being pretty gay?  Going a
lot?"

"How could she?" George asked cheerfully.  "In mourning, of course all
she could do was just sit around and look on.  That's all Lucy could
do either, for the matter of that."

"I suppose so," his aunt assented.  "How did Lucy get home?"

George regarded her with astonishment.  "Why, on the train with the
rest of us, of course."

"I didn't mean that," Fanny explained.  "I meant from the station.
Did you drive out to their house with her before you came here?"

"No.  She drove home with her father, of course."

"Oh, I see.  So Eugene came to the station to meet you."

"To meet us?"  George echoed, renewing his attack upon the salmon
salad.  "How could he?"

"I don't know what you mean," Fanny said drearily, in the desolate
voice that had become her habit.  "I haven't seen him while your
mother's been away."

"Naturally," said George.  "He's been East himself."

At this Fanny's drooping eyelids opened wide.

"Did you see him?"

"Well, naturally, since he made the trip home with us!"

"He did?" she said sharply.  "He's been with you all the time?"

"No; only on the train and the last three days before we left.  Uncle
George got him to come."

Fanny's eyelids drooped again, and she sat silent until George pushed
back his chair and lit a cigarette, declaring his satisfaction with
what she had provided.  "You're a fine housekeeper," he said
benevolently.  "You know how to make things look dainty as well as
taste the right way. I don't believe you'd stay single very long if
some of the bachelors and widowers around town could just once see--"

She did not hear him.  "It's a little odd," she said.

"What's odd?"

"Your mother's not mentioning that Mr. Morgan had been with you."

"Didn't think of it, I suppose," said George carelessly; and, his
benevolent mood increasing, he conceived the idea that a little
harmless rallying might serve to elevate his aunt's drooping spirits.
"I'll tell. you something, in confidence," he said solemnly.

She looked up, startled. "What?"

"Well, it struck me that Mr. Morgan was looking pretty absent-minded,
most of the time; and he certainly is dressing better than he used to.
Uncle George told me he heard that the automobile factory had been
doing quite well--won a race, too!  I shouldn't be a bit surprised if
all the young fellow had been waiting for was to know he had an
assured income before he proposed."

"What 'young fellow'?"

"This young fellow Morgan," laughed George; "Honestly, Aunt Fanny, I
shouldn't be a bit surprised to have him request an interview with me
any day, and declare that his intentions are honourable, and ask my
permission to pay his addresses to you.  What had I better tell him?"

Fanny burst into tears.

"Good heavens!" George cried.  "I was only teasing. I didn't mean--"

"Let me alone," she said lifelessly; and, continuing to weep, rose and
began to clear away the dishes.

"Please, Aunt Fanny--"

"Just let me alone."

George was distressed.  "I didn't mean anything, Aunt Fanny!  I didn't
know you'd got so sensitive as all that."

"You'd better go up to bed," she said desolately, going on with her
work and her weeping.

"Anyhow," he insisted, "do let these things wait.  Let the servants
'tend to the table in the morning."

"No."

"But, why not?"

"Just let me alone."

"Oh, Lord!"  George groaned, going to the door.  There he turned.
"See here, Aunt Fanny, there's not a bit of use your bothering about
those dishes tonight.  What's the use of a butler and three maids if--"

"Just let me alone."

He obeyed, and could still hear a pathetic sniffing from the dining
room as he went up the stairs.

"By George!" he grunted, as he reached his own room; and his thought
was that living with a person so sensitive to kindly raillery might
prove lugubrious.  He whistled, long and low, then went to the window
and looked through the darkness to the great silhouette of his
grandfather's house.  Lights were burning over there, upstairs;
probably his newly arrived uncle was engaged in talk with the Major.

George's glance lowered, resting casually upon the indistinct ground,
and he beheld some vague shapes, unfamiliar to him.  Formless heaps,
they seemed; but, without much curiosity, he supposed that sewer
connections or water pipes might be out of order, making necessary
some excavations.  He hoped the work would not take long; he hated to
see that sweep of lawn made unsightly by trenches and lines of dirt,
even temporarily.  Not greatly disturbed, however, he pulled down the
shade, yawned, and began to, undress, leaving further investigation
for the morning.

But in the morning he had forgotten all about it, and raised his
shade, to let in the light, without even glancing toward the ground.
Not until he had finished dressing did he look forth from his window,
and then his glance was casual.  The next instant his attitude became
electric, and he gave utterance to a bellow of dismay.  He ran from
his room, plunged down the stairs, out of the front door, and, upon a
nearer view of the destroyed lawn, began to release profanity upon the
breezeless summer air, which remained unaffected.  Between his
mother's house and his grandfather's, excavations for the cellars of
five new houses were in process, each within a few feet of its
neighbour.  Foundations of brick were being laid; everywhere were
piles of brick and stacked lumber, and sand heaps and mortar' beds.

It was Sunday, and so the workmen implicated in these defacings were
denied what unquestionably; they would have considered a treat; but as
the fanatic orator continued the monologue, a gentleman in flannels
emerged upward from one of the excavations, and regarded him
contemplatively.

"Obtaining any relief, nephew?" he inquired with some interest.  "You
must have learned quite a number of those expressions in childhood--
it's so long since I'd heard them I fancied they were obsolete."

"Who wouldn't swear?"  George demanded hotly.  "In the name of God,
what does grandfather mean, doing such things?"

"My private opinion is," said Amberson gravely, "he desires to
increase his income by building these houses to rent."

"Well, in the name of God, can't he increase his income any other way
but this?"

"In the name of God, it would appear he couldn't."

"It's beastly!  It's a damn degradation!  It's a crime!"

"I don't know about its being a crime," said his uncle, stepping over
some planks to join him.  "It might be a mistake, though.  Your mother
said not to tell you until we got home, so as not to spoil
commencement for you.  She rather feared you'd be upset."

"Upset!  Oh, my Lord, I should think I would be upset!  He's in his
second childhood.  What did you let him do it for, in the name of--"

"Make it in the name of heaven this time, George; it's Sunday.  Well,
I thought, myself, it was a mistake."

"I should say so!"

"Yes," said Amberson.  "I wanted him to put up an apartment building
instead of these houses."

"An apartment building!  Here?"

"Yes; that was my idea."

George struck his hands together despairingly.  "An apartment house!
Oh, my Lord!"

"Don't worry!  Your grandfather wouldn't listen to me, but he'll wish
he had, some day.  He says that people aren't going to live in
miserable little flats when they can get a whole house with some grass
in front and plenty of backyard behind.  He sticks it out that
apartment houses will never do in a town of this type, and when I
pointed out to him that a dozen or so of em already are doing, he
claimed it was just the novelty, and that they'd all be empty as soon
as people got used to 'em.  So he's putting up these houses."

"Is he getting miserly in his old age?"

"Hardly!  Look what he gave Sydney and Amelia!"

"I don't mean he's a miser, of course," said George.  "Heaven knows
he's liberal enough with mother and me; but why on earth didn't he
sell something or other rather than do a thing like this?"

"As a matter of fact," Amberson returned coolly, "I believe he has
sold something or other, from time to time."

"Well, in heaven's name," George cried, "what did he do it for?"

"To get money," his uncle mildly replied.  "That's my deduction."

"I suppose you're joking--or trying to!"

"That's the best way to look at it," Amberson said amiably.  "Take the
whole thing as a joke--and in the meantime, if you haven't had your
breakfast--"

"I haven't!"

"Then if I were you I'd go in and gets some.  And"--he paused,
becoming serious--"and if I were you I wouldn't say anything to your
grandfather about this."

"I don't think I could trust myself to speak to him about it," said
George.  "I want to treat him respectfully, because he is my
grandfather, but I don't believe I could if I talked to him about such
a thing as this!"

And with a gesture of despair, plainly signifying that all too soon
after leaving bright college years behind him he had entered into the
full tragedy of life, George turned bitterly upon his heel and went
into the house for his breakfast.

His uncle, with his head whimsically upon one side, gazed after him
not altogether unsympathetically, then descended again into the
excavation whence he had lately emerged.  Being a philosopher he was
not surprised, that afternoon, in the course of a drive he took in the
old carriage with the Major, when, George was encountered upon the
highway, flashing along in his runabout with Lucy beside him and
Pendennis doing better than three minutes.

"He seems to have recovered," Amberson remarked:  "Looks in the
highest good spirits."

"I beg your pardon."

"Your grandson," Amberson explained.  "He was inclined to melancholy
this morning, but seemed jolly enough just now when they passed us."

"What was he melancholy about?  Not getting remorseful about all the
money he's spent at college, was he?"  The Major chuckled feebly, but
with sufficient grimness.  "I wonder what he thinks I'm made of," he
concluded querulously.

"Gold," his son suggested, adding gently, "And he's right about part
of you, father."

"What part?"

"Your heart."

The Major laughed ruefully.  "I suppose that may account for how heavy
it feels, sometimes, nowadays.  This town seems to be rolling right
over that old heart you mentioned, George--rolling over it and burying
it under!  When I think of those devilish workmen digging up my lawn,
yelling around my house--"

"Never mind, father.  Don't think of it.  When things are a nuisance
it's a good idea not to keep remembering 'em."

"I try not to," the old gentleman murmured.  "I try to keep
remembering that I won't be remembering anything very long."  And,
somehow convinced that this thought was a mirthful one, he laughed
loudly, and slapped his knee.  "Not so very long now, my boy!" he
chuckled, continuing to echo his own amusement.  "Not so very long.
Not so very long!"




Chapter XVII



Young George paid his respects to his grandfather the following
morning, having been occupied with various affairs and engagements on
Sunday until after the Major's bedtime; and topics concerned with
building or excavations were not introduced into the conversation,
which was a cheerful one until George lightly mentioned some new plans
of his.  He was a skillful driver, as the Major knew, and he spoke of
his desire to extend his proficiency in this art: in fact, be
entertained the ambition to drive a four-in-hand.  However, as the
Major said nothing, and merely sat still, looking surprised, George
went on to say that he did not propose to "go in for coaching just at
the start"; he thought it would be better to begin with a tandem.  He
was sure Pendennis could be trained to work as a leader; and all that
one needed to buy at present, he said, would be "comparatively
inexpensive--a new trap, and the harness, of course, and a good bay to
match Pendennis."  He did not care for a special groom; one of the
stablemen would do.

At this point the Major decided to speak.  "You say one of the
stablemen would do?" he inquired, his widened eyes remaining fixed
upon his grandson.  "That's lucky, because one's all there is, just at
present, George.  Old fat Tom does it all.  Didn't you notice, when
you took Pendennis out, yesterday?"

"Oh, that will be all right, sir.  My mother can lend me her man."

"Can she?"  The old gentleman smiled faintly.  "I wonder--"  He
paused.

"What, sir?"

"Whether you mightn't care to go to law-school somewhere perhaps.  I'd
be glad to set aside a sum that would see you through."

This senile divergence from the topic in hand surprised George
painfully.  "I have no interest whatever in the law," he said.  "I
don't care for it, and the idea of being a professional man has never
appealed to me.  None of the family has ever gone in for that sort of
thing, to my knowledge, and I don't care to be the first. I was
speaking of driving a tandem--"

"I know you were," the Major said quietly.

George looked hurt.  "I beg your pardon.  Of course if the idea
doesn't appeal to you--"  And he rose to go.

The Major ran a tremulous hand through his hair, sighing deeply.  "I--
I don't like to refuse you anything, Georgie," he said.  "I don't know
that I often have refused you whatever you wanted--in reason--"

"You've always been more than generous, sir," George interrupted
quickly.  "And if the idea of a tandem doesn't appeal to you, why--of
course--"  And he waved his hand, heroically dismissing the tandem.

The Major's distress became obvious.  "Georgie, I'd like to, but--but
I've an idea tandems are dangerous to drive, and your mother might be
anxious.  She--"

"No, sir; I think not.  She felt it would be rather a good thing--help
to keep me out in the open air.  But if perhaps your finances--"

"Oh, it isn't that so much," the old gentleman said hurriedly.  "I
wasn't thinking of that altogether."  He laughed uncomfortably.  "I
guess we could still afford a new horse or two, if need be--"

 "I thought you said--"

The Major waved his hand airily.  "Oh, a few retrenchments where
things were useless; nothing gained by a raft of idle darkies in the
stable--nor by a lot of extra land that might as well be put to work
for us in rentals.  And if you want this thing so very much--"

"It's not important enough to bother about, really, of course."

"Well, let's wait till autumn then," said the Major in a tone of
relief.  "We'll see about it in the autumn, if you're still in the
mind for it then.  That will be a great deal better.  You remind me of
it, along in September--or October.  We'll see what can be done."  He
rubbed his hands cheerfully.  "We'll see what can be done about it
then, Georgie.  We'll see."

And George, in reporting this conversation to his mother, was ruefully
humorous.  "In fact, the old boy cheered up so much," he told her,
"you'd have thought he'd got a real load off his mind.  He seemed to
think he'd fixed me up perfectly, and that I was just as good as
driving a tandem around his library right that minute!  Of course I
know he's anything but miserly; still I can't help thinking he must be
salting a lot of money away.  I know prices are higher than they used
to b, but he doesn't spend within thousands of what he used to, and we
certainly can't be spending more than we always have spent.  Where
does it all go to?  Uncle George told me grandfather had sold some
pieces of property, and it looks a little queer.  If he's really
'property poor,' of course we ought to be more saving than we are, and
help him out.  I don't mind giving up a tandem if it seems a little
too expensive just now.  I'm perfectly willing to live quietly till he
gets his bank balance where he wants it.  But I have a faint
suspicion, not that he's getting miserly--not that at all--but that
old age has begun to make him timid about money.  There's no doubt
about it, he's getting a little queer: he can't keep his mind on a
subject long.  Right in the middle of talking about one thing he'll
wander off to something else; and I shouldn't be surprised if he
turned out to be a lot better off than any of us guess.  It's entirely
possible that whatever he's sold just went into government bonds, or
even his safety deposit box.  There was a friend of mine in college
had an old uncle like that: made the whole family think he was poor as
dirt--and then left seven millions.  People get terribly queer as they
get old, sometimes, and grandfather certainly doesn't act the way he
used to.  He seems to be a totally different man.  For instance, he
said he thought tandem driving might be dangerous--'

"Did he?" Isabel asked quickly.  "Then I'm glad he doesn't want you to
have one.  I didn't dream--"

"But it's not.  There isn't the slightest--"

Isabel had a bright idea.  "Georgie!  Instead of a tandem wouldn't it
interest you to get one of Eugene's automobiles?"

"I don't think so.  They're fast enough, of course.  In fact, running
one of those things is getting to be quite on the cards for sport, and
people go all over the country in 'em.  But they're dirty things, and
they keep getting out of order, so that you're always lying down on
your back in the mud, and--"

"Oh, no," she interrupted eagerly.  "Haven't you noticed?  You don't
see nearly so many people doing that nowadays as you did two or three
years ago, and, when you do, Eugene says it's apt to be one of the
older patterns.  The way they make them now, you can get at most of
the machinery from the top.  I do think you'd be interested, dear."

George remained indifferent.  "Possibly--but I hardly think so.  I
know a lot of good people are really taking them up, but still--"

"But still' what?" she said as he paused.

"But still--well, I suppose I'm a little old-fashioned and fastidious,
but I'm afraid being a sort of engine driver never will  appeal to me,
mother.  It's exciting, and I'd like that part of it, but still it
doesn't seem to me precisely the thing a gentleman ought to do.  Too
much overalls and monkey-wrenches and grease!"

"But Eugene says people are hiring mechanics to do all that sort of
thing for them.  They're beginning to have them just the way they have
coachmen; and he says it's developing into quite a profession."

"I know that, mother, of course; but I've seen some of these
mechanics, and they're not very satisfactory.  For one thing, most of
them only pretend to understand the machinery and they let people
break down a hundred miles from nowhere, so that about all these
fellows are good for is to hunt up a farmer and hire a horse to pull
the automobile.  And friends of mine at college that've had a good
deal of experience tell me the mechanics who do understand the engines
have no training at all as servants.  They're awful!  They say
anything they like, and usually speak to members of the family as
'Say!'  No, I believe I'd rather wait for September and a tandem,
mother."

Nevertheless, George sometimes consented to sit in an automobile,
while waiting for September, and he frequently went driving in one of
Eugene's cars with Lucy and her father.  He even allowed himself to be
escorted with his mother and Fanny through the growing factory, which
was now, as the foreman of the paint shop informed the visitors,
"turning out a car and a quarter a day."  George had seldom been more
excessively bored, but his mother showed a lively interest in
everything, wishing to have all the machinery explained to her.  It
was Lucy who did most of the explaining, while her father looked on
and laughed at the mistakes she made, and Fanny remained in the
background with George, exhibiting a bleakness that overmatched his
boredom.

From the factory Eugene took them to lunch at a new restaurant, just
opened in the town, a place which surprised Isabel with its
metropolitan air, and, though George made fun of it to her, in a
whisper, she offered everything the tribute of pleased exclamations;
and her gayety helped Eugene's to make the little occasion almost a
festive one.

George's ennui disappeared in spite of himself, and he laughed to see
his mother in such spirits.  "I didn't know mineral waters could go to
a person's head," he said.  "Or perhaps it's this place.  It might pay
to have a new restaurant opened somewhere in town every time you get
the blues."

Fanny turned to him with a wan smile.  "Oh, she doesn't 'get the
blues,' George!"  Then she added, as if fearing her remark might be
thought unpleasantly significant, "I never knew a person of a more
even disposition. I wish I could be like that!"  And though the tone
of this afterthought was not so enthusiastic as she tried to make it,
she succeeded in producing a fairly amiable effect.

"No," Isabel said, reverting to George's remark, and overlooking
Fanny's.  "What makes me laugh so much at nothing is Eugene's factory.
Wouldn't anybody be delighted to see an old friend take an idea out of
the air like that--an idea that most people laughed at him for--
wouldn't any old friend of his be happy to see how he'd made his idea
into such a splendid, humming thing as that factory--all shiny steel,
clicking and buzzing away, and with all those workmen, such muscled
looking men and yet so intelligent looking?"

"Hear! Hear!"  George applauded.  "We seem to have a lady orator among
us.  I hope the waiters won't mind."

Isabel laughed, not discouraged.  "It's beautiful to see such a
thing," she said.  "It makes us all happy, dear old Eugene!"

And with a brave gesture she stretched out her hand to him across the
small table.  He took it quickly, giving her a look in which his
laughter tried to remain, but vanished before a gratitude threatening
to become emotional in spite of him.  Isabel, however, turned
instantly to Fanny.  "Give him your hand, Fanny," she said gayly; and,
as Fanny mechanically obeyed, "There!"  Isabel cried.  "If brother
George were here, Eugene would have his three oldest and best friends
congratulating him all at once.  We know what brother George thinks
about it, though.  It's just beautiful, Eugene!"

Probably if her brother George had been with them at the little table,
he would have made known what he thought about herself, for it must
inevitably have struck him that she was in the midst of one of those
"times" when she looked "exactly fourteen years old."  Lucy served as
a proxy for Amberson, perhaps, when she leaned toward George and
whispered:  "Did you ever see anything so lovely?"

"As what?"  George inquired, not because he misunderstood, but because
he wished to prolong the pleasant neighbourliness of whispering.

"As your mother!  Think of her doing that!  She's a darling!  And
papa"--here she imperfectly repressed a tendency to laugh--"papa
looks as if he were either going to explode or utter loud sobs!"

Eugene commanded his features, however, and they resumed their
customary apprehensiveness.  "I used to write verse," he said--"if you
remember--"

"Yes," Isabel interrupted gently.  "I remember."

"I don't recall that I've written any for twenty years or so," he
continued.  "But I'm almost thinking I could do it again, to thank
you for making a factory visit into such a kind celebration."

"Gracious!"  Lucy whispered, giggling.  "Aren't they sentimental"

"People that age always are," George returned.  "They get sentimental
over anything at all.  Factories or restaurants, it doesn't matter
what!"

And both of them were seized with fits of laughter which they managed
to cover under the general movement of departure, as Isabel had risen
to go.

Outside, upon the crowded street, George helped Lucy into his
runabout, and drove off, waving triumphantly, and laughing at Eugene
who was struggling with the engine of his car, in the tonneau of which
Isabel and Fanny had established themselves.  "Looks like a hand-organ
man grinding away for pennies," said George, as the runabout turned
the corner and into National Avenue.  "I'll still take a horse, any
day."

He was not so cocksure, half an hour later, on an open road, when a
siren whistle wailed behind him, and before the sound had died away,
Eugene's car, coming from behind with what seemed fairly like one long
leap, went by the runabout and dwindled almost instantaneously in
perspective, with a lace handkerchief in a black-gloved hand
fluttering sweet derision as it was swept onward into minuteness--a
mere white speck--and then out of sight.

George was undoubtedly impressed.  "Your Father does know how to drive
some," the dashing exhibition forced him to admit.  "Of course
Pendennis isn't as young as he was, and I don't care to push him too
hard.  I wouldn't mind handling one of those machines on the road like
that, myself, if that was all there was to it--no cranking to do, or
fooling with the engine.  Well, I enjoyed part of that lunch quite a
lot, Lucy."

"The salad?"

"No.  Your whispering to me."

"Blarney!"

George made no response, but checked Pendennis to a walk.  Whereupon
Lucy protested quickly:  "Oh, don't!"

"Why?  Do you want him to trot his legs off?"

"No, but--"

"No, but'--what?"

She spoke with apparent gravity:  "I know when you make him walk it's
so you can give all your attention to--to proposing to me again!"

And as she turned a face of exaggerated color to him, "By the Lord,
but you're a little witch!"  George cried.

"George, do let Pendennis trot again!"

"I won't!"

She clucked to the horse.  "Get up, Pendennis!  Trot!  Go on!
Commence!"

Pendennis paid no attention; she meant nothing to him, and George
laughed at her fondly.  "You are the prettiest thing in this world,
Lucy!" he exclaimed.  "When I see you in winter, in furs, with your
cheeks red, I think you're prettiest then, but when I see you in
summer, in a straw hat and a shirtwaist and a duck skirt and white
gloves and those little silver buckled slippers, and your rose-
coloured parasol, and your cheeks not red but with a kind of pinky
glow about them, then I see I must have been wrong about the winter!
When are you going to drop the 'almost' and say we're really engaged?"

"Oh, not for years!  So there's the answer, and Let's trot again."

But George was persistent; moreover, he had become serious during the
last minute or two.  "I want to know," he said.  "I really mean it."

"Let's don't be serious, George," she begged him hopefully.  "Let's
talk of something pleasant."

He was a little offended.  "Then it isn't pleasant for you to know
that I want to marry you?"

At this she became as serious as he could have asked; she looked down,
and her lip quivered like that of a child about to cry.  Suddenly she
put her hand upon one of his for just an instant, and then withdrew
it.

"Lucy!" he said huskily.  "Dear, what's the matter?  You look as if
you were going to cry.  You always do that," he went on plaintively,
"whenever I can get you to talk about marrying me."

"I know it," she murmured.

"Well, why do you?"

Her eyelids flickered, and then she looked up at him with a sad
gravity, tears seeming just at the poise.  "One reason's because I
have a feeling that it's never going to be."

"Why?"

"It's just a feeling."

"You haven't any reason or--"

"It's just a feeling."

"Well, if that's all," George said, reassured, and laughing
confidently, "I guess I won't be very much troubled!"  But at once he
became serious again, adopting the tone of argument.  "Lucy, how is
anything ever going to get a chance to come of it, so long as you keep
sticking to 'almost'?  Doesn't it strike you as unreasonable to have a
'feeling' that we'll never be married, when what principally stands
between us is the fact that you won't be really engaged to me?  That
does seem pretty absurd!  Don't you care enough about me to marry me?"

She looked down again, pathetically troubled.  "Yes."

"Won't you always care that much about me?"

"I'm--yes--I'm afraid so, George.  I never do change much about
anything."

"Well, then, why in the world won't you drop the 'almost'?"

Her distress increased.  "Everything is--everything--"

"What about 'everything'?"

"Everything is so--so unsettled."

And at that he uttered an exclamation of impatience.  "If you aren't
the queerest girl!  What is 'unsettled'?"

"Well, for one thing," she said, able to smile at his vehemence, "you
haven't settled on anything to do.  At least, if you have you've never
spoken of it."

As she spoke, she gave him the quickest possible side glance of
hopeful scrutiny; then looked away, not happily.  Surprise and
displeasure were intentionally visible upon the countenance of her
companion; and he permitted a significant period of silence to elapse
before making any response.  "Lucy," he said, finally, with cold
dignity, "I should like to ask you a few questions."

"Yes?"

"The first is: Haven't you perfectly well understood that I don't mean
to go into business or adopt a profession?"

"I wasn't quite sure," she said gently.  "I really didn't know--
quite."

"Then of course it's time I did tell you.  I never have been able to
see any occasion for a man's going into trade, or being a lawyer, or
any of those things if his position and family were such that he
didn't need to.  You know, yourself, there are a lot of people in the
East--in the South, too, for that matter--that don't think we've got
any particular family or position or culture in this part of the
country.  I've met plenty of that kind of provincial snobs myself, and
they're pretty galling.  There were one or two men in my crowd at
college, their families had lived on their income for three
generations, and they never dreamed there was anybody in their class
out here.  I had to show them a thing or two, right at the start, and
I guess they won't forget it!  Well, I think it's time all their sort
found out that three generations can mean just as much out here as
anywhere else.  That's the way I feel about it, and let me tell you I
feel it pretty deeply!"

"But what are you going to do, George?" she cried.

George's earnestness surpassed hers; he had become flushed and his
breathing was emotional.  As he confessed, with simple genuineness, he
did feel what he was saying "pretty deeply"; and in truth his state
approached the tremulous.  "I expect to live an honourable life," he
said.  "I expect to contribute my share to charities, and to take part
in--in movements."

"What kind?"

"Whatever appeals to me," he said.

Lucy looked at him with grieved wonder.  "But you really don't mean to
have any regular business or profession at all?"

"I certainly do not!"  George returned promptly and emphatically.

"I was afraid so," she said in a low voice.

George continued to breathe deeply throughout another protracted
interval of silence.  Then he said, "I should like to revert to the
questions I was asking you, if you don't mind."

"No, George.  I think we'd better--"

"Your father is a business man--"

"He's a mechanical genius," Lucy interrupted quickly.  "Of course he's
both.  And he was a lawyer once--he's done all sorts of things."

"Very well.  I merely wished to ask if it's his influence that makes
you think I ought to 'do' something?"

Lucy frowned slightly.  "Why, I suppose almost everything I think or
say must be owing to his influence in one way or another.  We haven't
had anybody but each other for so many years, and we always think
about alike, so of course--"

"I see!"  And George's brow darkened with resentment.  "So that's it,
is it?  It's your father's idea that I ought to go into business and
that you oughtn't to be engaged to me until I do."

Lucy gave a start, her denial was so quick.  "No! I've never once
spoken to him about it.  Never!"

George looked at her keenly, and he jumped to a conclusion not far
from the truth.  "But you know without talking to him that it's the
way he does feel about it?  I see."

She nodded gravely.  "Yes."

George's brow grew darker still.  "Do you think I'd be much of a man,"
he said, slowly, "if I let any other man dictate to me my own way of
life?"

"George! Who's 'dictating' your--"

"It seems to me it amounts to that!" he returned.

"Oh, no!  I only know how papa thinks about things.  He's never, never
spoken unkindly, or 'dictatingly' of you."  She lifted her hand in
protest, and her face was so touching in its distress that for the
moment George forgot his anger.  He seized that small, troubled hand.

"Lucy," he said huskily.  "Don't you know that I love you?"

"Yes--I do."

"Don't you love me?"

"Yes--I do."

"Then what does it matter what your father thinks about my doing
something or not doing anything?  He has his way, and I have mine.  I
don't believe in the whole world scrubbing dishes and selling potatoes
and trying law cases.  Why, look at your father's best friend, my
Uncle George Amberson--he's never done anything in his life, and--"

"Oh, yes, he has," she interrupted.  "He was in politics."

"Well, I'm glad he's out," George said.  "Politics is a dirty business
for a gentleman, and Uncle George would tell you that himself.  Lucy,
let's not talk any more about it.  Let me tell mother when I get home
that we're engaged. Won't you, dear?"

She shook her head.

"Is it because--"

For a fleeting instant she touched to her cheek the hand that held
hers.  "No," she said, and gave him a sudden little look of renewed
gayety.  "Let's let it stay 'almost'."

"Because your father--"

"Oh, because it's better!"

George's voice shook.  "Isn't it your father?"

"It's his ideals I'm thinking of--yes."

George dropped her hand abruptly and anger narrowed his eyes.  "I know
what you mean," he said.  "I dare say I don't care for your father's
ideals any more than he does for mine!"

He tightened the reins, Pendennis quickening eagerly to the trot; and
when George jumped out of the runabout before Lucy's gate, and
assisted her to descend, the silence in which they parted was the same
that had begun when Fendennis began to trot.




Chapter XVIII



That evening, after dinner, George sat with his mother and his Aunt
Fanny upon the veranda.  In former summers, when they sat outdoors in
the evening, they had customarily used an open terrace at the side of
the house, looking toward the Major's, but that more private retreat
now afforded too blank and abrupt a view of the nearest of the new
houses; so, without consultation, they had abandoned it for the
Romanesque stone structure in front, an oppressive place.

Its oppression seemed congenial to George; he sat upon the copestone
of the stone parapet, his back against a stone pilaster; his attitude
not comfortable, but rigid, and his silence not comfortable, either,
but heavy.  However, to the eyes of his mother and his aunt, who
occupied wicker chairs at a little distance, he was almost
indistinguishable except for the stiff white shield of his evening
frontage.

"It's so nice of you always to dress in the evening, Georgie," his
mother said, her glance resting upon this surface.  "Your Uncle George
always used to, and so did father, for years; but they both stopped
quite a long time ago.  Unless there's some special occasion, it seems
to me we don't see it done any more, except on the stage and in the
magazines."

He made no response, and Isabel, after waiting a little while, as if
she expected one, appeared to acquiesce in his mood for silence, and
turned her head to gaze thoughtfully out at the street.

There, in the highway, the evening life of the Midland city had begun.
A rising moon was bright upon the tops of the shade trees, where their
branches met overhead, arching across the street, but only filtered
splashings of moonlight reached the block pavement below; and through
this darkness flashed the firefly lights of silent bicycles gliding by
in pairs and trios--or sometimes a dozen at a time might come, and not
so silent, striking their little bells; the riders' voices calling and
laughing; while now and then a pair of invisible experts would pass,
playing mandolin and guitar as if handle-bars were of no account in
the world--their music would come swiftly, and then too swiftly die
away.  Surreys rumbled lightly by, with the plod-plod of honest old
horses, and frequently there was the glitter of whizzing spokes from a
runabout or a sporting buggy, and the sharp, decisive hoof-beats of a
trotter.  Then, like a cowboy shooting up a peaceful camp, a frantic
devil would hurtle out of the distance, bellowing, exhaust racketing
like a machine gun gone amuck--and at these horrid sounds the surreys
and buggies would hug the curbstone, and the bicycles scatter to
cover, cursing; while children rushed from the sidewalks to drag pet
dogs from the street.  The thing would roar by, leaving a long wake of
turbulence; then the indignant street would quiet down for a few
minutes--till another came.

"There are a great many more than there used to be," Miss Fanny
observed, in her lifeless voice, as the lull fell after one of these
visitations.  "Eugene is right about that; there seem to be at least
three or four times as many as there were last summer, and you never
hear the ragamuffins shouting 'Get a horse!' nowadays; but I think he
may be mistaken about their going on increasing after this.  I don't
believe we'll see so many next summer as we do now."

"Why?" asked Isabel.

"Because I've begun to agree with George about their being more a fad
than anything else, and I think it must be the height of the fad just
now.  You know how roller-skating came in--everybody in the world
seemed to be crowding to the rinks--and now only a few children use
rollers for getting to school.  Besides, people won't permit the
automobiles to be used.  Really, I think they'll make laws against
them.  You see how they spoil the bicycling and the driving; people
just seem to hate them!  They'll never stand it--never in the world!
Of course I'd be sorry to see such a thing happen to Eugene, but I
shouldn't be really surprised to see a law passed forbidding the sale
of automobiles, just the way there is with concealed weapons."

"Fanny!" exclaimed her sister-in-law.  "You're not in earnest?"

"I am, though!"

Isabel's sweet-toned laugh came out of the dusk where she sat.  "Then
you didn't mean it when you told Eugene you'd enjoyed the drive this
afternoon?"

"I didn't say it so very enthusiastically, did I?"

"Perhaps not, but he certainly thought he'd pleased you."

"I don't think I gave him any right to think he'd pleased me"  Fanny
said slowly.

"Why not?  Why shouldn't you, Fanny?"

Fanny did not reply at once, and when she did, her voice was almost
inaudible, but much more reproachful than plaintive.  "I hardly think
I'd want any one to get the notion he'd pleased me just now.  It
hardly seems time, yet--to me."

Isabel made no response, and for a time the only sound upon the dark
veranda was the creaking of the wicker rocking-chair in which Fanny
sat--a creaking which seemed to denote content and placidity on the
part of the chair's occupant, though at this juncture a series of
human shrieks could have been little more eloquent of emotional
disturbance.  However, the creaking gave its hearer one great
advantage: it could be ignored.

"Have you given up smoking, George?" Isabel asked presently.

"No."

"I hoped perhaps you had, because you've not smoked since dinner.  We
shan't mind if you care to."

"No, thanks."

There was silence again, except for the creaking of the rocking-chair;
then a low, clear whistle, singularly musical, was heard softly
rendering an old air from "Fra Diavolo."  The creaking stopped.

"Is that you, George?"  Fanny asked abruptly.

"Is that me what?"

"Whistling 'On Yonder Rock Reclining'?"

"It's I," said Isabel.

"Oh,"  Fanny said dryly.

"Does it disturb you?"

"Not at all. I had an idea George was depressed about something, and
merely wondered if he could be making such a cheerful sound."  And
Fanny resumed her creaking.

"Is she right, George?" his mother asked quickly, leaning forward in
her chair to peer at him through the dusk.  "You didn't eat a very
hearty dinner, but I thought it was probably because of the warm
weather.  Are you troubled about anything?"

"No!" he said angrily.

"That's good. I thought we had such a nice day, didn't you?"

"I suppose so," he muttered, and, satisfied, she leaned back in her
chair; but "Fra Diavolo" was not revived.  After a time she rose, went
to the steps, and stood for several minutes looking across the street.
Then her laughter was faintly heard.

"Are you laughing about something?"  Fanny inquired.

"Pardon?" Isabel did not turn, but continued her observation of what
had interested her upon the opposite side of the street.

"I asked:  Were you laughing at something?"

"Yes, I was!"  And she laughed again.  "It's that funny, fat old Mrs.
Johnson.  She has a habit of sitting at her bedroom window with a pair
of opera-glasses."

"Really!"

"Really.  You can see the window through the place that was left when
we had the dead walnut tree cut down.  She looks up and down the
street, but mostly at father's and over here.  Sometimes she forgets
to put out the light in her room, and there she is, spying away for
all the world to see!"

However, Fanny made no effort to observe this spectacle, but continued
her creaking.  "I've always thought her a very good woman," she said
primly.

"So she is," Isabel agreed.  "She's a good, friendly old thing, a
little too intimate in her manner, sometimes, and if her poor old
opera-glasses afford her the quiet happiness of knowing what sort of
young man our new cook is walking out with, I'm the last to begrudge
it to her!  Don't you want to come and look at her, George?"

"What?  I beg your pardon.  I hadn't noticed what you were talking
about."

"It's nothing," she laughed.  "Only a funny old lady--and she's gone
now.  I'm going, too--at least, I'm going indoors to read.  It's
cooler in the house, but the heat's really not bad anywhere, since
nightfall.  Summer's dying.  How quickly it goes, once it begins to
die."

When she had gone into the house, Fanny stopped rocking, and, leaning
forward, drew her black gauze wrap about her shoulders and shivered.
"Isn't it queer," she said drearily, "how your mother can use such
words?"

"What words are you talking about?"  George asked.

"Words like 'die' and 'dying.'  I don't see how she can bear to use
them so soon after your poor father--"  She shivered again.

"It's almost a year," George said absently, and he added:  "It seems
to me you're using them yourself."

"I?  Never!"

"Yes, you did."

"When?"

"Just this minute."

"Oh!" said Fanny.  "You mean when I repeated what she said?  That's
hardly the same thing, George."

He was not enough interested to argue the point.  "I don't think
you'll convince anybody that mother's unfeeling," he said
indifferently.

"I'm not trying to convince anybody. I mean merely that in my opinion
--well, perhaps it may be just as wise for me to keep my opinions to
myself."

She paused expectantly, but her possible anticipation that George
would urge her to discard wisdom and reveal her opinion was not
fulfilled.  His back was toward her, and he occupied himself with
opinions of his own about other matters.  Fanny may have felt some
disappointment as she rose to withdraw.

However, at the last moment she halted with her hand upon the latch of
the screen door.

"There's one thing I hope," she said.  "I hope at least she won't
leave off her full mourning on the very anniversary of Wilbur's
death!"

The light door clanged behind her, and the sound annoyed her nephew.
He had no idea why she thus used inoffensive wood and wire to
dramatize her departure from the veranda, the impression remaining
with him being that she was critical of his mother upon some point of
funeral millinery.  Throughout the desultory conversation he had been
profoundly concerned with his own disturbing affairs, and now was
preoccupied with a dialogue taking place (in his mind) between himself
and Miss Lucy Morgan.  As he beheld the vision, Lucy had just thrown
herself at his feet.  "George, you must forgive me!" she cried.  "Papa
was utterly wrong!  I have told him so, and the truth is that I have
come to rather dislike him as you do, and as you always have, in your
heart of hearts. George, I understand you: thy people shall be my
people and thy gods my gods.  George, won't you take me back?"

"Lucy, are you sure you understand me?"  And in the darkness George's
bodily lips moved in unison with those which uttered the words in his
imaginary rendering of this scene.  An eavesdropper, concealed behind
the column, could have heard the whispered word "sure," the emphasis
put upon it in the vision was so poignant.  "You say you understand
me, but are you sure?"

Weeping, her head bowed almost to her waist, the ethereal Lucy made
reply:  "Oh, so sure!  I will never listen to father's opinions again.
I do not even care if I never see him again!"

"Then I pardon you," he said gently.

This softened mood lasted for several moments--until he realized that
it had been brought about by processes strikingly lacking in
substance.  Abruptly he swung his feet down from the copestone to the
floor of the veranda.  "Pardon nothing!"  No meek Lucy had thrown
herself in remorse at his feet; and now he pictured her as she
probably really was at this moment: sitting on the white steps of her
own front porch in the moonlight, with red-headed Fred Kinney and
silly Charlie Johnson and four or five others--all of them laughing,
most likely, and some idiot playing the guitar!

George spoke aloud: "Riffraff!"

And because of an impish but all too natural reaction of the mind, he
could see Lucy with much greater distinctness in this vision than in
his former pleasing one.  For a moment she was miraculously real
before him, every line and colour of her.  He saw the moonlight
shimmering in the chiffon of her skirts brightest on her crossed knee
and the tip of her slipper; saw the blue curve of the characteristic
shadow behind her, as she leaned back against the white step; saw the
watery twinkling of sequins in the gauze wrap over her white shoulders
as she moved, and the faint, symmetrical lights in her black hair--and
not one alluring, exasperating twentieth-of-an-inch of her laughing
profile was spared him as she seemed to turn to the infernal Kinney--

"Riffraff!"  And George began furiously to pace the stone floor.
"Riffraff!"  By this hard term--a favourite with him since childhood's
scornful hour--he meant to indicate, not Lucy, but the young gentlemen
who, in his vision, surrounded her.  "Riffraff!" he said again, aloud,
and again:

"Riffraff!"

At that moment, as it happened, Lucy was playing chess with her
father; and her heart, though not remorseful, was as heavy as George
could have wished.  But she did not let Eugene see that she was
troubled, and he was pleased when he won three games of her.  Usually
she beat him.




Chapter XIX


George went driving the next afternoon alone, and, encountering Lucy
and her father on the road, in one of Morgan's cars, lifted his hat,
but nowise relaxed his formal countenance as they passed.  Eugene
waved a cordial hand quickly returned to the steering-wheel; but Lucy
only nodded gravely and smiled no more than George did.  Nor did she
accompany Eugene to the Major's for dinner, the following Sunday
evening, though both were bidden to attend that feast, which was
already reduced in numbers and gayety by the absence of George
Amberson.  Eugene explained to his host that Lucy had gone away to
visit a school-friend.

The information, delivered in the library, just before old Sam's
appearance to announce dinner, set Miss Minafer in quite a flutter.
"Why, George!" she said, turning to her nephew.  "How does it happen
you didn't tell us?"  And with both hands opening, as if to express
her innocence of some conspiracy, she exclaimed to the others, "He's
never said one word to us about Lucy's planning to go away!"

"Probably afraid to," the Major suggested.  "Didn't know but he might
break down and cry if he tried to speak of it!"  He clapped his
grandson on the shoulder, inquiring jocularly, "That it, Georgie?"

Georgie made no reply, but he was red enough to justify the Major's
developing a chuckle into laughter; though Miss Fanny, observing her
nephew keenly, got an impression that this fiery blush was in truth
more fiery than tender.  She caught a glint in his eye less like
confusion than resentment, and saw a dilation of his nostrils which
might have indicated not so much a sweet agitation as an inaudible
snort.  Fanny had never been lacking in curiosity, and, since her
brother's death, this quality was more than ever alert.  The fact that
George had spent all the evenings of the past week at home had not
been lost upon her, nor had she failed to ascertain, by diplomatic
inquiries, that since the day of the visit to Eugene's shops George
had gone driving alone.

At the dinner-table she continued to observe him, sidelong; and toward
the conclusion of the meal she was not startled by an episode which
brought discomfort to the others.  After the arrival of coffee the
Major was rallying Eugene upon some rival automobile shops lately
built in a suburb, and already promising to flourish.

"I suppose they'll either drive you out of the business," said the old
gentleman, "or else the two of you'll drive all the rest of us off the
streets."

"If we do, we'll even things up by making the streets five or ten
times as long as they are now," Eugene returned.

"How do you propose to do that?"

"It isn't the distance from the center of a town that counts," said
Eugene; "it's the time it takes to get there.  This town's already
spreading; bicycles and trolleys have been doing their share, but the
automobile is going to carry city streets clear out to the county
line."

The Major was skeptical.  "Dream on, fair son!" he said.  "It's lucky
for us that you're only dreaming; because if people go to moving that
far, real estate values in the old residence part of town are going to
be stretched pretty thin."

"I'm afraid so," Eugene assented.  "Unless you keep things so bright
and clean that the old section will stay more attractive than the new
ones."

"Not very likely!  How are things going to be kept 'bright and clean'
with soft coal, and our kind of city government?"

"They aren't," Eugene replied quickly.  "There's no hope of it, and
already the boarding-house is marching up National Avenue.  There are
two in the next block below here, and there are a dozen in the half-
mile below that.  My relatives, the Sharons, have sold their house and
are building in the country--at least, they call it 'the country.'  It
will be city in two or three years."

"Good gracious!" the Major exclaimed, affecting 'dismay.  "So your
little shops are going to ruin all your old friends, Eugene!"

"Unless my old friends take warning in time, or abolish smoke and get
a new kind of city government.  I should say the best chance is to
take Warning."

"Well, well!" the Major laughed.  "You have enough faith in miracles,
Eugene--granting that trolleys and bicycles and automobiles are
miracles.  So you think they're to change the face of the land, do
you?"

"They're already doing it, Major; and it can't be stopped.
Automobiles--"

At this point he was interrupted.  George was the interrupter.  He had
said nothing since entering the dining room, but now he spoke in a
loud and peremptory voice, using the tone of one in authority who
checks idle prattle and settles a matter forever.

"Automobiles are a useless nuisance," he said.

There fell a moment's silence.

Isabel gazed incredulously at George, colour slowly heightening upon
her cheeks and temples, while Fanny watched him with a quick
eagerness, her eyes alert and bright.  But Eugene seemed merely
quizzical, as if not taking this brusquerie to himself.  The Major was
seriously disturbed.

"What did you say, George?" he asked, though George had spoken but too
distinctly.

"I said all automobiles were a nuisance," George answered, repeating
not only the words but the tone in which he had uttered them.  And he
added, "They'll never amount to anything but a nuisance.  They had no
business to be invented."

The Major frowned.  "Of course you forget that Mr. Morgan makes them,
and also did his share in inventing them.  If you weren't so
thoughtless he might think you rather offensive."

"That would be too bad," said George coolly.  "I don't think I could
survive it."

Again there was a silence, while the Major stared at his grandson,
aghast.  But Eugene began to laugh cheerfully.

"I'm not sure he's wrong about automobiles," he said.  "With all their
speed forward they may be a step backward in civilization--that is, in
spiritual civilization.  It may be that they will not add to the
beauty of the world, nor to the life of men's souls.  I am not sure.
But automobiles have come, and they bring a greater change in our life
than most of us suspect.  They are here, and almost all outward things
are going to be different because of what they bring.  They are going
to alter war, and they are going to alter peace.  I think men's minds
are going to be changed in subtle ways because of automobiles; just
how, though, I could hardly guess.  But you can't have the immense
outward changes that they will cause without some inward ones, and it
may be that George is right, and that the spiritual alteration will be
bad for us.  Perhaps, ten or twenty years from now, if we can see the
inward change in men by that time, I shouldn't be able to defend the
gasoline engine, but would have to agree with him that automobiles
'had no business to be invented.'"  He laughed good-naturedly, and
looking at his watch, apologized for having an engagement which made
his departure necessary when he would so much prefer to linger.  Then
he shook hands with the Major, and bade Isabel, George, and Fanny a
cheerful good-night--a collective farewell cordially addressed to all
three of them together--and left them at the table.

Isabel turned wondering, hurt eyes upon her son.  "George, dear!" she
said.  "What did you mean?"

"Just what I said," he returned, lighting one of the Major's cigars,
and his manner was imperturbable enough to warrant the definition
(sometimes merited by imperturbability) of stubbornness.

Isabel's hand, pale and slender, upon the tablecloth, touched one of
the fine silver candlesticks aimlessly: the fingers were seen to
tremble.  "Oh, he was hurt!" she murmured.

"I don't see why he should be," George said.  "I didn't say anything
about him.  He didn't seem to me to be hurt--seemed perfectly
cheerful.  What made you think he was hurt?"

"I know him!" was all of her reply, half whispered.

The Major stared hard at George from under his white eyebrows.  "You
didn't mean 'him,' you say, George?  I suppose if we had a clergyman
as a guest here you'd expect him not to be offended, and to understand
that your remarks were neither personal nor untactful, if you said the
church was a nuisance and ought never to have been invented.  By Jove,
but you're a puzzle!"

"In what way, may I ask, sir?"

"We seem to have a new kind of young people these days," the old
gentleman returned, shaking his head.  "It's a new style of courting a
pretty girl, certainly, for a young fellow to go deliberately out of
his way to try and make an enemy of her father by attacking his
business!  By Jove!  That's a new way to win a woman!"

George flushed angrily and seemed about to offer a retort, but held
his breath for a moment; and then held his peace.  It was Isabel who
responded to the Major.  "Oh, no!" she said.  "Eugene would never be
anybody's enemy--he couldn't!--and last of all Georgie's.  I'm afraid
he was hurt, but I don't fear his not having understood that George
spoke without thinking of what he was saying--I mean, with-out
realizing its bearing on Eugene."

Again George seemed upon the point of speech, and again controlled the
impulse.  He thrust his hands in his pockets, leaned back in his
chair, and smoked, staring inflexibly at the ceiling.

"Well, well," said his grandfather, rising.  "It wasn't a very
successful little dinner!"

Thereupon he offered his arm to his daughter, who took it fondly, and
they left the room, Isabel assuring him that all his little dinners
were pleasant, and that this one was no exception.

George did not move, and Fanny, following the other two, came round
the table, and paused close beside his chair; but George remained
posed in his great imperturbability, cigar between teeth, eyes upon
ceiling, and paid no attention to her.  Fanny waited until the sound
of Isabel's and the Major's voices became inaudible in the hall.  Then
she said quickly, and in a low voice so eager that it was unsteady:

"George, you've struck just the treatment to adopt: you're doing the
right thing!"

She hurried out, scurrying after the others with a faint rustling of
her black skirts, leaving George mystified but incurious.  He did not
understand why she should bestow her approbation upon him in the
matter, and cared so little whether she did or not that he spared
himself even the trouble of being puzzled about it.

In truth, however, he was neither so comfortable nor so imperturbable
as he appeared.  He felt some gratification: he had done a little to
put the man in his place--that man whose influence upon his daughter
was precisely the same thing as a contemptuous criticism of George
Amberson Minafer, and of George Amberson Minafer's "ideals of life."
Lucy's going away without a word was intended, he supposed, as a bit
of punishment.  Well, he wasn't the sort of man that people were
allowed to punish: he could demonstrate that to them--since they
started it!

It appeared to him as almost a kind of insolence, this abrupt
departure--not even telephoning!  Probably she wondered how he would
take it; she even might have supposed he would show some betraying
chagrin when he heard of it.

He had no idea that this was just what he had shown; and he was
satisfied with his evening's performance.  Nevertheless, he was not
comfortable in his mind; though he could not have explained his inward
perturbations, for he was convinced, without any confirmation from his
Aunt Fanny, that he had done "just the right thing."




Chapter XX



Isabel came to George's door that night, and when she had kissed him
good-night she remained in the open doorway with her hand upon his
shoulder and her eyes thoughtfully lowered, so that her wish to say
something more than good-night was evident.  Not less obvious was her
perplexity about the manner of saying it; and George, divining her
thought, amiably made an opening for her.

"Well, old lady," he said indulgently, "you needn't look so worried.
I won't be tactless with Morgan again.  After this I'll just keep out
of his way."

Isabel looked up, searching his face with the fond puzzlement which
her eyes sometimes showed when they rested upon him; then she glanced
down the hall toward Fanny's room, and, after another moment of
hesitation, came quickly in, and closed the door.

"Dear," she said, "I wish you'd tell me something: Why don't you like
Eugene?"

"Oh, I like him well enough," George returned, with a short laugh, as
he sat down and began to unlace his shoes.  "I like him well enough--
in his place."

"No, dear," she said hurriedly.  "I've had a feeling from the very
first that you didn't really like him--that you really never liked
him.  Sometimes you've seemed to be friendly with him, and you'd laugh
with him over something in a jolly, companionable way, and I'd think I
was wrong, and that you really did like him, after all; but to-night
I'm sure my other feeling was the right one: you don't like him.  I
can't understand it, dear; I don't see what can be the matter."

"Nothing's the matter."

This easy declaration naturally failed to carry great weight, and
Isabel went on, in her troubled voice, "It seems so queer, especially
when you feel as you do about his daughter."

At this, George stopped unlacing his shoes abruptly, and sat up.  "How
do I feel about his daughter?" he demanded.

"Well, it's seemed--as if--as if--" Isabel began timidly.  "It did
seem--At least, you haven't looked at any other girl, ever since they
came here and--and certainly you've seemed very much interested in
her.  Certainly you've been very great friends?"

"Well, what of that?"

"It's only that I'm like your grandfather: I can't see how you could
be so much interested in a girl and--and not feel very pleasantly
toward her father."

"Well, I'll tell you something," George said slowly; and a frown of
concentration could be seen upon his brow, as from a profound effort
at self-examination.  "I haven't ever thought much on that particular
point, but I admit there may be a little something in what you say.
The truth is, I don't believe I've ever thought of the two together,
exactly--at least, not until lately.  I've always thought of Lucy just
as Lucy, and of Morgan just as Morgan.  I've always thought of her as
a person herself, not as anybody's daughter. I don't see what's very
extraordinary about that.  You've. probably got plenty of friends, for
instance, that don't care much about your son--"

"No, indeed!" she protested quickly.  "And if I knew anybody who felt
like that, I wouldn't--"

"Never mind," he interrupted.  "I'll try to explain a little more.  If
I have a friend, I don't see that it's incumbent upon me to like that
friend's relatives.  If I didn't like them, and pretended to, I'd be a
hypocrite.  If that friend likes me and wants to stay my friend 'he'll
have to stand my not liking his relatives, or else he can quit.  I
decline to be a hypocrite about it; that's all.  Now, suppose I have
certain ideas or ideals which I have chosen for the regulation of my
own conduct in life.  Suppose some friend of mine has a relative with
ideals directly the opposite of mine, and my friend believes more in
the relative's ideals than in mine:  Do you think I ought to give up
my own just to please a person who's taken up ideals that I really
despise?"

"No, dear; of course people can't give up their ideals; but I don't
see what this has to do with dear little Lucy and--"

"I didn't say it had anything to do with them," he interrupted.  "I
was merely putting a case to show how a person would be justified in
being a friend of one member of a family, and feeling anything but
friendly toward another.  I don't say, though, that I feel unfriendly
to Mr. Morgan.  I don't say that I feel friendly to him, and I don't
say that I feel unfriendly; but if you really think that I was rude to
him to-night--"

"Just thoughtless, dear.  You didn't see that what you said to-night--"

"Well, I'll not say anything of that sort again where he can hear it.
There, isn't that enough?"

This question, delivered with large indulgence, met with no response;
for Isabel, still searching his face with her troubled and perplexed
gaze, seemed not to have heard it.  On that account, George repeated
it, and rising, went to her and patted her reassuringly upon the
shoulder.  "There, old lady, you needn't fear my tactlessness will
worry you again.  I can't quite promise to like people I don't care
about one way or another, but you can be sure I'll be careful, after
this, not to let them see it.  It's all right, and you'd better toddle
along to bed, because I want to undress."

"But, George," she said earnestly, "you would like him, if you'd just
let yourself.  You say you don't dislike him.  Why don't you like him?
I can't understand at all.  What is it that you don't--"

"There, there!" he said.  "It's all right, and you toddle along."

"But, George, dear--"

"Now, now!  I really do want to get into bed.  Good-night, old lady."

"Good-night, dear.  But--"

"Let's not talk of it any more," he said.  "It's all right, and
nothing in the world to worry about.  So good-night, old lady.  I'll
be polite enough to him, never fear--if we happen to be thrown
together.  So good-night!"

"But, George, dear--"

"I'm going to bed, old lady; so good-night."'

Thus the interview closed perforce.  She kissed him again before going
slowly to her own room, her perplexity evidently not dispersed; but
the subject was not renewed between them the next day or subsequently.
Nor did Fanny make any allusion to the cryptic approbation she had
bestowed upon her nephew after the Major's "not very successful little
dinner"; though she annoyed George by looking at him oftener and
longer than he cared to be looked at by an aunt.  He could not glance
her way, it seemed, without finding her red-rimmed eyes fixed upon him
eagerly, with an alert and hopeful calculation in them which he
declared would send a nervous man, into fits.  For thus, one day, he
broke out, in protest:

"It would!" he repeated vehemently.  "Given time it would--straight
into fits!  What do you find the matter with me?  Is my tie always
slipping up behind?  Can't you look at something else?  My Lord!  We'd
better buy a cat for you to stare at, Aunt Fanny!  A cat could stand
it, maybe.  What in the name of goodness do you expect to see?"

But Fanny laughed good-naturedly, and was not offended.  "It's more as
if I expected you to see something, isn't it?" she said quietly, still
laughing.

"Now, what do you mean by that?"

"Never mind!"

"All right, I don't.  But for heaven's sake stare at somebody else
awhile.  Try it on the house-maid!"

"Well, well," Fanny said indulgently, and then chose to be more
obscure in her meaning than ever, for she adopted a tone of deep
sympathy for her final remark, as she left him:  "I don't wonder
you're nervous these days, poor boy!"

And George indignantly supposed that she referred to the ordeal of
Lucy's continued absence.  During this period he successfully avoided
contact with Lucy's father, though Eugene came frequently to the
house, and spent several evenings with Isabel and Fanny; and sometimes
persuaded them and the Major to go for an afternoon's motoring.  He
did not, however, come again to the Major's Sunday evening dinner,
even when George Amberson returned.  Sunday evening was the time, he
explained, for going over the week's work with his factory managers.

When Lucy came home the autumn was far enough advanced to smell of
burning leaves, and for the annual editorials, in the papers, on the
purple haze, the golden branches, the ruddy fruit, and the pleasure of
long tramps in the brown forest.  George had not heard of her arrival,
and he met her, on the afternoon following that event, at the
Sharons', where he had gone in the secret hope that he might hear
something about her.  Janie Sharon had just begun to tell him that
she heard Lucy was expected home soon, after having "a perfectly
gorgeous time"--information which George received with no responsive
enthusiasm--when Lucy came demurely in, a proper little autumn figure
in green and brown.

Her cheeks were flushed, and her dark eyes were bright indeed;
evidences, as George supposed, of the excitement incidental to the
perfectly gorgeous time just concluded; though Janie and Mary Sharon
both thought they were the effect of Lucy's having seen George's
runabout in front of the house as she came in.  George took on colour,
himself, as, he rose and nodded indifferently; and the hot suffusion
to which he became subject extended its area to include his neck and
ears.  Nothing could have made him much more indignant than his
consciousness of these symptoms of the icy indifference which it was
his purpose not only to show but to feel.

She kissed her cousins, gave George her hand, said "How d'you do," and
took a chair beside Janie with a composure which augmented George's
indignation.

"How d'you do," he said.  "I trust that ah--I trust--I do trust--"

He stopped, for it seemed to him that the word "trust" sounded
idiotic.  Then, to cover his awkwardness, he coughed, and even to his
own rosy ears his cough was ostentatiously a false one.  Whereupon,
seeking to be plausible, he coughed again, and instantly hated
himself: the sound he made was an atrocity.  Meanwhile, Lucy sat
silent, and the two Sharon girls leaned forward, staring at him with
strained eyes, their lips tightly compressed; and both were but too
easily diagnosed as subject to an agitation which threatened their
self-control.  He began again.

"I er--I hope you have had a--a pleasant time.  I er--I hope you are
well.  I hope you are extremely--I hope extremely--extremely--"  And
again he stopped in the midst of his floundering, not knowing how to
progress beyond "extremely," and unable to understand why the infernal
word kept getting into his mouth.

"I beg your pardon?" Lucy said.

George was never more furious; he felt that he was "making a spectacle
of himself"; and no young gentleman in the world was more loath than
George Amberson Minafer to look a figure of fun.  And while he stood
there, undeniably such a figure, with Janie and Mary Sharon
threatening to burst at any moment, if laughter were longer denied
them.  Lucy sat looking at him with her eyebrows delicately lifted in
casual, polite inquiry.  Her own complete composure was what most
galled him.

"Nothing of the slightest importance!" he managed to say.  "I was just
leaving. Good afternoon!"  And with long strides he reached the door
and hastened through the hall; but before he closed the front door he
heard from Janie and Mary Sharon the outburst of wild, irrepressible
emotion which his performance had inspired.

He drove home in a tumultuous mood, and almost ran down two ladies who
were engaged in absorbing conversation at a crossing.  They were his
Aunt Fanny and the stout Mrs. Johnson; a jerk of the reins at the last
instant saved them by a few inches; but their conversation was so
interesting that they were unaware of their danger, and did not notice
the runabout, nor how close it came to them.  George was so furious
with himself and with the girl whose unexpected coming into a room
could make him look such a fool, that it might have soothed him a
little if he had actually run over the two absorbed ladies without
injuring them beyond repair.  At least, he said to himself that he
wished he had; it might have taken his mind off of himself for a few
minutes.  For, in truth, to be ridiculous (and know it) was one of
several things that George was unable to endure.  He was savage.

He drove into the Major's stable too fast, the sagacious Pendennis
saving himself from going through a partition by a swerve which
splintered a shaft of the runabout and almost threw the driver to the
floor.  George swore, and then swore again at the fat old darkey, Tom,
for giggling at his swearing.

"Hoopee!" said old Tom.  "Mus' been some white lady use Mist' Jawge
mighty bad!  White lady say, 'No, suh, I ain' go'n out ridin' 'ith
Mist' Jawge no mo'!'  Mist' Jawge drive in.  'Dam de dam worl'!  Dam
de dam hoss!  Dam de dam nigga'!  Dam de dam dam!'  Hoopee!"

"That'll do!"  George said sternly.

"Yessuh!"

George strode from the stable, crossed the Major's back yard, then
passed behind the new houses, on his way home.  These structures were
now approaching completion, but still in a state of rawness hideous to
George--though, for that matter, they were never to be anything except
hideous to him.  Behind them, stray planks, bricks, refuse of plaster
and lath, shingles, straw, empty barrels, strips of twisted tin and
broken tiles were strewn everywhere over the dried and pitted gray mud
where once the suave lawn had lain like a green lake around those
stately islands, the two Amberson houses.  And George's state of mind
was not improved by his present view of this repulsive area, nor by
his sensations when he kicked an uptilted shingle only to discover
that what uptilted it was a brickbat on the other side of it.  After
that, the whole world seemed to be one solid conspiracy of
malevolence.

In this temper he emerged from behind the house nearest to his own,
and, glancing toward the street, saw his mother standing with Eugene
Morgan upon the cement path that led to the front gate.  She was
bareheaded, and Eugene held his hat and stick in his hand; evidently
he had been calling upon her, and she had come from the house with
him, continuing their conversation and delaying their parting.

They had paused in their slow walk from the front door to the gate,
yet still stood side by side, their shoulders almost touching, as
though neither Isabel nor Eugene quite realized that their feet had
ceased to bear them forward; and they were not looking at each other,
but at some indefinite point before them, as people do who consider
together thoughtfully and in harmony.  The conversation was evidently
serious; his head was bent, and Isabel's lifted left hand rested
against her cheek; but all the significances of their thoughtful
attitude denoted companionableness and a shared understanding.  Yet, a
stranger, passing, would not have thought them married: somewhere
about Eugene, not quite to be located, there was a romantic gravity;
and Isabel, tall and graceful, with high colour and absorbed eyes, was
visibly no wife walking down to the gate with her husband.

George stared at them.  A hot dislike struck him at the sight of
Eugene; and a vague revulsion, like a strange, unpleasant taste in his
mouth, came over him as he looked at his mother: her manner was
eloquent of so much thought about her companion and of such reliance
upon him.  And the picture the two thus made was a vivid one indeed,
to George, whose angry eyes, for some reason, fixed themselves most
intently upon Isabel's lifted hand, upon the white ruffle at her
wrist, bordering the graceful black sleeve, and upon the little
indentations in her cheek where the tips of her fingers rested.  She
should not have worn white at her wrist, or at the throat either,
George felt; and then, strangely, his resentment concentrated upon
those tiny indentations at the tips of her fingers--actual changes,
however slight and fleeting, in his mother's face, made because of Mr.
Eugene Morgan.  For the moment, it seemed to George that Morgan might
have claimed the ownership of a face that changed for him. . It was as
if he owned Isabel.

The two began to walk on toward the gate, where they stopped again,
turning to face each other, and Isabel's glance, passing Eugene, fell
upon George.  Instantly she smiled and waved her hand to him; while
Eugene turned and nodded; but George, standing as in some rigid
trance, and staring straight at them, gave these signals of greeting
no sign of recognition whatever.  Upon this, Isabel called to him,
waving her hand again.

"Georgie!" she called, laughing.  "Wake up, dear!  Georgie, hello!"

George turned away as if he had neither seen nor heard, and stalked
into the house by the side door.




Chapter XXI


He went to his room, threw off his coat, waistcoat, collar, and tie,
letting them lie where they chanced to fall, and then, having
violently enveloped himself in a black velvet dressing-gown, continued
this action by lying down with a vehemence that brought a wheeze of
protest from his bed.  His repose was only a momentary semblance,
however, for it lasted no longer than the time it took him to groan
"Riffraff!" between his teeth.  Then he sat up, swung his feet to the
floor, rose, and began to pace up and down the large room.

He had just been consciously rude to his mother for the first time in
his life; for, with all his riding down of populace and riffraff, he
had never before been either deliberately or impulsively disregardful
of her.  When he had hurt her it had been accidental; and his remorse
for such an accident was always adequate compensation--and more--to
Isabel.  But now he had done a rough thing to her; and he did not
repent; rather he was the more irritated with her.  And when he heard
her presently go by his door with a light step, singing cheerfully to
herself as she went to her room, he perceived that she had mistaken
his intention altogether, or, indeed, had failed to perceive that he
had any intention at all.  Evidently she had concluded that he refused
to speak to her and Morgan out of sheer absent-mindedness, supposing
him so immersed in some preoccupation that he had not seen them or
heard her calling to him.  Therefore there was nothing of which to
repent, even if he had been so minded; and probably Eugene himself was
unaware that any disapproval had recently been expressed. George
snorted.  What sort of a dreamy loon did they take him to be?

There came a delicate, eager tapping at his door, not done with a
knuckle but with the tip of a fingernail, which was instantly
clarified to George's mind's eye as plainly as if he saw it: the long
and polished white-mooned pink shield on the end of his Aunt Fanny's
right forefinger.  But George was in no mood for human communications,
and even when things went well he had little pleasure in Fanny's
society.  Therefore it is not surprising that at the sound of her
tapping, instead of bidding her enter, he immediately crossed the room
with the intention of locking the door to keep her out.

Fanny was too eager, and, opening the door before he reached it, came
quickly in, and closed it behind her.  She was in a street dress and a
black hat, with a black umbrella in her black-gloved hand--for Fanny's
heavy mourning, at least, was nowhere tempered with a glimpse of
white, though the anniversary of Wilbur's death had passed.  An
infinitesimal perspiration gleamed upon her pale skin; she breathed
fast, as if she had run up the stairs; and excitement was sharp in her
widened eyes.  Her look was that of a person who had just seen
something extraordinary or heard thrilling news.

"Now, what on earth do you want?" her chilling nephew demanded.

"George," she said hurriedly, "I saw what you did when you wouldn't
speak to them.  I was sitting with Mrs. Johnson at her front window,
across the street, and I saw it all."

"Well, what of it?"

"You did right!" Fanny said with a vehemence not the less spirited
because she suppressed her voice almost to a whisper.  "You did
exactly right!  You're behaving splendidly about the whole thing, and
I want to tell you I know your father would thank you if he could see
what you're doing."

"My Lord!"  George broke out at her.  "You make me dizzy!  For
heaven's sake quit the mysterious detective business--at least do quit
it around me!  Go and try it on somebody else, if you like; but I
don't want to hear it!"

She began to tremble, regarding him with a fixed gaze.  "You don't
care to hear then," she said huskily, "that I approve of what you're
doing?"

"Certainly not!  Since I haven't the faintest idea what you think I'm
'doing,' naturally I don't care whether you approve of it or not.  All
I'd like, if you please, is to be alone.  I'm not giving a tea here,
this afternoon, if you'll permit me to mention it!"

Fanny's gaze wavered; she began to blink; then suddenly she sank into
a chair and wept silently, but with a terrible desolation.

"Oh, for the Lord's sake!" he moaned.  "What in the world is wrong
with you?"

"You're always picking on me," she quavered wretchedly, her voice
indistinct with the wetness that bubbled into it from her tears.  "You
do--you always pick on me!  You've always done it--always--ever since
you were a little boy!  Whenever anything goes wrong with you, you
take it out on me!  You do! You always--"

George flung to heaven a gesture of despair; it seemed to him the last
straw that Fanny should have chosen this particular time to come and
sob in his room over his mistreatment of her!

"Oh, my Lord!" he whispered; then, with a great effort, addressed her
in a reasonable tone: "Look here, Aunt Fanny; I don't see what you're
making all this fuss about.  Of course I know I've teased you
sometimes, but--"

"Teased' me?" she wailed.  "Teased' me!  Oh, it does seem too hard,
sometimes--this mean old life of mine does seem too hard!  I don't
think I can stand it!  Honestly, I don't think I can!  I came in here
just to show you I sympathized with you--just to say something
pleasant to you, and you treat me as if I were--oh, no, you wouldn't
treat a servant the way you treat me!  You wouldn't treat anybody in
the world like this except old Fanny!  'Old Fanny' you say.  'It's
nobody but old Fanny, so I'll kick her--nobody will resent it.  I'll
kick her all I want to!'  You do!  That's how you think of me-I know
it!  And you're right: I haven't got anything in the world, since my
brother died--nobody--nothing--nothing!"

"Oh my Lord!"  George groaned.

Fanny spread out her small, soaked handkerchief, and shook it in the
air to dry it a little, crying as damply and as wretchedly during this
operation' as before--a sight which gave George a curious shock to add
to his other agitations, it seemed so strange.  "I ought not to have
come," she went on, "because I might have known it would only give you
an excuse to pick on me again!  I'm sorry enough I came, I can tell
you! I didn't mean to speak of it again to you, at all; and I wouldn't
have, but I saw how you treated them, and I guess I got excited about
it, and couldn't help following the impulse--but I'll know better next
time, I can tell you!  I'll keep my mouth shut as I meant to, and as I
would have, if I hadn't got excited and if I hadn't felt sorry for
you.  But what does it matter to anybody if I'm sorry for them?  I'm
only old Fanny!"

"Oh, good gracious!  How can it matter to me who's sorry for me when I
don't know what they're sorry about!"

"You're so proud," she quavered, "and so hard!  I tell you I didn't
mean to speak of it to you, and I never, never in the world would have
told you about it, nor have made the faintest reference to it, if I
hadn't seen that somebody else had told you, or you'd found out for
yourself some way.  I--"

In despair of her intelligence, and in some doubt of his own, George
struck the palms of his hands together.  "Somebody else had told me
what?  I'd found what out for myself?"

"How people are talking about your mother."

Except for the incidental teariness of her voice, her tone was casual,
as though she mentioned a subject previously discussed and understood;
for Fanny had no doubt that George had only pretended to be mystified
because, in his pride, he would not in words admit that he knew what
he knew.

"What did you say?" he asked incredulously.

"Of course I understood what you were doing," Fanny went on, drying
her handkerchief again.  "It puzzled other people when you began to be
rude to Eugene, because they couldn't see how you could treat him as
you did when you were so interested in Lucy.  But I remembered how you
came to me, that other time when there was so much talk about Isabel;
and I knew you'd give Lucy up in a minute, if it came to a question of
your mother's reputation, because you said then that--"

"Look here," George interrupted in a shaking voice.  "Look here, I'd
like--"  He stopped, unable to go on, his agitation was so great.  His
chest heaved as from hard running, and his complexion, pallid at
first, had become mottled; fiery splotches appearing at his temples
and cheeks.  "What do you mean by telling me--telling me there's talk
about--about--"  He gulped, and began again: "What do you mean by
using such words as 'reputation'?  What do you mean, speaking of a
'question' of my--my mother's reputation?"

Fanny looked up at him woefully over the handkerchief which she now
applied to her reddened nose.  "God knows I'm sorry for you, George,"
she murmured.  "I wanted to say so, but it's only old Fanny, so
whatever she says--even when it's sympathy--pick on her for it!
Hammer her!"  She sobbed.  "Hammer her!  It's only poor old lonely
Fanny!"

"You look here!"  George said harshly.  "When I spoke to my Uncle
George after that rotten thing I heard Aunt Amelia say about my
mother, he said if there was any gossip it was about you!  He said
people might be laughing about the way you ran after Morgan, but that
was all."

Fanny lifted her hands, clenched them, and struck them upon her knees.
"Yes; it's always Fanny!" she sobbed.  "Ridiculous old Fanny--always,
always!"

"You listen!" George said.  "After I'd talked to Uncle George I saw
you; and you said I had a mean little mind for thinking there might be
truth in what Aunt Amelia said about people talking.  You denied it.
And that wasn't the only time; you'd attacked me before then, because
I intimated that Morgan might be coming here too often.  You made me
believe that mother let him come entirely on your account, and now you
say--"

"I think he did," Fanny interrupted desolately.  "I think he did come
as much to see me as anything--for a while it looked like it.  Anyhow,
he liked to dance with me.  He danced with me as much as he danced
with her, and he acted as if he came on my account at least as much as
he did on hers.  He did act a good deal that way--and if Wilbur hadn't
died--"

"You told me there wasn't any talk."

"I didn't think there was much, then," Fanny protested.  "I didn't
know how much there was."

"What!"

"People don't come and tell such things to a person's family, you
know.  You don't suppose anybody was going to say to George Amberson
that his sister was getting herself talked about, do you?  Or that
they were going to say much to me?"

"You told me," said George, fiercely, "that mother never saw him
except when she was chaperoning you."

"They weren't much alone together, then," Fanny returned.  "Hardly
ever, before Wilbur died.  But you don't suppose that stops people
from talking, do you?  Your father never went anywhere, and people saw
Eugene with her everywhere she went--and though I was with them people
just thought"--she choked--"they just thought I didn't count!  'Only
old Fanny Minafer,' I suppose they'd say!  Besides, everybody knew
that he'd been engaged to her--"

"What's that?"  George cried.

"Everybody knows it.  Don't you remember your grandfather speaking of
it at the Sunday dinner one night?"

"He didn't say they were engaged or--"

"Well, they were!  Everybody knows it; and she broke it off on account
of that serenade when Eugene didn't know what he was doing.  He drank
when he was a young man, and she wouldn't stand it, but everybody in
this town knows that Isabel has never really cared for any other man
in her life!  Poor Wilbur!  He was the only soul alive that didn't
know it!"

Nightmare had descended upon the unfortunate George; he leaned back
against the foot-board of his bed, gazing wildly at his aunt.  "I
believe I'm going crazy," he said.  "You mean when you told me there
wasn't any talk, you told me a falsehood?"

"No!"  Fanny gasped.

"You did!"

"I tell you I didn't know how much talk there was, and it wouldn't
have amounted to much if Wilbur had lived."  And Fanny completed this
with a fatal admission:  "I didn't want you to interfere."

George overlooked the admission; his mind was not now occupied with
analysis.  "What do you mean," he asked, "when you say that if father
had lived, the talk wouldn't have amounted to anything?"

"Things might have been--they might have been different."

"You mean Morgan might have married you?"

Fanny gulped.  "No. Because I don't know that I'd have accepted him."
She had ceased to weep, and now she sat up stiffly.  "I certainly
didn't care enough about him to marry him; I wouldn't have let myself
care that much until he showed that he wished to marry me.  I'm not
that sort of person!"  The poor lady paid her vanity this piteous
little tribute.  "What I mean is, if Wilbur hadn't died, people
wouldn't have had it proved before their very eyes that what they'd
been talking about was true!"

"You say--you say that people believe--"  George shuddered, then
forced himself to continue, in a sick voice:  "They believe my mother
is--is in love with that man?"

"Of course!"

"And because he comes here--and they see her with him driving--and all
that--they think they were right when they said she was in--in love
with him before--before my father died?"

She looked at him gravely with her eyes now dry between their reddened
lids.  "Why, George," she said, gently, "don't you know that's what
they say?  You must know that everybody in town thinks they're going
to be married very soon."

George uttered an incoherent cry; and sections of him appeared to
writhe.  He was upon the verge of actual nausea.

"You know it!"  Fanny cried, getting up.  "You don't think I'd have
spoken of it to you unless I was sure you knew it?"  Her voice was
wholly genuine, as it had been throughout the wretched interview:
Fanny's sincerity was unquestionable.  "George, I wouldn't have told
you, if you didn't know.  What other reason could you have for
treating Eugene as you did, or for refusing to speak to them like that
a while ago in the yard?  Somebody must have told you?"

"Who told you?" he said.

"What?"

"Who told you there was talk?  Where is this talk?  Where does it come
from?  Who does it?"

"Why, I suppose pretty much everybody," she said.  "I know it must be
pretty general."

"Who said so?"

"What?"

George stepped close to her.  "You say people don't speak to a person
of gossip about that person's family.  Well, how did you hear it,
then?  How did you get hold of it?  Answer me!"

Fanny looked thoughtful. "Well, of course nobody not one's most
intimate friends would speak to them about such things, and then only
in the kindest, most considerate way."

"Who's spoken of it to you in any way at all?"  George demanded.

"Why--"  Fanny hesitated.

"You answer me!"

"I hardly think it would be fair to give names."

"Look here," said George.  "One of your most intimate friends is that
mother of Charlie Johnson's, for instance.  Has she ever mentioned
this to you?  You say everybody is talking.  Is she one?"

"Oh, she may have intimated--"

"I'm asking you:  Has she ever spoken of it to you?"

"She's a very kind, discreet woman, George; but she may have
intimated--"

George had a sudden intuition, as there flickered into his mind the
picture of a street-crossing and two absorbed ladies almost run down
by a fast horse.  "You and she have been talking about it to-day!" he
cried.  "You were talking about it with her not two hours ago.  Do you
deny it?"

"I--"

"Do you deny it?"

"No!"

"All right," said George.  "That's enough!"

She caught at his arm as he turned away.  "What are you going to do,
George?"

"I'll not talk about it, now," he said heavily.  "I think you've done
a good deal for one day, Aunt Fanny!"

And Fanny, seeing the passion in his face, began to be alarmed.  She
tried to retain possession of the black velvet sleeve which her
fingers had clutched, and he suffered her to do so, but used this
leverage to urge her to the door.  "George, you know I'm sorry for
you, whether you care or not," she whimpered.  "I never in the world
would have spoken of it, if I hadn't thought you knew all about it. I
wouldn't have--"

But he had opened the door with his free hand.  "Never mind!" he said,
and she was obliged to pass out into the hall, the door closing
quickly behind her.




Chapter XXII


George took off his dressing-gown and put on a collar and a tie, his
fingers shaking so that the tie was not his usual success; then he
picked up his coat and waistcoat, and left the room while still in
process of donning them, fastening the buttons, as he ran down the
front stairs to the door.  It was not until he reached the middle of
the street that he realized that he had forgotten his hat; and he
paused for an irresolute moment, during which his eye wandered, for no
reason, to the Fountain of Neptune.  This castiron replica of too
elaborate sculpture stood at the next corner, where the Major had
placed it when the Addition was laid out so long ago.  The street
corners had been shaped to conform with the great octagonal basin,
which was no great inconvenience for horse-drawn vehicles, but a
nuisance to speeding automobiles; and, even as George looked, one of
the latter, coming too fast, saved itself only by a dangerous skid as
it rounded the fountain.  This skid was to George's liking, though he
would have been more pleased to see the car go over, for he was
wishing grief and destruction, just then, upon all the automobiles in
the world.

His eyes rested a second or two longer upon the Fountain of Neptune,
not an enlivening sight even in the shielding haze of autumn twilight.
For more than a year no water had run in the fountain: the connections
had been broken, and the Major was evasive about restorations, even
when reminded by his grandson that a dry fountain is as gay as a dry
fish.  Soot streaks and a thousand pits gave Neptune the distinction,
at least, of leprosy, which the mermaids associated with him had been
consistent in catching; and his trident had been so deeply affected as
to drop its prongs.  Altogether, this heavy work of heavy art, smoked
dry, hugely scabbed, cracked, and crumbling, was a dismal sight to the
distracted eye of George Amberson Minafer, and its present condition
of craziness may have added a mite to his own.  His own was
sufficient, with no additions, however, as he stood looking at the
Johnsons' house and those houses on both sides of it--that row of
riffraff dwellings he had thought so damnable, the day when he stood
in his grandfather's yard, staring at them, after hearing what his
Aunt Amelia said of the "talk" about his mother.

He decided that he needed no hat for the sort of call he intended to
make, and went forward hurriedly.  Mrs. Johnson was at home, the Irish
girl who came to the door informed him, and he was left to await the
lady, in a room like an elegant well--the Johnsons' "reception room":
floor space, nothing to mention; walls, blue calcimined; ceiling,
twelve feet from the floor; inside shutters and gray lace curtains;
five gilt chairs, a brocaded sofa, soiled, and an inlaid walnut table,
supporting two tall alabaster vases; a palm, with two leaves, dying in
a corner.

Mrs. Johnson came in, breathing noticeably; and her round head,
smoothly but economically decorated with the hair of an honest woman,
seemed to be lingering far in the background of the Alpine bosom which
took precedence of the rest of her everywhere; but when she was all in
the room, it was to be seen that her breathing was the result of
hospitable haste to greet the visitor, and her hand, not so dry as
Neptune's Fountain, suggested that she had paused for only the
briefest ablutions.  George accepted this cold, damp lump
mechanically.

"Mr. Amberson--I mean Mr. Minafer!" she exclaimed.  "I'm really
delighted: I understood you asked for me.  Mr. Johnson's out of the
city, but Charlie's downtown and I'm looking for him at any minute,
now, and he'll be so pleased that you--"

"I didn't want to see Charlie," George said.  "I want"

"Do sit down," the hospitable lady urged him, seating herself upon the
sofa.  "Do sit down."

"No, I thank you. I wish--"

"Surely you're not going to run away again, when you've just come.  Do
sit down, Mr. Minafer.  I hope you're all well at your house and at
the dear old Major's, too.  He's looking--"

"Mrs. Johnson" George said, in a strained loud voice which arrested
her attention immediately, so that she was abruptly silent, leaving
her surprised mouth open.  She had already been concealing some
astonishment at this unexampled visit, however, and the condition of
George's ordinarily smooth hair (for he had overlooked more than his
hat) had not alleviated her perplexity.  "Mrs. Johnson," he said, "I
have come to ask you a few questions which I would like you to answer,
if you please."

She became grave at once.  "Certainly, Mr. Minafer. Anything I can--"

He interrupted sternly, yet his voice shook in spite of its sternness.
"You were talking with my Aunt Fanny about my mother this afternoon."

At this Mrs. Johnson uttered an involuntary gasp, but she recovered
herself.  "Then I'm sure our conversation was a very pleasant one, if
we were talking of your mother, because--"

Again he interrupted.  "My aunt has told me what the conversation
virtually was, and I don't mean to waste any time, Mrs. Johnson.  You
were talking about a--"  George's shoulders suddenly heaved
uncontrollably; but he went fiercely on: "You were discussing a
scandal that involved my mother's name."

"Mr. Minafer!"

"Isn't that the truth?"

"I don't feel called upon to answer, Mr. Minafer," she said with
visible agitation.  "I do not consider that you have any right--"

"My aunt told me you repeated this scandal to her."

"I don't think your aunt can have said that," Mrs. Johnson returned
sharply.  "I did not repeat a scandal of any kind to your aunt and I
think you are mistaken in saying she told you I did.  We may, have
discussed some matters that have been a topic of comment about town--"

"Yes!" George cried.  "I think you may have!  That's what I'm here
about, and what I intend to--"

"Don't tell me what you intend, please," Mrs. Johnson interrupted
crisply.  "And I should prefer that you would not make your voice
quite so loud in this house, which I happen to own.  Your aunt may
have told you--though I think it would have been very unwise in her if
she did, and not very considerate of me--she may have told you that we
discussed some such topic as I have mentioned, and possibly that would
have been true.  If I talked it over with her, you may be sure I spoke
in the most charitable spirit, and without sharing in other peopie's
disposition to put an evil interpretation on what may, be nothing more
than unfortunate appearances and--"

"My God!" said George.  "I can't stand this!"

"You have the option of dropping the subject," Mrs. Johnson suggested
tartly, and she added:  "Or of leaving the house."

"I'll do that soon enough, but first I mean to know--"

"I am perfectly willing to tell you anything you wish if you will
remember to ask it quietly.  I'll also take the liberty of reminding
you that I had a perfect right to discuss the subject with your aunt.
Other people may be less considerate in not confining their discussion
of it, as I have, to charitable views expressed only to a member of
the family.  Other people--"

"Other people!" the unhappy George repeated viciously.  "That's what I
want to know about--these other people!"

"I beg your pardon."

"I want to ask you about them.  You say you know of other people who
talk about this."

"I presume they do."

"How many?"

"What?"

"I want to know how many other people talk about it?"

"Dear, dear!" she protested.  "How should I know that?"

"Haven't you heard anybody mention it?"

"I presume so."

"Well, how many have you heard?"

Mrs. Johnson was becoming more annoyed than apprehensive, and she
showed it.  "Really, this isn't a court-room," she said.  "And I'm not
a defendant in a libel-suit, either!"

The unfortunate young man lost what remained of his balance.  "You may
be!" he cried.  "I intend to know just who's dared to say these
things, if I have to force my way into every house in town, and I'm
going to make them take every word of it back!  I mean to know the
name of every slanderer that's spoken of this matter to you and of
every tattler you've passed it on to yourself. I mean to know--"

"You'll know something pretty quick!" she said, rising with
difficulty; and her voice was thick with the sense of insult.  "You'll
know that you're out in the street.  Please to leave my house!"

George stiffened sharply.  Then he bowed, and strode out of the door.

Three minutes later, disheveled and perspiring, but cold all over, he
burst into his Uncle George's room at the Major's without knocking.
Amberson was dressing.

"Good gracious, Georgie!" he exclaimed.  "What's up?"

"I've just come from Mrs. Johnson's--across the street," George
panted.

"You have your own tastes!" was Amberson's comment.  "But curious as
they are, you ought to do something better with your hair, and button
your waistcoat to the right buttons--even for Mrs. Johnson!  What were
you doing over there?"

"She told me to leave the house," George said desperately.  "I went
there because Aunt Fanny told me the whole town was talking about my
mother and that man Morgan--that they say my mother is going to marry
him and that proves she was too fond of him before my father died--she
said this Mrs. Johnson was one that talked about it, and I went to her
to ask who were the others."

Amberson's jaw fell in dismay.  "Don't tell me you did that!" he said,
in a low voice; and then, seeing that it was true, "Oh, now you have
done it!"




Chapter XXIII



"I've 'done it'?" George cried.  "What do you mean: I've done it?  And
what have I done?"

Amberson had collapsed into an easy chair beside his dressing-table,
the white evening tie he had been about to put on dangling from his
hand, which had fallen limply on the arm of the chair.  The tie
dropped to the floor before he replied; and the hand that had held it
was lifted to stroke his graying hair reflectively.  "By Jove!" he
muttered.  "That is too bad!"

George folded his arms bitterly.  "Will you kindly answer my question?
What have I done that wasn't honourable and right?  Do you think these
riffraff can go about bandying my mother's name--"

"They can now," said Amberson.  "I don't know if they could before,
but they certainly can now!"

"What do you mean by that?"

His uncle sighed profoundly, picked up his tie and, preoccupied with
despondency, twisted the strip of white lawn till it became
unwearable.  Meanwhile, he tried to enlighten his nephew.  "Gossip is
never fatal, Georgie," he said, "until it is denied.  Gossip goes on
about every human being alive and about all the dead that are alive
enough to be remembered, and yet almost never does any harm until some
defender makes a controversy.  Gossip's a nasty thing, but it's
sickly, and if people of good intentions will let it entirely alone,
it will die, ninety-nine times out of a hundred."

"See here," George said: "I didn't come to listen to any generalizing
dose of philosophy!  I ask you--"

"You asked me what you've done, and I'm telling you."  Amberson gave
him a melancholy smile, continuing: "Suffer me to do it in my own way.
Fanny says there's been talk about your mother, and that Mrs. Johnson
does some of it.  I don't know, because naturally nobody would come to
me with such stuff or mention it before me; but it's presumably true--
I suppose it is.  I've seen Fanny with Mrs. Johnson quite a lot; and
that old lady is a notorious gossip, and that's why she ordered you
out of her house when you pinned her down that she'd been gossiping.
I have a suspicion Mrs. Johnson has been quite a comfort to Fanny in
their long talks; but she'll probably quit speaking to her over this,
because Fanny told you. I suppose it's true that the 'whole town,' a
lot of others, that is, do share in the gossip.  In this town,
naturally, anything about any Amberson has always been a stone dropped
into the centre of a pond, and a lie would send the ripples as far as
a truth would.  I've been on a steamer when the story went all over
the boat, the second day out,' that the prettiest girl on board didn't
have any ears; and you can take it as a rule that when a woman's past
thirty-five the prettier her hair is, the more certain you are to meet
somebody with reliable information that it's a wig.  You can be sure
that for many years there's been more gossip in this place about the
Ambersons than about any other family.  I dare say it isn't so much so
now as it used to be, because the town got too big long ago, but it's
the truth that the more prominent you are the more gossip there is
about you, and the more people would like to pull you down.  Well,
they can't do it as long as you refuse to know what gossip there is
about you.  But the minute you notice it, it's got you!  I'm not
speaking of certain kinds of slander that sometimes people have got to
take to the courts; I'm talking of the wretched buzzing the Mrs. John-
sons do--the thing you seem to have such a horror of--people
'talking'--the kind of thing that has assailed your mother.  People
who have repeated a slander either get ashamed or forget it, if
they're let alone.  Challenge them, and in self-defense they believe
everything they've said: they'd rather believe you a sinner than
believe themselves liars, naturally.  Submit to gossip and you kill
it; fight it and you make it strong.  People will forget almost any
slander except one that's been fought."

"Is that all?"  George asked.

"I suppose so," his uncle murmured sadly.

"Well, then, may I ask what you'd have done, in my place?"

"I'm not sure, Georgie.  When I was your age I was like you in many
ways, especially in not being very cool-headed, so I can't say.  Youth
can't be trusted for much, except asserting itself and fighting and
making love."

"Indeed!" George snorted.  "May I ask what you think I ought to have
done?"

"Nothing."

"'Nothing?"  George echoed, mocking bitterly "I suppose you think I
mean to let my mother's good name--"

"Your mother's good name!"  Amberson cut him off impatiently.  "Nobody
has a good name in a bad mouth.  Nobody has a good name in a silly
mouth, either.  Well, your mother's name was in some silly mouths, and
all you've done was to go and have a scene with the worst old woman
gossip in the town--a scene that's going to make her into a partisan
against your mother, whereas she was a mere prattler before.  Don't
you suppose she'll be all over town with this to-morrow?  To-morrow?
Why, she'll have her telephone going to-night as long as any of her
friends are up!  People that never heard anything about this are going
to bear it all now, with embellishments.  And she'll see to it that
everybody who's hinted anything about poor Isabel will know that
you're on the warpath; and that will put them on the defensive and
make them vicious.  The story will grow as it spreads and--"

George unfolded his arms to strike his right fist into his left palm.
"But do you suppose I'm going to tolerate such things?" he shouted.
"What do you suppose I'll be doing?"

"Nothing helpful."

"Oh, you think so, do you?"

"You can do absolutely nothing," said Amberson.  "Nothing of any use.
The more you do the more harm you'll do."

"You'll see!  I'm going to stop this thing if I have to force my way
into every house on National Avenue and Amberson Boulevard!"

His uncle laughed rather sourly, but made no other comment.

"Well, what do you propose to do?" George demanded.  "Do you propose
to sit there--"

"Yes."

"--and let this riffraff bandy my mother's good name back and forth
among them?  Is that what you propose to do?"

"It's all I can do," Amberson returned.  "It's all any of us can do
now: just sit still and hope that the thing may die down in time, in
spite of your stirring up that awful old woman."

George drew a long breath, then advanced and stood close before his
uncle.  "Didn't you understand me when I told you that people are
saying my mother means to marry this man?"

"Yes, I understood you."

"You say that my going over there has made matters worse," George went
on.  "How about it if such a--such an unspeakable marriage did take
place?  Do you think that would make people believe they'd been wrong
in saying--you know what they say."

"No," said Amberson deliberately; "I don't believe it would.  There'd
be more badness in the bad mouths and more silliness in the silly
mouths, I dare say.  But it wouldn't hurt Isabel and Eugene, if they
never heard of it; and if they did hear of it, then they could take
their choice between placating gossip or living for their own
happiness.  If they have decided to marry--"

George almost staggered.  "Good God!" he gasped.  "You speak of it
calmly!"

Amberson looked up at him inquiringly.  "Why shouldn't they marry if
they want to?" he asked.  "It's their own affair."

"Why shouldn't they?" George echoed.  "Why shouldn't they?"

"Yes.  Why shouldn't they?  I don't see anything precisely monstrous
about two people getting married when they're both free and care about
each other.  What's the matter with their marrying?"

"It would be monstrous!" George shouted.  "Monstrous even if this
horrible thing hadn't happened, but now in the face of this--oh, that
you can sit there and even speak of it!  Your own sister!  O God!
Oh--"  He became incoherent, swinging away from Amberson and making for
the door, wildly gesturing.

"For heaven's sake, don't be so theatrical!" said his uncle, and then,
seeing that George was leaving the room: "Come back here.  You mustn't
speak to your mother of this!"

"Don't 'tend to," George said indistinctly; and he plunged out into
the big dimly lit hall.  He passed his grandfather's room on the way
to the stairs; and the Major was visible within, his white head
brightly illumined by a lamp, as he bent low over a ledger upon his
roll-top desk.  He did not look up, and his grandson strode by the
door, not really conscious of the old figure stooping at its tremulous
work with long additions and subtractions that refused to balance as
they used to.  George went home and got a hat and overcoat without
seeing either his mother or Fanny.  Then he left word that he would be
out for dinner, and hurried away from the house.

He walked the dark streets of Amberson Addition for an hour, then went
downtown and got coffee at a restaurant.  After that he walked through
the lighted parts of the town until ten o'clock, when he turned north
and came back to the purlieus of the Addition.  He strode through the
length and breadth of it again, his hat pulled down over his forehead,
his overcoat collar turned up behind.  He walked fiercely, though his
feet ached, but by and by he turned homeward, and, when he reached the
Major's, went in and sat upon the steps of the huge stone veranda in
front--an obscure figure in that lonely and repellent place.  All
lights were out at the Major's, and finally, after twelve, he saw his
mother's window darken at home.

He waited half an hour longer, then crossed the front yards of the new
houses and let himself noiselessly in the front door.  The light in
the hall had been left burning, and another in his own room, as he
discovered when he got there.  He locked the door quickly and without
noise, but his fingers were still upon the key when there was a quick
footfall in the hall outside.

"Georgie, dear?"

He went to the other end of the room before replying.

"Yes?"

"I'd been wondering where you were, dear."

"Had you?"

There was a pause; then she said timidly:  "Wherever it was, I hope
you had a pleasant evening."

After a silence, "Thank you," he said, without expression.

Another silence followed before she spoke again.

"You wouldn't care to be kissed good-night, I suppose?"  And with a
little flurry of placative laughter, she added: "At your age, of
course!"

"I'm going to bed, now," he said.  "Goodnight."

Another silence seemed blanker than those which had preceded it, and
finally her voice came--it was blank, too.

"Good-night."

After he was in bed his thoughts became more tumultuous than ever;
while among all the inchoate and fragmentary sketches of this dreadful
day, now rising before him, the clearest was of his uncle collapsed in
a big chair with a white tie dangling from his hand; and one
conviction, following upon that picture, became definite in George's
mind: that his Uncle George Amberson was a hopeless dreamer from whom
no help need be expected, an amiable imbecile lacking in normal
impulses, and wholly useless in a struggle which required honour to be
defended by a man of action.

Then would return a vision of Mrs. Johnson's furious round head, set
behind her great bosom like the sun far sunk on the horizon of a
mountain plateau--and her crackling, asthmatic voice. . . "Without
sharing in other people's disposition to put an evil interpretation on
what may be nothing more than unfortunate appearances." . . . "Other
people may be less considerate in not confirming their discussion of
it, as I have, to charitable views." . . . "you'll know something pretty
quick!  You'll know you're out in the street." . . . And then George
would get up again--and again--and pace the floor in his bare feet.

That was what the tormented young man was doing when daylight came
gauntly in at his window--pacing the floor, rubbing his head in his
hands, and muttering:

"It can't be true: this can't be happening to me!"




Chapter XXIV



Breakfast was brought to him in his room, as usual; but he did not
make his normal healthy raid upon the dainty tray: the food remained
untouched, and he sustained himself upon coffee--four cups of it,
which left nothing of value inside the glistening little percolator.
During this process he heard his mother being summoned to the
telephone in the hall, not far from his door, and then her voice
responding: "Yes?  Oh, it's you!  Indeed I should! . . . Of course. .
. . Then I'll expect you about three. . . Yes.  Good-bye till then."
A few minutes later he heard her speaking to someone beneath his
window and, looking out, saw her directing the removal of plants from
a small garden bed to the Major's conservatory for the winter.  There
was an air of briskness about her; as she turned away to go into the
house, she laughed gaily with the Major's gardener over something he
said, and this unconcerned cheerfulness of her was terrible to her
son.

He went to his desk, and, searching the jumbled contents of a drawer,
brought forth a large, unframed photograph of his father, upon which
he gazed long and piteously, till at last hot tears stood in his eyes.
It was strange how the inconsequent face of Wilbur seemed to increase
in high significance during this belated interview between father and
son; and how it seemed to take on a reproachful nobility--and yet,
under the circumstances, nothing could have been more natural than
that George, having paid but the slightest attention to his father in
life, should begin to deify him, now that he was dead.  "Poor, poor
father!" the son whispered brokenly.  "Poor man, I'm glad you didn't
know!"

He wrapped the picture in a sheet of newspaper, put it under his arm,
and, leaving the house hurriedly and stealthily, went downtown to the.
shop of a silversmith, where he spent sixty dollars on a resplendently
festooned silver frame for the picture.  Having lunched upon more
coffee, he returned to the house at two o'clock, carrying the framed
photograph with him, and placed it upon the centre-table in the
library, the room most used by Isabel and Fanny and himself.  Then he
went to a front window of the long "reception room," and sat looking
out through the lace curtains.

The house was quiet, though once or twice he heard his mother and
Fanny moving about upstairs, and a ripple of song in the voice of
Isabel--a fragment from the romantic ballad of Lord Bateman.

"Lord Bateman was a noble lord,
A noble lord of high degree;
And he sailed West and he sailed East,
Far countries for to see. . . ."

The words became indistinct; the air was hummed absently; the humming
shifted to a whistle, then drifted out of hearing, and the place was
still again.

George looked often at his watch, but his vigil did not last an hour.
At ten minutes of three, peering through the curtain, he saw an
automobile stop in front of the house and Eugene Morgan jump lightly
down from it.  The car was of a new pattern, low and long, with an
ample seat in the tonneau, facing forward; and a professional driver
sat at the wheel, a strange figure in leather, goggled out of all
personality and seemingly part of the mechanism.

Eugene himself, as he came up the cement path to the house, was a
figure of the new era which was in time to be so disastrous to stiff
hats and skirted coats; and his appearance afforded a debonair
contrast to that of the queer-looking duck capering: at the Amberson
Ball in an old dress coat, and chugging up National Avenue through the
snow in his nightmare of a sewing-machine.  Eugene, this afternoon,
was richly in the new outdoor mode: motoring coat was soft gray fur;
his cap and gloves were of gray suede; and though Lucy's hand may have
shown itself in the selection of these garnitures, he wore them
easily, even with becoming hint of jauntiness.  Some change might be
his face, too, for a successful man is seldom to be mistaken,
especially if his temper be genial.  Eugene had begun to look like a
millionaire.

But above everything else, what was most evident about him, as he came
up the path, was confidence in the happiness promised by his errand;
the anticipation in his eyes could have been read by a stranger.  His
look at the door of Isabel's house was the look of a man who is quite
certain that the next moment will reveal something ineffably charming,
inexpressibly dear.

When the bell rang, George waited at the entrance of the "reception
room" until a housemaid came through the hall on her way to answer the
summons.

"You needn't mind, Mary," he told her.  "I'll see who it is and what
they want.  Probably it's only a pedlar."

"Thank you, sir, Mister George," said Mary; and returned to the rear
of the house.

George went slowly to the front door, and halted, regarding the misty
silhouette of the caller upon the ornamental frosted glass.  After a
minute of waiting, this silhouette changed outline so that an arm
could be distinguished--an arm outstretched toward the bell, as if the
gentleman outside doubted whether or not it had sounded, and were
minded to try again.  But before the gesture was completed George
abruptly threw open the door, and stepped squarely upon the middle of
the threshold.

A slight change shadowed the face of Eugene; his look of happy
anticipation gave way to something formal and polite.  "How do you do,
George," he said.  "Mrs. Minafer expects to go driving with me, I
believe--if you'll be so kind as to send her word that I'm here."

George made not the slightest movement.

"No," he said.

Eugene was incredulous, even when his second glance revealed how hot
of eye was the haggard young man before him.  "I beg your pardon.  I
said--"

"I heard you," said George.  "You said you had an engagement with my
mother, and I told you, No!"

Eugene gave him a steady look, and then he quietly:  "What is the--the
difficulty?"

George kept his own voice quiet enough, but that, did not mitigate the
vibrant fury of it.  "My--mother will have no interest in knowing that
you came her to-day," he said.  "Or any other day!"

Eugene continued to look at him with a scrutiny in which began to
gleam a profound anger, none less powerful because it was so quiet.
"I am afraid I do not understand you."

"I doubt if I could make it much plainer," George said, raising his
voice slightly, "but I'll try.  You're not wanted in this house, Mr.
Morgan, now or at any other time.  Perhaps you'll understand--this!"

And with the last word he closed the Eugene's face.

Then, not moving away, he stood just inside door, and noted that the
misty silhouette remained upon the frosted glass for several moments,
as if the forbidden gentleman debated in his mind what course to
pursue.  "Let him ring again!"  George thought grimly.  "Or try the
side door--or the kitchen!"

But Eugene made no further attempt; the silhouette disappeared;
footsteps could be heard withdrawing across the floor of the veranda;
and George, returning to the window in the "reception room," was
rewarded by the sight of an automobile manufacturer in baffled
retreat, with all his wooing furs and fineries mocking him.  Eugene
got into his car slowly, not looking back at the house which had just
taught him such a lesson; and it was easily visible--even from a
window seventy feet distant--that he was not the same light suitor who
had jumped so gallantly from the car only a few minutes earlier.
Observing the heaviness of his movements as he climbed into the
tonneau, George indulged in a sickish throat rumble which bore a
distant cousinship to mirth.

The car was quicker than its owner; it shot away as soon as he had
sunk into his seat; and George, having watched its impetuous
disappearance from his field of vision, ceased to haunt the window.
He went to the library, and, seating himself beside the table whereon
he had placed the photograph of his father, picked up a book, and
pretended to been engaged in reading it.

Presently Isabel's buoyant step was heard descending the stairs, and
her low, sweet whistling, renewing the air of "Lord Bateman."  She
came into the library, still whistling thoughtfully, a fur coat over
her arm, ready to put on, and two veils round her small black hat, her
right hand engaged in buttoning the glove upon her left; and, as the
large room contained too many pieces of heavy furniture, and the
inside shutters excluded most of the light of day, she did not at once
perceive George's presence.  Instead, she went to the bay window at
the end of the room, which afforded a view of the street, and glanced
out expectantly; then bent her attention upon her glove; after that,
looked out toward the street again, ceased to whistle, and turned
toward the interior of the room.

"Why, Georgie!"

She came, leaned over from behind him, and there was a faint,
exquisite odour as from distant apple blossoms as she kissed his
cheek.  "Dear, I waited lunch almost an hour for you, but you didn't
come!  Did you lunch out somewhere?"

"Yes."  He did not look up from the book.

"Did you have plenty to eat?"

"Yes."

"Are you sure?  Wouldn't you like to have Maggie get you something now
in the dining room?  Or they could bring it to you here, if you think
it would be cozier.  Shan't I--"

A tinkling bell was audible, and she moved to the doorway into the
hall.  "I'm going out driving, dear.  I--"  She interrupted herself to
address the housemaid, who was passing through the hall: "I think it's
Mr. Morgan, Mary.  Tell him I'll be there at once."

"Yes, ma'am."

Mary returned.  "Twas a pedlar, ma'am."

"Another one?"  Isabel said, surprised.  "I thought you said it was a
pedlar when the bell rang a little while ago."

"Mister George said it was, ma'am; he went to the door," Mary informed
her, disappearing.

"There seem to be a great many of them," Isabel mused.  "What did
yours want to sell, George?"

"He didn't say."

"You must have cut him off short!" she laughed; and then, still
standing in the doorway, she noticed the big silver frame upon the
table beside him.  "Gracious, Georgie!" she exclaimed.  "You have been
investing!" and as she came across the room for a closer view, "Is it-
--is it Lucy?" she asked half timidly, half archly.  But the next
instant she saw whose likeness was thus set forth in elegiac
splendour--and she was silent, except for a long, just-audible "Oh!"

He neither looked up nor moved.

"That was nice of you, Georgie," she said, in a low voice presently.
"I ought to have had it framed, myself, when I gave it to you."

He said nothing, and, standing beside him, she put her hand gently
upon his shoulder, then as gently withdrew it, and went out of the
room.  But she did not go upstairs; he heard the faint rustle of her
dress in the hall, and then the sound of her footsteps in the
"reception room."  After a time, silence succeeded even these slight
tokens of her presence; whereupon George rose and went warily into the
hall, taking care to make no noise, and he obtained an oblique view of
her through the open double doors of the "reception room."  She was
sitting in the chair which he had occupied so long; and she was
looking out of the window expectantly--a little troubled.

He went back to the library, waited an interminable half hour, then
returned noiselessly to the same position in the hall, where he could
see her.  She was still sitting patiently by the window.

Waiting for that man, was she?  Well, it might be quite a long wait!
And the grim George silently ascended the stairs to his own room, and
began to pace his suffering floor.




Chapter XXV



He left his door open, however, and when he heard the front door-bell
ring, by and by, he went half way down the stairs and stood to listen.
He was not much afraid that Morgan would return, but he wished to make
sure.

Mary appeared in the hall below him, but, after a glance toward the
front of the house, turned back, and withdrew.  Evidently Isabel had
gone to the door.  Then a murmur was heard, and George Amberson's
voice, quick and serious: "I want to talk to you, Isabel" . . . and
another murmur; then Isabel and her brother passed the foot of the
broad, dark stairway, but did not look up, and remained unconscious of
the watchful presence above them.  Isabel still carried her cloak upon
her arm, but Amberson had taken her hand, and retained it; and as he
led her silently into the library there was something about her
attitude, and the pose of her slightly bent head, that was both
startled and meek.  Thus they quickly disappeared from George's sight,
hand in hand; and Amberson at once closed the massive double doors of
the library.

For a time all that George could hear was the indistinct sound of his
uncle's voice: what he was saying could not be surmised, though the
troubled brotherliness of his tone was evident.  He seemed to be
explaining something at considerable length, and there were moments
when he paused, and George guessed that his mother was speaking, but
her voice must have been very low, for it was entirely inaudible to
him.

Suddenly he did hear her.  Through the heavy doors her outcry came,
clear and loud:

"Oh, no!"

It was a cry of protest, as if something her brother told her must be
untrue, or, if it were true, the fact he stated must be undone; and it
was a sound of sheer pain.

Another sound of pain, close to George, followed it; this was a
vehement sniffling which broke out just above him, and, looking up, he
saw Fanny Minafer on the landing, leaning over the banisters and
applying her handkerchief to her eyes and nose.

"I can guess what that was about," she whispered huskily.  "He's just
told her what you did to Eugene!"

George gave her a dark look over his shoulder.  "You go on back to
your room!" he said; and he began to descend the stairs; but Fanny,
guessing his purpose, rushed down and caught his arm, detaining him.

"You're not going in there?", she whispered huskily.  "You don't--"

"Let go of me!"

But she clung to him savagely.  "No, you don't, Georgie Minafer!
You'll keep away from there!  You will!"

"You let go of--"

"I won't!  You come back here!  You'll come upstairs and let them
alone; that's what you'll do!"  And with such passionate determination
did she clutch and tug, never losing a grip of him somewhere, though
George tried as much as he could, without hurting her, to wrench away
--with such utter forgetfulness of her maiden dignity did she assault
him, that she forced him, stumbling upward, to the landing.

"Of all the ridiculous--" he began furiously; but she spared one hand
from its grasp of his sleeve and clapped it over his mouth.

"Hush up!" Never for an instant in this grotesque struggle did Fanny
raise her voice above a husky whisper.  "Hush up!  It's indecent--like
squabbling outside the door of an operating-room!  Go on to the top of
the stairs--go on!"

And when George had most unwillingly obeyed, she planted herself in
his way, on the top step.  "There!" she said.  "The idea of your going
in there now!  I never heard of such a thing!"  And with the sudden
departure of the nervous vigour she had shown so amazingly, she began
to cry again.  "I was an awful fool!  I thought you knew what was
going on or I never, never would have done it.  Do you suppose I
dreamed you'd go making everything into such a tragedy?  Do you?"

"I don't care what you dreamed," George muttered.

But Fanny went on, always taking care to keep her voice from getting
too loud, in spite of her most grievous agitation.  "Do you dream I
thought you'd go making such a fool of yourself at Mrs. Johnson's?
Oh, I saw her this morning!  She wouldn't talk to me, but I met George
Amberson on my way back, and he told me what you'd done over there!
And do you dream I thought you'd do what you've done here this
afternoon to Eugene?  Oh, I knew that, too!  I was looking out of the
front bedroom window, and I saw him drive up, and then go away again,
and I knew you'd been to the door.  Of course he went to George
Amberson about it, and that's why George is here.  He's got to tell
Isabel the whole thing now, and you wanted to go in there interfering
--God knows what!  You stay here and let her brother tell her; he's got
some consideration for her!"

"I suppose you think I haven't!"  George said, challenging her, and at
that Fanny laughed witheringly.

"You!  Considerate of anybody!"

"I'm considerate of her good name!" he said hotly.  "It seems to me
that's about the first thing to be considerate of, in being
considerate of a person!  And look here: it strikes me you're taking a
pretty different tack from what you did yesterday afternoon!"

Fanny wrung her hands. "I did a terrible thing!" she lamented.  "Now
that it's done and too late I know what it was!  I didn't have sense
enough just to let things go on.  I didn't have any business to
interfere, and I didn't mean to interfere--I only wanted to talk, and
let out a little!  I did think you already knew everything I told you.
I did!  And I'd rather have cut my hand off than stir you up to doing
what you have done!  I was just suffering so that I wanted to let out
a little--I didn't mean any real harm.  But now I see what's happened
--oh, I was a fool!  I hadn't any business interfering.  Eugene never
would have looked at me, anyhow, and, oh, why couldn't I have seen
that before!  He never came here a single time in his life except on
her account, never! and I might have let them alone, because he
wouldn't have looked at me even if he'd never seen Isabel.  And they
haven't done any harm: she made Wilbur happy, and she was a true wife
to him as long as he lived.  It wasn't a crime for her to care for
Eugene all the time; she certainly never told him she did--and she
gave me every chance in the world!  She left us alone together every
time she could--even since Wilbur died--but what was the use?  And
here I go, not doing myself a bit of good by it, and just"--Fanny
wrung her hands again--"just ruining them!"

"I suppose you mean I'm doing that," George said bitterly.

"Yes, I do!" she sobbed, and drooped upon the stairway railing,
exhausted.

"On the contrary, I mean to save my mother from a calamity."

Fanny looked at him wanly, in a tired despair; then she stepped by him
and went slowly to her own door, where she paused and beckoned to him.

"What do you want?"

"Just come here a minute."

"What for?" he asked impatiently.

"I just wanted to say something to you."

"Well, for heaven's sake, say it!  There's nobody to hear."
Nevertheless, after a moment, as she beckoned him again, he went to
her, profoundly annoyed.  "Well, what is it?"

"George," she said in a low voice, "I think you ought to be told
something.  If I were you, I'd let my mother alone."

"Oh, my Lord!" he groaned.  "I'm doing these things for her, not
against her!"

A mildness had come upon Fanny, and she had controlled her weeping.
She shook her head gently.  "No, I'd let her alone if I were you.  I
don't think she's very well, George."

"She!  I never saw a healthier person in my life."

"No.  She doesn't let anybody know, but she goes to the doctor
regularly."

"Women are always going to doctors regularly."

"No.  He told her to."

George was not impressed.  "It's nothing at all; she spoke of it to me
years ago--some kind of family failing.  She said grandfather had it,
too; and look at him!  Hasn't proved very serious with him!  You act
as if I'd done something wrong in sending that man about his business,
and as if I were going to persecute my mother, instead of protecting
her.  By Jove, it's sickening!  You told me how all the riffraff in
town were busy with her name, and then the minute I lift my hand to
protect her, you begin to attack me and--"

"Sh!"  Fanny checked him, laying her hand on his arm.  "Your uncle is
going."

The library doors were heard opening, and a moment later there came
the sound of the front door closing.

George moved toward the head of the stairs, then stood listening; but
the house was silent.

Fanny made a slight noise with her lips to attract his attention, and,
when he glanced toward her, shook her head at him urgently.  "Let her
alone," she whispered.  "She's down there by herself.  Don't go down.
Let her alone."

She moved a few steps toward him and halted, her face pallid and
awestruck, and then both stood listening for anything that might break
the silence downstairs.  No sound came to them; that poignant silence
was continued throughout long, long minutes, while the two listeners
stood there under its mysterious spell; and in its plaintive
eloquence--speaking, as it did, of the figure alone in the big, dark
library, where dead Wilbur's new silver frame gleamed in the dimness--
there was something that checked even George.

Above the aunt and nephew, as they kept this strange vigil, there was
a triple window of stained glass, to illumine the landing and upper
reaches of the stairway.  Figures in blue and amber garments posed
gracefully in panels, conceived by some craftsman of the Eighties to
represent Love and Purity and Beauty, and these figures, leaded to
unalterable attitudes, were little more motionless than the two human
beings upon whom fell the mottled faint light of the window.  The
colours were growing dull; evening was coming on.

Fanny Minafer broke the long silence with a sound from her throat, a
stilled gasp; and with that great companion of hers, her handkerchief,
retired softly to the loneliness of her own chamber.  After she had
gone George looked about him bleakly, then on tiptoe crossed the hall
and went into his own room, which was filled with twilight.  Still
tiptoeing, though he could not have said why, he-went across the room
and sat down heavily in a chair facing the window.  Outside there was
nothing but the darkening air and the wall of the nearest of the new
houses.  He had not slept at all, the night before, and he had eaten
nothing since the preceding day at lunch, but he felt neither
drowsiness nor hunger.  His set determination filled him, kept him but
too wide awake, and his gaze at the grayness beyond the window was
wide--eyed and bitter.

Darkness had closed in when there was a step in the room behind him.
Then someone knelt beside the chair, two arms went round him with
infinite compassion, a gentle head rested against his shoulder, and
there came the faint scent as of apple-blossoms far away.

"You mustn't be troubled, darling," his mother whispered.




Chapter XXVI


George choked.  For an instant he was on the point of breaking down,
but he commanded himself, bravely dismissing the self-pity roused by
her compassion.  "How can I help but be?" he said.

"No, no."  She soothed him.  "You mustn't.  You mustn't be troubled,
no matter what happens."

"That's easy enough to say!" he protested; and he moved as if to rise.

"Just let's stay like this a little while, dear.  Just a minute or
two.  I want to tell you: brother George has been here, and he told me
everything about--about how unhappy you'd been--and how you went so
gallantly to that old woman with the operaglasses."  Isabel gave a sad
little laugh.  "What a terrible old woman she is!  What a really
terrible thing a vulgar old woman can be!"

"Mother, I--"  And again he moved to rise.

"Must you?  It seemed to me such a comfortable way to talk.  Well--"
She yielded; he rose, helped her to her feet, and pressed the light
into being.

As the room took life from the sudden lines of fire within the bulbs
Isabel made a deprecatory gesture, and, with a faint laugh of
apologetic protest, turned quickly away from George.  What she meant
was:  "You mustn't see my face until I've made it nicer for you."
Then she turned again to him, her eyes downcast, but no sign of tears
in them, and she contrived to show him that there was the semblance of
a smile upon her lips.  She still wore her hat, and in her unsteady
fingers she held a white envelope, somewhat crumpled.

"Now, mother--"

"Wait, dearest," she said; and though he stood stone cold, she lifted
her arms, put them round him again, and pressed her cheek lightly to
his.  "Oh, you do look so troubled, poor dear!  One thing you couldn't
doubt, beloved boy: you know I could never care for anything in the
world as I care for you--never, never!"

"Now, mother--"

She released him, and stepped back.  "Just a moment more, dearest. I
want you to read this first.  We can get at things better."  She
pressed into his hand the envelope she had brought with her, and as he
opened it, and began to read the long enclosure, she walked slowly to
the other end of the room; then stood there, with her back to him, and
her head drooping a little, until he had finished.

The sheets of paper were covered with Eugene's handwriting.

George Amberson will bring you this, dear Isabel.  He is waiting while
I write.  He and I have talked things over, and before he gives this
to you he will tell you what has happened.  Of course I'm rather
confused, and haven't had time to think matters out very definitely,
and yet I believe I should have been better prepared for what took
place to-day--I ought to have known it was coming, because I have
understood for quite a long time that young George was getting to
dislike me more and more.  Somehow, I've never been able to get his
friendship; he's always had a latent distrust of me--or something like
distrust--and perhaps that's made me sometimes a little awkward and
diffident with him.  I think it may be he felt from the first that I
cared a great deal about you, and he naturally resented it.  I think
perhaps he felt this even during all the time when I was so careful--
at least I thought I was--not to show, even to you, how immensely I
did care.  And he may have feared that you were thinking too much
about me--even when you weren't and only liked me as an old friend.
It's perfectly comprehensible to me, also, that at his age one gets
excited about gossip.  Dear Isabel, what I'm trying to get at, in my
confused way, is that you and I don't care about this nonsensical
gossip, ourselves, at all.  Yesterday I thought the time had come when
I could ask you to marry me, and you were dear enough to tell me
"sometime it might come to that."  Well, you and I, left to ourselves,
and knowing what we have been and what we are, we'd pay as much
attention to "talk" as we would to any other kind of old cats' mewing!
We'd not be very apt to let such things keep us from the plenty of
life we have left to us for making up to ourselves for old
unhappinesses and mistakes.  But now we're faced with--not the slander
and not our own fear of it, because we haven't any, but someone else's
fear of it--your son's.  And, oh, dearest woman in the world, I know
what your son is to you, and it frightens me!  Let me explain a
little: I don't think he'll change--at twenty-one or twenty-two so
many things appear solid and permanent and terrible which forty sees
are nothing but disappearing miasma.  Forty can't tell twenty about
this; that's the pity of it!  Twenty can find out only by getting to
be forty.  And so we come to this, dear:  Will you live your own life
your way, or George's way?  I'm going a little further, because it
would be fatal not to be wholly frank now.  George will act toward you
only as your long worship of him, your sacrifices--all the unseen
little ones every day since he was born--will make him act.  Dear, it
breaks my heart for you, but what you have to oppose now is the
history of your own selfless and perfect motherhood.  I remember
saying once that what you worshipped in your son was the angel you saw
in him--and I still believe that is true of every mother.  But in a
mother's worship she may not see that the Will in her son should not
always be offered incense along with the angel.  I grow sick with fear
for you--for both you and me--when I think how the Will against us two
has grown strong through the love you have given the angel--and how
long your own sweet Will has served that other.  Are you strong
enough, Isabel?  Can you make the fight?  I promise you that if you
will take heart for it, you will find so quickly that it has all
amounted to nothing.  You shall have happiness, and, in a little
while, only happiness.  You need only to write me a line--I can't come
to your house--and tell me where you will meet me.  We will come back
in a month, and the angel in your son will bring him to you; I promise
it.  What is good in him will grow so fine, once you have beaten the
turbulent Will--but it must be beaten!

Your brother, that good friend, is waiting with such patience; I
should not keep him longer--and I am saying too much for wisdom, I
fear.  But, oh, my dear, won't you be strong--such a little short
strength it would need!  Don't strike my lifedown twice, dear--this
time I've not deserved it.
                                  Eugene.

Concluding this missive, George tossed it abruptly from him so that
one sheet fell upon his bed and the others upon the floor; and at the
faint noise of their falling Isabel came, and, kneeling, began to
gather them up.

"Did you read it, dear?"

George's face was pale no longer, but pink with fury.  "Yes, I did."

"All of it?" she asked gently, as she rose.

"Certainly!"

She did not look at him, but kept her eyes downcast upon the letter in
her hands, tremulously rearranging the sheets in order as she spoke--
and though she smiled, her smile was as tremulous as her hands.
Nervousness and an irresistible timidity possessed her.  "I--I wanted
to say, George," she faltered.  "I felt that if--if some day it should
happen--I mean, if you came to feel differently about it, and Eugene
and I--that is if we found that it seemed the most sensible thing to
do--I was afraid you might think it would be a little queer about--
Lucy, I mean if--if she were your step-sister.  Of course, she'd not
be even legally related to you, and if you--if you cared for her--"

Thus far she got stumblingly with what she wanted to say, while George
watched her with a gaze that grew harder and hotter; but here he cut
her off.  "I have already given up all idea of Lucy," he said.
"Naturally, I couldn't have treated her father as I deliberately did
treat him--I could hardly have done that and expected his daughter
ever to speak to me again."

Isabel gave a quick cry of compassion, but he allowed her no
opportunity to speak.  "You needn't think I'm making any particular
sacrifice," he said sharply, "though I would, quickly enough, if I
thought it necessary in a matter of honour like this.  I was
interested in her, and I could even say I did care for her; but she
proved pretty satisfactorily that she cared little enough about me!
She went away right in the midst of a--of a difference of opinion we
were having; she didn't even let me know she was going, and never
wrote a line to me, and then came back telling everybody she'd had 'a
perfectly gorgeous time!'  That's quite enough for me.  I'm not
precisely the sort to arrange for that kind of thing to be done to me
more than once!  The truth is, we're not congenial and we'd found that
much out, at least, before she left.  We should never have been happy;
she was 'superior' all the time, and critical of me--not very
pleasant, that!  I was disappointed in her, and I might as well say
it.  I don't think she has the very deepest nature in the world, and--"

But Isabel put her hand timidly on his arm.  "Georgie, dear, this is
only a quarrel: all young people have them before they get adjusted,
and you mustn't let--"

"If you please!" he said emphatically, moving back from her.  "This
isn't that kind.  It's all over, and I don't care to speak of it
again.  It's settled.  Don't you understand?"

"But, dear--"

"No. I want to talk to you about this letter of her father's."

"Yes, dear, that's why--"

"It's simply the most offensive piece of writing that I've ever held
in my hands!"

She stepped back from him, startled.  "But, dear, I thought--"

"I can't understand your even showing me such a thing!" he cried.
"How did you happen to bring it to me?"

"Your uncle thought I'd better.  He thought it was the simplest thing
to do, and he said that he'd suggested it to Eugene, and Eugene had
agreed.  They thought--"

"Yes!"  George said bitterly.  "I should like to hear what they
thought!"

"They thought it would be the most straightforward thing."

George drew a long breath.  "Well, what do you think, mother?"

"I thought it would be the simplest and most straightforward thing; I
thought they were right."

"Very well!  We'll agree it was simple and straightforward.  Now, what
do you think of that letter itself?"

She hesitated, looking away.  "I--of course I don't agree with him in
the way he speaks of you, dear--except about the angel!  I don't agree
with some of the things he implies.  You've always been unselfish--
nobody knows that better than your mother.  When Fanny was left with
nothing, you were so quick and generous to give up what really should
have come to you, and--"

"And yet," George broke in, "you see what he implies about me.  Don't
you think, really, that this was a pretty insulting letter for that
man to be asking you to hand your son?"

"Oh, no!" she cried.  "You can see how fair he means to be, and he
didn't ask for me to give it to you.  It was brother George who--"

"Never mind that, now!  You say he tries to be fair, and yet do you
suppose it ever occurs to him that I'm doing my simple duty?  That I'm
doing what my father would do if he were alive?  That I'm doing what
my father would ask me to do if he could speak from his grave out
yonder?  Do you suppose it ever occurs to that man for one minute that
I'm protecting my mother?"  George raised his voice, advancing upon
the helpless lady fiercely; and she could only bend her head before
him.  "He talks about my 'Will'--how it must be beaten down; yes, and
he asks my mother to do that little thing to please him!  What for?
Why does he want me 'beaten' by my mother?  Because I'm trying to
protect her name!  He's got my mother's name bandied up and down the
streets of this town till I can't step in those streets without
wondering what every soul I meet is thinking of me and of my family,
and now he wants you to marry him so that every gossip in town will
say 'There!  What did I tell you?  I guess that proves it's true!'
You can't get away from it; that's exactly what they'd say, and this
man pretends he cares for you, and yet asks you to marry him and give
them the right to say it.  He says he and you don't care what they
say, but I know better!  He may not care-probably he's that kind--but
you do.  There never was an Amberson yet that would let the Amberson
name go trailing in the dust like that!  It's the proudest name in
this town and it's going to stay the proudest; and I tell you that's
the deepest thing in my nature-not that I'd expect Eugene Morgan to
understand--the very deepest thing in my nature is to protect that
name, and to fight for it to the last breath when danger threatens it,
as it does now--through my mother!"  He turned from her, striding up
and down and tossing his arms about, in a tumult of gesture.  "I can't
believe it of you, that you'd think of such a sacrilege!  That's what
it would be--sacrilege!  When he talks about your unselfishness toward
me, he's right--you have been unselfish and you have been a perfect
mother.  But what about him?  Is it unselfish of him to want you to
throw away your good name just to please him?  That's all he asks of
you--and to quit being my mother!  Do you think I can believe you
really care for him?  I don't!  You are my mother and you're an
Amberson--and I believe you're too proud!  You're too proud to care
for a man who could write such a letter as that!"  He stopped, faced
her, and spoke with more self-control:  "Well, what are you going to
do about it, mother?

George was right about his mother's being proud.  And even when she
laughed with a negro gardener, or even those few times in her life
when people saw her weep, Isabel had a proud look--something that was
independent and graceful and strong.  But she did not have it now: she
leaned against the wall, beside his dressing-table, and seemed beset
with humility and with weakness.  Her head drooped.

"What answer are you going to make to such a letter?"  George
demanded, like a judge on the bench.

"I--I don't quite know, dear," she murmured.

"Wait," she begged him.  "I'm so--confused."

"I want to know what you're going to write him.  Do you think if you
did what be wants you to I could bear to stay another day in this
town, mother?  Do you think I could ever bear even to see you again if
you married him?  I'd want to, but you surely know I just--couldn't!"

She made a futile gesture, and seemed to breathe with difficulty.
"I--I wasn't--quite sure," she faltered, "about--about it's being wise
for us to be married--even before knowing how you feel about it.  I
wasn't even sure it was quite fair to--to Eugene.  I have--I seem to
have that family trouble--like father's--that I spoke to you about
once."  She managed a deprecatory little dry laugh.  "Not that it
amounts to much, but I wasn't at all sure that it would be fair to
him.  Marrying doesn't mean so much, after all--not at my age.  It's
enough to know that--that people think of you--and to see them.  I
thought we were all--oh, pretty happy the way things were, and I don't
think it would mean giving up a great deal for him or me, either, if
we just went on as we have been.  I--I see him almost every day, and--"

"Mother!"  George's voice was loud and stern.  "Do you think you could
go on seeing him after this!"

She had been talking helplessly enough before; her tone was little
more broken now.  "Not--not even--see him?"

"How could you?"  George cried.  "Mother, it seems to me that if he
ever set foot in this house again--oh!  I can't speak of it!  Could
you see him, knowing what talk it makes every time he turns into this
street, and knowing what that means to me?  Oh, I don't understand all
this--I don't!  If you'd told me, a year ago, that such things were
going to happen, I'd have thought you were insane--and now I believe I
am!"

Then, after a preliminary gesture of despair, as though he meant harm
to the ceiling, he flung himself heavily, face downward, upon the bed.
his anguish was none the less real for its vehemence; and the stricken
lady came to him instantly and bent over him, once more enfolding him
in her arms.  She said nothing, but suddenly her tears fell upon his
head; she saw them, and seemed to be startled.

"Oh, this won't do!" she said.  "I've never let you see me cry before,
except when your father died. I mustn't!"

And she ran from the room.

. . .A little while after she had gone, George rose and began solemnly
to dress for dinner.  At one stage of these conscientious proceedings
he put on, temporarily, his long black velvet dressing-gown, and,
happening to catch sight in his pier glass of the picturesque and
medieval figure thus presented, he paused to regard it; and something
profoundly theatrical in his nature came to the surface.

His lips moved; he whispered, half-aloud, some famous fragments:

"Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black . . ."

For, in truth, the mirrored princely image, with hair dishevelled on
the white brow, and the long tragic fall of black velvet from the
shoulders, had brought about (in his thought at least) some
comparisons of his own times, so out of joint, with those of that
other gentle prince and heir whose widowed mother was minded to marry
again.

"But I have that within which passeth show;
These but the trappings and the suits of Woe."

Not less like Hamlet did be feel and look as he sat gauntly at the
dinner table with Fanny to partake of a meal throughout which neither
spoke.  Isabel had sent word "not to wait" for her, an injunction it
was as well they obeyed, for she did not come at all.  But with the
renewal of sustenance furnished to his system, some relaxation must
have occurred within the high-strung George.  Dinner was not quite
finished when, without warning, sleep hit him hard.  His burning eyes
could no longer restrain the lids above them; his head sagged beyond
control; and he got to his feet, and went lurching upstairs, yawning
with exhaustion.  From the door of his room, which he closed
mechanically, with his eyes shut, he went blindly to his bed, fell
upon it soddenly, and slept--with his face full upturned to the light.

It was after midnight when he woke, and the room was dark.  He had not
dreamed, but he woke with the sense that somebody or something had
been with him while he slept--somebody or something infinitely
compassionate; somebody or something infinitely protective, that would
let him come to no harm and to no grief.

He got up, and pressed the light on.  Pinned to the cover of his
dressing-table was a square envelope, with the words, "For you, dear,"
written in pencil upon it.  But the message inside was in ink, a
little smudged here and there.

I have been out to the mail-box, darling, with a letter I've written
to Eugene, and he'll have it in the morning.  It would be unfair not
to let him know at once, and my decision could not change if I waited.
It would always be the same.  I think it, is a little better for me to
write to you, like this, instead of waiting till you wake up and then
telling you, because I'm foolish and might cry again, and I took a vow
once, long ago, that you should never see me cry.  Not that I'll feel
like crying when we talk things over tomorrow.  I'll be "all right and
fine" (as you say so often) by that time--don't fear.  I think what
makes me most ready to cry now is the thought of the terrible
suffering in your poor face, and the unhappy knowledge that it is I,
your mother who put it there.  It shall never come again!  I love you
better than anything and everything else on earth.  God gave you to
me--and oh! how thankful I have been every day of my life for that
sacred gift--and nothing can ever come between me and God's gift.  I
cannot hurt you, and I cannot let you stay hurt as you have been--not
another instant after you wake up, my darling boy!  It is beyond my
power.  And Eugene was right--I know you couldn't change about this.
Your suffering shows how deep-seated the feeling is within you.  So
I've written him just about what I think you would like me to--though
I told him I would always be fond of him and always his best friend,
and I hoped his dearest friend.  He'll understand about not seeing
him.  He'll understand that, though I didn't say it in so many words.
You mustn't trouble about that--he'll understand.  Good-night, my
darling, my beloved, my beloved!  You mustn't be troubled. I think I
shouldn't mind anything very much so long as I have you "all to
myself"--as people say--to make up for your long years away from me at
college.  We'll talk of what's best to do in the morning, shan't we?
And for all this pain you'll forgive your loving and devoted mother.

Isabel.




Chapter XXVII


Having finished some errands downtown, the next afternoon, George
Amberson Minafer was walking up National Avenue on his homeward way
when he saw in the distance, coming toward him, upon the same side of
the street, the figure of a young lady--a figure just under the middle
height, comely indeed, and to be mistaken for none other in the world
--even at two hundred yards.  To his sharp discomfiture his heart
immediately forced upon him the consciousness of its acceleration; a
sudden warmth about his neck made him aware that he had turned red,
and then, departing, left him pale.  For a panicky moment he thought
of facing about in actual flight; he had little doubt that Lucy would
meet him with no token of recognition, and all at once this
probability struck him as unendurable.  And if she did not speak, was
it the proper part of chivalry to lift his hat and take the cut
bareheaded?  Or should the finer gentleman acquiesce in the lady's
desire for no further acquaintance, and pass her with stony mien and
eyes constrained forward?  George was a young man badly flustered.

But the girl approaching him was unaware of his trepidation, being
perhaps somewhat preoccupied with her own.  She saw only that he was
pale, and that his eyes were darkly circled.  But here he was
advantaged with her, for the finest touch to his good looks was given
by this toning down; neither pallor nor dark circles detracting from
them, but rather adding to them a melancholy favour of distinction.
George had retained his mourning, a tribute completed down to the
final details of black gloves and a polished ebony cane (which he
would have been pained to name otherwise than as a "walking-stick")
and in the aura of this sombre elegance his straight figure and drawn
face were not without a tristful and appealing dignity.

In everything outward he was cause enough for a girl's cheek to flush,
her heart to beat faster, and her eyes to warm with the soft light
that came into Lucy's now, whether she would or no.  If his spirit had
been what his looks proclaimed it, she would have rejoiced to let the
light glow forth which now shone in spite of her.  For a long time,
thinking of that spirit of his, and what she felt it should be, she
had a persistent sense: "It must be there!" but she had determined to
believe this folly no longer.  Nevertheless, when she met him at the
Sharons', she had been far less calm than she seemed.

People speaking casually of Lucy were apt to define her as "a little
beauty," a definition short of the mark.  She was "a little beauty,"
but an independent, masterful, sell-reliant little American, of whom
her father's earlier gipsyings and her own sturdiness had made a woman
ever since she was fifteen.  But though she was the mistress of her
own ways and no slave to any lamp save that of her own conscience, she
had a weakness: she had fallen in love with George Amberson Minafer at
first sight, and no matter how she disciplined herself, she had never
been able to climb out.  The thing had happened to her; that was all.
George had looked just the way she had always wanted someone to look--
the riskiest of all the moonshine ambushes wherein tricky romance
snares credulous young love.  But what was fatal to Lucy was that this
thing having happened to her, she could not change it.  No matter what
she discovered in George's nature she was unable to take away what she
had given him; and though she could think differently about him, she
could not feel differently about him, for she was one of those too
faithful victims of glamour.  When she managed to keep the picture of
George away from her mind's eye, she did well enough; but when she let
him become visible, she could not choose but love what she disdained.
She was a little angel who had fallen in love with high-handed
Lucifer; quite an experience, and not apt to be soon succeeded by any
falling in love with a tamer party--and the unhappy truth was that
George did make better men seem tame.  But though she was a victim,
she was a heroic one, anything but helpless.

As they drew nearer, George tried to prepare himself to meet her with
some remnants of aplomb.  He decided that he would keep on looking
straight ahead, and lift his hand toward his hat at the very last
moment when it would be possible for her to see him out of the corner
of her eye: then when she thought it over later, she would not be sure
whether he had saluted her or merely rubbed his forehead.  And there
was the added benefit that any third person who might chance to look
from a window, or from a passing carriage, would not think that he was
receiving a snub, because he did not intend to lift his hat, but,
timing the gesture properly, would in fact actually rub his forehead.
These were the hasty plans which occupied his thoughts until he was
within about fifty feet of her--when he ceased to have either plans or
thoughts, he had kept his eyes from looking full at her until then,
and as he saw her, thus close at hand, and coming nearer, a regret
that was dumfounding took possession of him.  For the first time he
had the sense of having lost something of overwhelming importance.

Lucy did not keep to the right, but came straight to meet him,
smiling, and with her hand offered to him.

"Why--you--" he stammered, as he took it.  "Haven't you--"  What he
meant to say was, "Haven't you heard?"

"Haven't I what?" she asked; and he saw that Eugene had not yet told
her.

"Nothing!" he gasped.  "May I--may I turn and walk with you a little
way?"

"Yes, indeed!" she said cordially.

He would not have altered what had been done: he was satisfied with all
that--satisfied that it was right, and that his own course was right.
But he began to perceive a striking inaccuracy in some remarks he had
made to his mother.  Now when he had put matters in such shape that
even by the relinquishment of his "ideals of life" he could not have
Lucy, knew that he could never have her, and knew that when Eugene
told her the history of yesterday he could not have a glance or word
even friendly from her--now when he must in good truth "give up all
idea of Lucy," he was amazed that he could have used such words as "no
particular sacrifice," and believed them when he said them!  She had
looked never in his life so bewitchingly pretty as she did today; and
as he walked beside her he was sure that she was the most exquisite
thing in the world.

"Lucy," he said huskily, "I want to tell you something.  Something
that matters."

"I hope it's a lively something then," she said; and laughed.  "Papa's
been so glum to-day he's scarcely spoken to me.  Your Uncle George
Amberson came to see him an hour ago and they shut themselves up in
the library, and your uncle looked as glum as papa.  I'd be glad if
you'll tell me a funny story, George."

"Well, it may seem one to you," he said bitterly, "Just to begin with:
when you went away you didn't let me know; not even a word--not a
line--"

Her manner persisted in being inconsequent.  "Why, no," she said.  "I
just trotted off for some visits."

"Well, at least you might have--"

"Why, no," she said again briskly.  "Don't you remember, George?  We'd
had a grand quarrel, and didn't speak to each other all the way home
from a long, long drive!  So, as we couldn't play together like good
children, of course it was plain that we oughtn't to play at all."

"Play!" he cried.

"Yes.  What I mean is that we'd come to the point where it was time to
quit playing--well, what we were playing."

"At being lovers, you mean, don't you?"

"Something like that," she said lightly.  "For us two, playing at
being lovers was just the same as playing at cross-purposes.  I had
all the purposes, and that gave you all the crossness: things weren't
getting along at all.  It was absurd!"

"Well, have it your own way," he said.  "It needn't have been absurd."

"No, it couldn't help but be!" she informed him cheerfully.  "The way
I am and the way you are, it couldn't ever be anything else.  So what
was the use?"

"I don't know," he sighed, and his sigh was abysmal.  "But what I wanted
to tell you is this: when you went away, you didn't let me know and didn't
care how or when I heard it, but I'm not like that with you.  This time,
I'm going away.  That's what I wanted to tell you.  I'm going away
tomorrow night--indefinitely."

She nodded sunnily.  "That's nice for you. I hope you'll have ever so
jolly a time, George."

"I don't expect to have a particularly jolly time."

"Well, then," she laughed, "if I were you I don't think I'd go."

It seemed impossible to impress this distracting creature, to make her
serious.  "Lucy," he said desperately, "this is our last walk
together."

"Evidently!" she said, "if you're going away tomorrow night."

"Lucy--this may be the last time I'll see you--ever--ever in my life."

At that she looked at him quickly, across her shoulder, but she smiled
as brightly as before, and with the same cordial inconsequence: "Oh, I
can hardly think that!" she said.  "And of course I'd be awfully sorry
to think it.  You're not moving away, are you, to live?"

"No."

"And even if you were, of course you'd be coming back to visit your
relatives every now and then."

"I don't know when I'm coming back.  Mother and I are starting to-
morrow night for a trip around the world."

At this she did look thoughtful.  "Your mother is going with you?"

"Good heavens!" he groaned.  "Lucy, doesn't it make any difference to
you that I am going?"

At this her cordial smile instantly appeared again.  "Yes, of course,"
she said.  "I'm sure I'll miss you ever so much.  Are you to be gone
long?"

He stared at her wanly.  "I told you indefinitely," he said.  "We've
made no plans--at all--for coming back."

"That does sound like a long trip!" she exclaimed admiringly.  "Do you
plan to be travelling all the time, or will you stay in some one place
the greater part of it?  I think it would be lovely to--"

"Lucy!"

He halted; and she stopped with him.  They had come to a corner at the
edge of the "business section" of the city, and people were everywhere
about them, brushing against them, sometimes, in passing.

"I can't stand this," George said, in a low voice.  "I'm just about
ready to go in this drug-store here, and ask the clerk for something
to keep me from dying in my tracks!  It's quite a shock, you see,
Lucy!"

"What is?"

"To find out certainly, at last, how deeply you've cared for me!  To
see how much difference this makes to you!  By Jove, I have mattered
to you!"

Her cordial smile was tempered now with good-nature.  "George!"  She
laughed indulgently.  "Surely you don't want me to do pathos on a
downtown corner!"

"You wouldn't 'do pathos' anywhere!"

"Well--don't you think pathos is generally rather fooling?"

"I can't stand this any longer," he said.  "I can't!  Good-bye, Lucy!"
He took her hand.  "It's good-bye--I think it's good-bye for good,
Lucy!"

"Good-bye!  I do hope you'll have the most splendid trip."  She gave
his hand a cordial little grip, then released it lightly.  "Give my
love to your mother.  Good-bye!"

He turned heavily away, and a moment later glanced back over his
shoulder.  She had not gone on, but stood watching him, that same
casual, cordial smile on her face to the very last; and now, as he
looked back, she emphasized her friendly unconcern by waving her small
hand to him cheerily, though perhaps with the slightest hint of
preoccupation, as if she had begun to think of the errand that brought
her downtown.

In his mind, George had already explained her to his own poignant
dissatisfaction--some blond pup, probably, whom she had met during
that "perfectly gorgeous time!"  And he strode savagely onward, not
looking back again.

But Lucy remained where she was until he was out of sight.  Then she
went slowly into the drugstore which had struck George as a possible
source of stimulant for himself.

"Please let me have a few drops of aromatic spirits of ammonia in a
glass of water," she said, with the utmost composure.

"Yes, ma'am!" said the impressionable clerk, who had been looking at
her through the display window as she stood on the corner.

But a moment later, as he turned from the shelves of glass jars
against the wall, with the potion she had asked for in his hand, he
uttered an exclamation: "For goshes' sake, Miss!"  And, describing
this adventure to his fellow-boarders, that evening, "Sagged pretty
near to the counter, she was," he said.  "If I hadn't been a bright,
quick, ready-for-anything young fella she'd 'a' flummixed plum!  I was
watchin' her out the window--talkin' to some young s'iety fella, and
she was all right then.  She was all right when she come in the store,
too.  Yes, sir; the prettiest girl that ever walked in our place and
took one good look at me.  I reckon it must be the truth what some you
town wags say about my face!"




CHAPTER XXVIII


At that hour the heroine of the susceptible clerk's romance was
engaged in brightening the rosy little coal fire under the white
mantelpiece in her pretty white-and-blue boudoir.  Four photographs
all framed in decorous plain silver went to the anthracite's fierce
destruction--frames and all--and three packets of letters and notes in
a charming Florentine treasure-box of painted wood; nor was the box,
any more than the silver frames, spared this rousing finish.  Thrown
heartily upon live coal, the fine wood sparkled forth in stars, then
burst into an alarming blaze which scorched the white mantelpiece, but
Lucy stood and looked on without moving.

It was not Eugene who told her what had happened at Isabel's door.
When she got home, she found Fanny Minafer waiting for her--a secret
excursion of Fanny's for the purpose, presumably, of "letting out"
again; because that was what she did.  She told Lucy everything
(except her own lamentable part in the production of the recent
miseries) and concluded with a tribute to George:  "The worst of it
is, he thinks he's been such a hero, and Isabel does, too, and that
makes him more than twice as awful.  It's been the same all his life:
everything he did was noble and perfect.  He had a domineering nature
to begin with, and she let it go on, and fostered it till it
absolutely ruled her.  I never saw a plainer case of a person's fault
making them pay for having it!  She goes about, overseeing the packing
and praising George and pretending to be perfectly cheerful about what
he's making her do and about the dreadful things he's done.  She
pretends he did such a fine thing--so manly and protective--going to
Mrs. Johnson.  And so heroic--doing what his 'principles' made him--
even though he knew what it would cost him with you!  And all the
while it's almost killing her--what he said to your father!  She's
always been lofty enough, so to speak, and had the greatest idea of
the Ambersons being superior to the rest of the world, and all that,
but rudeness, or anything like a 'scene,' or any bad manners--they
always just made her sick!  But she could never see what George's
manners were--oh, it's been a terrible adulation! . . . It's going to
be a task for me, living in that big house, all alone: you must come
and see me--I mean after they've gone, of course.  I'll go crazy if I
don't see something of people.  I'm sure you'll come as often as you
can.  I know you too well to think you'll be sensitive about coming
there, or being reminded of George.  Thank heaven you're too well-
balanced," Miss Fanny concluded, with a profound fervour, "you're too
well-balanced to let anything affect you deeply about that--that
monkey!"

The four photographs and the painted Florentine box went to their
cremation within the same hour that Miss Fanny spoke; and a little
later Lucy called her father in, as he passed her door, and pointed to
the blackened area on the underside of the mantelpiece, and to the
burnt heap upon the coal, where some metallic shapes still retained
outline.  She flung her arms about his neck in passionate sympathy,
telling him that she knew what had happened to him; and presently he
began to comfort her and managed an embarrassed laugh.

"Well, well--" he said.  "I was too old for such foolishness to be
getting into my head, anyhow."

"No, no!" she sobbed.  "And if you knew how I despise myself for--for
ever having thought one instant about--oh, Miss Fanny called him the
right name: that monkey!  He is!"

"There, I think I agree with you," Eugene said grimly, and in his eyes
there was a steady light of anger that was to last.  "Yes, I think I
agree with you about that!"

"There's only one thing to do with such a person," she said
vehemently.  "That's to put him out of our thoughts forever--forever!"

And yet, the next day, at six o'clock, which was the hour, Fanny had
told her, when George and his mother were to leave upon their long
journey, Lucy touched that scorched place on her mantel with her hand
just as the little clock above it struck.  Then, after this odd,
unconscious gesture, she went to a window and stood between the
curtains, looking out into the cold November dusk; and in spite of
every reasoning and reasonable power within her, a pain of loneliness
struck through her heart.  The dim street below her window, the dark
houses across the way, the vague air itself--all looked empty, and
cold and (most of all) uninteresting.  Something more sombre than
November dusk took the colour from them and gave them that air of
desertion.

The light of her fire, flickering up behind her showed suddenly a
flying group of tiny snowflakes nearing the window-pane; and for an
instant she felt the sensation of being dragged through a snows drift
under a broken cutter, with a boy's arms about her--an arrogant,
handsome, too-conquering boy, who nevertheless did his best to get
hurt himself, keeping her from any possible harm.

She shook the picture out of her eyes indignantly, then came and sat
before her fire, and looked long and long at the blackened
mantelpiece.  She did not have the mantelpiece repainted--and, since
she did not, might as well have kept his photographs.  One forgets
what made the scar upon his hand but not what made the scar upon his
wall.

She played no marche funebre upon her piano, even though Chopin's
romantic lamentation was then at the top of nine-tenths of the music-
racks in the country, American youth having recently discovered the
distinguished congeniality between itself and this deathless bit of
deathly gloom.  She did not even play "Robin Adair"; she played
"Bedelia" and all the new cake-walks, for she was her father's
housekeeper, and rightly looked upon the office as being the same as
that of his heart-keeper.  Therefore it was her affair to keep both
house and heart in what state of cheerfulness might be contrived.  She
made him "go out" more than ever; made him take her to all the
gayeties of that winter, declining to go herself unless he took her,
and, though Eugene danced no more, and quoted Shakespeare to prove all
lightfoot caperings beneath the dignity of his age, she broke his
resolution for him at the New Year's Eve "Assembly" and half coaxed,
half dragged him forth upon the floor, and made him dance the New Year
in with her.

New faces appeared at the dances of the winter; new faces had been
appearing everywhere, for that matter, and familiar ones were
disappearing, merged in the increasing crowd, or gone forever and
missed a little and not long; for the town was growing and changing as
it never had grown and changed before.

It was heaving up in the middle incredibly; it was spreading
incredibly; and as it heaved and spread, it befouled itself and
darkened its sky.  Its boundary was mere shapelessness on the run; a
raw, new house would appear on a country road; four or five others
would presently be built at intervals between it and the outskirts of
the town; the country road would turn into an asphalt street with a
brick-faced drugstore and a frame grocery at a corner; then bungalows
and six-room cottages would swiftly speckle the open green spaces--and
a farm had become a suburb which would immediately shoot out other
suburbs into the country, on one side, and, on the other, join itself
solidly to the city.  You drove between pleasant fields and woodland
groves one spring day; and in the autumn, passing over the same
ground, you were warned off the tracks by an interurban trolley-car's
gonging, and beheld, beyond cement sidewalks just dry, new house-
owners busy "moving in."  Gasoline and electricity were performing the
miracles Eugene had predicted.

But the great change was in the citizenry itself.  What was left of
the patriotic old-stock generation that had fought the Civil War, and
subsequently controlled politics, had become venerable and was little
heeded.  The descendants of the pioneers and early settlers were
merging into the new crowd, becoming part of it, little to be
distinguished from it.  What happened to Boston and to Broadway
happened in degree to the Midland city; the old stock became less and
less typical, and of the grown people who called the place home, less
than a third had been born in it.  There was a German quarter; there
was a Jewish quarter; there was a negro quarter--square miles of it--
called "Bucktown"; there were many Irish neighbourhoods; and there
were large settlements of Italians, and of Hungarians, and of
Rumanians, and of Serbians and other Balkan peoples.  But not the
emigrants, themselves, were the almost dominant type on the streets
downtown.  That type was the emigrant's prosperous offspring:
descendant of the emigrations of the Seventies and Eighties and
Nineties, those great folk-journeyings in search not so directly of
freedom and democracy as of more money for the same labour.  A new
Midlander--in fact, a new American--was beginning dimly to emerge.

A new spirit of citizenship had already sharply defined itself.  It
was idealistic, and its ideals were expressed in the new kind of young
men in business downtown.  They were optimists--optimists to the point
of belligerence--their motto being "Boost! Don't Knock!"  And they
were hustlers, believing in hustling and in honesty because both paid.
They loved their city and worked for it with a plutonic energy which
was always ardently vocal.  They were viciously governed, but they
sometimes went so far to struggle for better government on account of
the helpful effect of good government on the price of real estate and
"betterment" generally; the politicians could not go too far with
them, and knew it.  The idealists planned and strove and shouted that
their city should become a better, better, and better city--and what
they meant, when they used the word "better," was "more prosperous,"
and the core of their idealism was this:  "The more prosperous my
beloved city, the more prosperous beloved I!"  They had one supreme
theory: that the perfect beauty and happiness of cities and of human
life was to be brought about by more factories; they had a mania for
factories; there was nothing they would not do to cajole a factory
away from another city; and they were never more piteously embittered
than when another city cajoled one away from them.

What they meant by Prosperity was credit at the bank; but in exchange
for this credit they got nothing that was not dirty, and, therefore,
to a sane mind, valueless; since whatever was cleaned was dirty again
before the cleaning was half done.  For, as the town grew, it grew
dirty with an incredible completeness.  The idealists put up
magnificent business buildings and boasted of them, but the buildings
were begrimed before they were finished.  They boasted of their
libraries, of their monuments and statues; and poured soot on them.
They boasted of their schools, but the schools were dirty, like the
children within them.  This was not the fault of the children or their
mothers.  It was the fault of the idealists, who said:  "The more
dirt, the more prosperity."  They drew patriotic, optimistic breaths
of the flying powdered filth of the streets, and took the foul and
heavy smoke with gusto into the profundities of their lungs.  "Boost!
Don't knock!" they said.  And every year or so they boomed a great
Clean-up Week, when everybody was supposed to get rid of the tin cans
in his backyard.

They were happiest when the tearing down and building up were most
riotous, and when new factory districts were thundering into life.  In
truth, the city came to be like the body of a great dirty man,
skinned, to show his busy works, yet wearing a few barbaric ornaments;
and such a figure carved, coloured, and discoloured, and set up in the
market-place, would have done well enough as the god of the new
people.  Such a god they had indeed made in their own image, as all
peoples make the god they truly serve; though of course certain of the
idealists went to church on Sunday, and there knelt to Another,
considered to be impractical in business.  But while the Growing went
on, this god of their market-place was their true god, their familiar
and spirit-control.  They did not know that they were his helplessly
obedient slaves, nor could they ever hope to realize their serfdom (as
the first step toward becoming free men) until they should make the
strange and hard discovery that matter should serve man's spirit.

"Prosperity" meant good credit at the bank, black lungs, and
housewives' Purgatory.  The women fought the dirt all they could; but
if they let the air into their houses they let in the dirt.  It
shortened their lives, and kept them from the happiness of ewer seeing
anything white.  And thus, as the city grew, the time came when Lucy,
after a hard struggle, had to give up her blue-and-white curtains and
her white walls.  Indoors, she put everything into dull gray and
brown, and outside had the little house painted the dark green nearest
to black.  Then she knew, of course, that everything was as dirty as
ever, but was a little less distressed because it no longer looked so
dirty as it was.

These were bad times for Amberson Addition.  This quarter, already
old, lay within a mile of the centre of the town, but business moved
in other directions; and the Addition's share of Prosperity was only
the smoke and dirt, with the bank credit left out.  The owners of the
original big houses sold them, or rented them to boarding-house
keepers, and the tenants of the multitude of small houses moved
"farther out" (where the smoke was thinner) or into apartment houses,
which were built by dozens now.  Cheaper tenants took their places,
and the rents were lower and lower, and the houses shabbier and
shabbier--for all these shabby houses, burning soft coal, did their
best to help in the destruction of their own value.  They helped to
make the quarter so dingy and the air so foul to breathe that no one
would live there who had money enough to get "farther out" where there
were glimpses of ungrayed sky and breaths of cleaner winds.  And with
the coming of the new speed, "farther out" was now as close to
business as the Addition had been in the days of its prosperity.
Distances had ceased to matter.

The five new houses, built so closely where had been the fine lawn of
the Amberson Mansion, did not look new.  When they were a year old
they looked as old as they would ever look; and two of them were
vacant, having never been rented, for the Major's mistake about
apartment houses had been a disastrous one.  "He guessed wrong,"
George Amberson said..  "He guessed wrong at just the wrong time!
Housekeeping in a house is harder than in an apartment; and where the
smoke and dirt are as thick as they are in the Addition, women can't
stand it.  People were crazy for apartments--too bad he couldn't have
seen it in time.  Poor man! he digs away at his ledgers by his old gas
drop-light lamp almost every night--he still refuses to let the
Mansion be torn up for wiring, you know.  But he had one painful
satisfaction this spring: he got his taxes lowered!"

Amberson laughed ruefully, and Fanny Minafer asked how the Major could
have managed such an economy.  They were sitting upon the veranda at
Isabel's one evening during the third summer of the absence of their
nephew and his mother; and the conversation had turned toward Amberson
finances.

"I said it was a 'painful satisfaction,' Fanny," he explained.  "The
property has gone down in value, and they assessed it lower than they
did fifteen years ago."

"But farther out--"

"Oh, yes, 'farther out!'  Prices are magnificent 'farther out,' and
farther in, too!  We just happen to be the wrong spot, that's all.
Not that I don't think something could be done if father would let me
have a hand; but he won't.  He can't, I suppose I ought to say.  He's
'always done his own figuring,' he says; and it's his lifelong habit
to keep his affairs: and even his books, to himself, and just hand us
out the money.  Heaven knows he's done enough of that!"

He sighed; and both were silent, looking out at the long flares of the
constantly passing automobile headlights, shifting in vast geometric
demonstrations against the darkness.  Now and then a bicycle wound
its nervous way among these portents, or, at long intervals, a surrey
or buggy plodded forlornly by.

"There seem to be so many ways of making money nowadays," Fanny said
thoughtfully.  "Every day I hear of a new fortune some person has got
hold of, one way or another--nearly always it's somebody you never
heard of.  It doesn't seem all to be in just making motor cars; I hear
there's a great deal in manufacturing these things that motor cars
use--new inventions particularly.  I met dear old Frank Bronson the
other day, and he told me--"

"Oh, yes, even dear old Frank's got the fever," Amberson laughed.
"He's as wild as any of them.  He told me about this invention he's
gone into, too.  'Millions in it!'  Some new electric headlight better
than anything yet--'every car in America can't help but have 'em,' and
all that.  He's putting half he's laid by into it, and the fact is, he
almost talked me into getting father to 'finance me' enough for me to
go into it.  Poor father! he's financed me before!  I suppose he would
again if I had the heart to ask him; and this seems to be a good
thing, though probably old Frank is a little too sanguine.  At any
rate, I've been thinking it over."

"So have I," Fanny admitted.  "He seemed to be certain it would pay
twenty-five per cent. the first year, and enormously more after that;
and I'm only getting four on my little principal.  People are making
such enormous fortunes out of everything to do with motor cars, it
does seem as if--" She paused.  "Well, I told him I'd think it over
seriously."

"We may turn out to be partners and millionaires then," Amberson
laughed.  "I thought I'd ask Eugene's advice."

"I wish you would," said Fanny.  "He probably knows exactly how much
profit there would be in this."

Eugene's advice was to "go slow": he thought electric lights for
automobiles were "coming--someday but probably not until certain
difficulties could be overcome."  Altogether, he was discouraging, but
by this time his two friends "had the fever" as thoroughly as old
Frank Bronson himself had it; for they had been with Bronson to see
the light working beautifully in a machine shop.  They were already
enthusiastic, and after asking Eugene's opinion they argued with him,
telling him how they had seen with their own eyes that the
difficulties he mentioned had been overcome.  "Perfectly!" Fanny
cried. "And if it worked in the shop it's bound to work any place
else, isn't it?"

He would not agree that it was "bound to"--yet, being pressed, was
driven to admit that "it might," and, retiring from what was
developing into an oratorical contest, repeated a warning about not
"putting too much into it."

George Amberson also laid stress on this caution later, though the
Major had "financed him" again, and he was "going in."  "You must be
careful to leave yourself a 'margin of safety,' Fanny," he said.  "I'm
confident that is a pretty conservative investment of its kind, and
all the chances are with us, but you must be careful to leave yourself
enough to fall back on, in case anything should go wrong."

Fanny deceived him.  In the impossible event of "anything going wrong"
she would have enough left to "live on," she declared, and laughed
excitedly, for she was having the best time that had come to her since
Wilbur's death.  Like so many women for whom money has always been
provided without their understanding how, she was prepared to be a
thorough and irresponsible plunger.

Amberson, in his wearier way, shared her excitement, and in the
winter, when the exploiting company had been formed, and he brought
Fanny, her importantly engraved shares of stock, he reverted to his
prediction of possibilities, made when they first spoke of the new
light.

"We seem to be partners, all right," he laughed.  "Now let's go ahead
and be millionaires before Isabel and young George come home."

"When they come home!" she echoed sorrowfully--and it was a phrase
which found an evasive echo in Isabel's letters.  In these letters
Isabel was always planning pleasant things that she and Fanny and the
Major and George and "brother George" would do--when she and her son
came home.  "They'll find things pretty changed, I'm afraid," Fanny
said.  "If they ever do come home!"

Amberson went over, the next summer, and joined his sister and nephew
in Paris, where they were living.  "Isabel does want to come home," he
told Fanny gravely, on the day of his return, in October.  "She's
wanted to for a long while--and she ought to come while she can stand
the journey--"  And he amplified this statement, leaving Fanny looking
startled and solemn when Lucy came by to drive him out to dinner at
the new house Eugene had just completed.

This was no white-and-blue cottage, but a great Georgian picture in
brick, five miles north of Amberson Addition, with four acres of its
own hedged land between it and its next neighbour; and Amberson
laughed wistfully as they turned in between the stone and brick gate
pillars, and rolled up the crushed stone driveway.  "I wonder, Lucy,
if history's going on forever repeating itself," he said.  "I wonder
if this town's going on building up things and rolling over them, as
poor father once said it was rolling over his poor old heart.  It
looks like it: here's the Amberson Mansion again, only it's Georgian
instead of nondescript Romanesque; but it's just the same Amberson
Mansion that my father built long before you were born.  The only
difference is that it's your father who's built this one now.  It's
all the same, in the long run."

Lucy did not quite understand, but she laughed as a friend should,
and, taking his arm, showed him through vast rooms where ivory-
panelled walls and trim window hangings were reflected dimly in dark,
rugless floors, and the sparse furniture showed that Lucy had been
"collecting" with a long purse.  "By Jove!" he said.  "You have been
going it!  Fanny tells me you had a great 'house-warming' dance, and
you keep right on being the belle of the ball, not any softer-hearted
than you used to be.  Fred Kinney's father says you've refused Fred so
often that he got engaged to Janie Sharon just to prove that someone
would have him in spite of his hair.  Well, the material world do
move, and you've got the new kind of house it moves into nowadays--if
it has the new price!  And even the grand old expanses of plate glass
we used to be so proud of at the other Amberson Mansion--they've gone,
too, with the crowded heavy gold and red stuff.  Curious!  We've still
got the plate glass windows, though all we can see out of 'em is the
smoke and the old Johnson house, which is a counter-jumper's
boardinghouse now, while you've got a view, and you cut it all up into
little panes.  Well, you're pretty refreshingly out of the smoke up
here."

"Yes, for a while," Lucy laughed.  "Until it comes and we have to move
out farther."

"No, you'll stay here," he assured her.  "It will be somebody else
who'll move out farther."

He continued to talk of the house after Eugene arrived, and gave them
no account of his journey until they had retired from the dinner table
to Eugene's library, a gray and shadowy room, where their coffee was
brought.  Then, equipped with a cigar, which seemed to occupy his
attention, Amberson spoke in a casual tone of his sister and her son.

"I found Isabel as well as usual," he said, "only I'm afraid 'as
usual' isn't particularly well.  Sydney and Amelia had been up to
Paris in the spring, but she hadn't seen them.  Somebody told her they
were there, it seems.  They'd left Florence and were living in Rome;
Amelia's become a Catholic and is said to give great sums to charity
and to go about with the gentry in consequence, but Sydney's ailing
and lives in a wheel-chair most of the time.  It struck me Isabel
ought to be doing the same thing."

He paused, bestowing minute care upon the removal of the little band
from his cigar; and as he seemed to have concluded his narrative,
Eugene spoke out of the shadow beyond a heavily shaded lamp:  "What do
you mean by that?" he asked quietly.

"Oh, she's cheerful enough," said Amberson, still not looking at
either his young hostess or her father.  "At least," he added, "she
manages to seem so.  I'm afraid she hasn't been really well for
several years.  She isn't stout you know--she hasn't changed in looks
much--and she seems rather alarmingly short of breath for a slender
person.  Father's been that way for years, of course; but never nearly
so much as Isabel is now.  Of course she makes nothing of it, but it
seemed rather serious to me when I noticed she had to stop and rest
twice to get up the one short flight of stairs in their two-floor
apartment.  I told her I thought she ought to make George let her come
home."

"Let her?"  Eugene repeated, in a low voice.  "Does she want to?"

"She doesn't urge it.  George seems to like the life there-in his
grand, gloomy, and peculiar way; and of course she'll never change
about being proud of him and all that--he's quite a swell.  But in
spite of anything she said, rather than because, I know she does
indeed want to come.  She'd like to be with father, of course; and I
think she's--well, she intimated one day that she feared it might even
happen that she wouldn't get to see him again.  At the time I thought
she referred to his age and feebleness, but on the boat, coming home,
I remembered the little look of wistfulness, yet of resignation, with
which she said it, and it struck me all at once that I'd been
mistaken:  I saw she was really thinking of her own state of health."

"I see," Eugene said, his voice even lower than it had been before.
"And you say he won't 'let' her come home?"

Amberson laughed, but still continued to be interested in his cigar.
"Oh, I don't think he uses force!  He's very gentle with her.  I doubt
if the subject is mentioned between them, and yet--and yet, knowing my
interesting nephew as you do, wouldn't you think that was about the
way to put it?"

"Knowing him as I do-yes," said Eugene slowly.  "Yes, I should think
that was about the way to put it."

A murmur out of the shadows beyond him--a faint sound, musical and
feminine, yet expressive of a notable intensity--seemed to indicate
that Lucy was of the same opinion.




Chapter XXIX



"Let her" was correct; but the time came--and it came in the spring of
the next year when it was no longer a question of George's letting his
mother come home.  He had to bring her, and to bring her quickly if
she was to see her father again; and Amberson had been right: her
danger of never seeing him again lay not in the Major's feebleness of
heart but in her own.  As it was, George telegraphed his uncle to have
a wheeled chair at the station, for the journey had been disasterous,
and to this hybrid vehicle, placed close to the platform, her son
carried her in his arms when she arrived.  She was unable to speak,
but patted her brother's and Fanny's hands and looked "very sweet,"
Fanny found the desperate courage to tell her.  She was lifted from
the chair into a carriage, and seemed a little stronger as they drove
home; for once she took her hand from George's, and waved it feebly
toward the carriage window.

"Changed," she whispered.  "So changed."

"You mean the town," Amberson said.  "You mean the old place is
changed, don't you, dear?"

She smiled and moved her lips: "Yes."

"It'll change to a happier place, old dear," he said, "now that you're
back in it, and going to get well again."

But she only looked at him wistfully, her eyes a little frightened.

When the carriage stopped, her son carried her into the house, and up
the stairs to her own room, where a nurse was waiting; and he came out
a moment later, as the doctor went in.  At the end of the hall a
stricken group was clustered: Amberson, and Fanny, and the Major.
George, deathly pale and speechless, took his grandfather's hand, but
the old gentleman did not seem to notice his action.

"When are they going to let me see my daughter?" he asked querulously.
"They told me to keep out of the way while they carried her in,
because it might upset her.  I wish they'd let me go in and speak to
my daughter.  I think she wants to see me."

He was right--presently the doctor came out and beckoned to him; and
the Major shuffled forward, leaning on a shaking cane; his figure,
after all its Years of proud soldierliness, had grown stooping at
last, and his untrimmed white hair straggled over the back of his
collar.  He looked old--old and divested of the world--as he crept
toward his daughter's room.  Her voice was stronger, for the waiting
group heard a low cry of tenderness and welcome as the old man reached
the open doorway.  Then the door was closed.

Fanny touched her nephew's arm.  "George, you must need something to
eat--I know she'd want you to.  I've had things ready: I knew she'd
want me to.  You'd better go down to the dining room:  there's plenty
on the table, waiting for you.  She'd want you to eat something."

He turned a ghastly face to her, it was so panic-stricken.  "I don't
want anything to eat !" he said savagely.  And he began to pace the
floor, taking care not to go near Isabel's door, and that his
footsteps were muffled by the long, thick hall rug.  After a while he
went to where Amberson, with folded arms and bowed head, had seated
himself near the front window.  "Uncle George," he said hoarsely. "I
didn't--"

"Well?"

"Oh, my God, I didn't think this thing the matter with her could ever
be serious! I--" He gasped.  "When that doctor I had meet us at the
boat--"  He could not go on.

Amberson only nodded his head, and did not otherwise change his
attitude.

Isabel lived through the night.  At eleven O'clock Fanny came timidly
to George in his room.  "Eugene is here," she whispered.  "He's
downstairs.  He wants--" She gulped.  "He wants to know if he can't
see her.  I didn't know what to say.  I said I'd see.  I didn't know--
the doctor said--"

"The doctor said we 'must keep her peaceful,'" George said sharply.
"Do you think that man's coming would be very soothing?  My God! if it
hadn't been for him this mightn't have happened: we could have gone on
living here quietly, and--why, it would be like taking a stranger into
her room!  She hasn't even spoken of him more than twice in all the
time we've been away.  Doesn't he know how sick she is?  You tell him
the doctor said she had to be quiet and peaceful.  That's what he did
say, isn't it?"

Fanny acquiesced tearfully.  "I'll tell him.  I'll tell him the doctor
said she was to be kept very quiet.  I--I didn't know--"  And she
pottered out.

An hour later the nurse appeared in George's doorway; she came
noiselessly, and his back was toward her; but he jumped as if he had
been shot, and his jaw fell, he so feared what she was going to say.

"She wants to see you."

The terrified mouth shut with a click; and he nodded and followed her;
but she remained outside his mother's room while he went in.

Isabel's eyes were closed, and she did not open them or move her head,
but she smiled and edged her hand toward him as he sat on a stool
beside the bed.  He took that slender, cold hand, and put it to his
cheek.

"Darling, did you--get something to eat?"  She could only whisper,
slowly and with difficulty.  It was as if Isabel herself were far
away, and only able to signal what she wanted to say.

"Yes, mother."

"All you--needed?"

"Yes, mother."

She did not speak again for a time; then, "Are you sure you didn't--
didn't catch cold coming home?"

"I'm all right, mother."

"That's good.  It's sweet--it's sweet--"

"What is, mother darling?"

"To feel--my hand on your cheek.  I--I can feel it."

But this frightened him horribly--that she seemed so glad she could
feel it, like a child proud of some miraculous seeming thing
accomplished.  It frightened him so that he could not speak, and he
feared that she would know how he trembled; but she was unaware, and
again was silent.  Finally she spoke again:

"I wonder if--if Eugene and Lucy know that we've come--home."

"I'm sure they do."

"Has he--asked about me?"

"Yes, he was here."

"Has he--gone?"

"Yes, mother."

She sighed faintly.  "I'd like--"

"What, mother?"

"I'd like to have--seen him."  It was just audible, this little
regretful murmur.  Several minutes passed before there was another.
"Just--just once," she whispered, and then was still.

She seemed to have fallen asleep, and George moved to go, but a faint
pressure upon his fingers detained him, and he remained, with her hand
still pressed against his cheek.  After a while he made sure she was
asleep, and moved again, to let the nurse come in, and this time there
was no pressure of the fingers to keep him.  She was not asleep, but
thinking that if he went he might get some rest, and be better
prepared for what she knew was coming, she commanded those longing
fingers of hers--and let him go.

He found the doctor standing with the nurse in the hall; and, telling
them that his mother was drowsing now, George went back to his own
room, where he was startled to find his grandfather lying on the bed,
and his uncle leaning against the wall.  They had gone home two hours
before, and he did not know they had returned.

"The doctor thought we'd better come over," Amberson said, then was
silent, and George, shaking violently, sat down on the edge of the
bed.  His shaking continued, and from time to time he wiped heavy
sweat from his forehead.

The hours passed, and sometimes the old man upon the bed would snore a
little, stop suddenly, and move as if to rise, but George Amberson
would set a hand upon his shoulder, and murmur a reassuring word or
two.  Now and then, either uncle or nephew would tiptoe into the hall
and look toward Isabel's room, then come tiptoeing back, the other
watching him haggardly.

Once George gasped defiantly: "That doctor in New York said she might
get better!  Don't you know he did?  Don't you know he said she
might?"

Amberson made no answer.

Dawn had been murking through the smoky windows, growing stronger for
half an hour, when both men started violently at a sound in the hall;
and the Major sat up on the bed, unchecked.  It was the voice of the
nurse speaking to Fanny Minafer, and the next moment, Fanny appeared
in the doorway, making contorted efforts to speak.

Amberson said weakly:  "Does she want us--to come in?"

But Fanny found her voice, and uttered a long, loud cry.  She threw
her arms about George, and sobbed in an agony of loss and compassion:

"She loved you!" she wailed.  "She loved you!  She loved you!  Oh, how
she did love you!"

Isabel had just left them.




Chapter XXX


Major Amberson remained dry-eyed through the time that followed: he
knew that this separation from his daughter would be short, that the
separation which had preceded it was the long one.  He worked at his
ledgers no more under his old gas drop-light, but would sit all
evening staring into the fire, in his bedroom, and not speaking unless
someone asked him a question.  He seemed almost unaware of what went
on around him, and those who were with him thought him dazed by
Isabel's death, guessing that he was lost in reminiscences and vague
dreams.  "Probably his mind is full of pictures of his youth, or the
Civil War, and the days when he and mother were young married people
and all of us children were jolly little things--and the city was a
small town with one cobbled street and the others just dirt roads with
board sidewalks."  This was George Amberson's conjecture, and the
others agreed; but they were mistaken.  The Major was engaged in the
profoundest thinking of his life.  No business plans which had ever
absorbed him could compare in momentousness with the plans that
absorbed him now, for he had to plan how to enter the unknown country
where he was not even sure of being recognized as an Amberson--not
sure of anything, except that Isabel would help him if she could.  His
absorption produced the outward effect of reverie, but of course it
was not.  The Major was occupied with the first really important
matter that had taken his attention since he came home invalided,
after the Gettysburg campaign, and went into business; and he realized
that everything which had worried him or delighted him during this
lifetime between then and to-day--all his buying and building and
trading and banking--that it all was trifling and waste beside what
concerned him now.

He seldom went out of his room, and often left untouched the meals
they brought to him there; and this neglect caused them to shake their
heads mournfully, again mistaking for dazedness the profound
concentration of his mind.  Meanwhile, the life of the little bereft
group still forlornly centering upon him began to pick up again, as
life will, and to emerge from its own period of dazedness.  It was not
Isabel's father but her son who was really dazed.

A month after her death he walked abruptly into Fanny's room, one
night, and found her at her desk, eagerly adding columns of figures
with which she had covered several sheets of paper.  This mathematical
computation was concerned with her future income to be produced by the
electric headlight, now just placed on the general market; but Fanny
was ashamed to be discovered doing anything except mourning, and
hastily pushed the sheets aside, even as she looked over her shoulder
to greet her hollow-eyed visitor.

"George!  You startled me."

"I beg your pardon for not knocking," he said huskily.  "I didn't
think."

She turned in her chair and looked at him solicitously.  "Sit down,
George, won't you?"

"No. I just wanted--"

"I could hear you walking up and down in your room," said Fanny.  "You
were doing it ever since dinner, and it seems to me you're at it
almost every evening.  I don't believe it's good for you--and I know
it would worry your mother terribly if she--" Fanny hesitated.

"See here," George said, breathing fast, "I want to tell you once more
that what I did was right.  How could I have done anything else but
what I did do?"

"About what, George?"

"About everything!" he exclaimed; and he became vehement.  "I did the
right thing, I tell you!  In heaven's name, I'd like to know what else
there was for anybody in my position to do!  It would have been a
dreadful thing for me to just let matters go on and not interfere--it
would have been terrible!  What else on earth was there for me to do?
I had to stop that talk, didn't I?  Could a son do less than I did?
Didn't it cost me something to do it?  Lucy and I'd had a quarrel, but
that would have come round in time--and it meant the end forever when
I turned her father back from our door.  I knew what it meant, yet I
went ahead and did it because knew it had to be done if the talk was
to be stopped.  I took mother away for the same reason.  I knew that
would help to stop it.  And she was happy over there--she was
perfectly happy. I tell you, I think she had a happy life, and that's
my only consolation.  She didn't live to be old; she was still
beautiful and young looking, and I feel she'd rather have gone before
she got old.  She'd had a good husband, and all the comfort and luxury
that anybody could have--and how could it be called anything but a
happy life?  She was always cheerful, and when I think of her I can
always see her laughing--I can always hear that pretty laugh of hers.
When I can keep my mind off of the trip home, and that last night, I
always think of her gay and laughing.  So how on earth could she have
had anything but a happy life?  People that aren't happy don't look
cheerful all the time, do they?  They look unhappy if they are
unhappy; that's how they look!  See here"--he faced her challengingly
--"do you deny that I did the right thing?"

"Oh, I don't pretend to judge," Fanny said soothingly, for his voice
and gesture both partook of wildness.  "I know you think you did,
George."

"Think I did!" he echoed violently.  "My God in heaven!"  And he began
to walk up and down the floor.  "What else was there to do?  What,
choice did I have?  Was there any other way of stopping the talk?"  He
stopped, close in front of her, gesticulating, his voice harsh and
loud: "Don't you hear me?  I'm asking you: Was there any other way on
earth of protecting her from the talk?"

Miss Fanny looked away.  "It died down before long, I think," she said
nervously.

"That shows I was right, doesn't it?" he cried.  "If I hadn't acted as
I did, that slanderous old Johnson woman would have kept on with her
slanders--she'd still be--"

"No," Fanny interrupted.  "She's dead.  She dropped dead with apoplexy
one day about six weeks after you left.  I didn't mention it in my
letters because I didn't want--I thought--"

"Well, the other people would have kept on, then.  They'd have--"

"I don't know," said Fanny, still averting her troubled eyes.  "Things
are so changed here, George.  The other people you speak of--one
hardly knows what's become of them.  Of course not a great many were
doing the talking, and they--well, some of them are dead, and some
might as well be--you never see them any more--and the rest, whoever
they were, are probably so mixed in with the crowds of new people that
seem never even to have heard of us--and I'm sure we certainly never
heard of them--and people seem to forget things so soon--they seem to
forget anything.  You can't imagine how things have changed here!"

George gulped painfully before he could speak.  "You--you mean to sit
there and tell me that if I'd just let things go on--Oh!"  He swung
away, walking the floor again.  "I tell you I did the only right
thing!  If you don't think so, why in the name of heaven can't you say
what else I should have done?  It's easy enough to criticize, but the
person who criticizes a man ought at least to tell him what else he
should have done!  You think I was wrong!"

"I'm not saying so," she said.

"You did at the time!" he cried.  "You said enough then, I think!
Well, what have you to say now, if you're so sure I was wrong?"

"Nothing, George."

"It's only because you're afraid to!" he said, and he went on with a
sudden bitter divination: "You're reproaching yourself with what you
had to do with all that; and you're trying to make up for it by doing
and saying what you think mother would want you to, and you think I
couldn't stand it if I got to thinking I might have done differently.
Oh, I know!  That's exactly what's in your mind: you do think I was
wrong!  So does Uncle George. I challenged him about it the other day,
and he answered just as you're answering--evaded, and tried to be
gentler I don't care to be handled with gloves!  I tell you I was
right, and I don't need any coddling by people that think I wasn't!
And I suppose you believe I was wrong not to let Morgan see her that
last night when he came here, and she--she was dying.  If you do, why
in the name of God did you come and ask me?  You could have taken him
in!  She did want to see him.  She--"

Miss Fanny looked startled.  "You think--"

"She told me so!"  And the tortured young man choked.  "She said--
'just once.'  She said 'I'd like to have seen him--just once!'  She
meant--to tell him good-bye!  That's what she meant!  And you put this
on me, too; you put this responsibility on me!  But I tell you, and I
told Uncle George, that the responsibility isn't all mine!  If you
were so sure I was wrong all the time--when I took her away, and when
I turned Morgan out--if you were so sure, what did you let me do it
for?  You and Uncle George were grown people, both of you, weren't
you?  You were older than I, and if you were so sure you were wiser
than I, why did you just stand around with your hands hanging down,
and let me go ahead?  You could have stopped it if it was wrong,
couldn't you?"

Fanny shook her head.  "No, George," she said slowly.  "Nobody could
have stopped you.  You were too strong, and--"

"And what?" he demanded loudly.

"And she loved you--too well."

George stared at her hard, then his lower lip began to move
convulsively, and he set his teeth upon it but could not check its
frantic twitching.

He ran out of the room.

She sat still, listening.  He had plunged into his mother's room, but
no sound came to Fanny's ears after the sharp closing of the door; and
presently she rose and stepped out into the hall--but could hear
nothing.  The heavy black walnut door of Isabel's room, as Fanny's
troubled eyes remained fixed upon it, seemed to become darker and
vaguer; the polished wood took the distant ceiling light, at the end
of the hall, in dim reflections which became mysterious; and to
Fanny's disturbed mind the single sharp point of light on the bronze
door-knob was like a continuous sharp cry in the stillness of night.
What interview was sealed away from human eye and ear within the
lonely darkness on the other side of that door--in that darkness where
Isabel's own special chairs were, and her own special books, and the
two great walnut wardrobes filled with her dresses and wraps?  What
tragic argument might be there vainly striving to confute the gentle
dead?  "In God's name, what else could I have done?"  For his mother's
immutable silence was surely answering him as Isabel in life would
never have answered him, and he was beginning to understand how
eloquent the dead can be.  They cannot stop their eloquence, no matter
how they have loved the living: they cannot choose.  And so, no matter
in what agony George should cry out, "What else could I have done?"
and to the end of his life no matter how often he made that wild
appeal, Isabel was doomed to answer him with the wistful, faint
murmur:

"I'd like to have-seen him.  Just--just once."

A cheerful darkey went by the house, loudly and tunelessly whistling
some broken thoughts upon women, fried food and gin; then a group of
high school boys, returning homeward after important initiations, were
heard skylarking along the sidewalk, rattling sticks on the fences,
squawking hoarsely, and even attempting to sing in the shocking new
voices of uncompleted adolescence.  For no reason, and just as a
poultry yard falls into causeless agitation, they stopped in front of
the house, and for half an hour produced the effect of a noisy
multitude in full riot.

To the woman standing upstairs in the hall, this was almost
unbearable; and she felt that she would have to go down and call to
them to stop; but she was too timid, and after a time went back to her
room, and sat at her desk again.  She left the door open, and
frequently glanced out into the hall, but gradually became once more
absorbed in the figures which represented her prospective income from
her great plunge in electric lights for automobiles.  She did not hear
George return to his own room.

A superstitious person might have thought it unfortunate that her
partner in this speculative industry (as in Wilbur's disastrous
rolling-mills) was that charming but too haphazardous man of the world,
George Amberson.  He was one of those optimists who believe that if
you put money into a great many enterprises one of them is sure to
turn out a fortune, and therefore, in order to find the lucky one, it
is only necessary to go into a large enough number of them.
Altogether gallant in spirit, and beautifully game under catastrophe,
he had gone into a great many, and the unanimity of their "bad luck,"
as he called it, gave him one claim to be a distinguished person, if
he had no other.  In business he was ill fated with a consistency
which made him, in that alone, a remarkable man; and he declared, with
some earnestness, that there was no accounting for it except by the
fact that there had been so much good luck in his family before he was
born that something had to balance it.

"You ought to have thought of my record and stayed out," he told
Fanny, one day the next spring, when the affairs of the headlight
company had begun to look discouraging.  "I feel the old familiar
sinking that's attended all my previous efforts to prove myself a
business genius.  I think it must be something like the feeling an
aeronaut has when his balloon bursts, and, looking down, he sees below
him the old home farm where he used to live--I mean the feeling he'd
have just before he flattened out in that same old clay barnyard.
Things do look bleak, and I'm only glad you didn't go into this
confounded thing to the extent I did."

Miss Fanny grew pink.  "But it must go right!" she protested.  "We saw
with our own eyes how perfectly it worked in the shop.  The light was
so bright no one could face it, and so there can't be any reason for
it not to work.  It simply--"

"Oh, you're right about that," Amberson said.  "It certainly was a
perfect thing--in the shop!  The only thing we didn't know was how
fast an automobile had to go to keep the light going.  It appears that
this was a matter of some importance."

"Well, how fast does one have to--"

"To keep the light from going entirely out," he informed her with
elaborate deliberation, "it is computed by those enthusiasts who have
bought our product--and subsequently returned it to us and got their
money back--they compute that a motor car must maintain a speed of
twenty-five miles an hour, or else there won't be any light at all.
To make the illumination bright enough to be noticed by an approaching
automobile, they state the speed must be more than thirty miles an
hour.  At thirty-five, objects in the path of the light begin to
become visible; at forty they are revealed distinctly; and at fifty
and above we have a real headlight.  Unfortunately many people don't
care to drive that fast at all times after dusk, especially in the
traffic, or where policemen are likely to become objectionable."

"But think of that test on the road when we--"

"That test was lovely," he admitted.  "The inventor made us happy with
his oratory, and you and Frank Bronson and I went whirling through the
night at a speed that thrilled us.  It was an intoxicating sensation:
we were intoxicated by the lights, the lights and the music.  We must
never forget that drive, with the cool wind kissing our cheeks and the
road lit up for miles ahead.  We must never forget it and we never
shall. It cost--

"But something's got to be done."

"It has, indeed!  My something would seem to be leaving my watch at my
uncle's.  Luckily, you--"

The pink of Fanny's cheeks became deeper.  "But isn't that man going
to do anything to remedy it? can't he try to--"

"He can try," said Amberson.  "He is trying, in fact. I've sat in the
shop watching him try for several beautiful afternoons, while outside
the windows all Nature was fragrant with spring and smoke.  He hums
ragtime to himself as he tries, and I think his mind is wandering to
something else less tedious--to some new invention in which he'd take
more interest."

"But you mustn't let him," she cried.  "You must make him keep on
trying!"

"Oh, yes.  He understands that's what I sit there for.  I'll keep
sitting!"

However, in spite of the time he spent sitting in the shop, worrying
the inventor of the fractious light, Amberson found opportunity to
worry himself about another matter of business.  This was the
settlement of Isabel's estate.

"It's curious about the deed to her house," he said to his nephew.
"You're absolutely sure it wasn't among her papers?"

"Mother didn't have any papers," George told him.  "None at all.  All
she ever had to do with business was to deposit the cheques
grandfather gave her and then write her own cheques against them."

"The deed to the house was never recorded," Amberson said
thoughtfully.  "I've been over to the courthouse to see.  I asked
father if he never gave her one, and he didn't seem able to understand
me at first.  Then he finally said he thought he must have given her a
deed long ago; but he wasn't sure.  I rather think he never did.  I
think it would be just as well to get him to execute one now in your
favour.  I'll speak to him about it."

George sighed.  "I don't think I'd bother him about it: the house is
mine, and you and I understand that it is.  That's enough for me, and
there isn't likely to be much trouble between you and me when we come
to settling poor grandfather's estate.  I've just been with him, and I
think it would only confuse him for you to speak to him about it
again.  I notice he seems distressed if anybody tries to get his
attention--he's a long way off, somewhere, and be likes to stay that
way.  I think--I think mother wouldn't want us to bother him about it;
I'm sure she'd tell us to let him alone.  He looks so white and
queer."

Amberson shook his head.  "Not much whiter and queerer than you do,
young fellow!  You'd better begin to get some air and exercise and
quit hanging about in the house all day.  I won't bother him any more
than I can help; but I'll have the deed made out ready for his
signature."

"I wouldn't bother him at all.  I don't see--"

"You might see," said his uncle uneasily.  "The estate is just about
as involved and mixed-up as an estate can well get, to the best of my
knowledge; and I haven't helped it any by what he let me have for this
infernal headlight scheme which has finally gone trolloping forever to
where the woodbine twineth.  Leaves me flat, and poor old Frank
Bronson just half flat, and Fanny--well, thank heaven!  I kept her
from going in so deep that it would leave her flat.  It's rough on her
as it is, I suspect.  You ought to have that deed."

"No.  Don't bother him."

"I'll bother him as little as possible.  I'll wait till some day when
he seems to brighten up a little."

But Amberson waited too long.  The Major had already taken eleven
months since his daughter's death to think important things out.  He
had got as far with them as he could, and there was nothing to detain
him longer in the world.  One evening his grandson sat with him--the
Major seemed to like best to have young George with him, so far as
they were able to guess his preferences--and the old gentleman made a
queer gesture: he slapped his knee as if he had made a sudden
discovery, or else remembered that he had forgotten something.

George looked at him with an air of inquiry, but said nothing.  He had
grown to be almost as silent as his grandfather.  However, the Major
spoke without being questioned.

"It must be in the sun," he said.  "There wasn't anything here but the
sun in the first place, and the earth came out of the sun, and we came
out of the earth.  So, whatever we are, we must have been in the sun.
We go back to the earth we came out of, so the earth will go back to
the sun that it came out of.  And time means nothing--nothing at all--
so in a little while we'll all be back in the sun together.  I wish--"

He moved his hand uncertainly as if reaching for something, and George
jumped up.  "Did you want anything, grandfather?"

"What?"

"Would you like a glass of water?"

"No--no.  No; I don't want anything."  The reaching hand dropped back
upon the arm of his chair, and he relapsed into silence; but a few
minutes later he finished the sentence he had begun:

"I wish--somebody could tell me!"

The next day he had a slight cold, but he seemed annoyed when his son
suggested calling the doctor, and Amberson let him have his own way so
far, in fact, that after he had got up and dressed, the following
morning, he was all alone when he went away to find out what he hadn't
been able to think out--all those things he had wished "somebody"
would tell him.

Old Sam, shuffling in with the breakfast tray, found the Major in his
accustomed easy-chair by the fireplace--and yet even the old darkey
could see instantly that the Major was not there.




Chapter XXXI



When the great Amberson Estate went into court for settlement, "there
wasn't any," George Amberson said--that is, when the settlement was
concluded there was no estate.  "I guessed it," Amberson went on.  "As
an expert on prosperity, my career is disreputable, but as a prophet
of calamity I deserve a testimonial banquet."  He reproached himself
bitterly for not having long ago discovered that his father had never
given Isabel a deed to her house.  "And those pigs, Sydney and
Amelia!" he added, for this was another thing he was bitter about.
"They won't do anything.  I'm sorry I gave them the opportunity of
making a polished refusal.  Amelia's letter was about half in Italian;
she couldn't remember enough ways of saying no in English.  One has to
live quite a long while to realize there are people like that!  The
estate was badly crippled, even before they took out their 'third,'
and the 'third' they took was the only good part of the rotten apple.
Well, I didn't ask them for restitution on my own account, and at
least it will save you some trouble, young George.  Never waste any
time writing to them; you mustn't count on them."

"I don't," George said quietly.  "I don't count on anything."

"Oh, we'll not feel that things are quite desperate," Amberson
laughed, but not with great cheerfulness.  "We'll survive, Georgie--
you will, especially.  For my part I'm a little too old and too
accustomed to fall back on somebody else for supplies to start a big
fight with life: I'll be content with just surviving, and I can do it
on an eighteen-hundred-dollar--a-year consulship.  An ex-congressman
can always be pretty sure of getting some such job, and I hear from
Washington the matter's about settled.  I'll live pleasantly enough
with a pitcher of ice under a palm tree, and black folks to wait on
me--that part of it will be like home--and I'll manage to send you
fifty dollars every now and then, after I once get settled.  So much
for me!  But you--of course you've had a poor training for making your
own way, but you're only a boy after all, and the stuff of the old
stock is in you.  It'll come out and do something.  I'll never forgive
myself about that deed: it would have given you something substantial
to start with.  Still, you have a little tiny bit, and you'll have a
little tiny salary, too; and of course your Aunt Fanny's here, and
she's got something you can fall back on if you get too pinched, until
I can begin to send you a dribble now and then."

George's "little tiny bit" was six hundred dollars which had come to
him from the sale of his mother's furniture; and the "little tiny
salary" was eight dollars a week which old Frank Bronson was to pay
him for services as a clerk and student-at-law.  Old Frank would have
offered more to the Major's grandson, but since the death of that best
of clients and his own experience with automobile headlights, he was
not certain of being able to pay more and at the same time settle his
own small bills for board and lodging.  George had accepted haughtily,
and thereby removed a burden from his uncle's mind.

Amberson himself, however, had not even a "tiny bit"; though he got
his consular appointment; and to take him to his post he found it
necessary to borrow two hundred of his nephew's six hundred dollars.
"It makes me sick, George," he said.  "But I'd better get there and
get that salary started.  Of course Eugene would do anything in the
world, and the fact is he wanted to, but I felt that--ah--under the
circumstances--"

"Never!"  George exclaimed, growing red.  "I can't imagine one of the
family--"  He paused, not finding it necessary to explain that "the
family" shouldn't turn a man from the door and then accept favours
from him.  "I wish you'd take more."

Amberson declined.  "One thing I'll say for you, young George; you
haven't a stingy bone in your body.  That's the Amberson stock in you
--and I like it!"

He added something to this praise of his nephew on the day he left for
Washington.  He was not to return, but to set forth from the capital
on the long journey to his post.  George went with him to the station,
and their farewell was lengthened by the train's being several minutes
late.

"I may not see you again, Georgie," Amberson said; and his voice was a
little husky as he set a kind hand on the young man's shoulder.  "It's
quite probable that from this time on we'll only know each other by
letter--until you're notified as my next of kin that there's an old
valise to be forwarded to you, and perhaps some dusty curios from the
consulate mantelpiece.  Well, it's an odd way for us to be saying
good-bye: one wouldn't have thought it, even a few years ago, but here
we are, two gentlemen of elegant appearance in a state of bustitude.
We can't ever tell what will happen at all, can we?  Once I stood
where we're standing now, to say good-bye to a pretty girl--only it
was in the old station before this was built, and we called it the
'depot.'  She'd been visiting your mother, before Isabel was married,
and I was wild about her, and she admitted she didn't mind that.  In
fact, we decided we couldn't live without each other, and we were to
be married.  But she had to go abroad first with her father, and when
we came to say good-bye we knew we wouldn't see each other again for
almost a year.  I thought I couldn't live through it--and she stood
here crying.  Well, I don't even know where she lives now, or if she
is living--and I only happen to think of her sometimes when I'm here
at the station waiting for a train.  If she ever thinks of me she
probably imagines I'm still dancing in the ballroom at the Amberson
Mansion, and she probably thinks of the Mansion as still beautiful--
still the finest house in town.  Life and money both behave like loose
quicksilver in a nest of cracks.  And when they're gone we can't tell
where--or what the devil we did with 'em!  But I believe I'll say now
--while there isn't much time left for either of us to get embarrassed
about it--I believe I'll say that I've always been fond of you,
Georgie, but I can't say that I always liked you.  Sometimes I've felt
you were distinctly not an acquired taste.  Until lately, one had to
be fond of you just naturally--this isn't very 'tactful,' of course--
for if he didn't, well, he wouldn't!  We all spoiled you terribly when
you were a little boy and let you grow up en prince--and I must say
you took to it!  But you've received a pretty heavy jolt, and I had
enough of your disposition, myself, at your age, to understand a
little of what cocksure youth has to go through inside when it finds
that it can make terrible mistakes.  Poor old fellow!  You get both
kinds of jolts together, spiritual and material--and you've taken them
pretty quietly and--well, with my train coming into the shed, you'll
forgive me for saying that there have been times when I thought you
ought to be hanged--but I've always been fond of you, and now I like
you!  And just for a last word: there may be somebody else in this
town who's always felt about you like that--fond of you, I mean, no
matter how much it seemed you ought to be hanged.  You might try--
Hello, I must run.  I'll send back the money as fast as they pay me--
so, good-bye and God bless you, Georgie!"

He passed through the gates, waved his hat cheerily from the other
side of the iron screen, and was lost from sight in the hurrying
crowd.  And as he disappeared, an unexpected poignant loneliness fell
upon his nephew so heavily and so suddenly that he had no energy to
recoil from the shock.  It seemed to him that the last fragment of his
familiar world had disappeared, leaving him all alone forever.

He walked homeward slowly through what appeared to be the strange
streets of a strange city; and, as a matter of fact, the city was
strange to him.  He had seen little of it during his years in college,
and then had followed the long absence and his tragic return.  Since
that he had been "scarcely outdoors at all," as Fanny complained,
warning him that his health would suffer, and he had been downtown
only in a closed carriage.  He had not realized the great change.

The streets were thunderous; a vast energy heaved under the universal
coating of dinginess.  George walked through the begrimed crowds of
hurrying strangers and saw no face that he remembered.  Great numbers
of the faces were even of a kind he did not remember ever to have
seen; they were partly like the old type that his boyhood knew, and
partly like types he knew abroad.  He saw German eyes with American
wrinkles at their corners; he saw Irish eyes and Neapolitan eyes,
Roman eyes, Tuscan eyes, eyes of Lombardy, of Savoy, Hungarian eyes,
Balkan eyes, Scandinavian eyes--all with a queer American look in
them.  He saw Jews who had been German Jews, Jews who had been Russian
Jews, Jews who had been Polish Jews but were no longer German or
Russian or Polish Jews.  All the people were soiled by the smoke-mist
through which they hurried, under the heavy sky that hung close upon
the new skyscrapers; and nearly all seemed harried by something
impending, though here and there a women with bundles would be
laughing to a companion about some adventure of the department stores,
or perhaps an escape from the charging traffic of the streets--and not
infrequently a girl, or a free-and-easy young matron, found time to
throw an encouraging look to George.

He took no note of these, and, leaving the crowded sidewalks, turned
north into National Avenue, and presently reached the quieter but no
less begrimed region of smaller shops and old-fashioned houses.  Those
latter had been the homes of his boyhood playmates; old friends of his
grandfather had lived here;--in this alley he had fought with two boys
at the same time, and whipped them; in that front yard he had been
successfully teased into temporary insanity by a. Sunday-school class
of pinky little girls.  On that sagging porch a laughing woman had fed
him and other boys with doughnuts and gingerbread; yonder he saw the
staggered relics of the iron picket fence he had made his white pony
jump, on a dare, and in the shabby, stone-faced house behind the fence
he had gone to children's parties, and, when he was a little older he
had danced there often, and fallen in love with Mary Sharon, and
kissed her, apparently by force, under the stairs in the hall.  The
double front doors, of meaninglessly carved walnut, once so glossily
varnished, had been painted smoke gray, but the smoke grime showed
repulsively, even on the smoke gray; and over the doors a smoked sign
proclaimed the place to be a "Stag Hotel."

Other houses had become boarding-houses too genteel for signs, but
many were franker, some offering "board by the day, week or meal," and
some, more laconic, contenting themselves with the label:  "Rooms."
One, having torn out part of an old stone-trimmed bay window for
purposes of commercial display, showed forth two suspended petticoats
and a pair of oyster-coloured flannel trousers to prove the claims of
its black-and-gilt sign: "French Cleaning and Dye House."  Its next
neighbour also sported a remodelled front and permitted no doubt that
its mission in life was to attend cosily upon death: "J. M. Rolsener.
Caskets.  The Funeral Home."  And beyond that, a plain old honest
four-square gray-painted brick house was flamboyantly decorated with a
great gilt scroll on the railing of the old-fashioned veranda:
"Mutual Benev't Order Cavaliers and Dames of Purity."  This was the
old Minafer house.

George passed it without perceptibly wincing; in fact, he held his
head up, and except for his gravity of countenance and the prison
pallor he had acquired by too constantly remaining indoors, there was
little to warn an acquaintance that he was not precisely the same
George Amberson Minafer known aforetime.  He was still so magnificent,
indeed, that there came to his ears a waft of comment from a passing
automobile.  This was a fearsome red car, glittering in brass, with
half-a-dozen young people in it whose motorism had reached an extreme
manifestation in dress.  The ladies of this party were favourably
affected at sight of the pedestrian upon the sidewalk, and, as the
machine was moving slowly, and close to the curb, they had time to
observe him in detail, which they did with a frankness not pleasing to
the object of their attentions.  "One sees so many nice-looking people
one doesn't know nowadays," said the youngest of the young ladies.
"This old town of ours is really getting enormous. I shouldn't mind
knowing who he is."

"I don't know," the youth beside her said, loudly enough to be heard
at a considerable distance.  "I don't know who he is, but from his
looks I know who he thinks be is: he thinks he's the Grand Duke
Cuthbert!"  There was a burst of tittering as the car gathered speed
and rolled away, with the girl continuing to look back until her
scandalized companions forced her to turn by pulling her hood over her
face.  She made an impression upon George, so deep a one, in fact,
that he unconsciously put his emotion into a muttered word:

Riffraff!

This was the last "walk home" he was ever to take by the route he was
now following: up National Avenue to Amberson Addition and the two big
old houses at the foot of Amberson Boulevard; for tonight would be the
last night that he and Fanny were to spend in the house which the
Major had forgotten to deed to Isabel.  To-morrow they were to "move
out," and George was to begin his work in Bronson's office.  He had
not come to this collapse without a fierce struggle--but the struggle
was inward, and the rolling world was not agitated by it, and rolled
calmly on.  For of all the "ideals of life" which the world, in its
rolling, inconsiderately flattens out to nothingness, the least likely
to retain a profile is that ideal which depends upon inheriting money.
George Amberson, in spite of his record of failures in business, had
spoken shrewdly when he realized at last that money, like life, was
"like quicksilver in a nest of cracks."  And his nephew had the
awakening experience of seeing the great Amberson Estate vanishing
into such a nest--in a twinkling, it seemed, now that it was indeed so
utterly vanished.

His uncle had suggested that he might write to college friends;
perhaps they could help him to something better than the prospect
offered by Bronson's office; but George flushed and shook his head,
without explaining.  In that small and quietly superior "crowd" of his
he had too emphatically supported the ideal of being rather than
doing.  He could not appeal to one of its members now to help him to a
job.  Besides, they were not precisely the warmest-hearted crew in the
world, and he had long ago dropped the last affectation of a
correspondence with any of them.  He was as aloof from any survival of
intimacy with his boyhood friends in the city, and, in truth, had lost
track of most of them.  "The Friends of the Ace," once bound by oath
to succour one another in peril or poverty, were long ago dispersed;
one or two had died; one or two had gone to live elsewhere; the others
were disappeared into the smoky bigness of the heavy city.  Of the
brethren, there remained within his present cognizance only his old
enemy, the red-haired Kinney, now married to Janie Sharon, and Charlie
Johnson, who, out of deference to his mother's memory, had passed the
Amberson Mansion one day, when George stood upon the front steps, and,
looking in fiercely, had looked away with continued fierceness--his
only token of recognition.

On this last homeward walk of his, when George reached the entrance
to Amberson Addition--that is, when he came to where the entrance had
formerly been--he gave a little start, and halted for a moment to
stare.  This was the first time he had noticed that the stone pillars,
marking the entrance, had been removed.  Then he realized that for a
long time he had been conscious of a queerness about this corner
without being aware of what made the difference.  National Avenue met
Amberson Boulevard here at an obtuse angle, and the removal of the
pillars made the Boulevard seem a cross-street of no overpowering
importance--certainly it did not seem to be a boulevard!

At the next corner Neptune's Fountain remained, and one could still
determine with accuracy what its designer's intentions had been.  It
stood in sore need of just one last kindness; and if the thing had
possessed any friends they would have done that doleful shovelling
after dark.

George did not let his eyes linger upon the relic; nor did he look
steadfastly at the Amberson Mansion.  Massive as the old house was, it
managed to look gaunt: its windows stared with the skull emptiness of
all windows in empty houses that are to be lived in no more.  Of
course the rowdy boys of the neighbourhood had been at work: many of
these haggard windows were broken; the front door stood ajar, forced
open; and idiot salacity, in white chalk, was smeared everywhere upon
the pillars and stonework of the verandas.

George walked by the Mansion hurriedly, and came home to his mother's
house for the last time.

Emptiness was there, too, and the closing of the door resounded
through bare rooms; for downstairs there was no furniture in the house
except a kitchen table in the dining room, which Fanny had kept "for
dinner," she said, though as she was to cook and serve that meal
herself George had his doubts about her name for it.  Upstairs, she
had retained her own furniture, and George had been living in his
mother's room, having sent everything from his own to the auction.
Isabel's room was still as it had been, but the furniture would be
moved with Fanny's to new quarters in the morning.  Fanny had made
plans for her nephew as well as herself; she had found a three-room
"kitchenette apartment" in an apartment house where several old friends
of hers had established themselves--elderly widows of citizens once
"prominent" and other retired gentry.  People used their own
"kitchenettes" for breakfast and lunch, but there was a table-d'hote
arrangement for dinner on the ground floor; and after dinner bridge
was played all evening, an attraction powerful with Fanny.  She had
"made all the arrangements," she reported, and nervously appealed for
approval, asking if she hadn't shown herself "pretty practical" in
such matters.  George acquiesced absent-mindedly, not thinking of what
she said and not realizing to what it committed him.

He began to realize it now, as he wandered about the dismantled house;
he was far from sure that he was willing to go and live in a "three-
room apartment" with Fanny and eat breakfast and lunch with her
(prepared by herself in the "kitchenette") and dinner at the table
d'hote in "such a pretty Colonial dining room" (so Fanny described it)
at a little round table they would have all to themselves in the midst
of a dozen little round tables which other relics of disrupted
families would have all to themselves.  For the first time, now that
the change was imminent, George began to develop before his mind's eye
pictures of what he was in for; and they appalled him.  He decided
that such a life verged upon the sheerly unbearable, and that after
all there were some things left that he just couldn't stand.  So he
made up his mind to speak to his aunt about it at "dinner," and tell
her that he preferred to ask Bronson to let him put a sofa-bed, a
trunk, and a folding rubber bathtub behind a screen in the dark rear
room of the office.  George felt that this would be infinitely more
tolerable; and he could eat at restaurants, especially as about all he
ever wanted nowadays was coffee.

But at "dinner" he decided to put off telling Fanny of his plan until
later: she was so nervous, and so distressed about the failure of her
efforts with sweetbreads and macaroni; and she was so eager in her
talk of how comfortable they would be "by this time to-morrow night."
She fluttered on, her nervousness increasing, saying how "nice" it
would be for him, when he came from work in the evenings, to be among
"nice people--people who know who we are," and to have a pleasant game
of bridge with "people who are really old friends of the family?"

When they stopped probing among the scorched fragments she had set
forth, George lingered downstairs, waiting for a better opportunity to
introduce his own subject, but when he heard dismaying sounds from the
kitchen he gave up.  There was a crash, then a shower of crashes;
falling tin clamoured to be heard above the shattering of porcelain;
and over all rose Fanny's wail of lamentation for the treasures saved
from the sale, but now lost forever to the "kitchenette."  Fanny was
nervous indeed; so nervous that she could not trust her hands.

For a moment George thought she might have been injured, but, before
he reached the kitchen, he heard her sweeping at the fragments, and
turned back.  He put off speaking to Fanny until morning.

Things more insistent than his vague plans for a sofa-bed in Bronson's
office had possession of his mind as he went upstairs, moving his hand
slowly along the smooth walnut railing of the balustrade.  Half way to
the landing he stopped, turned, and stood looking down at the heavy
doors masking the black emptiness that had been the library.  Here he
had stood on what he now knew was the worst day of his life; here he
had stood when his mother passed through that doorway, hand-in-hand
with her brother, to learn what her son had done.

He went on more heavily, more slowly; and, more heavily and slowly
still, entered Isabel's room and shut the door.  He did not come forth
again, and bade Fanny good-night through the closed door when she
stopped outside it later.

"I've put all the lights out, George," she said.  "Everything's all
right."

"Very well," he called.  "Good-night."

She did not go.  "I'm sure we're going to enjoy the new little home,
George," she said timidly.  "I'll try hard to make things nice for
you, and the people really are lovely.  You mustn't feel as if things
are altogether gloomy, George. I know everything's going to turn out
all right.  You're young and strong and you have a good mind and I'm
sure--" she hesitated--"I'm sure your mother's watching over you,
Georgie.  Good-night, dear."

"Good-night, Aunt Fanny."

His voice had a strangled sound in spite of him; but she seemed not to
notice it, and he heard her go to her own room and lock herself in
with bolt and key against burglars.  She had said the one thing she
should not have said just then:  "I'm sure your mother's watching over
you, Georgie."  She had meant to be kind, but it destroyed his last
chance for sleep that night.  He would have slept little if she had
not said it, but since she had said it, he could not sleep at all.
For he knew that it was true--if it could be true--and that his
mother, if she still lived in spirit, would be weeping on the other
side of the wall of silence, weeping and seeking for some gate to let
her through so that she could come and "watch over him."

He felt that if there were such gates they were surely barred: they
were like those awful library doors downstairs, which had shut her in
to begin the suffering to which he had consigned her.

The room was still Isabel's.  Nothing had been changed: even the
photographs of George, of the Major, and of "brother George" still
stood on her dressing-table, and in a drawer of her desk was an old
picture of Eugene and Lucy, taken together, which George had found,
but had slowly closed away again from sight, not touching it.  To-
morrow everything would be gone; and he had heard there was not long
to wait before the house itself would be demolished.  The very space
which tonight was still Isabel's room would be cut into new shapes by
new walls and floors and ceilings; yet the room would always live, for
it could not die out of George's memory.  It would live as long as he
did, and it would always be murmurous with a tragic, wistful
whispering.

And if space itself can be haunted, as memory is haunted, then some
time, when the space that was Isabel's room came to be made into the
small bedrooms and "kitchenettes" already designed as its destiny,
that space might well be haunted and the new occupants come to feel
that some seemingly causeless depression hung about it--a wraith of
the passion that filled it throughout the last night that George
Minafer spent there.

Whatever remnants of the old high-handed arrogance were still within
him, he did penance for his deepest sin that night--and it may be that
to this day some impressionable, overworked woman in a "kitchenette,"
after turning out the light will seem to see a young man kneeling in
the darkness, shaking convulsively, and, with arms outstretched
through the wall, clutching at the covers of a shadowy bed.  It may
seem to her that she hears the faint cry, over and over:

"Mother, forgive me!  God, forgive me!"




Chapter XXXII



At least, it may be claimed for George that his last night in the
house where he had been born was not occupied with his own
disheartening future, but with sorrow for what sacrifices his pride
and youth had demanded of others.  And early in the morning he came
downstairs and tried to help Fanny make coffee on the kitchen range.

"There was something I wanted to say to you last night, Aunt Fanny,"
he said, as she finally discovered that an amber fluid, more like tea
than coffee, was as near ready to be taken into the human system as it
would ever be.  "I think I'd better do it now."

She set the coffee-pot back upon the stove with a little crash, and,
looking at him in a desperate anxiety, began to twist her dainty apron
between her fingers without any consciousness of what she was doing.

"Why--why--" she stammered; but she knew what he was going to say, and
that was why she had been more and more nervous.  "Hadn't--perhaps--
perhaps we'd better get the--the things moved to the little new home
first, George.  Let's--"

He interrupted quietly, though at her phrase, "the little new home,"
his pungent impulse was to utter one loud shout and run.  "It was
about this new place that I wanted to speak.  I've been thinking it
over, and I've decided. I want you to take all the things from
mother's room and use them and keep them for me, and I'm sure the
little apartment will be just what you like; and with the extra
bedroom probably you could find some woman friend to come and live
there, and share the expense with you.  But I've decided on another
arrangement for myself, and so I'm not going with you.  I don't
suppose you'll mind much, and I don't see why you should mind--
particularly, that is.  I'm not very lively company these days, or any
days, for that matter.  I can't imagine you, or any one else, being
much attached to me, so--"

He stopped in amazement: no chair had been left in the kitchen, but
Fanny gave .a despairing glance around her, in search of one, then
sank abruptly, and sat flat upon the floor.

"You're going to leave me in the lurch!" she gasped.

"What on earth--" George sprang to her.  "Get up, Aunt Fanny!"

"I can't. I'm too weak.  Let me alone, George!"  And as he released
the wrist he had seized to help her, she repeated the dismal prophecy
which for days she had been matching against her hopes: "You're going
to leave me--in the lurch!"

"Why no, Aunt Fanny!" he protested.  "At first I'd have been something
of a burden on you.  I'm to get eight dollars a week; about thirty-two
a month.  The rent's thirty-six dollars a month, and the table-d'hote
dinner runs up to over twenty-two dollars apiece, so with my half of
the rent--eighteen dollars--I'd have less than nothing left out of my
salary to pay my share of the groceries for all the breakfasts and
luncheons.  You see you'd not only be doing all the housework and
cooking, but you'd be paying more of the expenses than I would."

She stared at him with such a forlorn blankness as he had never seen.
"I'd be paying--" she said feebly.  "I'd be paying--"

"Certainly you would.  You'd be using more of your money than--"

"My money!"  Fanny's chin drooped upon her thin chest, and she laughed
miserably.  "I've got twenty-eight dollars.  That's all."

"You mean until the interest is due again?"

"I mean that's all," Fanny said.  "I mean that's all there is.  There
won't be any more interest because there isn't any principal."

"Why, you told--"

She shook. her head.  "No, I haven't told you anything."

"Then it was Uncle George.  He told me you had enough to fall back on.
That's just what he said: 'to fall back on.'  He said you'd lost more
than you should, in the headlight company, but he'd insisted that you
should hold out enough to live on, and you'd very wisely followed his
advice."

"I know," she said weakly.  "I told him so.  He didn't know, or else
he'd forgotten, how much Wilbur's insurance amounted to, and I--oh, it
seemed such a sure way to make a real fortune out of a little--and I
thought I could do something for you, George, if you ever came to need
it--and it all looked so bright I just thought I'd put it all in.  I
did--every cent except my last interest payment--and it's gone."

"Good Lord!" George began to pace up and down on the worn planks of
the bare floor.  "Why on earth did you wait till now to tell such a
thing as this?"

"I couldn't tell till I had to," she said piteously.  "I couldn't till
George Amberson went away.  He couldn't do anything to help, anyhow,
and I just didn't want him to talk to me about it--he's been at me so
much about not putting more in than I could afford to lose, and said
he considered he had my--my word I wasn't putting more than that in
it.  So I thought: What was the use?  What was the use of going over
it all with him and having him reproach me, and probably reproach
himself?  It wouldn't do any good--not any good on earth."  She got
out her lace handkerchief and began to cry.  "Nothing does any good, I
guess, in this old world.  Oh, how tired of this old world I am!  I
didn't know what to do.  I just tried to go ahead and be as practical
as I could, and arrange some way for us to live.  Oh, I knew you
didn't want me, George!  You always teased me and berated me whenever
you had a chance from the time you were a little boy--you did so!
Later, you've tried to be kinder to me, but you don't want me around--
oh, I can see that much!  You don't suppose I want to thrust myself on
you, do you?  It isn't very pleasant to be thrusting yourself on a
person you know doesn't want you--but I knew you oughtn't to be left
all alone in the world; it isn't good.  I knew your mother'd want me
to watch over you and try to have something like a home for you--I
know she'd want me to do what I tried to do!"  Fanny's tears were
bitter now, and her voice, hoarse and wet, was tragically sincere.  "I
tried--I tried to be practical--to look after your interests--to make
things as nice for you as I could--I walked my heels down looking for
a place for us to live--I walked and walked over this town--I didn't
ride one block on a street-car--I wouldn't use five cents no matter
how tired I--Oh!"  She sobbed uncontrollably.  "Oh! and now--you don't
want--you want--you want to leave me in the lurch!  You--"

George stopped walking.  "In God's name, Aunt Fanny," he said, "quit
spreading out your handkerchief and drying it and then getting it all
wet again!  I mean stop crying!  Do!  And for heaven's sake, get up.
Don't sit there with your back against the boiler and--"

"It's not hot," Fanny sniffled.  "It's cold; the; plumbers
disconnected it.  I wouldn't mind if they hadn't.  I wouldn't mind if
it burned me, George."

"Oh, my Lord!"  He went to her, and lifted her.  "For God's sake, get
up!  Come, let's take the coffee into the other room, and see what's
to be done."

He got her to her feet; she leaned upon him, already somewhat
comforted, and, with his arm about her, he conducted her to the dining
room and seated her in one of the two kitchen chairs which had been
placed at the rough table.  "There!" he said, "get over it!"  Then he
brought the coffee-pot, some lumps of sugar in a tin pan, and, finding
that all the coffee-cups were broken, set water glasses upon the
table, and poured some of the pale coffee into them.  By this time
Fanny's spirits had revived appreciably: she looked up with a
plaintive eagerness.  "I had bought all my fall clothes, George," she
said; "and I paid every bill I owed. I don't owe a cent for clothes,
George."

"That's good," he said wanly, and he had a moment of physical
dizziness that decided him to sit down quickly.  For an instant it
seemed to him that he was not Fanny's nephew, but married to her.  He
passed his pale hand over his paler forehead.  "Well, let's see where
we stand," he said feebly.  "Let's see if we can afford this place
you've selected."

Fanny continued to brighten.  "I'm sure it's the most practical plan
we could possibly have worked out, George--and it is a comfort to be
among nice people.  I think we'll both enjoy it, because the truth is
we've been keeping too much to ourselves for a long while.  It isn't
good for people."

"I was thinking about the money, Aunt Fanny.  You see--"

"I'm sure we can manage it," she interrupted quickly.  "There really
isn't a cheaper place in town that we could actually live in and be--"
Here she interrupted herself.  "Oh! There's one great economy I forgot
to tell you, and it's especially an economy for you, because you're
always too generous about such things: they don't allow any tipping.
They have signs that prohibit it."

"That's good," he said grimly.  "But the rent is thirty-six dollars a
month; the dinner is twenty-two and a half for each of us, and we've
got to have some provision for other food.  We won't need any clothes
for a year, perhaps--"

"Oh, longer!" she exclaimed.  "So you see--"

"I see that forty-five and thirty-six make eighty-one," he said.  "At
the lowest, we need a hundred dollars a month--and I'm going to make
thirty-two."

"I thought of that, George," she said confidently, "and I'm sure it
will be all right.  You'll be earning a great deal more than that very
soon."

"I don't see any prospect of it--not till I'm admitted to the bar, and
that will be two years at the earliest."

Fanny's confidence was not shaken.  "I know you'll be getting on
faster than--"

"Faster?" George echoed gravely.  "We've got to have more than that to
start with."

"Well, there's the six hundred dollars from the sale.  Six hundred and
twelve dollars it was."

"It isn't six hundred and twelve now," said George.  "It's about one
hundred and sixty."

Fanny showed a momentary dismay.  "Why, how--"

"I lent Uncle George two hundred; I gave fifty apiece to old Sam and
those two other old darkies that worked for grandfather so long, and
ten to each of the servants here--"

"And you gave me thirty-six," she said thoughtfully, "for the first
month's rent, in advance."

"Did I?  I'd forgotten.  Well, with about a hundred and sixty in bank
and our expenses a hundred a month, it doesn't seem as if this new
place--"

"Still," she interrupted, "we have paid the first month's rent in
advance, and it does seem to be the most practical--"

George rose.  "See here, Aunt Fanny," he said decisively.  "You stay
here and look after the moving.  Old Frank doesn't expect me until
afternoon, this first day, but I'll go and see him now."

It was early, and old Frank, just established at his big, flat-topped
desk, was surprised when his prospective assistant and pupil walked
in.  He was pleased, as well as surprised, however, and rose, offering
a cordial old hand.  "The real flare!" he said.  "The real flare for
the law.  That's right!  Couldn't wait till afternoon to begin!  I'm
delighted that you--"

"I wanted to say--" George began, but his patron cut him off.

"Wait just a minute, my boy.  I've prepared a little speech of
welcome, and even though you're five hours ahead of time, I mean to
deliver it.  First of all, your grandfather was my old war-comrade and
my best client; for years I prospered through my connection with his
business, and his grandson is welcome in my office and to my best
efforts in his behalf.  But I want to confess, Georgie, that during
your earlier youth I may have had some slight feeling of--well,
prejudice, not altogether in your favour; but whatever slight feeling
it was, it began to vanish on that afternoon, a good while ago, when
you stood up to your Aunt Amelia Amberson as you did in the Major's
library, and talked to her as a man and a gentleman should.  I saw
then what good stuff was in you--and I always wanted to mention it.
If my prejudice hadn't altogether vanished after that, the last
vestiges disappeared during these trying times that have come upon you
this past year, when I have been a witness to the depth of feeling
you've shown and your quiet consideration for your grandfather and for
everyone else around you.  I just want to add that I think you'll find
an honest pleasure now in industry and frugality that wouldn't have
come to you in a more frivolous career.  The law is a jealous mistress
and a stern mistress, but a--"

George had stood before him in great and increasing embarrassment; and
he was unable to allow the address to proceed to its conclusion.

"I can't do it!" he burst out.  "I can't take her for my mistress."

"What?"

"I've come to tell you, I've got to find something that's quicker. I
can't--"

Old Frank got a little red.  "Let's sit down," he said.  "What's the
trouble?"

George told him.

The old gentleman listened sympathetically, only murmuring:  "Well,
well!" from time to time, and nodding acquiescence.

"You see she's set her mind on this apartment," George explained.
"She's got some old cronies there, and I guess she's been looking
forward to the games of bridge and the kind of harmless gossip that
goes on in such places.  Really, it's a life she'd like better than
anything else--better than that she's lived at home, I really believe.
It struck me she's just about got to have it, and after all she could
hardly have anything less."

"This comes pretty heavily upon me, you know," said old Frank.  "I got
her into that headlight company, and she fooled me about her resources
as much as she did your Uncle George.  I was never your father's
adviser, if you remember, and when the insurance was turned over to
her some other lawyer arranged it--probably your father's.  But it
comes pretty heavily on me, and I feel a certain responsibility."

"Not at all.  I'm taking the responsibility."

And George smiled with one corner of his mouth.  "She's not your aunt,
you know, sir."

"Well, I'm unable to see, even if she's yours, that a young man is
morally called upon to give up a career at the law to provide his aunt
with a favourable opportunity to play bridge whist!"

"No," George agreed.  "But I haven't begun my 'career at the law' so
it can't be said I'm making any considerable sacrifice.  I'll tell you
how it is, sir."  He flushed, and, looking out of the streaked and
smoky window beside which he was sitting, spoke with difficulty.  "I
feel as if--as if perhaps I had one or two pretty important things in
my life to make up for.  Well, I can't.  I can't make them up to--to
whom I would.  It's struck me that, as I couldn't, I might be a little
decent to somebody else, perhaps--if I could manage it!  I never have
been particularly decent to poor old Aunt Fanny."

"Oh, I don't know: I shouldn't say that.  A little youthful teasing--I
doubt if she's minded so much.  She felt your father's death
terrifically, of course, but it seems to me she's had a fairly
comfortable life-up to now--if she was disposed to take it that way."

"But 'up to now' is the important thing," George said.  "Now is now--
and you see I can't wait two years to be admitted to the bar and begin
to practice.  I've got to start in at something else that pays from
the start, and that's what I've come to you about.  I have an idea,
you see."

"Well, I'm glad of that!" said old Frank, smiling.  "I can't think of
anything just at this minute that pays from the start."

"I only know of one thing, myself."

"What is it?"

George flushed again, but managed to laugh at his own embarrassment.
"I suppose I'm about as ignorant of business as anybody in the world,"
he said.  "But I've heard they pay very high wages to people in
dangerous trades; I've always heard they did, and I'm sure it must be
true.  I mean people that handle touchy chemicals or high explosives--
men in dynamite factories, or who take things of that sort about the
country in wagons, and shoot oil wells.  I thought I'd see if you
couldn't tell me something more about it, or else introduce me to
someone who could, and then I thought I'd see if I couldn't get
something of the kind to do as soon as possible.  My nerves are good;
I'm muscular, and I've got a steady hand; it seemed to me that this
was about the only line of work in the world that I'm fitted for.  I
wanted to get started to-day if I could."

Old Frank gave him a long stare.  At first this scrutiny was sharply
incredulous; then it was grave; finally it developed into a threat of
overwhelming laughter; a forked vein in his forehead became more
visible and his eyes seemed about to protrude.

But he controlled his impulse; and, rising, took up his hat and
overcoat.  "All right," he said.  "If you'll promise not to get blown
up, I'll go with you to see if we can find the job."  Then, meaning
what be said, but amazed that he did mean it, he added: "You certainly
are the most practical young man I ever met!"




Chapter XXXIII


They found the job.  It needed an apprenticeship of only six weeks,
during which period George was to receive fifteen dollars a week;
after that he would get twenty-eight.  This settled the apartment
question, and Fanny was presently established in a greater contentment
than she had known for a long time.  Early every morning she made
something she called (and believed to be) coffee for George, and he
was gallant enough not to undeceive her.  She lunched alone in her
"kitchenette," for George's place of employment was ten miles out of
town on an interurban trolley-line, and he seldom returned before
seven.  Fanny found partners for bridge by two o'clock almost every
afternoon, and she played until about six.  Then she got George's
"dinner clothes" out for him--he maintained this habit--and she
changed her own dress.  When he arrived he usually denied that he was
tired, though he sometimes looked tired, particularly during the first
few months; and he explained to her frequently--looking bored enough
with her insistence--that his work was "fairly light, and fairly
congenial, too."  Fanny had the foggiest idea of what it was, though
she noticed that it roughened his hands and stained them.  "Something
in those new chemical works," she explained to casual inquirers.  It
was not more definite in her own mind.

Respect for George undoubtedly increased within her, however, and she
told him she'd always had a feeling he might "turn out to be a
mechanical genius, or something."  George assented with a nod, as the
easiest course open to him.  He did not take a hand at bridge after
dinner: his provisions' for Fanny's happiness refused to extend that
far, and at the table d'hote he was a rather discouraging boarder.  He
was considered "affected" and absurdly "up-stage" by the one or two
young men, and the three or four young women, who enlivened the
elderly retreat; and was possibly less popular there than he had been
elsewhere during his life, though he was now nothing worse than a
coldly polite young man who kept to himself.  After dinner he would
escort his aunt from the table in some state (not wholly unaccompanied
by a leerish wink or two from the wags of the place) and he would
leave her at the door of the communal parlours and card rooms, with a
formality in his bow of farewell which afforded an amusing contrast to
Fanny's always voluble protests.  (She never failed to urge loudly
that he really must come and play, just this once, and not go hiding
from everybody in his room every evening like this!)  At least some of
the other inhabitants found the contrast amusing, for sometimes, as he
departed stiffly toward the elevator, leaving her still entreating in
the doorway (though with one eye already on her table, to see that it
was not seized) a titter would follow him which he was no doubt meant
to hear.  He did not care whether they laughed or not.

And once, as he passed the one or two young men of the place
entertaining the three or four young women, who were elbowing and
jerking on a settee in the lobby, he heard a voice inquiring quickly,
as he passed:

"What makes people tired?"

"Work?"

"No."

"Well, what's the answer?"

Then, with an intentional outbreak of mirth, the answer was given by
two loudly whispering voices together:

"A stuck-up boarder!"

George didn't care.

On Sunday mornings Fanny went to church and George took long walks.
He explored the new city, and found it hideous, especially in the
early spring, before the leaves of the shade trees were out.  Then the
town was fagged with the long winter and blacked with the heavier
smoke that had been held close to the earth by the smoke-fog it bred.
Every-thing was damply streaked with the soot: the walls of the
houses, inside and out, the gray curtains at the windows, the windows
themselves, the dirty cement and unswept asphalt underfoot, the very
sky overhead.  Throughout this murky season he continued his
explorations, never seeing a face he knew--for, on Sunday, those whom
he remembered, or who might remember him, were not apt to be found
within the limits of the town, but were congenially occupied with the
new outdoor life which had come to be the mode since his boyhood.  He
and Fanny were pretty thoroughly buried away within the bigness of the
city.

One of his Sunday walks, that spring, he made into a sour pilgrimage.
It was a misty morning of belated snow slush, and suited him to a
perfection of miserableness, as he stood before the great dripping
department store which now occupied the big plot of ground where once
had stood both the Amberson Hotel and the Amberson Opera House.  From
there he drifted to the old "Amberson Block," but this was fallen into
a back-water; business had stagnated here.  The old structure had not
been replaced, but a cavernous entryway for trucks had been torn in
its front, and upon the cornice, where the old separate metal letters
had spelt "Amberson Block," there was a long billboard sign:  "Doogan
Storage."

To spare himself nothing, he went out National Avenue and saw the
piles of slush-covered wreckage where the Mansion and his mother's
house had been, and where the Major's ill-fated five "new" houses had
stood; for these were down, too, to make room for the great tenement
already shaped in unending lines of foundation.  But the Fountain of
Neptune was gone at last--and George was glad that it was!

He turned away from the devastated site, thinking bitterly that the
only Amberson mark still left upon the town was the name of the
boulevard--Amberson Boulevard.  But he had reckoned without the city
council of the new order, and by an unpleasant coincidence, while the
thought was still in his mind, his eye fell upon a metal oblong sign
upon the lamppost at the corner.  There were two of these little signs
upon the lamp-post, at an obtuse angle to each other, one to give
passers-by the name of National Avenue, the other to acquaint them
with Amberson Boulevard.  But the one upon which should have been
stenciled "Amberson Boulevard" exhibited the words "Tenth Street."

George stared at it hard. Then he walked quickly along the boulevard
to the next corner and looked at the little sign there.  "Tenth
Street."

It had begun to rain, but George stood unheeding, staring at the
little sign.  "Damn them!" he said finally, and, turning up his coat-
collar, plodded back through the soggy streets toward "home."

The utilitarian impudence of the city authorities put a thought into
his mind.  A week earlier he had happened to stroll into the large
parlour of the apartment house, finding it empty, and on the
center table he noticed a large, red-bound, gilt-edged book, newly
printed, bearing the title: "A Civic History," and beneath the title,
the rubric, "Biographies of the 500 Most Prominent Citizens and
Families in the History of the City."  He had glanced at it absently,
merely noticing the title and sub-title, and wandered out of the room,
thinking of other things and feeling no curiosity about the book.  But
he had thought of it several times since with a faint, vague
uneasiness; and now when he entered the lobby he walked directly into
the parlour where he had seen the book.  The room was empty, as it
always was on Sunday mornings, and the flamboyant volume was still
upon the table--evidently a fixture as a sort of local Almanach de
Gotha, or Burke, for the enlightenment of tenants and boarders.

He opened it, finding a few painful steel engravings of placid, chin-
bearded faces, some of which he remembered dimly; but much more
numerous, and also more unfamiliar to him, were the pictures of neat,
aggressive men, with clipped short hair and clipped short moustaches--
almost all of them strangers to him.  He delayed not long with these,
but turned to the index where the names of the five hundred Most
Prominent Citizens and Families in the History of the City were
arranged in alphabetical order, and ran his finger down the column of
A's:

Abbett
Abbott
Abrams
Adam
Adams
Adler
Akers
Albertsmeyer
Alexander
Allen
Ambrose
Ambuhl
Anderson
Andrews
Appenbasch
Archer
Arszman
Ashcraft
Austin
Avey

George's eyes remained for some time fixed on the thin space between
the names "Allen" and "Ambrose."  Then he closed the book quietly, and
went up to his own room, agreeing with the elevator boy, on the way,
that it was getting to be a mighty nasty wet and windy day outside.

The elevator boy noticed nothing unusual about him and neither did
Fanny, when she came in from church with her hat ruined, an hour
later.  And yet something had happened--a thing which, years ago, had
been the eagerest hope of many, many good citizens of the town.  They
had thought of it, longed for it, hoping acutely that they might live
to see the day when it would come to pass.  And now it had happened at
last: Georgie Minafer had got his come-upance.

He had got it three times filled and running over.  The city had
rolled over his heart, burying it under, as it rolled over the Major's
and buried it under.  The city had rolled over the Ambersons and
buried them under to the last vestige; and it mattered little that
George guessed easily enough that most of the five hundred Most
Prominent had paid something substantial "to defray the cost of steel
engraving, etc."--the Five Hundred had heaved the final shovelful of
soot upon that heap of obscurity wherein the Ambersons were lost
forever from sight and history.  "Quicksilver in a nest of cracks!"

Georgie Minafer had got his come-upance, but the people who had so
longed for it were not there to see it, and they never knew it.  Those
who were still living had forgotten all about it and all about him.




Chapter XXXIV



There was one border section of the city which George never explored
in his Sunday morning excursions.  This was far out to the north where
lay the new Elysian Fields of the millionaires, though he once went as
far in that direction as the white house which Lucy had so admired
long ago--her "Beautiful House."  George looked at it briefly and
turned back, rumbling with an interior laugh of some grimness.  The
house was white no longer; nothing could be white which the town had
reached, and the town reached far beyond the beautiful white house
now.  The owners had given up and painted it a despairing chocolate,
suitable to the freight-yard life it was called upon to endure.

George did not again risk going even so far as that, in the direction
of the millionaires, although their settlement began at least two
miles farther out.  His thought of Lucy and her father was more a
sensation than a thought, and may be compared to that of a convicted
cashier beset by recollections of the bank he had pillaged--there are
some thoughts to which one closes the mind.  George had seen Eugene
only once since their calamitous encounter.  They had passed on
opposite sides of the street, downtown; each had been aware of the
other, and each had been aware that the other was aware of him, and
yet each kept his eyes straight forward, and neither had shown a
perceptible alteration of countenance.  It seemed to George that he
felt emanating from the outwardly imperturbable person of his mother's
old friend a hate that was like a hot wind.

At his mother's funeral and at the Major's he had been conscious that
Eugene was there: though he had afterward no recollection of seeing
him, and, while certain of his presence, was uncertain how he knew of
it.  Fanny had not told him, for she understood George well enough not
to speak to him of Eugene or Lucy.  Nowadays Fanny almost never saw
either of them and seldom thought of them--so sly is the way of time
with life.  She was passing middle age, when old intensities and
longings grow thin and flatten out, as Fanny herself was thinning and
flattening out; and she was settling down contentedly to her apartment
house intimacies.  She was precisely suited by the table-d'hote life,
with its bridge, its variable alliances and shifting feuds, and the
long whisperings of elderly ladies at corridor corners--those eager
but suppressed conversations, all sibilance, of which the elevator boy
declared he heard the words "she said" a million times and the word
"she," five million.  The apartment house suited Fanny and swallowed
her.

The city was so big, now, that people disappeared into it unnoticed,
and the disappearance of Fanny and her nephew was not exceptional.
People no longer knew their neighbours as a matter of course; one
lived for years next door to strangers--that sharpest of all the
changes since the old days--and a friend would lose sight of a friend
for a year, and not know it.

One May day George thought he had a glimpse of Lucy.  He was not
certain, but he was sufficiently disturbed, in spite of his
uncertainty.  A promotion in his work now frequently took him out of
town for a week, or longer, and it was upon his return from one of
these absences that he had the strange experience.  He had walked home
from the station, and as he turned the corner which brought him in
sight of the apartment house entrance, though two blocks distant from
it, he saw a charming little figure come out, get into a shiny
landaulet automobile, and drive away.  Even at that distance no one
could have any doubt that the little figure was charming; and the
height, the quickness and decision of motion, even the swift gesture
of a white glove toward the chauffeur--all were characteristic of
Lucy.  George was instantly subjected to a shock of indefinable
nature, yet definitely a shock: he did not know what he felt--but he
knew that he felt.  Heat surged over him:  probably he would not have
come face to face with her if the restoration of all the ancient
Amberson magnificence could have been his reward.  He went on slowly,
his knees shaky.

But he found Fanny not at home; she had been out all afternoon; and
there was no record of any caller--and he began to wonder, then to
doubt if the small lady he had seen in the distance was Lucy.  It
might as well have been, he said to himself--since any one who looked
like her could give him "a jolt like that!"

Lucy had not left a card.  She never left one when she called on
Fanny; though she did not give her reasons a quite definite form in
her own mind.  She came seldom; this was but the third time that year,
and, when she did come, George was not mentioned either by her hostess
or by herself--an oddity contrived between the two ladies without
either of them realizing how odd it was.  For, naturally, while Fanny
was with Lucy, Fanny thought of George, and what time Lucy had
George's aunt before her eyes she could not well avoid the thought of
him.  Consequently, both looked absent-minded as they talked, and each
often gave a wrong answer which the other consistently failed to
notice.

At other times Lucy's thoughts of George were anything but continuous,
and weeks went by when he was not consciously in her mind at all.  Her
life was a busy one: she had the big house "to keep up"; she had a
garden to keep up, too, a large and beautiful garden; she represented
her father as a director for half a dozen public charity
organizations, and did private charity work of her own, being a proxy
mother of several large families; and she had "danced down," as she
said, groups from eight or nine classes of new graduates returned from
the universities, without marrying any of them, but she still danced--
and still did not marry.

Her father, observing this circumstance happily, yet with some
hypocritical concern, spoke of it to her one day as they stood in her
garden.  "I suppose I'd want to shoot him," he said, with attempted
lightness.  "But I mustn't be an old pig.  I'd build you a beautiful
house close by--just over yonder."

"No, no!  That would be like--" she began impulsively; then checked
herself.  George Amberson's comparison of the Georgian house to the
Amberson Mansion had come into her mind, and she thought that another
new house, built close by for her, would be like the house the Major
built for Isabel.

"Like what?"

"Nothing."  She looked serious, and when he reverted to his idea of
"some day" grudgingly surrendering her up to a suitor, she invented a
legend.  "Did you ever hear the Indian name for that little grove of
beech trees on the other side of the house?" she asked him.

"No--and you never did either!" he laughed.

"Don't be so sure!  I read a great deal more than I used to--getting
ready for my bookish days when I'll have to do something solid in the
evenings and won't be asked to dance any more, even by the very
youngest boys who think it's a sporting event to dance with the oldest
of the 'older girls'.  The name of the grove was 'Loma-Nashah' and it
means 'They-Couldn't-Help-It'."

"Doesn't sound like it."

"Indian names don't.  There was a bad Indian chief lived in the grove
before the white settlers came.  He was the worst Indian that ever
lived, and his name was--it was 'Vendonah.'  That means 'Rides-Down-
Everything'."

"What?"

"His name was Vendonah, the same thing as Rides-Down-Everything."

"I see," said Eugene thoughtfully.  He gave her a quick look and then
fixed his eyes upon the end of the garden path.  Go on."

"Vendonah was an unspeakable case," Lucy continued.  "He was so proud
that he wore iron shoes and he walked over people's faces with them.
he was always killing people that way, and so at last the tribe
decided that it wasn't a good enough excuse for him that he was young
and inexperienced--he'd have to go.  They took him down to the river,
and put him in a canoe, and pushed him out from shore; and then they
ran along the bank and wouldn't let him land, until at last the
current carried the canoe out into the middle, and then on down to the
ocean, and he never got back.  They didn't want him back, of course,
and if he'd been able to manage it, they'd have put him in another
canoe and shoved him out into the river again.  But still, they didn't
elect another chief in his place.  Other tribes thought that was
curious, and wondered about it a lot, but finally they came to the
conclusion that the beech grove people were afraid a new chief might
turn out to be a bad Indian, too, and wear iron shoes like Vendonah.
But they were wrong, because the real reason was that the tribe had
led such an exciting life under Vendonah that they couldn't settle
down to anything tamer.  He was awful, but he always kept things
happening--terrible things, of course.  They bated him, but they
weren't able to discover any other warrior that they wanted to make
chief in his place.  I suppose it was a little like drinking a glass
of too strong wine and then trying to take the taste out of your mouth
with barley water.  They couldn't help feeling that way."

"I see," said Eugene.  "So that's why they named the place 'They-
Couldn't-Help-It'!"

"It must have been."

"And so you're going to stay here in your garden," he said musingly.
"You think it's better to keep on walking these sunshiny gravel paths
between your flower-beds, and growing to look like a pensive garden
lady in a Victorian engraving."

"I suppose I'm like the tribe that lived here, papa.  I had too much
unpleasant excitement.  It was unpleasant--but it was excitement.  I
don't want any more; in fact, I don't want anything but you."

"You don't?"  He looked at her keenly, and she laughed and shook her
head; but he seemed perplexed, rather doubtful.  "What was the name of
the grove?" he asked.  "The Indian name, I mean."

"Mola-Haha."

"No, it wasn't; that wasn't the name you said."

"I've forgotten."

"I see you have," he said, his look of perplexity remaining.  "Perhaps
you remember the chief's name better."

She shook her head again. "I don't!"

At this he laughed, but not very heartily, and walked slowly to the
house, leaving her bending over a rose-bush, and a shade more pensive
than the most pensive garden lady in any Victorian engraving.

. . . Next day, it happened that this same "Vendonah" or "Rides-Down-
Everything" became the subject of a chance conversation between Eugene
and his old friend Kinney, father of the fire-topped Fred.  The two
gentlemen found themselves smoking in neighbouring leather chairs
beside a broad window at the club, after lunch.

Mr. Kinney had remarked that he expected to get his family established
at the seashore by the Fourth of July, and, following a train of
thought, he paused and chuckled.  "Fourth of July reminds me," he
said.  "Have you heard what that Georgie Minafer is doing?"

"No, I haven't," said Eugene, and his friend failed to notice the
crispness of the utterance.

"Well, sir," Kinney chuckled again, "it beats the devil!  My boy Fred
told me about it yesterday.  He's a friend of this young Henry Akers,
son of F. P. Akers of the Akers Chemical Company.  It seems this young
Akers asked Fred if he knew a fellow named Minafer, because he knew
Fred had always lived here, and young Akers had heard some way that
Minafer used to be an old family name here, and was sort of curious
about it.  Well, sir, you remember this young Georgie sort of
disappeared, after his grandfather's death, and nobody seemed to know
much what had become of him--though I did hear, once or twice, that he
was still around somewhere.  Well, sir, he's working for the Akers
Chemical Company, out at their plant on the Thomasvile Road."

He paused, seeming to reserve something to be delivered only upon
inquiry, and Eugene offered him the expected question, but only after
a cold glance through the nose-glasses he had lately found it
necessary to adopt.  "What does he do?"

Kinney laughed and slapped the arm of his chair.

"He's a nitroglycerin expert!"

He was gratified to see that Eugene was surprised, if not, indeed, a
little startled.

"He's what?"

"He's an expert on nitroglycerin.  Doesn't that beat the devil!  Yes,
sir!  Young Akers told Fred that this George Minafer had worked like a
houn'-dog ever since he got started out at the works.  They have a
special plant for nitroglycerin, way off from the main plant, o'
course--in the woods somewhere--and George Minafer's been working
there, and lately they put him in charge of it.  He oversees shooting
oil-wells, too, and shoots 'em himself, sometimes.  They aren't
allowed to carry it on the railroads, you know--have to team it.
Young Akers says George rides around over the bumpy roads, sitting on
as much as three hundred quarts of nitroglycerin!  My Lord!  Talk
about romantic tumbles!  If he gets blown sky-high some day he won't
have a bigger drop, when he comes down, than he's already had!  Don't
it beat the devil!  Young Akers said he's got all the nerve there is
in the world.  Well, he always did have plenty of that--from the time
he used to ride around here on his white pony and fight all the Irish
boys in Can-Town, with his long curls all handy to be pulled out.
Akers says he gets a fair salary, and I should think he ought to!
Seems to me I've heard the average life in that sort of work is
somewhere around four years, and agents don't write any insurance at
all for nitroglycerin experts.  Hardly!"

"No," said Eugene.  "I suppose not."

Kinney rose to go.  "Well, it's a pretty funny thing--pretty odd, I
mean--and I suppose it would be pass-around-the-hat for old Fanny
Minafer if he blew up.  Fred told me that they're living in some
apartment house, and said Georgie supports her.  He was going to study
law, but couldn't earn enough that way to take care of Fanny, so he
gave it up.  Fred's wife told him all this.  Says Fanny doesn't do
anything but play bridge these days.  Got to playing too high for
awhile and lost more than she wanted to tell Georgie about, and
borrowed a little from old Frank Bronson.  Paid him back, though.
Don't know how Fred's wife heard it.  Women do' hear the darndest
things!"

"They do," Eugene agreed.

"I thought you'd probably heard about it--thought most likely Fred's
wife might have said something to your daughter, especially as they're
cousins."

"I think not."

"Well, I'm off to the store," said Mr. Kinney briskly; yet he
lingered.  "I suppose we'll all have to club in and keep old Fanny out
of the poorhouse if he does blow up.  From all I hear it's usually
only a question of time.  They say she hasn't got anything else to
depend on."

"I suppose not."

"Well--I wondered--"  Kinney hesitated.  "I was wondering why you
hadn't thought of finding something around your works for him.  They
say he's an all-fired worker and he certainly does seem to have hid
some decent stuff in him under all his damfoolishness.  And you used
to be such a tremendous friend of the family--I thought perhaps you--
of course I know he's a queer lot--I know--"

"Yes, I think he is," said Eugene.  "No. I haven't anything to offer
him."

"I suppose not," Kinney returned thoughtfully, as he went out.  "I
don't know that I would myself.  Well, we'll probably see his name in
the papers some day if he stays with that job!"

However, the nitroglycerin expert of whom they spoke did not get into
the papers as a consequence of being blown up, although his daily life
was certainly a continuous exposure to that risk.  Destiny has a
constant passion for the incongruous, and it was George's lot to
manipulate wholesale quantities of terrific and volatile explosives in
safety, and to be laid low by an accident so commonplace and
inconsequent that it was a comedy.  Fate had reserved for him the
final insult of riding him down under the wheels of one of those
juggernauts at which he had once shouted "Git a hoss!"  Nevertheless,
Fate's ironic choice for Georgie's undoing was not a big and swift and
momentous car, such as Eugene manufactured; it was a specimen of the
hustling little type that was flooding the country, the cheapest,
commonest, hardiest little car ever made.

The accident took place upon a Sunday morning, on a downtown crossing,
with the streets almost empty, and no reason in the world for such a
thing to happen.  He had gone out for his Sunday morning walk, and he
was thinking of an automobile at the very moment when the little car
struck him; he was thinking of a shiny landaulet and a charming figure
stepping into it, and of the quick gesture of a white glove toward the
chauffeur, motioning him to go on.  George heard a shout but did not
look up, for he could not imagine anybody's shouting at him, and he
was too engrossed in the question "Was it Lucy?"  He could not decide,
and his lack of decision in this matter probably superinduced a lack
of decision in another, more pressingly vital.  At the second and
louder shout he did look up; and the car was almost on him; but he
could not make up his mind if the charming little figure he had seen
was Lucy's and he could not make up his mind whether to go backward or
forward: these questions became entangled in his mind.  Then, still
not being able to decide which of two ways to go, he tried to go both
--and the little car ran him down.  It was not moving very rapidly, but
it went all the way over George.

He was conscious of gigantic violence; of roaring and jolting and
concussion; of choking clouds of dust, shot with lightning, about his
head; he heard snapping sounds as loud as shots from a small pistol,
and was stabbed by excruciating pains in his legs.  Then he became
aware that the machine was being lifted off of him.  People were
gathering in a circle round him, gabbling.

His forehead was bedewed with the sweat of anguish, and he tried to
wipe off this dampness, but failed.  He could not get his arm that
far.

"Nev' mind," a policeman said; and George could see above his eyes the
skirts of the blue coat, covered with dust and sunshine.  "Amb'lance
be here in a minute.  Nev' mind tryin' to move any.  You want 'em to
send for some special doctor?"

"No."  George's lips formed the word.

"Or to take you to some private hospital?"

"Tell them to take me," he said faintly, "to the City Hospital."

"A' right."

A smallish young man in a duster fidgeted among the crowd, explaining
and protesting, and a strident voiced girl, his companion, supported
his argument, declaring to everyone her willingness to offer testimony
in any court of law that every blessed word he said was the God's
truth.

"It's the fella that hit you," the policeman said, looking down on
George.  "I guess he's right; you must of been thinkin' about somep'm'
or other.  It's wunnerful the damage them little machines can do--
you'd never think it--but I guess they ain't much case ag'in this
fella that was drivin' it."

"You bet your life they ain't no case on me!" the young man in the
duster agreed, with great bitterness.  He came and stood at George's
feet, addressing him heatedly:  "I'm sorry fer you all right, and I
don't say I ain't.  I hold nothin' against you, but it wasn't any more
my fault than the statehouse!  You run into me, much as I run into
you, and if you get well you ain't goin' to get not one single cent
out o' me!  This lady here was settin' with me and we both yelled at
you.  Wasn't goin' a step over eight mile an hour!  I'm perfectly
willing to say I'm sorry for you though, and so's the lady with me.
We're both willing to say that much, but that's all, understand!"

George's drawn eyelids twitched; his misted glance rested fleetingly
upon the two protesting motorists, and the old imperious spirit within
him flickered up in a single word.  Lying on his back in the middle of
the street, where he was regarded an increasing public as an
unpleasant curiosity, he spoke this word clearly from a mouth filled
with dust, and from lips smeared with blood.

It was a word which interested the policeman.  When the ambulance
clanged away, he turned to a fellow patrolman who had joined him.
"Funny what he says to the little cuss that done the damage.  That's
all he did call him--'nothin' else at all--and the cuss had broke both
his legs fer him and God-knows-what-all!"

"I wasn't here then.  What was it?"

"Riffraff!"




Chapter XXXV



Eugene's feeling about George had not been altered by his talk with
Kinney in the club window, though he was somewhat disturbed.  He was
not disturbed by Kinney's hint that Fanny Minafer might be left on the
hands of her friends through her nephew's present dealings with
nitroglycerin, but he was surprised that Kinney had "led up" with
intentional tact to the suggestion that a position might be made for
George in the Morgan factory.  Eugene did not care to have any
suggestions about Georgie Minafer made to him.  Kinney had represented
Georgie as a new Georgie--at least in spots--a Georgie who was proving
that decent stuff had been hid in him; in fact, a Georgie who was
doing rather a handsome thing in taking a risky job for the sake of
his aunt, poor old silly Fanny Minafer!  Eugene didn't care what risks
Georgie took, or how much decent stuff he had in him: nothing that
Georgie would ever do in this world or the next could change Eugene
Morgan's feeling toward him.

If Eugene could possibly have brought himself to offer Georgie a
position in the automobile business, he knew full well the proud devil
wouldn't have taken it from him; though Georgie's proud reason would
not have been the one attributed to him by Eugene.  George would never
reach the point where he could accept anything material from Eugene
and preserve the self-respect he had begun to regain.

But if Eugene had wished, he could easily have taken George out of the
nitroglycerin branch of the chemical works.  Always interested in
apparent impossibilities of invention, Eugene had encouraged many
experiments in such gropings as those for the discovery of substitutes
for gasoline and rubber; and, though his mood had withheld the
information from Kinney, he had recently bought from the elder Akers a
substantial quantity of stock on the condition that the chemical
company should establish an experimental laboratory.  He intended to
buy more; Akers was anxious to please him; and a word from Eugene
would have placed George almost anywhere in the chemical works.
George need never have known it, for Eugene's purchases of stock were
always quiet ones: the transaction remained, so far, between him and
Akers, and could be kept between them.

The possibility just edged itself into Eugene's mind; that is, he let
it become part of his perceptions long enough for it to prove to him
that it was actually a possibility.  Then he half started with disgust
that he should be even idly considering such a thing over his last
cigar for the night, in his library.  "No!"  And he threw the cigar
into the empty fireplace and went to bed.

His bitterness for himself might have worn away, but never his
bitterness for Isabel.  He took that thought to bed with him--and it
was true that nothing George could do would ever change this
bitterness of Eugene.  Only George's mother could have changed it.

And as Eugene fell asleep that night, thinking thus bitterly of
Georgie, Georgie in the hospital was thinking of Eugene.  He had come
"out of ether" with no great nausea, and had fallen into a reverie,
though now and then a white sailboat staggered foolishly into the
small ward where he lay.  After a time he discovered that this
happened only when he tried to open his eyes and look about him; so he
kept his eyes shut, and his thoughts were clearer.

He thought of Eugene Morgan and of the Major; they seemed to be the
same person for awhile, but he managed to disentangle them and even to
understand why he had confused them.  Long ago his grandfather had
been the most striking figure of success in the town: "As rich as
Major Amberson!" they used to say.  Now it was Eugene.  "If I had
Eugene Morgan's money," he would hear the workmen day-dreaming at the
chemical works; or, "If Eugene Morgan had hold of this place you'd see
things hum!"  And the boarders at the table d'hote spoke of "the
Morgan Place" as an eighteenth-century Frenchman spoke of Versailles.
Like his uncle, George had perceived that the "Morgan Place" was the
new Amberson Mansion.  His reverie went back to the palatial days of
the Mansion, in his boyhood, when he would gallop his pony up the
driveway and order the darkey stable-men about, while they whooped and
obeyed, and his grandfather, observing from a window, would laugh and
call out to him, "That's right, Georgie.  Make those lazy rascals
jump!"  He remembered his gay young uncles, and how the town was eager
concerning everything about them, and about himself.  What a clean,
pretty town it had been!  And in his reverie be saw like a pageant
before him the magnificence of the Ambersons--its passing, and the
passing of the Ambersons themselves.  They had been slowly engulfed
without knowing how to prevent it, and almost without knowing what was
happening to them.  The family lot, in the shabby older quarter, out
at the cemetery, held most of them now; and the name was swept
altogether from the new city.  But the new great people who had taken
their places--the Morgans and Akerses and Sheridans--they would go,
too.  George saw that.  They would pass, as the Ambersons had passed,
and though some of them might do better than the Major and leave the
letters that spelled a name on a hospital or a street, it would be
only a word and it would not stay forever.  Nothing stays or holds or
keeps where there is growth, he somehow perceived vaguely but truly.
Great Caesar dead and turned to clay stopped no hole to keep the wind
away dead Caesar was nothing but a tiresome bit of print in a book
that schoolboys study for awhile and then forget.  The Ambersons had
passed, and the new people would pass, and the new people that came
after them, and then the next new ones, and the next--and the next--

He had begun to murmur, and the man on duty as night nurse for the
ward came and bent over him.

"Did you want something?"

"There's nothing in this family business," George told him
confidentially.  "Even George Washington is only something in a book."

Eugene read a report of the accident in the next morning's paper.  He
was on the train, having just left for New York, on business, and with
less leisure would probably have overlooked the obscure item:

LEGS BROKEN

G. A. Minafer, an employee of the Akers Chemical Co., was run down by
an automobile yesterday at the corner of Tennessee and Main and had
both legs broken.  Minafer was to blame for the accident according to
patrolman F. A. Kax, who witnessed the affair.  The automobile was a
small one driven by Herbert Cottleman of 9173 Noble Avenue who stated
that he was making less than 4 miles an hour.  Minafer is said to
belong to a family formerly of considerable prominence in the city.
He was taken to the City Hospital where physicians stated later that
he was suffering from internal injuries besides the fracture of his
legs but might recover.

Eugene read the item twice, then tossed the paper upon the opposite
seat of his compartment, and sat looking out of the window.  His
feeling toward Georgie was changed not a jot by his human pity for
Georgie's human pain and injury.  He thought of Georgie's tall and
graceful figure, and he shivered, but his bitterness was untouched.
He had never blamed Isabel for the weakness which had cost them the
few years of happiness they might have had together; he had put the
blame all on the son, and it stayed there.

He began to think poignantly of Isabel: he had seldom been able to
"see" her more clearly than as be sat looking out of his compartment
window, after reading the account of this accident.  She might have
been just on the other side of the glass, looking in at him--and then
he thought of her as the pale figure of a woman, seen yet unseen,
flying through the air, beside the train, over the fields of
springtime green and through the woods that were just sprouting out
their little leaves.  He closed his eyes and saw her as she had been
long ago.  He saw the brown-eyed, brown-haired, proud, gentle,
laughing girl he had known when first he came to town, a boy just out
of the State College.  He remembered--as he had remembered ten
thousand times before--the look she gave him when her brother George
introduced him to her at a picnic; it was "like hazel starlight" he
had written her, in a poem, afterward.  He remembered his first call
at the Amberson Mansion, and what a great personage she seemed, at
home in that magnificence; and yet so gay and friendly.  He remembered
the first time he had danced with her--and the old waltz song began to
beat in his ears and in his heart.  They laughed and sang it together
as they danced to it:

"Oh, love for a year, a week, a day,
But alas for the love that lasts always--"

Most plainly of all he could see her dancing; and he became articulate
in the mourning whisper: "So graceful--oh, so graceful--"

All the way to New York it seemed to him that Isabel was near him, and
he wrote of her to Lucy from his hotel the next night:

I saw an account of the accident to George Minafer.  I'm sorry, though
the paper states that it was plainly his own fault.  I suppose it may
have been as a result of my attention falling upon the item that I
thought of his mother a great deal on the way here.  It seemed to me
that I had never seen her more distinctly or so constantly, but, as
you know, thinking of his mother is not very apt to make me admire
him!  Of course, however, he has my best wishes for his recovery.

He posted the letter, and by the morning's mail he received one from
Lucy written a few hours after his departure from home.  She enclosed
the item he had read on the train.

I thought you might not see it.

I have seen Miss Fanny and she has got him put into a room by himself.
Oh, poor Rides-Down-Everything I have been thinking so constantly of
his mother and it seemed to me that I have never seen her more
distinctly.  How lovely she was--and how she loved him!

If Lucy had not written this letter Eugene might not have done the odd
thing he did that day.  Nothing could have been more natural than that
both he and Lucy should have thought intently of Isabel after reading
the account of George's accident, but the fact that Lucy's letter had
crossed his own made Eugene begin to wonder if a phenomenon of
telepathy might not be in question, rather than a chance coincidence.
The reference to Isabel in the two letters was almost identical: he
and Lucy, it appeared, had been thinking of Isabel at the same time--
both said "constantly" thinking of her--and neither had ever "seen her
more distinctly."  He remembered these phrases in his own letter
accurately.

Reflection upon the circumstance stirred a queer spot in Eugene's
brain--he had one.  He was an adventurer; if he had lived in the
sixteenth century he would have sailed the unknown new seas, but
having been born in the latter part of the nineteenth, when geography
was a fairly well-settled matter, he had become an explorer in
mechanics.  But the fact that he was a "hard-headed business man" as
well as an adventurer did not keep him from having a queer spot in his
brain, because hard-headed business men are as susceptible to such
spots as adventurers are.  Some of them are secretly troubled when
they do not see the new moon over the lucky shoulder; some of them
have strange, secret incredulities--they do not believe in geology,
for instance; and some of them think they have had supernatural
experiences.  "Of course there was nothing in it--still it was queer!"
they say.

Two weeks after Isabel's death, Eugene had come to New York on urgent
business and found that the delayed arrival of a steamer gave him a
day with nothing to do.  His room at the hotel had become intolerable;
outdoors was intolerable; everything was intolerable.  It seemed to
him that he must see Isabel once more, hear her voice once more; that
he must find some way to her, or lose his mind.  Under this pressure
he had gone, with complete scepticism, to a "trance-medium" of whom be
had heard, wild accounts from the wife of a business acquaintance.  He
thought despairingly that at least such an excursion would be "trying
to do something!"  He remembered the woman's name; found it in the
telephone book, and made an appointment.

The experience had been grotesque, and he came away with an
encouraging message from his father, who had failed to identify
himself satisfactorily, but declared that everything was "on a higher
plane" in his present state of being, and that all life was
"continuous and progressive."  Mrs. Horner spoke of herself as a
"psychic"; but otherwise she seemed oddly unpretentious and matter-of-
fact; and Eugene had no doubt at all of her sincerity.  He was sure
that she was not an intentional fraud, and though he departed in a
state of annoyance with himself, he came to the conclusion that if any
credulity were played upon by Mrs. Horner's exhibitions, it was her
own.

Nevertheless, his queer spot having been stimulated to action by the
coincidence of the letters, he went to Mrs. Horner's after his
directors' meeting today.  He used the telephone booth in the
directors' room to make the appointment; and he laughed feebly at
himself, and wondered what the group of men in that mahogany apartment
would think if they knew what he was doing.  Mrs. Horner had changed
her address, but he found the new one, and somebody purporting to be a
niece of hers talked to him and made an appointment for a "sitting" at
five o'clock.  He was prompt, and the niece, a dull-faced fat girl
with a magazine under her arm, admitted him to Mrs. Horner's
apartment, which smelt of camphor; and showed him into a room with
gray painted walls, no rug on the floor and no furniture except a
table (with nothing on it) and two chairs: one a leather easy-chair
and the other a stiff little brute with a wooden seat.  There was one
window with the shade pulled down to the sill, but the sun was bright
outside, and the room had light enough.

Mrs. Horner appeared in the doorway, a wan and unenterprising looking
woman in brown, with thin hair artificially waved--but not recently--
and parted in the middle over a bluish forehead.  Her eyes were small
and seemed weak, but she recognized the visitor.

"Oh, you been here before," she said, in a thin voice, not unmusical.
"I recollect you.  Quite a time ago, wa'n't it?"

"Yes, quite a long time."

"I recollect because I recollect you was disappointed.  Anyway, you
was kind of cross."  She laughed faintly.

"I'm sorry if I seemed so," Eugene said.  "Do you happen to have found
out my name?"

She looked surprised and a little reproachful.  "Why, no. I never try
to find out people's name.  Why should I?  I don't claim anything for
the power; I only know I have it--and some ways it ain't always such a
blessing, neither, I can tell you!"

Eugene did not press an investigation of her meaning, but said
vaguely, "I suppose not.  Shall we--"

"All right," she assented, dropping into the leather chair, with her
back to the shaded window.  "You better set down, too, I reckon. I
hope you'll get something this time so you won't feel cross, but I
dunno. I can't never tell what they'll do.  Well--"

She sighed, closed her eyes, and was silent, while Eugene, seated in
the stiff chair across the table from her, watched her profile,
thought himself an idiot, and called himself that and other names.
And as the silence continued, and the impassive woman in the easy-
chair remained impassive, he began to wonder what had led him to be
such a fool.  It became clear to him that the similarity of his letter
and Lucy's needed no explanation involving telepathy, and was not even
an extraordinary coincidence.  What, then, had brought him back to
this absurd place and caused him to be watching this absurd woman
taking a nap in a chair?  In brief: What the devil did he mean by it?
He had not the slightest interest in Mrs. Horner's naps--or in her
teeth, which were being slightly revealed by the unconscious parting
of her lips, as her breathing became heavier.  If the vagaries of his
own mind had brought him into such a grotesquerie as this, into what
did the vagaries of other men's minds take them?  Confident that he
was ordinarily saner than most people, he perceived that since he was
capable of doing a thing like this, other men did even more idiotic
things, in secret.  And he had a fleeting vision of sober-looking
bankers and manufacturers and lawyers, well-dressed church-going men,
sound citizens--and all as queer as the deuce inside!

How long was he going to sit here presiding over this unknown woman's
slumbers?  It struck him that to make the picture complete he ought to
be shooing flies away from her with a palm-leaf fan.

Mrs. Horner's parted lips closed again abruptly, and became
compressed; her shoulders moved a little, then jerked repeatedly; her
small chest heaved; she gasped, and the compressed lips relaxed to a
slight contortion, then began to move, whispering and bringing forth
indistinguishable mutterings.

Suddenly she spoke in a loud, husky voice:

"Lopa is here!"

"Yes," Eugene said dryly.  "That's what you said last time.  I
remember 'Lopa.'  She's your 'control' I think you said."

"I'm Lopa," said the husky voice.  "I'm Lopa herself."

"You mean I'm to suppose you're not Mrs. Horner now?"

"Never was Mrs. Horner!" the voice declared, speaking undeniably from
Mrs. Horner's lips--but with such conviction that Eugene, in spite of
everything, began to feel himself in the presence of a third party,
who was none the less an individual, even though she might be another
edition of the apparently somnambulistic Mrs. Horner.  "Never was Mrs.
Horner or anybody but just Lopa.  Guide."

"You mean you're Mrs. Horner's guide?"  he asked.

"Your guide now," said the voice with emphasis, to which was
incongruously added a low laugh.  "You came here once before.  Lopa
remembers."

"Yes--so did Mrs. Horner."

Lopa overlooked his implication, and continued, quickly: "You build.
Build things that go.  You came here once and old gentleman on this
side, he spoke to you.  Same old gentleman here now.  He tell Lopa
he's your grandfather--no, he says 'father.'  He's your father."

"What's his appearance?"

"How?"

"What does he look like?"

"Very fine!  White beard, but not long beard.  He says someone else
wants to speak to you.  See here.  Lady.  Not his wife, though.  No.
Very fine lady!  Fine lady, fine lady!"

"Is it my sister?"  Eugene asked.

"Sister?  No.  She is shaking her head.  She has pretty brown hair.
She is fond of you.  She is someone who knows you very well but she is
not your sister.  She is very anxious to say something to you--very
anxious.  Very fond of you; very anxious to talk to you.  Very glad
you came here--oh, very, glad!"

"What is her name?"

"Name," the voice repeated, and seemed to ruminate.  "Name hard to
get--always very hard for Lopa. Name.  She wants to tell me her name
to tell you.  She wants you to understand names are hard to make.  She
says you must think of something that makes a sound."  Here the voice
seemed to put a question to an invisible presence and to receive an
answer.  "A little sound or a big sound?  She says it might be a
little sound or a big sound.  She says a ring--oh, Lopa knows!  She
means a bell!  That's it, a bell."

Eugene looked grave.  "Does she mean her name is Belle?"

"Not quite.  Her name is longer."

"Perhaps," he suggested, "she means that she was a belle."

"No.  She says she thinks you know what she means.  She says you must
think of a colour. What colour?"  Again Lopa addressed the unknown,
but this time seemed to wait for an answer.

"Perhaps she means the colour of her eyes," said Eugene.

"No. She says her colour is light--it's a light colour and you can see
through it."

"Amber?" he said, and was startled, for Mrs. Horner, with her eyes
still closed, clapped her hands, and the voice cried out in delight:

"Yes!  She says you know who she is from amber.  Amber!  Amber!
That's it!  She says you understand what her name is from a bell and
from amber.  She is laughing and waving a lace handkerchief at me
because she is pleased.  She says I have made you know who it is."

This was the strangest moment of Eugene's life, because, while it
lasted, he believed that Isabel Amberson, who was dead, had found
means to speak to him.  Though within ten minutes he doubted it, he
believed it then.

His elbows pressed hard upon the table, and, his head between his
hands, he leaned forward, staring at the commonplace figure in the
easy-chair.  "What does she wish to say to me?"

"She is happy because you know her.  No--she is troubled.  Oh--a great
trouble!  Something she wants to tell you.  She wants so much to tell
you.  She wants Lopa to tell you.  This is a great trouble.  She says
--oh, yes, she wants you to be--to be kind!  That's what she says.
That's it.  To be kind."

"Does she--"

"She wants you to be kind," said the voice.  "She nods when I tell you
this.  Yes; it must be right.  She is a very fine lady.  Very pretty.
She is so anxious for you to understand.  She hopes and hopes you
will.  Someone else wants to speak to you.  This is a man.  He says--"

"I don't want to speak to any one else," said Eugene quickly.  "I
want--"

"This man who has come says that he is a friend of yours.  He says--"

Eugene struck the table with his fist.  "I don't want to speak to any
one else, I tell you!" he cried passionately.  "If she is there I--"
He caught his breath sharply, checked himself, and sat in amazement.
Could his mind so easily accept so stupendous a thing as true?
Evidently it could!

Mrs. Horner spoke languidly in her own voice: "Did you get anything
satisfactory?" she asked.  "I certainly hope it wasn't like that other
time when you was cross because they couldn't get anything for you."

"No, no," he said hastily.  "This was different It was very
interesting."

He paid her, went to his hotel, and thence to his train for home.
Never did he so seem to move through a world of dream-stuff: for he
knew that, he was not more credulous than other men, and. if he could
believe what he had believed, though he had believed it for no longer
than a moment or two, what hold had he or any other human being on
reality?

His credulity vanished (or so he thought) with his recollection that
it was he, and not the alleged "Lopa," who had suggested the word
"amber."  Going over the mortifying, plain facts of his experience, he
found that Mrs. Horner, or the subdivision of Mrs. Horner known as
"Lopa," had told him to think of a bell and of a colour, and that
being furnished with these scientific data, he had leaped to the
conclusion that he spoke with Isabel Amberson!

For a moment he had believed that Isabel was there, believed that she
was close to him, entreating him--entreating him "to be kind."  But
with this recollection a strange agitation came upon him.  After all,
had she not spoken to him?  If his own unknown consciousness had told
the "psychic's" unknown consciousness how to make the picture of the
pretty brown-haired, brown-eyed lady, hadn't the picture been a true
one?  And hadn't the true Isabel--oh, indeed her very soul!--called to
him out of his own true memory of her?

And as the train roared through the darkened evening he looked out
beyond his window, and saw her as he had seen her on his journey, a
few days ago--an ethereal figure flying beside the train, but now it
seemed to him that she kept her face toward his window with an
infinite wistfulness.

"To be kind!"  If it had been Isabel, was that what she would have
said?  If she were anywhere, and could come to him through the
invisible wall, what would be the first thing she would say to him?

Ah, well enough, and perhaps bitterly enough, he knew the answer to
that question!  "To be kind"--to Georgie!

A red-cap at the station, when he arrived, leaped for his bag,
abandoning another which the Pullman porter had handed him.  "Yessuh,
Mist' Morgan.  Yessuh.  You' car waitin' front the station fer you,
Mist' Morgan, suh!"

And people in the crowd about the gates turned to stare, as he passed
through, whispering, "That's Morgan."

Outside, the neat chauffeur stood at the door of the touring-car like
a soldier in whip-cord.

"I'll not go home now, Harry," said Eugene, when he had got in.
"Drive to the City Hospital."

"Yes, sir," the man returned.  "Miss Lucy's 'there.  She said she
expected you'd come there before you went home"

"She did?"

"Yes, sir."

Eugene stared.  "I suppose Mr. Minafer must be pretty bad," he said.

"Yes, sir.  I understand he's liable to get well, though, sir."  He
moved his lever into high speed, and the car went through the heavy
traffic like some fast, faithful beast that knew its way about, and
knew its master's need of haste.  Eugene did not speak again until
they reached the hospital.

Fanny met him in the upper corridor, and took him to an open door.

He stopped on the threshold, startled; for, from the waxen face on the
pillow, almost it seemed the eyes of Isabel herself were looking at
him: never before had the resemblance between mother and son been so
strong--and Eugene knew that now he had once seen it thus startlingly,
he need divest himself of no bitterness "to be kind" to Georgie.

George was startled, too.  He lifted a white hand in a queer gesture,
half forbidding, half imploring, and then let his arm fall back upon
the coverlet.  "You must have thought my mother wanted you to come,"
he said, "so that I could ask you to--to forgive me."

But Lucy, who sat beside him, lifted ineffable eyes from him to her
father, and shook her head.  "No, just to take his hand--gently!"

She was radiant.

But for Eugene another radiance filled the room.  He knew that he had
been true at last to his true love, and that through him she had
brought her boy under shelter again.  Her eyes would look wistful no
more.

The End





End of Project Gutenberg's The Magnificent Ambersons, by Booth Tarkington





Produced by Distributed Proofreaders





THE AMBER WITCH

by

Mary Schweidler


The most interesting trial for witchcraft ever known. Printed from an
imperfect manuscript by her father Abraham Schweidler, the pastor of
Coserow, in the Island of Usedom.

Edited by W. Meinhold
Doctor of Theology, and Pastor, etc.

Translated from the German by Lady Duff Gordon.

Original publication date: 1846.




PREFACE


In laying before the public this deeply affecting and romantic trial,
which I have not without reason called on the title-page the most
interesting of all trials for witchcraft ever known, I will first give
some account of the history of the manuscript.

At Coserow, in the Island of Usedom, my former cure, the same which was
held by our worthy author some two hundred years ago, there existed
under a seat in the choir of the church a sort of niche, nearly on a
level with the floor. I had, indeed, often seen a heap of various
writings in this recess; but owing to my short sight, and the darkness
of the place, I had taken them for antiquated hymn-books, which were
lying about in great numbers. But one day, while I was teaching in the
church, I looked for a paper mark in the Catechism of one of the boys,
which I could not immediately find; and my old sexton, who was past
eighty (and who, although called Appelmann, was thoroughly unlike his
namesake in our story, being a very worthy, although a most ignorant
man), stooped down to the said niche, and took from it a folio volume
which I had never before observed, out of which he, without the slightest
hesitation, tore a strip of paper suited to my purpose, and reached it to
me. I immediately seized upon the book, and, after a few minutes' perusal,
I know not which was greater, my astonishment or my vexation at this
costly prize. The manuscript, which was bound in vellum, was not only
defective both at the beginning and at the end, but several leaves had
even been torn out here and there in the middle. I scolded the old man as
I had never done during the whole course of my life; but he excused
himself, saying that one of my predecessors had given him the manuscript
for waste paper, as it had lain about there ever since the memory of man,
and he had often been in want of paper to twist round the altar candles,
etc. The aged and half-blind pastor had mistaken the folio for old
parochial accounts which could be of no more use to any one.[1]

No sooner had I reached home than I fell to work upon my new acquisition,
and after reading a bit here and there with considerable trouble, my
interest was powerfully excited by the contents.

I soon felt the necessity of making myself better acquainted with the
nature and conduct of these witch trials, with the proceedings, nay,
even with the history of the whole period in which these events occur.
But the more I read of these extraordinary stories, the more was I
confounded; and neither the trivial Beeker (_die bezauberte Welt_, the
enchanted world), nor the more careful Horst (_Zauberbibliothek_, the
library of magic), to which, as well as to several other works on the
same subject, I had flown for information, could resolve my doubts, but
rather served to increase them.

Not alone is the demoniacal character, which pervades nearly all these
fearful stories, so deeply marked, as to fill the attentive reader with
feelings of alternate horror and dismay, but the eternal and unchangeable
laws of human feeling and action are often arrested in a manner so
violent and unforeseen, that the understanding is entirely baffled. For
instance, one of the original trials which a friend of mine, a lawyer,
discovered in our province, contains the account of a mother, who, after
she had suffered the torture, and received the holy Sacrament, and was
on the point of going to the stake, so utterly lost all maternal feeling,
that her conscience obliged her to accuse as a witch her only dearly-loved
daughter, a girl of fifteen, against whom no one had ever entertained a
suspicion, in order, as she said, to save her poor soul. The court, justly
amazed at an event which probably has never since been paralleled, caused
the state of the mother's mind to be examined both by clergymen and
physicians, whose original testimonies are still appended to the records,
and are all highly favourable to her soundness of mind. The unfortunate
daughter, whose name was Elizabeth Hegel, was actually executed on the
strength of her mother's accusation.[2]

The explanation commonly received at the present day, that these
phenomena were produced by means of animal magnetism, is utterly
insufficient. How, for instance, could this account for the deeply
demoniacal nature of old Lizzie Kolken as exhibited in the following
pages? It is utterly incomprehensible, and perfectly explains why the
old pastor, notwithstanding the horrible deceits practised on him in
the person of his daughter, retained as firm a faith in the truth of
witchcraft as in that of the Gospel.

During the earlier centuries of the middle ages little was known of
witchcraft. The crime of magic, when it did occur, was leniently
punished. For instance, the Council of Ancyra (314) ordained the whole
punishment of witches to consist in expulsion from the Christian
community. The Visigoths punished them with stripes, and Charlemagne,
by advice of his bishops, confined them in prison until such time as
they should sincerely repent.[3] It was not until very soon before
the Reformation, that Innocent VIII. lamented that the complaints of
universal Christendom against the evil practices of these women had
become so general and so loud, that the most vigorous measures must be
taken against them; and towards the end of the year 1489, he caused the
notorious Hammer for Witches (_Malleus Maleficarum_) to be published,
according to which proceedings were set on foot with the most fanatical
zeal, not only in Catholic, but, strange to say, even in Protestant
Christendom, which in other respects abhorred everything belonging
to Catholicism. Indeed, the Protestants far outdid the Catholics in
cruelty, until, among the latter, the noble-minded Jesuit, J. Spee, and
among the former, but not until seventy years later, the excellent
Thomasius, by degrees put a stop to these horrors.

After careful examination into the nature and characteristics of
witchcraft, I soon perceived that among all these strange and often
romantic stories, not one surpassed my 'amber witch' in lively interest;
and I determined to throw her adventures into the form of a romance.
Fortunately, however, I was soon convinced that her story was already in
itself the most interesting of all romances; and that I should do far
better to leave it in its original antiquated form, omitting whatever
would be uninteresting to modern readers, or so universally known as to
need no repetition. I have therefore attempted, not indeed to supply
what is missing at the beginning and end, but to restore those leaves
which have been torn out of the middle, imitating, as accurately as I
was able, the language and manner of the old biographer, in order that
the difference between the original narrative and my own interpolations
might not be too evident.

This I have done with much trouble, and after many ineffectual attempts;
but I refrain from pointing out the particular passages which I have
supplied, so as not to disturb the historical interest of the greater
part of my readers. For modern criticism, which has now attained to a
degree of acuteness never before equalled, such a confession would be
entirely superfluous, as critics will easily distinguish the passages
where Pastor Schweidler speaks from those written by Pastor Meinhold.

I am, nevertheless, bound to give the public some account of what I have
omitted, namely,--

1st. Such long prayers as were not very remarkable for Christian unction.

2d. Well-known stories out of the Thirty Years' War.

3d. Signs and wonders in the heavens, which were seen here and there,
and which are recorded by other Pomeranian writers of these fearful
times; for instance, by Micraelius.[4] But when these events formed part
of the tale itself, as, for instance, the cross on the Streckelberg, I,
of course, allowed them to stand.

4th. The specification of the whole income of the church at Coserow,
before and during the terrible times of the Thirty Years' War.

5th. The enumeration of the dwellings left standing, after the
devastations made by the enemy in every village throughout the parish.

6th. The names of the districts to which this or that member of the
congregation had emigrated.

7th. A ground plan and description of the old Manse.

I have likewise here and there ventured to make a few changes in the
language, as my author is not always consistent in the use of his words
or in his orthography. The latter I have, however, with very few
exceptions, retained.

And thus I lay before the gracious reader a work, glowing with the fire
of heaven, as well as with that of hell.

MEINHOLD.

[1] The original manuscript does indeed contain several accounts which
at first sight may have led to this mistake; besides, the handwriting
is extremely difficult to read, and in several places the paper is
discoloured and decayed.

[2] It is my intention to publish this trial also, as it possesses very
great psychological interest.

[3] Horst, _Zauberbibliothek_, vi. p. 231.

[4] _Vom Alten Pommerlande_ (of old Pomerania), book v.




INTRODUCTION


The origin of our biographer cannot be traced with any degree of
certainty, owing to the loss of the first part of his manuscript. It is,
however, pretty clear that he was not a Pomeranian, as he says he was in
Silesia in his youth, and mentions relations scattered far and wide, not
only at Hamburg and Cologne, but even at Antwerp; above all, his south
German language betrays a foreign origin, and he makes use of words which
are, I believe, peculiar to Swabia. He must, however, have been living for
a long time in Pomerania at the time he wrote, as he even more frequently
uses Low-German expressions, such as occur in contemporary native
Pomeranian writers.

Since he sprang from an ancient noble family, as he says on several
occasions, it is possible that some particulars relating to the
Schweidlers might be discovered in the family records of the seventeenth
century which would give a clew to his native country; but I have sought
for that name in all the sources of information accessible to me, in vain,
and am led to suspect that our author, like many of his contemporaries,
laid aside his nobility and changed his name when he took holy orders.

I will not, however, venture on any further conjectures; the manuscript,
of which six chapters are missing, begins with the words "Imperialists
plundered," and evidently the previous pages must have contained an
account of the breaking out of the Thirty Years' War in the island of
Usedom. It goes on as follows:--

"Coffers, chests, and closets were all plundered and broken to pieces,
and my surplice also was torn, so that I remained in great distress and
tribulation. But my poor little daughter they did not find, seeing that
I had hidden her in the stable, which was dark, without which I doubt
not they would have made my heart heavy indeed. The lewd dogs would even
have been rude to my old maid Ilse, a woman hard upon fifty, if an old
cornet had not forbidden them. Wherefore I gave thanks to my Maker when
the wild guests were gone, that I had first saved my child from their
clutches, although not one dust of flour, nor one grain of corn, one
morsel of meat even of a finger's length was left, and I knew not how I
should any longer support my own life, and my poor child's. _Item_, I
thanked God that I had likewise secured the _vasa sacra_, which I had
forthwith buried in the church in front of the altar, in presence of the
two churchwardens, Hinrich Seden and Claus Bulken, of Uekeritze,
commending them to the care of God. And now because, as I have already
said, I was suffering the pangs of hunger, I wrote to his lordship the
Sheriff Wittich V. Appelmann, at Pudgla, that for the love of God and
his holy Gospel he should send me that which his highness' grace
Philippus Julius had allowed me as _praestanda_ from the convent at
Pudgla, to wit, thirty bushels of barley and twenty-five marks of
silver, which, howbeit his lordship had always withheld from me hitherto
(for he was a very hard inhuman man, as he despised the holy Gospel and
the preaching of the Word, and openly, without shame, reviled the
servants of God, saying that they were useless feeders, and that Luther
had but half cleansed the pigstye of the Church--God mend it!). But he
answered me nothing, and I should have perished for want if Hinrich
Seden had not begged for me in the parish. May God reward the honest
fellow for it in eternity! Moreover, he was then growing old, and was
sorely plagued by his wicked wife Lizzie Kolken. Methought when I
married them that it would not turn out over well, seeing that she was
in common report of having long lived in unchastity with Wittich
Appelmann, who had ever been an arch-rogue, and especially an arrant
whoremaster, and such the Lord never blesses. This same Seden now
brought me five loaves, two sausages, and a goose, which old goodwife
Paal, at Loddin, had given him; also a flitch of bacon from the farmer
Jack Tewert. But he said I must shield him from his wife, who would have
had half for herself, and when he denied her she cursed him, and wished
him gout in his head, whereupon he straightway felt a pain in his right
cheek, and it was quite hard and heavy already. At such shocking news I
was affrighted, as became a good pastor, and asked whether peradventure
he believed that she stood in evil communication with Satan, and could
bewitch folks? But he said nothing, and shrugged his shoulders. So I
sent for old Lizzie to come to me, who was a tall, meagre woman of about
sixty, with squinting eyes, so that she could not look any one in the
face; likewise with quite red hair, and indeed her goodman had the same.
But though I diligently admonished her out of God's Word, she made no
answer until at last I said, 'Wilt thou unbewitch thy goodman (for I
saw from the window how that he was raving in the street like a madman),
or wilt thou that I should inform the magistrate of thy deeds?' Then,
indeed, she gave in, and promised that he should soon be better (and so
he was); moreover she begged that I would give her some bread and some
bacon, inasmuch as it was three days since she had a bit of anything to
put between her lips, saving always her tongue. So my daughter gave her
half a loaf, and a piece of bacon about two handsbreadths large; but she
did not think it enough, and muttered between her teeth; whereupon my
daughter said, 'If thou art not content, thou old witch, go thy ways and
help thy goodman; see how he has laid his head on Zabel's fence, and
stamps with his feet for pain.' Whereupon she went away, but still kept
muttering between her teeth, 'Yea, forsooth, I will help him and thee
too.'"




_The Seventh Chapter_


HOW THE IMPERIALISTS ROBBED ME OF ALL THAT WAS LEFT, AND LIKEWISE BROKE
INTO THE CHURCH AND STOLE THE _VASA SACRA_; ALSO WHAT MORE BEFELL US

After a few days, when we had eaten almost all our food, my last cow fell
down dead (the wolves had already devoured the others, as mentioned
above), not without a strong suspicion that Lizzie had a hand in it,
seeing that the poor beast had eaten heartily the day before; but I leave
that to a higher judge, seeing that I would not willingly calumniate any
one; and it may have been the will of God, whose wrath I have well
deserved. _Summa_, I was once more in great need, and my daughter Mary
pierced my heart with her sighs, when the cry was raised that another
troop of Imperialists was come to Uekeritze, and was marauding there more
cruelly than ever, and, moreover, had burnt half the village. Wherefore I
no longer thought myself safe in my cottage; and after I had commended
everything to the Lord in a fervent prayer, I went up with my daughter and
old Ilse into the Streckelberg, where I already had looked out for
ourselves a hole like a cavern, well grown over with brambles, against the
time when the troubles should drive us thither. We therefore took with us
all we had left to us for the support of our bodies, and fled into the
woods, sighing and weeping, whither we soon were followed by the old men,
and the women and children; these raised a great cry of hunger when they
saw my daughter sitting on a log and eating a bit of bread and meat, and
the little things came with their tiny hands stretched out and cried "Have
some too, have some too." Therefore, being justly moved by such great
distress, I hindered not my daughter from sharing all the bread and meat
that remained among the hungry children. But first I made them pray--"The
eyes of all wait upon thee"; upon which words I then spake comfortably to
the people, telling them that the Lord, who had now fed their little
children, would find means to fill their own bellies, and that they must
not be weary of trusting in him.

This comfort did not, however, last long; for after we had rested within
and around the cavern for about two hours, the bells in the village began
to ring so dolefully that it went nigh to break all our hearts, the more
as loud firing was heard between-whiles; _item_, the cries of men and the
barking of dogs resounded, so that we could easily guess that the enemy
was in the village. I had enough to do to keep the women quiet, that they
might not by their senseless lamentations betray our hiding-place to the
cruel enemy; and more still when it began to smell smoky, and presently
the bright flames gleamed through the trees. I therefore sent old Paasch
up to the top of the hill, that he might look around and see how matters
stood, but told him to take good care that they did not see him from the
village, seeing that the twilight had but just begun.

This he promised, and soon returned with the news that about twenty
horsemen had galloped out of the village towards the Damerow, but that
half the village was in flames. _Item_, he told us that by a wonderful
dispensation of God a great number of birds had appeared in the
juniper-bushes and elsewhere, and that if we could catch them they would be
excellent food for us. I therefore climbed up the hill myself, and having
found everything as he had said, and also perceived that the fire had, by
the help of God's mercy, abated in the village; _item_, that my cottage
was left standing, far beyond my merits and deserts; I came down again and
comforted the people, saying, "The Lord hath given us a sign, and he will
feed us, as he fed the people of Israel in the wilderness; for he has sent
us a fine flight of fieldfares across the barren sea, so that they whirr
out of every bush as ye come near it. Who will now run down into the
village, and cut off the mane and tail of my dead cow which lies out behind
on the common?" (for there was no horsehair in all the village, seeing that
the enemy had long since carried off or stabbed all the horses). But no one
would go, for fear was stronger even than hunger, till my old Ilse spoke,
and said, "I will go, for I fear nothing, when I walk in the ways of God;
only give me a good stick." When old Paasch had lent her his staff, she
began to sing, "God the Father be with us," and was soon out of sight among
the bushes. Meanwhile I exhorted the people to set to work directly, and to
cut little wands for springes, and to gather berries while the moon still
shone; there were a great quantity of mountain-ash and elder-bushes all
about the mountain. I myself and my daughter Mary stayed to guard the
little children, because it was not safe there from wolves. We therefore
made a blazing fire, sat ourselves around it, and heard the little folks
say the Ten Commandments, when there was a rustling and crackling behind
us, and my daughter jumped up and ran into the cavern, crying, "_Proh dolor
hostis_!" But it was only some of the able-bodied men who had stayed behind
in the village, and who now came to bring us word how things stood there. I
therefore called to her directly, "_Emergas amici_" whereupon she came
skipping joyously out, and sat down again by the fire, and forthwith my
warden Hinrich Seden related all that had happened, and how his life had
only been saved by means of his wife Lizzie Kolken; but that Jurgen Flatow,
Chim Burse, Claus Peer, and Chim Seideritz were killed, and the last named
of them left lying on the church steps. The wicked incendiaries had burned
down twelve sheds, and it was not their fault that the whole village was
not destroyed, but only in consequence of the wind not being in the quarter
that suited their purpose. Meanwhile they tolled the bells in mockery and
scorn, to see whether any one would come and quench the fire; and that when
he and the three other young fellows came forward they fired off their
muskets at them, but, by God's help, none of them were hit. Hereupon his
three comrades jumped over the paling and escaped; but him they caught, and
had already taken aim at him with their firelocks, when his wife Lizzie
Kolken came out of the church with another troop and beckoned to them to
leave him in peace. But they stabbed Lene Hebers as she lay in childbed,
speared the child, and flung it over Claus Peer's hedge among the nettles,
where it was yet lying when they came away. There was not a living soul
left in the village, and still less a morsel of bread, so that unless the
Lord took pity on their need they must all die miserably of hunger.

(Now who is to believe that such people can call themselves Christians!)

I next inquired, when he had done speaking (but with many sighs, as any
one may guess), after my cottage; but of that they knew nought save that
it was still standing. I thanked the Lord therefore with a quiet sigh;
and having asked old Seden what his wife had been doing in the church, I
thought I should have died for grief when I heard that the villains came
out of it with both the chalices and patens in their hands. I therefore
spoke very sharply to old Lizzie, who now came slinking through the
bushes; but she answered insolently that the strange soldiers had forced
her to open the church, as her goodman had crept behind the hedge, and
nobody else was there; that they had gone straight up to the altar, and
seeing that one of the stones was not well fitted (which, truly, was an
arch-lie), had begun to dig with their swords till they found the chalices
and patens; or somebody else might have betrayed the spot to them, so I
need not always to lay the blame on her, and rate her so hardly.

Meanwhile the old men and the women came with a good store of berries;
_item_, my old maid, with the cow's tail and mane, who brought word that
the whole house was turned upside down, the windows all broken, and the
books and writings trampled in the dirt in the midst of the street, and
the doors torn off their hinges. This, however, was a less sorrow to me
than the chalices; and I only bade the people make springes and snares,
in order next morning to begin our fowling, with the help of Almighty God.
I therefore scraped the rods myself until near midnight; and when we had
made ready a good quantity, I told old Seden to repeat the evening
blessing, which we all heard on our knees; after which I wound up with
a prayer, and then admonished the people to creep in under the bushes
to keep them from the cold (seeing that it was now about the end of
September, and the wind blew very fresh from the sea), the men apart, and
the women also apart by themselves. I myself went up with my daughter and
my maid into the cavern, where I had not slept long before I heard old
Seden moaning bitterly because, as he said, he was seized with the colic.
I therefore got up and gave him my place, and sat down again by the fire
to cut springes, till I fell asleep for half an hour; and then morning
broke, and by that time he had got better, and I woke the people to
morning prayer. This time old Paasch had to say it, but could not get
through with it properly, so that I had to help him. Whether he had forgot
it, or whether he was frightened, I cannot say. _Summa_. After we had all
prayed most devoutly, we presently set to work, wedging the springes into
the trees, and hanging berries all around them; while my daughter took
care of the children, and looked for blackberries for their breakfast. Now
we wedged the snares right across the wood along the road to Uekeritze;
and mark what a wondrous act of mercy befell from gracious God! As I
stepped into the road with the hatchet in my hand (it was Seden his
hatchet, which he had fetched out of the village early in the morning), I
caught sight of a loaf as long as my arm, which a raven was pecking, and
which doubtless one of the Imperial troopers had dropped out of his
knapsack the day before, for there were fresh hoofmarks in the sand by it.
So I secretly buttoned the breast of my coat over it, so that none should
perceive anything, although the aforesaid Paasch was close behind me;
_item_, all the rest followed at no great distance. Now, having set the
springes so very early, towards noon we found such a great number of birds
taken in them that Katy Berow, who went beside me while I took them out,
scarce could hold them all in her apron; and at the other end old Pagels
pulled nearly as many out of his doublet and coat pockets. My daughter
then sat down with the rest of the womankind to pluck the birds; and
as there was no salt (indeed it was long since most of us had tasted
any), she desired two men to go down to the sea, and to fetch a little
salt-water in an iron pot borrowed from Staffer Zuter; and so they did. In
this water we first dipped the birds, and then roasted them at a large
fire, while our mouths watered only at the sweet savour of them, seeing it
was so long since we had tasted any food.

And now when all was ready, and the people seated on the earth, I said,
"Behold how the Lord still feeds his people Israel in the wilderness with
fresh quails: if now he did yet more, and sent us a piece of manna bread
from heaven, what think ye? Would ye then ever weary of believing in him,
and not rather willingly endure all want, tribulation, hunger and thirst,
which he may hereafter lay upon you according to his gracious will?"
Whereupon they all answered and said, "Yea, surely!" _Ego_: "Will you then
promise me this in truth?" And they said again, "Yea, that will we!" Then
with tears I drew forth the loaf from my breast, held it on high, and
cried, "Behold, then, thou poor believing little flock, how sweet a manna
loaf your faithful Redeemer hath sent ye through me!" Whereupon they all
wept, sobbed and groaned; and the little children again came running up
and held out their hands, crying, "See, bread, bread!" But as I myself
could not pray for heaviness of soul, I bade Paasch his little girl say
the _Gratias_ the while my Mary cut up the loaf and gave to each his
share. And now we all joyfully began to eat our meat from God in the
wilderness.

Meanwhile I had to tell in what manner I had found the blessed manna
bread, wherein I neglected not again to exhort them to lay to heart this
great sign and wonder, how that God in his mercy had done to them as of
old to the prophet Elijah, to whom a raven brought bread in his great need
in the wilderness; as likewise this bread had been given to me by means of
a raven, which showed it to me, when otherwise I might have passed it by
in my heaviness without ever seeing it.

When we were satisfied with food, I said the thanksgiving from Luke xii.
24, where the Lord saith, "Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor
reap; which neither have storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them:
how much more are ye better than the fowls?" But our sins stank before
the Lord. For old Lizzie, as I afterwards heard, would not eat her
birds because she thought them unsavoury, but threw them among the
juniper-bushes; whereupon the wrath of the Lord was kindled against us as
of old against the people of Israel, and at night we found but seven birds
in the snares, and next morning but two. Neither did any raven come again
to give us bread. Wherefore I rebuked old Lizzie, and admonished the
people to take upon themselves willingly the righteous chastisement of the
Most High God, to pray without ceasing, to return to their desolate
dwellings, and to see whether the all-merciful God would peradventure give
them more on the sea. That I also would call upon him with prayer night
and day, remaining for a time in the cavern with my daughter and the maid
to watch the springes, and see whether his wrath might be turned from us.
That they should meanwhile put my manse to rights to the best of their
power, seeing that the cold was become very irksome to me. This they
promised me, and departed with many sighs. What a little flock! I counted
but twenty-five souls where there used to be above eighty: all the rest
had been slain by hunger, pestilence, or the sword. I then abode a while
alone and sorrowing in the cave, praying to God, and sent my daughter with
the maid into the village to see how things stood at the manse; _item_, to
gather together the books and papers, and also to bring me word whether
Hinze the carpenter, whom I had straightway sent back to the village, had
knocked together some coffins for the poor corpses, so that I might bury
them next day. I then went to look at the springes, but found only one
single little bird, whereby I saw that the wrath of God had not yet passed
away. Howbeit, I found a fine blackberry bush, from which I gathered
nearly a pint of berries, and put them, together with the bird, in Staffer
Zuter his pot, which the honest fellow had left with us for a while, and
set them on the fire for supper against my child and the maid should
return. It was not long before they came through the coppice and told me
of the fearful devastation which Satan had made in the village and manse
by the permission of all-righteous God. My child had gathered together a
few books, which she brought with her, above all, a _Virgilius_ and a
Greek Bible. And after she had told me that the carpenter would not have
done till next day, and we had satisfied the cravings of hunger, I made
her read to me again, for the greater strengthening of my faith, the
_locus_ about the blessed raven from the Greek of Luke, at the twelfth
chapter; also, the beautiful _locus parallelus_, Matt. vi. After which the
maid said the evening blessing, and we all went into the cave to rest for
the night. When I awoke next morning, just as the blessed sun rose out the
sea and peeped over the mountain, I heard my poor hungry child already
standing outside the cave reciting the beautiful verses about the joys of
paradise which St. Augustine wrote and I had taught her. She sobbed for
grief as she spoke the words:--

  Uno pane vivunt cives utriusque patriae;
  Avidi et semper pleni, quod habent desiderant.
  Non sacietas fastidit, neque fames cruciat;
  Inhiantes semper edunt, et edentes inhiant.
  Flos perpetuus rosarum ver agit perpetuum;
  Candent lilia, rubescit crocus, sudat balsamum,
  Virent prata, vernant sata, rivi mellis influunt;
  Pigmentorum spirat odor liquor et aromatum,
  Pendent poma floridorum non lapsura nemorum.
  Non alternat luna vices, sol vel cursus syderum.
  Agnus est faelicis urbis lumen inocciduum.

At these words my own heart was melted; and when she ceased from speaking,
I asked, "What art thou doing, my child?" Whereupon she answered, "Father,
I am eating." Thereat my tears now indeed began to flow, and I praised her
for feeding her soul, as she had no meat for her body. I had not, however,
spoken long, before she cried to me to come and look at the great wonder
that had risen out of the sea, and already appeared over the cave. For
behold a cloud, in shape just like a cross, came over us, and let great
heavy drops, as big or bigger than large peas, fall on our heads, after
which it sank behind the coppice. I presently arose and ran up the
mountain with my daughter to look after it. It floated on towards the
Achterwater, where it spread itself out into a long blue streak, whereon
the sun shone so brightly that it seemed like a golden bridge on which, as
my child said, the blessed angels danced. I fell on my knees with her and
thanked the Lord that our cross had passed away from us; but, alas! our
cross was yet to come, as will be told hereafter.




_The Eighth Chapter_


HOW OUR NEED WAXED SORER AND SORER, AND HOW I SENT OLD ILSE WITH ANOTHER
LETTER TO PUDGLA, AND HOW HEAVY A MISFORTUNE THIS BROUGHT UPON ME

Next day, when I had buried the poor corpses amid the lamentations of the
whole village (by the same token that they were all buried under where the
lime-tree overhangs the wall), I heard with many sighs that neither the
sea nor the Achterwater would yield anything. It was now ten days since
the poor people had caught a single fish. I therefore went out into the
field, musing how the wrath of the just God might be turned from us,
seeing that the cruel winter was now at hand, and neither corn, apples,
fish nor flesh to be found in the village, nor even throughout all the
parish. There was indeed plenty of game in the forests of Coserow and
Uekeritze; but the old forest ranger, Zabel Nehring, had died last year of
the plague, and there was no new one in his place. Nor was there a musket
nor a grain of powder to be found in all the parish; the enemy had robbed
and broken everything: we were therefore forced, day after day, to see
how the stags and the roes, the hares and the wild boars, _et cet_., ran
past us, when we would so gladly have had them in our bellies, but had no
means of getting at them: for they were too cunning to let themselves be
caught in pit-falls. Nevertheless, Claus Peer succeeded in trapping a roe,
and gave me a piece of it, for which may God reward him. _Item_, of
domestic cattle there was not a head left; neither was there a dog, nor
a cat, which the people had not either eaten in their extreme hunger,
or knocked on the head or drowned long since. Albeit old farmer Paasch
still owned two cows; _item_, an old man in Uekeritze was said to have
one little pig:--this was all. Thus, then, nearly all the people lived on
blackberries and other wild fruits: the which also soon grew to be scarce,
as may easily be guessed. Besides all this, a boy of fourteen was missing
(old Labahn his son) and was never more heard of, so that I shrewdly think
that the wolves devoured him.

And now let any Christian judge by his own heart in what sorrow and
heaviness I took my staff in my hand, seeing that my child fell away like
a shadow from pinching hunger; although I myself, being old, did not, by
the help of God's mercy, find any great failing in my strength. While I
thus went continually weeping before the Lord, on the way to Uekeritze, I
fell in with an old beggar with his wallet, sitting on a stone, and eating
a piece of God's rare gift, to wit, a bit of bread. Then truly did my poor
mouth so fill with water that I was forced to bow my head and let it run
upon the earth before I could ask, "Who art thou? and whence comest thou?
seeing that thou hast bread." Whereupon he answered that he was a poor man
of Bannemin, from whom the enemy had taken all; and as he had heard that
the Lieper Winkel had long been in peace, he had travelled thither to beg.
I straightway answered him, "Oh, poor beggar-man, spare to me, a sorrowful
servant of Christ, who is poorer even than thyself, one little slice of
bread for his wretched child; for thou must know that I am the pastor of
this village, and that my daughter is dying of hunger. I beseech thee by
the living God not to let me depart without taking pity on me, as pity
also hath been shown to thee!" But the beggar-man would give me none,
saying that he himself had a wife and four children, who were likewise
staggering towards death's door under the bitter pangs of hunger; that the
famine was sorer far in Bannemin than here, where we still had berries;
whether I had not heard that but a few days ago a woman (he told me her
name, but horror made me forget it) had there killed her own child, and
devoured it from hunger? That he could not therefore help me, and I might
go to the Lieper Winkel myself.

I was horror-stricken at his tale, as is easy to guess, for we in our own
trouble had not yet heard of it, there being little or no traffic between
one village and another; and thinking on Jerusalem, and sheer despairing
because the Lord had visited us, as of old that ungodly city, although we
had not betrayed or crucified him, I almost forgot all my necessities, and
took my staff in my hand to depart. But I had not gone more than a few
yards when the beggar called me to stop, and when I turned myself round he
came towards me with a good hunch of bread which he had taken out of his
wallet, and said, "There! but pray for me also, so that I may reach my
home; for if on the road they smell that I have bread, my own brother
would strike me dead, I believe." This I promised with joy, and instantly
turned back to take to my child the gift hidden in my pocket. And behold,
when I came to the road which leads to Loddin, I could scarce trust my
eyes (before I had overlooked it in my distress) when I saw my glebe,
which could produce seven bushels, ploughed, sown, and in stalk; the
blessed crop of rye had already shot lustily out of the earth a finger's
length in height. I could not choose but think that the Evil One had
deceived me with a false show, yet, however hard I rubbed my eyes, rye it
was and rye it remained. And seeing that old Paasch his piece of land
which joined mine was in like manner sown, and that the blades had shot up
to the same height, I soon guessed that the good fellow had done this
deed, seeing that all the other land lay waste. Wherefore, I readily
forgave him for not knowing the morning prayer; and thanking the Lord for
so much love from my flock, and earnestly beseeching him to grant me
strength and faith to bear with them steadfastly and patiently all the
troubles and adversities which it might please him henceforward to lay
upon us, according to his divine pleasure, I ran rather than walked back
into the village to old Paasch his farm, where I found him just about to
kill his cow, which he was slaughtering from grim hunger. "God bless
thee," said I, "worthy friend, for sowing my field; how shall I reward
thee?" But the old man answered, "Let that be, and do you pray for us";
and when I gladly promised this and asked him how he had kept his corn
safe from the savage enemy, he told me that he had hidden it secretly in
the caves of the Streckelberg, but that now all his store was used up.
Meanwhile he cut a fine large piece of meat from the top of the loin, and
said, "There is something for you, and when that is gone you can come
again for more." As I was then about to go with many thanks, his little
Mary, a child nearly seven years old, the same who had said the _Gratias_
on the Streckelberg, seized me by the hand and wanted to go to school to
my daughter; for since my _Custos_, as above mentioned, departed this life
in the plague, she had to teach the few little ones there were in the
village; this, however, had long been abandoned. I could not, therefore,
deny her, although I feared that my child would share her bread with her,
seeing that she dearly loved the little maid, who was her godchild; and so
indeed it happened; for when the child saw me take out the bread, she
shrieked for joy, and began to scramble up on the bench. Thus she also got
a piece of the slice, our maid got another, and my child put the third
piece into her own mouth, as I wished for none, but said that I felt no
signs of hunger and would wait until the meat was boiled, the which I now
threw upon the bench. It was a goodly sight to see the joy which my poor
child felt when I then also told her about the rye. She fell upon my neck,
wept, sobbed, then took the little one up in her arms, danced about the
room with her, and recited as she was wont, all manner of Latin _versus_,
which she knew by heart. Then she would prepare a right good supper for
us, as a little salt was still left in the bottom of a barrel of meat
which the Imperialists had broken up. I let her take her own way, and
having scraped some soot from the chimney and mixed it with water, I tore
a blank leaf out of _Virgilius_, and wrote to the _Pastor Liepensis_, his
reverence Abraham Tiburtius, praying that for God his sake he would take
our necessities to heart, and would exhort his parishioners to save us
from dying of grim hunger, and charitably to spare to us some meat and
drink, according as the all-merciful God had still left some to them,
seeing that a beggar had told me that they had long been in peace from
the terrible enemy. I knew not, however, wherewithal to seal the letter,
until I found in the church a little wax still sticking to a wooden
altar-candlestick, which the Imperialists had not thought it worth their
while to steal, for they had only taken the brass ones. I sent three
fellows in a boat with Hinrich Seden, the churchwarden, with this letter
to Liepe.

First, however, I asked my old Ilse, who was born in Liepe, whether she
would not rather return home, seeing how matters stood, and that I, for
the present at least, could not give her a stiver of her wages (mark that
she had already saved up a small sum, seeing that she had lived in my
service above twenty years, but the soldiers had taken it all). Howbeit, I
could nowise persuade her to this, but she wept bitterly, and besought me
only to let her stay with the good damsel whom she had rocked in her
cradle. She would cheerfully hunger with us if it needs must be, so that
she were not turned away. Whereupon I yielded to her, and the others went
alone.

Meanwhile the broth was ready, but scarce had we said the _Gratias_, and
were about to begin our meal, when all the children of the village, seven
in number, came to the door, and wanted bread, as they had heard we had
some from my daughter her little godchild. Her heart again melted, and
notwithstanding I besought her to harden herself against them, she
comforted me with the message to Liepe, and poured out for each child a
portion of broth on a wooden platter (for these also had been despised by
the enemy), and put into their little hands a bit of meat, so that all our
store was eaten up at once. We were, therefore, left fasting next morning,
till towards mid-day, when the whole village gathered together in a meadow
on the banks of the river to see the boat return. But, God be merciful to
us, we had cherished vain hopes! six loaves and a sheep, _item_, a quarter
of apples, was all they had brought. His reverence Abraham Tiburtius wrote
to me that after the cry of their wealth had spread throughout the island,
so many beggars had flocked thither that it was impossible to be just to
all, seeing that they themselves did not know how it might fare with them
in these heavy troublous times. Meanwhile he would see whether he could
raise any more. I therefore with many sighs had the small pittance carried
to the manse, and though two loaves were, as _Pastor Liepensis_ said in
his letter, for me alone, I gave them up to be shared among all alike,
whereat all were content save Seden his squint-eyed wife, who would have
had somewhat _extra_ on the score of her husband's journey, which,
however, as may be easily guessed, she did not get; wherefore she again
muttered certain words between her teeth as she went away, which, however,
no one understood. Truly she was an ill woman, and not to be moved by the
word of God.

Any one may judge for himself that such a store could not last long; and
as all my parishioners felt an ardent longing after spiritual food, and
as I and the churchwardens could only get together about sixteen
farthings in the whole parish, which was not enough to buy bread and
wine, the thought struck me once more to inform my lord the Sheriff of
our need. With how heavy a heart I did this may be easily guessed, but
necessity knows no law. I therefore tore the last blank leaf out of
_Virgilius_, and begged that, for the sake of the Holy Trinity, his
lordship would mercifully consider mine own distress and that of the
whole parish, and bestow a little money to enable me to administer the
holy sacrament for the comfort of afflicted souls; also, if possible,
to buy a cup, were it only of tin, since the enemy had plundered us of
ours, and I should otherwise be forced to consecrate the sacred elements
in an earthen vessel. _Item_, I besought him to have pity on our bodily
wants, and at last to send me the first-fruits which had stood over for
so many years. That I did not want it for myself alone, but would
willingly share it with my parishioners, until such time as God in his
mercy should give us more.

Here a huge blot fell upon my paper; for the windows being boarded up, the
room was dark, and but little light came through two small panes of glass
which I had broken out of the church, and stuck in between the boards;
this, perhaps, was the reason why I did not see better. However, as I
could not anywhere get another piece of paper, I let it pass, and ordered
the maid, whom I sent with the letter to Pudgla, to excuse the same to his
lordship the Sheriff, the which she promised to do, seeing that I could
not add a word more on the paper, as it was written all over. I then
sealed it as I had done before.

But the poor creature came back trembling for fear and bitterly weeping,
and said that his lordship had kicked her out of the castle-gate, and had
threatened to set her in the stocks if she ever came before him again.
"Did the parson think that he was as free with his money as I seemed to be
with my ink? I surely had water enough to celebrate the Lord's supper
wherewithal. For if the Son of God had once changed the water into wine,
he could surely do the like again. If I had no cup, I might water my flock
out of a bucket, as he did himself"; with many more blasphemies, such as
he afterwards wrote to me, and by which, as may easily be guessed, I was
filled with horror. Touching the first-fruits, as she told me he said
nothing at all. In such great spiritual and bodily need the blessed Sunday
came round, when nearly all the congregation would have come to the Lord's
table, but could not. I therefore spoke on the words of St. Augustine,
_crede et manducasti_, and represented that the blame was not mine, and
truly told what had happened to my poor maid at Pudgla, passing over much
in silence, and only praying God to awaken the hearts of magistrates for
our good. Peradventure I may have spoken more harshly than I meant. I know
not, only that I spoke that which was in my heart. At the end I made all
the congregation stay on their knees for nearly an hour, and call upon the
Lord for his holy sacrament; _item_, for the relief of their bodily wants,
as had been done every Sunday, and at all the daily prayers I had been
used to read ever since the heavy time of the plague. Last of all I led
the glorious hymn, "When in greatest need we be," which was no sooner
finished than my new churchwarden, Claus Bulk of Uekeritze, who had
formerly been a groom with his lordship, and whom he had now put into a
farm, ran off to Pudgla, and told him all that had taken place in the
church. Whereat his lordship was greatly angered, insomuch that he
summoned the whole parish, which still numbered about 150 souls, without
counting the children, and dictated _ad protocollum_ whatsoever they could
remember of the sermon, seeing that he meant to inform his princely grace
the Duke of Pomerania of the blasphemous lies which I had vomited against
him, and which must sorely offend every Christian heart. _Item_, what an
avaricious wretch I must be to be always wanting something of him, and to
be daily, so to say, pestering him in these hard times with my filthy
letters, when he had not enough to eat himself. This he said should break
the parson his neck, since his princely grace did all that he asked of
him, and that no one in the parish need give me anything more, but only
let me go my ways. He would soon take care that they should have quite a
different sort of parson from what I was.

(Now I would like to see the man who could make up his mind to come into
the midst of such wretchedness at all.)

This news was brought to me in the selfsame night, and gave me a great
fright, as I now saw that I should not have a gracious master in his
lordship, but should all the time of my miserable life, even if I could
anyhow support it, find in him an ungracious lord. But I soon felt some
comfort, when Chim Krueger from Uekeritze, who brought me the news, took a
little bit of his sucking-pig out of his pocket and gave it to me.
Meanwhile old Paasch came in and said the same, and likewise brought me a
piece of his old cow; _item_, my other warden, Hinrich Seden, with a slice
of bread, and a fish which he had taken in his net, all saying they wished
for no better priest than me, and that I was only to pray to the merciful
Lord to bestow more upon them, whereupon I should want for nothing.
Meanwhile I must be quiet and not betray them. All this I promised, and my
daughter Mary took the blessed gifts of God off the table and carried them
into the inner chamber. But, alas! next morning, when she would have put
the meat into the caldron, it was all gone. I know not who prepared this
new sorrow for me, but much believe it was Hinrich Seden his wicked wife,
seeing he can never hold his tongue, and most likely told her everything.
Moreover, Paasch his little daughter saw that she had meat in her pot next
day; _item_, that she had quarrelled with her husband, and had flung the
fish-board at him, whereon some fresh fish-scales were sticking: she had,
however, presently recollected herself when she saw the child. (Shame on
thee, thou old witch, it is true enough, I dare say!) Hereupon nought was
left us but to feed our poor souls with the word of God. But even our
souls were so cast down that they could receive nought, any more than our
bellies; my poor child, especially, from day to day grew paler, greyer,
and yellower, and always threw up all her food, seeing she ate it without
salt or bread. I had long wondered that the bread from Liepe was not yet
done, but that every day at dinner I still had a morsel. I had often
asked, "Whence comes all this blessed bread? I believe, after all, you
save the whole for me, and take none for yourself or the maid." But they
both then lifted to their mouths a piece of fir-tree bark, which they had
cut to look like bread, and laid by their plates; and as the room was
dark, I did not find out their deceit, but thought that they, too, were
eating bread. But at last the maid told me of it, so that I should allow
it no longer, as my daughter would not listen to her. It is not hard to
guess how my heart was wrung when I saw my poor child lying on her bed of
moss struggling with grim hunger. But things were to go yet harder with
me, for the Lord in his anger would break me in pieces like a potter's
vessel. For behold, on the evening of the same day, old Paasch came
running to me, complaining that all his and my corn in the field had been
pulled up and miserably destroyed, and that it must have been done by
Satan himself, as there was not a trace either of oxen or horses. At these
words my poor child screamed aloud and fainted. I would have run to help
her, but could not reach her bed, and fell on the ground myself for bitter
grief. The loud cries of the maid and old Paasch soon brought us both to
our senses. But I could not rise from the ground alone, for the Lord had
bruised all my bones. I besought them, therefore, when they would have
helped me, to leave me where I was; and when they would not, I cried out
that I must again fall on the ground to pray, and begged them all save my
daughter to depart out of the room. This they did, but the prayer would
not come. I fell into heavy doubting and despair, and murmured against the
Lord that he plagued me more sorely than Lazarus or Job. Wretch that I
was, I cried, "Thou didst leave to Lazarus at least the crumbs and the
pitiful dogs, but to me thou hast left nothing, and I myself am less in
thy sight even than a dog; and Job thou didst not afflict until thou hadst
mercifully taken away his children, but to me thou hast left my poor
little daughter, that her torments may increase mine own a thousandfold.
Behold, then, I can only pray that thou wilt take her from the earth, so
that my grey head may gladly follow her to the grave! Woe is me, ruthless
father, what have I done? I have eaten bread, and suffered my child to
hunger! Oh, Lord Jesu, who hast said, 'What man is there of you, whom if
his son ask bread will he give him a stone?' Behold I am that man!--behold
I am that ruthless father! I have eaten bread and have given wood to my
child! Punish me; I will bear it and lie still. Oh, righteous Jesu, I have
eaten bread, and have given wood to my child!" As I did not speak, but
rather shrieked these words, wringing my hands the while, my child fell
upon my neck, sobbing, and chid me for murmuring against the Lord, seeing
that even she, a weak and frail woman, had never doubted his mercy, so
that with shame and repentance I presently came to myself, and humbled
myself before the Lord for such heavy sin.

Meanwhile the maid had run into the village with loud cries to see if she
could get anything for her poor young mistress, but the people had already
eaten their noontide meal, and most of them were gone to sea to seek their
blessed supper; thus she could find nothing, seeing that old wife Seden,
who alone had any victuals, would give her none, although she prayed her
by Jesu's wounds.

She was telling us this when we heard a noise in the chamber, and
presently Lizzie her worthy old husband, who had got in at the window by
stealth, brought us a pot of good broth, which he had taken off the fire
whilst his wife was gone for a moment into the garden. He well knew that
his wife would make him pay for it, but that he did not mind, so the young
mistress would but drink it, and she would find it salted and all. He
would make haste out of the window again, and see that he got home before
his wife, that she might not find out where he had been. But my daughter
would not touch the broth, which sorely vexed him, so that he set it down
on the ground cursing, and ran out of the room. It was not long before his
squint-eyed wife came in at the front door, and when she saw the pot still
steaming on the ground, she cried out, "Thou thief, thou cursed thieving
carcass!" and would have flown at the face of my maid. But I threatened
her, and told her all that had happened, and that if she would not believe
me she might go into the chamber and look out of the window, whence she
might still, belike, see her good man running home. This she did, and
presently we heard her calling after him, "Wait, and the devil shall tear
off thine arms; only wait till thou art home again!" After this she came
back, and, muttering something, took the pot off the ground. I begged her,
for the love of God, to spare a little to my child; but she mocked at me
and said, "You can preach to her, as you did to me," and walked towards
the door with the pot. My child indeed besought me to let her go, but I
could not help calling after her, "For the love of God, one good sup, or
my poor child must give up the ghost: wilt thou that at the day of
judgment God should have mercy on thee, so show mercy this day to me and
mine!" But she scoffed at us again, and cried out, "Let her cook herself
some bacon," and went out at the door. I then sent the maid after her with
the hour-glass which stood before me on the table, to offer it to her for
a good sup out of the pot; but the maid brought it back, saying that she
would not have it. Alas, how I wept and sobbed, as my poor dying child
with a loud sigh buried her head again in the moss! Yet the merciful God
was more gracious to me than my unbelief had deserved; for when the
hard-hearted woman bestowed a little broth on her neighbour, old Paasch,
he presently brought it to my child, having heard from the maid how it
stood with her; and I believe that this broth, under God, alone saved her
life, for she raised her head as soon as she had supped it, and was able
to go about the house again in an hour. May God reward the good fellow for
it! Thus I had some joy in the midst of my trouble. But while I sat by the
fireside in the evening musing on my fate, my grief again broke forth, and
I made up my mind to leave my house, and even my cure, and to wander
through the wide world with my daughter as a beggar. God knows I had cause
enough for it; for now that all my hopes were dashed, seeing that my field
was quite ruined, and that the Sheriff had become my bitter enemy;
moreover, that it was five years since I had had a wedding, _item_, but
two christenings during the past year, I saw my own and my daughter's
death staring me in the face, and no prospect of better times at hand. Our
want was increased by the great fears of the congregation; for although
by God's wondrous mercy they had already begun to take good draughts of
fish both in the sea and the Achterwater, and many of the people in the
other villages had already gotten bread, salt, oatmeal, etc., from the
Polters and Quatzners, of Anklam and Lassan in exchange for their fish;
nevertheless, they brought me nothing, fearing lest it might be told at
Pudgla, and make his lordship ungracious to them. I therefore beckoned my
daughter to me, and told her what was in my thoughts, saying that God in
his mercy could any day bestow on me another cure if I was found worthy in
his sight of such a favour, seeing that these terrible days of pestilence
and war had called away many of the servants of his word, and that I had
not fled like a hireling from his flock, but on the contrary, till _datum_
shared sorrow and death with it. Whether she were able to walk five or ten
miles a day; for that then we would beg our way to Hamburg, to my departed
wife her step-brother, Martin Behring, who is a great merchant in that
city.

This at first sounded strange to her, seeing that she had very seldom been
out of our parish, and that her departed mother and her little brother lay
in our churchyard. She asked, "Who was to make up their graves and plant
flowers on them? _Item_, as the Lord had given her a smooth face, what I
should do if in these wild and cruel times she were attacked on the
highways by marauding soldiers or other villains, seeing that I was a weak
old man and unable to defend her; _item_, wherewithal should we shield
ourselves from the frost, as the winter was setting in and the enemy had
robbed us of our clothes, so that we had scarce enough left to cover our
nakedness?" All this I had not considered, and was forced to own that she
was right; so after much discussion we determined to leave it this night
to the Lord, and to do whatever he should put into our hearts next
morning. At any rate, we saw that we could in nowise keep the old maid any
longer; I therefore called her out of the kitchen, and told her she had
better go early next morning to Liepe, as there still was food there,
whereas here she must starve, seeing that perhaps we ourselves might leave
the parish and the country to-morrow. I thanked her for the love and faith
she had shown us, and begged her at last, amid the loud sobs of my poor
daughter, to depart forthwith privately, and not to make our hearts still
heavier by leave-taking; that old Paasch was going a-fishing to-night on
the Achterwater, as he had told me, and no doubt would readily set her on
shore at Gruessow, where she had friends, and could eat her fill even
to-day. She could not say a word for weeping, but when she saw that I was
really in earnest she went out of the room. Not long after we heard the
house-door shut to, whereupon my daughter moaned, "She is gone already,"
and ran straight to the window to look after her. "Yes," cried she, as she
saw her through the little panes, "she is really gone"; and she wrung her
hands and would not be comforted. At last, however, she was quieted when I
spoke of the maid Hagar, whom Abraham had likewise cast off, but on whom
the Lord had nevertheless shown mercy in the wilderness; and hereupon we
commended ourselves to the Lord, and stretched ourselves on our couches of
moss.




_The Ninth Chapter_


HOW THE OLD MAID-SERVANT HUMBLED ME BY HER FAITH, AND THE LORD YET BLESSED
ME HIS UNWORTHY SERVANT

"Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy
name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases; who
redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies" (Psalm ciii.).

Alas! wretched man that I am, how shall I understand all the benefits and
mercies which the Lord bestowed upon me the very next day? I now wept for
joy, as of late I had done for sorrow; and my child danced about the room
like a young roe, and would not go to bed, but only cry and dance, and
between-whiles repeat the 103rd Psalm, then dance and cry again until
morning broke. But as she was still very weak, I rebuked her presumption,
seeing that this was tempting the Lord; and now mark what had happened.

After we had both woke in the morning with deep sighs, and called upon the
Lord to manifest to us in our hearts what we should do, we still could not
make up our minds. I therefore called to my child, if she felt strong
enough, to leave her bed and light a fire in the stove herself, as our
maid was gone; that we would then consider the matter further. She
accordingly got up, but came back in an instant with cries of joy, because
the maid had privately stolen back into the house, and had already made
a fire. Hereupon I sent for her to my bedside, and wondered at her
disobedience, and asked what she now wanted here but to torment me and
my daughter still more, and why she did not go yesterday with old Paasch?
But she lamented and wept so sore that she scarce could speak, and I
understood only thus much--that she had eaten with us, and would likewise
starve with us, for that she could never part from her young mistress,
whom she had known from her cradle. Such faithful love moved me so, that I
said almost with tears, "But hast thou not heard that my daughter and I
have determined to wander as beggars about the country; where, then, wilt
thou remain?" To this she answered that neither would she stay behind,
seeing it was more fitting for her to beg than for us; but that she could
not yet see why I wished to go out into the wide world; whether I had
already forgotten that I had said in my induction sermon that I would
abide with my flock in affliction and in death? That I should stay yet
a little longer where I was, and send her to Liepe, as she hoped to get
something worth having for us there from her friends and others. These
words, especially those about my induction sermon, fell heavy on my
conscience, and I was ashamed of my want of faith, since not my daughter
only, but yet more even my maid, had stronger faith than I, who
nevertheless professed to be a servant of God's word. I believed that the
Lord--to keep me, poor fearful hireling, and at the same time to humble
me--had awakened the spirit of this poor maid-servant to prove me, as the
maid in the palace of the high-priest had also proved the fearful St.
Peter. Wherefore I turned my face towards the wall, like Hezekiah, and
humbled myself before the Lord, which scarce had I done before my child
ran into the room again, with a cry of joy; for behold, some Christian
heart had stolen quietly into the house in the night, and had laid in the
chamber two loaves, a good piece of meat, a bag of oatmeal, _item_, a bag
of salt, holding near a pint. Any one may guess what shouts of joy we all
raised. Neither was I ashamed to confess my sins before my maid; and in
our common morning prayer, which we said on our knees, I made fresh vows
to the Lord of obedience and faith. Thus we had that morning a grand
breakfast, and sent something to old Paasch besides; _item_, my daughter
again sent for all the little children to come, and kindly fed them with
our store before they said their tasks; and when in my heart of little
faith I sighed thereat, although I said nought, she smiled, and said,
"Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of itself."

The Holy Ghost spoke by her, as I cannot but believe, nor thou either,
beloved reader: for mark what happened. In the afternoon she (I mean my
child) went up the Streckelberg to seek for blackberries, as old Paasch
had told her, through the maid, that a few bushes were still left. The
maid was chopping wood in the yard, to which end she had borrowed old
Paasch his axe, for the Imperialist thieves had thrown away mine, so that
it could nowhere be found; and I myself was pacing up and down in the
room, meditating my sermon; when my child, with her apron full, came
quickly in at the door, quite red and with beaming eyes, and scarce able
for joy to say more than "Father, father, what have I got?" "Well," quoth
I, "what hast thou got, my child?" Whereupon she opened her apron, and I
scarce trusted my eyes when I saw, instead of the blackberries which she
had gone to seek, two shining pieces of amber, each nearly as big as a
man's head, not to mention the small pieces, some of which were as large
as my hand, and that, God knows, is no small one. "Child of my heart,"
cried I, "how camest thou by this blessing from God?" As soon as she could
fetch her breath, she told me as follows:--

That while she was seeking for blackberries in a dell near the shore she
saw somewhat glistening in the sun, and on coming near she found this
wondrous godsend, seeing that the wind had blown the sand away from off a
black vein of amber. That she straightway had broken off these pieces with
a stick, and that there was plenty more to be got, seeing that it rattled
about under the stick when she thrust it into the sand, neither could she
force it farther than, at most, a foot deep into the ground; _item,_ she
told me that she had covered the place all over again with sand, and swept
it smooth with her apron, so as to leave no traces.

Moreover, that no stranger was at all likely to go thither, seeing that no
blackberries grew very near, and she had gone to the spot, moved by
curiosity and a wish to look upon the sea, rather than from any need; but
that she could easily find the place again herself, inasmuch as she had
marked it with three little stones. What was our first act after the
all-merciful God had rescued us out of such misery, nay, even, as it
seemed, endowed us with great riches, any one may guess. When we at length
got up off our knees, my child would straightway have run to tell the maid
our joyful news. But I forbade her, seeing that we could not be sure that
the maid might not tell it again to her friends, albeit in all other
things she was a faithful woman and feared God; but that if she did that,
the Sheriff would be sure to hear of it, and to seize upon our treasure
for his princely highness the Duke--that is to say, for himself; and that
nought would be left to us but the sight thereof, and our want would begin
all over again; that we therefore would say, when folks asked about the
luck that had befallen us, that my deceased brother, who was a councillor
at Rotterdam, had left us a good lump of money; and, indeed, it was true
that I had inherited near two hundred florins from him a year ago, which,
however, the soldiery (as mentioned above) cruelly robbed me of; _item,_
that I would go to Wolgast myself next day and sell the little bits as
best I might, saying that thou hadst picked them up by the seaside; thou
mayest tell the maid the same, if thou wilt, but show the larger pieces to
no one, and I will send them to thy uncle at Hamburg to be turned into
money for us; perchance I may be able to sell one of them at Wolgast, if I
find occasion, so as to buy clothes enough for the winter for thee and for
me, wherefore thou, too, mayst go with me. We will take the few farthings
which the congregation have brought together to pay the ferry, and thou
canst order the maid to wait for us till eventide at the water-side to
carry home the victuals. She agreed to all this, but said we had better
first break off some more amber, so that we might get a good round sum for
it at Hamburg; and I thought so too, wherefore we stopped at home next
day, seeing that we did not want for food, and that my child, as well as
myself, both wished to refresh ourselves a little before we set out on our
journey; _item_, we likewise bethought us that old Master Rothoog, of
Loddin, who is a cabinetmaker, might knock together a little box for us to
put the amber in, wherefore I sent the maid to him in the afternoon.
Meanwhile we ourselves went up the Streckelberg, where I cut a young
fir-tree with my pocket-knife, which I had saved from the enemy, and
shaped it like a spade, so that I might be better able to dig deep
therewith. First, however, we looked about us well on the mountain, and,
seeing nobody, my daughter walked on to the place, which she straightway
found again. Great God! what a mass of amber was there! The vein was hard
upon twenty feet long, as near as I could feel, and the depth of it I
could not sound. Nevertheless, save four good-sized pieces, none, however,
so big as those of yesterday, we this day only broke out little splinters,
such as the apothecaries bruise for incense. After we had most carefully
covered and smoothed over the place, a great mishap was very near
befalling us; for we met Witthan her little girl, who was seeking
blackberries, and she asked what my daughter carried in her apron, who
straightway grew red, and stammered so that our secret would have been
betrayed if I had not presently said, "What is that to thee? She has got
fir-apples for firing," which the child believed. Wherefore we resolved in
future only to go up the mountain at night by moonlight, and we went home
and got there before the maid, and hid our treasure in the bedstead, so
that she should not see it.




_The Tenth Chapter_


HOW WE JOURNEYED TO WOLGAST, AND MADE GOOD BARTER THERE

Two days after, so says my daughter, but old Ilse thinks it was three
(and I myself know not which is true), we at last went to the town,
seeing that Master Rothoog had not got the box ready before. My daughter
covered it over with a piece of my departed wife her wedding-gown, which
the Imperialists had indeed torn to pieces, but as they had left it
lying outside, the wind had blown it into the orchard, where we found
it. It was very shabby before, otherwise I doubt not they would have
carried it off with them. On account of the box, we took old Ilse with
us, who had to carry it, and, as amber is very light ware, she readily
believed that the box held nothing but eatables. At daybreak, then, we
took our staves in our hands and set out with God. Near Zitze, a hare
ran across the road before us, which they say bodes no good. Well-a-day!
When we came near Bannemin I asked a fellow if it was true that here a
mother had slaughtered her own child from hunger, as I had heard. He
said it was, and that the old woman's name was Zisse; but that God had
been wroth at such a horrid deed, and she had got no good by it, seeing
that she vomited so much upon eating it that she forthwith gave up the
ghost. On the whole, he thought things were already going rather better
with the parish, as Almighty God had richly blessed them with fish, both
out of the sea and the Achterwater. Nevertheless a great number of
people had died of hunger here also. He told us that their vicar,
his reverence Johannes Lampius, had had his house burnt down by the
Imperialists, and was lying in a hovel near the church. I sent him
my greeting, desiring that he would soon come to visit me (which the
fellow promised he would take care to deliver to him), for the reverend
Johannes is a pious and learned man, and has also composed sundry Latin
_Chronosticha_ on these wretched times, in _metrum heroicum_, which, I
must say, please me greatly. When we had crossed the ferry we went in at
Sehms his house, on the Castle Green, who keeps an ale-house; he told us
that the pestilence had not yet altogether ceased in the town; whereat I
was much afraid, more especially as he described to us so many other
horrors and miseries of these fearful times, both here and in other
places, _e.g._ of the great famine in the island of Ruegen, where a
number of people had grown as black as Moors from hunger; a wondrous
thing if it be true, and one might almost gather therefrom how the first
blackamoors came about. But be that as it may. _Summa_. When Master
Sehms had told us all the news he had heard, and we had thus learnt,
to our great comfort, that the Lord had not visited us only in these
times of heavy need, I called him aside into a chamber and asked him
whether I could not here find means to get money for a piece of amber
which my daughter had found by the sea. At first he said "No"; but then
recollecting, he began, "Stay, let me see, at Nicolas Graeke's, the inn
at the castle, there are two great Dutch merchants--Dieterich von
Pehnen and Jacob Kiekebusch--who are come to buy pitch and boards,
_item_ timber for ships and beams; perchance they may like to cheapen
your amber too; but you had better go up to the castle yourself, for I
do not know for certain whether they still are there." This I did,
although I had not yet eaten anything in the man's house, seeing that I
wanted to know first what sort of bargain I might make, and to save the
farthings belonging to the church until then. So I went into the
castle-yard. Gracious God! what a desert had even his Princely Highness'
house become within a short time! The Danes had ruined the stables and
hunting-lodge, Anno 1628; _item_, destroyed several rooms in the castle;
and in the _locamentum_ of his Princely Highness Duke Philippus, where,
Anno 22, he so graciously entertained me and my child, as will be told
further on, now dwelt the innkeeper Nicolas Graeke; and all the fair
tapestries, whereon was represented the pilgrimage to Jerusalem of his
Princely Highness Bogislaus X, were torn down and the walls left grey
and bare. At this sight my heart was sorely grieved; but I presently
inquired for the merchants, who sat at the table drinking their parting
cup, with their travelling equipments already lying by them, seeing that
they were just going to set out on their way to Stettin; straightway one
of them jumped up from his liquor--a little fellow with a right noble
paunch and a black plaster on his nose--and asked me what I would of
them? I took him aside into a window, and told him I had some fine
amber, if he had a mind to buy it of me, which he straightway agreed to
do. And when he had whispered somewhat into the ear of his fellow, he
began to look very pleasant, and reached me the pitcher before we went
to my inn. I drank to him right heartily, seeing that (as I have already
said) I was still fasting, so that I felt my very heart warmed by it in
an instant. (Gracious God, what can go beyond a good draught of wine
taken within measure!) After this we went to my inn, and told the maid
to carry the box on one side into a small chamber. I had scarce opened
it and taken away the gown, when the man (whose name was Dieterich von
Pehnen, as he had told me by the way) held up both hands for joy, and
said he had never seen such wealth of amber, and how had I come by it? I
answered that my child had found it on the sea-shore; whereat he
wondered greatly that we had so much amber here, and offered me three
hundred florins for the whole box. I was quite beside myself for joy at
such an offer, but took care not to let him see it, and bargained with
him till I got five hundred florins, and I was to go with him to the
castle and take the money forthwith. Hereupon I ordered mine host to
make ready at once a mug of beer and a good dinner for my child, and
went back to the castle with the man and the maid, who carried the box,
begging him, in order to avoid common talk, to say nothing of my good
fortune to mine host, nor, indeed, to any one else in the town, and to
count out the money to me privately, seeing that I could not be sure
that the thieves might not lay in wait for me on the road home if they
heard of it, and this the man did; for he whispered something into the
ear of his fellow, who straightway opened his leathern surcoat, _item_
his doublet and hose, and unbuckled from his paunch a well-filled purse,
which he gave to him. _Summa_. Before long I had my riches in my pocket,
and, moreover, the man begged me to write to him at Amsterdam whenever I
found any more amber, the which I promised to do. But the worthy fellow
(as I have since heard) died of the plague at Stettin, together with his
companion--truly I wish it had happened otherwise. Shortly after I was
very near getting into great trouble; for, as I had an extreme longing
to fall on my knees, so that I could not wait until such time as I
should have got back to my inn, I went up three or four steps of the
castle stairs and entered into a small chamber, where I humbled myself
before the Lord. But the host, Nicolas Graeke, followed me, thinking I
was a thief, and would have stopped me, so that I knew not how to excuse
myself by saying that I had been made drunken by the wine which the
strange merchants had given to me (for he had seen what a good pull I
had made at it), seeing I had not broken my fast that morning, and that
I was looking for a chamber wherein I might sleep a while, which lie he
believed (if, in truth, it were a lie, for I was really drunken, though
not with wine, but with love and gratitude to my Maker), and accordingly
he let me go.

But I must now tell my story of his Princely Highness, as I promised
above. Anno 22, as I chanced to walk with my daughter, who was then a
child of about twelve years old, in the castle-garden at Wolgast, and was
showing her the beautiful flowers that grew there, it chanced that as we
came round from behind some bushes we espied my gracious lord the Duke
Philippus Julius, with his Princely Highness the Duke Bogislaff, who lay
here on a visit, standing on a mount and conversing, wherefore we were
about to return. But as my gracious lords presently walked on toward the
drawbridge, we went to look at the mount where they had stood; of a sudden
my little girl shouted loudly for joy, seeing that she found on the earth
a costly signet-ring, which one of their Princely Highnesses doubtless
had dropped. I therefore said, "Come and we will follow our gracious lords
with all speed, and thou shall say to them in Latin, '_Serenissimi
principes, quis vestrum hunc annulum deperdidit_?' (for, as I have
mentioned above, I had instructed her in the Latin tongue ever since her
seventh year); and if one of them says '_Ego_,' give to him the ring.
_Item_.--Should he ask thee in Latin to whom thou belongest, be not
abashed, and say '_Ego sum filia pastoris Coserowiensis_'; for thou wilt
thus find favour in the eyes of their Princely Highnesses, for they are
both gracious gentlemen, more especially the taller one, who is our
gracious ruler, Philippus Julius himself." This she promised to do; but as
she trembled sorely as she went, I encouraged her yet more and promised
her a new gown if she did it, seeing that even as a little child she would
have given a great deal for fine clothes. As soon, then, as we were come
into the courtyard, I stood by the statue of his Princely Highness Ernest
Ludewig, and whispered her to run boldly after them, as their Princely
Highnesses were only a few steps before us, and had already turned toward
the great entrance. This she did, but of a sudden she stood still, and
would have turned back, because she was frightened by the spurs of their
Princely Highnesses, as she afterwards told me, seeing that they rattled
and jingled very loudly.

But my gracious lady the Duchess Agnes saw her from the open window
wherein she lay, and called to his Princely Highness, "My lord, there is a
little maiden behind you, who, it seems, would speak with you," whereupon
his Princely Highness straightway turned him round, smiling pleasantly, so
that my little maid presently took courage, and, holding up the ring,
spoke in Latin as I had told her. Hereat both the princes wondered beyond
measure, and after my gracious Duke Philippus had felt his finger, he
answered, "_Dulcissima puella, ego perdidi_"; whereupon she gave it to
him. Then he patted her cheek, and again asked, "_Sed quaenam es, et unde
venis?_" whereupon she boldly gave her answer, and at the same time
pointed with her finger to where I stood by the statue; whereupon his
Princely Highness motioned me to draw near. My gracious lady saw all that
passed from the window, but all at once she left it. She, however,
came back to it again before I had time even humbly to draw near to my
gracious lord, and beckoned to my child, and held a cake out of the window
for her. On my telling her, she ran up to the window, but her Princely
Highness could not reach so low nor she so high above her as to take it,
wherefore my gracious lady commanded her to come up into the castle, and
as she looked anxiously round after me, motioned me also, as did my
gracious lord himself, who presently took the timid little maid by the
hand and went up with his Princely Highness the Duke Bogislaff. My
gracious lady came to meet us at the door, and caressed and embraced my
little daughter, so that she soon grew quite bold and ate the cake. When
my gracious lord had asked me my name, _item_, why I had in so singular a
manner taught my daughter the Latin tongue, I answered that I had heard
much from a cousin at Cologne of Maria Schurman, and as I had observed a
very excellent _ingenium_ in my child, and also had time enough in my
lonely cure, I did not hesitate to take her in hand, and teach her from
her youth up, seeing I had no boy alive. Hereat their Princely Highnesses
marvelled greatly, and put some more questions to her in Latin, which she
answered without any prompting from me. Whereupon my gracious lord Duke
Philippus said in the vulgar tongue, "When thou art grown up and art one
day to be married, tell it to me, and thou shall then have another ring
from me, and whatsoever else pertains to a bride, for thou hast this day
done me good service, seeing that this ring is a precious jewel to me, as
I had it from my wife." Hereupon I whispered her to kiss his Princely
Highness' hand for such a promise, and so she did.

(But alas! most gracious God, it is one thing to promise, and quite
another to hold. Where is his Princely Highness at this time? Wherefore
let me ever keep in mind that "thou only art faithful, and that which thou
hast promised thou wilt surely hold." Psalm xxxiii. 4. Amen.)

_Item_. When his Princely Highness had also inquired concerning myself
and my cure, and heard that I was of ancient and noble family, and my
_salarium_ very small, he called from the window to his chancellor,
D. Rungius, who stood without, looking at the sun-dial, and told him that
I was to have an addition from the convent at Pudgla, _item_ from the
crown-lands at Ernsthoff, as I mentioned above; but, more's the pity, I
never have received the same, although the _instrumentum donationis_ was
sent me soon after by his Princely Highness' chancellor.

Then cakes were brought for me also, _item_, a glass of foreign wine in a
glass painted with armorial bearings, whereupon I humbly took my leave,
together with my daughter.

However, to come back to my bargain, anybody may guess what joy my child
felt when I showed her the fair ducats and florins I had gotten for the
amber. To the maid, however, we said that we had inherited such riches
from my brother in Holland; and after we had again given thanks to the
Lord on our knees, and eaten our dinner, we bought in a great store of
bread, salt, meat, and stock-fish: _item_, of clothes, seeing that I
provided what was needful for us three throughout the winter from the
cloth-merchant. Moreover, for my daughter I bought a hair-net and a
scarlet silk bodice, with a black apron and white petticoat, _item_, a
fine pair of earrings, as she begged hard for them; and as soon as I had
ordered the needful from the cordwainer we set out on our way homewards,
as it began to grow very dark; but we could not carry nearly all we had
bought. Wherefore we were forced to get a peasant from Bannemin to help
us, who likewise was come into the town; and as I found out from him
that the fellow who gave me the piece of bread was a poor cotter called
Pantermehl, who dwelt in the village by the roadside, I shoved a couple of
loaves in at his house-door without his knowing it, and we went on our way
by the bright moonlight, so that by the help of God we got home about ten
o'clock at night. I likewise gave a loaf to the other fellow, though truly
he deserved it not, seeing that he would go with us no further than to
Zitze. But I let him go, for I, too, had not deserved that the Lord should
so greatly bless me.




_The Eleventh Chapter_


HOW I FED ALL THE CONGREGATION:
_ITEM_, HOW I JOURNEYED TO THE HORSE FAIR AT GUeTZKOW, AND WHAT BEFELL
ME THERE

Next morning my daughter cut up the blessed bread, and sent to every one
in the village a good large piece. But as we saw that our store would
soon run low, we sent the maid with a truck, which we bought of Adam
Lempken, to Wolgast to buy more bread, which she did. _Item_, I gave
notice throughout the parish that on Sunday next I should administer the
blessed sacrament, and in the meantime I bought up all the large fish
that the people of the village had caught. And when the blessed Sunday
was come I first heard the confessions of the whole parish, and after
that I preached a sermon on Matt. xv. 32--"I have compassion on the
multitude ... for they have nothing to eat." I first applied the same to
spiritual food only, and there arose a great sighing from both the men
and the women, when, at the end, I pointed to the altar, whereon stood
the blessed food for the soul, and repeated the words, "I have compassion
on the multitude ... for they have nothing to eat." (N.B.--The pewter
cup I had borrowed at Wolgast, and bought there a little earthenware
plate for a paten till such time as Master Bloom should have made ready
the silver cup and paten I had bespoke.) Thereupon as soon as I had
consecrated and administered the blessed sacrament, _item_, led the
closing hymn, and every one had silently prayed his "Our Father" before
going out of church, I came out of the confessional again, and motioned
the people to stay yet a while, as the blessed Saviour would feed not
only their souls, but their bodies also, seeing that he still had the
same compassion on his people as of old on the people at the Sea of
Galilee, as they should presently see. Then I went into the tower and
fetched out two baskets which the maid had bought at Wolgast, and which I
had hidden there in good time; set them down in front of the altar, and
took off the napkins with which they were covered, whereupon a very loud
shout arose, inasmuch as they saw one filled with broiled fish and the
other with bread, which we had put into them privately. Hereupon, like
our Saviour, I gave thanks and brake it, and gave it to the churchwarden
Hinrich Seden, that he might distribute it among the men, and to my
daughter for the women. Whereupon I made application of the text, "I have
compassion on the multitude ... for they have nothing to eat," to the
food of the body also; and walking up and down in the church, amid great
outcries from all, I exhorted them alway to trust in God's mercy, to pray
without ceasing, to work diligently, and to consent to no sin. What was
left I made them gather up for their children and the old people who were
left at home.

After church, when I had scarce put off my surplice, Hinrich Seden his
squint-eyed wife came and impudently asked for more for her husband's
journey to Liepe; neither had she had anything for herself, seeing she had
not come to church. This angered me sore, and I said to her, "Why wast thou
not at church? Nevertheless, if thou hadst come humbly to me thou shouldst
have gotten somewhat even now, but as thou comest impudently, I will give
thee nought: think on what thou didst to me and to my child." But she stood
at the door and glowered impudently about the room till my daughter took
her by the arm and led her out, saying, "Hear'st thou, thou shalt come back
humbly before thou gett'st anything, but when thou comest thus, thou also
shalt have thy share, for we will no longer reckon with thee an eye for an
eye, and a tooth for a tooth; let the Lord do that if such be his will, but
we will gladly forgive thee!" Hereupon she at last went out at the door,
muttering to herself as she was wont; but she spat several times in the
street, as we saw from the window.

Soon after I made up my mind to take into my service a lad, near upon
twenty years of age, called Claus Neels, seeing that his father, old
Neels of Loddin, begged hard that I would do so, besides which the lad
pleased me well in manners and otherwise. Then, as we had a good harvest
this year, I resolved to buy me a couple of horses forthwith, and to sow
my field again; for although it was now late in the year, I thought that
the most merciful God might bless the crop with increase if it seemed
good to him.

Neither did I feel much care with respect to food for them, inasmuch as
there was a great plenty of hay in the neighbourhood, seeing that all the
cattle had been killed or driven away (as related above). I therefore made
up my mind to go in God's name with my new ploughman to Guetzkow, whither a
great many Mecklenburg horses were brought to the fair, seeing that times
were not yet so bad there as with us. Meanwhile I went a few more times up
the Streckelberg with my daughter at night, and by moonlight, but found
very little; so that we began to think our luck had come to an end, when,
on the third night, we broke off some pieces of amber bigger even than
those the two Dutchmen had bought. These I resolved to send to my wife's
brother, Martin Behring, at Hamburg, seeing that the schipper Wulff of
Wolgast intends, as I am told, to sail thither this very autumn, with
pitch and wood for shipbuilding. I accordingly packed it all up in a
strong chest, which I carried with me to Wolgast when I started with my
man on my journey to Guetzkow. Of this journey I will only relate thus
much, that there were plenty of horses and very few buyers in the market.
Wherefore I bought a pair of fine black horses for twenty florins apiece;
_item_, a cart for five florins; _item_, twenty-five bushels of rye, which
also came from Mecklenburg, at one florin the bushel, whereas it is hardly
to be had now at Wolgast for love or money, and costs three florins or
more the bushel. I might therefore have made a good bargain in rye at
Guetzkow if it had become my office, and had I not, moreover, been afraid
lest the robbers, who swarm in these evil times, should take away my corn,
and ill-use and perchance murder me into the bargain, as has happened to
sundry people already. For, at this time especially, such robberies were
carried on after a strange and frightful fashion on Strellin heath at
Guetzkow; but by God's help it all came to light just as I journeyed
thither with my man-servant to the fair, and I will here tell how it
happened. Some months before a man had been broken on the wheel at
Guetzkow, because, being tempted of Satan, he murdered a travelling
workman. The man, however, straightway began to walk after so fearful a
fashion, that in the evening and night-season he sprang down from the
wheel in his gallows' dress whenever a cart passed by the gallows, which
stands hard by the road to Wolgast, and jumped up behind the people, who
in horror and dismay flogged on their horses, and thereby made a great
rattling on the log embankment which leads beside the gallows into a
little wood called the Kraulin. And it was a strange thing that on the
same night the travellers were almost always robbed or murdered on
Strellin heath. Hereupon the magistrates had the man taken down from the
wheel and buried under the gallows, in hopes of laying his ghost. But it
went on just as before, sitting at night snow-white on the wheel, so that
none durst any longer travel the road to Wolgast. Until at last it
happened that, at the time of the above-named fair, young Ruediger von
Nienkerken of Mellenthin, in Usedom, who had been studying at Wittenberg
and elsewhere, and was now on his way home, came this road by night with
his carriage. Just before, at the inn, I myself had tried to persuade him
to stop the night at Guetzkow on account of the ghost, and to go on his
journey with me next morning, but he would not. Now as soon as this young
lord drove along the road, he also espied the apparition sitting on the
wheel, and scarcely had he passed the gallows when the ghost jumped down
and ran after him. The driver was horribly afraid, and lashed on the
horses, as everybody else had done before, and they, taking fright,
galloped away over the log-road with a marvellous clatter. Meanwhile,
however, the young nobleman saw by the light of the moon how that the
apparition flattened a ball of horse-dung whereon it trod, and straightway
felt sure within himself that it was no ghost. Whereupon he called to the
driver to stop; and as the man would not hearken to him, he sprang out of
the carriage, drew his rapier, and hastened to attack the ghost. When the
ghost saw this he would have turned and fled, but the young nobleman gave
him such a blow on the head with his fist that he fell upon the ground
with a loud wailing. _Summa_: the young lord, having called back his
driver, dragged the ghost into the town again, where he turned out to be a
shoemaker called Schwelm.

I also, on seeing such a great crowd, ran thither with many others to
look at the fellow. He trembled like an aspen leaf; and when he was
roughly told to make a clean breast, whereby he might peradventure save
his own life, if it appeared that he had murdered no one, he confessed
that he had got his wife to make him a gallows' dress, which he had
put on, and had sat on the wheel before the dead man, when, from the
darkness and the distance, no one could see that the two were sitting
there together; and this he did more especially when he knew that a
cart was going from the town to Wolgast. When the cart came by, and he
jumped down and ran after it, all the people were so affrighted that
they no longer kept their eyes upon the gallows, but only on him,
flogged the horses, and galloped with much noise and clatter over the
log embankment. This was heard by his fellows in Strellin and Dammbecke
(two villages which are about three-fourths on the way), who held
themselves ready to unyoke the horses and to plunder the travellers
when they came up with them. That after the dead man was buried he
could play the ghost more easily still, etc. That this was the whole
truth, and that he himself had never in his life robbed, still less
murdered, any one; wherefore he begged to be forgiven: that all the
robberies and murders which had happened had been done by his fellows
alone. Ah, thou cunning knave! But I heard afterwards that he and his
fellows were broken on the wheel together, as was but fair.

And now to come back to my journey. The young nobleman abode that night
with me at the inn, and early next morning we both set forth; and as we
had grown into good-fellowship together, I got into his coach with him,
as he offered me, so as to talk by the way, and my Claus drove behind
us. I soon found that he was a well-bred, honest, and learned gentleman,
seeing that he despised the wild student life, and was glad that he had
now done with their scandalous drinking-bouts: moreover, he talked his
Latin readily. I had therefore much pleasure with him in the coach.
However, at Wolgast the rope of the ferry-boat broke, so that we were
carried down the stream to Zeuzin, and at length we only got ashore with
great trouble. Meanwhile it grew late, and we did not get into Coserow
till nine, when I asked the young lord to abide the night with me, which
he agreed to do. We found my child sitting in the chimney-corner, making
a petticoat for her little god-daughter out of her own old clothes. She
was greatly frighted, and changed colour when she saw the young lord
come in with me, and heard that he was to lie there that night, seeing
that as yet we had no more beds than we had bought for our own need from
old Zabel Nehring the forest ranger his widow, at Uekeritze. Wherefore
she took me aside: What was to be done? My bed was in an ill plight, her
little god-child having lain on it that morning; and she could nowise
put the young nobleman into hers, although she would willingly creep in
by the maid herself. And when I asked her why not? she blushed scarlet
and began to cry, and would not show herself again the whole evening, so
that the maid had to see to everything, even to the putting white sheets
on my child's bed for the young lord, as she would not do it herself. I
only tell this to show how maidens are. For next morning she came into
the room with her red silk bodice, and the net on her hair, and the
apron; _summa_, dressed in all the things I had bought her at Wolgast,
so that the young lord was amazed, and talked much with her over the
morning meal. Whereupon he took his leave, and desired me to visit him
at his castle.

[Illustration: The Gallows Ghost]




_The Twelfth Chapter_


WHAT FURTHER JOY AND SORROW BEFELL US:
_ITEM_, HOW WITTICH APPELMANN RODE TO DAMEROW TO THE WOLFHUNT, AND WHAT HE
PROPOSED TO MY DAUGHTER

The Lord blessed my parish wonderfully this winter, inasmuch as not only a
great quantity of fish were caught and sold in all the villages, but in
Coserow they even killed four seals: _item_, the great storm of the 12th
of December threw a goodly quantity of amber on the shore, so that many
found amber, although no very large pieces, and they began to buy cows and
sheep from Liepe and other places, as I myself also bought two cows;
_item_, my grain which I had sown, half on my own field and half on old
Paasch's, sprang up bravely and gladly, as the Lord had till _datum_
bestowed on us an open winter; but so soon as it had shot up a finger's
length, we found it one morning again torn up and ruined, and this time
also by the devil's doings, since now, as before, not the smallest trace
of oxen or of horses was to be seen in the field. May the righteous God,
however, reward it, as indeed he already has done. Amen.

Meanwhile, however, something uncommon happened. For one morning, as I
have heard, when Lord Wittich saw out of the window that the daughter of
his fisherman, a child of sixteen, whom he had diligently pursued, went
into the coppice to gather dry sticks, he went thither too; wherefore, I
will not say, but every one may guess for himself. When he had gone some
way along the convent mound, and was come to the first bridge, where the
mountain-ash stands, he saw two wolves coming towards him; and as he had
no weapon with him, save a staff, he climbed up into a tree; whereupon the
wolves trotted round it, blinked at him with their eyes, licked their
lips, and at last jumped with their fore-paws up against the tree,
snapping at him; he then saw that one was a he-wolf, a great fat brute
with only one eye. Hereupon in his fright he began to scream, and the
long-suffering of God was again shown to him, without, however, making him
wiser; for the maiden, who had crept behind a juniper-bush in the field
when she saw the Sheriff coming, ran back again to the castle and called
together a number of people, who came and drove away the wolves, and
rescued his lordship. He then ordered a great wolf-hunt to be held next
day in the convent wood, and he who brought the one-eyed monster, dead or
alive, was to have a barrel of beer for his pains. Still they could not
catch him, albeit they that day took four wolves in their nets, and killed
them. He therefore straightway ordered a wolf-hunt to be held in my
parish. But when the fellow came to toll the bell for a wolf-hunt, he did
not stop a while, as is the wont for wolf-hunts, but loudly rang the bell
on, _sine mora_, so that all the folk thought a fire had broken out, and
ran screaming out of their houses. My child also came running out (I
myself had driven to visit a sick person at Zempin, seeing that walking
began to be wearisome to me, and that I could now afford to be more at
mine ease); but she had not stood long, and was asking the reason of the
ringing, when the Sheriff himself, on his grey charger, with three
cart-loads of toils and nets following him, galloped up and ordered the
people straightway to go into the forest and to drive the wolves with
rattles. Hereupon he, with his hunters and a few men whom he had picked
out of the crowd, were to ride on and spread the nets behind Damerow,
seeing that the island is wondrous narrow there, and the wolf dreads the
water. When he saw my daughter he turned his horse round, chucked her
under the chin, and graciously asked her who she was, and whence she came?
When he had heard it, he said she was as fair as an angel, and that he had
not known till now that the parson here had so beauteous a girl. He then
rode off, looking round at her two or three times. At the first beating
they found the one-eyed wolf, who lay in the rushes near the water. Hereat
his lordship rejoiced greatly, and made the grooms drag him out of the net
with long iron hooks, and hold him there for near an hour, while my lord
slowly and cruelly tortured him to death, laughing heartily the while,
which is a _prognosticon_ of what he afterwards did with my poor child,
for wolf or lamb is all one to this villain. Just God! But I will not be
beforehand with my tale.

Next day came old Seden his squint-eyed wife, limping like a lame dog, and
put it to my daughter whether she would not go into the service of the
Sheriff; praised him as a good and pious man; and vowed that all the world
said of him were foul lies, as she herself could bear witness, seeing that
she had lived in his service for above ten years. _Item_, she praised the
good cheer they had there, and the handsome beer-money that the great
lords who often lay there gave the servants which waited upon them; that
she herself had more than once received a rose-noble from his Princely
Highness Duke Ernest Ludewig; moreover, many pretty fellows came there,
which might make her fortune, inasmuch as she was a fair woman, and might
take her choice of a husband; whereas here in Coserow, where nobody ever
came, she might wait till she was old and ugly before she got a curch on
her head, etc. Hereat my daughter was beyond measure angered, and
answered, "Ah! thou old witch, and who has told thee that I wish to go
into service to get a curch on my head? Go thy ways, and never enter the
house again, for I have nought to do with thee." Whereupon she walked away
again, muttering between her teeth.

Scarce had a few days passed, and I was standing in the chamber with the
glazier, who was putting in new windows, when I heard my daughter scream
in the kitchen. Whereupon I straightway ran in thither, and was shocked
and affrighted when I saw the Sheriff himself standing in the corner with
his arm round my child her neck; he, however, presently let her go, and
said: "Aha, reverend Abraham, what a coy little fool you have for a
daughter! I wanted to greet her with a kiss, as I always use to do, and
she struggled and cried out as if I had been some young fellow who had
stolen in upon her, whereas I might be her father twice over." As I
answered nought, he went on to say that he had done it to encourage her,
seeing that he desired to take her into his service, as indeed I knew,
with more excuses of the same kind which I have forgot. Hereupon I pressed
him to come into the room, seeing that after all he was the ruler set over
me by God, and humbly asked what his lordship desired of me. Whereupon he
answered me graciously that it was true he had just cause for anger
against me, seeing that I had preached at him before the whole
congregation, but that he was ready to forgive me, and to have the
complaint he had sent in _contra me_ to his Princely Highness at Stettin,
and which might easily cost me my place, returned to him if I would but do
his will. And when I asked what his Lordship's will might be, and excused
myself as best I might with regard to the sermon, he answered that he
stood in great need of a faithful housekeeper whom he could set over the
other women-folk; and as he had learnt that my daughter was a faithful and
trustworthy person, he would that I should send her into his service. "See
there," said he to her, and pinched her cheek the while, "I want to lead
you to honour, though you are such a young creature, and yet you cry out
as if I were going to bring you to dishonour. Fie upon you!" (My child
still remembers all this _verbotenus_; I myself should have forgot it a
hundred times over in all the wretchedness I since underwent.) But she was
offended at his words, and, jumping up from her seat, she answered
shortly, "I thank your lordship for the honour, but will only keep house
for my papa, which is a better honour for me"; whereupon he turned to me
and asked what I said to that. I must own that I was not a little
affrighted, inasmuch as I thought of the future and of the credit in which
the Sheriff stood with his Princely Highness. I therefore answered with
all humility that I could not force my child, and that I loved to have her
about me, seeing that my dear huswife had departed this life during the
heavy pestilence, and I had no child but only her. That I hoped therefore
his lordship would not be displeased with me that I could not send her
into his lordship's service. This angered him sore, and after disputing
some time longer in vain he took leave, not without threats that he would
make me pay for it. _Item_, my man, who was standing in the stable, heard
him say as he went round the corner, "I will have her yet, in spite of
him!"

I was already quite disheartened by all this, when, on the Sunday
following, there came his huntsman Johannes Kurt, a tall, handsome fellow,
and smartly dressed. He brought a roebuck tied before him on his horse,
and said that his lordship had sent it to me for a present, in hopes that
I would think better of his offer, seeing that he had been ever since
seeking on all sides for a housekeeper in vain. Moreover, that if I
changed my mind about it his lordship would speak for me to his Princely
Highness, so that the dotation of Duke Philippus Julius should be paid to
me out of the princely _aerarium_, etc. But the young fellow got the same
answer as his master had done, and I desired him to take the roebuck away
with him again. But this he refused to do; and as I had by chance told him
at first that game was my favourite meat, he promised to supply me with it
abundantly, seeing that there was plenty of game in the forest, and that
he often went a-hunting on the Streckelberg; moreover, that I (he meant my
daughter) pleased him uncommonly, the more because I would not do his
master's will, who, as he told me in confidence, would never leave any
girl in peace, and certainly would not let my damsel alone. Although I had
rejected his game, he brought it notwithstanding, and in the course of
three weeks he was sure to come four or five times, and grew more and more
sweet upon my daughter. He talked a vast deal about his good place, and
how he was in search of a good huswife, whence we soon guessed what
quarter the wind blew from. _Ergo_, my daughter told him that if he was
seeking for a huswife she wondered that he lost his time in riding to
Coserow to no purpose, for that she knew of no huswife for him there,
which vexed him so sore that he never came again.

And now any one would think that the grapes were sour even for the
Sheriff; nevertheless he came riding to us soon after, and without more
ado asked my daughter in marriage for his huntsman. Moreover, he promised
to build him a house of his own in the forest; _item_, to give him pots
and kettles, crockery, bedding, etc., seeing that he had stood god-father
to the young fellow, who, moreover, had ever borne himself well during
seven years he had been in his service. Hereupon my daughter answered that
his lordship had already heard that she would keep house for nobody but
her papa, and that she was still much too young to become a huswife.

This, however, did not seem to anger him, but after he had talked a long
time to no purpose, he took leave quite kindly, like a cat which pretends
to let a mouse go, and creeps behind the corners, but she is not in
earnest, and presently springs out upon it again. For doubtless he saw
that he had set to work stupidly; wherefore he went away in order to begin
his attack again after a better fashion, and Satan went with him, as
whilom with Judas Iscariot.




_The Thirteenth Chapter_


WHAT MORE HAPPENED DURING THE WINTER:
_ITEM_, HOW IN THE SPRING WITCHCRAFT BEGAN IN THE VILLAGE

Nothing else of note happened during the winter, save that the merciful
God bestowed a great plenty of fish, both from the Achterwater and the
sea, and the parish again had good food; so that it might be said of us,
as it is written, "For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great
mercies will I gather thee." Wherefore we were not weary of praising the
Lord; and the whole congregation did much for the church, buying new
pulpit and altar cloths, seeing that the enemy had stolen the old ones.
_Item_, they desired to make good to me the money I had paid for the new
cups, which, however, I would not take.

There were still, however, about ten peasants in the parish who had not
been able to buy their seed-corn for the spring, inasmuch as they had
spent all their earnings on cattle and corn for bread. I therefore made an
agreement with them that I would lend them the money for it, and that if
they could not repay me this year, they might the next, which offer they
thankfully took; and we sent seven waggons to Friedland, in Mecklenburg,
to fetch seed-corn for us all. For my beloved brother-in-law, Martin
Behring, in Hamburg, had already sent me by the schipper Wulf, who had
sailed home by Christmas, 700 florins for the amber: may the Lord prosper
it with him!

Old Thiemcke died this winter in Loddin, who used to be the midwife in the
parish, and had also brought my child into the world. Of late, however,
she had had but little to do, seeing that in this year I only baptized two
children, namely, Jung his son in Uekeritze, and Lene Hebers her little
daughter, the same whom the Imperialists afterwards speared. _Item_, it
was now full five years since I had married the last couple. Hence any one
may guess that I might have starved to death had not the righteous God so
mercifully considered and blessed me in other ways. Wherefore to him alone
be all honour and glory. Amen.

Meanwhile, however, it so happened that, not long after the Sheriff had
last been here, witchcraft began in the village. I sat reading with my
child the second book of _Virgilius_ of the fearful destruction of the
city of Troy, which was more terrible even than that of our own village,
when a cry arose that our old neighbour Zabel his red cow, which he had
bought only a few days before, had stretched out all-fours and seemed
about to die; and this was the more strange as she had fed heartily but
half an hour before. My child was therefore begged to go and pluck three
hairs from its tail, and bury them under the threshold of the stall; for
it was well known that if this was done by a pure maid the cow would get
better. My child then did as they would have her, seeing that she is the
only maid in the whole village (for the others are still children); and
the cow got better from that very hour, whereat all the folks were amazed.
But it was not long before the same thing befell Witthahn her pig, whilst
it was feeding heartily. She too came running to beg my child for God's
sake to take compassion on her, and to do something for her pig, as ill
men had bewitched it. Hereupon she had pity on her also, and it did as
much good as it had done before. But the woman, who was _gravida_, was
straightway taken in labour from the fright; and my child was scarce out
of the pigsty when the woman went into her cottage, wailing and holding by
the wall, and called together all the woman of the neighbourhood, seeing
that the proper midwife was dead, as mentioned above; and before long
something shot to the ground from under her; and when the women stooped
down to pick it up, the devil's imp, which had wings like a bat, flew up
off the ground, whizzed and buzzed about the room, and then shot out of
the window with a great noise, so that the glass clattered down into the
street. When they looked after it nothing was to be found. Any one may
judge for himself what a great noise this made in all the neighbourhood;
and the whole village believed that it was no one but old Seden his
squint-eyed wife that had brought forth such a devil's brat.

But the people soon knew not what to believe. For that woman her cow got
the same thing as all the other cows; wherefore she too came lamenting,
and begged my daughter to take pity on her, as on the rest, and to cure
her poor cow for the love of God. That if she had taken it ill of her that
she had said anything about going into service with the Sheriff, she could
only say she had done it for the best, etc. _Summa_, she talked over my
unhappy child to go and cure her cow.

Meanwhile I was on my knees every Sunday before the Lord with the whole
congregation, praying that he would not allow the Evil One to take from us
that which his mercy had once more bestowed upon us after such extreme
want. _Item_, that he would bring to light the _auctor_ of such devilish
works, so that he might receive the punishment he deserved.

But all was of no avail. For a very few days had passed when the mischief
befell Stoffer Zuter his spotted cow, and he, too, like all the rest, came
running to fetch my daughter; she accordingly went with him, but could do
no good, and the beast died under her hands.

_Item_, Katy Berow had bought a little pig with the money my daughter had
paid her in the winter for spinning, and the poor woman kept it like a
child, and let it run about her room. This little pig got the mischief,
like all the rest, in the twinkling of an eye; and when my daughter was
called it grew no better, but also died under her hands; whereupon the
poor woman made a great outcry and tore her hair for grief, so that my
child was moved to pity her, and promised her another pig next time my sow
should litter. Meantime another week passed over, during which I went on,
together with the whole congregation, to call upon the Lord for his
merciful help, but all in vain, when the same thing happened to old wife
Seden her little pig. Whereupon she again came running for my daughter
with loud outcries, and although my child told her that she must have seen
herself that nothing she could do for the cattle cured them any longer,
she ceased not to beg and pray her and to lament till she went forth to do
what she could for her with the help of God. But it was all to no purpose,
inasmuch as the little pig died before she left the sty. What think you
this devil's whore then did? After she had run screaming through the
village she said that any one might see that my daughter was no longer a
maid, else why could she now do no good to the cattle, whereas she had
formerly cured them? She supposed my child had lost her maiden honour on
the Streckelberg, whither she went so often this spring, and that God only
knew who had taken it! But she said no more then, and we did not hear the
whole until afterwards. And it is indeed true that my child had often
walked on the Streckelberg this spring, both with me and also alone, in
order to seek for flowers and to look upon the blessed sea, while she
recited aloud, as she was wont, such verses out of _Virgilius_ as pleased
her best (for whatever she read a few times, that she remembered).

Neither did I forbid her to take these walks, for there were no wolves now
left on the Streckelberg, and even if there had been they always fly
before a human creature in the summer season. Howbeit, I forbade her to
dig for amber. For as it now lay deep, and we knew not what to do with the
earth we threw up, I resolved to tempt the Lord no further, but to wait
till my store of money grew very scant before we would dig any more.

But my child did not do as I had bidden her, although she had promised she
would, and of this her disobedience came all our misery. (Oh, blessed
Lord, how grave a matter is thy holy fourth commandment!) For as his
reverence Johannes Lampius, of Crummin, who visited me this spring, had
told me that the Cantor of Wolgast wanted to sell the _Opp. St.
Augustini_, and I had said before her that I desired above all things to
buy that book, but had not money enough left, she got up in the night
without my knowledge to dig for amber, meaning to sell it as best she
might at Wolgast, in order secretly to present me with the _Opp. St.
Augustini_ on my birthday, which falls on the 28th _mensis Augusti_. She
had always covered over the earth she cast up with twigs of fir, whereof
there were plenty in the forest, so that no one should perceive anything
of it.

Meanwhile, however, it befell that the young _nobilis_ Ruediger of
Nienkerken came riding one day to gather news of the terrible witchcraft
that went on in the village. When I had told him all about it he shook his
head doubtingly, and said he believed that all witchcraft was nothing but
lies and deceit; whereat I was struck with great horror, inasmuch as I had
hitherto held the young lord to be a wiser man, and now could not but see
that he was an Atheist. He guessed what my thoughts were, and with a smile
he answered me by asking whether I had ever read Johannes Wierus, who
would hear nothing of witchcraft, and who argued that all witches were
melancholy persons who only imagined to themselves that they had a
_pactum_ with the devil; and that to him they seemed more worthy of pity
than of punishment? Hereupon I answered that I had not indeed read any
such book (for say, who can read all that fools write?), but that the
appearances here and in all other places proved that it was a monstrous
error to deny the reality of witchcraft, inasmuch as people might then
likewise deny that there were such things as murder, adultery, and theft.

But he called my _argumentum_ a _dilemma_, and after he had discoursed a
great deal of the devil, all of which I have forgotten, seeing it savoured
strangely of heresy, he said he would relate to me a piece of witchcraft
which he himself had seen at Wittenberg.

It seems that one morning, as an Imperial captain mounted his good charger
at the Elstergate in order to review his company, the horse presently
began to rage furiously, reared, tossed his head, snorted, kicked, and
roared, not as horses used to neigh, but with a sound as though the voice
came from a human throat, so that all the folks were amazed, and thought
the horse bewitched. It presently threw the captain, and crushed his head
with its hoof, so that he lay writhing on the ground, and straightway set
off at full speed. Hereupon a trooper fired his carabine at the bewitched
horse, which fell in the midst of the road, and presently died. That he,
Ruediger, had then drawn near, together with many others, seeing that the
colonel had forthwith given orders to the surgeon of the regiment to cut
open the horse and see in what state it was inwardly. However, that
everything was quite right, and both the surgeon and army physician
testified that the horse was thoroughly sound; whereupon all the people
cried out more than ever about witchcraft. Meanwhile he himself (I mean
the young _nobilis_) saw a thin smoke coming out from the horse's
nostrils, and on stooping down to look what it might be, he drew out a
match as long as my finger, which still smouldered, and which some wicked
fellow had privately thrust into its nose with a pin. Hereupon all
thoughts of witchcraft were at an end, and search was made for the
culprit, who was presently found to be no other than the captain's own
groom. For one day that his master had dusted his jacket for him he swore
an oath that he would have his revenge, which indeed the provost-marshal
himself had heard as he chanced to be standing in the stable. _Item_,
another soldier bore witness that he had seen the fellow cut a piece off
the fuse not long before he led out his master's horse. And thus thought
the young lord, would it be with all witchcraft if it were sifted to the
bottom; like as I myself had seen at Guetzkow, where the devil's apparition
turned out to be a cordwainer, and that one day I should own that it was
the same sort of thing here in our village. By reason of this speech I
liked not the young nobleman from that hour forward, believing him to be
an Atheist. Though, indeed, afterwards, I have had cause to see that he
was in the right, more's the pity; for had it not been for him what would
have become of my daughter?

But I will say nothing beforehand.--_Summa_: I walked about the room in
great displeasure at his words, while the young lord began to argue with
my daughter upon witchcraft, now in Latin, and now in the vulgar tongue,
as the words came into his mouth, and wanted to hear her mind about it.
But she answered that she was a foolish thing, and could have no opinion
on the matter; but that, nevertheless, she believed that what happened in
the village could not be by natural means. Hereupon the maid called me out
of the room (I forget what she wanted of me); but when I came back again
my daughter was as red as scarlet, and the nobleman stood close before
her. I therefore asked her, as soon as he had ridden off, whether anything
had happened, which she at first denied, but afterwards owned that he had
said to her while I was gone that he knew but one person who could
bewitch; and when she asked him who that person was, he caught hold of her
hand and said, "It is yourself, sweet maid; for you have thrown a spell
upon my heart, as I feel right well!" But that he said nothing further,
but only gazed on her face with eager eyes, and this it was that made her
so red.

But this is the way with maidens; they ever have their secrets if one's
back is turned but for a minute; and the proverb

  To drive a goose and watch a maid
  Needs the devil himself to aid

is but too true, as will be shown hereafter, more's the pity!




_The Fourteenth Chapter_


HOW OLD SEDEN DISAPPEARED ALL ON A SUDDEN:
_ITEM_, HOW THE GREAT GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS CAME TO POMERANIA, AND TOOK THE
FORT AT PEENEMUeNDE

We were now left for some time in peace from witchcraft; unless, indeed, I
reckon the caterpillars, which miserably destroyed my orchard, and which
truly were a strange thing; for the trees blossomed so fair and sweetly
that one day as we were walking under them, and praising the almighty
power of the most merciful God, my child said, "If the Lord goes on to
bless us so abundantly, it will be Christmas Eve with us every night of
next winter!" But things soon fell out far otherwise; for all in a moment
the trees were covered with such swarms of caterpillars (great and small,
and of every shape and colour) that one might have measured them by the
bushel, and before long my poor trees looked like brooms, and the blessed
fruit--which was so well set--all fell off, and was scarce good enough for
the pigs. I do not choose to lay this to any one, though I had my own
private thoughts upon the matter, and have them yet. However, my barley,
whereof I had sown about three bushels out on the common, shot up bravely.
On my field I had sown nothing, seeing that I dreaded the malice of Satan.
Neither was corn at all plentiful throughout the parish--in part because
they had sown no winter crops, and in part because the summer crops did
not prosper. However, in all the villages a great supply of fish was
caught by the mercy of God, especially herring; but they were very low in
price. Moreover, they killed many seals; and at Whitsuntide I myself
killed one as I walked by the sea with my daughter. The creature lay on a
rock close to the water, snoring like a Christian. Thereupon I pulled of