le than usual, grow suddenly scarlet, and,
meeting my eyes, she hid her face in her two hands.  Then, seeing
her distress, in that same instant I found the answer to my
question, and so stood, turning poor George's letter over and
over, more like a fool than ever.

"You must go away--you must go away!" she repeated.

"Hum!" said I.

"You must go soon; he means it, I--I've seen death in his face,"
she said, shuddering; "go to-day--the longer you stay here the
worse for all of us--go now."

"Prudence!" said I.

"Yes, Mr. Peter!" from behind her hands.

"You always loved Black George, didn't you?"

"Yes, Mr. Peter."

"And you love him still, don't you?"  A moment's silence, then:

"Yes, Mr. Peter."

"Excellent!" said I.  Her head was raised a trifle, and one
tearful eye looked at me over her fingers.  "I had always hoped
you did," I continued, "for his sake, and for yours, and in my
way, a very blundering way as it seems now, I have tried to bring
you two together."  Prudence only sobbed.  "But things are not
hopeless yet.  I think I can see a means of straightening out
this tangle."

"Oh, if we only could!" sobbed Prudence.  "Ye see, I were very
cruel to him, Mr. Peter!"

"Just a little, perhaps," said I, and, while she dabbed at her
pretty eyes with her snowy apron, I took pen and ink from the
shelf where I kept them, which, together with George's letter, I
set upon the anvil.  "Now," said I, in answer to her questioning
look, "write down just here, below where George signed his name,
what you told me a moment ago."

"You mean, that I--"

"That you love him, yes."

"Oh, Mr. Peter!"

"Prudence," said I, "it is the only way, so far as I can see, of
saving George from himself; and no sweet, pure maid need be ashamed
to tell her love, especially to such a man as this, who worships
the very ground that little shoe of yours has once pressed."

She glanced up at me, under her wet lashes, as I said this, and a
soft light beamed in her eyes, and a smile hovered upon her red lips.

"Do he--really, Mr. Peter?"

"Indeed he does, Prudence, though I think you must know that
without my telling you."  So she stooped above the anvil,
blushing a little, and sighing a little, and crying a little,
and, with fingers that trembled somewhat, to be sure, wrote these
four words:

         "George, I love you."

"What now, Mr. Peter?" she inquired, seeing me begin to unbuckle
my leather apron.

"Now," I answered, "I am going to look for Black George."

"No!--no!" she cried, laying her hands upon my arm, "no! no! if
'ee do meet him, he--he'll kill 'ee!"

"I don't think he will," said I, shaking my head.

"Oh, don't go!--don't go!" she pleaded, shaking my arm in her
eagerness; "he be so strong and wild and quick--he'll give 'ee
no chance to speak--'twill be murder!"

"Prudence," said I, "my mind is set on it.  I am going--for your
sake, for his sake, and my own;" saying which, I loosed her hands
gently and took down my coat from its peg.

"Dear God!" she exclaimed, staring down at the floor with wide
eyes, "if he were to kill 'ee--!"

"Well," said I, "my search would be ended and I should be a deal
wiser in all things than I am to-day."

"And he--would be hanged!" said Prudence, shuddering.

"Probably--poor fellow!" said I.  At this she glanced quickly up,
and once again the crimson dyed her cheeks.

"Oh, Mr. Peter, forgive me!  I--I were only thinkin' of Jarge,
and--"

"And quite right too, Prudence," I nodded; "he is indeed worth
any good woman's thoughts; let it be your duty to think of him,
and for him, henceforth."

"Wait!" said she, "wait!"  And turning, she fled through the
doorway and across the road, swift and graceful as any bird, and
presently was back again, with something hidden in her apron.

"He be a strong man, and terrible in his wrath," said she, "and
I--love him, but--take this wi' you, and if it--must be--use it,
because I _do_ love him."  Now, as she said this, she drew from
her apron that same brass-bound pistol that had served me so well
against the "ghost" and thrust it into my hand.  "Take it, Mr.
Peter--take it, but--oh!"--here a great sob choked her voice--"
don't--don't use it--if--if you can help it, for my sake."

"Why, Prue!" said I, touching her bowed head very tenderly, "how
can you think I would go up against my friend with death in my
hand--Heaven forbid!"  So I laid aside the weapon and, clapping
on my hat, strode out into the glory of the summer morning, but
left her weeping in the shadows.




CHAPTER VII

WHICH NARRATES A SOMEWHAT REMARKABLE CONVERSATION


To find a man in Cambourne Woods, even so big a man as Black George,
would seem as hard a matter as to find the needle in the proverbial
"bottle of hay;" the sun crept westward, the day declined into
evening, yet, hungry though I was, I persevered in my search, not
so much in the hope of finding him (in the which I knew I must be
guided altogether by chance), as from a disinclination to return,
just yet, to the cottage.  "It would be miserable there at this
hour," I told myself, "miserable and lonely."

Yet why should I be lonely; I, who had gloried in my solitude
hitherto?  Whence then had come this change?

While I stood thus, seeking an answer to this self-imposed
question and finding none, I heard some one approach, whistling,
and, looking about, beheld a fellow with an axe upon his shoulder,
who strode along at a good pace, keeping time to his whistle.  He
gave me a cheery greeting as he came up, but without stopping.

"You seem in a hurry," said I.

"Ah!" grinned the man, over his shoulder, "'cause why?--'cause I
be goin' 'ome."

"Home!" said I.

"To supper," he nodded, and, forthwith, began to whistle again,
while I stood listening till the clear notes had died away.

"Home!" said I for the second time, and there came upon me a
feeling of desolation such as I had never known even in my
neglected boyhood's days.

Home! truly a sweet word, a comfortable word, the memory of which
has been as oil and wine to many a sick and weary traveler upon
this Broad Highway of life; a little word, and yet one which may
come betwixt a man and temptation, covering him like a shield.
"Roof and walls, be they cottage or mansion, do not make home,"
thought I, "rather is it the atmosphere of mutual love, the
intimacies of thought, the joys and sorrows endured together, and
the never-failing sympathy--that bond invisible yet stronger than
death."

And, because I had, hitherto, known nothing of this, I was
possessed of a great envy for this axe-fellow as I walked on
through the wood.

Now as I went, it was as if there were two voices arguing
together within me, whereof ensued the following triangular
conversation:


MYSELF.  Yet I have my books--I will go to my lonely cottage and
bury myself among my books.

FIRST VOICE.  Assuredly!  Is it for a philosopher to envy a
whistling axe-fellow--go to!

SECOND VOICE.  Far better a home and loving companionship than
all the philosophy of all the schools; surely Happiness is
greater than Learning, and more to be desired than Wisdom!

FIRST VOICE.  Better rather that Destiny had never sent her to
you.

MYSELF (rubbing my chin very hard, and staring at nothing in
particular).  Her?

SECOND VOICE.  Her!--to be sure, she who has been in your
thoughts all day long.

FIRST VOICE (with lofty disdain).  Crass folly!--a woman utterly
unknown, who came heralded by the roar of wind and the rush of
rain--a creature born of the tempest, with flame in her eyes and
hair, and fire in the scarlet of her mouth; a fierce, passionate
being, given to hot impulse--even to the taking of a man's life!

("But," said I, somewhat diffidently, "the fellow was a proved
scoundrel!")

FIRST VOICE (bellowing).  Sophistry! sophistry! even supposing he
was the greatest of villains, does that make her less a murderess
in intent?

MYSELF.  Hum!

FIRST VOICE (roaring).  Of course not!  Again, can this woman
even faintly compare with your ideal of what a woman should be
--this shrew!--this termagant!  Can a woman whose hand has the
strength to level a pistol, and whose mind the will to use it, be
of a nature gentle, clinging, sweet--

SECOND VOICE (sotto).  And sticky!

FIRST VOICE (howling).  Of course not!--preposterous!

(Hereupon, finding no answer, I strode on through the alleys of
the wood; but, when I had gone some distance, I stopped again,
for there rushed over me the recollection of the tender pity of
her eyes and the gentle touch of her hand, as when she had bound
up my hurts.

"Nevertheless," said I doggedly, "her face can grow more
beautiful with pity, and surely no woman's hand could be lighter
or more gentle.")

FIRST VOICE (with withering contempt).  Our Peter fellow is like
to become a preposterous ass.

(But, unheeding, I thrust my hand into my breast, and drew out a
small handful of cambric, whence came a faint perfume of violets.
And, closing my eyes, it seemed that she was kneeling before me,
her arms about my neck, as when she had bound this handkerchief
about my bleeding temples.

"Truly," said I, "for that one sweet act alone, a woman might be
worth dying for!")

SECOND VOICE.  Or better still--living for!

FIRST VOICE (in high indignation).  Balderdash, Sir!--sentimental
balderdash!

SECOND VOICE.  A truth incontrovertible!

("Folly!" said I, and threw the handkerchief from me.  But next
moment, moved by a sudden impulse, I stooped and picked it up
again.)

FIRST VOICE.  Our Peter fellow is becoming the fool of fools!

MYSELF.  No, of that there is not the slightest fear, because
--she is--gone.

And thus I remained staring at the handkerchief for a great
while.




CHAPTER VIII

IN WHICH I SEE A VISION IN THE GLORY OF THE MOON, AND EAT OF A
POACHED RABBIT


The moon was rising as, hungry and weary, I came to that steep
descent I have mentioned more than once, which leads down into
the Hollow, and her pale radiance was already, upon the world--a
sleeping world wherein I seemed alone.  And as I stood to gaze
upon the wonder of the heavens, and the serene beauty of the
earth, the clock in Cranbrook Church chimed nine.

All about me was a soft stirring of leaves, and the rustle of
things unseen, which was as the breathing of a sleeping host.
Borne to my nostrils came the scent of wood and herb and dewy
earth, while upstealing from the shadow of the trees below, the
voice of the brook reached me, singing its never-ending song--now
loud and clear, now sinking to a rippling murmur--a melody of joy
and sorrow, of laughter and tears, like the greater melody of Life.

And, presently, I descended into the shadows, and, walking on
beside the brook, sat me down upon a great boulder; and,
straightway, my weariness and hunger were forgotten, and I fell
a-dreaming.

Truly it was a night to dream in--a white night, full of the moon
and the magic of the moon.  Slowly she mounted upwards, peeping
down at me through whispering leaves, checkering the shadows with
silver, and turning the brook into a path of silver for the feet
of fairies.  Yes, indeed, the very air seemed fraught with a
magic whereby the unreal became the real and things impossible
the manifestly possible.

And so, staring up at the moon's pale loveliness, I dreamed the
deathless dreams of long-dead poets and romancers, wherein were
the notes of dreamy lutes, the soft whisper of trailing garments,
and sighing voices that called beneath the breath.  Between
Petrarch's Laura and Dante's Beatrice came one as proud and
gracious and beautiful as they, deep-bosomed, broad-hipped, with
a red, red mouth, and a subtle witchery of the eyes.  I dreamed
of nymphs and satyrs, of fauns and dryads, and of the young
Endymion who, on just such another night, in just such another
leafy bower, waited the coming of his goddess.

Now as I sat thus, chin in hand, I heard a little sound behind
me, the rustling of leaves, and, turning my head, beheld one who
stood half in shadow, half in moonlight, looking down at me
beneath a shy languor of drooping lids, with eyes hidden by their
lashes--a woman tall and fair, and strong as Dian's self.

Very still she stood, and half wistful, as if waiting for me to
speak, and very silent I sat, staring up at her as she had been
the embodiment of my dreams conjured tip by the magic of the
night, while, from the mysteries of the woods, stole the soft,
sweet song of a nightingale.

"Charmian?" said I at last, speaking almost in a whisper.  Surely
this was the sweet goddess herself, and I the wondering shepherd
on Mount Ida's solitude.

"Charmian!" said I again, "you--have come then?"  With the words
I rose.  "You have come, then?" I repeated.

But now she sighed a little, and, turning her head away, laughed
very sweet and low--and sighed again.

"Were you expecting me?"

"I--I think I was--that is--I--I don't know!" I stammered.

"Then you were not--very surprised to see me?"

"No."

"And you are not--very sorry to see me?"

"No."

"And--are you not very--glad to see me?

"Yes."

Here there fell a silence between us, yet a silence that was full
of leafy stirrings, soft night noises, and the languorous murmur
of the brook.  Presently Charmian reached out a hand, broke off a
twig of willow and began to turn it round and round in her white
fingers, while I sought vainly for something to say.

"When I went away this morning," she began at last, looking down
at the twig, "I didn't think I should ever come back again."

"No, I--I supposed not," said I awkwardly.

"But, you see, I had no money."

"No money?"

"Not a penny.  It was not until I had walked a long, long way,
and was very tired, and terribly hungry, that I found I hadn't
enough to buy even a crust of bread."

"And there was three pounds, fifteen shillings, and sixpence in
Donald's old shoe," said I.

"Sevenpence!" she corrected.

"Sevenpence?" said I, in some surprise.

"Three pounds, fifteen shillings, and sevenpence.  I counted it."

"Oh!" said I.

She nodded.  "And in the other I found a small, very curiously
shaped piece of wood."

"Ah--yes, I've been looking for that all the week.  You see, when
I made my table, by some miscalculation, one leg persisted in
coming out shorter than the others, which necessitated its being
shored up by a book until I made that block."

"Mr. Peter Vibart's Virgil book!" she said, nodding to the twig.

"Y-e-s!" said I, somewhat disconcerted.

"It was a pity to use a book," she went on, still very, intent
upon the twig, "even if that book does belong to a man with such
a name as Peter Vibart."

Now presently, seeing I was silent, she stole a glance at me, and
looking, laughed.

"But," she continued more seriously, "this has nothing to do with
you, of course, nor me, for that matter, and I was trying to tell
you how hungry--how hatefully hungry I was, and I couldn't beg,
could I, and so--and so I--I--"

"You came back," said I.

"I came back."

"Being hungry."

"Famishing!"

"Three pounds, fifteen shillings, and--sevenpence is not a great
sum," said I, "but perhaps it will enable you to reach your family."

"I'm afraid not; you see I have no family."

"Your friends, then."

"I have no friends; I am alone in the world."

"Oh!" said I, and turned to stare down into the brook, for I
could think only that she was alone and solitary, even as I,
which seemed like an invisible bond between us, drawing us each
nearer the other, whereat I felt ridiculously pleased that this
should be so.

"No," said Charmian, still intent upon the twig, "I have neither
friends nor family nor money, and so being hungry--I came back
here, and ate up all the bacon."

"Why, I hadn't left much, if I remember."

"Six slices!"

Now, as she stood, half in shadow, half in moonlight, I could not
help but be conscious of her loveliness.  She was no pretty
woman; beneath the high beauty of her face lay a dormant power
that is ever at odds with prettiness, and before which I felt
vaguely at a loss.  And yet, because of her warm beauty, because
of the elusive witchery of her eyes, the soft, sweet column of
the neck and the sway of the figure in the moonlight--because she
was no goddess, and I no shepherd in Arcadia, I clasped my hands
behind me, and turned to look down into the stream.

"Indeed," said I, speaking my thought aloud, "this is no place
for a woman, after all."

"No," said she very softly.

"No--although, to be sure, there are worse places."

"Yes," said she, "I suppose so."

"Then again, it is very far removed from the world, so that a
woman must needs be cut off from all those little delicacies and
refinements that are supposed to be essential to her existence."

"Yes," she sighed.

"Though what," I continued, "what on earth would be the use of
a--harp, let us say, or a pair of curling-irons in this wilderness,
I don't know."

"One could play upon the one and curl one's hair with the other,
and there is a deal of pleasure to be had from both," said she.

"Then also," I pursued, "this place, as I told you, is said to be
haunted--not," I went on, seeing that she was silent, "not that
you believe in such things, of course?  But the cottage is very
rough, and ill and clumsily furnished--though, to be sure, it
might be made comfortable enough, and--"

"Well?" she inquired, as I paused.

"Then--" said I, and was silent for a long time, watching the
play of the moonbeams on the rippling water.

"Well?" said she again at last.

"Then," said I, "if you are friendless, God forbid that I should
refuse you the shelter of even such a place as this--so--if you
are homeless, and without money--stay here--if you will--so long
as it pleases you."

I kept my eyes directed to the running water at my feet as I
waited her answer, and it seemed a very long time before she spoke.

"Are you fond of stewed rabbit?"

"Rabbit!" said I, staring.  "With onions!"

"Onions?"

"Oh, I can cook a little, and supper is waiting."

"Supper?"

"So if you are hungry--"

"I am ravenous!"

"Then why not come home and eat it?"

"Home?"

"Instead of echoing my words and staring the poor moon out of
countenance?  Come," and, with the word, she turned and led the
way to the cottage.  And behold, the candles were lighted, the
table was spread with a snowy cloth, and a pot simmered upon the
hob: a pot that gave forth an odor delectable, and over which
Charmian bent forthwith, and into which she gazed with an anxious
brow and thrust an inquiring fork.

"I think it's all right!"

"I'm sure of it," said I, inhaling the appetizing aroma--"but,
pray, where did you get it?"

"A man sold it to me--he had a lot of them."

"Hum!" said I, "probably poached."

"I bought this for sixpence--out of the old shoe."

"Sixpence?--then they certainly were poached.  These are the
Cambourne Woods, and everything upon them fish, flesh, or fowl,
living or dead--belongs to the Lady Sophia Sefton of Cambourne."

"Then--perhaps we had better not eat it," said she, glancing at
me over her shoulder--but, meeting my eye, she laughed.  And so
we presently sat down to supper and, poached though it may have
been, that rabbit made a truly noble end, notwithstanding.




CHAPTER IX

WHICH RELATES SOMEWHAT OF CHARMIAN BROWN


We were sitting in the moonlight.

"Now," said Charmian, staring up at the luminous heaven, "let us
talk."

"Willingly," I answered; "let us talk of stars."

"No--let us talk of ourselves."

"As you please."

"Very well, you begin."

"Well--I am a blacksmith."

"Yes, you told me so before."

"And I make horseshoes--"

"He is a blacksmith, and makes horseshoes!" said Charmian,
nodding at the moon.

"And I live here, in this solitude, very contentedly; so that it
is only reasonable to suppose that I shall continue to live here,
and make horseshoes--though, really,"  I broke off, letting my
eyes wander from my companion's upturned face back to the glowing
sky, once more, "there is little I could tell you about so
commonplace a person as myself that is likely to interest you."

"No," said Charmian, "evidently not!"  Here my gaze came down to
her face again so quickly that I fancied I detected the ghost of
a smile upon her lips.

"Then," said I, "by all means let us talk of something else."

"Yes," she agreed; "let us talk of the woman Charmian--Charmian
--Brown."  A tress of hair had come loose, and hung low above her
brow, and in its shadow her, eyes seemed more elusive, more
mocking than ever, and, while our glances met, she put up a hand
and began to, wind this glossy tress round and round her finger.

"Well?" said she.

"Well," said I, "supposing you begin."

"But is she likely to interest you?"

"I think so--yes."

"Aren't you sure, then?"

"Quite sure--certainly."

"Then why don't you say so?"

"I thought you would take that for granted."

"A woman should take nothing for granted, sir."

"Then," said I, "supposing you begin."

"I've half a mind not to," she retorted, curling the tress of
hair again, and then, suddenly: "What do you think of Charmian
Brown?"

"I think of her as little as I can."

"Indeed, sir!"

"Indeed," said I.

"And why, pray?"

"Because," said I, knocking the ashes from my pipe, "because the
more I think about her the more incomprehensible she becomes."

"Have you known many women?"

"Very few," I confessed, "but--"

"But?"

"I am not altogether unfamiliar with the sex--for I have known a
great number--in books."

"Our blacksmith," said Charmian, addressing the moon again, "has
known many women--in books!  His knowledge is, therefore,
profound!" and she laughed.

"May I ask why you laugh at me?"

"Oh!" said she, "don't you know that women in books and women out
of books are no more the same than day and night, or summer and
winter?"

"And yet there are thousands of women who exist for us in books
only, Laura, Beatrice, Trojan Helen, Aspasia, the glorious
Phryne, and hosts of others," I demurred.

"Yes; but they exist for us only as their historians permit them,
as their biographers saw, or imagined them.  Would Petrarch ever
have permitted Laura to do an ungracious act, or anything which,
to his masculine understanding, seemed unfeminine; and would
Dante have mentioned it had Beatrice been guilty of one?  A man
can no more understand a woman from the reading of books than he
can learn Latin or Greek from staring at the sky."

"Of that," said I, shaking my head, "of that I am not so sure."

"Then--personally--you know very little concerning women?" she
inquired.

"I have always been too busy," said I.  Here Charmian turned to
look at me again.

"Too busy?" she repeated, as though she had not heard aright;
"too busy?"

"Much too busy!"  Now, when I said this, she laughed, and then
she frowned, and then she laughed again.

"You would much rather make a--horseshoe than talk with a woman,
perhaps?"

"Yes, I think I would."

"Oh!" said Charmian, frowning again, but this time she did not
look at me.

"You see," I explained, turning my empty pipe over and over,
rather aimlessly, "when I make a horseshoe I take a piece of
iron and, having heated it, I bend and shape it, and with
every hammer-stroke I see it growing into what I would have
it--I am sure of it, from start to finish; now, with a woman
it is--different."

"You mean that you cannot bend, and shape her, like your
horseshoe?" still without looking towards me.

"I mean that--that I fear I should never be quite sure of a
--woman, as I am of my horseshoe."

"Why, you see," said Charmian, beginning to braid the tress of
hair, "a woman cannot, at any time, be said to resemble a
horseshoe--very much, can she?"

"Surely," said I, "surely you know what I mean--?"

"There are Laura and Beatrice and Helen and Aspasia and Phryne,
and hosts of others," said Charmian, nodding to the moon again.
"Oh, yes--our blacksmith has read of so many women in books that
he has no more idea of women out of books than I of Sanscrit."

And, in a little while, seeing I was silent, she condescended to
glance towards me:

"Then I suppose, under the circumstances, you have never been--in
love?"

"In love?" I repeated, and dropped my pipe.

"In love."

"The Lord forbid!"

"Why, pray?"

"Because Love is a disease--a madness, coming between a man and
his life's work.  Love!" said I, "it is a calamity!"

"Never having been in love himself, our blacksmith, very
naturally, knows all about it!" said Charmian to the moon.

"I speak only of such things as I have read--" I began.

"More books!" she sighed.

"--words of men, much wiser than I--poets and philosophers,
written--"

"When they were old and gray-headed," Charmian broke in; "when
they were quite incapable of judging the matter--though many a
grave philosopher loved; now didn't he?"

"To be sure," said I, rather hipped, "Dionysius Lambienus, I
think, says somewhere that a woman with a big mouth is infinitely
sweeter in the kissing--and--"

"Do you suppose he read that in a book?" she inquired, glancing
at me sideways.

"Why, as to that," I answered, "a philosopher may love, but not
for the mere sake of loving."

"For whose sake then, I wonder?"

"A man who esteems trifles for their own sake is a trifler, but
one who values them, rather, for the deductions that may be drawn
from them--he is a philosopher."

Charmian rose, and stood looking down at me very strangely.

"So!" said she, throwing back her head, "so, throned in lofty
might, superior Mr. Smith thinks Love a trifle, does he?"

"My name is Vibart, as I think you know," said I, stung by her
look or her tone, or both.

"Yes," she answered, seeming to look down at me from an
immeasurable attitude, "but I prefer to know him, just now, as
Superior Mr. Smith."

"As you will," said I, and rose also; but, even then, though she
had to look up to me, I had the same inward conviction that her
eyes were regarding me from a great height; wherefore I,
attempted--quite unsuccessfully to light my pipe.

And after I had struck flint and steel vainly, perhaps a dozen
times, Charmian took the box from me, and, igniting the tinder,
held it for me while I lighted my tobacco.

"Thank you!" said I, as she returned the box, and then I saw that
she was smiling.  "Talking of Charmian Brown--" I began.

"But we are not."

"Then suppose you begin?"

"Do you really wish to hear about that--humble person?"

"Very much!"

"Then you must know, in the first place, that she is old, sir,
dreadfully old!"

"But," said I, "she really cannot be more than twenty-three--or
four at the most."

"She is just twenty-one!" returned Charmian, rather hastily, I
thought.

"Quite a child!"

"No, indeed--it is experience that ages one--and by experience
she is quite--two hundred!"

"The wonder is that she still lives."

"Indeed it is!" "And, being of such a ripe age, it is probable
that she, at any rate, has--been in love."

"Scores of times!"

"Oh!" said I, puffing very hard at my pipe

"Or fancied so," said Charmian.  "That," I replied, "that is a
very different thing!"

"Do you think so?"

"Well--isn't it?"

"Perhaps."

"Very well, then, continue, I beg."

"Now, this woman," Charmian went on, beginning to curl the tress
of hair again, "hating the world about her with its shams, its
hypocrisy, and cruelty, ran away from it all, one day, with a
villain."

"And why with a villain?"

"Because he was a villain!"

"That," said I, turning to look at her, "that I do not
understand!"

"No, I didn't suppose you would," she answered.

"Hum!" said I, rubbing my chin.  "And why did you run away from
him?"

"Because he was a villain."

"That was very illogical!" said I.

"But very sensible, sir."

Here there fell a silence between us, and, as we walked, now and
then her gown would brush my knee, or her shoulder touch mine,
for the path was very narrow.

"And--did you--" I began suddenly, and stopped.

"Did I--what, sir?"

"Did you love him?" said I, staring straight in front of me.

"I--ran away from him."

"And--do you--love him?"

"I suppose," said Charmian, speaking very slowly, "I suppose you
cannot understand a woman hating and loving a man, admiring and
despising him, both at the same time?"

"No, I can't."

"Can you understand one glorying in the tempest that may destroy
her, riding a fierce horse that may crush her, or being attracted
by a will strong and masterful, before which all must yield or
break?"

"I think I can."

"Then," said Charmian, "this man is strong and wild and very
masterful, and so--I ran away with him."

"And do you--love him?"

We walked on some distance ere she answered:

"I--don't know."

"Not sure, then?"

"No."

After this we fell silent altogether, yet once, when I happened
to glance at her, I saw that her eyes were very bright beneath
the shadow of her drooping lashes, and that her lips were
smiling; and I pondered very deeply as to why this should be.

Re-entering the cottage, I closed the door, and waited the while
she lighted my candle.

And, having taken the candle from her hand, I bade her "Good
night," but paused at the door of my chamber.

"You feel--quite safe here?"

"Quite safe!"

"Despite the color of my hair and eyes--you have no fear of
--Peter Smith?"

"None!"

"Because--he is neither fierce nor wild nor masterful!"

"Because he is neither fierce nor wild," she echoed.

"Nor masterful!" said I.

"Nor masterful!" said Charmian, with averted head.  So I opened
the door, but, even then, must needs turn back again.

"Do you think I am so very--different--from him?"

"As different as day from night, as the lamb from the wolf," said
she, without looking at me.  "Good night, Peter!"

"Good night!" said I, and so, going into my room, I closed the
door behind me.

"A lamb!" said I, tearing off my neckcloth, and sat, for some
time listening to her footstep and the soft rustle of her
petticoats going to and fro.

"A lamb!" said I again, and slowly drew off my coat.  As I did
so, a little cambric handkerchief fell to the floor, and I kicked
it, forthwith, into a corner.

"A lamb!" said I, for the third time, but, at this moment, came a
light tap upon the door.

"Yes?" said I, without moving.

"Oh, how is your injured thumb?"

"Thank you, it is as well as can be expected."

"Does it pain you very much?"

"It is not unbearable!" said I.

"Good night, Peter!" and I heard her move away.  But presently
she was back again.

"Oh, Peter?"

"Well?"

"Are you frowning?"

"I--I think I was--why?"

"When you frown, you are very like--him, and have the same
square set of the mouth and chin, when you are angry--so don't,
please don't frown, Peter--Good night!"

"Good night, Charmian!" said I, and stooping, I picked up the
little handkerchief and thrust it under my pillow.




CHAPTER X

I AM SUSPECTED OF THE BLACK ART


"Vibart!"

The word had been uttered close behind me, and very softly, yet I
started at this sudden mention of my name and stood for a moment
with my hammer poised above the anvil ere I turned and faced the
speaker.  He was a tall man with a stubbly growth of grizzled
hair about his lank jaws, and he was leaning in at that window of
the smithy which gave upon a certain grassy back lane.

"You spoke, I think!" said I.

"I said, 'Vibart'!"

"Well?"

"Well?"

"And why should you say 'Vibart'?"

"And why should you start?"  Beneath the broad, flapping hat his
eyes glowed with a sudden intensity as he waited my answer.

"It is familiar," said I.

"Ha! familiar?" he repeated, and his features were suddenly
contorted as with a strong convulsion, and his teeth gleamed
between his pallid lips.

My hammer was yet in my grasp, and, as I met this baleful look,
my fingers tightened instinctively about the shaft.

"Familiar?" said he again.

"Yes," I nodded; "like your face, for it would almost seem that I
have seen you somewhere before, and I seldom forget faces."

"Nor do I!" said the man.

Now, while we thus fronted each other, there came the sound of
approaching footsteps, and John Pringle, the Carrier, appeared,
followed by the pessimistic Job.

"Marnin', Peter!--them 'orseshoes," began John, pausing just
outside the smithy door, "you was to finish 'em 's arternoon; if
so be as they bean't done, you bein' short'anded wi'out Jarge,
why, I can wait."  Now, during this speech, I was aware that both
his and Job's eyes had wandered from my bandaged thumb to my bare
throat, and become fixed there.

"Come in and sit down," said I, nodding to each, as I blew up the
fire, "come in."  For a moment they hesitated, then John stepped
gingerly into the smithy, closely followed by Job, and, watching
them beneath my brows as I stooped above the shaft of the
bellows, I saw each of them furtively cross his fingers.

"Why do you do that, John Pringle?" said I.

"Do what, Peter?"

"Cross your fingers."

"Why, ye see, Peter," said John, glancing in turn at the floor,
the rafters, the fire, and the anvil, but never at me, "ye see,
it be just a kind o' way o' mine."

"But why does Job do the same?"

"An' why do 'ee look at a man so sharp an' sudden-like?" retorted
Job sullenly; "dang me! if it aren't enough to send cold shivers
up a chap's spine--I never see such a pair o' eyes afore--no--nor
don't want to again."

"Nonsense!" said I; "my eyes can't hurt you."

"An' 'ow am I to know that, 'ow am I to be sure o' that; an' you
wi' your throat all torn wi' devil's claws an' demon's clutches
--it bean't nat'ral--Old Amos says so, an' I sez so."

"Pure folly!" said I, plucking the iron from the fire, and
beginning to beat and shape it with my hammer, but presently,
remembering the strange man who had spoken my name, I looked up,
and then I saw that he was gone.  "Where is he?" said I
involuntarily.

"Where's who?" inquired John Pringle, glancing about uneasily.

"The fellow who was talking to me as you came up?"

"I didn't see no fellow!" said Job, looking at John and edging
nearer the door.

"Nor me neither!" chimed in John Pringle, looking at Job.

"Why, he was leaning in at the window here, not a minute ago,"
said I, and, plunging the half-finished horseshoe back into the
fire, I stepped out into the road, but the man was nowhere to be
seen.

"Very strange!" said I.

"What might 'e 'ave been like, now?" inquired John.

"He was tall and thin, and wore a big flapping hat."

John Pringle coughed, scratched his chin, and coughed again.

"What is it, John?" I inquired.

"Why, then, you couldn't 'appen to notice--'im wearin' 'is 'at
--you couldn't 'appen to notice if 'e 'ad ever a pair o' 'orns,
Peter?"

"Horns!" I exclaimed.

"Or a--tail, Peter?"

"Or even a--'oof, now?" suggested Job.

"Come," said I, looking from one to the other, "what might you be
driving at?"

"Why, ye see, Peter," answered John, coughing again, and
scratching his chin harder than ever, "ye see, Peter, it aren't
nat'ral for a 'uman bein' to go a-vanishin' away like this 'ere
--if 'twere a man as you was a-talkin' to--"

"Which I doubts!" muttered Job.

"If 'twere a man, Peter, then I axes you--where is that man?"

Before I could answer this pointed question, old Joel Amos
hobbled up, who paused on the threshold to address some one over
his shoulder.

"Come on, James, 'ere 'e be--come for'ard, James, like a man."

Thus adjured, another individual appeared: a somewhat
flaccid-looking individual, with colorless hair and eyes, one
who seemed to exhale an air of apology, as it were, from the
hobnailed boot upon the floor to the grimy forefinger that
touched the strawlike hair in salutation.

"Marnin', Peter!" said Old Amos, "this yere is Dutton."

"How do you do?" said I, acknowledging the introduction, "and
what can I do for Mr. Dutton?"  The latter, instead of replying,
took out a vivid belcher handkerchief, and apologetically mopped
his face.

"Speak up, James Dutton," said Old Amos.

"Lord!" exclaimed Dutton, "Lord!  I du be that 'ot!--you speak
for I, Amos, du."

"Well," began Old Amos, not ill-pleased, "this 'ere Dutton wants
to ax 'ee a question, 'e du, Peter."

"I shall be glad to answer it, if I can," I returned.

"You 'ear that?--well, ax your question, James Dutton," commanded
the old man.

"W'y, ye see, Amos," began Dutton, positively reeking apology, "I
du be that on-common 'ot--you ax un."

"W'y, then, Peter," began Amos, with great unction, "it's 'is
pigs!"

"Pigs?" I exclaimed, staring.

"Ah! pigs, Peter," nodded Old Amos, "Dutton's pigs; 'is sow
farrowed last week--at three in the marnin'--nine of 'em!"

"Well?" said I, wondering more and more.

"Well, Peter, they was a fine 'earty lot, an' all a-doin' well
--till last Monday."

"Indeed!" said I.

"Last Monday night, four on 'em sickened an' died!"

"Most unfortunate!" said I.

"An' the rest 'as never been the same since."

"Probably ate something that disagreed with them," said I,
picking up my hammer and laying it down again.  Old Amos smiled
and shook his head.

"You know James Dutton's pigsty, don't ye, Peter?"

"I really can't say that I do."

"Yet you pass it every day on your way to the 'Oller--it lays
just be'ind Simon's oast-'ouse, as James 'isself will tell 'ee."

"So it du," interpolated Dutton, with an apologetic nod, "which,
leastways, if it don't, can't be no'ow!" having delivered himself
of which, he buried his face in the belcher handkerchief.

"Now, one evenin', Peter," continued Old Amos, "one evenin' you
leaned over the fence o' that theer pigsty an' stood a-lookin' at
they pigs for, p'r'aps, ten minutes."

"Did I?"

"Ay, that ye did--James Dutton see ye, an' 'is wife, she see ye
tu, and I see ye."

"Then," said I, "probably I did.  Well?"

"Well," said the old man, looking round upon his hearers, and
bringing out each word with the greatest unction, "that theer
evenin' were last Monday evenin' as ever was--the very same hour
as Dutton's pigs sickened an' died!"  Hereupon John Pringle and
Job rose simultaneously from where they had been sitting, and
retreated precipitately to the door.

"Lord!" exclaimed John.

"I might ha' knowed it!" said Job, drawing a cross in the air
with his finger.

"An' so James Dutton wants to ax ye to tak' it off, Peter," said
Old Amos.

"To take what off?"

"Why, the spell, for sure."  Hereupon I gave free play to my
amusement, and laughed, and laughed, while the others watched me
with varying expressions.

"And so you think that I bewitched Dutton's pigs, do you?" said
I, at last, glancing from Old Amos to the perspiring Apology (who
immediately began to mop at his face and neck again).  "And why,"
I continued, seeing that nobody appeared willing to speak, "why
should you think it of me?"

"W'y, Peter, ye bean't like ordinary folk; your eyes goes through
an' through a man.  An' then, Peter, I mind as you come a-walkin'
into Siss'n'urst one night from Lord knows wheer, all covered wi'
dust, an' wi' a pack on your back."

"You are wrong there, Amos," said I, "it was afternoon when I
came, and the Ancient was with me."

"Ah! an' wheer did 'e find ye, Peter?--come, speak up an' tell us."

"In the Hollow," I answered.

"Ay, 'e found 'ee in the very spot wheer the Wanderer o' the
Roads 'ung 'isself, sixty an' six years ago."

"There is nothing very strange in that!" said I.

"What's more, you come into the village an' beat Black Jarge
throwin' th' 'ammer, an' 'im the strongest man in all the South
Country!"

"I beat him because he did not do his best--so there is nothing
strange in that either."

"An' then, you lives all alone in that theer ghashly 'Oller--an'
you fights, an' struggles wi' devils an' demons, all in the wind
an' rain an' tearin' tempest--an' what's most of all--you comes
back--alive; an' what's more yet, wi' devil-marks upon ye an'
your throat all tore wi' claws.  Old Gaffer be over proud o'
findin' ye, but old Gaffer be dodderin'--dodderin' 'e be, an'
fulish wi' years; 'e'd ha' done much better to ha' left ye alone
--I've heerd o' folk sellin' theirselves to the devil afore now,
I've likewise heerd o' the 'Evil Eye' afore now--ah! an' knows
one when I sees it."

"Nonsense!" said I sternly, "nonsense!  This talk of ghosts and
devils is sheer folly.  I am a man, like the rest of you, and
could not wish you ill--even if I would come, let us all shake
hands, and forget this folly!" and I extended my hand to Old Amos.

He glanced from it to my face, and immediately, lowering his
eyes, shook his head.

"'Tis the Evil Eye'!" said he, and drew across upon the floor
with his stick, "the 'Evil Eye'!"

"Nonsense!" said I again; "my eye is no more evil than yours or
Job's.  I never wished any man harm yet, nor wronged one, and I
hope I never may.  As for Mr. Dutton's pigs, if he take better
care of them, and keep them out of the damp, they will probably
thrive better than ever--come, shake hands!"

But, one by one, they edged their way to the door after Old Amos,
until only John Pringle was left; he, for a moment, stood
hesitating, then, suddenly reaching out, he seized my hand, and
shook it twice.

"I'll call for they 'orseshoes in the marnin', Peter," said he,
and vanished.

"Arter all," I heard him say, as he joined the others, "'tis
summat to ha' shook 'ands wi' a chap as fights wi' demons!"




CHAPTER XI

A SHADOW IN THE HEDGE


Over the uplands, to my left, the moon was peeping at me, very
broad and yellow, as yet, casting long shadows athwart my way.
The air was heavy with the perfume of honeysuckle abloom in the
hedges--a warm, still air wherein a deep silence brooded, and in
which leaf fluttered not and twig stirred not; but it was none of
this I held in my thoughts as I strode along, whistling softly as
I went.  Yet, in a while, chancing to lift my eyes, I beheld the
object of my reverie coming towards me through the shadows.

"Why--Charmian!" said I, uncovering my head.

"Why--Peter!"

"Did you come to meet me?"

"It must be nearly nine o'clock, sir."

"Yes, I had to finish some work."

"Did any one pass you on the road?"

"Not a soul."

"Peter, have you an enemy?"

"Not that I know of, unless it be myself.  Epictetus says
somewhere that--"

"Oh, Peter, how dreadfully quiet everything is!" said she, and
shivered.

"Are you cold?"

"No--but it is so dreadfully--still."

Now in one place the lane, narrowing suddenly, led between high
banks crowned with bushes, so that it was very dark there.  As we
entered this gloom Charmian suddenly drew closer to my side and
slipped her hand beneath my arm and into my clasp, and the touch
of her fingers was like ice.

"Your hand is very cold!" said I.  But she only laughed, yet I
felt her shiver as she pressed herself close against me.

And now it was she who talked and I who walked in silence, or
answered at random, for I was conscious only of the clasp of her
fingers and the soft pressure of hip and shoulder.

So we passed through this place of shadows, walking neither fast
nor slow, and ever her cold fingers clasped my fingers, and her
shoulder pressed my arm while she talked, and laughed, but of
what, I know not, until we had left the dark place behind.  Then
she sighed deeply and turned, and drew her arm from mine, almost
sharply, and stood looking back, with her two hands pressed upon
her bosom.

"What is it?"

"Look!" she whispered, pointing, "there--where it is darkest
--look!"  Now, following the direction of her finger, I saw
something that skulked amid the shadows something that slunk
away, and vanished as I watched.

"A man!" I exclaimed, and would have started in pursuit, but
Charmian's hands were upon my arm, strong and compelling.

"Are you mad?" cried she angrily; "would you give him the
opportunity I prevented?  He was waiting there to--to shoot you,
I think!"

And, after we had gone on some little way, I spoke.

"Was that why you--came to meet me?"

"Yes."

"And--kept so close beside me."

"Yes."

"Ah, yes, to be sure!" said I, and walked on in silence; and now
I noticed that she kept as far from me as the path would allow.

"Are you thinking me very--unmaidenly again, sir?"

"No," I answered; "no."

"You see, I had no other way.  Had I told you that there was a
man hidden in the hedge you would have gone to look, and then
--something dreadful would have happened."

"How came you to know he was there?"

"Why, after I had prepared supper I climbed that steep path which
leads to the road and sat down upon the fallen tree that lies
there, to watch for you, and, as I sat there, I saw a man come
hurrying down the road."

"A very big man?"

"Yes, very tall he seemed, and, as I watched, he crept in behind
the hedge.  While I was wondering at this, I heard your step on
the road, and you were whistling."

"And yet I seldom whistle."

"It was you--I knew your step."

"Did you, Charmian?"

"I do wish you would not interrupt, sir."

"I beg your pardon," said I humbly.

"And then I saw you coming, and the man saw you too, for he
crouched suddenly; I could only see him dimly in the shadow of
the hedge, but he looked murderous, and it seemed to me that if
you reached his hiding-place before I did--something terrible
would happen, and so--"

"You came to meet me."

"Yes."

"And walked close beside me, so that you were between me and the
shadow in the hedge?"

"Yes."

"And I thought--" I began, and stopped.

"Well, Peter?" Here she turned, and gave me a swift glance beneath
her lashes.

"--that it was because--you were--perhaps--rather glad to see
me."  Charmian did not speak; indeed she was so very silent that
I would have given much to have seen her face just then, but the
light was very dim, as I have said, moreover she had turned her
shoulder towards me.  "But I am grateful to you," I went on,
"very grateful, and--it was very brave of you!"

"Thank you, sir," she answered in a very small voice, and I more
than suspected that she was laughing at me.

"Not," I therefore continued, "that there was any real danger."

"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

"I mean that, in all probability, the man you saw was Black
George, a very good friend of mine, who, though he may imagine he
has a grudge against me, is too much of a man to lie in wait to
do me hurt."

"Then why should he hide in the hedge?"

"Because he committed the mistake of throwing the town Beadle
over the churchyard wall, and is, consequently, in hiding, for
the present."

"He has an ill-sounding name."

"And is the manliest, gentlest, truest, and worthiest fellow that
ever wore the leather apron."

Seeing how perseveringly she kept the whole breadth of the path
between us, I presently fell back and walked behind her; now her
head was bent, and thus I could not but remark the little curls
and tendrils of hair upon her neck, whose sole object seemed to
be to make the white skin more white by contrast.

"Peter," said she suddenly, speaking over her shoulder, "of what
are you thinking?"

"Of a certain steak pasty that was promised for my supper," I
answered immediately, mendacious.

"Oh!"

"And what," I inquired, "what were you thinking?"

"I was thinking, Peter, that the--shadow in the hedge may not
have been Black George, after all."




CHAPTER XII

WHO COMES?


"This table wobbles!" said Charmian.

"It does," said I, "but then I notice that the block is misplaced
again."

"Then why use a block?"

"A book is so clumsy--" I began.

"Or a book?  Why not cut down the long legs to match the short
one?"

"That is really an excellent idea."

"Then why didn't you before?"

"Because, to be frank with you, it never occurred to me."

"I suppose you are better as a blacksmith than a carpenter,
aren't you, Peter?"  And, seeing I could find no answer worthy of
retort, she laughed, and, sitting down, watched me while I took
my saw, forthwith, and shortened the three long legs as she had
suggested.  Having done which, to our common satisfaction, seeing
the moon was rising, we went and sat down on the bench beside the
cottage door.

"And--are you a very good blacksmith?" she pursued, turning to
regard me, chin in hand.

"I can swing a hammer or shoe a horse with any smith in Kent
--except Black George, and he is the best in all the South
Country."

"And is that a very great achievement, Peter?"

"It is not a despicable one."

"Are you quite satisfied to be able to shoe horses well, sir?"

"It is far better to be a good blacksmith than a bad poet or an
incompetent prime minister."

"Meaning that you would rather succeed in the little thing than
fail in the great?"

"With your permission, I will smoke," said I.

"Surely," she went on, nodding her permission, "surely it is
nobler to be a great failure rather than a mean success?"

"Success is very sweet, Charmian, even in the smallest thing; for
instance," said I, pointing to the cottage door that stood open
beside her, "when I built that door, and saw it swing on its
hinges, I was as proud of it as though it had been--"

"A really good door," interpolated Charmian, "instead of a bad
one!"

"A bad one, Charmian?"

"It is a very clumsy door, and has neither bolt nor lock."

"There are no thieves hereabouts, and, even if there were, they
would not dare to set foot in the Hollow after dark."

"And then, unless one close it with great care, it sticks--very
tight!"

"That, obviating the necessity of a latch, is rather to be
commended," said I.

"Besides, it is a very ill-fitting door, Peter."

"I have seen worse."

"And will be very draughty in cold weather."

"A blanket hung across will remedy that."

"Still, it can hardly be called a very good door, can it, Peter?"
Here I lighted my pipe without answering.  "I suppose you make
horseshoes much better than you make doors?"  I puffed at my pipe
in silence.  "You are not angry because I found fault with your
door, are you, Peter?"

"Angry?" said I; "not in the least."

"I am sorry for that."

"Why sorry?"

"Are you never angry, Peter?"

"Seldom, I hope."

"I should like to see you so--just once.  Finding nothing to say
in answer to this, I smoked my negro-head pipe and stared at the
moon, which was looking down at us through a maze of tree-trunks
and branches.

"Referring to horseshoes," said Charmian at last, "are you
content to be a blacksmith all your days?"

"Yes, I think I am."

"Were you never ambitious, then?"

"Ambition is like rain, breaking itself upon what it falls on--at
least, so Bacon says, and--"

"Oh, bother Bacon!  Were you never ambitious, Peter?"

"I was a great dreamer."

"A dreamer!" she exclaimed with fine scorn; "are dreamers ever
ambitious?"

"Indeed, they are the most truly ambitious," I retorted; "their
dreams are so vast, so infinite, so far beyond all puny human
strength and capacity that they, perforce, must remain dreamers
always.  Epictetus himself--"

"I wish," sighed Charmian, "I do wish--"

"What do you wish?"

"That you were not--"

"That I was not?"

"Such a--pedant!"

"Pedant!" said I, somewhat disconcerted.

"And you have a way of echoing my words that is very irritating."

"I beg your pardon," said I, feeling much like a chidden
schoolboy; "and I am sorry you should think me a pedant."

"And you are so dreadfully precise and serious," she continued.

"Am I, Charmian?"

"And so very solemn and austere, and so ponderous, and
egotistical, and calm--yes, you are hatefully calm and placid,
aren't you, Peter?"

And, after I had smoked thoughtfully awhile, I sighed.

"Yes, I fear I may seem so."

"Oh, I forgive you!"

"Thank you."

"Though you needn't be so annoyingly humble about it," said she,
and frowned, and, even while she frowned, laughed and shook her
head.

"And pray, why do you laugh?"

"Because--oh, Peter, you are such a--boy!"

"So you told me once before," said I, biting my pipe-stem
viciously.

"Did I, Peter?"

"You also called me a--lamb, I remember--at least, you suggested it."

"Did I, Peter?" and she began to laugh again, but stopped all at
once and rose to her feet.

"Peter!" said she, with a startled note in her voice, "don't you
hear something?"

"Yes," said I.

"Some one is coming!"

"Yes."

"And--they are coming this way!"

"Yes."

"Oh--how can you sit there so quietly?  Do you think--"she began,
and stopped, staring into the shadows with wide eyes.

"I think," said I, knocking the ashes from my pipe, and laying it
on the bench beside me, "that, all things considered, you were
wiser to go into the cottage for a while."

"No--oh, I couldn't do that!"

"You would be safer, perhaps."

"I am not a coward.  I shall remain here, of course."

"But I had rather you went inside."

"And I much prefer staying where I am."

"Then I must ask you to go inside, Charmian."

"No, indeed, my mind is made up."

"Then I insist, Charmian."

"Mr. Vibart!" she exclaimed, throwing up her head, "you forget
yourself, I think.  I permit no one to order my going and coming,
and I obey no man's command."

"Then--I beg of you."

"And I refuse, sir--my mind is made up."

"And mine also!" said I, rising.

"Why, what--what are you going to do?" she cried, retreating as I
advanced towards her.

"I am going to carry you into the cottage."

"You would not dare!"

"If you refuse to walk, how else can you get there?" said I.

Anger, amazement, indignation, all these I saw in her eyes as she
faced me, but anger most of all.

"Oh--you would--not dare!" she said again, and with a stamp of
her foot.

"Indeed, yes," I nodded.  And now her glance wavered beneath mine,
her head drooped, and, with a strange little sound that was neither
a laugh nor a sob, and yet something of each, she turned upon her
heel, ran into the cottage, and slammed the door behind her.




CHAPTER XIII

A PEDLER IN ARCADIA


The cottage, as I have said, was entirely hidden from the chance
observer by reason of the foliage: ash, alder, and bramble
flourished luxuriantly, growing very thick and high, with here
and there a great tree; but, upon one side, there was a little
grassy glade, or clearing rather, some ten yards square, and it
was towards this that my eyes were directed as I reseated myself
upon the settle beside the door, and waited the coming of the
unknown.

Though the shadows were too deep for my eyes to serve me, yet I
could follow the newcomer's approach quite easily by the sound he
made; indeed, I was particularly struck by the prodigious
rustling of leaves.  Whoever it was must be big and bulky, I
thought, and clad, probably, in a long, trailing garment.

All at once I knew I was observed, for the sounds ceased, and I
heard nothing save the distant bark of a dog and the ripple of
the brook near by.

I remained there for, maybe, a full minute, very still, only my
fists clenched themselves as I sat listening and waiting--and
that minute was an hour.

"You won't be wantin' ever a broom, now?"

The relief was so sudden and intense that I had much ado to keep
from laughing outright.

"You won't be wantin' ever a broom, now?" inquired the voice
again.

"No," I answered, "nor yet a fine leather belt with a steel
buckle made in Brummagem as ever was."

"Oh, it's you, is it?" said the Pedler, and forthwith Gabbing
Dick stepped out of the shadows, brooms on shoulder and bulging
pack upon his back, at sight of which the leafy tumult of his
approach was immediately accounted for.  "So it's you, is it?" he
repeated, setting down his brooms and spitting lugubriously at
the nearest patch of shadow.

"Yes," I answered, "but what brings you here?"

"I be goin' to sleep 'ere, my chap."

"Oh!--you don't mind the ghost, then?"

"Oh, Lord, no!  Theer be only two things as I can't abide--trees
as ain't trees is one on em, an' women's t' other."

"Women?"

"Come, didn't I 'once tell you I were married?"

"You did."

"Very well then!  Trees as ain't trees is bad enough, Lord
knows!--but women's worse--ah!" said the Pedler, shaking his
head, "a sight worse!  Ye see, trees ain't got tongues--leastways
not as I ever heerd tell on, an' a tree never told a lie--or ate
a apple, did it?"

"What do you mean by 'ate an apple'?"

"I means as a tree can't tell a lie, or eat a apple, but a woman
can tell a lie--which she does--frequent, an' as for apples--"

"But--" I began.

"Eve ate a apple, didn't she?"

"The Scriptures say so," I nodded.

"An' told a lie arterwards, didn't she?"

"So we are given to understand."

"Very well then!" said the Pedler, "there y' are!" and he turned
to spit into the shadow again.  "Wot's more," he continued,
"'twere a woman as done me out o' my birthright."

"How so?"

"Why, 'twere Eve as got us druv out o' the Gardin o' Eden,
weren't it?  If it 'adn't been for Eve I might ha' been livin' on
milk an' 'oney, ah! an' playin' wi' butterflies, 'stead o' bein'
married, an' peddlin' these 'ere brooms.  Don't talk to me o'
women, my chap; I can't abide 'em bah! if theer's any trouble
afoot you may take your Bible oath as theer's a woman about
some'eres--theer allus is!"

"Do you think so?"

"I knows so; ain't I a-'earin' an' a-seein' such all day, an'
every day--theer's Black Jarge, for one."

"What about him?"

"What about 'im!" repeated the Pedler; "w'y, ain't 'is life been
ruined, broke, wore away by one o' them Eves?--very well then!"

"What do you mean--how has his life been ruined?"

"Oh! the usual way of it; Jarge loves a gell--gell loves Jarge
--sugar ain't sweeter--very well then!  Along comes another cove
--a strange cove--a cove wi' nice white 'ands an' soft, takin'
ways--'e talks wi' 'er walks wi' 'er--smiles at 'er--an' pore
Jarge ain't nowheeres--pore Jarge's cake is dough--ah! an' doughy
dough at that!"

"How do you come to know all this?"

"'Ow should I come to know it but from the man 'isself?  'Dick,'
says 'e" (baptismal name Richard, but Dick for short), "'Dick,'
says 'e, 'd'ye see this 'ere stick?' an' 'e shows me a good,
stout cudgel cut out o' th' 'edge, an' very neatly trimmed it
were too.  'Ah! I sees it, Jarge,' says I.  'An' d'ye see this
un?' says 'e, 'oldin' up another as like the first as one pea to
its fellow.  'Ah! I sees that un too, Jarge,' says I.  'Well,'
says Jarge, 'one's for 'im an' one's for me--'e can take 'is
chice,' 'e says, 'an' when we do meet, it's a-goin' to be one or
t' other of us,' 'e says, an' wot's more--'e looked it!  'If I
'ave to wait, an' wait, an' foller 'im, an' foller 'im,' says
Jarge, 'I'll catch 'im alone, one o' these fine nights, an' it'll
be man to man.'"

"And when did he tell you all this?"

"'S marnin' as ever was."

"Where did you see him?"

"Oh, no!" said the Pedler, shaking his head, "not by no manner o'
means.  I'm married, but I ain't that kind of a cove!"

"What do you mean?"

"The runners is arter 'im--lookin' for 'im 'igh an' low, an'
--though married, I ain't one to give a man away.  I ain't a
friendly cove myself, never was, an' never shall be--never 'ad a
friend all my days, an' don't want one but I likes Black Jarge--I
pities, an' I despises 'im."

"Why do you despise him?"

Because 'e carries on so, all about a Eve--w'y, theer ain't a
woman breathin' as is worth a man's troublin' 'is lead over, no,
nor never will be--yet 'ere's Black Jarge ready--ah! an' more
than willin' to get 'isself 'ung, an' all for a wench--a Eve--"

"Get, himself hanged?" I repeated.

"Ah 'ung! w'y, ain't 'e a-waitin' an' a-waitin' to get at this
cove--this cove wi' the nice white 'ands an' the takin' ways,
ain't 'e awatchin' an' a-watchin' to meet 'im some lonely night
--and when 'e do meet 'im--"  The Pedler sighed.

"Well?"

"W'y, there'll be blood shed--blood!--quarts on it--buckets on
it! Black Jarge'll batter this 'ere cove's 'ead soft, so sure as
I were baptized Richard 'e'll lift this cove up in 'is great,
strong arms, an' 'e'll throw this cove down, an' 'e'll gore 'im,
an' stamp 'im down under 'is feet, an' this cove's blood'll go
soakin' an' a-soakin' into the grass, some'eres beneath some
'edge, or in some quiet corner o' the woods--and the birds'll
perch on this cove's breast, an' flutter their wings in this
cove's face, 'cause they'll know as this cove can never do nobody
no 'urt no wore; ah! there'll be blood--gallons of it!"

"I hope not!" said I.  "Ye do, do ye?"

"Most fervently!"

"An' 'cause why?"

"Because I happen to be that cove," I answered.

"Oh!" said the Pedler, eyeing me more narrowly; "you are, are
ye?"

"I am!"

"Yet you ain't got w'ite 'ands."

"They were white once," said I.

"An' I don't see as your ways is soft--nor yet takin'!"

"None the less, I am that cove!"

"Oh!" repeated the Pedler, and, having turned this intelligence
over in his mind, spat thoughtfully into the shadow again.  "You
won't be wantin' ever a broom, I think you said?"

"No," said I.

"Very well then!" he nodded, and, lifting his brooms, made
towards the cottage door!

"Where are you going?"

"To sleep in this 'ere empty 'ut."

"But it isn't empty!"

"So much the better," nodded the Pedler, "good night!" and, with
the words, he laid his hand upon the door, but, as he did so, it
opened, and Charmian appeared.  The Pedler fell back three or
four paces, staring with round eyes.

"By Goles!" he exclaimed.  "So you are married then?"

Now, when he said this I felt suddenly hot all over, even to the
very tips of my ears, and, for the life of me, I could not have
looked at Charmian.

"Why--why--" I began, but her smooth, soft voice came to my
rescue.

"No--he is not married," said she, "far from it."

"Not?" said the Pedler, "so much the better; marriage ain't love,
no, nor love ain't marriage--I'm a married cove myself, so I know
what I'm a-sayin'; if folk do talk, an' shake their 'eads over
ye--w'y, let 'em, only don't--don't go a-spilin' things by
gettin' 'churched.'  You're a woman, but you're a fine un--a
dasher, by Goles, nice an' straight-backed, an' round, an' plump
if I was this 'ere cove, now, I know what--"

"Here," said I hastily, "here--sell me a broom!"

The Pedler drew a broom from his bundle and passed it to me.

"One shillin' and sixpence!" said he, which sum I duly paid over.
"Don't," he continued, pocketing the money, and turning to
Charmian, "don't go spilin' things by lettin' this young cove go
a-marryin' an' a-churchin' ye--nobody never got married as didn't
repent it some time or other, an' wot's more, when Marriage comes
in at the door, Love flies out up the chimbley--an' there y'are!
Now, if you loves this young cove, w'y, very good! if this 'ere
young cove loves you--which ain't to be wondered at--so much the
better, but don't--don't go a-marryin' each other, an'--as for
the children--"

"Come--I'll take a belt--give me a belt!" said I, more hastily
than before.

"A belt?" said the Pedler.

"A belt, yes."

"Wi' a fine steel buckle made in--"

"Yes--yes!" said I.

"Two shillin' an' sixpence!" said the Pedler.

"When I saw you last time, you offered much the same belt for a
shilling," I demurred.

"Ah!" nodded the Pedler, "but belts is riz--'arf-a-crown's the
price--take it or leave it."

"It's getting late," said I, slipping the money into his hand,
"and I'll wish you good night!"

"You're in a 'urry about it, ain't you?"

"Yes."

"Ah--to be sure!" nodded the fellow, looking from me to Charmian
with an evil leer, "early to bed an'--"

"Come--get off!" said I angrily.

"Wot--are ye goin' to turn me away--at this time o' night!"

"It is not so far to Sissinghurst!" said I:

"But, Lord! I wouldn't disturb ye--an' there's two rooms, ain't
there?"

"There are plenty of comfortable beds to be had at 'The Bull.'"

"So you won't gi'e me a night's shelter, eh?"

"No," I answered, greatly annoyed by the fellow's persistence.

"An' you don't want to buy nothin' for the young woman--a
necklace--or, say--a pair o' garters?"  But here, meeting my eye,
he shouldered his brooms hastily and moved off.  And, after he
had gone some dozen yards or so, he paused and turned.

"Very well then!" he shouted, "I 'opes as you gets your 'ead
knocked off--ah!--an' gets it knocked off soon!"  Having said
which, he spat up into the air towards me, and trudged off.




CHAPTER XIV

CONCERNING BLACK GEORGE'S LETTER


It was with a feeling of great relief that I watched the fellow
out of sight; nevertheless his very presence seemed to have left a
blight upon all things, for he, viewing matters with the material
eye of Common-sense, had, thereby, contaminated them--even the air
seemed less pure and sweet than it had been heretofore, so that,
glancing over my shoulder, I was glad to see that Charmian had
re-entered the cottage.

"Here," said I to myself, "here is Common-sense in the shape of a
half-witted peddling fellow, blundering into Arcadia, in the
shape of a haunted cottage, a woman, and a man.  Straightway our
Pedler, being Common-sense, misjudges us--as, indeed, would every
other common-sense individual the world over; for Arcadia, being
of itself abstract and immaterial, is opposed to, and incapable
of being understood by concrete common-sense, and always will be
--and there's the rub!  And yet," said I, "thanks to the Wanderer
of the Roads, who built this cottage and hanged himself here, and
thanks to a Highland Scot who performed wonderfully on the
bagpipes, there is little chance of any common-sense vagrant
venturing near Arcadia again--at least until the woman is gone,
or the man is gone, or--"

Here, going to rub my chin (being somewhat at a loss), I found
that I had been standing, all this while, the broom in one hand
and the belt in the other, and now, hearing a laugh behind me, I
turned, and saw Charmian was leaning in the open doorway watching
me.

"And so you are the--the cove--with the white hands and the
taking ways, are you, Peter?"

"Why--you were actually--listening then?"

"Why, of course I was."

"That," said I, "that was very--undignified!"

"But very--feminine, Peter!"  Hereupon I threw the belt from me
one way, and the broom the other, and sitting down upon the bench
began to fill any pipe rather awkwardly, being conscious of
Charmian's mocking scrutiny.

"Poor--poor Black George!" she sighed.

"What do you mean by that?" said I quickly.

"Really I can almost understand his being angry with you."

"Why?"

"You walked with her, and talked with her, Peter--like Caesar,
'you came, you saw, you conquered'!"

Here I dragged my tinder-box from my pocket so awkwardly as to
bring the lining with it.

"And--even smiled at her, Peter--and you so rarely smile!"

Having struck flint and steel several times without success, I
thrust the tinder-box back into my pocket and fixed my gaze upon
the moon.

"Is she so very pretty, Peter?"

I stared up at the moon without answering.

"I wonder if you bother her with your Epictetus and--and
dry-as-dust quotations?"

I bit my lips and stared up at the moon.

"Or perhaps she likes your musty books and philosophy?"

But presently, finding that I would not speak, Charmian began to
sing, very sweet and low, as if to herself, yet, when I chanced
to glance towards her, I found her mocking eyes still watching
me.  Now the words of her song were these:

       "O, my luve's like a red, red rose,
        That's newly sprung in June;
        O, my luve's like the melodie
        That's sweetly played in tune."

And so, at last, unable to bear it any longer, I rose and, taking
my candle, went into my room and closed the door.  But I had been
there scarcely five minutes when Charmian knocked.

"Oh, Peter! I wish to speak to you--please."  Obediently I opened
the door.

"What is it, Charmian?"

"You dropped this from your pocket when you took out your
tinder-box so clumsily!" said she, holding towards me a crumpled
paper.  And looking down at it, I saw that it was Black George's
letter to Prudence.

Now, as I took it from her, I noticed that her hand trembled,
while in her eyes I read fear and trouble; and seeing this, I
was, for a moment, unwontedly glad, and then wondered at myself.

"You--did not read it--of course?" said I, well knowing that she
had.

"Yes, Peter--it lay open, and--"

"Then," said I, speaking my thought aloud, "you know that she
loves George."

"He means you harm," said she, speaking with her head averted,
"and, if he killed you--"

"I should be spared a deal of sorrow, and--and mortification,
and--other people would be no longer bothered by Epictetus and
dry-as-dust quotations."  She turned suddenly, and, crossing to
the open doorway, stood leaning there.  "But, indeed," I went on
hurriedly, "there is no chance of such a thing happening--not the
remotest.  Black George's bark is a thousand times worse than his
bite; this letter means nothing, and--er--nothing at all," I
ended, somewhat lamely, for she had turned and was looking at me
over her shoulder.

"If he has to 'wait and wait, and follow you and follow you'?"
said she, in the same low tone.

"Those are merely the words of a half-mad pedler," said I.

"'And your blood will go soaking, and soaking into the grass'!"

"Our Pedler has a vivid imagination!" said I lightly.  But she
shook her head, and turned to look out upon the beauty of the
night once more, while I watched her, chin in hand.

"I was angry with you to-night, Peter," said she at length,
"because you ordered me to do something against my will--and I
--did it; and so, I tried to torment you--you will forgive me
for that, won't you?"

"There is nothing to forgive, nothing, and--good night, Charmian."
Here she turned, and, coming to me, gave me her hand.

"Charmian Brown will always think of you as a--"

"Blacksmith!" said I.

"As a blacksmith!" she repeated, looking at me with a gleam in
her eyes, "but oftener as a--"

"Pedant!" said I.

"As a pedant!" she repeated obediently, "but most of all as a--"

"Well?" said I.

"As a--man," she ended, speaking with bent head.  And here again
I was possessed of a sudden gladness that was out of all reason,
as I immediately told myself.

"Your hand is very small," said I, finding nothing better to say,
"smaller even than I thought."

"Is it?" and she smiled and glanced up at me beneath her lashes,
for her head was still bent.

"And wonderfully smooth and soft!"

"Is it?" said she again, but this time she did not look up at me.
Now another man might have stooped and kissed those slender,
shapely fingers--but, as for me, I loosed them, rather suddenly,
and, once more bidding her good night, re-entered my own chamber,
and closed the door.

But to-night, lying upon my bed, I could not sleep, and fell to
watching the luminous patch of sky framed in my open casement.  I
thought of Charmian, of her beauty, of her strange whims and
fancies, her swift-changing moods and her contrariness, comparing
her, in turn, to all those fair women I had ever read of or
dreamed over in my books.  Little by little, however, my thoughts
drifted to Gabbing Dick and Black George, and, with my mind's
eye, I could see him as he was (perhaps at this very moment),
fierce-eyed and grim of mouth, sitting beneath some hedgerow,
while, knife in hand, he trimmed and trimmed his two bludgeons,
one of which was to batter the life out of me.  From such
disquieting reflections I would turn my mind to sweet-eyed
Prudence, to the Ancient, the forge, and the thousand and one
duties of the morrow.  I bethought me, once more, of the storm,
of the coming of Charmian, of the fierce struggle in the dark, of
the Postilion, and of Charmian again.  And yet, in despite of me,
my thoughts would revert to George, and I would see myself even
as the Pedler pictured me, out in some secluded corner of the
woods, lying stiffly upon my back with glassy eyes staring up
sightlessly through the whispering leaves above, while my blood
soaked and soaked into the green, and with a blackbird singing
gloriously upon my motionless breast.




CHAPTER XV

WHICH, BEING IN PARENTHESIS, MAY BE SKIPPED IF THE READER SO DESIRE


As this life is a Broad Highway along which we must all of us
pass whether we will or no; as it is a thoroughfare sometimes
very hard and cruel in the going, and beset by many hardships,
sometimes desolate and hatefully monotonous, so, also, must its
aspect, sooner or later, change for the better, and, the stony
track overpassed, the choking heat and dust left behind, we may
reach some green, refreshing haven shady with trees, and full of
the cool, sweet sound of running waters.  Then who shall blame us
if we pause unduly in this grateful shade, and, lying upon our
backs a while, gaze up through the swaying green of trees to the
infinite blue beyond, ere we journey on once more, as soon we
must, to front whatsoever of good or evil lies waiting for us in
the hazy distance.

To just such a place am I now come, in this, my history; the
record of a period which I, afterwards, remembered as the
happiest I had ever known, the memory of which must remain with
me, green and fragrant everlastingly.

If, in the forthcoming pages, you shall find over-much of
Charmian, I would say, in the first place, that it is by her, and
upon her, that this narrative hangs; and, in the second place,
that in this part of my story I find my greatest pleasure; though
here, indeed, I am faced with a great difficulty, seeing that I
must depict, as faithfully as may be, that most difficult, that
most elusive of all created things, to wit--a woman.

Truly, I begin to fear lest my pen fail me altogether for the
very reason that it is of Charmian that I would tell, and of
Charmian I understand little more than nothing; for what rule has
ever been devised whereby a woman's mind may be accurately
gauged, and who of all those wise ones who have written hitherto
--poets, romancers, or historians--has ever fathomed the why and
wherefore of the Mind Feminine?

A fool indeed were I to attempt a thing impossible; I do but seek
to show her to you as I saw her, and to describe her in so far as
I learned to know her.

And yet, how may I begin?  I might tell you that her nose was
neither arched nor straight, but perfect, none the less; I might
tell you of her brows, straight and low, of her eyes, long and
heavy-lashed, of her chin, firm and round and dimpled; and yet,
that would not be Charmian.  For I could not paint you the scarlet
witchery of her mouth with its sudden, bewildering changes, nor
show you how sweetly the lower lip curved up to meet its mate.
I might tell you that to look into her eyes was like gazing down
into very deep water, but I could never give you their varying
beauty, nor the way she had with her lashes; nor can I ever
describe her rich, warm coloring, nor the lithe grace of her body.

Thus it is that I misdoubt my pen of its task, and fear that, when
you shall have read these pages, you shall, at best, have caught
but a very imperfect reflection of Charmian as she really is.

Wherefore, I will waste no more time or paper upon so unprofitable
a task, but hurry on with my narrative, leaving you to find her
out as best you may.




CHAPTER XVI

CONCERNING, AMONG OTHER MATTERS, THE PRICE OF BEEF, AND THE LADY
SOPHIA SEFTON OF CAMBOURNE


Charmian sighed, bit the end of her pen, and sighed again.  She
was deep in her housekeeping accounts, adding and subtracting
and, between whiles, regarding the result with a rueful frown.

Her sleeves were rolled up over her round, white arms, and I
inwardly wondered if the much vaunted Phryne's were ever more
perfect in their modelling, or of a fairer texture.  Had I
possessed the genius of a Praxiteles I might have given to the
world a masterpiece of beauty to replace his vanished Venus of
Cnidus; but, as it happened, I was only a humble blacksmith, and
she a fair woman who sighed, and nibbled her pen, and sighed
again.

"What is it, Charmian?"

"Compound addition, Peter, and I hate figures I detest, loathe,
and abominate them--especially when they won't balance!"

"Then never mind them," said I.

"Never mind them, indeed--the idea, Sir!  How can I help minding
them when living costs so much and we so poor?"

"Are we?" said I.

"Why, of course we are."

"Yes--to be sure--I suppose we are," said I dreamily.

Lais was beautiful, Thais was alluring, and Berenice was famous
for her beauty, but then, could either of them have shown such
arms--so long, so graceful in their every movement, so subtly
rounded in their lines, arms which, for all their seeming
firmness, must (I thought) be wonderfully soft to the touch, and
smooth as ivory, and which found a delicate sheen where the light
kissed them?

"We have spent four shillings for meat this week, Peter!" said
Charmian, glancing up suddenly.

"Good!" said I.

"Nonsense, sir--four shillings is most extravagant!"

"Oh!--is it, Charmian?"

"Why, of course it is."

"Oh!" said I; "yes--perhaps it is."

"Perhaps!" said she, curling her lip at me, "perhaps, indeed!"
Having said which, Charmian became absorbed in her accounts
again, and I in Charmian.

In Homer we may read that the loveliness of Briseis caused
Achilles much sorrow; Ovid tells us that Chione was beautiful
enough to inflame two gods, and that Antiope's beauty drew down
from heaven the mighty Jove himself; and yet, was either of them
formed and shaped more splendidly than she who sat so near me,
frowning at what she had written, and petulantly biting her pen?

"Impossible!" said I, so suddenly that Charmian started and
dropped her pen, which I picked up, feeling very like a fool.

"What did you mean by 'impossible,' Peter?"

"I was--thinking merely."

"Then I wish you wouldn't think so suddenly next time."

"I beg your pardon."

"Nor be so very emphatic about it."

"No," said I, "er--no."  Hereupon, deigning to receive her pen
back again, she recommenced her figuring, while I began to fill
my pipe.

"Two shillings for tea!"

"Excellent!" said I.

"I do wish," she sighed, raising her head to shake it
reproachfully at me, "that you would be a little more sensible."

"I'll try."

"Tea at twelve shillings a pound is a luxury!"

"Undoubtedly!"

"And to pay two shillings for a luxury when we are so poor--is
sinful!"

"Is it, Charmian?"

"Of course it is."

"Oh!" said I; "and yet, life without tea--more especially as you
brew it--would be very stale, flat, and unprofitable, and--"

"Bacon and eggs--one shilling and fourpence!" she went on,
consulting her accounts.

"Ah!" said I, not venturing on "good," this time.

"Butter--one shilling!"

"Hum!" said I cautiously, and with the air of turning this over
in my mind.

"Vegetables--tenpence!"

"To be sure," said I, nodding my head, "tenpence, certainly."

"And bread, Peter" (this in a voice of tragedy) "--eightpence."

"Excellent!" said I recklessly, whereat Charmian immediately
frowned at me.

"Oh, Peter!" said she, with a sigh of resignation, "you possess
absolutely no idea of proportion.  Here we pay four shillings for
meat, and only eightpence for bread; had we spent less on luxuries
and more on necessaries we should have had money in hand instead
of--let me see!" and she began adding up the various items before
her with soft, quick little pats of her fingers on the table.
Presently, having found the total, she leaned back in her chair
and, summoning my attention with a tap of her pen, announced:

"We have spent nine shillings and tenpence, Peter!"

"Good, indeed!" said I.

"Leaving exactly--twopence over."

"A penny for you, and a penny for me."

"I fear I am a very bad housekeeper, Peter."

"On the contrary."

"You earn ten shillings a week."

"Well?"

"And here is exactly--twopence left--oh, Peter!"

"You are forgetting the tea and the beef, and--and the other
luxuries," said I, struck by the droop of her mouth.

"But you work so very, very hard, and earn so little and that
little--"

"I work that I may live, Charmian, and lo! I am alive."

"And dreadfully poor!"

"And ridiculously happy."

"I wonder why?" said she, beginning to draw designs on the page
before her.

"Indeed, though I have asked myself that question frequently
of late, I have as yet found no answer, unless it be my busy,
care-free life, with the warm sun about me and the voice of the
wind in the trees."

"Yes, perhaps that is it."

"And yet I don't know," I went on thoughtfully, "for now I come
to think of it, my life has always been busy and care-free, and I
have always loved the sun and the sound of wind in trees--yet,
like Horace, have asked 'What is Happiness?' and looked for it in
vain; and now, here--in this out-of-the-world spot, working as a
village smith, it has come to me all unbidden and unsought--which
is very strange!"

"Yes, Peter," said Charmian, still busy with her pen.

"Upon consideration I think my thanks are due to my uncle for
dying and leaving me penniless."

"Do you mean that he disinherited you?"

"In a way, yes; he left me his whole fortune provided that I
married a certain lady within the year."

"A certain lady?"

"The Lady Sophia Sefton, of Cambourne," said I.

Charmian's pen stopped in the very middle of a letter, and she
bent down to examine what she had been writing.

"Oh!" said she very softly, "the Lady Sophia Sefton of Cambourne?"

"Yes," said I.

"And--your cousin--Sir Maurice--were the conditions the same in
his case?"

"Precisely!"

"Oh!" said Charmian, just as softly as before, "and this lady
--she will not--marry you?"

"No," I answered.

"Are you quite--sure?"

"Certain!--you see, I never intend to ask her."

Charmian suddenly raised her head and looked at me,

"Why not, Peter?"

"Because, should I ever marry--a remote contingency, and most
improbable--I am sufficiently self-willed to prefer to exert my
own choice in the matter; moreover, this lady is a celebrated
toast, and it would be most repugnant to me that my wife's name
should ever have been bandied from mouth to mouth, and hiccoughed
out over slopping wineglasses--"

The pen slipped from Charmian's fingers to the floor, and before
I could pick it up she had forestalled me, so that when she
raised her head she was flushed with stooping.

"Have you ever seen this lady, Peter?"

"Never, but I have heard of her--who has not?"

"What have you heard?"

"That she galloped her horse up and down the steps of St. Paul's
Cathedral, for one thing."

"What more?"

"That she is proud, and passionate, and sudden of temper--in a
word, a virago!"

"Virago!" said Charmian, flinging up her head.

"Virago!" I nodded, "though she is handsome, I understand--in a
strapping way--and I have it on very excellent authority that she
is a black-browed goddess, a peach, and a veritable plum."

"'Strapping' is a hateful word, Peter!"

"But very descriptive."

"And--doesn't she interest you--a little, Peter?".

"Not in the least," said I.

"And, pray, why not?"

"Because I care very little for either peaches or plums."

"Or black-browed goddesses, Peter?"

"Not if she is big and strapping, and possesses a temper."

"I suppose--to such a philosopher as you--a woman or a goddess,
black-browed or not, can scarcely compare with, or hope to rival
an old book, can she, sir?"

"Why, that depends, Charmian."

"On what?"

"On the book!" said I.

Charmian rested her round elbows upon the table, and, setting her
chin in her hands, stared squarely at me.

"Peter," said she.

"Yes, Charmian?"

"If ever you did meet this lady--I think--"

"Well?"

"I know--"

"What?"

"That you would fall a very easy victim!"

"I think not," said I.

"You would be her slave in--a month--three weeks--or much less--"

"Preposterous!" I exclaimed.

"If she set herself to make you!"

"That would be very immodest!" said I; "besides, no woman can
make a man love her."

"Do your books teach you that, Peter?"  Here, finding I did not
answer, she laughed and nodded her head at me.  "You would be
head over ears in love before you knew it!"

"I think not," said I, smiling.

"You are the kind of man who would grow sick with love, and never
know what ailed him."

"Any man in such a condition would be a pitiful ass!" said I.

Charmian only laughed at me again, and went back to her scribbling.

"Then, if this lady married you," said she suddenly, "you would
be a gentleman of good position and standing?"

"Yes, I suppose so--and probably miserable."

"And rich, Peter?"

"I should have more than enough."

"Instead of being a village blacksmith--"

"With just enough, and absurdly happy and content," I added,
"which is far more desirable--at least I think so."

"Do you mean to say that you would rather--exist here, and make
horseshoes all your life, than--live, respected, and rich."

"And married to--"

"And married to the Lady Sophia?"

"Infinitely!" said I.

"Then your cousin, so far as you are concerned, is free to woo
and win her and your uncle's fortune?"

"And I wish him well of his bargain!" I nodded.  "As for me,
I shall probably continue to live here, and make horseshoes
--wifeless and content."

"Is marriage so hateful to you?"

"In the abstract--no; for in my mind there exists a woman whom I
think I could love--very greatly; but, in the actual--yes,
because there is no woman in all the world that is like this
woman of my mind."

"Is she so flawlessly perfect--this imaginary woman?"

"She is one whom I would respect for her intellect."

"Yes."

"Whom I would honor for her proud virtue."

"Yes, Peter."

"Whom I would worship for her broad charity, her gentleness, and
spotless purity."

"Yes, Peter."

"And love with all my strength, for her warm, sweet womanhood--in
a word, she is the epitome of all that is true and womanly!"

"That is to say--as you understand such things, sir, and all your
knowledge of woman, and her virtues and failings, you have
learned from your books, therefore, misrepresented by history,
and distorted by romance, it is utterly false and unreal.  And,
of course, this imaginary creature of yours is ethereal,
bloodless, sexless, unnatural, and quite impossible!"

Now, when she spoke thus, I laid down my pipe and stared, but,
before I could get my breath, she began again, with curling lip
and lashes that drooped disdainfully.

"I quite understand that there can be no woman worthy of Mr.
Peter Vibart--she whom he would honor with marriage must be
specially created for him!  Ah! but some day a woman--a real,
live woman--will come into his life, and the touch of her hand,
the glance of her eyes, the warmth of her breath, will dispel
this poor, flaccid, misty creature of his imagination, who will
fade and fade, and vanish into nothingness.  And when the real
woman has shown him how utterly false and impossible this dream
woman was--then, Mr. Peter Vibart, I hope she will laugh at you
--as I do, and turn her back upon you--as I do, and leave you
--for the very superior, very pedantic pedant that you are--and
scorn you--as I do, most of all because you are merely a
--creature!"  With the word, she flung up her head and stamped
her foot at me, and turning, swept out through the open door
into the moonlight.

"Creature?" said I, and so sat staring at the table, and the
walls, and the floor, and the rafters in a blank amazement.

But in a while, my amazement growing, I went and stood in the
doorway, looking at Charmian, but saying nothing.

And, as I watched, she began to sing softly to herself, and,
putting up her hand, drew the comb from her hair so that it fell
down, rippling about her neck and shoulders.  And, singing softly
thus, she shook her hair about her, so that I saw it curled far
below her waist; stooped her head, and, parting it upon her neck,
drew it over either shoulder, whence it flowed far down over her
bosom in two glorious waves, for the moon, peeping through the
rift in the leaves above, sent down her beams to wake small fires
in it, that came and went, and winked with her breathing.

"Charmian, you have glorious hair!" said I, speaking on the
impulse--a thing I rarely do.

But Charmian only combed her tresses, and went on singing to
herself.

"Charmian," said I again, "what did you mean when you called me
a--creature?"

Charmian went on singing.

"You called me a 'pedant' once before; to be told that I am
superior, also, is most disquieting.  I fear my manner must be
very unfortunate to afford you such an opinion of me."

Charmian went on singing.

"Naturally I am much perturbed, and doubly anxious to know what
you wish me to understand by the epithet 'creature'?"

Charmian went on singing.  Wherefore, seeing she did not intend
to answer me, I presently re-entered the cottage.

Now it is ever my custom, when at all troubled or put out in any
way, to seek consolation in my books, hence, I now took up my
Homer, and, trimming the candles, sat down at the table.

In a little while Charmian came in, still humming the air of her
song, and not troubling even to glance in my direction.

Some days before, at her request, I had brought her linen and
lace and ribands from Cranbrook, and these she now took out,
together with needle and cotton, and, sitting down at the
opposite side of the table, began to sew.

She was still humming, and this of itself distracted my mind from
the lines before me; moreover, my eye was fascinated by the gleam
of her flying needle, and I began to debate within myself what
she was making.  It (whatever it might be) was ruffled, and edged
with lace, and caught here and there with little bows of blue
riband, and, from these, and divers other evidences, I had
concluded it to be a garment of some sort, and was casting about
in my mind to account for these bows of riband, when, glancing up
suddenly, she caught my eye; whereupon, for no reason in the
world, I felt suddenly guilty, to hide which I began to search
through my pockets for my pipe.

"On the mantelshelf!" said she.

"What is?"

"Your pipe!"

"Thank you!" said I, and reached it down.

"What are you reading?" she inquired; "is it of Helen or Aspasia
or Phryne?"

"Neither--it is the parting of Hector and Andromache," I answered.

"Is it very interesting?"

"Yes."

"Then why do your eyes wander so often from the page?"

"I know many of the lines by heart," said I.  And having lighted
my pipe, I took up the book, and once more began to read.  Yet I
was conscious, all the time, of Charmian's flashing needle, also
she had begun to hum again.

And, after I had endeavored to read, and Charmian had hummed for
perhaps five minutes, I lowered my book, and, sighing, glanced
at her.

"I am trying to read, Charmian."

"So I see."

"And your humming confuses me."

"It is very quiet outside, Peter."

"But I cannot read by moonlight, Charmian."

"Then--don't read, Peter."  Here she nibbled her thread with
white teeth, and held up what she had been sewing to view the
effect of a bow of riband, with her head very much on one side.
And I inwardly wondered that she should spend so much care upon
such frippery--all senseless bows and laces.

"To hum is a very disturbing habit!" said I.

"To smoke an evil-smelling pipe is worse--much worse, Peter!"

"I beg your pardon!" said I, and laid the offending object back
upon the mantel.

"Are you angry, Peter?"

"Not in the least; I am only sorry that my smoking annoyed you
--had I known before--"

"It didn't annoy me in the least!"

"But from what you said I understood--"

"No, Peter, you did not understand; you never understand, and I
don't think you ever will understand anything but your Helens and
Phrynes--and your Latin and Greek philosophies, and that is what
makes you so very annoying, and so--so quaintly original!"

"But you certainly found fault with my pipe."

"Naturally!--didn't you find fault with my humming?"

"Really," said I, "really, I fail to see--"

"Of course you do!" sighed Charmian.  Whereupon there fell a
silence between us, during which she sewed industriously, and I
went forth with brave Hector to face the mighty Achilles.  But
my eye had traversed barely twenty lines when:

"Peter?"

"Yes?"

"Do you remember my giving you a locket?"

"Yes."

"Where is it?"

"Oh! I have it still--somewhere."

"Somewhere, sir?" she repeated, glancing at me with raised brows.

"Somewhere safe," said I, fixing my eyes upon my book.

"It had a riband attached, hadn't it?"

"Yes."

"A pink riband, if I remember--yes, pink."

"No--it was blue!" said I unguardedly.

"Are you sure, Peter?"  And here, glancing up, I save that she
was watching me beneath her lashes.

"Yes," I answered; "that is--I think so."

"Then you are not sure?"

"Yes, I am," said I; "it was a blue riband," and I turned over a
page very ostentatiously.

"Oh!" said Charmian, and there was another pause, during which I
construed probably fifty lines or so.

"Peter?"

"Well?"

"Where did you say it was now--my locket?"

"I didn't say it was anywhere."

"No, you said it was 'somewhere'--in a rather vague sort of way,
Peter."

"Well, perhaps I did," said I, frowning at my book.

"It is not very valuable, but I prized it for association's sake,
Peter."

"Ah!--yes, to be sure," said I, feigning to be wholly absorbed.

"I was wondering if you ever--wear it, Peter?"

"Wear it!" I exclaimed, and glancing furtively down at myself, I
was relieved to see that there were no signs of a betraying blue
riband; "wear it!" said I again, "why should I wear it?"

"Why, indeed, Peter, unless it was because it was there to wear."
Suddenly she uttered an exclamation of annoyance, and, taking up
a candle, began looking about the floor.

"What have you lost?"

"My needle! I think it must have fallen under the table.  and
needles are precious in this wilderness; won't you please help me
to find it?"

"With pleasure!" said I, getting down upon my hands and knees,
and together we began to hunt for the lost needle.

Now, in our search, it chanced that we drew near together, and
once her hand touched mine, and once her soft hair brushed my
cheek, and there stole over me a perfume like the breath of
violets, the fragrance that I always associated with her, faint
and sweet and alluring--so much so, that I drew back from further
chance of contact, and kept my eyes directed to the floor.

And, after I had sought vainly for some time, I raised my head
and looked at Charmian, to find her regarding me with a very
strange expression.

"What is it?" I inquired.  "Have you found the needle?"  Charmian
sat back on her heels, and laughed softly.

"Oh, yes, I've found the needle, Peter, that is--I never lost it."

"Why, then--what--what did you mean--?"

For answer, she raised her hand and pointed to my breast.  Then,
glancing hurriedly down, I saw that the locket had slipped
forward through the bosom of my shirt, and hung in plain view.  I
made an instinctive movement to hide it, but, hearing her laugh,
looked at her instead.

"So this was why you asked me to stoop to find your needle?"

"Yes, Peter."

"Then you--knew?"

"Of course I knew."

"Hum!" said I.  A distant clock chimed eleven, and Charmian began
to fold away her work, seeing which, I rose, and took up my
candle.  "And--pray--"

"Well?"

"And, pray," said I, staring hard at the flame of my candle, "how
did you happen to--find out--?"

"Very simply--I saw the riband round your neck days ago.  Good
night, Peter!"

"Oh," said I.  "Good night!"




CHAPTER XVII

THE OMEN


          "My lady sweet, arise!
           My lady sweet, arise
           With everything that pretty is,
           My lady sweet, arise;
              Arise, arise."

It was morning, and Charmian was singing.  The pure, rich notes
floated in at my open lattice, and I heard the clatter of her
pail as she went to fetch water from the brook.  Wherefore I
presently stepped out into the sunshine, my coat and neckcloth
across my arm, to plunge my head and face into the brook, and
carry back the heavy bucket for her, as was my custom.

Being come to the brook I found the brimming bucket, sure enough,
but no Charmian.  I was looking about wonderingly, when she began
to sing again, and, guided by this, I espied her kneeling beside
the stream.

The water ran deep and very still, just here, overhung by ash and
alder and willow, whose slender, curving branches formed a leafy
bower wherein she half knelt, half sat, bending over to regard
herself in the placid water.  For a long moment she remained
thus, studying her reflection intently in this crystal mirror,
and little by little her song died away.  Then she put up her
hands and began to rearrange her hair with swift, dexterous
fingers, apostrophizing her watery image the while, in this wise:

"My dear, you are growing positively apple-cheeked--I vow you
are! your enemies might almost call you strapping--alack!  And
then your complexion, my dear, your adorable complexion!" she
went on, with a rueful shake of her head, "you are as brown as a
gipsy--not that you need go breaking your heart over it--for,
between you and me, my dear, I think it rather improves you; the
pity of it is that you have no one to appreciate you properly--to
render to your charms the homage they deserve, no one--not a soul,
my dear; your hermit, bless you! can see, or think, of nothing
that exists out of a book--which, between you and me and the
bucket yonder, is perhaps just as well--and yet--heigho!  To be
so lovely and so forlorn! indeed, I could shed tears for you if
it would not make your eyelids swell and your classic nose
turn red."

Here she sighed again, and, taking a tendril of hair between her
fingers, transformed it, very cleverly, into a small curl.

"Yes, your tan certainly becomes you, my dear," she went on,
nodding to her reflection; "not that he will ever notice--dear
heart, no! were you suddenly to turn as black as a Hottentot
--before his very eyes--he would go on serenely smoking his pipe,
and talk to you of Epictetus--heighho!"  Sighing thus, she broke
off a spray of leaves and proceeded to twine them in among the
lustrous coils of her hair, bending over her reflection
meanwhile, and turning her head this way and that, to note the
effect.

"Yes," said she at last, nodding at her image with a satisfied
air, "that touch of green sets off your gipsy complexion
admirably, my dear--I could positively kiss you--I vow I could,
and I am hard to please.  St. Anthony himself, meeting you alone
in the desert, would, at least, have run away from you, and that
would have been some tribute to your charms, but our philosopher
will just glance at you with his slow, grave smile, and tell
you, in his solemn, affable way--that it is a very fine morning
--heigho!"

Here (somewhat late in the day, perhaps) perceiving that I was
playing eavesdropper, I moved cautiously away, and taking up the
pail, returned to the cottage.  I now filled the kettle and set
it upon the fire, and proceeded to spread the cloth (a luxurious
institution of Charmian's, on which she insisted) and to lay out
the breakfast things.  In the midst of which, however, chancing
to fall into a reverie, I became oblivious of all things till
roused by a step behind me, and, turning, beheld Charmian
standing with the glory of the sun about her--like the Spirit of
Summer herself, broad of hip and shoulder, yet slender, and long
of limb, all warmth and life, and long, soft curves from throat
to ankle--perfect with vigorous youth from the leaves that
crowned her beauty to the foot that showed beneath her gown.

And, as I gazed upon her, silent and wondering, lo! though her
mouth was solemn yet there was laughter in her eyes as she spoke.

"Well, sir--have you no greeting for me?"

"It--is a--very fine morning!" said I.  And now the merriment
overflowed her eyes, and she laughed, yet blushed a little, too,
and lowered her eyes from mine, and said, still laughing:

"Oh, Peter--the teapot--do mind the teapot!"

"Teapot?" I repeated, and then I saw that I still held it in my
hand.

"Pray, sir--what might you be going to do with the teapot in one
hand, and that fork in the other?"

"I was going to make the tea, I remember," said I.

"Is that why you were standing there staring at the kettle while
it boiled over?"

"I--forgot all about the kettle," said I.  So Charmian took the
teapot from me, and set about brewing the tea, singing merrily
the while.  Anon she began to fry the bacon, giving each
individual slice its due amount of care and attention; but, her
eyes chancing to meet mine, the song died upon her lip, her
lashes flickered and fell, while up from throat to brow there
crept a slow, hot wave of crimson.  And in that moment I turned
away and strode down to the brook.

Now it happened that I came to that same spot where she had
leaned and, flinging myself down, I fell to studying my
reflection in the water, even as she had done.

Heretofore, though I had paid scant heed to my appearance, I had
been content (in a certain impersonal sort of way), had dressed
in the fashion, and taken advantage of such adornments as were in
favor, as much from habit as from any set design; but now, lying
beside the brook with my chin propped in my hands, I began to
study myself critically, feature by feature, as I had never
dreamed of doing before.

Mirrored in the clear waters I beheld a face lean and brown, and
with lank, black hair; eyes, dark and of a strange brilliance,
looked at me from beneath a steep prominence of brow; I saw a
somewhat high-bridged nose with thin, nervous nostrils, a long,
cleft chin, and a disdainful mouth.

Truly, a saturnine face, cold and dark and unlovely, and thus
--even as I gazed--the mouth grew still more disdainful, and the
heavy brow lowered blacker and more forbidding.  And yet, in that
same moment, I found myself sighing, while I strove to lend some
order to the wildness of my hair.

"Fool!" said I, and plunged my head beneath the water, and held
it there so long that I came up puffing and blowing; whereupon I
caught up the towel and fell to rubbing myself vigorously, so
that presently, looking down into the water again, I saw that my
hair was wilder than ever--all rubbed into long elf-locks.
Straightway I lifted my hands, and would have smoothed it
somewhat, but checked the impulse.

"Let be," said I to myself, turning away, "let be.  I am as I am,
and shall be henceforth in very truth a village blacksmith--and
content so to be--absolutely content."

At sight of me Charmian burst out laughing, the which, though I
had expected it, angered me nevertheless.

"Why, Peter!" she exclaimed, "you look like--"

"A very low fellow!" said I, "say a village blacksmith who has
been at his ablutions."

"If you only had rings in your ears, and a scarf round your head,
you would be the image of a Spanish brigand--or like the man Mina
whose exploits The Gazette is full of--a Spanish general, I think."

"A guerrilla leader," said I, taking my place at the table, "and
a singularly cold-blooded villain--indeed I think it probable
that we much resemble one another; is it any wonder that I am
shunned by my kind--avoided by the ignorant and regarded askance
by the rest?"

"Why, Peter!" said Charmian, regarding me with grave eyes, "what
do you mean?"

"I mean that the country folk hereabout go out of their way to
avoid crossing my path--not that, I suppose, they ever heard of
Mina, but because of my looks."

"Your looks?"

"They think me possessed of the 'Evil Eye' or some such folly
--may I cut you a piece of bread?"

"Oh, Peter!"

"Already, by divers honest-hearted rustics, I am credited with
having cast a deadly spell upon certain unfortunate pigs, with
having fought hand to hand with the hosts of the nethermost pit,
and with having sold my soul to the devil--may I trouble you to
pass the butter?"

"Oh, Peter, how foolish of them!"

"And how excusable! considering their ignorance and superstition,"
said I.  "Mine, I am well aware, is not a face to win me the heart
of man, woman, or child; they (especially women and children) share,
in common with dogs and horses, that divine attribute which, for
want of a better name, we call 'instinct,' whereby they love or
hate for the mere tone of a voice, the glance of an eye, the motion
of a hand, and, the love or hate once given, the prejudice for, or
against, is seldom wholly overcome."

"Indeed," said Charmian, "I believe in first impressions."

"Being a woman," said I.

"Being a woman!" she nodded; "and the instinct of dog and child
and woman has often proved true in the end."

"Surely instinct is always true?" said I--"I'd thank you for
another cup of tea--yet, strangely enough, dogs generally make
friends with me very readily, and the few children to whom I've
spoken have neither screamed nor run away from me.  Still, as I
said before, I am aware that my looks are scarcely calculated to
gain the love of man, woman, or child; not that it matters
greatly, seeing that I am likely to hold very little converse
with either."

"There is one woman, Peter, to whom you have talked by the hour
together--"

"And who is doubtless weary enough of it all--more especially of
Epictetus and Trojan Helen."

"Two lumps of sugar, Peter?"

"Thank you! Women are very like flowers--" I began.

"That is a very profound remark, sir!--more especially coming
from one who has studied and knows womankind so deeply."

"--and it is a pity that they should be allowed to 'waste their
sweetness on the desert air.'"

"And philosophical blacksmiths, Peter?"

"More so if they be poor blacksmiths."

"I said 'philosophical,' Peter."

"You probably find your situation horribly lonely here?" I went
on after a pause.

"Yes; it's nice and lonely, Peter."

"And, undoubtedly, this cottage is very poor and mean, and--er
--humble?"  Charmian smiled and shook her head.

"But then, Charmian Brown is a very humble person, sir."

"And you haven't even the luxury of a mirror to dress your hair by!"

"Is it so very clumsily dressed, sir?"

"No, no," said I hastily, "indeed I was thinking--"

"Well, Peter?"

"That it was very--beautiful!"

"Why, you told me that last night--come, what do you think of it
this morning?"

"With those leaves in it--it is--even more so!"

Charmian laughed, and, rising, swept me a stately curtesy.

"After all, sir, we find there be exceptions to every rule!"

"You mean?"

"Even blacksmiths!"

And in a while, having finished my breakfast, I rose, and, taking
my hat, bade Charmian "Good morning," and so came to the door.
But on the threshold I turned and looked back at her.  She had
risen, and stood leaning with one hand on the table; now in the
other she held the breadknife, and her eyes were upon mine.

And lo! wonder of wonders! once again, but this time sudden and
swift--up from the round, full column of her throat, up over
cheek and brow there rushed that vivid tide of color; her eyes
grew suddenly deep and soft, and then were hidden 'neath her
lashes--and, in that same moment, the knife slipped from her
grasp, and falling, point downwards, stood quivering in the floor
between us--an ugly thing that gleamed evilly.

Was this an omen--a sign vouchsafed of that which, dark and
terrible, was, even then, marching to meet us upon this Broad
Highway?  O Blind, and more than blind!

Almost before it had ceased to quiver I stooped, and, plucking it
from the floor, gave it into her hand.  Now, as I did so, her
fingers touched mine, and, moved by a sudden mad impulse, I
stooped and pressed my lips upon them--kissed them quick and
fierce, and so turned, and hurried upon my way.

Yet, as I went, I found that the knife had cut my chin, and that
I was bleeding.

O Blind, and more than blind!  Surely this was a warning, an omen
to heed--to shiver over, despite the warm sun!

But, seeing the blood, I laughed, and strode villagewards, blithe
of heart and light of foot.

O Blind, and more than blind!




CHAPTER XVIII

IN WHICH I HEAR NEWS OF SIR MAURICE VIBART


"Which I says--Lord love me!"

I plunged the iron back into the fire, and, turning my head,
espied a figure standing in the doorway; and, though the leather
hat and short, round jacket had been superseded by a smart
groom's livery, I recognized the Postilion.

"So 'elp me, Bob, if this ain't a piece o' luck!" he exclaimed,
and, with the words, he removed his hat and fell to combing his
short, thick hair with the handle of his whip.

"I'm glad you think so," said I.

"You can drownd me if it ain't!" said he.

"And, pray, how is the gentleman who--happened to fall and hurt
himself, if you remember--in the storm?"

"'Appened to fall an' 'urt 'isself?" repeated the Postilion,
winking knowingly, "'urt 'isself,' says you 'Walker!' says I,
'Walker!'" with which he laid his forefinger against the side of
his nose and winked again.

"What might you be pleased to mean?"

"I means as a gent 'appenin' to fall in the dark may p'r'aps cut
'is 'ead open--but 'e don't give 'isself two black eyes, a bloody
nose, a split lip, an' three broken ribs, all at once--it ain't
nat'ral, w'ich if you says contrairy, I remarks--'Walker!' Lord!"
continued the Postilion, seeing I did not speak, "Lord! it must
'a' been a pretty warm go while it lasted--you put 'im to sleep
sound enough; it took me over a hour to Tonbridge, an' 'e never
moved till 'e'd been put to bed at 'The Chequers' an' a doctor
sent for.  Ah! an' a nice time I 'ad of it, what wi' chamber-maids
a-runnin' up an' down stairs to see the 'poor gentleman,' an'
everybody a-starin' at me, an' a-shakin' their 'eads, an' all
a-axin' questions, one atop o' the other, till the doctor come.
"Ow did this 'appen, me man?' says 'e.  'A haccident!' says I.
'A haccident?' says the doctor, wi' a look in 'is eye as I didn't
just like.  'Ah!' says I, 'fell on 'is 'ead--out o' the chaise,'
says I, 'struck a stone, or summ'at,' says I.  'Did 'e fall of
'is own accord?' says the doctor.  'Ah, for sure!' says I.
'Humph!' says the doctor, 'what wi' 'is eyes, an' 'is nose, an'
'is lip, looks to me as if some one 'ad 'elped 'im.' 'Then you
must be a dam' fool!' says a voice, an' there's my gentleman
--Number One, you know, a-sittin' up in bed an' doin' 'is 'ardest
to frown.  'Sir?' says the doctor.  'Sir! to you,' says my
gentleman, 'this honest fellow tells the truth.  I did fall out
o' the accursed chaise--an' be damned to you!' says 'e.  'Don't
excite yourself,' says the doctor; 'in your present condition it
would be dangerous.' 'Then be so good as to go to the devil!'
says my gentleman.  'I will!' says the doctor, an' off 'e goes.
'Hi, there, you,' says my gentleman, callin' to me as soon as we
were alone, 'this accursed business 'as played the devil with me,
an' I need a servant.  'Ow much do you want to stay wi' me?'
'Twenty-five shillin' a week,' says I, doin' myself proud while I
'ad the chance.  'I'll give ye thirty,' says 'e; 'wot's ye name?'
'Jacob Trimble, sir,' says I.  'An' a most accursed name it is!
--I'll call you Parks,' says 'e, 'an' when I ring let no one answer
but yourself.  You can go, Parks--an', Parks--get me another
doctor.'  Well," pursued the Postilion, seating himself near by,
"we'd been there a couple o' weeks, an' though 'e was better, an'
'is face near well again, 'e still kept to 'is room, when, one
day, a smart phaeton an' blood 'osses drives up, an' out steps a
fine gentleman--one o' them pale, sleepy sort.  I was a-standin'
in the yard, brushin' my master's coat--a bottle-green wi' silver
buttons, each button 'avin' what they calls a monneygram stamped
onto it.  'Ha, me man!' says the sleepy gent, steppin' up to me,
'a fine coat--doocid fashionable cut, curse me!--your master's?'
'Yes, sir,' says I, brushin' away.  'Silver buttons too!' says
the gent, 'let me see--ah yes!--a V, yes, to be sure--'ave the
goodness to step to your master an' say as a gentleman begs to
see 'im.'  'Can't be done, sir,' says I; 'me master ain't seein'
nobody, bein' in indifferent 'ealth.' 'Nonsense!' says the
gentleman, yawnin' an' slippin' a guinea into me 'and.  'Just
run, like a good feller, an' tell 'im as I bear a message from
George!'  'From 'oo?' says I.  'From George,' says the gent,
smilin' an' yawnin'--'just say from George.'  So, to come to the
end of it, up I goes, an' finds me master walkin' up an' down an'
aswearin' to 'isself as usual.  'A gentleman to see you, sir,'
says I.  'Why, devil burn your miserable carcass!' say 'e,
'didn't I tell you as I'd see nobody?'  'Ay, but this 'ere gent's
a-sayin' 'e 'as a message from George, sir.'  My master raised
both clenched fists above 'is 'ead an' swore--ah! better than I'd
heard for many a long day.  'Ows'ever, downstairs 'e goes,
cursin' on every stair.  In a time 'e comes back.  'Parks,' says
'e, 'do you remember that--that place where we got lost--in the
storm, Parks?'  'Ah, sir,' says I.  'Well, go there at once,'
says 'e,' an','--well--'e give me certain orders--jumps into the
phaeton wi' the sleepy gentleman, an' they drive off together--an'
accordin' to orders--'ere I am."

"A very interesting story!" said I.  "And so you are a groom now?"

"Ah!--an' you are a blacksmith, eh?"

"Yes."

"Well, if it don't beat everything as ever I heard--I'm a stiff
'un, that's all!"

"What do you mean?"

"I means my droppin' in on you, like this 'ere, just as if you
wasn't the one man in all England as I was 'opeful to drop in on."

"And you find me very busy!" said I.

"Lord love me!" said the Postilion, combing his hair so very hard
that it wrinkled his brow.  "I comes up from Tonbridge this 'ere
very afternoon, an', 'avin' drunk a pint over at 'The Bull'
yonder, an' axed questions as none o' they chawbacons could give
a answer to, I 'ears the chink o' your 'ammer, an' comin' over
'ere, chance like, I finds--you; I'll be gormed if it ain't
a'most onnat'ral!"

"And why?"

"'Cos you was the very i-dentical chap as I come up from
Tonbridge to find."

"Were you sent to find me?"

"Easy a bit--you're a blacksmith, a'n't you?"

"I told you so before."

"Wot's more, you looks a blacksmith in that there leather apron,
an' wi' your face all smutty.  To be sure, you're powerful like
'im--Number One as was--my master as now is--"

"Did he send you to find me?"

"Some folks might take you for a gentleman, meetin' you off'and
like, but I knows different."

"As how?"

"Well, I never 'eard of a gentleman turnin' 'isself into a
blacksmith, afore, for one thing--"

"Still, one might," I ventured.

"No," answered the Postilion, with a decisive shake of the head,
"it's ag'in' natur'; when a gentleman gets down in the world, an'
'as to do summ'at for a livin', 'e generally shoots 'isself--ah!
an' I've knowed 'em do it too!  An' then I've noticed as you
don't swear, nor yet curse--not even a damn."

"Seldom," said I; "but what of that?"

"I've seed a deal o' the quality in my time, one way or another
--many's the fine gentleman as I've druv, or groomed for, an'
never a one on 'em as didn't curse me--ah!" said the Postilion,
sighing and shaking his head, "_'ow_ they _did_ curse me!--'specially
one--a young lord--oncommon fond o' me 'e were too, in 'is way,
to the day 'is 'oss fell an' rolled on 'im.  'Jacob,' says 'e,
short like, for 'e were agoin' fast.  'Jacob!' says 'e, 'damn
your infernally ugly mug!' says 'e; 'you bet me as that cursed
brute would do for me.' 'I did, my lord,' says I, an' I remember
as the tears was a-runnin' down all our faces as we carried 'im
along on the five-barred gate, that bein' 'andiest.  'Well, devil
take your soul, you was right, Jacob, an' be damned to you!' says
'e; 'you'll find a tenner in my coat pocket 'ere, you've won it,
for I sha'n't last the day out, Jacob.'  An' 'e didn't either,
for 'e died afore we got 'im 'ome, an' left me a 'undred pound in
'is will.  Ah! gentlemen as is gents is all the same.  Lord love
you! there never was one on 'em but damned my legs, or my liver,
or the chaise, or the 'osses, or the road, or the inns, or all on
'em together.  If you was to strip me as naked as the palm o'
your 'and, an' to strip a lord, or a earl, or a gentleman as
naked as the palm o' your 'and, an' was to place us side by side
--where'd be the difference?  We're both men, both flesh and
blood, a'n't we?--then where 'd be the difference?  'Oo's to
tell which is the lord an' which is the postilion?"

"Who indeed?" said I, setting down my hammer.  "Jack is often as
good as his master--and a great deal better."

"Why, nobody!" nodded the Postilion, "not a soul till we opened
our mouths; an' then 'twould be easy enough, for my lord, or
earl, or gentleman, bein' naked, an' not likin' it (which would
only be nat'ral), would fall a-swearin' 'eavens 'ard, damning
everybody an' cursin' everything, an' never stop to think, while
I--not bein' born to it--should stand there a-shiverin' an'
tryin' a curse or two myself, maybe--but Lord! mine wouldn't
amount to nothin' at all, me not bein' nat'rally gifted, nor yet
born to it--an' this brings me round to 'er!"

"Her?"

"Ah--'er! Number Two--'er as quarrelled wi' Number One all the
way from London--'er as run away from Number One--wot about--'er?"
Here he fell to combing his hair again with his whip-handle,
while his quick, bright eyes dodged from my face to the glowing
forge and back again, and his clean-shaven lips pursed themselves
in a soundless whistle.  And, as I watched him, it seemed to me
that this was the question that had been in his mind all along.

"Seeing she did manage to run away from him--Number One--she is
probably very well," I answered.

"Ah--to be sure! very well, you say?--ah, to be sure!" said the
Postilion, apparently lost in contemplation of the bellows; "an'
--where might she be, now?"

"That I am unable to tell you," said I, and began to blow up the
fire while the Postilion watched me, sucking the handle of his
whip reflectively.

"You work oncommon 'ard--drownd me if you don't!"

"Pretty hard!" I nodded.

"An' gets well paid for it, p'r'aps?"

"Not so well as I could wish," said I.

"Not so well as 'e could wish," nodded the Postilion, apparently
addressing the sledge-hammer, for his gaze was fixed upon it.
"Of course not--the 'arder a man works the wuss 'e gets paid--'ow
much did you say you got a week?"

"I named no sum," I replied.

"Well--'ow much might you be gettin' a week?"

"Ten shillings."

"Gets ten shillin' a week!" he nodded to the sledgehammer, "that
ain't much for a chap like 'im--kick me, if it is!"

"Yet I make it do very well!"

The Postilion became again absorbed in contemplation of the
bellows; indeed he studied them so intently, viewing them with
his head now on one side, now on the other, that I fell to
watching him, under my brows, and so, presently, caught him
furtively watching me.  Hereupon he drew his whip from his mouth
and spoke.

"Supposing--" said he, and stopped.

"Well?" I inquired, and, leaning upon my hammer, I looked him
square in the eye.

"Supposing--wot are you a-staring at, my feller?"

"You have said 'supposing' twice--well?"

"Well," said he, fixing his eye upon the bellows again,
"supposing you was to make a guinea over an' above your wages
this week?"

"I should be very much surprised," said I.

"You would?"

"I certainly should."

"Then--why not surprise yourself?"

"You must speak more plainly," said I.

"Well then," said the Postilion, still with his gaze abstracted,
"supposin' I was to place a guinea down on that there anvil o'
yours--would that 'elp you to remember where Number Two--'er
--might be?"

"No!"

"It wouldn't?"

"No!"

"A guinea's a lot o' money!"

"It is," I nodded.

"An' you say it wouldn't?"

"It would not!" said I.

"Then say--oh! say two pun' ten an' 'ave done with it."

"No!" said I, shaking my head.

"What--not--d'ye say 'no' to two pun' ten?"

"I do."

"Well, let's say three pound."

I shook my head and, drawing the iron from the fire, began to
hammer at it.

"Well then," shouted the Postilion, for I was making as much din
as possible, "say four--five--ten--fifteen--twenty-five--fifty!"
Here I ceased hammering.

"Tell me when you've done!" said I.

"You're a cool customer, you are--ah! an' a rum un' at that--I
never see a rummer."

"Other people have thought the same," said I, examining the
half-finished horseshoe ere I set it back in the fire.

"Sixty guineas!" said the Postilion gloomily.

"Come again!" said I.

"Seventy then!" said he, his gloom deepening.

"Once more!" said I.

"A 'undred--one 'undred guineas!" said he, removing his hat to
mop at his brow.

"Any more?" I inquired.

"No!" returned the Postilion sulkily, putting on his hat, "I'm
done!"

"Did he set the figure at a hundred guineas?" said I.

"'Im--oh! 'e's mad for 'er, 'e is--'e'd ruin 'isself, body and
soul, for 'er, 'e would, but I ain't goin' to ofer no more; no
woman as ever breathed--no matter 'ow 'andsome an' up-standin'
--is worth more 'n a 'undred guineas--it ain't as if she was a
blood-mare--an' I'm done!"

"Then I wish you good-day!"

"But--just think--a 'undred guineas is a fortun'!"

"It is!" said I.

"Come, think it over," said the Postilion persuasively, "think it
over, now!"

"Let me fully understand you then," said I; "you propose to pay
me one hundred guineas on behalf of your master, known heretofore
as Number One, for such information as shall enable him to
discover the whereabouts of a certain person known as Her, Number
Two--is that how the matter stands?"

"Ah! that's 'ow it stands," nodded the Postilion, "the money to
be yours as soon as ever 'e lays 'ands on 'er--is it a go?"

"No!"

"No?"

"No!"

"W'y, you must be stark, starin' mad--that you must--unless
you're sweet on 'er yourself--"

"You talk like a fool!" said I angrily.

"So you are sweet on 'er then?"

"Ass!" said I.  "Fool!"  And, dropping my hammer, I made towards
him, but he darted nimbly to the door, where, seeing I did not
pursue, he paused.

"I may be a hass," he nodded, "an' I may be a fool--but I don't go
a-fallin' in love wi' ladies as is above me, an' out o' my reach,
and don't chuck away a 'undred guineas for one as ain't likely to
look my way--not me!  Which I begs leave to say--hass yourself,
an' likewise fool--bah!"  With which expletive he set his thumb
to his nose, spread out his fingers, wagged them and swaggered off.

Above me, and out of my reach! One not likely to look my way!

And, in due season, having finished the horseshoe, having set
each tool in its appointed place in the racks, and raked out the
clinkers from the fire, I took my hat and coat, and, closing the
door behind me, set out for the Hollow.




CHAPTER XIX

HOW I MET BLACK GEORGE AGAIN, AND WHEREIN THE PATIENT READER
SHALL FIND A "LITTLE BLOOD"


It was evening--that time before the moon is up and when the
earth is dark, as yet, and full of shadows.  Now as I went, by
some chance there recurred to me the words of an old song I had
read somewhere, years ago, words written in the glorious, brutal,
knightly days of Edward the First, of warlike memory; and the
words ran thus:

      "For her love I carke, and care,
       For her love I droop, and dare,
       For her love my bliss is bare.
       And I wax wan!"

"I wonder what poor, love-sick, long-dead-and-forgotten fool
wrote that?" said I aloud.

      "For her love, in sleep I slake,
       For her love, all night I wake,
       For her love, I mourning make
       More than any man!"

Some doughty squire-at-arms, or perhaps some wandering knight
(probably of a dark, unlovely look), who rode the forest ways
with his thoughts full of Her, and dreaming of Her loveliness.
"Howbeit, he was, beyond all doubt, a fool and a great one!" said
I, "for it is to be inferred, from these few words he has left
us, that his love was hopeless.  She was, perhaps, proud and of a
high estate, one who was above him, and far beyond his reach--who
was not likely even to look his way.  Doubtless she was
beautiful, and therefore haughty and disdainful, for disdainful
pride is an attribute of beauty, and ever was and ever will be
--and hence it came that our misfortunate squire, or knight-errant,
was scorned for his pains, poor fool!  Which yet was his own
fault, after all, and, indeed, his just reward, for what has any
squire-at-arms or lusty knight, with the world before him, and
glory yet unachieved--to do with love?  Love is a bauble--a toy,
a pretty pastime for idle folk who have no thought above such
--away with it!--Bah!"  And, in my mind--that is to say, mentally
--I set my thumb to my nose, and spread my fingers, and wagged
them--even as the Postilion had done.  And yet, despite this, the
words of the old song recurred again and again, pathetically
insistent, voicing themselves in my footsteps so that, to banish
them, I presently stood still.

And in that very moment a gigantic figure came bursting through
the hedge, clearing the ditch in a single bound--and Black George
confronted me.

Haggard of face, with hair and beard matted and unkempt, his
clothes all dusty and torn, he presented a very wild and terrible
appearance; and beneath one arm he carried two bludgeons.  The
Pedler had spoken truly, then, and, as I met the giant's
smouldering eye, I felt my mouth become suddenly parched and dry,
and the palms of my hands grew moist and clammy.

For a moment neither of us spoke, only we looked at each other
steadily in the eye; and I saw the hair of his beard bristle, and
he raised one great hand to the collar of his shirt, and tore it
open as if it were strangling him.

"George!" said I at last, and held out my hand

George never stirred.

"Won't you shake hands, George?"

His lips opened, but no words came.

"Had I known where to look for you, I should have sought you out
days ago," I went on; "as it is I have been wishing to meet you,
hoping to set matters right."

Once again his lips opened, but still no word came.

"You see, Prudence is breaking her heart over you."

A laugh burst from him, sudden, and harsh.

"You 'm a liar!" said he, and his voice quavered strangely.

"I speak gospel truth!" said I.

"I be nowt to Prue since the day you beat me at th' 'ammer-throwin'
--an' ye know it."

"Prudence loves you, and always has," said I.  "Go back to her,
George, go back to her, and to your work be the man I know you are;
go back to her--she loves you.  If you still doubt my word--here,
read that!" and I held out his own letter, the letter on which
Prudence had written those four words: "George, I love you."

He took it from me--crumpled it slowly in his hand and tossed it
into the ditch.

"You 'm a liar!" said he again, "an' a--coward!"

"And you," said I, "you are a fool, a blind, gross, selfish fool,
who, in degrading yourself--in skulking about the woods and
lanes--is bringing black shame and sorrow to as sweet a maid as
ever--"

"It don't need you to tell me what she be an' what she bean't,"
said Black George, in a low, repressed voice.  "I knowed 'er long
afore you ever set eyes on 'er--grew up wi' 'er, I did, an' I
bean't deaf nor blind.  Ye see, I loved 'er--all my life--that's
why one o' us two's a-goin' to lie out 'ere all night--ah! an'
all to-morrow, likewise, if summun don't chance to find us,"
saying which, he forced a cudgel into my hand.

"What do you mean, George?"

"I means as if you don't do for me, then I be a-goin' to do for
'ee."

"But why?" I cried; "in God's name--why?"

"I be slow, p'r'aps, an' thick p'raps, but I bean't a fule--come,
man--if she be worth winnin' she be worth fightin' for."

"But I tell you she loves Black George, and no other she never
had any thought of me, or I of her--this is madness--and worse!"
and I tossed the cudgel aside.

"An' I tell 'ee," broke in the smith, his repression giving way
before a fury as fierce as it was sudden, "I tell 'ee--you be a
liar, an' a coward--I know, I know--I've heerd an' I've seen
--your lyin', coward's tongue sha'n't save 'ee--oh, ecod! wi'
your white face an' tremblin' 'ands--you be a shame to the woman
as loves ye, an' the woman as bore ye!--stand up, I say, or by
God!  I'll do for 'ee!" and he raised his weapon.

Without another word I picked up the cudgel, and, pointing to a
gate a little farther along the road, I led the way into the
meadow beyond.  On the other side of this meadow ran the lane I
have mentioned before, and beyond the lane was the Hollow, and
glancing thitherward, I bethought me that supper would be ready,
and Charmian waiting for me, just about now, and I sighed, I
remember, as I drew off my coat, and laid it, together with my
hat, under the hedge.

The moon was beginning to rise, casting the magic of her pale
loveliness upon the world, and, as I rolled up my sleeves, I
glanced round about me with an eye that strove to take in the
beauty of all things--of hedge and tree and winding road, the
gloom of wood, the sheen of water, and the far, soft sweep of
hill and dale.  Over all these my glance lingered yearningly, for
it seemed to me that this look might be my last.  And now, as I
stooped and gripped my weapon, I remembered how I had, that
morning, kissed her fingers, and I was strangely comforted and
glad.

The night air, which had been warm heretofore, struck chilly now,
and, as I stood up fronting Black George, I shivered, seeing
which he laughed, short and fierce, and, with the laugh, came at
me, striking downwards at my head as he came, and tough wood met
tough wood with a shock that jarred me from wrist to shoulder.

To hit him upon the arm, and disable him, was my one thought and
object.  I therefore watched for an opening, parrying his swift
strokes and avoiding his rushes as well as I might.  Time and
again our weapons crashed together, now above my head, now to
right, or left, sometimes rattling in quick succession, sometimes
with pauses between strokes, pauses filled in with the sound of
heavy breathing and the ceaseless thud of feet upon the sward.  I
was already bruised in half-a-dozen places, my right hand and arm
felt numb, and with a shooting pain in the shoulder, that grew
more acute with every movement; my breath also was beginning to
labor.  Yet still Black George pressed on, untiring, relentless,
showering blow on blow, while my arm grew ever weaker and weaker,
and the pain in my shoulder throbbed more intensely.

How long had we fought? five minutes--ten--half-an-hour--an hour?
I could see the sweat gleaming upon his cheek, his eyes were wild,
his mouth gaped open, and he drew his breath in great sobbing
pants.  But, as I looked, his cudgel broke through my tired guard,
and, taking me full upon the brow, drove me reeling back; my
weapon slipped from my grasp, and, blinded with blood, I staggered
to and fro, like a drunken man, and presently slipped to the grass.
And how sweet it was to lie thus, with my cheek upon kind mother
earth, to stretch my aching body, and with my weary limbs at rest.
But Black George stood above me, panting, and, as his eyes met
mine, he laughed--a strange-sounding, broken laugh, and whirled
up his cudgel--to beat out my brains--even as the Pedler had
foretold--to-morrow the blackbird would sing upon my motionless
breast, and, looking into Black George's eyes--I smiled.

"Get up!" he panted, and lowered the cudgel.  "Get up--or, by
God--I'll do--for 'ee!"

Sighing, I rose, and took the cudgel he held out to me, wiping
the blood from my eyes as I did so.

And now, as I faced him once more, all things vanished from my
ken save the man before me--he filled the universe, and, even as
he leaped upon me, I leaped upon him, and struck with all my
strength; there was a jarring, splintering shock, and Black
George was beaten down upon his knees, but as, dropping my
weapon, I stepped forward, he rose, and stood panting, and
staring at the broker cudgel in his hand.

"George!" said I.

"You 'm a-bleedin', Peter!"

"For that matter, so are you."

"Blood-lettin' be--good for a man--sometimes eases un."

"It does," I panted; "perhaps you are--willing to hear reason--now?"

"We be--even so fur--but fists be better nor--sticks any day--an'
I--be goin'--to try ye--wi' fists!"

"Have we not bled each other sufficiently?"

"No," cried George, between set teeth, "theer be more nor
blood-lettin' 'twixt you an' me--I said as 'ow one on us would lie
out 'ere all night--an' so 'e shall--by God!--come on--fists be
best arter all!"

This was the heyday of boxing, and, while at Oxford I had earned
some small fame at the sport.  But it was one thing to spar with
a man my own weight in a padded ring, with limited rounds governed
by a code of rules, and quite another to fight a man like Black
George, in a lonely meadow, by light of moon.  Moreover, he was
well acquainted with the science, as I could see from the way he
"shaped," the only difference between us being that whereas he
fought with feet planted square and wide apart, I balanced myself
upon my toes, which is (I think) to be commended as being quicker,
and more calculated to lessen the impact of a blow.

Brief though the respite had been, it had served me to recover my
breath, and, though my head yet rung from the cudgel-stroke, and
the blood still flowed freely, getting, every now and then, into
my eyes, my brain was clear as we fronted each other for what we
both knew must be the decisive bout.

The smith stood with his mighty shoulders stooped something
forward, his left arm drawn back, his right flung across his
chest, and, so long as we fought, I watched that great fist and
knotted forearm, for, though he struck oftener with his left, it
was in that passive right that I thought my danger really lay.

It is not my intention to chronicle this fight blow by blow;
enough, and more than enough, has already been said in that
regard; suffice it then, that as the fight progressed I found
that I was far the quicker, as I had hoped, and that the majority
of his blows I either blocked or avoided easily enough.

Time after time his fist shot over my shoulder, or over my head,
and time after time I countered heavily--now on his body, now on
his face; once he staggered, and once I caught a momentary
glimpse of his features convulsed with pain; he was smeared with
blood from the waist up, but still he came on.

I fought desperately now, savagely, taking advantage of every
opening, for though I struck him four times to his once, yet his
blows had four times the weight of mine; my forearms were bruised
to either elbow, and my breath came in gasps; and always I
watched that deadly "right."  And presently it came, with arm
and shoulder and body behind it--quick as a flash, and resistless
as a cannonball; but I was ready, and, as I leaped, I struck, and
struck him clean and true upon the angle of the jaw; and,
spinning round, Black George fell, and lay with his arms wide
stretched, and face buried in the grass.

Slowly, slowly he got upon his knees, and thence to his feet, and
so stood panting, hideous with blood and sweat, bruised and cut
and disfigured, staring at me, as one in amaze.

Now, as I looked, my heart went out to him, and I reached forth
my right hand.

"George!" I panted.  "Oh, George!"

But Black George only looked at me, and shook his head, and
groaned.

"Oh, Peter!" said he, "you be a man, Peter!  I've fou't--ah! many
's the time, an' no man ever knocked me down afore.  Oh, Peter!
I--I could love 'ee for it if I didn't hate the very sight of
'ee--come on, an' let's get it over an' done wi'."

So once again fists were clenched and jaws set--once again came
the trampling of feet, the hiss of breath, and the thudding shock
of blows given and taken.

A sudden, jarring impact--the taste of sulphur on my tongue--a
gathering darkness before my eyes, and, knowing this was the end,
I strove desperately to close with him; but I was dazed, blind
--my arms fell paralyzed, and, in that moment, the Smith's right
fist drove forward.  A jagged flame shot up to heaven--the earth
seemed to rush up towards me--a roaring blackness engulfed me,
and then--silence.




CHAPTER XX

HOW I CAME UP OUT OF THE DARK


Some one was calling to me, a long way off.

Some one was leaning down from a great height to call to me in
the depths; and the voice was wonderfully sweet, but faint,
faint, because the height was so very high, and the depths so
very great.

And still the voice called and called, and I felt sorry that I
could not answer, because, as I say, the voice was troubled, and
wonderfully sweet.

And, little by little, it seemed that it grew nearer, this voice;
was it descending to me in these depths of blackness, or was I
being lifted up to the heights where, I knew, blackness could not
be?  Ay, indeed, I was being lifted, for I could feel a hand upon
my brow--a smooth, cool hand that touched my cheek, and brushed
the hair from my forehead; a strong, gentle hand it was, with
soft fingers, and it was lifting me up and up from the loathly
depths which seemed more black and more horrible the farther I
drew from them.

And so I heard the voice nearer, and ever nearer, until I could
distinguish words, and the voice had tears in it, and the words
were very tender.

"Peter--speak!--speak to me, Peter!"

"Charmian?" said I, within myself; "why, truly, whose hand but
hers could have lifted me out of that gulf of death, back to
light and life?"  Yet I did not speak aloud, for I had no mind
to, yet a while.

"Ah! speak to me--speak to me, Peter! How can you lie there so
still and pale?"

And now her arms were about me, strong and protecting, and my
head was drawn down upon her bosom.

"Oh, Peter!--my Peter!"

Nay, but was this Charmian, the cold, proud Charmian?  Truly I
had never heard that thrill in her voice before--could this indeed
be Charmian?  And lying thus, with my head on this sweet pillow,
I could hear her heart whispering to me, and it seemed that it
was striving to tell me something--striving, striving to tell me
something, could I but understand--ah! could I but understand!

"I waited for you so long--so long, Peter--and the supper is all
spoiled--a rabbit, Peter--you liked rabbit, and--and oh, God! I
want you--don't you hear me, Peter--I want you--want you!" and
now her cheek was pressed to mine, and her lips were upon my hair,
and upon my brow--her lips!  Was this indeed Charmian, and was I
Peter Vibart?  Ah, if I could but know what it was her heart was
trying to tell me, so quickly and passionately!

And while I lay listening, listening, something hot splashed down
upon my cheek, and then another, and another; her bosom heaved
tumultuously, and instinctively, raising my arms, I clasped them
about her.

"Don't!" I said, and my voice was a whisper; "don't, Charmian!"

For a moment her clasp tightened about me, she was all tenderness
and clinging warmth; then I heard a sudden gasp, her arms
loosened and fell away, and so I presently raised my head, and,
supporting myself upon my hand, looked at her.  And then I saw
that her cheeks were burning.

"Peter."

"Yes, Charmian?"

"Did you--"  She paused, plucking nervously at the grass, and
looking away from me.

"Well, Charmian?"

"Did you--hear--"  Again she broke off, and still her head was
averted.

"I heard your voice calling to me from a great way off, and so--I
came, Charmian."

"Were you conscious when--when I--found you?"

"No," I answered; "I was lying in a very deep, black, pit."  Here
she looked at me again.

"I--I thought you--were--dead, Peter."

"My soul was out of my body--until you recalled it."

"You were lying upon your back, by the hedge here, and--oh, Peter!
your face was white and shining in the moonlight--and there
was--blood upon it, and you looked like one that is--dead!" and
she shivered.

"And you have brought me back to life," said I, rising; but, being
upon my feet, I staggered giddily, to hide which, I laughed, and
leaned against a tree.  "Indeed," said I, "I am very much alive
still, and monstrously hungry--you spoke of a rabbit, I think--"

"A rabbit!" said Charmian in a whisper, and as I met her eye I
would have given much to have recalled that thoughtless speech.

"I--I think you did mention a rabbit," said I, floundering
deeper.

"So, then--you deceived me, you lay there and deceived me--with
your eyes shut, and your ears open, taking advantage of my pity--"

"No, no--indeed, no--I thought myself still dreaming; it--it all
seemed so unreal, so--so beyond all belief and possibility and--"
I stopped, aghast at my crass folly, for, with a cry, she sprang
to her feet, and hid her face in her hands, while I stood
dumbfounded, like the fool I was.  When she looked up, her eyes
seemed to, scorch me.

"And I thought Mr. Vibart a man of honor--like a knight of his
old-time romances, high and chivalrous--oh! I thought him a
--gentleman!"

"Instead of which," said I, speaking (as it were), despite
myself, "instead of which, you find me only a blacksmith--a low,
despicable fellow eager to take advantage of your unprotected
womanhood."  She did not speak standing tall and straight, her
head thrown back; wherefore, reading her scorn of me in her eyes,
seeing the proud contempt of her mouth, a very demon seemed
suddenly to possess me, for certainly the laugh that rang from my
lip, proceeded from no volition of mine.

"And yet, madam," my voice went on, "this despicable blacksmith
fellow refused one hundred guineas for you to-day."

"Peter!" she cried, and shrank away from me as if I had
threatened to strike her.

"Ah!--you start at that--your proud lip trembles--do not fear,
madam--the sum did not tempt him--though a large one."

"Peter!" she cried again, and now there was a note of appeal in
her voice.

"Indeed, madam, even so degraded a fellow as this blacksmith
could not very well sell that which he does not possess--could
he?  And so the hundred guineas go a-begging, and you are still
--unsold!"  Long before I had done she had covered her face again,
and, coming near, I saw the tears running out between her fingers
and sparkling as they fell.  And once again the devil within me
laughed loud and harsh.  But, while it still echoed, I had flung
myself down at her feet.

"Charmian," I cried, "forgive me--you will, you must!" and,
kneeling before her, I strove to catch her gown, and kiss its
hem, but she drew it close about her, and, turning, fled from me
through the shadows.

Heedless of all else but that she was leaving me, I stumbled to
my feet and followed.  The trees seemed to beset me as I ran, and
bushes to reach out arms to stay me, but I burst from them,
running wildly, blunderingly, for she was going--Charmian was
leaving me.  And so, spent and panting, I reached the cottage,
and met Charmian at the door.  She was clad in the long cloak she
had worn when she came, and the hood was drawn close about her
face.

I stood panting in the doorway, barring her exit.

"Let me pass, Peter."

"By God--no!" I cried, and, entering, closed the door, and leaned
my back against it.

And, after we had stood thus awhile, each looking upon the other,
I reached out my hands to her, and my hands were torn and bloody.

"Don't go, Charmian," I mumbled, "don't go!  Oh, Charmian--I'm
hurt--I didn't want you to know, but you mustn't leave me--I am
not--well; it is my head, I think.  I met Black George, and he
was too strong for me.  I'm deaf, Charmian, and half blinded--oh,
don't leave me--I'm afraid, Charmian!"  Her figure grew more
blurred and indistinct, and I sank down upon my knees; but in the
dimness I reached out and found her hands, and clasped them, and
bowed my aching head upon them, and remained thus a great while,
as it seemed to me.

And presently, through the mist, her voice reached me.

"Oh, Peter!  I will not leave you--lean on me there--there!"
And, little by little, those strong, gentle hands drew me up once
more to light and life.  And so she got me to a chair, and brought
cool water, and washed the blood and sweat from me, as she had
once before, only now my hurts were deeper, for my head grew
beyond my strength to support, and hung upon my breast, and my
brain throbbed with fire, and the mist was ever before my eyes.

"Are you in much pain, Peter?"

"My head--only my head, Charmian--there is a bell ringing there,
no--it is a hammer, beating."  And indeed I remembered little for
a while, save the touch of her hands and the soothing murmur of
her voice, until I found she was kneeling beside me, feeding me
with broth from a spoon.  Wherefore I presently took the basin
from her and emptied it at a gulp, and, finding myself greatly
revived thereby, made some shift to eat of the supper she set
before me.

So she presently came and sat beside me and ate also, watching me
at each morsel.

"Your poor hands!" said she, and, looking down at them, I saw
that my knuckles were torn and broken, and the fingers much
swelled.  "And yet," said Charmian, "except for the cut in your
head, you are quite unmarked, Peter."

"He fought mostly for the body," I answered, "and I managed to
keep my face out of the way; but he caught me twice--once upon
the chin, lightly, and once up behind the ear, heavily; had his
fist landed fairly I don't think even you could have brought me
back from those loathly depths, Charmian."

And in a while, supper being done, she brought my pipe, and
filled it, and held the light for me.  But my head throbbed
woefully and for once the tobacco was flavorless; so I sighed,
and laid the pipe by.

"Why, Peter!" said Charmian, regarding me with an anxious frown,
"can't you smoke?"

"Not just now, Charmian," said I, and leaning my head in my
hands, fell into a sort of coma, till, feeling her touch upon my
shoulder, I started, and looked up.

"You must go to bed, Peter."

"No," said I.

"Yes, Peter."

"Very well, Charmian, yes--I will go to bed," and I rose.

"Do you feel better now, Peter?"

"Thank you, yes--much better."

"Then why do you hold on to the chair?"

"I am still a little giddy--but it will pass."  And "Charmian
--you forgive--"

"Yes--yes, don't--don't look at me like that, Peter--and--oh,
good night!--foolish boy!"

"I am--twenty-five, Charmian!"  But as she turned away I saw that
there were tears in her eyes.

Dressed as I was, I lay down upon my bed, and, burying my head in
the pillow, groaned, for my pain was very sore; indeed I was to
feel the effects of George's fist for many a day to come, and it
seems to me now that much of the morbid imaginings, the nightly
horrors, and black despair, that I endured in the time which
immediately followed, was chiefly owing to that terrible blow
upon the head.




CHAPTER XXI

OF THE OPENING OF THE DOOR, AND HOW CHARMIAN BLEW OUT THE LIGHT


He bestrode a powerful black charger, and his armor glittered
through the green.  And, as he rode beneath the leafy arches of
the wood, he lifted up his voice, and sang, and the song was
mournful, and of a plaintive seeming, and rang loud behind his
visor-bars; therefore, as I sat beside the freshet, I hearkened
to his song:

      "For her love I carke, and care,
       For her love I droop, and dare,
       For her love my bliss is bare.
       And I wax wan!"

Forth he rode from the shadowy woodland, pacing very solemn and
slow; and thrice he struck his iron hand upon his iron breast.

      "For her love, in sleep I slake,
       For her love, all night I wake,
       For her love, I mourning make
       More than any man!"

Now, being come to where I sat beside the brook, he checked his
horse, and gazed full long upon me, and his eyes shone from the
gloom of his helmet.

"Messire," quoth be; "how like you my song?"

"But little, sir--to be plain with you, not a whit," I answered.

"And, beseech you--wherefore?"

"Because it is folly--away with it, for, if your head be full of
such, how shall you achieve any lasting good--Glory, Learning,
Power?"  But, sighing, he shook his head; quoth he:

"O Blind One!--Glory is but a name, Learning but a yearning
emptiness, and whither leadeth Ambition?  Man is a mote dancing
in a sun-ray--the world, a speck hanging in space.  All things
vanish and pass utterly away save only True-love, and that
abideth everlastingly; 'tis sweeter than Life, and stronger than
Death, and reacheth up beyond the stars; and thus it is I pray
you tell me--where is she?"

"She?"

"She whom ye love?"

"I love no woman," said I.

"Liar!" cried he, in a terrible voice, and the voice was the
voice of Black George.

"And who are you that says so?" I demanded, and stood upon my
feet.

"Look--behold and know thyself, O Blind and more than blind!"
And, leaning down, he raised his visor so that the moonlight fell
upon his face, and the face I looked upon was my own; and, while
I gazed, he lifted up his voice, and cried:

"Ye Spirits of the Wood, I charge ye--who is he that rideth in
the green, dreaming ever of her beauty, and sighing forth his
love everlastingly, Spirits of the Wood, I charge ye?"

And out of the gloom of the wood, from every rustling leaf and
opening bud, came a little voice that rose and blended in a soft,
hushed chorus, crying:

"Peter Vibart--Peter Vibart!"

"Spirits of the Wood, I charge ye--who is he that walketh to and
fro in the world, and having eyes, seeth not, and ears, heareth
not--a very Fool of Love?"

Once again the voices cried in answer:

"Peter Vibart!--Peter Vibart!"

"Spirits of the Wood, I charge ye--who is he that shall love with
a love mightier than most--who shall suffer greatly for love and
because of it--who shall think of it by day, and dream of it o'
nights--who is he that must die to find love and the fulness of
life?--O Spirits of the Wood, I charge ye!"

And again from out the green came the soft, hushed chorus:

"Peter Vibart--Peter Vibart!"

But, even as I laughed, came one from the wood, with a horse and
armor.  And the armor he girded on me, and the horse I mounted.
And there, in the moonlit glade, we fought, and strove together,
my Other Self and I.  And, sudden and strong he smote me, so that
I fell down from my horse, and lay there dead, with my blood
soaking and soaking into the grass.  And, as I watched, there
came a blackbird that perched upon my breast, carolling
gloriously.  Yet, little by little, this bird changed, and lo! in
its place was a new Peter Vibart standing upon the old; and the
New trampled the Old down into the grass, and--it was gone.
Then, with his eyes on the stars, the new Peter Vibart fell
a-singing, and the words I sang were these:

      "For her love I carke, and care,
       For her love I droop, and dare,
       For her love my bliss is bare.
       And I wax wan!"

And thus there came into my heart that which had been all
unknown--undreamed of hitherto, yet which, once there, could
never pass away.

"O Spirits of the Wood, I charge ye--who is he that counteth
True-love sweeter than Life--greater than Wisdom--stronger than
Death?  O Spirits of the Wood, I charge ye!"

And the hushed voices chorused softly.

"Peter Vibart--Peter Vibart!"  And, while I listened, one by one
the voices ceased, till there but one remained--calling, calling,
but ever soft and far away, and when I would have gone toward
this voice--lo! there stood a knife quivering in the ground before
me, that grew and grew until its haft touched heaven, yet still
the voice called upon my name very softly:

"Peter!--Peter!--oh, Peter, I want you!--oh, Peter!--wake! wake!"
I sat up in bed, and, as I listened, grew suddenly sick, and a
fit of trembling shook me violently, for the whisper was still
in my ears, and in the whisper was an agony of fear and dread
indescribable.

"Peter!--oh, Peter, I am afraid!--wake! wake!"

A cold sweat broke out upon me and I glared helplessly, towards
the door.

"Quick, Peter!--come to me--oh, God!"

I strove to move, but still I could not.  And now, in the
darkness, hands were shaking me wildly, and Charmian's voice was
speaking in my ear.

"The door!" it whispered, "the door!"

Then I arose, and was in the outer room, with Charmian close
beside me in the dark, and my eyes were upon the door.  And then
I beheld a strange thing, for a thin line of white light
traversed the floor from end to end.  Now, as I watched this
narrow line, I saw that it was gradually widening and widening;
very slowly, and with infinite caution, the door was being opened
from without.  In this remote place, in this still, dead hour of
the night, full of the ghostly hush that ever precedes the dawn
--there was something devilish--something very like murder in its
stealthy motion.  I heard Charmian's breath catch, and, in the
dark, her hand came and crept into mine and her fingers were cold
as death.

And now a great anger came upon me, and I took a quick step
forward, but Charmian restrained me.

"No, Peter!" she breathed; "not yet--wait!" and wound her arms
round mine.

In a corner near by stood that same trusty staff that had been
the companion of my wanderings, and now I reached, and took it
up, balancing it in my hand.  And all the time I watched that
line of light upon the floor widening and widening, growing ever
broader and more broad.  The minutes dragged slowly by, while the
line grew into a streak, and the streak into a lane, and upon the
lane came a blot that slowly resolved itself into the shadow of a
hand upon the latch.  Slowly, slowly, to the hand came a wrist,
and to the wrist an arm--another minute, and this maddening
suspense would be over.  Despite Charmian's restraining clasp, I
crept a long pace nearer the softly moving door.

The sharp angle of the elbow was growing obtuse as the shadowy
arm straightened itself.  Thirty seconds more!  I began to count,
and, gripping my staff, braced myself for what might be, when
--with a sudden cry, Charmian sprang forward, and, hurling herself
against the door, shut it with a crash.

"Quick, Peter!" she panted.  I was beside her almost as she
spoke, and had my hand upon the latch.

"I must see who this was," said I.

"You are mad!" she cried.

"Let me open the door, Charmian."

"No, no--I say no!"

"Whoever it was must not escape--open the door!"

"Never! never--I tell you--death is outside--there's murder in
the very air; I feel it--and--dear God--the door has no bolt."

"They are gone now--whoever they were," said I reassuringly; "the
danger is over--if danger it could be called."

"Danger!" cried Charmian.  "I tell you--it was death."

"Yet, after all, it may have been only some homeless wanderer."

"Then why that deadly, silent caution?"

"True!" said I, becoming thoughtful.

"Bring the table, Peter, and set it across the door."

"Surely the table is too light to--"

"But it will give sufficient warning--not that I shall sleep
again to-night.  Oh, Peter! had I not been dreaming, and happened
to wake--had I not chanced to look towards the door, it would
have opened--wide, and then--oh, horrible!"

"You were dreaming?"

"A hateful, hateful dream, and awoke in terror, and, being
afraid, glanced towards the door, and saw it opening--and now
--bring the table, Peter."

Now, groping about, my hand encountered one of the candles, and
taking out my tinder-box, all unthinking, I lighted it.
Charmian was leaning against the door, clad in a flowing white
garment--a garment that was wonderfully stitched--all dainty
frills and laces, with here and there a bow of blue riband,
disposed, it would seem, by the hand of chance, and yet most
wonderfully.  And up from this foam of laces her shoulders rose,
white, and soft, and dimpled, sweeping up in noble lines to the
smooth round column of her throat.  But as I stared at all this
loveliness she gave a sudden gasp, and stooped her head, and
crossed her hands upon her bosom, while up over the snow of
shoulder, over neck and cheek and brow ebbed that warm, crimson
tide; and I could only gaze and gaze--till, with a movement swift
and light, she crossed to that betraying candle and, stooping,
blew out the light.

Then I set the table across the door, having done which I stood
looking towards where she yet stood.

"Charmian," said I.

"Yes, Peter."

"To-morrow--"

"Yes, Peter?"

"I will make a bar to hold the door."

"Yes, Peter."

"Two bars would be better, perhaps?"

"Yes, Peter."

"You would feel safe, then--safer than ever?"

"Safer than ever, Peter."




CHAPTER XXII

IN WHICH THE ANCIENT DISCOURSES ON LOVE


I am forging a bar for my cottage door: such a bar as might give
check to an army, or resist a battering-ram; a bar that shall
defy all the night-prowlers that ever prowled; a stout, solid
bar, broad as my wrist, and thick as my two fingers; that,
looking upon it as it lies in its sockets across the door,
Charmian henceforth may sleep and have no fear.

The Ancient sat perched on his stool in the corner, but for once
we spoke little, for I was very busy; also my mind was plunged in
a profound reverie.

And of whom should I be thinking but of Charmian, and of the
dimple in her shoulder?

"'Tis bewitched you be, Peter!" said the old man suddenly,
prodding me softly with his stick, "bewitched as ever was," and
he chuckled.

"Bewitched!" said I, starting.

"Ah!--theer you stand wi' your 'ammer in your 'and--a-starin' an'
a-starin' at nobody, nor nothin'--leastways not as 'uman eye can
see, an' a-sighin', an' a-sighin'--"

"Did I indeed sigh, Ancient?"

"Ah--that ye did--like a cow, Peter, or a 'orse 'eavy an' tired
like.  An' slow you be, an' dreamy--you as was so bright an'
spry; theer's some--fools, like Joel Amos, as might think as
'twere the work o' ghostes, or demons, a-castin' their spells on
ye, or that some vampire 'ad bit ye in the night, an' sucked your
blood as ye lay asleep, but I know different--you 'm just
bewitched, Peter!" and he chuckled again.

"Who knows?--perhaps I am, but it will pass, whatever it is, it
will pass--"

"Don't ye be too sure o' that--theer's bewitchments an'
bewitchments, Peter."

Hereupon the smithy became full of the merry din of my hammer,
and while I worked the Ancient smoked his pipe and watched me,
informing me, between whiles, that the Jersey cow was "in calf,"
that the hops seemed more than usually forward, and that he had
waked that morning with a "touch o' the rheumatics," but,
otherwise, he was unusually silent; moreover, each time that I
happened to glance up, it was to find him regarding me with a
certain fixity of eye, which at another time would have struck me
as portentous.

"Ye be palish this marnin', Peter!" said he, dabbing at me
suddenly with his pipe-stem; "shouldn't wonder if you was to tell
me as your appetite was bad; come now--ye didn't eat much of a
breakfus' this marnin', did ye?"

"I don't think I did, Ancient."

"A course not!" said the--old man, with a nod of profound
approval--" it aren't to be expected.  Let's see, it be all o'
four months since I found ye, bean't it?"

"Four months and a few odd days," I nodded, and fell to work upon
my glowing iron bar:

"Ye'll make a tidy smith one o' these days, Peter," said the old
man encouragingly, as I straightened my back and plunged the iron
back into the fire.

"Thank you, Ancient."

"Ay--you've larned to use a 'ammer purty well, considerin',
though you be wastin' your opportoonities shameful, Peter,
shameful."

"Am I, Ancient?"

"Ay, that ye be--moon can't last much longer--she be on the wane
a'ready!"

"Moon?" said I, staring.

"Ah, moon!" nodded the old man; "theer's nowt like a moon, Peter,
an' if she be at the full so much the better."

"But what have the moon and I to do with each other, Ancient?"

"Old I be, Peter, a old, old man, but I were young once, an' I
tell 'ee the moon 'as a lot more to do wi' it than some folks
think--why, Lord love 'ee! theer wouldn't be near so many
children a-playin' in the sun if it wasn't for the moon!"

"Ancient," said I, "what might you be driving at?"

"Love, Peter!"

"Love!" said I, letting go the handle of the bellows.

"An' marriage, Peter."

"What in the world--put--such thoughts into your head?"

"You did, Peter."

"I?"

"Ah!--some men is born lovers, Peter, an' you be one.  I never
see such eyes as yourn afore, so burnin' 'ot they be.  Ah, Peter!
some maid will see the lovelight aflame in 'em some day, an'
droop 'er 'ead an' blush an' tremble--for she'll know, Peter,
she'll know; maids was made to be loved, Peter--"

"But, Ancient, I am not the kind of man women would be attracted
by.  I love books and solitude, and am called a--pedant! and,
besides, I am not of a loving sort--"

"Some men, Peter, falls in love as easy as they falls out; it
comes to some soft an' quiet--like the dawn of a summer's day,
Peter; but to others it comes like a gert an' tur'ble storm--oh,
that it do! Theer's a fire ready to burn up inside o' ye at the
touch o' some woman's 'and, or the peep o' 'er eye--ah! a fire
as'll burn, an' burn, an' never go out again--not even if you
should live to be as old as I be--an' you'll be strong an' wild
an' fierce wi' it--an' some day you'll find 'er, Peter, an'
she'll find you--"

"And," said I, staring away into the distance, "do you think
that, by any possible chance, she might love me, this woman?"

"Ay, for sure," said the Ancient, "for sure she will; why don't
'ee up an ax 'er?  Wi' a fine round moon over-'ead, an' a pretty
maid at your elber, it's easy enough to tell 'er you love 'er,
aren't it?"

"Indeed, yes," said I, beginning to rub my chin, "very easy!" and
I sighed.

"An' when you looks into a pair o' sweet eyes, an' sees the shine
o' the moon in 'em--why, it aren't so very fur to 'er lips, are
it, Peter?

"No," said I, rubbing my chin harder than ever; "no--and there's
the danger of it."

"Wheer's t' danger, Peter?"

"Everywhere!" I answered; "in her eyes, in her thick, soft hair,
the warmth of her breath, the touch of her hand, the least
contact of her garments--her very step!"

"I knowed it!" cried the Ancient joyfully, peering at me under
his brows; "I knowed it!"

"Knew what?"

"You be in love--good lad! good lad!" and he flourished his pipe
in the air.

"In love!" I exclaimed; "in love--I?"

"Sure as sure!"

"But love, according to Aristotle, is--"

"Love, Peter, is what makes a man forget 'is breakfus', an' 'is
work, an' 'is--"

"But I work very hard--besides--"

"Love is what makes a man so brave as a lion, Peter, an' fall
a-tremblin' like a coward when She stands a-lookin' up at 'im;
love makes the green earth greener, an' the long road short--ah!
almost too short, sometimes, the love of a woman comes betwixt a
man an' all evils an' dangers--why don't 'ee up an' ax 'er, Peter?"

"She'd laugh at me, Ancient."

"Not she."

"That soft, low laugh of hers."

"Well, what o' that?"

"Besides, she hardly knows me!"

The Ancient took out his snuff-box and gave two loud double
knocks upon the lid.

"A woman knows a man sooner than a man knows a woman--ah, a sight
sooner!  Why, Lord bless ye, Peter, she 'as 'im all reckoned up
long afore 'e knows for sure if 'er eyes be--black 'uns or brown
'uns--that she 'as."  Here he extracted a pinch of snuff.  "As
for Prudence--she loves 'ee wi' all 'er 'eart an' soul!"

"Prudence?" said I, staring.

"Ah! Prudence--I be 'er grandfeyther, an' I know."

"Prudence!" said I again.

"She 'm a 'andsome lass, an' so pretty as a picter--you said so
yourself, an' what's more, she 'm a sensible lass, an' 'll make
ye as fine a wife as ever was if only--"

"If only she loved me, Ancient."

"To be sure, Peter."

"But, you see, she doesn't."

"Eh--what?  What, Peter?"

"Prudence doesn't love me!"

"Doesn't--"

"Not by any means."

"Peter--ye're jokin'."

"No, Ancient."

"But I--I be all took aback--mazed I be--not love ye, an' me wi'
my 'eart set on it--are ye sure?"

"Certain."

"'Ow d'ye know?"

"She told me so."

"But--why--why shouldn't she love ye?"

"Why should she?"

"But I--I'd set my 'eart on it, Peter."

"It is very unfortunate!" said I, and began blowing up the fire.

"Peter."

"Yes, Ancient?"

"Do 'ee love she?"

"No, Ancient."  The old man rose, and, hobbling forward, tapped
me upon the breast with the handle of his stick.  "Then who was
you a-talkin' of, a while back--'bout 'er eyes, an' 'er 'air, an'
'er dress, an' bein' afraid o' them?"

"To be exact, I don't know, Ancient."

"Oh, Peter!" exclaimed the old man, shaking his head, "I wonders
at ye; arter me a-thinkin' an' a-thinkin', an' a-plannin' an'
a-plannin' all these months--arter me a-sendin' Black Jarge about
'is business--"

"Ancient, what do you mean?"

"Why, didn't I out an' tell un as you was sweet on Prue--"

"Did you tell him that?" I cried.

"Ay, to be sure I did; an' what's more, I says to un often an'
often, when you wasn't by: 'Jarge,' I'd say, 'Prue's a lovely
maid, an' Peter's a fine young chap, an' they 'm beginnin' to
find each other out, they be all'us a-talkin' to each other an'
a-lookin' at each other, mornin', noon an' night!' I says; 'like
as not we'll 'ave 'em marryin' each other afore very long!' an'
Jarge 'ud just wrinkle up 'is brows, an' walk away, an' never say
a word.  But now--it be tur'ble 'ard to be disapp'inted like this,
Peter arter I'd set my 'eart on it--an' me such a old man such a
very ancient man.  Oh, Peter! you be full o' disapp'intments, an'
all manner o' contrariness; sometimes I a'most wishes as I'd never
took the trouble to find ye at all!"

And, with this Parthian shot, the old man sighed, and turned his
back upon me, and tottered out of the forge.




CHAPTER XXIII

HOW GABBING DICK, THE PEDLER, SET A HAMMER GOING IN MY HEAD


Having finished my bars, with four strong brackets to hold them,
I put away my tools, and donned hat and coat.

It was yet early, and there was, besides, much work waiting to be
done, but I felt unwontedly tired and out of sorts, wherefore,
with my bars and brackets beneath my arm, I set out for the
Hollow.

From the hedges, on either side of me, came the sweet perfume of
the honeysuckle, and beyond the hedges the fields stood high with
ripening corn--a yellow, heavy-headed host, nodding and swaying
lazily.  I stood awhile to listen to its whisper as the gentle
wind swept over it, and to look down the long green alleys of the
hop-gardens beyond; and at the end of one of these straight
arched vistas there shone a solitary, great star.

And presently, lifting my eyes to the sky, already deepening to
evening, and remembering how I had looked round me ere I faced
Black George, I breathed a sigh of thankfulness that I was yet
alive with strength to walk within a world so beautiful.

Now, as I stood thus, I heard a voice hailing me, and, glancing
about, espied one, some distance up the road, who sat beneath the
hedge, whom, upon approaching, I recognized as Gabbing Dick, the
Pedler.

He nodded and grinned as I came up, but in both there was a vague
unpleasantness, as also in the manner in which he eyed me slowly
up and down.

"You've stood a-lookin' up into the sky for a good ten minutes!"
said he.

"And what if I have?"

"Nothin," said the Pedler, "nothin' at all--though if the moon
'ad been up, a cove might ha' thought as you was dreamin' of some
Eve or other; love-sick folk always stares at the moon--leastways,
so they tell me.  Any one as stares at the moon when 'e might be
doin' summ'at better is a fool, as great a fool as any man as
stares at a Eve, for a Eve never brought any man nothin' but
trouble and sorrer, and never will, no'ow?  Don't frown, young
cove, nor shake your 'ead, for it's true; wot's caused more
sorrer an' blood than them Eves?  Blood?--ah! rivers of it!
Oceans of good blood's been spilt all along o' women, from the
Eve as tricked old Adam to the Eve as tricks the like o' me, or
say--yourself."  Here he regarded me with so evil a leer that I
turned my back in disgust.

"Don't go, young cove; I ain't done yet, and I got summ'at to
tell ye."

"Then tell it!" said I, stopping again, struck by the fellow's
manner, "and tell it quickly."

"I'm a-comin' to it as fast as I can, ain't I?  Very well then!
You're a fine, up-standin' young cove, and may 'ave white 'ands
(which I don't see myself, but no matter) and may likewise be
chock-full o' taking ways (which, though not noticin', I won't go
for to deny)--but a Eve's a Eve, and always will be--you'll mind
as I warned you again' 'em last time I see ye?--very well then!"

"Well?" said I impatiently.

"Well," nodded the Pedler, and his eyes twinkled malevolently.
"I says it again--I warns you again.  You're a nice, civil-spoke
young cove, and quiet (though I don't like the cock o' your eye),
and, mind, I don't bear you no ill-will--though you did turn me
from your door on a cold, dark night--"

"It was neither a cold nor a dark night!" said I.

"Well, it might ha' been, mightn't it?--very well then! Still, I
don't," said the Pedler, spitting dejectedly into the ditch, "I
don't bear you no 'ard feelin's for it, no'ow--me always makin'
it a pint to forgive them as woefully oppresses me, likewise them
as despitefully uses me--it might ha' been cold, and dark, wi'
ice and snow, and I might ha' froze to death--but we won't say no
more about it."

"You've said pretty well, I think," said I; "supposing you tell
me what you have to tell me--otherwise--good night!"

"Very well then!" said the Pedler, "let's talk o' summ'at else;
still livin' in the 'Oller, I suppose?"

"Yes."

"Ah, well!  I come through there today," said he, grinning, and
again his eyes grew malevolent.

"Indeed?"

"Ah!--indeed! I come through this 'ere very arternoon, and
uncommon pretty everythin' was lookin', wi' the grass so green,
and the trees so--so--"

"Shady."

"Shady's the word!" nodded the Pedler, glancing up at me through
his narrowed eyelids, and chuckling.  "A paradise you might call
it--ah! a paradise or a--garden of Eden, wi' Eve and the serpent
and all!" and he broke out into a cackling laugh.  And, in the
look and the laugh, indeed about his whole figure, there was
something so repellent, so evil, that I was minded to kick and
trample him down into the ditch, yet the leering triumph in his
eyes held me.

"Yes?" said I.

"Ye see, bein' by, I 'appened to pass the cottage--and very
pretty that looked too, and nice and neat inside!"

"Yes?" said I.

"And, bein' so near, I 'appened to glance in at the winder, and
there, sure enough, I see--'er--as you might say, Eve in the
gardin.  And a fine figure of a Eve she be, and 'andsome wi' it
--'t ain't often as you see a maid the likes o' 'er, so proud
and 'aughty like."

"Well?"

"Well, just as I 'appened to look in at the winder, she 'appened
to be standin' wi' an open book in 'er 'and--a old, leather book
wi' a broken cover."

"Yes?" said I.

"And she was a-laughin'--and a pretty, soft, Eve's laugh it were,
too."

"Yes?" said I.

"And--_'e_ were a-lookin' at the book-over 'er shoulder!"  The
irons slipped from my grasp, and fell with a harsh clang.

"Ketches ye, does it?" said the Pedler.  I did not speak, but,
meeting my eye, he scrambled hastily to his feet, and, catching
up his pack, retreated some little way down the road.

"Ketches ye, does it, my cove?" he repeated; "turn me away from
your door on a cold, dark night, would ye (not as I bears you any
ill-will for it, bein' of a forgivin' natur')?  But I says to
you, I says--look out!--a fine 'andsome lass she be, wi' 'er soft
eyes and red lips, and long, white arms--the eyes and lips and
arms of a Eve; and Eve tricked Adam, didn't she?--and you ain't a
better man nor Adam, are ye?--very well then!" saying which, he
spat once more into the ditch, and, shouldering his pack, strode
away.

And, after some while, I took up my iron bars, and trudged on
towards the cottage.  As I went, I repeated to myself, over and
over again, the word "Liar."  Yet my step was very slow and heavy,
and my feet dragged in the dust; and, somewhere in my head, a
small hammer had begun to beat, soft and slow and regular, but
beating, beating upon my brain.

Now the upper cover of my Virgil book was broken!




CHAPTER XXIV

THE VIRGIL BOOK


A man was leaning in the shadow of a tree, looking down into the
Hollow.

I could not see him very distinctly because, though evening had
scarcely fallen, the shadows, where he stood, were very dense,
but he was gazing down into the Hollow in the attitude of one who
waits.  For what?--for whom?

A sudden fit of shivering shook me from head to foot, and, while
I yet shivered, I grew burning hot; the blood throbbed at my
temples, the small hammer was drumming much faster now, and the
cool night air seemed to be stifling me.

Very cautiously I began creeping nearer the passive figure, while
the hammer beat so loud that it seemed he must hear it where he
stood: a shortish, broad-shouldered figure, clad in a blue coat.
He held his hat in his hand, and he leaned carelessly against the
tree, and his easy assurance of air maddened me the more.

As he stood thus, looking always down into the Hollow, his neck
gleamed at me above the collar of his coat, wherefore I stooped
and, laying my irons in the grass, crept on, once more, and, as I
went, I kept my eyes upon his neck.

A stick snapped sharp and loud beneath my tread, the lounging
back stiffened and grew rigid, the face showed for an instant
over the shoulder, and, with a spring, he had vanished into the
bushes.

It was a vain hope to find a man in such a dense tangle of boughs
and underbrush, yet I ran forward, nevertheless; but, though I
sought eagerly upon all sides, he had made good his escape.  So,
after a while, I retraced my steps to where I had left my irons
and brackets, and taking them up, turned aside to that precipitous
path which, as I have already said, leads down into the Hollow.

Now, as I went, listening to the throb of the hammer in my head,
whom should I meet but Charmian, coming gayly through the green,
and singing as she came.  At sight of me she stopped, and the
song died upon her lip.

"Why--why, Peter--you look pale--dreadfully pale--"

"Thank you, I am very well!" said I.

"You have not been--fighting again?"

"Why should I have been fighting, Charmian?"

"Your eyes are wild--and fierce, Peter."

"Were you coming to--to--meet me, Charmian?"

"Yes, Peter."  Now, watching beneath my brows, it almost seemed
that her color had changed, and that her eyes, of set purpose,
avoided mine.  Could it be that she was equivocating?

"But I--am much before my usual time, to-night, Charmian."

"Then there will be no waiting for supper, and I am ravenous,
Peter!"

And as she led the way along the path she began to sing again.

Being come to the cottage, I set down my bars and brackets, with
a clang.

"These," said I, in answer to her look, "are the bars I promised
to make for the door."

"Do you always keep your promises, Peter?"

"I hope so."

"Then," said she, coming to look at the great bars, with a fork
in her hand, for she was in the middle of dishing up, "then, if
you promise me always to come home by the road, and never through
the coppice--you will do so, won't you?"

"Why should I?" I inquired, turning sharply to look at her.

"Because the coppice is so dark and lonely, and if--I say, if I
should take it into my head to come and meet you sometimes, there
would be no chance of my missing you."  And so she looked at me
and smiled, and, going back to her cooking, fell once more
a-singing, the while I sat and watched her beneath my brows.

Surely, surely no woman whose heart was full of deceit could sing
so blithely and happily, or look at one with such sweet candor in
her eyes?

And yet the supper was a very ghost of a meal, for when I
remembered the man who had watched and waited, the very food grew
nauseous and seemed to choke me.  "She's a Eve--a Eve!" rang a
voice in my ear; "Eve tricked Adam, didn't she, and you ain't a
better man nor Adam; she's a Eve--a Eve!"

"Peter, you eat nothing."

"Yes, indeed!" said I, staring unseeingly down at my plate, and
striving to close my ears against the fiendish voice.

"And you are very pale!"

I shrugged my shoulders.

"Peter--look at me."

I looked up obediently.

"Yes, you are frightfully pale--are you ill again--is it your
head; Peter--what is it?" and, with a sudden, half-shy gesture,
she stretched her hand to me across the table.  And as I looked
from the mute pity of her eyes to the mute pity of that would-be
comforting hand, I had a great impulse to clasp it close in mine,
to speak, and tell her all my base and unworthy suspicions, and,
once more, to entreat her pardon and forgiveness.  The words were
upon my lips, but I checked them, madman that I was, and shook my
head.

"It is nothing," I answered, "unless it be that I have not yet
recovered from Black George's fist; it is nothing!"  And so the
meal drew to an end, and though, feeling my thoughts base, I sat
with my head on my hand and my eyes upon the cloth, yet I knew
she watched me, and more than once I heard her sigh.  A man who
acts on impulse may sometimes be laughed at for his mistakes, but
he will frequently attain to higher things, and be much better
loved by his fellows than the colder, more calculating logician
who rarely makes a blunder; and Simon Peter was a man of impulse.

Supper being over and done, Charmian must needs take my coat,
despite my protests, and fall to work upon its threadbare
shabbiness, mending a great rent in the sleeve.  And, watching
her through the smoke of my pipe, noting the high mould of her
features, the proud poise of her head, the slender elegance of
her hands, I was struck sharply by her contrast to the rough,
bare walls that were my home, and the toil-worn, unlovely garment
beneath her fingers.  As I looked, she seemed to be suddenly
removed from me--far above and beyond my reach.

"That is the fourth time, Peter."

"What, Charmian?"

"That is the fourth time you have sighed since you lighted your
pipe, and it is out, and you never noticed it!"

"Yes" said I, and laid the pipe upon the table and sighed again,
before I could stop myself.  Charmian raised her head, and looked
at me with a laugh in her eyes.

"Oh, most philosophical, dreamy blacksmith! where be your
thoughts?"

"I was thinking how old and worn and disreputable my coat looked."

"Indeed, sir," said Charmian, holding it up and regarding it with
a little frown, "forsooth it is ancient, and hath seen better
days."

"Like its wearer!" said I, and sighed again.

"Hark to this ancient man!" she laughed, "this hoary-headed
blacksmith of ours, who sighs, and forever sighs; if it could
possibly be that he had met any one sufficiently worthy--I should
think that he had fallen--philosophically--in love; how think
you, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance?"

"I remember," said I, "that, among other things, you once called
me 'Superior Mr. Smith.'"  Charmian laughed and nodded her head
at me.

"You had been describing to me some quite impossible, idealistic
creature, alone worthy of your regard, sir."

"Do you still think me 'superior,' Charmian?"

"Do you still dream of your impalpable, bloodlessly-perfect
ideals, sir?"

"No," I answered; "no, I think I have done with dreaming."

"And I have done with this, thy coat, for behold! it is
finished," and rising, she folded it over the back of my chair.

Now, as she stood thus behind me, her hand fell and, for a
moment, rested lightly upon my shoulder.

"Peter."

"Yes, Charmian."

"I wish, yes, I do wish that you were either much younger or
very much older."

"Why?"

"Because you wouldn't be quite so--so cryptic--such a very
abstruse problem.  Sometimes I think I understand you better than
you do yourself, and sometimes I am utterly lost; now, if you
were younger I could read you easily for myself, and, if you were
older, you would read yourself for me."

"I was never very young!" said I.

"No, you were always too repressed, Peter."

"Yes, perhaps I was."

"Repression is good up to a certain point, but beyond that it is
dangerous," said she, with a portentous shake of the head.
"Heigho! was it a week or a year ago that you avowed yourself
happy, and couldn't tell why?"

"I was the greater fool!" said I.

"For not knowing why, Peter?"

"For thinking myself happy!"

"Peter, what is happiness?"

"An idea," said I, "possessed generally of fools!"

"And what is misery?"

"Misery is also an idea."

"Possessed only by the wise, Peter; surely he is wiser who
chooses happiness?"

"Neither happiness nor misery comes from choice."

"But--if one seeks happiness, Peter?"

"One will assuredly find misery!" said I, and, sighing, rose, and
taking my hammer from its place above my bookshelf, set to work
upon my brackets, driving them deep into the heavy framework of
the door.  All at once I stopped, with my hammer poised, and,
for no reason in the world, looked back at Charmian, over my
shoulder; looked to find her watching me with eyes that were (if
it could well be) puzzled, wistful, shy, and glad at one and the
same time; eyes that veiled themselves swiftly before my look,
yet that shot one last glance, between their lashes, in which
were only joy and laughter.

"Yes?" said I, answering the look.  But she only stooped her head
and went on sewing; yet the color was bright in her cheeks.

And, having driven in the four brackets, or staples, and closed
the door, I took up the bars and showed her how they were to lie
crosswise across the door, resting in the brackets.

"We shall be safe now, Peter," said she; "those bars would
resist--an elephant."

"I think they would," I nodded; "but there is yet something more."
Going to my shelf of books I took thence the silver-mounted pistol
she had brought with her, and balanced it in my hand.  "To-morrow
I will take this to Cranbrook, and buy bullets to fit it."

"Why, there are bullets there--in one of the old shoes, Peter."

"They are too large; this is an unusually small calibre, and yet
it would be deadly enough at close range.  I will load it for
you, Charmian, and give it into your keeping, in case you should
ever--grow afraid again, when I am not by; this is a lonely
place--for a woman--at all times."

"Yes, Peter."  She was busily employed upon a piece of
embroidery, and began to sing softly to herself again as she
worked,--that old song which worthy Mr. Pepys mentions having
heard from the lips of mischievous-eyed Nell Gwynn:

      "In Scarlet town, where I was born,
       There was a fair maid dwellin',
       Made every youth cry Well-a-way!
       Her name was Barbara Allen."

"Are you so happy, Charmian?"

"Oh, sir, indifferent well, I thank you.

     "'All in the merry month of May
       When green buds they were swellin',
       Young Jemmy Grove on his death-bed lay,
       For love of Barbara Allen.'

"Are you so--miserable, Peter?"

"Why do you ask?"

"Because you sigh, and sigh, like--poor Jemmy Grove in the song."

"He was a fool!" said I.

"For sighing, Peter?"

"For dying."

"I suppose no philosopher could ever be so--foolish, Peter?"

"No," said I; "certainly not!"

"It is well to be a philosopher, isn't it, Peter?"

"Hum!" said I, and once more set about lighting my pipe.  Anon I
rose and, crossing to the open door, looked out upon the summer
night, and sighed, and coming back, sat watching Charmian's busy
fingers.

"Charmian," said I at last.

"Yes, Peter?"

"Do you--ever see any--any--men lurking about the Hollow--when I
am away?"  Her needle stopped suddenly, and she did not look up
as she answered:

"No, Peter!"

"Never?--are you--sure, Charmian?"  The needle began to fly to
and fro again, but still she did not look up.

"No--of course not--how should I see any one?  I scarcely go
beyond the Hollow, and--I'm busy all day."

"A Eve--a Eve!" said a voice in my ear.  "Eve tricked Adam,
didn't she?--a Eve!"

After this I sat for a long time without, moving, my mind harassed
with doubts and a hideous, morbid dread.  Why had she avoided my
eye?  Her own were pure and truthful, and could not lie!  Why, why
had they avoided mine?  If only she had looked at me!

Presently I rose and began to pace up and down the room.

"You are very restless, Peter!"

"Yes," said I; "yes, I fear I am--you must pardon me--"

"Why not read?"

"Indeed I had not thought of my books."

"Then read me something aloud, Peter."

"I will read you the sorrow of Achilles for the loss of Briseis,"
said I, and, going into the corner, I raised my hand to my shelf
of books--and stood there with hand upraised yet touching no book,
for a sudden spasm seemed to have me in its clutches, and once
again the trembling seized me, and the hammer had recommenced
its beat, beating upon my brain.

And, in a while, I turned from my books, and, crossing to the
door, leaned there with my back to her lest she should see my
face just then.

"I--I don't think I--will read--to-night!" said I at last.

"Very well, Peter, let us talk."

"Or talk," said I; "I--I think I'll go to bed.  Pray," I went on
hurriedly, for I was conscious that she had raised her head and
was looking at me in some surprise, "pray excuse me--I'm very
tired."  So, while she yet stared at me, I turned away, and,
mumbling a good night, went into my chamber, and closing the
door, leaned against it, for my mind was sick with dread, and
sorrow, and a great anguish; for now I knew that Charmian had
lied to me--my Virgil book had been moved from its usual place.




CHAPTER XXV

IN WHICH THE READER SHALL FIND LITTLE TO DO WITH THE STORY, AND
MAY, THEREFORE, SKIP


Is there anywhere in the world so damnable a place of torment as
a bed?  To lie awake through the slow, dragging hours, surrounded
by a sombre quietude from whose stifling blackness thoughts, like
demons, leap to catch us by the throat; or, like waves, come
rolling in upon us, ceaselessly, remorselessly--burying us beneath
their resistless flow, catching us up, whirling us dizzily
aloft, dashing us down into depths infinite; now retreating, now
advancing, from whose oncoming terror there is no escape, until
we are once more buried beneath their stifling rush.

To lie awake, staring wide-eyed into a crowding darkness wherein
move terrors unimagined; to bury our throbbing temples in pillows
of fire; to roll and toss until the soul within us cries out in
agony, and we reach out frantic hands into a void that mocks us
by the contrast of its deep and awful quiet.  At such times fair
Reason runs affrighted to hide herself, and foaming Madness fills
her throne; at such times our everyday sorrows, howsoever small
and petty they be, grow and magnify themselves until they
overflow the night, filling the universe above and around us; and
of all the woes the human mind can bear--surely Suspicion gnaws
deeper than them all!

So I lay beneath the incubus, my temples clasped tight between my
burning palms to stay the maddening ring of the hammer in my
brain.  And suspicion grew into certainty, and with certainty
came madness; imagination ran riot: she was a Messalina--a Julia
--a Joan of Naples--a veritable Succuba--a thing polluted,
degraded, and abominable; and, because of her beauty, I cursed
all beautiful things, and because of her womanhood, I cursed all
women.  And ever the hammer beat upon my brain, and foul shapes
danced before my eyes--shapes so insanely hideous and revolting
that, of a sudden, I rose from my bed, groaning, and coming to
the casement--leaned out.

Oh! the cool, sweet purity of the night!  I heard the soft stir
and rustle of leaves all about me, and down from heaven came a
breath of wind, and in the wind a great raindrop that touched my
burning brow like the finger of God.  And, leaning there, with
parted lips and closed eyes, gradually my madness left me, and
the throbbing in my brain grew less.

How many poor mortals, since the world began, sleepless and
anguish-torn--even as I--have looked up into that self-same sky
and sorrowed for the dawn!

        "For her love, in sleep I slake,
         For her love, all night I wake,
         For her love, I mourning make
         More than any man!"

Poor fool! to think that thou couldst mourn more than thy kind!

Thou'rt but a little handful of gray dust, ages since, thy name
and estate long out of mind; where'er thou art, thou shouldst
have got you wisdom by now, perchance.

Poor fool! that thou must love a woman--and worship with thy
love, building for her an altar in thine heart.  If altar crumble
and heart burst, is she to blame who is but woman, or thou, who
wouldst have made her all divine?

Well, thou'rt dead--a small handful of gray dust, long since
--perchance thou hast got thee wisdom ere now--poor fool--O Fool
Divine!

As thou art now, thy sleepless nights forgot--the carking sorrows
of thy life all overpast, and done--so must I some time be, and,
ages hence, shall smile at this, and reckon it no more than a
broken toy--heigho!

And so I presently turned back to my tumbled bed, but it seemed
to me that torment and terror still waited me there; moreover, I
was filled with a great desire for action.  This narrow chamber
stifled me, while outside was the stir of leaves, the gentle
breathing of the wind, the cool murmur of the brook, with night
brooding over all, deep and soft and still.

Being now dressed, I stood awhile, deliberating how I might
escape without disturbing her who slumbered in the outer room.
So I came to the window, and thrusting my head and shoulders
sidewise through the narrow lattice, slowly, and with much ado,
wriggled myself out.  Rising from my hands and knees, I stood up
and threw wide my arms to the perfumed night, inhaling its
sweetness in great, deep breaths, and so turned my steps towards
the brook, drawn thither by its rippling melody; for a brook is a
companionable thing, at all times, to a lonely man, and very full
of wise counsel and friendly admonitions, if he but have ears to
hear withal.

Thus, as I walked beside the brook, it spoke to me of many things,
grave and gay, delivering itself of observations upon the folly of
Humans, comparing us very unfavorably with the godlike dignity of
trees, the immutability of mountains, and the profound philosophy
of brooks.  Indeed it waged most eloquent upon this theme,
caustic, if you will, but with a ripple, between whiles, like the
deep-throated chuckle of the wise old philosopher it was.

"Go to!" chuckled the brook.  "Oh, heavy-footed, heavy-sighing
Human--go to!  It is written that Man was given dominion over
birds and beasts and fishes, and all things made, yet how doth
Man, in all his pride, compare with even a little mountain?  And,
as to birds and beasts and fishes, they provide for themselves,
day in and day out, while Man doth starve and famish!  To what
end is Man born but to work, beget his kind, and die?  O Man!
lift up thy dull-sighted eyes--behold the wonder of the world,
and the infinite universe about thee; behold thyself, and see thy
many failings and imperfections, and thy stupendous littleness
--go to!  Man was made for the world, and not the world for man!
Man is a leaf in the forest--a grain of dust borne upon the wind,
and, when the wind faileth, dust to dust returneth; out upon
thee, with thy puny griefs and sorrows.

"O Man!--who hath dominion over all things save thine own heart,
and who, in thy blind egotism, setteth thyself much above me,
who am but a runlet of water.  O Man! I tell thee, when thou art
dusty bones, I shall still be here, singing to myself in the sun
or talking to some other poor human fool, in the dark.  Go to!"
chuckled the brook, "the Wheel of Life turneth ever faster and
faster; the woes of to-day shall be the woes of last year, or
ever thou canst count them all--out upon thee--go to!"




CHAPTER XXVI

OF STORM, AND TEMPEST, AND HOW I MET ONE PRAYING IN THE DAWN


On I went, chin on breast, heedless of all direction--now beneath
the shade of trees, now crossing grassy glades or rolling meadow,
or threading my way through long alleys of hop-vines; on and on,
skirting hedges, by haycocks looming ghostly in the dark, by
rustling cornfields, through wood and coppice, where branches
touched me, as I passed, like ghostly fingers in the dark; on I
went, lost to all things but my own thoughts.  And my thoughts
were not of Life nor Death nor the world nor the spaces beyond
the world--but of my Virgil book with the broken cover, and of
him who had looked at it--over her shoulder.  And, raising my
hands, I clasped them about my temples, and, leaning against a
tree, stood there a great while.  Yet, when the trembling fit had
left me, I went on again, and with every footstep there rose a
voice within me, crying: "Why?  Why?  Why?"

Why should I, Peter Vibart, hale and well in body, healthy in
mind--why should I fall thus into ague-spasms because of a woman
--of whom I knew nothing, who had come I knew not whence,
accompanied by one whose presence, under such conditions, meant
infamy to any woman; why should I burn thus in a fever if she
chose to meet another while I was abroad?  Was she not free to
follow her own devices; had I any claim upon her; by what right
did I seek to compass her goings and comings, or interest myself
in her doings?  Why?  Why?  Why?

As I went, the woods gradually fell away, and I came out upon an
open place.  The ground rose sharply before me, but I climbed on
and up and so, in time, stood upon a hill.

Now, standing upon this elevation, with the woods looming dimly
below me, as if they were a dark tide hemming me in on all sides,
I became conscious of a sudden great quietude in the air--a
stillness that was like the hush of expectancy; not a sound came
to me, not a whisper from the myriad leaves below.

But, as I stood there listening, very faint and far away, I heard
a murmur that rose and died and rose again, that swelled and
swelled into the roll of distant thunder.  Down in the woods was
a faint rustling, as if some giant were stirring among the
leaves, and out of their depths breathed a puff of wind that
fanned my cheek, and so was gone.  But, in a while, it was back
again, stronger, more insistent than before, till, sudden as it
came, it died away again, and all was hushed and still, save only
for the tremor down there among the leaves; but lightning
flickered upon the horizon, the thunder rolled nearer and nearer,
and the giant grew ever more restless.

Round about me, in the dark, were imps that laughed and whispered
together, and mocked me amid the leaves:

"Who is the madman that stands upon a lonely hill at midnight,
bareheaded, half clad, and hungers for the storm?  Peter Vibart!
Peter Vibart!  Who is he that, having eyes, sees not, and having
ears, hears not?  Peter Vibart!  Peter Vibart!  Blow, Wind, and
buffet him!  Flame, O Lightning, that he may see!  Roar, O
Thunder, that he may hear and know!"

Upon the stillness came a rustling, loud and ever louder, drowning
all else, for the giant was awake at last, and stretching himself;
and now, up he sprang with a sudden bellow, and, gathering himself
together, swept up towards me through the swaying treetops,
pelting me with broken twigs and flying leaves, and filling the
air with the tumult of his coming.

Oh, the wind!--the bellowing, giant wind!  On he came, exulting,
whistling through my hair, stopping my breath, roaring in my ears
his savage, wild halloo!  And, as if in answer, forth from the
inky heaven burst a jagged, blinding flame, that zigzagged down
among the tossing trees, and vanished with a roaring thunder-clap
that seemed to stun all things to silence.  But not for long, for
in the darkness came the wind again--fiercer, wilder than before,
shrieking a defiance.  The thunder crashed above me, and the
lightning quivered in the air about me, till my eyes ached with
the swift transitions from pitch darkness to dazzling light--light
in which distant objects started out clear and well defined, only
to be lost again in a swirl of blackness.  And now came rain--a
sudden, hissing downpour, long threads of scintillating fire where
the lightning caught it--rain that wetted me through and through.

The storm was at its height, and, as I listened, rain and wind
and thunder became merged and blended into awful music--a
symphony of Life and Death played by the hands of God; and I was
an atom--a grain of dust an insect, to be crushed by God's little
finger.  And yet needs must this insect still think upon its
little self for half drowned, deafened, blind, and half stunned
though I was, still the voice within me cried: "Why?  Why?  Why?"

Why was I here instead of lying soft and sheltered, and sleeping
the blessed sleep of tired humanity?  Why was I here, with death
about me--and why must I think, and think, and think of Her?

The whole breadth of heaven seemed torn asunder--blue flame
crackled in the air; it ran hissing along the ground; then
--blackness, and a thunderclap that shook the very hill beneath
me, and I was down upon my knees, with the swish of the rain
about me.

Little by little upon this silence stole the rustle of leaves,
and in the leaves were the imps who mocked me:

"Who is he that doth love--in despite of himself, and shall do,
all his days--be she good or evil, whatever she was, whatever she
is?  Who is the very Fool of Love?  Peter Vibart!  Peter Vibart!"

And so I bowed my face upon my hands, and remained thus a great
while, heeding no more the tempest about me.  For now indeed was
my question answered, and my fear realized.

"I love her!--whatever she was--whatever she is--good or evil--I
love her.  O Fool!--O most miserable Fool!"

And presently I rose, and went on down the hill.  Fast I strode,
stumbling and slipping, plunging on heedlessly through bush and
brake until at last, looking about me, I found myself on the
outskirts of a little spinney or copse; and then I became
conscious that the storm had passed, for the thunder had died
down to a murmur, and the rain had ceased; only all about me were
little soft sounds, as if the trees were weeping silently
together.

Pushing on, I came into a sort of narrow lane, grassy underfoot
and shut in on either hand by very tall hedges that loomed solid
and black in the night; and, being spent and weary, I sat down
beneath one of these and propped my chin in my hands.

How long I remained thus I cannot say, but I was at length
aroused by a voice--a strangely sweet and gentle voice at no
great distance, and the words it uttered were these:

"Oh! give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good, for His mercy
endureth forever!  O Lord! I beseech Thee look down in Thine
infinite pity upon this, Thy world; for to-day is at hand, and
Thy children must soon awake to life and toil and temptation.
Oh! Thou who art the Lover of Men, let Thy Holy Spirit wait to
meet with each one of us upon the threshold of the dawn, and lead
us through this coming day.  Like as a father pitieth his
children, so dost Thou pity all the woeful and heavy-hearted.
Look down upon all those who must so soon awake to their griefs,
speak comfortably to them; remember those in pain who must so
soon take up their weary burdens!  Look down upon the hungry and
the rich, the evil and the good, that, in this new day, finding
each something of Thy mercy, they may give thanks unto the Lord,
for He is good, for His mercy endureth forever."

So the voice ended, and there were silence and a profound
stillness upon all things; wherefore, lifting my eyes unto the
east, I saw that it was dawn.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE EPILEPTIC


Now, when the prayer was ended, I turned my back upon the
lightening east and set off along the lane.

But, as I went, I heard one hailing me, and glancing round, saw
that in the hedge was a wicket-gate, and over this gate a man was
leaning.  A little, thin man with the face of an ascetic, or
mediaeval saint, a face of a high and noble beauty, upon whose
scholarly brow sat a calm serenity, yet beneath which glowed the
full, bright eye of the man of action.

"Good morning, friend!" said be; "welcome to my solitude.  I wish
you joy of this new day of ours; it is cloudy yet, but there is a
rift down on the horizon--it will be a fair day, I think."

"On the contrary, sir," said I, "to me there are all the
evidences of the bad weather continuing.  I think it will be a
bad day, with rain and probably thunder and lightning!  Good
morning, sir!"

"Stay!" cried he as I turned away, and, with the word, set his
hand upon the gate, and, vaulting nimbly over, came towards me,
with a broad-brimmed straw hat in one hand and a long-stemmed
wooden pipe in the other.

"Sir," said he, "my cottage is close by; you look warn and jaded.
Will you not step in and rest awhile?"

"Thank you, sir; but I must be upon my way."

"And whither lies your way?"

"To Sissinghurst, sir."

"You have a long walk before you, and, with your permission, I
will accompany you a little way."

"With pleasure, sir!" I answered, "though I fear you will find me
a moody companion, and a somewhat silent one; but then, I shall
be the better listener, so light your pipe, sir, and, while you
smoke, talk."

"My pipe!" said he, glancing down at it; "ah! yes--I was about to
compose my Sunday evening's sermon."

"You are a clergyman, sir?"

"No, no--a preacher--or say rather--a teacher, and a very humble
one, who, striving himself after Truth, seeks to lend such aid to
others as he may."

"Truth!" said I; "what is Truth?"

"Truth, sir, is that which can never pass away; the Truth of Life
is Good Works, which abide everlastingly."

"Sir," said I, "you smoke a pipe, I perceive, and should,
therefore, be a good preacher; for smoking begets thought--"

"And yet, sir, is not to act greater than to think?"

"Why, Thought far outstrips puny Action!" said I--" it reaches
deeper, soars higher; in our actions we are pigmies, but in our
thoughts we may be gods, and embrace a universe."

"But," sighed the Preacher, "while we think, our fellows perish
in ignorance and want!"

"Hum!" said I.

"Thought," pursued the Preacher, "may become a vice, as it did
with the old-time monks and hermits, who, shutting themselves
away from their kind, wasted their lives upon their knees,
thinking noble thoughts and dreaming of holy things, but--leaving
the world very carefully to the devil.  And, as to smoking, I am
seriously considering giving it up."  Here he took the pipe from
his lips and thrust it behind his back.

"Why?"

"It has become, unfortunately, too human!  It is a strange thing,
sir," he went on, smiling and shaking his head, "that this, my
one indulgence, should breed me more discredit than all the
cardinal sins, and become a stumbling-block to others.  Only last
Sunday I happened to overhear two white-headed old fellows
talking.  'A fine sermon, Giles?' said the one.  'Ah! good
enough,' replied the other, 'but it might ha' been better--ye
see--'e smokes!'  So I am seriously thinking of giving it up, for
it would appear that if a preacher prove himself as human as his
flock, they immediately lose faith in him, and become deaf to his
teaching."

"Very true, sir!" I nodded.  "It has always been human to admire
and respect that only which is in any way different to ourselves;
in archaic times those whose teachings were above men's
comprehension, or who were remarkable for any singularity of
action were immediately deified.  Pythagoras recognized this
truth when he shrouded himself in mystery and delivered his
lectures from behind a curtain, though to be sure he has come to
be regarded as something of a charlatan in consequence."

"Pray, sir," said the Preacher, absent-mindedly puffing at his
pipe again, "may I ask what you are?"

"A blacksmith, sir."

"And where did you read of Pythagoras and the like?"

"At Oxford, sir."

"How comes it then that I find you in the dawn, wet with rain,
buffeted by wind, and--most of all--a shoer of horses?"

But, instead of answering, I pointed to a twisted figure that lay
beneath the opposite hedge.

"A man!" exclaimed the Preacher, "and asleep, I think."

"No," said I, "not in that contorted attitude."

"Indeed, you are right," said the Preacher; "the man is ill--poor
fellow!"  And, hurrying forward, he fell on his knees beside the
prostrate figure.

He was a tall man, roughly clad, and he lay upon his back, rigid
and motionless, while upon his blue lips were flecks and bubbles
of foam.

"Epilepsy!" said I.  The Preacher nodded and busied himself with
loosening the sodden neckcloth, the while I unclasped the icy
fingers to relieve the tension of the muscles,

The man's hair was long and matted, as was also his beard, and
his face all drawn and pale, and very deeply lined.  Now, as I
looked at him, I had a vague idea that I had somewhere, at some
time, seen him before.

"Sir," said the Preacher, looking up, "will you help me to carry
him to my cottage?  It is not very far."

So we presently took the man's wasted form between us and bore
it, easily enough, to where stood a small cottage bowered in
roses and honeysuckle.  And, having deposited our unconscious
burden upon the Preacher's humble bed, I turned to depart.

"Sir," said the Preacher, holding out his hand, "it is seldom one
meets with a blacksmith who has read the Pythagorean Philosophy
--at Oxford, and I should like to see you again.  I am a lonely man
save for my books; come and sup with me some evening, and let us
talk--"

"And smoke?" said I.  The little Preacher sighed.  "I will come,"
said I; "thank you! and good-by!"  Now, even as I spoke, chancing
to cast my eyes upon the pale, still face on the bed, I felt more
certain than ever that I had somewhere seen it before.




CHAPTER XXVIII

IN WHICH I COME TO A DETERMINATION


As I walked through the fresh, green world there ensued within me
the following dispute, as it were, between myself and two voices;
and the first voice I will call Pro, and the other Contra.

MYSELF.  May the devil take that "Gabbing Dick"!

PRO.  He probably will.

MYSELF.  Had he not told me of what he saw--of the man who looked
at my Virgil--over her shoulder--

PRO.  Or had you not listened.

MYSELF.  Ah, yes!--but then, I did listen, and that he spoke the
truth is beyond all doubt; the misplaced Virgil proves that.
However, it is certain, yes, very certain, that I can remain no
longer in the Hollow.

CONTRA.  Well, there is excellent accommodation at "The Bull."

PRO.  And, pray, why leave the Hollow?

MYSELF.  Because she is a woman--

PRO.  And you love her!

MYSELF.  To my sorrow.

PRO.  Well, but woman was made for man, Peter, and man for
woman--!

MYSELF (sternly).  Enough of that--I must go!

PRO.  Being full of bitter jealousy.

MYSELF.  No!

PRO.  Being a mad, jealous fool--

MYSELF.  As you will.

PRO.  --who has condemned her unheard--with no chance of
justification.

MYSELF.  To-morrow, at the very latest, I shall seek some other
habitation.

PRO.  Has she the look of guilt?

MYSELF.  No; but then women are deceitful by nature, and very
skilful in disguising their faults--at least so I have read in my
books--

PRO (contemptuously).  Books!  Books!  Books!

MYSELF (shortly).  No matter; I have decided.

PRO.  Do you remember how willingly she worked for you with those
slender, capable hands of hers--?

MYSELF.  Why remind me of this?

Pro.  You must needs miss her presence sorely; her footstep, that
was always so quick and light--

MYSELF.  Truly wonderful in one so nobly formed!

PRO.  --and the way she had of singing softly to herself.

MYSELF.  A beautiful voice--

PRO.  With a caress in it!  And then, her habit of looking at you
over her shoulder.

MYSELF.  Ah, yes!--her lashes a little drooping, her brows a
little wrinkled, her lips a little parted.

CONTRA.  A comfortable inn is "The Bull."

MYSELF (hastily).  Yes, yes--certainly.

PRO.  Ah!--her lips--the scarlet witchery of her lips!  Do you
remember how sweetly the lower one curved upward to its fellow?
A mutinous mouth, with its sudden, bewildering changes!  You
never quite knew which to watch oftenest--her eyes or her lips--

CONTRA (hoarsely).  Excellent cooking at "The Bull"!

PRO.  And how she would berate you and scoff at your Master
Epictetus, and dry-as-dust philosophers!

MYSELF.  I have sometimes wondered at her pronounced antipathy to
Epictetus.

PRO.  And she called you a "creature."

MYSELF.  The meaning of which I never quite fathomed.

PRO.  And, frequently, a "pedant."

MYSELF.  I think not more than four times.

PRO.  On such occasions, you will remember, she had a petulant
way of twitching her shoulder towards you and frowning, and,
occasionally, stamping her foot; and, deep within you, you loved
it all, you know you did.

CONTRA.  But that is all over, and you are going to "The Bull."

MYSELF (hurriedly).  To be sure--"The Bull."

PRO.  And, lastly, you cannot have forgotten--you never will
forget--the soft tumult of the tender bosom that pillowed your
battered head--the pity of her hands--those great, scalding
tears, the sudden, swift caress of her lips, and the thrill in
her voice when she said--

MYSELF (hastily).  Stop! that is all forgotten.

PRO.  You lie!  You have dreamed of it ever since, working at
your anvil, or lying upon your bed, with your eyes upon the
stars; you have loved her from the beginning of things!

MYSELF.  And I did not know it; I was very blind.  The wonder is
that she did not discover my love for her long ago, for, not
knowing it was there, how should I try to hide it?

CONTRA.  O Blind, and more than blind!  Why should you suppose
she hasn't?

MYSELF (stopping short).  What?  Can it be possible that she has?

CONTRA.  Didn't she once say that she could read you like a book?

MYSELF.  She did.

CONTRA.  And have you not often surprised a smile upon her lips,
and wondered?

MYSELF.  Many times.

CONTRA.  Have you not beheld a thin-veiled mockery in her look?
Why, poor fool, has she not mocked you from the first?  You dream
of her lips.  Were not their smiles but coquetry and derision?

MYSELF.  But why should she deride me?

CONTRA.  For your youth and--innocence.

MYSELF.  My youth! my innocence!

CONTRA.  Being a fool ingrain, didn't you boast that you had
known but few women?

MYSELF.  I did, but--

CONTRA.  Didn't she call you boy! boy! boy!--and laugh at you?

MYSELF.  Well--even so--

CONTRA (with bitter scorn).  O Boy!  O Innocent of the innocent!
Go to, for a bookish fool!  Learn that lovely ladies yield
themselves but to those who are masterful in their wooing, who
have wooed often, and triumphed as often.  O Innocent of the
innocent! Forget the maudlin sentiment of thy books and old
romances--thy pure Sir Galahads, thy "vary parfait gentil
knightes," thy meek and lowly lovers serving their ladies on
bended knee; open thine eyes, learn that women to-day love only
the strong hand, the bold eye, the ready tongue; kneel to her,
and she will scorn and contemn you.  What woman, think you, would
prefer the solemn, stern-eyed purity of a Sir Galahad (though he
be the king of men) to the quick-witted gayety of a debonair
Lothario (though he be but the shadow of a man)?  Out upon thee,
pale-faced student!  Thy tongue hath not the trick, nor thy mind
the nimbleness for the winning of a fair and lovely lady.
Thou'rt well enough in want of a better, but, when Lothario
comes, must she not run to meet him with arms outstretched?

"To-morrow," said I, clenching my fists, "to-morrow I will go
away!"

Being now come to the Hollow, I turned aside to the brook, at
that place where was the pool in which I was wont to perform my
morning ablutions; and, kneeling down, I gazed at myself in the
dark, still water; and I saw that the night had, indeed, set its
mark upon me.

"To-morrow," said I again, nodding to the wild face below,
"to-morrow I will go far hence."

Now while I yet gazed at myself, I heard a sudden gasp behind me
and, turning, beheld Charmian.

"Peter! is it you?" she whispered, drawing back from me.

"Who else, Charmian?  Did I startle you?"

"Yes--oh, Peter!"

"Are you afraid of me?"

"You are like one who has walked with--death!"

I rose to my feet, and stood looking down at her.  "Are you
afraid of me, Charmian?"

"No, Peter."

"I am glad of that," said I, "because I want to ask you--to marry
me, Charmian."




CHAPTER XXIX

IN WHICH CHARMIAN ANSWERS MY QUESTION


"Peter!"

"Yes?"

"I wish you wouldn't."

"Wouldn't what, Charmian?"

"Stir your tea round and round and round--it is really most
--exasperating!"

"I beg your pardon!" said I humbly.

"And you eat nothing; and that is also exasperating!"

"I am not hungry."

"And I was so careful with the bacon--see it is fried
--beautifully--yes, you are very exasperating, Peter!"

Here, finding I was absent-mindedly stirring my tea round and
round again, I gulped it down out of the way, whereupon Charmian
took my cup and refilled it; having done which, she set her
elbows upon the table, and, propping her chin in her hands,
looked at me.

"You climbed out through your window last night, Peter?"

"Yes."

"It must have been a--dreadfully tight squeeze!"

"Yes."

"And why did you go by the window?"

"I did not wish to disturb you."

"That was very thoughtful of you--only, you see, I was up and
dressed; the roar of the thunder woke me.  It was a dreadful
storm, Peter!"

"Yes."

"The lightning was awful!"

"Yes."

"And you were out in it?"

"Yes."

"Oh, you poor, poor Peter! How cold you must have been!"

"On the contrary," I began, "I--"

"And wet, Peter--miserably wet and clammy!"

"I did not notice it," I murmured.

"Being a philosopher, Peter, and too much engrossed in your
thoughts?"

"I was certainly thinking."

"Of yourself!"

"Yes--"

"You are a great egoist, aren't you, Peter?"

"Am I, Charmian?"

"Who but an egoist could stand with his mind so full of himself
and his own concerns as to be oblivious to thunder and lightning,
and not know that he is miserably clammy and wet?"

"I thought of others besides myself."

"But only in connection with yourself; everything you have ever read
or seen you apply to yourself, to make that self more worthy in Mr.
Vibart's eyes.  Is this worthy of Peter Vibart?  Can Peter Vibart
do this, that, or the other, and still retain the respect of Peter
Vibart?  Then why, being in all things so very correct and precise,
why is Peter Vibart given to prowling abroad at midnight, quite
oblivious to thunder, lightning, wet and clamminess?  I answer:
Because Peter Vibart is too much engrossed by--Peter Vibart.
There! that sounds rather cryptic and very full of Peter Vibart;
but that is as it should be," and she laughed.

"And what does it mean, Charmian?"

"Good sir, the sibyl hath spoken!  Find her meaning for yourself."

"You have called me, on various occasions, a 'creature,' a
'pedant'--very frequently a 'pedant,' and now, it seems I am an
'egoist,' and all because--"

"Because you think too much, Peter; you never open your lips
without having first thought out just what you are going to say;
you never do anything without having laboriously mapped it all
out beforehand, that you may not outrage Peter Vibart's
tranquillity by any impulsive act or speech.  Oh! you are always
thinking and thinking--and that is even worse than stirring, and
stirring at your tea, as you are doing now."  I took the spoon
hastily from my cup, and laid it as far out of reach as possible.
"If ever you should write the book you once spoke of, it would be
just the very sort of book that I should--hate."

"Why, Charmian?"

"Because it would be a book of artfully turned phrases; a book in
which all the characters, especially women, would think and speak
and act by rote and rule--as according to Mr. Peter Vibart; it
would be a scholarly book, of elaborate finish and care of
detail, with no irregularities of style or anything else to break
the monotonous harmony of the whole--indeed, sir, it would be a
most unreadable book!"

"Do you think so, Charmian?" said I, once more taking up the
teaspoon.

"Why, of course!" she answered, with raised brows; "it would
probably be full of Greek and Latin quotations!  And you would
polish and rewrite it until you had polished every vestige of
life and spontaneity out of it, as you do out of yourself, with
your thinking and thinking."

"But I never quote you Greek or Latin; that is surely something,
and, as for thinking, would you have me a thoughtless fool or an
impulsive ass?"

"Anything rather than a calculating, introspective philosopher,
seeing only the mote in the sunbeam, and nothing of the glory."
Here she gently disengaged the teaspoon from my fingers and laid
it in her own saucer, having done which she sighed, and looked at
me with her head to one side.  "Were they all like you, Peter, I
wonder--those old philosophers, grim and stern, and terribly
repressed, with burning eyes, Peter, and with very long chins?
Epictetus was, of course!"

"And you dislike Epictetus, Charmian?"

"I detest him!  He was just the kind of person, Peter, who, being
unable to sleep, would have wandered out into a terrible
thunderstorm, in the middle of the night, and, being cold and wet
and clammy, Peter, would have drawn moral lessons, and made
epigrams upon the thunder and lightning.  Epictetus, I am quite
sure, was a--person!"

"He was one of the wisest, gentlest, and most lovable of all the
Stoics!" said I.

"Can a philosopher possibly be lovable, Peter?"  Here I very
absent-mindedly took up a fork, but, finding her eye upon me,
laid it down again.

"You are very nervous, Peter, and very pale and worn and haggard,
and all because you habitually--overthink yourself; and indeed,
there is something very far wrong with a man who perseveringly
stirs an empty cup--with a fork!"  And, with a laugh, she took my
cup and, having once more refilled it, set it before me.

"And yet, Peter--I don't think--no, I don't think I would have
you very much changed, after all."

"You mean that you would rather I remained the pedantic,
egotistical creature--"

"I mean, Peter, that, being a woman, I naturally love novelty,
and you are very novel--and very interesting."

"Thank you!" said I, frowning.

"And more contradictory than any woman!"

"Hum!" said I.

"You are so strong and simple--so wise and brave--and so very
weak and foolish and timid!"

"Timid?" said I.

"Timid!" nodded she.

"I am a vast fool!" I acknowledged.

"And I never knew a man anything like you before, Peter!"

"And you have known many, I understand?"

"Very many."

"Yes--you told me so once before, I believe."

"Twice, Peter; and each time you became very silent and gloomy!
Now you, on the other hand," she continued, "have known very few
women?"

"And my life has been calm and unruffled in consequence!"

"You had your books, Peter, and your horseshoes."

"My books and horseshoes, yes."

"And were content?"

"Quite content."

"Until, one day--a woman--came to you."

"Until, one day--I met a woman."

"And then--?"

"And then--I asked her to marry me, Charmian."  Here there ensued
a pause, during which Charmian began to pleat a fold in the
tablecloth.

"That was rather--unwise of you, wasn't it?" said she at last.

"How unwise?"

"Because--she might--have taken you at your word, Peter."

"Do you mean that--that you won't, Charmian?"

"Oh dear, no!  I have arrived at no decision yet how could I?
You must give me time to consider."  Here she paused in her
pleating to regard it critically, with her head on one side.  "To
be sure," said she, with a little nod, "to be sure, you need some
one to--to look after you--that is very evident!"

"Yes."

"To cook--and wash for you."

"Yes."

"To mend your clothes for you."

"Yes."

"And you think me--sufficiently competent?"

"Oh, Charmian, I--yes."

Thank you!" said she, very solemnly, and, though her lashes had
drooped, I felt the mockery of her eyes; wherefore I took a
sudden great gulp of tea, and came near choking, while Charmian
began to pleat another fold in the tablecloth.

"And so Mr. Vibart would stoop to wed so humble a person as
Charmian Brown?  Mr. Peter Vibart would, actually, marry a woman
of whose past he knows nothing?"

"Yes," said I.

"That, again, would be rather--unwise, wouldn't it?"

"Why?"

"Considering Mr. Vibart's very lofty ideals in regard to women."

"What do you mean?"

"Didn't you once say that your wife's name must be above
suspicion--like Caesar's--or something of the kind?"

"Did I?--yes, perhaps I did--well?"

"Well, this woman--this Humble Person has no name at all, and no
shred of reputation left her.  She has compromised herself beyond
all redemption in the eyes of the world."

"But then," said I, "this world and I have always mutually
despised each other."

"She ran away, this woman--eloped with the most notorious, the
most accomplished rake in London."

"Well?"

"Oh!--is not that enough?"

"Enough for what, Charmian?"  I saw her busy fingers falter and
tremble, but her voice was steady when she answered:

"Enough to make any--wise man think twice before asking this
Humble Person to--to marry him."

"I might think twenty times, and it would be all one!"

"You--mean--?"

"That if Charmian Brown will stoop to marry a village blacksmith,
Peter Vibart will find happiness again; a happiness that is not
of the sunshine--nor the wind in the trees--Lord, what a fool I
was!"  Her fingers had stopped altogether now, but she neither
spoke nor raised her head.

"Charmian," said I, leaning nearer across the table, "speak."

"Oh, Peter!" said she, with a sudden break in her voice, and
stooped her head lower.  Yet in a little she looked up at me, and
her eyes were very sweet and shining.

Now, as our glances met thus, up from throat to brow there crept
that hot, slow wave of color, and in her face and in her eyes I
seemed to read joy, and fear, and shame, and radiant joy again.
But now she bent her head once more, and strove to pleat another
fold, and could not; while I grew suddenly afraid of her and of
myself, and longed to hurl aside the table that divided us; and
thrust my hands deep into my pockets, and, finding there my
tobacco-pipe, brought it out and fell to turning it aimlessly
over and over.  I would have spoken, only I knew that my voice
would tremble, and so I sat mum-chance, staring at my pipe with
unseeing eyes, and with my brain in a ferment.  And presently
came her voice, cool and sweet and sane:

"Your tobacco, Peter," and she held the box towards me across the
table.

"Ah, thank you!" said I, and began to fill my pipe, while she
watched me with her chin propped in her hands.

"Peter!"

"Yes, Charmian?"

"I wonder why so grave a person as Mr. Peter Vibart should seek
to marry so impossible a creature as--the Humble Person?"

"I think," I answered, "I think, if there is any special reason,
it is because of--your mouth."

"My mouth?"

"Or your eyes--or the way you have with your lashes."

Charmian laughed, and forthwith drooped them at me, and laughed
again, and shook her head.

"But surely, Peter, surely there are thousands, millions of women
with mouths and eyes like--the Humble Person's?"

"It is possible," said I, "but none who have the same way with
their lashes."

"What do you mean?"

"I can't tell; I don't know."

"Don't you, Peter?"

"No--it is just a way."

"And so it is that you want to marry this very Humble Person?"

"I think I have wanted to from the very first, but did not know
it--being a blind fool!"

"And--did it need a night walk in a thunderstorm to teach you?"

"No--that is, yes--perhaps it did."

"And--are you quite, quite sure?"

"Quite--quite sure!" said I, and, as I spoke, I laid my pipe upon
the table and rose; and, because my hands were trembling, I
clenched my fists.  But, as I approached her, she started up and
put out a hand to hold me off, and then I saw that her hands were
trembling also.  And standing thus, she spoke, very softly:

"Peter."

"Yes, Charmian?"

"Do you remember describing to me the--the perfect woman who
should be your--wife?"

"Yes."

"How that you must be able to respect her for her intellect?"

"Yes."

"Honor her for her virtue?"

"Yes, Charmian."

"And worship her--for her--spotless purity?"

"I dreamed a paragon--perfect and impossible; I was a fool!" said I.

"Impossible!  Oh, Peter! what--what do you mean?"

"She was only an impalpable shade quite impossible of
realization--a bloodless thing, as you said, and quite unnatural
--a sickly figment of the imagination.  I was a fool!"

"And you are--too wise now, to expect--such virtues--in any
woman?"

"Yes," said I; "no--oh, Charmian!  I only know that you have
taken this phantom's place--that you fill all my thoughts
--sleeping, and waking--"

"No!  No!" she cried, and struggled in my arms, so that I caught
her hands, and held them close, and kissed them many times.

"Oh, Charmian! Charmian!--don't you know--can't you see--it
is you I want--you, and only you forever; whatever you were
--whatever you are--I love you--love you, and always must!
Marry me, Charmian!--marry me! and you shall be dearer than
my life--more to me than my soul--"  But, as I spoke, her hands
were snatched away, her eyes blazed into mine, and her lips
were all bitter scorn, and at the sight, fear came upon me.

"Marry you!" she panted; "marry you?--no and no and no!"  And so
she stamped her foot, and sobbed, and turning, fled from me, out
of the cottage.

And now to fear came wonder, and with wonder was despair.

Truly, was ever man so great a fool!




CHAPTER XXX

CONCERNING THE FATE OF BLACK GEORGE


A broad, white road; on either hand some half-dozen cottages with
roofs of thatch or red tile, backed by trees gnarled and ancient,
among which rises the red conical roof of some oast-house.  Such,
in a word, is Sissinghurst.

Now, upon the left-hand side of the way, there stands a square,
comfortable, whitewashed building, peaked of roof, bright as to
windows, and with a mighty sign before the door, whereon you shall
behold the picture of a bull: a bull rolling of eye, astonishingly
curly of horn and stiff as to tail, and with a prodigious girth
of neck and shoulder; such a snorting, fiery-eyed, curly-horned
bull as was never seen off an inn-sign.

It was at this bull that I was staring with much apparent
interest, though indeed, had that same curly-horned monstrosity
been changed by some enchanter's wand into a green dragon or
griffin, or swan with two necks, the chances are that I should
have continued sublimely unconscious of the transformation.

Yet how should honest Silas Hoskins, ostler, and general factotum
of "The Bull" inn, be aware of this fact, who, being thus early
at work, and seeing me lost in contemplation, paused to address
me in all good faith?

"A fine bull 'e be, eh, Peter?  Look at them 'orns, an' that
theer tail; it's seldom as you sees 'orns or a tail the like o'
them, eh?"

"Very seldom!" I answered, and sighed.

"An' then--'is nose-'oles, Peter, jest cast your eye on them
nose'oles, will ye; why, dang me! if I can't 'ear 'im a-snortin'
when I looks at 'em!  An' 'e were all painted by a chap--a little
old chap wi' gray whiskers--no taller 'n your elber, Peter!
Think o' that--a little chap no taller 'n your elber!  I seen 'im
do it wi' my two eyes--a-sittin' on a box.  Drored t' bull in
wi' a bit o' chalk, first; then 'e outs wi' a couple o' brushes;
dab 'e goes, an' dab, dab again, an'--by Goles! theer was a pair
o' eyes a-rollin' theirselves at me--just a pair o' eyes, Peter.
Ah! 'e were a wonder were that little old chap wi' gray whiskers!
The way 'e went at that theer bull, a-dabbin' at 'im 'ere, an'
a-dabbin' at 'im theer till 'e come to 'is tail--'e done 'is tail
last of all, Peter.  'Give un a good tail!' says I.  'Ah! that I
will,' says 'e.  'An' a good stiff un!' says I.  'Ye jest keep
your eye on it, an' watch!' says 'e.  Talk about tails, Peter!
'E put in that theer tail so quick as nigh made my eyes water,
an'--as for stiffness--well, look at it!  I tell 'ee that chap
could paint a bull wi' 'is eyes shut, ah, that 'e could! an' 'im
such a very small man wi' gray whiskers.  No, ye don't see many
bulls like that un theer, I'm thinkin', Peter?"

"They would be very hard to find!" said I, and sighed again.
Whereupon Silas sighed, for company's sake, and nodding, went off
about his many duties, whistling cheerily.

So I presently turned about and crossed the road to the smithy.
But upon the threshold I stopped all at once and drew softly
back, for, despite the early hour, Prudence was there, upon her
knees before the anvil, with George's great hand-hammer clasped
to her bosom, sobbing over it, and, while she sobbed, she kissed
its worn handle.  And because such love was sacred and hallowed
that dingy place, I took off my hat as I once more crossed the
road.

Seeing "The Bull" was not yet astir, for the day was still young
(as I say), I sat me down in the porch and sighed.

And after I had sat there for some while, with my chin sunk upon
my breast, and plunged in bitter meditation, I became aware of
the door opening, and next moment a tremulous hand was laid upon
my head, and, looking round, I beheld the Ancient.

"Bless 'ee, Peter--bless 'ee, lad!--an' a old man's blessin' be
no light thing--'specially such a old, old man as I be--an' it
bean't often as I feels in a blessin' sperrit--but oh, Peter!
'twere me as found ye, weren't it?"

"Why, to be sure it was, Ancient, very nearly five months ago."

"An' I be allus ready wi' some noos for ye, bean't I?"

"Yes, indeed!"

"Well, I got more noos for 'ee, Peter--gert noos!"

"And what is it this time?"

"I be allus full up o' noos, bean't I?" he repeated.

"Yes, Ancient," said I, and sighed; "and what is your news?"

"Why, first of all, Peter, jest reach me my snuff-box, will 'ee?
--'ere it be--in my back 'ind pocket--thankee! thankee!"  Hereupon
he knocked upon the lid with a bony knuckle.  "I du be that full
o' noos this marnin' that my innards be all of a quake, Peter,
all of a quake!" he nodded, saying which, he sat down close
beside me.

"Peter."

"Yes, Ancient?"

"Some day--when that theer old stapil be all rusted away, an'
these old bones is a-restin' in the churchyard over to Cranbrook,
Peter--you'll think, sometimes, o' the very old man as was always
so full o' noos, won't 'ee, Peter?"

"Surely, Ancient, I shall never forget you," said I, and sighed.

"An' now, Peter," said the old man, extracting a pinch of snuff,
"now for the noos--'bout Black Jarge, it be."

"What of him, Ancient?" The old man shook his head.

"It took eight on 'em to du it, Peter, an' now four on 'em's
a-layin' in their beds, an' four on 'em's 'obblin' on crutches--an'
all over a couple o' rabbits--though theer be some fules as says
they was pa'tridges!"

"Why--what do you mean?"

"Why, ye see, Peter, Black Jarge be such a gert, strong man (I
were much such another when I were young) like; lion, in 'is
wrath, 'e be--ah!--a bull bean't nothin' to Black Jarge!  An'
they keepers come an' found 'im under a tree, fast asleep--like
David in the Cave of Adullam, Peter, wi' a couple o' rabbits as
'e'd snared.  An' when they keepers tried to tak' 'im, 'e rose
up, 'e did, an' throwed some on 'em this way an' some on 'em that
way--'twere like Samson an' the Philistines; if only 'e'd
'appened to find the jaw-bone of a ass lyin' 'andy, 'e'd ha'
killed 'em all an' got away, sure as sure.  But it weren't to be,
Peter, no; dead donkeys be scarce nowadays, an' as for asses'
jaw-bones--"

"Do you mean that George is taken--a prisoner?"

The Ancient nodded, and inhaled his pinch of snuff with much
evident relish.

"It be gert noos, bean't it, Peter?"

"What have they done with him?  Where is he, Ancient?"  But,
before the old man could answer, Simon appeared.

"Ah, Peter!" said he, shaking his head, "the Gaffer's been
tellin' ye 'ow they've took Jarge for poachin', I suppose--"

"Simon!" cried the Ancient, "shut thy mouth, lad hold thy gab an'
give thy poor old feyther a chance--I be tellin' 'im so fast as I
can!  As I was a-sayin', Peter like a fur'us lion were Jarge wi'
they keepers--eight on 'em, Peter--like dogs, a-growlin' an'
growlin', an' leapin', and worryin' all round 'im--ah!--like a
lion 'e were--"

"Waitin' for a chance to use 'is 'right, d'ye see, Peter!"
added Simon.

ANCIENT.  Wi' 'is eyes a-rollin' an' flamin', Peter, an' 'is mane
all bristlin'--

SIMON.  Cool as any cucumber, Peter--

ANCIENT.  A-roarin' an' a-lashin' of 'is tail--

SIMON.  And sparrin' for an openin', Peter, and when 'e sees one
--downin' 'is man every time--

ANCIENT.  Leapin' in the air, rollin' in the grass, wi' they
keepers clingin' to 'im like leeches--ah! leeches--

SIMON.  And every time they rushed, tap 'ud go 'is "left," and
bang 'ud go 'is "right"--

ANCIENT.  An' up 'e'd get, like Samson again, Peter, an' give
'isself a shake; bellerin'--like a bull o' Bashan--

SIMON.  Ye see, they fou't so close together that the keepers was
afear'd to use their guns--

ANCIENT (indignantly).  Guns!--who's a-talkin' o' guns?  Simon,
my bye--you be allus a-maggin' an' a-maggin'; bridle thy tongue,
lad, bridle thy tongue afore it runs away wi' ye.

SIMON (sheepishly).  All right, Old Un--fire away!

But, at this juncture, Old Amos hove in view, followed by the
Apologetic Dutton, with Job and sundry others, on their way to
work, and, as they came, they talked together, with much solemn
wagging of heads.  Having reached the door of "The Bull," they
paused and greeted us, and I thought Old Amos's habitual grin
seemed a trifle more pronounced than usual.

"So poor Jarge 'as been an' gone an' done for 'isself at last,
eh?  Oh, my soul! think o' that, now!" sighed Old Amos.

"Allus knowed as 'e would!" added Job; "many's the time I've
said as 'e would, an' you know it--all on you."

"It'll be the Barbadies, or Austrayley!" grinned Amos; "transportation,
it'll be--Oh, my soul! think o' that now--an' 'im a Siss'n'urst man!"

"An' all along o' a couple o'--rabbits!" said the Ancient,
emphasizing the last word with a loud rap on his snuff-box.

"Pa'tridges, Gaffer!--they was pa'tridges!" returned Old Amos.

"I allus said as Black Jarge'd come to a bad end," reiterated
Job, "an' what's more--'e aren't got nobody to blame but
'isself!"

"An' all for a couple o'--rabbits!" sighed the Ancient, staring
Old Amos full in the eye.

"Pa'tridges, Gaffer, they was pa'tridges--you, James Dutton--was
they pa'tridges or was they not--speak up, James."

Hereupon the man Dutton, all perspiring apology, as usual,
shuffled forward, and, mopping his reeking brow, delivered
himself in this wise:

"W'ich I must say--meanin' no offence to nobody, an' if so be,
apologizin'--w'ich I must say--me 'avin' seen 'em--they was
--leastways," he added, as he met the Ancient's piercing eye,
"leastways--they might 'ave been, w'ich--if they ain't--no
matter!"

Having said which, he apologetically smeared his face all over
with his shirt-sleeve, and subsided again.

"It do wring my 'eart--ah, that it do! to think o' pore Jarge a
convic' at Bot'ny Bay!" said Old Amos, "a-workin', an' diggin',
an' slavin' wi' irons on 'is legs an' arms, a-jinglin', an'
ajanglin' when 'e walks."

"Well, but it's Justice, aren't it?" demanded Job--"a poacher's
a thief, an' a thief's a convic'--or should be!"

"I've 'eerd," said Old Amos, shaking his head, "I've 'eerd as
they ties they convic's up to posts, an' lashes an' lashes 'em
wi' the cat-o'-nine-tails!"

"They generally mostly deserves it!" nodded Job.

"But 'tis 'ard to think o' pore Jarge tied up to one o' them
floggin'-posts, wi' 'is back all raw an' bleedin!" pursued Old
Amos; "crool 'ard it be, an' 'im such a fine, strappin' young
chap."

"'E were allus a sight too fond o' pitchin' into folk, Jarge were!"
said Job; "it be a mercy as my back weren't broke more nor once."

"Ah!" nodded the Ancient, "you must be amazin' strong in the
back, Job!  The way I've seed 'ee come a-rollin' an' awallerin'
out o' that theer smithy's wonnerful, wonnerful.  Lord! Job--'ow
you did roll!"

"Well, 'e won't never do it no more," said Job, glowering; "what
wi' poachin' 'is game, an' knockin' 'is keepers about, 't aren't
likely as Squire Beverley'll let 'im off very easy--"

"Who?" said I, looking up, and speaking for the first time.

"Squire Beverley o' Burn'am 'All."

"Sir Peregrine Beverley?"

"Ay, for sure."

"And how far is it to Burnham Hall?"

"'Ow fur?" repeated Job, staring; "why, it lays 't other side o'
Horsmonden--"

"It be a matter o' eight mile, Peter," said the Ancient.  "Nine,
Peter!" cried old Amos--"nine mile, it be!"

"Though I won't swear, Peter," continued the Ancient, "I won't
swear as it aren't--seven--call it six an' three quarters!" said
he, with his eagle eye on Old Amos.

"Then I had better start now," said I, and rose.

"Why, Peter--wheer be goin'?"

"To Burnham Hall, Ancient."

"What--you?" exclaimed Job; "d'ye think Squire'll see you?"

"I think so; yes."

"Well, 'e won't--they'll never let the likes o' you or me beyond
the gates."

"That remains to be seen," said I.

"So you 'm goin', are ye?"

"I certainly am."

"All right!" nodded Job, "if they sets the dogs on ye, or chucks
you into the road--don't go blamin' it on to me, that's all!"

"What--be ye really a-goin', Peter?"

"I really am, Ancient."

"Then--by the Lord!--I'll go wi' ye."

"It's a long walk!"

"Nay--Simon shall drive us in the cart."

"That I will!" nodded the Innkeeper.

"Ay, lad," cried the Ancient, laying his hand upon my arm, "we'll
up an' see Squire, you an' me--shall us, Peter?  There be some
fules," said he, looking round upon the staring company, "some
fules as talks o' Bot'ny Bay, an' irons, an' whippin'-posts--all
I says is--let 'em, Peter, let 'em!  You an' me'll up an' see
Squire, Peter, sha'n't us?  Black Jarge aren't a convic' yet, let
fules say what they will; we'll show 'em, Peter, we'll show 'em!"
So saying, the old man led me into the kitchen of "The Bull,"
while Simon went to have the horses put to.




CHAPTER XXXI

IN WHICH THE ANCIENT IS SURPRISED


A cheery place, at all times, is the kitchen of an English inn, a
comfortable place to eat in, to talk in, or to doze in; a place
with which your parlors and withdrawing-rooms, your salons (a la
the three Louis) with their irritating rococo, their gilt and
satin, and spindle-legged discomforts, are not (to my mind)
worthy to compare.

And what inn kitchen, in all broad England, was ever brighter,
neater, and more comfortable than this kitchen of "The Bull,"
where sweet Prue held supreme sway, with such grave dignity, and
with her two white-capped maids to do her bidding and behests?
--surely none.  And surely in no inn, tavern, or hostelry soever,
great or small, was there ever seen a daintier, prettier, sweeter
hostess than this same Prue of ours.

And her presence was reflected everywhere, and, if ever the
kitchen of an inn possessed a heart to lose, then, beyond all
doubt, this kitchen had lost its heart to Prue long since; even
the battered cutlasses crossed upon the wall, the ponderous jack
above the hearth, with its legend: ANNO DOMINI 1643, took on a
brighter sheen to greet her when she came, and as for the pots
and pans, they fairly twinkled.

But today Prue's eyes were red, and her lips were all a-droop,
the which, though her smile was brave and ready, the Ancient was
quick to notice.

"Why, Prue, lass, you've been weepin'!"

"Yes, grandfer."

"Your pretty eyes be all swole--red they be; what's the trouble?"

"Oh! 'tis nothing, dear, 'tis just a maid's fulishness--never
mind me, dear."

"Ah! but I love 'ee, Prue--come, kiss me--theer now, tell me all
about it--all about it, Prue."

"Oh, grandfer!" said she, from the hollow of his shoulder, "'tis
just--Jarge!"  The old man grew very still, his mouth opened
slowly, and closed with a snap.

"Did 'ee--did'ee say--Jarge, Prue?  Is it--breekin' your 'eart ye
be for that theer poachin' Black Jarge?  To think--as my Prue
should come down to a poacbin'--"

Prudence slipped from his encircling arm and stood up very
straight and proud--there were tears thick upon her lashes, but
she did not attempt to wipe them away.

"Grandfer," she said very gently, "you mustn't speak of Jarge to
me like that--ye mustn't--ye mustn't because I--love him, and if
--he ever--comes back I'll marry him if--if he will only ax me;
and if he--never comes back, then--I think--I shall--die!"  The
Ancient took out his snuff-box, knocked it, opened it, glanced
inside, and--shut it up again.

"Did 'ee tell me as you--love--Black Jarge, Prue?"

"Yes, grandfer, I always have and always shall!"

"Loves Black Jarge!" he repeated; "allus 'as--allus will!  Oh,
Lord! what 'ave I done?"  Now, very slowly, a tear crept down his
wrinkled cheek, at sight of which Prue gave a little cry, and,
kneeling beside his chair, took him in her arms.  "Oh, my lass!
--my little Prue--'tis all my doin'.  I thought--Oh, Prue, 'twere
me as parted you! I thought--"  The quivering voice broke off.

"'Tis all right, grandfer, never think of it--see there, I be
smilin'!" and she kissed him many times.

"A danged fule I be!" said the old man, shaking his head.

"No, no, grandfer!"

"That's what I be, Prue--a danged fule!  If I do go afore that
theer old, rusty stapil, 'twill serve me right--a danged fule I
be!  Allus loved 'im--allus will, an' wishful to wed wi' 'im!
Why, then," said the Ancient, swallowing two or three times, "so
'ee shall, my sweet--so 'ee shall, sure as sure, so come an' kiss
me, an' forgive the old man as loves 'ee so."

"What do 'ee mean, grandfer?" said Prue between two kisses.

"A fine, strappin' chap be Jarge; arter all, Peter, you bean't a
patch on Jarge for looks, be you?"

"No, indeed, Ancient!"

"Wishful to wed 'im, she is, an' so she shall.  Lordy Lord!  Kiss
me again, Prue, for I be goin' to see Squire--ay, I be goin' to
up an' speak wi' Squire for Jarge an' Peter be comin' too."

"Oh, Mr. Peter!" faltered Prudence, "be this true?" and in her
eyes was the light of a sudden hope.

"Yes," I nodded.

"D'you think Squire'll see you--listen to you?" she cried
breathlessly.

"I think he will, Prudence," said I.

"God bless you, Mr. Peter!" she murmured.  "God bless you!"

But now came the sound of wheels and the voice of Simon, calling,
wherefore I took my hat and followed the Ancient to the door, but
there Prudence stopped me.

"Last time you met wi' Jarge he tried to kill you.  Oh, I know,
and now--you be goin' to--"

"Nonsense, Prue!" said I.  But, as I spoke, she stooped and would
have kissed my hand, but I raised her and kissed her upon the
cheek, instead.  "For good luck, Prue," said I, and so turned and
left her.

In the porch sat Job, with Old Amos and the rest, still in solemn
conclave over pipes and ale, who watched with gloomy brows as I
swung myself up beside the Ancient in the cart.

"A fule's journey!" remarked Old Amos sententiously, with a wave
of his pipe; "a fule's journey!"

The Ancient cast an observing eye up at the cloudless sky, and
also nodded solemnly.

"Theer be some fules in this world, Peter, as mixes up rabbits
wi' pa'tridges, and honest men--like Jarge--wi' thieves, an' lazy
waggabones--like Job--but we'll show 'em, Peter, we'll show 'em
--dang 'em!  Drive on, Simon, my bye!"

So, with this Parthian shot, feathered with the one strong word
the Ancient kept for such occasions, we drove away from the
silenced group, who stared mutely after us until we were lost to
view.  But the last thing I saw was the light in Prue's sweet
eyes as she watched us from the open lattice.




CHAPTER XXXII

HOW WE SET OUT FOR BURNHAM HALL


"Peter," said the Ancient, after we had gone a little way,
"Peter, I do 'opes as you aren't been an' gone an' rose my Prue's
'opes only to dash 'em down again."

"I can but do my best, Ancient."

"Old Un," said Simon, "'tweren't Peter as rose 'er 'opes,
'twere you; Peter never said nowt about bringin' Jarge 'ome--"

"Simon," commanded the Ancient, "hold thy tongue, lad; I says
again, if Peter's been an' rose Prue's 'opes only to dash 'em 't
will be a bad day for Prue, you mark my words; Prue's a lass as
don't love easy, an' don't forget easy."

"Why, true, Gaffer, true, God bless 'er!"

"She be one as 'ud pine--slow an' quiet, like a flower in the
woods, or a leaf in autumn--ah! fade, she would, fade an' fade!"

"Well, she bean't a-goin' to do no fadin', please the Lord!"

"Not if me an' Peter an' you can 'elp it, Simon, my bye--but we
'm but poor worms, arter all, as the Bible says; an' if Peter 'as
been an' rose 'er 'opes o' freein' Jarge, an' don't free Jarge
--if Jarge should 'ave to go a convic' to Austrayley, or--or t'
other place, why then--she'll fade, fade as ever was, an' be laid
in the churchyard afore 'er poor old grandfeyther!"

"Lord, Old Un!" exclaimed Simon, "who's a-talkin' o' fadin's an'
churchyards?  I don't like it--let's talk o' summ'at else."

"Simon," said the Ancient, shaking his head reprovingly, "ye be a
good bye--ah! a steady, dootiful lad ye be, I don't deny it; but
the Lord aren't give you no imagination, which, arter all, you
should be main thankful for; a imagination's a troublesome thing
--aren't it, Peter?"

"It is," said I, "a damnable thing!"

"Ay--many's the man as 'as been ruinated by 'is imagination
--theer was one, Nicodemus Blyte were 'is name--"

"And a very miserable cove 'e sounds, too!" added Simon.

"But a very decent, civil-spoke, quiet young chap 'e were!"
continued the Ancient, "only for 'is imagination; Lord! 'e were
that full o' imagination 'e couldn't drink 'is ale like an
ordinary chap--sip, 'e'd go, an' sip, sip, till 'twere all gone,
an' then 'e'd forget as ever 'e'd 'ad any, an' go away wi'out
paying for it--if some 'un didn't remind 'im--"

"'E were no fule, Old Un!" nodded Simon.

"An' that weren't all, neither, not by no manner o' means," the
Ancient continued.  "I've knowed that theer chap sit an' listen
to a pretty lass by the hour together an' never say a word--not
one!"

"Didn't git a chance to, p'r'aps?" said Simon.

"It weren't that, no, it were jest 'is imagination a-workin' an'
workin' inside of 'im, an' fillin' 'im up.  'Ows'ever, at last,
one day, 'e up an' axed 'er to marry 'im, an' she, bein' all took
by surprise, said 'yes,' an' went an' married some'un else."

"Lord!" said Simon, "what did she go and marry another chap for?"

"Simon," returned the Ancient, "don't go askin' fulish questions.
'Ows'ever, she did, an' poor Nicodemus growed more imaginative
than ever; arter that, 'e took to turnips."

"Turnips?" exclaimed Simon, staring.

"Turnips as ever was!" nodded the Ancient, "used to stand, for
hours at a time, a-lookin' at 'is turnips an' shakin' 'is 'ead
over 'em."

"But--what for?--a man must be a danged fule to go shakin' of 'is
'ead over a lot o' turnips!"

"Well, I don't know," rejoined the Ancient; "'is turnips was very
good uns, as a rule, an' fetched top prices in the markets."

At this juncture there appeared a man in a cart, ahead of us, who
flourished his whip and roared a greeting, a coarse-visaged,
loud-voiced fellow, whose beefy face was adorned with a pair of
enormous fiery whiskers that seemed forever striving to hide his
ears, which last, being very large and red, stood boldly out at
right angles to his head, refusing to be thus ambushed, and
scorning all concealment.

"W'at--be that the Old Un--be you alive an' kickin' yet?"

"Ay, God be thanked, John!"

"And w'at be all this I 'ear about that theer Black Jarge--'e
never were much good--but w'at be all this?"

"Lies, mostly, you may tak' your oath!" nodded the Ancient.

"But 'e've been took for poachin', ah! an' locked up at the
'All--"

"An' we 'm goin' to fetch un--we be goin' to see Squire--"

"W'at--you, Old Un?  You see Squire--haw! haw!"

"Ah, me!--an' Peter, an' Simon, 'ere--why not?"

"_You_ see 'is Worship Sir Peregrine Beverley, Baronet, an' Justice
o' the Peace--you?  Ecod! that's a good un--danged if it ain't!
An' what might you be wishful to do when ye see 'im--which ye
_won't?_"

"Fetch back Jarge, o' course."

"Old Un, you must be crazed in your lead, arter Jarge killin'
four keepers--Sir Peregrine's own keepers too--shootin' 'em stone
dead, an' three more a-dyin'--"

"John," said the Ancient, shaking his head, "that's the worst o'
bein' cursed wi' ears like yourn--"

"My ears is all right!" returned John, frowning.

"Oh, ah!" chuckled the old man, "your ears is all right, John
--prize ears, ye might call 'em; I never seed a pair better
grow'd--never, no!"

"A bit large, they may be," growled John, giving a furtive pull
to the nearest ambush, "but--"

"Large as ever was, John!" nodded the Ancient--"oncommon large!
an', consequent, they ketches a lot too much.  I've kep' my eye
on them ears o' yourn for thirty year an' more, John--if so be as
they grows any bigger, you'll be 'earin' things afore they're
spoke, an'--"

John gave a fierce tug to the ambush, muttered an oath, and,
lashing up his horse, disappeared down the road in a cloud of
dust.

"'Twere nigh on four year ago since Black Jarge thrashed John,
weren't it, Simon?"

"Ah!" nodded Simon, "John were in 'The Ring' then, Peter, an' a
pretty tough chap 'e were, too, though a bit too fond o' swingin'
wi' 'is 'right' to please me."

"'E were very sweet on Prue then, weren't 'e, Simon?"

"Ah!" nodded Simon again; "'e were allus 'anging round 'The
Bull'--till I warned 'im off--"

"An'-'e laughed at 'ee, Simon."

"Ah! 'e did that; an' I were going to 'ave a go at 'im myself;
an' the chances are 'e'd 'ave beat me, seein' I 'adn't been
inside of a ring for ten year, when--"

"Up comes Jarge," chuckled the Ancient.  'What's all this?' say
Jarge.  'I be goin' to teach John 'ere to keep away from my
Prue,' says Simon.  'No, no,' says Jarge, 'John's young, an' you
bean't the man you was ten years ago--let me,' says Jarge.  'You?'
says John, 'you get back to your bellers--you be purty big, but
I've beat the 'eads off better men nor you!' 'Why, then, 'ave a
try at mine,' says Jarge; an' wi' the word, bang! comes John's
fist again' 'is jaw, an' they was at it.  Oh, Peter! that were a
fight!  I've seed a few in my time, but nothin' like that 'ere."

"And when 'twere all over," added Simon, "Jarge went back to 'is
'ammer an' bellers, an' we picked John up, and I druv 'im 'ome in
this 'ere very cart, an' nobody's cared to stand up to Jarge
since."

"You have both seen Black George fight, then?" I inquired.

"Many's the time, Peter."

"And have you ever--seen him knocked down?"

"No," returned the Ancient, shaking his head, "I've seed 'im all
blood from 'ead to foot, an' once a gert, big sailor-man knocked
'im sideways, arter which Jarge got fu'rus-like, an' put 'im to
sleep--"

"No, Peter!" added Simon, "I don't think as there be a man in
all England as could knock Black Jarge off 'is pins in a fair,
stand-up fight."

"Hum!" said I.

"Ye see--'e be that 'ard, Peter!" nodded the Ancient.  "Why,
look!" he cried--"look 'ee theer!"

Now, looking where he pointed, I saw a man dart across the road
some distance away; he was hidden almost immediately, for there
were many trees thereabouts, but there was no mistaking that
length of limb and breadth of shoulder.

"'Twere Black Jarge 'isself!" exclaimed Simon, whipping up his
horses; but when we reached the place George was gone, and though
we called and sought for some time, we saw him no more.

So, in a while, we turned and jogged back towards Sissinghurst.

"What be you a-shakin' your 'ead over, Old Un?" inquired Simon,
after we had ridden some distance.

"I were wonderin' what that old fule Amos'll say when we drive
back wi'out Jarge."

Being come to the parting of the ways, I descended from the cart,
for my head was strangely heavy, and I felt much out of sorts,
and, though the day was still young I had no mind for work.
Therefore I bade adieu to Simon and the Ancient, and turned aside
towards the Hollow, leaving them staring after me in wonderment.




CHAPTER XXXIII

IN WHICH I FALL FROM FOLLY INTO MADNESS


It was with some little trepidation that I descended into the
Hollow, and walked along beside the brook, for soon I should meet
Charmian, and the memory of our parting, and the thought of this
meeting, had been in my mind all day long.

She would not be expecting me yet, for I was much before my usual
time, wherefore I walked on slowly beside the brook, deliberating
on what I should say to her, until I came to that large stone
where I had sat dreaming the night when she had stood in the
moonlight, and first bidden me in to supper.  And now, sinking
upon this stone, I set my elbows upon my knees, and my chin in my
hands, and, fixing my eyes upon the ever-moving waters of the
brook, fell into a profound meditation.

From this I was suddenly aroused by the clink of iron and the
snort of a horse.

Wondering, I lifted my eyes, but the bushes were very dense, and
I could see nothing.  But, in a little, borne upon the gentle
wind, came the sound of a voice, low and soft and very sweet
--whose rich tones there was no mistaking--followed, almost
immediately, by another--deeper, gruffer--the voice of a man.

With a bound, I was upon my feet, and had, somehow, crossed the
brook, but, even so, I was too late; there was the crack of a
whip, followed by the muffled thud of a horse's hoofs, which died
quickly away, and was lost in the stir of leaves.

I ground my teeth, and cursed that fate which seemed determined
that I should not meet this man face to face--this man whose back
I had seen but once--a broad-shouldered back clad in a blue coat.

I stood where I was, dumb and rigid, staring straight before me,
and once again a tremor passed over me, that came and went,
growing stronger and stronger, and, once again, in my head was
the thud, thud, thud of the hammer.

      "'In Scarlet town, where I was born,
        There was a fair maid dwellin',
        Made every youth cry Well-a-way!
        Her name was Barbara Allen.'"

She was approaching by that leafy path that wound its way along
beside the brook, and there came upon me a physical nausea, and
ever the thud of the hammer grew more maddening.

      "'All in the merry month of May,
        When green buds they were swellin',
        Young Jemmy Grove on his death-bed lay,
        For love of Barbara Allen.'"

Now, as she ended the verse, she came out into the open, and saw
me, and, seeing me, looked deliberately over my head, and went on
singing, while I--stood shivering:

       "'So, slowly, slowly rase she up
        And slowly she came nigh him,
        And when she drew the curtain by--
        "Young man, I think you're dyin'!"'"

And suddenly the trees and bushes swung giddily round--the grass
swayed beneath my feet--and Charmian was beside me with her arm
about my shoulders; but I pusbed her from me, and leaned against
a tree near by, and hearkened to the hammer in my brain.

"Why--Peter!" said she.  "Oh--Peter!"

"Please, Charmian," said I, speaking between the hammer-strokes,
"do not--touch me again--it is--too soon after--"

"What do you mean--Peter?  What do you mean?"

"He has--been with you--again--"

"What do you mean?" she cried.

"I know of--his visits--if he was--the same as--last time--in a
--blue coat--no, don't, don't touch me."

But she had sprung upon me, and caught me by the arms, and shook
me in a grip so strong that, giddy as I was, I reeled and
staggered like a drunken man.  And still her voice hissed: "What
do you mean?"  And her voice and hands and eyes were strangely
compelling.

"I mean," I answered, in a low, even voice, like one in a trance,
"that you are a Messalina, a Julia, a Joan of Naples, beautiful
as they--and as wanton."

Now at the word she cried out, and struck me twice across the
face, blows that burnt and stung.

"Beast!" she cried.  "Liar!  Oh, that I had the strength to
grind you into the earth beneath my foot.  Oh! you poor, blind,
self-deluding fool!" and she laughed, and her laughter stung me
most of all.  "As I look at you," she went on, the laugh still
curling her lip, "you stand there--what you are--a beaten hound.
This is my last look, and I shall always remember you as I see
you now--scarlet-cheeked, shamefaced--a beaten hound!"  And,
speaking, she shook her hand at me, and turned upon her heel;
but with that word, and in that instant, the old, old demon
leapt up within me, and, as he leapt, I clasped my arms about
her, and caught her up, and crushed her close and high against
my breast.

"Go?" said I.  "Go--no--no, not yet!"

And now, as her eyes met mine, I felt her tremble, yet she strove
to hide her fear, and heaped me with bitter scorn; but I only
shook my head and smiled.  And now she struggled to break my
clasp, fiercely, desperately; her long hair burst its fastenings,
and enveloped us both in its rippling splendor; she beat my face,
she wound her fingers in my hair, but my lips smiled on, for the
hammer in my brain had deadened all else.

And presently she lay still.  I felt her body relax and grow
suddenly pliable and soft, her head fell back across my arm, and,
as she lay, I saw the tears of her helplessness ooze out beneath
her drooping lashes; but still I smiled.

So, with her long hair trailing over me, I bore her to the
cottage.  Closing the door behind me with my foot, I crossed the
room, and set her down upon the bed.

She lay very still, but her bosom heaved tumultuously, and the
tears still crept from beneath her lashes; but in a while she
opened her eyes and looked at me, and shivered, and crouched
farther from me, among the pillows.

"Why did you lie to me, Charmian; why did you lie to me?"  She
did not answer, only she watched me as one might watch some
relentless, oncoming peril.

"I asked you once if you ever saw men hereabouts--when I was
away, do you remember?  You told me, 'no,' and, while you spoke,
I knew you lied, for I had seen him standing among the leaves,
waiting and watching for you.  I once asked you if you were ever
lonely when I was away, and you answered 'no',--you were too
busy--'seldom went beyond the Hollow'--do you remember?  And yet
--you had brought him here--here, into the cottage he had looked
at my Virgil--over your shoulder--do you remember?"

"You played the spy!" she whispered with trembling lips, yet with
eyes still fierce and scornful.

"You know I did not; had I seen him I should have killed him,
because--I loved you.  I had set up an altar to you in my heart,
where my soul might worship--poor fool that I was!  I loved you
with every breath I drew.  I think I must have shown you
something of this, from time to time, for you are very clever,
and you may have laughed over it together--you and he.  And
lately I have seen my altar foully desecrated, shattered, and
utterly destroyed, and, with it, your sweet womanhood dragged in
the mire, and yet--I loved you still.  Can you imagine, I wonder,
the agony of it, the haunting horrors of imagination, the bitter
days, the sleepless nights?  To see you so beautiful, so
glorious, and know you so base!  Indeed, I think it came near
driving me mad.  It has sent me out into the night; I have held
out my arms for the lightning to blast me; I have wished myself a
thousand deaths.  If Black George had but struck a little harder
--or a little lighter; I am not the man I was before he thrashed
me; my head grows confused and clouded at times--would to God I
were dead!  But now--you would go!  Having killed my heart,
broken my life, driven away all peace of mind--you would leave
me!  No, Charmian, I swear by God you shall not go--yet awhile.
I have bought you very dear--bought you with my bitter agony, and
by all the blasting torments I have suffered."

Now, as I ended, she sprang from the bed and faced me, but,
meeting my look, she shrank a little, and drew her long hair
about her like a mantle, then sought with trembling hands to hold
me off.

"Peter--be sane.  Oh, Peter! be merciful and let me go--give me
time--let me explain."

"My books," said I, "have taught me that the more beautiful a
woman's face the more guileful is her heart; and your face is
wonderfully beautiful, and, as for your heart--you lied to me
before."

"I--oh, Peter!--I am not the poor creature you think me."

"Were you the proudest lady in the land--you have deceived me and
mocked me and lied to me!"  So saying, I reached out, and seized
her by each rounded arm, and slowly drew her closer.  And now she
strove no more against me, only in her face was bitter scorn, and
an anger that cast out fear.

"I hate you--despise you!" she whispered.  "I hate you more than
any man was ever hated!"

Inch by inch I drew her to me, until she stood close, within the
circle of my arms.

"And I think I love you more than any woman was ever loved!" said
I; "for the glorious beauty of your strong, sweet body, for the
temptation of your eyes, for the red lure of your lips!"  And so
I stooped and kissed her full upon the mouth.  She lay soft and
warm in my embrace, all unresisting, only she shivered beneath my
kiss, and a great sob rent her bosom.

"And I also think," said I, "that, because of the perfidy of your
heart, I hate you as much as you do me--as much as ever woman,
dead or living, was hated by man and shall--forever!"

And, while I spoke, I loosed her and turned, and strode swiftly
out and away from the cottage.




CHAPTER XXXIV

IN WHICH I FIND PEACE AND JOY AND AN ABIDING SORROW


I hurried on, looking neither to right nor left, seeing only the
face of Charmian, now fearful and appealing, now blazing with
scorn.  And coming to the brook, I sat down, and thought upon her
marvellous beauty, of the firm roundness of the arms that my
fingers had so lately pressed.  Anon I started up again, and
plunged, knee-deep, through the brook, and strode on and on,
bursting my way through bramble and briar, heedless of their
petty stings, till at last I was clear of them, being now among
trees.  And here, where the shadow was deepest, I came upon a
lurking figure--a figure I recognized--a figure there was no
mistaking, and which I should have known in a thousand.

A shortish, broad-shouldered man, clad in a blue coat, who stood
with his back towards me, looking down into the Hollow, in the
attitude of one who waits--for what? for whom?

He was cut off from me by a solitary bush, a bramble, that seemed
to have strayed from its kind and lost itself, and, running upon
my toes, I cleared this bush at a bound, and, before the fellow
had realized my presence, I had pinned him by the collar.

"Damn you!--show your face!" I cried, and swung him round so
fiercely that he staggered, and his hat fell off.

Then, as I saw, I clasped my head between my hands, and fell
back--staring.

A grizzled man with an honest, open face, a middle-aged man whose
homely features were lighted by a pair of kindly blue eyes, just
now round with astonishment.

"Lord!--Mr. Peter!" he exclaimed.

"Adam!" I groaned.  "Oh, God forgive me, it's Adam!"

"Lord! Mr. Peter," said he again, "you sure give me a turn, Sir!
But what's the matter wi' you, sir?  Come, Mr. Peter, never
stare so wild like--come, sir, what is it?"

"Tell me--quick!" said I, catching his hand in mine, "you have
been here many times before of late?"

"Why--yes, Mr. Peter, but--"

"Quick!" said I; "on one occasion she took you into the cottage
yonder and showed you a book--you looked at it over her
shoulder?"

"Yes, sir--but--"

"What sort of book was it?"

"A old book, sir, wi' the cover broke, and wi' your name writ
down inside of it; 'twas that way as she found out who you was--"

"Oh, Adam!" I cried.  "Oh, Adam! now may God help me!"  And,
dropping his hand, I turned and ran until I reached the cottage;
but it was empty, Charmian was gone.

In a fever of haste I sought her along the brook, among the
bushes and trees, even along the road.  And, as I sought, night
fell, and in the shadows was black despair.

I searched the Hollow from end to end, calling upon her name, but
no sound reached me, save the hoot of an owl, and the far-off,
dismal cry of a corncrake.

With some faint hope that she might have returned to the cottage,
I hastened thither, but, finding it dark and desolate, I gave way
to my despair.

O blind, self-deceiving fool!  She had said that, and she was
right--as usual.  She had called me an egoist--I was an egoist, a
pedant, a blind, self-deceiving fool who had wilfully destroyed
all hopes of a happiness the very thought of which had so often
set me trembling--and now--she had left me--was gone!  The world
--my world, was a void--its emptiness terrified me.  How should I
live without Charmian, the woman whose image was ever before my
eyes, whose soft, low voice was ever in my ears?

And I had thought so much to please her!  I who had set my
thoughts to guard my tongue, lest by word or look I might offend
her! And this was the end of it!

Sitting down at the table, I leaned my head there, pressing my
forehead against the hard wood, and remained thus a great while.

At last, because it was very dark, I found and lighted a candle,
and came and stood beside her bed.  Very white and trim it
looked, yet I was glad to see its smoothness rumpled where I had
laid her down, and to see the depression in the pillow that her
head had made.  And, while I stood there, up to me stole a
perfume very faint, like the breath of violets in a wood at
evening time, wherefore I sank down upon my knees beside the bed.

And now the full knowledge of my madness rushed upon me in an
overwhelming flood; but with misery was a great and mighty joy,
for now I knew her worthy of all respect and honor and worship,
for her intellect, for her proud virtue, and for her spotless
purity.  And thus, with joy came remorse, and with remorse--an
abiding sorrow.

And gradually my arms crept about the pillow where her head had
so often rested, wherefore I kissed it, and laid my head upon it
and sighed, and so fell into a troubled sleep.




CHAPTER XXXV

HOW BLACK GEORGE FOUND PRUDENCE IN THE DAWN


The chill of dawn was in the air when I awoke, and it was some
few moments before, with a rush, I remembered why I was kneeling
there beside Charmian's bed.  Shivering, I rose and walked up and
down to reduce the stiffness in my limbs.

The fire was out and I had no mind to light it, for I was in no
mood to break my fast, though the necessary things stood ready,
as her orderly hands had set them, and the plates and cups and
saucers twinkled at me from the little cupboard I had made to
hold them; a cupboard whose construction she had overlooked with
a critical eye.  And I must needs remember how she had insisted
on being permitted to drive in three nails with her own hand--I
could put my finger on those very nails; how she had tapped at
those nails for fear of missing them; how beautiful she had
looked in her coarse apron, and with her sleeves rolled up over
her round white arms--how womanly and sweet; yet I had dared to
think--had dared to call her--a Messalina!  Oh, that my tongue
had withered or ever I had coupled one so pure and noble with a
creature so base and common!

So thinking, I sighed and went out into the dawn; as I closed the
door behind me its hollow slam struck me sharply, and I called to
mind how she had called it a bad and ill-fitting door.  And
indeed so it was.

With dejected step and hanging head I made my way towards
Sissinghurst (for, since I was up, I might as well work, and
there was much to be done), and, as I went, I heard a distant
clock chime four.

Now, when I reached the village the sun was beginning to rise,
and thus, lifting up my eyes, I beheld one standing before "The
Bull," a very tall man, much bigger and greater than most; a wild
figure in the dawn, with matted hair and beard, and clad in
tattered clothes; yet hair and beard gleamed a red gold where the
light touched them, and there was but one man I knew so tall and
so mighty as this.  Wherefore I hurried towards him, all
unnoticed, for his eyes were raised to a certain latticed
casement of the inn.

And, being come up, I reached out and touched this man upon the arm.

"George!" said I, and held out my hand.  He turned swiftly, but,
seeing me, started back a pace, staring.

"George!" said I again.  "Oh, George!"  But George only backed
still farther, passing his hand once or twice across his eyes.

"Peter?" said he at last, speaking hardly above a whisper; "but
you 'm dead, Peter, dead--I killed--'ee."

"No," I answered, "you didn't kill me, George indeed, I wish you
had--you came pretty near it, but you didn't quite manage it.
And, George--I'm very desolate--won't you shake hands with a very
desolate man?--if you can, believing that I have always been your
friend, and a true and loyal one, then, give me your hand; if
not--if you think me still the despicable traitor you once did,
then, let us go into the field yonder, and if you can manage to
knock me on the head for good and all this time--why, so much the
better.  Come, what do you say?"

Without a word Black George turned and led the way to a narrow
lane a little distance beyond "The Bull," and from the lane into
a meadow.  Being come thither, I took off my coat and neckerchief,
but this time I cast no look upon the world about me, though indeed
it was fair enough.  But Black George stood half turned from me,
with his fists clenched and his broad shoulders heaving oddly.

"Peter," said he, in his slow, heavy way, "never clench ye fists
to me--don't--I can't abide it.  But oh, man, Peter! 'ow may I
clasp 'ands wi' a chap as I've tried to kill--I can't do it,
Peter--but don't--don't clench ye fists again me no more.  I
were jealous of 'ee from the first--ye see, you beat me at th'
'ammer-throwin'--an' she took your part again me; an' then, you
be so takin' in your ways, an' I be so big an' clumsy--so very
slow an' 'eavy.  Theer bean't no choice betwixt us for a maid
like Prue she allus was different from the likes o' me, an' any
lass wi' half an eye could see as you be a gentleman, ah! an'
a good un.  An' so Peter, an' so--I be goin' away--a sojer--
p'r'aps I shan't love the dear lass quite so much arter a bit
--p'r'aps it won't be quite so sharp-like, arter a bit, but
what's to be--is to be.  I've larned wisdom, an' you an' she
was made for each other an' meant for each other from the
first; so--don't go to clench ye fists again me no more, Peter."

"Never again, George!" said I.

"Unless," he continued, as though struck by a bright idea,
"unless you 'm minded to 'ave a whack at me; if so be--why, tak'
it, Peter, an' welcome.  Ye see, I tried so 'ard to kill 'ee--so
cruel 'ard, Peter, an' I thought I 'ad.  I thought 'twere for
that as they took me, an' so I broke my way out o' the lock-up,
to come an' say 'good-by' to Prue's winder, an' then I were
goin' back to give myself up an' let 'em hang me if they wanted
to."

"Were you, George?"

"Yes."  Here George turned to look at me, and, looking, dropped
his eyes and fumbled with his hands, while up under his tanned
skin there crept a painful, burning crimson.  "Peter!" said he.

"Yes, George?"

"I got summ'at more to tell 'ee--summ'at as I never meant to tell
to a soul; when you was down--lyin' at my feet--"

"Yes, George?"

"I--I kicked 'ee--once!"

"Did you, George?"

"Ay--I--I were mad--mad wi' rage an' blood lust, an'--oh, man,
Peter!--I kicked 'ee.  Theer," said he, straightening his
shoulders, "leastways I can look 'ee in the eye now that be off
my mind.  An' now, if so be you 'm wishful to tak' ye whack at
me--why, let it be a good un, Peter."

"No, I shall never raise my hand to you again, George."

"'Tis likely you be thinkin' me a poor sort o' man, arter what
--what I just told 'ee--a coward?"

"I think you more of a man than ever," said I.

"Why, then, Peter--if ye do think that, here's my hand--if ye'll
tak' it, an' I--bid ye--good-by!"

"I'll take your hand--and gladly, George, but not to wish you
goodby--it shall be, rather, to bid you welcome home again."

"No," he cried.  "No--I couldn't--I couldn't abide to see you
an'--Prue--married, Peter--no, I couldn't abide it."

"And you never will, George.  Prue loves a stronger, a better man
than I.  And she has wept over him, George, and prayed over him,
such tears and prayers as surely might win the blackest soul to
heaven, and has said that she would marry that man--ah! even if
he came back with fetter-marks upon him--even then she would
marry him--if he would only ask her."

"Oh, Peter!" cried George, seizing my shoulders in a mighty grip
and looking into my eyes with tears in his own, "oh, man, Peter
--you as knocked me down an' as I love for it--be this true?"

"It is God's truth!" said I, "and look!--there is a sign to prove
I am no liar--look!" and I pointed towards "The Bull."

George turned, and I felt his fingers tighten suddenly, for
there, at the open doorway of the inn, with the early glory of
the morning all about her, stood Prue.  As we watched, she began
to cross the road towards the smithy, with laggard step and
drooping head.

"Do you know where she is going, George?  I can tell you--she is
going to your smithy--to pray for you--do you hear, to pray for
you?  Come!" and I seized his arm.

"No, Peter, no--I durstn't--I couldn't."  But he suffered me to
lead him forward, nevertheless.  Once he stopped and glanced
round, but the village was asleep about us.  And so we presently
came to the open doorway of the forge.

And behold!  Prue was kneeling before the anvil with her face
hidden in her arms, and her slender body swaying slightly.  But
all at once, as if she felt him near her, she raised her head and
saw him, and sprang to her feet with a glad cry.  And, as she
stood, George went to her, and knelt at her feet, and raising the
hem of her gown, stooped and kissed it.

"Oh, my sweet maid!" said he.  "Oh, my sweet Prue!--I bean't
worthy--I bean't--"  But she caught the great shaggy head to her
bosom and stifled it there.

And in her face was a radiance--a happiness beyond words, and
the man's strong arms clung close about her.

So I turned, and left them in paradise together.




CHAPTER XXXVI

WHICH SYMPATHIZES WITH A BRASS JACK, A BRACE OF CUTLASSES, AND
DIVERS POTS AND PANS


I found the Ancient sunning himself in the porch before the inn,
as he waited for his breakfast.

"Peter," said he, "I be tur'ble cold sometimes.  It comes
a-creepin' on me all at once, even if I be sittin' before a roarin'
fire or a-baskin' in this good, warm sun--a cold as reaches down
into my poor old 'eart--grave-chills, I calls 'em, Peter--ah!
grave-chills.  Ketches me by the 'eart they do; ye see I be that
old, Peter, that old an' wore out."

"But you're a wonderful man for your age!" said I, clasping the
shrivelled hand in mine, "and very lusty and strong--"

"So strong as a bull I be, Peter!" he nodded readily, "but then,
even a bull gets old an' wore out, an' these grave-chills ketches
me oftener an' oftener.  'Tis like as if the Angel o' Death
reached out an' touched me--just touched me wi' 'is finger,
soft-like, as much as to say: ''Ere be a poor, old, wore-out
creeter as I shall be wantin' soon.'  Well, I be ready; 'tis
only the young or the fule as fears to die.  Threescore years
an' ten, says the Bible, an' I be years an' years older than
that.  Oh! I shan't be afeared to answer when I'm called, Peter.
''Ere I be, Lord!' I'll say.  ''Ere I be, thy poor old servant'
--but oh, Peter! if I could be sure o' that theer old rusty
stapil bein' took first, why then I'd go j'yful--j'yful, but--
why theer be that old fule Amos--Lord! what a dodderin' old
fule 'e be, an' theer be Job, an' Dutton--they be comin' to
plague me, Peter, I can feel it in my bones.  Jest reach me
my snuff-box out o' my 'ind pocket, an' you shall see me smite
they Amalekites 'ip an' thigh."

"Gaffer," began Old Amos, saluting us with his usual grin, as he
came up, "we be wishful to ax 'ee a question--we be wishful to
know wheer be Black Jarge, which you 'avin' gone to fetch 'im,
an' bring 'im 'ome again--them was your words."

"Ah!" nodded Job, "them was your very words, 'bring 'im 'ome
again,' says you--"

"But you didn't bring 'im 'ome," continued Old Amos, "leastways,
not in the cart wi' you.  Dutton 'ere--James Dutton see you come
drivin' 'ome, but 'e didn't see no Jarge along wi' you--no, not
so much as you could shake a stick at, as you might say.  Speak
up, James Dutton you was a-leanin' over your front gate as Gaffer
come drivin' 'ome, wasn't you, an' you see Gaffer plain as plain,
didn't you?"

"W'ich, me wishin' no offense, an' no one objectin'--I did," began
the Apology, perspiring profusely as usual, "but I takes the
liberty to say as it were a spade, an' not a gate--leastways--"

"But you didn't see no signs o' Jarge, did ye?" demanded Old
Amos, "as ye might say, neither 'ide nor 'air of 'im--speak up,
James Dutton."

"W'ich, since you axes me, I makes so bold as to answer--an' very
glad I'm sure--no; though as to 'ide an' 'air, I aren't wishin'
to swear to, me not bein' near enough--w'ich could only be
expected, an' very much obliged, I'm sure."

"Ye see, Gaffer," pursued Amos, "if you didn't bring Jarge back
wi' you--w'ich you said you would--the question we axes is--wheer
be Jarge?"

"Ah!--wheer?" nodded Job gloomily.  Here the Ancient was
evidently at a loss, to cover which, he took a vast pinch of
snuff.

"'Ow be we to know as 'e bean't pinin' away in a dungeon cell wi'
irons on 'is legs, an' strapped in a straitjacket an--"

Old Amos stopped, open-mouthed and staring, for out from the
gloom of the smithy issued Black George himself, with Prue upon
his arm.  The Ancient stared also, but, dissembling his vast
surprise, he dealt the lid of his snuffbox two loud, triumphant
knocks.

"Peter," said he, rising stiffly, "Peter, lad, I were beginnin'
to think as Jarge were never comin' in to breakfus' at all.  I've
waited and waited till I be so ravenous as a lion an' tiger--but
'ere 'e be at last, Peter, 'ere 'e be, so let's go in an' eat
summ'at."  Saying which, he turned his back upon his discomfited
tormentors, and led me into the kitchen of the inn.

And there were the white-capped maids setting forth such a
breakfast as only such a kitchen could produce.  And, presently,
there was Prue herself, with George hanging back, something
shamefaced, till the Ancient had hobbled forward to give him
welcome.  And there was honest Simon, all wonderment and hearty
greeting.  And (last, but by no means least) there were the
battered cutlasses, the brass jack, and the glittering pots and
pans--glittering and gleaming and twinkling a greeting likewise,
and with all their might.

Ah! but they little guessed why Prue's eyes were so shy and
sweet, or why the color came and went in her pretty cheeks;
little they guessed why, this golden-haired giant trod so
lightly, and held his tall head so very high--little they dreamed
of the situation as yet; had they done so, surely they must, one
and all, have fallen upon that curly, golden head and buried it
beneath their gleaming, glittering, twinkling jealousy.

And what a meal was that! with those deft, whitecapped maids to
wait upon our wants, and with Prudence hovering here and there to
see that all were duly served, and refusing to sit down until
George's great arm--a very gentle arm for one so strong and big
--drew her down beside him.

Yes, truly, what a meal that was, and how the Ancient chuckled,
and dug me with one bony elbow and George with the other, and
chuckled again till he choked, and choked till he gasped, and
gasped till he had us all upon our feet, then demanded indignantly
why we couldn't let him "enj'y hisself in peace."

And now, when the meal was nearly over, he suddenly took it into
his head that Prue didn't love George as she should and as he
deserved to be, and nothing would content him but that she must
kiss him then and there.

"An' not on the forr'ud, mind--nor on the cheek, but on the place
as God made for it--the mouth, my lass!"

And now, who so shy and blushing as Prue, and who so nervous, for
her sake, as Black George, very evidently clasping her hand under
the table, and bidding her never to mind--as he was content, and
never to put herself out over such as him.  Whereupon Mistress
Prue must needs turn, and taking his bead between her hands,
kissed him--not once, or twice, but three times, and upon "the
place God made for it--the mouth."

O gleaming Cutlasses!  O great Brass Jack and glittering Pots and
Pans! can ye any longer gleam and glitter and twinkle in doubt?
Alas! I trow not.  Therefore it is only natural and to be
expected that beneath your outward polish lurk black and bitter
feelings against this curly-headed giant, and a bloodthirsty
desire for vengeance.  If so, then one and all of you have, at
least, the good feeling not to show it, a behavior worthy of
gentlemen--what do I say?--of gentlemen?--fie! rather let it be
said--of pots and pans.




CHAPTER XXXVII

THE PREACHER


It is a wise and (to some extent) a true saying, that hard work
is an antidote to sorrow, a panacea for all trouble; but when the
labor is over and done, when the tools are set by, and the weary
worker goes forth into the quiet evening--how then?  For we
cannot always work, and, sooner or later, comes the still hour
when Memory rushes in upon us again, and Sorrow and Remorse sit,
dark and gloomy, on either hand.

A week dragged by, a season of alternate hope and black despair,
a restless fever of nights and days, for with each dawn came
hope, that lived awhile beside me, only to fly away with the sun,
and leave me to despair.

I hungered for the sound of Charmian's voice, for the quick,
light fall of her foot, for the least touch of her hand.  I
became more and more possessed of a morbid fancy that she might
be existing near by--could I but find her; that she had passed
along the road only a little while before me, or, at this very
moment, might be approaching, might be within sight, were I but
quick enough.

Often at such times I would fling down my hammer or tongs, to
George's surprise, and, hurrying to the door, stare up and down
the road; or pause in my hammerstrokes, fiercely bidding George
do the same, fancying I heard her voice calling to me from a
distance.  And George would watch me with a troubled brow but,
with a rare delicacy, say no word.

Indeed, the thought of Charmian was with me everywhere, the
ringing hammers mocked me with her praises, the bellows sang of
her beauty, the trees whispered "Charmian! Charmian!" and
Charmian was in the very air.

But when I had reluctantly bidden George "good night," and set
out along lanes full of the fragrant dusk of evening; when,
reaching the Hollow, I followed that leafy path beside the brook,
which she and I had so often trodden together; when I sat in my
gloomy, disordered cottage, with the deep silence unbroken save
for the plaintive murmur of the brook--then, indeed, my
loneliness was well-nigh more than I could bear.

There were dark hours when the cottage rang with strange sounds,
when I would lie face down upon the floor, clutching my throbbing
temples between my palms--fearful of myself, and dreading the
oncoming horror of madness.

It was at this time, too, that I began to be haunted by the thing
above the door--the rusty staple upon which a man had choked out
his wretched life sixty and six years ago; a wanderer, a lonely
man, perhaps acquainted, with misery or haunted by remorse, one
who had suffered much and long--even as I--but who had eventually
escaped it all--even as I might do.  Thus I would sit, chin in
hand, staring up at this staple until the light failed, and
sometimes, in the dead of night, I would steal softly there to
touch it with my finger.

Looking back on all this, it seems that I came very near losing
my reason, for I had then by no means recovered from Black
George's fist, and indeed even now I am at times not wholly free
from its effect.

My sleep, too, was often broken and troubled with wild dreams, so
that bed became a place of horror, and, rising, I would sit before
the empty hearth, a candle guttering at my elbow, and think of
Charmian until I would fancy I heard the rustle of her garments
behind me, and start up, trembling and breathless; at such times
the tap of a blown leaf against the lattice would fill me with a
fever of hope and expectation.  Often and often her soft laugh
stole to me in the gurgle of the brook, and she would call to me
in the deep night silences in a voice very sweet, and faint, and
far away.  Then I would plunge out into the dark, and lift my
hands to the stars that winked upon my agony, and journey on through
a desolate world, to return with the dawn, weary and despondent.

It was after one of these wild night expeditions that I sat
beneath a tree, watching the sunrise.  And yet I think I must
have dozed, for I was startled by a voice close above me, and,
glancing up, I recognized the little Preacher.  As our eyes met
he immediately took the pipe from his lips, and made as though to
cram it into his pocket.

"Though, indeed, it is empty!" he explained, as though I had
spoken.  "Old habits cling to one, young sir, and my pipe, here,
has been the friend of my solitude these many years, and I cannot
bear to turn my back upon it yet, so I carry it with me still,
and sometimes, when at all thoughtful, I find it between my lips.
But though the flesh, as you see, is very weak, I hope, in time,
to forego even this," and he sighed, shaking his head in gentle
deprecation of himself.  "But you look pale--haggard," he went
on; "you are ill, young sir!"

"No, no," said I, springing to my feet; "look at this arm, is it
the arm of a sick man?  No, no--I am well enough, but what of him
we found in the ditch, you and I--the miserable creature who lay
bubbling in the grass?"

"He has been very near death, sir--indeed his days are numbered,
I think, yet he is better, for the time being, and last night
declared his intention of leaving the shelter of my humble roof
and setting forth upon his mission."

"His mission, sir?"

"He speaks of himself as one chosen by God to work His will, and
asks but to live until this mission, whatever it is, be
accomplished.  A strange being!" said the little Preacher,
puffing at his empty pipe again as we walked on side by side, "a
dark, incomprehensible man, and a very, very wretched one--poor
soul!"

"Wretched?" said I, "is not that our human lot?  'Man is born to
sorrow as the sparks fly upward,' and Job was accounted wise in
his generation."

"That was a cry from the depths of despond; but Job stood, at
last, upon the heights, and felt once more God's blessed sun, and
rejoiced--even as we should.  But, as regards this stranger, he
is one who would seem to have suffered some great wrong, the
continued thought of which has unhinged his mind; his heart seems
broken--dead.  I have, sitting beside his delirious couch, heard
him babble a terrible indictment against some man; I have also
heard him pray, and his prayers have been all for vengeance."

"Poor fellow!" said I, "it were better we had left him to die in
his ditch, for if death does not bring oblivion, it may bring a
change of scene."

"Sir," said the Preacher, laying his hand upon my arm, "such
bitterness in one so young is unnatural; you are in some trouble,
I would that I might aid you, be your friend--know you better--"

"Oh, sir! that is easily done.  I am a blacksmith, hardworking,
sober, and useful to my fellows; they call me Peter Smith.  A
certain time since I was a useless dreamer; spending more money
in a week than I now earn in a year, and getting very little for
it.  I was studious, egotistical, and pedantic, wasting my time
upon impossible translations that nobody wanted--and they knew me
as--Peter Vibart."

"Vibart!" exclaimed the Preacher, starting and looking up at me.

"Vibart!" I nodded.

"Related in any way to--Sir Maurice Vibart?"

"His cousin, sir."  My companion appeared lost in thought, for he
was puffing at his empty pipe again.

"Do you happen to know Sir Maurice?" I inquired.

"No," returned the Preacher; "no, sir, but I have heard mention
of him, and lately, though just when, or where, I cannot for the
life of me recall."

"Why, the name is familiar to a great many people," said I; "you
see, he is rather a famous character, in his way."

Talking thus, we presently reached a stile beyond which the
footpath led away through swaying corn and by shady hopgarden, to
Sissinghurst village.  Here the Preacher stopped and gave me his
hand, but I noticed he still puffed at his pipe.

"And you are now a blacksmith?"

"And mightily content so to be."

"You are a most strange young man!" said the Preacher, shaking
his head.

"Many people have told me the same, sir," said I, and vaulted
over the stile.  Yet, turning back when I had gone some way, I
saw him leaning where I had left him, and with his pipe still in
his mouth.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

IN WHICH I MEET MY COUSIN, SIR MAURICE VIBART


As I approached the smithy, late though the hour was (and George
made it a rule to have the fire going by six every morning), no
sound of hammer reached me, and coming into the place, I found it
empty.  Then I remembered that to-day George was to drive over to
Tonbridge, with Prudence and the Ancient, to invest in certain
household necessities, for in a month's time they were to be
married.

Hereupon I must needs contrast George's happy future with my
dreary one, and fall bitterly to cursing myself; and, sitting on
the Ancient's stool in the corner, I covered my face, and my
thoughts were very black.

Now presently, as I sat thus, I became conscious of a very
delicate perfume in the air, and also, that some one had entered
quietly.  My breath caught in my throat, but I did not at once
look up, fearing to dispel the hope that tingled within me.  So I
remained with my face still covered until something touched me,
and I saw that it was the gold-mounted handle of a whip,
wherefore I raised my head suddenly and glanced up.

Then I beheld a radiant vision in polished riding-boots and
speckless moleskins, in handsome flowered waistcoat and
perfect-fitting coat, with snowy frills at throat and wrists;
a tall, gallant figure, of a graceful, easy bearing, who stood,
a picture of cool, gentlemanly insolence, tapping his boot
lightly with his whip.  But, as his eye met mine, the tapping
whip grew suddenly still; his languid expression vanished, he
came a quick step nearer and bent his face nearer my own--a
dark face, handsome in its way, pale and aquiline, with a
powerful jaw, and dominating eyes and mouth; a face (nay, a
mask rather) that smiled and smiled, but never showed the man
beneath.

Now, glancing up at his brow, I saw there a small, newly healed
scar.

"Is it possible?" said he, speaking in that softly modulated
voice I remembered to have heard once before.  "Can it be
possible that I address my worthy cousin?  That shirt! that
utterly impossible coat and belcher!  And yet--the likeness is
remarkable!  Have I the--honor to address Mr. Peter Vibart--late
of Oxford?"

"The same, sir," I answered, rising.

"Then, most worthy cousin, I salute you," and he removed his hat,
bowing with an ironic grace.  "Believe me, I have frequently
desired to see that paragon of all the virtues whose dutiful
respect our revered uncle rewarded with the proverbial shilling.
Egad!" he went on, examining me through his glass with a great
show of interest, "had you been any other than that same virtuous
Cousin Peter whose graces and perfections were forever being
thrown at my head, I could have sympathized with you, positively
--if only on account of that most obnoxious coat and belcher, and
the grime and sootiness of things in general.  Poof!" he
exclaimed, pressing his perfumed handkerchief to his nostrils,
"faugh! how damnably sulphur-and-brimstony you do keep yourself,
cousin--oh, gad!"

"You would certainly find it much clearer outside," said I,
beginning to blow up the fire.

"But then, Cousin Peter, outside one must become a target for the
yokel eye, and I detest being stared at by the uneducated, who,
naturally, lack appreciation.  On the whole, I prefer the smoke,
though it chokes one most infernally.  Where may one venture to
sit here?"  I tendered him the stool, but he shook his head, and,
crossing to the anvil, flicked it daintily with his handkerchief
and sat down, dangling his leg.

"'Pon my soul!" said he, eyeing me languidly through his glass
again, "'pon my soul! you are damnably like me, you know, in
features."

"Damnably!" I nodded.

He glanced at me sharply, and laughed.

"My man, a creature of the name of Parks," said he, swinging his
spurred boot to and fro, "led me to suppose that I should meet a
person here--a blacksmith fellow--"

"Your man Parks informed you correctly," I nodded; "what can I do
for you?"

"The devil!" exclaimed Sir Maurice, shaking his head; "but no
--you are, as I gather, somewhat eccentric, but even you would
never take such a desperate step as to--to--"

"--become a blacksmith fellow?" I put in.

"Precisely!"

"Alas, Sir Maurice, I blush to say that rather than become an
unprincipled adventurer living on my wits, or a mean-spirited
hanger-on fawning upon acquaintances for a livelihood, or doing
anything rather than soil my hands with honest toil, I became a
blacksmith fellow some four or five months ago."

"Really it is most distressing to observe to what depths Virtue
may drag a man!--you are a very monster of probity and rectitude!"
exclaimed Sir Maurice; "indeed I am astonished! you manifested not
only shocking bad judgment, but a most deplorable lack of thought
(Virtue is damnably selfish as a rule)--really, it is quite
disconcerting to find one's self first cousin to a blacksmith--"

"--fellow!" I added.

"Fellow!" nodded Sir Maurice.  "Oh, the devil! to think of my
worthy cousin reduced to the necessity of laboring with hammer
and saw--"

"Not a saw," I put in.

"We will say, chisel, then--a Vibart with hammer and chisel
--deuce take me!  Most distressing! and, you will pardon my
saying so, you do not seem to thrive on hammers and chisels; no
one could say you looked blooming, or even flourishing like the
young bay tree (which is, I fancy, an Eastern expression)."

"Sir," said I, "may I remind you that I have work to do?"

"A deuced interesting place though, this," he smiled, staring
round imperturbably through his glass; "so--er--so devilish grimy
and smutty and gritty--quite a number of horseshoes, too.  D'ye
know, cousin, I never before remarked what a number of holes
there are in a horseshoe--but live and learn!"  Here he paused to
inhale a pinch of snuff, very daintily, from a jewelled box.  "It
is a strange thing," he pursued, as he dusted his fingers on his
handkerchief, "a very strange thing that, being cousins, we have
never met till now--especially as I have heard so very much about
you."

"Pray," said I, "pray how should you hear about one so very
insignificant as myself?"

"Oh, I have heard of good Cousin Peter since I was an imp of a
boy!" he smiled.  "Cousin Peter was my chart whereby to steer
through the shoals of boyish mischief into the haven of our Uncle
George's good graces.  Oh, I have heard over much of you, cousin,
from dear, kind, well-meaning relatives and friends--damn 'em!
They rang your praises in my ears, morning, noon, and night.  And
why?--simply that I might come to surpass you in virtue,
learning, wit, and appearance, and so win our Uncle George's
regard, and, incidentally, his legacy.  But I was a young demon,
romping with the grooms in the stable, while you were a young
angel in nankeens, passing studious hours with your books.  When
I was a scapegrace at Harrow, you were winning golden opinions at
Eton; when you were an 'honors' man at Oxford, I was 'rusticated'
at Cambridge.  Naturally enough, perhaps, I grew sick of the name
of Peter (and, indeed, it smacks damnably of fish, don't you
think?)--you, or your name, crossed me at every turn.  If it
wasn't for Cousin Peter, I was heir to ten thousand a year; but
good Cousin Peter was so fond of Uncle George, and Uncle George
was so fond of good Cousin Peter, that Maurice might go hang for
a graceless dog and be damned to him!"

"You have my deepest sympathy and apologies!" said I.

"Still, I have sometimes been curious to meet worthy Cousin
Peter, and it is rather surprising that I have never done so."

"On the contrary--" I began, but his laugh stopped me.

"Ah, to be sure!" he nodded, "our ways have lain widely separate
hitherto--you, a scholar, treading the difficult path of
learning; I--oh, egad! a terrible fellow! a mauvais sujet! a sad,
sad dog! But after all, cousin, when one comes to look at you
to-day, you might stand for a terrible example of Virtue run
riot--a distressing spectacle of dutiful respect and good
precedent cut off with a shilling.  Really, it is horrifying to
observe to what depths Virtue may plunge an otherwise well-balanced
individual.  Little dreamed those dear, kind, well-meaning
relatives and friends--damn 'em! that while the wilful Maurice
lived on, continually getting into hot water and out again, up
to his eyes in debt, and pretty well esteemed, the virtuous
pattern Peter would descend to a hammer and saw--I should say,
chisel--in a very grimy place where he is, it seems, the
presiding genius.  Indeed, this first meeting of ours, under
these circumstances, is somewhat dramatic, as it should be."

"And yet, we have met before," said I, "and the circumstances
were then even more dramatic, perhaps,--we met in a tempest, sir."

"Ha!" he exclaimed, dwelling on the word, and speaking very
slowly, "a tempest, cousin?"

"There was much wind and rain, and it was very dark."

"Dark, cousin?"

"But I saw your face very plainly as you lay on your back, sir,
by the aid of a Postilion's lanthorn, and was greatly struck by
our mutual resemblance."  Sir Maurice raised his glass and looked
at me, and, as he looked, smiled, but he could not hide the
sudden, passionate quiver of his thin nostrils, or the gleam of
the eyes beneath their languid lids.  He rose slowly and paced to
the door; when he came back again, he was laughing softly, but
still he could not hide the quiver of his nostrils, or the gleam
of the eyes beneath their languid lids.

"So--it was--you?" he murmured, with a pause between the words.
"Oh, was ever anything so damnably contrary!  To think that I
should hunt her into your very arms!  To think that of all men in
the world it should be you to play the squire of dames!"  And he
laughed again, but, as he did so, the stout riding-whip snapped
in his hands like a straw.  He glanced down at the broken pieces,
and from them to me.  "You see, I am rather strong in the hands,
cousin," said he, shaking his head, "but I was not--quite strong
enough, last time we met, though, to be sure, as you say, it was
very dark.  Had I known it was worthy Cousin Peter's throat I
grasped, I think I might have squeezed it just--a little--tighter."

"Sir," said I, shaking my head, "I really don't think you could
have done it."

"Yes," he sighed, tossing his broken whip into a corner.  "Yes, I
think so--you see, I mistook you for merely an interfering
country bumpkin--"

"Yes," I nodded, "while I, on the other hand, took you for a fine
gentleman nobly intent on the ruin of an unfortunate, friendless
girl, whose poverty would seem to make her an easy victim--"

"In which it appears you were as much mistaken as I, Cousin
Peter."  Here he glanced at me with a sudden keenness.

"Indeed?"

"Why, surely," said he, "surely you must know--"  He paused to
flick a speck of soot from his knee, and then continued: "Did she
tell you nothing of--herself?"

"Very little beside her name."

"Ah! she told you her name, then?"

"Yes, she told me her name."

"Well, cousin?"

"Well, sir?"  We had both risen, and now fronted each other
across the anvil, Sir Maurice debonair and smiling, while I stood
frowning and gloomy.

"Come," said I at last, "let us understand each other once for
all.  You tell me that you have always looked upon me as your
rival for our uncle's good graces--I never was.  You have
deceived yourself into believing that because I was his ward that
alone augmented my chances of becoming the heir; it never did.
He saw me as seldom as possible, and, if he ever troubled his
head about either of us, it would seem that he favored you.  I
tell you I never was your rival in the past, and never shall be
in the future."

"Meaning, cousin?"

"Meaning, sir, in regard to either the legacy or the Lady Sophia
Sefton.  I was never fond enough of money, to marry for it.  I
have never seen this lady, nor do I propose to, thus, so far as I
am concerned, you are free to win her and the fortune as soon as
you will; I, as you see, prefer horseshoes."

"And what," said Sir Maurice, flicking a speck of soot from his
cuff, and immediately looking at me again, "what of Charmian?"

"I don't know," I answered, "nor should I be likely to tell you,
if I did; wherever she may be she is safe, I trust, and beyond
your reach--"

"No," he broke in, "she will never be beyond my reach until she is
dead--or I am--perhaps not even then, and I shall find her again,
sooner or later, depend upon it--yes, you may depend upon that!"

"Cousin Maurice," said I, reaching out my hand to him, "wherever
she may be, she is alone and unprotected--pursue her no farther.
Go back to London, marry your Lady Sefton, inherit your fortune,
but leave Charmian Brown in peace."

"And pray," said he, frowning suddenly, "whence this solicitude
de on her behalf?  What is she to you--this Charmian Brown?"

"Nothing," I answered hurriedly, "nothing at all, God knows--nor
ever can be--"  Sir Maurice leaned suddenly forward, and,
catching me by the shoulder, peered into my face.

"By Heaven!" he exclaimed, "the fellow--actually loves her!"

"Well?" said I, meeting his look, "why not?  Yes, I love her."  A
very fury of rage seemed suddenly to possess him, the languid,
smiling gentleman became a devil with vicious eyes and evil,
snarling mouth, whose fingers sank into my flesh as he swung me
back and forth in a powerful grip.

"You love her?--you?--you?" he panted.

"Yes," I answered, flinging him off so that he staggered; "yes
--yes!  I--who fought for her once, and am willing--most willing,
to do so again, now or at any other time, for, though I hold no
hope of winning her--ever--yet I can serve her still, and protect
her from the pollution of your presence," and I clenched my
fists.

He stood poised as though about to spring at me, and I saw his
knuckles gleam whiter than the laces above them, but, all at
once, he laughed lightly, easily as ever.

"A very perfect, gentle knight!" he murmured, "sans peur et sans
reproche--though somewhat grimy and in a leather apron.  Chivalry
kneeling amid hammers and horseshoes, worshiping Her with a
reverence distant and lowly!  How like you, worthy cousin, how
very like yon, and how affecting!  But"--and here his nostrils
quivered again--" but I tell you--she is mine--mine, and always
has been, and no man living shall come between us--no, by God!"

"That," said I, "that remains to be seen!"

"Ha?"

"Though, indeed, I think she is safe from you while I live."

"But then, Cousin Peter, life is a very uncertain thing at best,"
he returned, glancing at me beneath his drooping lids.

"Yes," I nodded, "it is sometimes a blessing to remember that."

Sir Maurice strolled to the door, and, being there, paused, and
looked back over his shoulder.

"I go to find Charmian," said he, "and I shall find her--sooner
or later, and, when I do, should you take it upon yourself to
--come between us again, or presume to interfere again, I shall
--kill you, worthy cousin, without the least compunction.  If
you  think this sufficient warning--act upon it, if not--"  He
shrugged his shoulders significantly.  "Farewell, good and worthy
Cousin Peter, farewell!--or shall we say--'au revoir'?"




CHAPTER XXXIX

HOW I WENT DOWN INTO THE SHADOWS


"Peter," said George, one evening, turning to me with the troubled
look I had seen so often on his face of late, "what be wrong wi'
you, my chap?  You be growing paler everyday.  Oh, Peter! you be
like a man as is dyin' by inches--if 'tis any o' my doin'--"

"Nonsense, George!" I broke in with sudden asperity, "I am well
enough!"

"Yet I've seen your 'ands fall a-trembling sometimes, Peter--all
at once.  An' you missed your stroke yesterday--come square down
on th' anvil--you can't ha' forgot?"

"I remember," I muttered; "I remember."

"An' twice again to-day.  An' you be silent, Peter, an' don't
seem to 'ear when spoke to, an' short in your temper--oh, you
bean't the man you was.  I've see it a-comin' on you more an'
more.  Oh, man, Peter!" he cried, turning his back upon me
suddenly, "you as I'd let walk over me--you as I'd be cut in
pieces for--if it be me as done it--"

"No, no, George--it wasn't you--of course not.  If I am a little
strange it is probably due to lack of sleep, nothing more."

"Ye see, Peter, I tried so 'ard to kill 'ee, an' you said
yourself as I come nigh doin' it--"

"But then, you didn't quite manage it," I cried harshly--"would
to God you had; as it is, I am alive, and there's an end of it."

"'Twere a woundy blow I give 'ee--that last one!  I'll never
forget the look o' your face as you went down.  Oh, Peter! you've
never been the same since--it be all my doin'--I know it, I know
it," and, sinking upon the Ancient's stool in the corner, Black
George covered his face.

"Never think of it, George," I said, laying my arm across his
heaving shoulders; "that is all over and done with, dear fellow,
and I would not have it otherwise, since it gained me your
friendship.  I am all right, well and strong; it is only sleep
that I need, George, only sleep."

Upon the still evening air rose the sharp tap, tap of the
Ancient's stick, whereat up started the smith, and, coming to the
forge, began raking out the fire with great dust and clatter, as
the old man hobbled up, saluting us cheerily as he came.

"Lord!" he exclaimed, pausing in the doorway to lean upon his
stick and glance from one to the other of us with his quick,
bright eyes.  "Lord! theer bean't two other such fine, up-standin',
likely-lookin' chaps in all the South Country as you two chaps
be--no, nor such smiths! it du warm my old 'eart to look at
'ee.  Puts me in mind o' what I were myself--ages an' ages
ago.  I weren't quite so tall as Jarge, p'r'aps, by about--say
'alf-a-inch, but then, I were wider--wider, ah! a sight wider
in the shoulder, an' so strong as--four bulls! an' wi' eyes big
an' sharp an' piercin'--like Peter's, only Peter's bean't quite
so sharp, no, nor yet so piercin'--an' that minds me as I've
got noos for 'ee, Peter."

"What news?" said I, turning.

"S'prisin' noos it be--ah! an' 'stonishin' tu.  But first of all,
Peter, I wants to ax 'ee a question."

"What is it, Ancient?"

"Why, it be this, Peter," said the old man, hobbling nearer, and
peering up into my face, "ever since the time as I went an' found
ye, I've thought as theer was summ'at strange about 'ee, what wi'
your soft voice an' gentle ways; an' it came on me all at once
--about three o' the clock's arternoon, as you might be a dook
--in disguise, Peter.  Come now, be ye a dook or bean't ye--yes
or ne, Peter?" and he fixed me with his eye.

"No, Ancient," I answered, smiling; "I'm no duke."

"Ah well!--a earl, then?"

"Nor an earl."

"A barrynet, p'r'aps?"

"Not even a baronet."

"Ah!" said the old man, eyeing me doubtfully, "I've often thought
as you might be one or t' other of 'em 'specially since 'bout
three o' the clock 's arternoon."

"Why so?"

"Why, that's the p'int--that's the very noos as I've got to tell
'ee," chuckled the Ancient, as he seated himself in the corner.
"You must know, then," he began, with an impressive rap on the
lid of his snuffbox, "'bout three o'clock 's arternoon I were
sittin' on the stile by Simon's five-acre field when along the
road comes a lady, 'an'some an' proud-looking, an' as fine as
fine could be, a-ridin' of a 'orse, an' wi' a servant ridin'
another 'orse be'ind 'er.  As she comes up she gives me a look
out o' 'er eyes, soft they was, an' dark, an' up I gets to touch
my 'at.  All at once she smiles at me, an' 'er smile were as
sweet an' gentle as 'er eyes; an' she pulls up 'er 'orse.  'W'y,
you must be the Ancient!' says she.  'W'y, so Peter calls me, my
leddy,' says I.  'An' 'ow is Peter?' she says, quick-like; ''ow
is Peter?' says she.  'Fine an' 'earty,' says I; 'eats well an'
sleeps sound,' says I; ''is arms is strong an' 'is legs is strong,
an' 'e aren't afeared o' nobody--like a young lion be Peter,'
says I.  Now, while I'm a-sayin' this, she looks at me, soft an'
thoughtful-like, an' takes out a little book an' begins to write
in it, a-wrinklin' 'er pretty black brows over it an' a-shakin'
'er 'ead to 'erself.  An' presently she tears out what she's
been a-writin' an' gives it to me.  'Will you give this to Peter
for me?' says she.  'That I will, my leddy!' says I.  'Thank
'ee!' says she, smilin' again, an' 'oldin' out 'er w'ite 'an' to
me, which I kisses.  'Indeed!' says she,' I understand now why
Peter is so fond of you.  I think I could be very fond of 'ee
tu!' says she.  An' so she turns 'er 'orse, an' the servant 'e
turns 'is an' off they go; an' 'ere, Peter--'ere be the letter."
Saying which, the Ancient took a slip of paper from the cavernous
interior of his hat and tendered it to me.

With my head in a whirl, I crossed to the door, and leaned there
awhile, staring sightlessly out into the summer evening; for it
seemed that in this little slip of paper lay that which meant
life or death to me; so, for a long minute I leaned there,
fearing to learn my fate.  Then I opened the little folded square
of paper, and, holding it before my eyes, read:

"Charmian Brown presents" (This scratched out.)  "While you
busied yourself forging horseshoes your cousin, Sir Maurice,
sought and found me.  I do not love him, but--     CHARMIAN.

"Farewell" (This also scored out.)

Again I stared before me with unseeing eyes, but my hands no
longer trembled, nor did I fear any more; the prisoner had
received his sentence, and suspense was at an end.

And, all at once, I laughed, and tore the paper across, and
laughed and laughed, till George and the Ancient came to stare at
me.

"Don't 'ee!" cried the old man; "don't 'ee, Peter--you be like a
corp' laughin'; don't 'ee!"  But the laugh still shook me while I
tore and tore at the paper, and so let the pieces drop and
flutter from my fingers.

"There!" said I, "there goes a fool's dream!  See how it
scatters--a little here, a little there; but, so long as this
world lasts, these pieces shall never come together again."  So
saying, I set off along the road, looking neither to right nor
left.  But, when I had gone some distance, I found that George
walked beside me, and he was very silent as he walked, and I saw
the trouble was back in his eyes again.

"George," said I, stopping, "why do you follow me?"

"I don't follow 'ee, Peter," he answered; "I be only wishful to
walk wi' you a ways."

"I'm in no mood for company, George."

"Well, I bean't company, Peter--your friend, I be," he said
doggedly, and without looking at me.

"Yes," said I; "yes, my good and trusty friend."

"Peter," he cried suddenly, laying his hand upon my shoulder,
"don't go back to that theer ghashly 'Oller to-night--"

"It is the only place in the world for me--to-night, George."
And so we went on again, side by side, through the evening, and
spoke no more until we had come to the parting of the ways.

Down in the Hollow the shadows lay black and heavy, and I saw
George shiver as he looked.

"Good-by!" said I, clasping his hand; "good-by, George!"

"Why do 'ee say good-by?"

"Because I am going away."

"Goin' away, Peter--but wheer?"

"God knows!" I answered, "but, wherever it be, I shall carry with
me the memory of your kind, true heart--and you, I think, will
remember me.  It is a blessed thing, George, to know that, howso
far we go, a friend's kind thoughts journey on with us, untiring
to the end."

"Oh, Peter, man! don't go for to leave me--"

"To part is our human lot, George, and as well now as later
--good-by!"

"No, no!" he cried, throwing his arm about me, "not down theer
--it be so deadly an' lonely down theer in the darkness.  Come
back wi' me--just for to-night."  But I broke from his detaining
hand, and plunged on down into the shadows.  And, presently,
turning my head, I saw him yet standing where I had left him,
looming gigantic upon the sky behind, and with his head sunk
upon his breast.

Being come at last to the cottage, I paused, and from that place
of shadows lifted my gaze to the luminous heaven, where were a
myriad eyes that seemed to watch me with a new meaning, to-night;
wherefore I entered the cottage hastily, and, closing the door,
barred it behind me.  Then I turned to peer up at that which
showed above the door--the rusty staple upon which a man had
choked his life out sixty and six years ago.  And I began, very
slowly, to loosen the belcher neckerchief about my throat.

"Peter!" cried a voice--"Peter!" and a hand was beating upon the
door.




CHAPTER XL

HOW, IN PLACE OF DEATH, I FOUND THE FULNESS OF LIFE


She came in swiftly, closing the door behind her, found and
lighted a candle, and, setting it upon the table between us, put
back the hood of her cloak, and looked at me, while I stood mute
before her, abashed by the accusation of her eyes.

"Coward!" she said, and, with the word, snatched the neckerchief
from my grasp, and, casting it upon the floor, set her foot upon
it.  "Coward!" said she again.

"Yes," I muttered; "yes, I was lost--in a great darkness, and
full of a horror of coming rights and days, and so--I would have
run away from it all--like a coward--"

"Oh, hateful--hateful!" she cried, and covered her face as from
some horror.

"Indeed, you cannot despise me more than I do myself," said I,
"now, or ever; I am a failure in all things, except, perhaps,
the making of horseshoes--and this world has no place for
failures--and as for horseshoes--"

"Fool," she whispered.  "Oh, fool that I dreamed so wise! Oh,
coward that seemed so brave and strong!  Oh, man that was so
gloriously young and unspoiled!--that it should end here--that it
should come to this."  And, though she kept her face hidden, I
knew that she was weeping.  "A woman's love transforms the man
till she sees him, not as he is, but as her heart would have him
be; the dross becomes pure gold, and she believes and believes
until--one day her heart breaks--"

"Charmian!--what--what do you mean?"

"Oh, are you still so blind?  Must I tell you?" she cried,
lifting her head proudly.  "Why did I live beside you here in the
wilderness?  Why did I work for you contrive for you--and seek to
make this desolation a home for you?  Often my heart cried out
its secret to you--but you never heard; often it trembled in my
voice, looked at you from my eyes--but you never guessed--Oh,
blind! blind!  And you drove me from you with shameful words
--but--oh!--I came back to you.  And now--I know you for but
common clay, after all, and--even yet--"  She stopped, suddenly,
and once more hid her face from me in her hands.

"And--even yet, Charmian?" I whispered.

Very still she stood, with her face bowed upon her hands, but she
could not hide from me the swift rise and fall of her bosom.

"Speak--oh, Charmian, speak!"

"I am so weak--so weak!" she whispered; "I hate myself."

"Charmian!" I cried "--oh, Charmian!" and seized her hands, and,
despite her resistance, drew her into my arms, and, clasping her
close, forced her to look at me.  "And even yet?--what more--what
more--tell me."  But, lying back across my arm, she held me off
with both hands.

"Don't!" she cried; "don't--you shame me--let me go."

"God knows I am all unworthy, Charmian, and so low in my
abasement that to touch you is presumption, but oh, woman whom I
have loved from the first, and shall, to the end, have you
stooped in your infinite mercy, to lift me from these depths--is
it a new life you offer me was it for this you came to-night?"

"Let me go--oh, Peter!--let me go."

"Why--why did you come?"

"Loose me!"

"Why did you come?"

"To meet--Sir Maurice Vibart."

"To meet Sir Maurice?" I repeated dully--"Sir Maurice?"  And in
that moment she broke from me, and stood with her head thrown
back, and her eyes very bright, as though defying me.  But I
remained where I was, my arms hanging.

"He was to meet me here--at nine o'clock."

"Oh, Charmian," I whispered, "are all women so cruel as you, I
wonder?"  And, turning my back upon her, I leaned above the
mantel, staring down at the long-dead ashes on the hearth.

But, standings there, I heard a footstep outside, and swung round
with clenched fists, yet Charmian was quicker, and, as the door
opened and Sir Maurice entered, she was between us.

He stood upon the threshold, dazzled a little by the light, but
smiling, graceful, debonair, and point-device as ever.  Indeed,
his very presence seemed to make the mean room the meaner by
contrast, and, as he bent to kiss her hand, I became acutely
conscious of my own rough person, my worn and shabby clothes, and
of my hands, coarsened and grimed by labor; wherefore my frown
grew the blacker and I clenched my fists the tighter.

"I lost my way, Charmian," he began, "but, though late, I am none
the less welcome, I trust?  Ah?--you frown, Cousin Peter?  Quite
a ghoulish spot this, at night--you probably find it most
congenial, good cousin Timon of Athens--indeed, cousin, you are
very like Timon of Athens--"  And he laughed so that I, finding
my pipe upon the mantelshelf, began to turn it aimlessly round
and round in my twitching fingers.

"You have already met, then?" inquired Charmian, glancing from
one to the other of us.

"We had that mutual pleasure nearly a week ago," nodded Sir
Maurice, "when we agreed to--disagree, as we always have done,
and shall do--with the result that we find each other agreeably
disagreeable."

"I had hoped that you might be friends."

"My dear Charmian--I wonder at you!" he sighed, "so unreasonable.
Would you have us contravene the established order of things?  It
was preordained that Cousin Peter should scowl at me (precisely
as he is doing), and that I should shrug my shoulders, thus, at
Cousin Peter--a little hate with, say, a dash of contempt, give a
zest to that dish of conglomerate vapidity which we call Life,
and make it almost palatable.

"But I am not here on Cousin Peter's account," he went on,
drawing a step nearer to her, "at this moment I heartily wish
him--among his hammers and chisels--I have come for you,
Charmian, because I love you.  I have sought you patiently until
I found you--and I will never forego you so long as life lasts
--but you know all this."

"Yes, I know all this."

"I have been very patient, Charmian, submitting to your whims and
fancies--but, through it all; I knew, and in your woman's heart
--you knew, that you must yield at last--that the chase must end
--some day; well--let it be to-night--my chaise is waiting--"

"When I ran away from you, in the storm, Sir Maurice, I told you,
once and for all, that I hated you.  Have you forgotten?--hated
you!--always and ever! and tried to--kill you--"

"Oh, Charmian! I have known such hate transfigured into love,
before now--such love as is only worth the winning.  And you are
mine--you always were--from the first moment that our eyes met.
Come, my chaise is waiting; in a few hours we can be in London,
or Dover--"

"No--never!"

"Never is a long time, Charmian--but I am at your service--what
is your will?"

"I shall remain--here."

"Here?  In the wilderness?"

"With my--husband."

"Your--husband?"

"I am going to marry your cousin--Peter Vibart."

The pipe slipped from my fingers and shivered to pieces on the
floor, and in that same fraction of time Sir Maurice had turned
and leapt towards me; but as he came I struck him twice, with
left and right, and he staggered backwards to the wall.  He stood
for a moment, with his head stooped upon his hands.  When he
looked up his face was dead white, and with a smear of blood upon
it that seemed to accentuate its pallor; but his voice came
smooth and unruffled as ever.

"The Mind Feminine is given to change," said he softly, "and--I
shall return--yes, I shall come back.  Smile, madam!  Triumph,
cousin! But I shall come between you yet--I tell you, I'll come
between you--living or dead!"

And so he turned, and was gone--into the shadows.

But as for me, I sat down, and, leaning my chin in my hand,
stared down at the broken fragments of my pipe.

"Peter?"

"You are safe now," said I, without looking up, "he is gone--but,
oh, Charmian! was there no other way--?"

She was down beside me on her knees, had taken my hand, rough and
grimy as it was, and pressed it to her lips, and so had drawn it
about her neck, holding it there, and with her face hidden in my
breast.

"Oh--strong man that is so weak!" she whispered.  "Oh--grave
philosopher that is so foolish! Oh--lonely boy that is so
helpless! Oh, Peter Vibart--my Peter!"

"Charmian," said I, trembling, "what does it mean?"

"It means, Peter--"

"Yes?"

"That--the--Humble Person--"

"Yes?"

"Will--marry you--whenever you will--if--"

"Yes?"

"If you will--only--ask her."




CHAPTER XLI

LIGHT AND SHADOW


Now, as the little Preacher closed his book, the sun rose up,
filling the world about us with his glory.

And looking into the eyes of my wife, it seemed that a veil was
lifted, for a moment, there, and I read that which her lips might
never tell; and there, also, were joy and shame and a deep
happiness.

"See," said the little Preacher, smiling upon us, "it is day and
a very glorious one; already a thousand little choristers of
God's great cathedral have begun to chant your marriage hymn.  Go
forth together, Man and Wife, upon this great wide road that we
call Life; go forth together, made strong in Faith, and brave
with Hope, and the memory of Him who walked these ways before
you; who joyed and sorrowed and suffered and endured all things
--even as we must.  Go forth together, and may His blessing abide
with you, and the 'peace that passeth understanding.'"

And so we turned together, side by side, and left him standing
amid his roses.

Silently we went together, homewards, through the dewy morning,
with a soft, green carpet underfoot, and leafy arches overhead,
where trees bent to whisper benedictions, and shook down jewels
from their dewy leaves upon us as we passed; by merry brooks that
laughed and chattered, and gurgled of love and happiness, while
over all rose the swelling chorus of the birds.  Surely never had
they piped so gladly in this glad world before--not even for the
gentle Spenser, though he says:

      "There was none of them that feigned
       To sing, for each of them him pained;
       To find out merry, crafty notes
       They ne spared not their throats."

And being come, at length, to the Hollow, Charmian must needs
pause beside the pool among the willows, to view herself in the
pellucid water.  And in this mirror our eyes met, and lo! of a
sudden, her lashes drooped, and she turned her head aside.

"Don't, Peter!" she whispered; "don't look at me so."

"How may I help it when you are so beautiful?"

And, because of my eyes, she would have fled from me, but I
caught her in my arms, and there, amid the leaves, despite the
jealous babble of the brook, for the second time in my life, her
lips met mine.  And, gazing yet into her eyes, I told her how, in
this shady bower, I had once watched her weaving leaves into her
hair, and heard her talk to her reflection--and so--had stolen
away, for fear of her beauty.

"Fear, Peter?"

"We were so far out of the world, and--I longed to kiss you."

"And didn't, Peter."

"And didn't, Charmian, because we were so very far from the
world, and because you were so very much alone, and--"

"And because, Peter, because you are a gentle man and strong, as
the old locket says.  And do you remember," she went on
hurriedly, laying her cool, restraining fingers on my eager lips,
"how I found you wearing that locket, and how you blundered and
stammered over it, and pretended to read your Homer?"

"And how you sang, to prevent me?"

"And how gravely you reproved me?"

"And how you called me a 'creature'?"

"And how you deserved it, sir--and grew more helpless and ill at
ease than ever, and how--just to flatter my vanity--you told me
I had 'glorious hair'?"

"And so you have," said I, kissing a curl at her temple; "when
you unbind it, my Charmian, it will cover you like a mantle."

Now when I said this, for some reason she glanced up at me,
sudden and shy, and blushed and slipped from my arms, and fled up
the path like a nymph.

So we presently entered the cottage, flushed and panting, and
laughing for sheer happiness.  And now she rolled up her sleeves,
and set about preparing breakfast, laughing my assistance to
scorn, but growing mightily indignant when I would kiss her, yet
blushing and yielding, nevertheless.  And while she bustled to
and fro (keeping well out of reach of my arm), she began to sing
in her soft voice to herself:

      "'In Scarlet town, where I was born,
        There was a fair maid dwellin',
        Made every youth cry Well-a-way!
        Her name was Barbara Allen.'"

"Oh, Charmian! how wonderful you are!"

      "'All in the merry month of May,
        When green buds they were swellin'--'"

"Surely no woman ever had such beautiful arms! so round and soft
and white, Charmian."  She turned upon me with a fork held up
admonishingly, but, meeting my look, her eyes wavered, and up
from throat to brow rushed a wave of burning crimson.

"Oh, Peter!--you make me--almost--afraid of you," she whispered,
and hid her face against my shoulder.

"Are you content to have married such a very poor man--to be the
wife of a village blacksmith?"

"Why, Peter--in all the world there never was such another
blacksmith as mine, and--and--there!--the kettle is boiling
over--"

"Let it!" said I.

"And the bacon--the bacon will burn--let me go, and--oh, Peter!"

So, in due time, we sat down to our solitary wedding breakfast;
and there were no eyes to speculate upon the bride's beauty, to
note her changing color, or the glory of her eyes; and no healths
were proposed or toasts drunk, nor any speeches spoken--except,
perhaps by my good friend--the brook outside, who, of course,
understood the situation, and babbled tolerantly of us to the
listening trees, like the grim old philosopher he was.

In this solitude we were surely closer together and belonged more
fully to each other, for all her looks and thoughts were mine, as
mine were hers.

And, as we ate, sometimes talking and sometimes laughing (though
rarely; one seldom laughs in the wilderness), our hands would
stray to meet each other across the table, and eye would answer
eye, while, in the silence, the brook would lift its voice to
chuckle throaty chuckles and outlandish witticisms, such as could
only be expected from an old reprobate who had grown so in years,
and had seen so very much of life.  At such times Charmian's
cheeks would flush and her lashes droop--as though (indeed) she
were versed in the language of brooks.

So the golden hours slipped by, the sun crept westward, and
evening stole upon us.

"This is a very rough place for you," said I, and sighed.

We were sitting on the bench before the door, and Charmian had
laid her folded hands upon my shoulder, and her chin upon her
hands.  And now she echoed my sigh, but answered without
stirring:

"It is the dearest place in all the world."

"And very lonely!" I pursued.

"I shall be busy all day long, Peter, and you always reach home
as evening falls, and then--then--oh! I sha'n't be lonely."

"But I am such a gloomy fellow at the best of times, and very
clumsy, Charmian, and something of a failure."

"And--my husband."

"Peter!--Peter!--oh, Peter!" I started, and rose to my feet.

"Peter!--oh, Peter!" called the voice again, seemingly from the
road, and now I thought it sounded familiar.

Charmian stole her arms aboat my neck.

"I think it is Simon," said I uneasily; "what can have brought
him?   And he will never venture down into the Hollow on account
of the ghost; I must go and see what he wants."

"Yes, Peter," she murmured, but the clasp of her arms tightened.

"What is it?" said I, looking into her troubled eyes.  "Charmian,
you are trembling!--what is it?"

"I don't know--but oh, Peter!  I feel as if a shadow--a black and
awful shadow were creeping upon us hiding us from each other.  I
am very foolish, aren't I? and this our wedding-day!"

"Peter!  Pe-ter!"

"Come with me, Charmian; let us go together."

"No, I must wait--it is woman's destiny--to wait--but I am brave
again; go--see what is wanted."

I found Simon, sure enough, in the lane, seated in his cart, and
his face looked squarer and grimmer even than usual.

"Oh, Peter!" said he, gripping my hand, "it be come at last
--Gaffer be goin'."

"Going, Simon?"

"Dyin', Peter.  Fell downstairs 's marnin'.  Doctor says 'e can't
last the day out--sinkin' fast, 'e be, an' 'e be axin' for 'ee,
Peter.  'Wheer be Peter?' says 'e over an' over again; 'wheer be
the Peter as I found of a sunshiny arternoon, down in th' 'aunted
'Oller?'  You weren't at work 's marnin', Peter, so I be come to
fetch 'ee--you'll come back wi' me to bid 'good-by' to the old:
man?"

"Yes, I'll come, Simon," I answered; "wait here for me."

Charmian was waiting for me in the cottage, and, as she looked up
at me, I saw the trouble was back in her eyes again.

"You must--go leave me?" she inquired.

"For a little while."

"Yes--I--I felt it," she said, with a pitiful little smile.

"The Ancient is dying," said I.  Now, as I spoke, my eyes
encountered the staple above the door, wherefore, mounting upon a
chair, I seized and shook it.  And lo! the rusty iron snapped off
in my fingers--like glass, and I slipped it into my pocket.

"Oh, Peter!--don't go--don't leave me!" cried Charmian suddenly,
and I saw that her face was very pale, and that she trembled.

"Charmian!" said I, and sprang to her side.  "Oh, my love!--what
is it?"

"It is--as though the shadow hung over us--darker and more
threatening, Peter; as if our happiness were at an end; I seem to
hear Maurice's threat--to come between us--living or--dead.  I am
afraid!" she whispered, clinging to me, "I am afraid!"  But, all
at once, she was calm again, and full of self-reproaches, calling
herself "weak," and "foolish," and "hysterical"--"though,
indeed, I was never hysterical before!"--and telling me that I
must go--that it was my duty to go to the "gentle, dying old
man"--urging me to the door, almost eagerly, till, being out of
the cottage, she must needs fall a-trembling once more, and wind
her arms about my neck, with a great sob.

"But oh!--you will come back soon--very soon, Peter?  And we know
that nothing can ever come between us again--never again--my
husband."  And, with that blessed word, she drew me down to her
lips, and, turning, fled into the cottage.

I went on slowly up the path to meet Simon, and, as I went, my
heart was heavy, and my mind full of a strange foreboding.  But I
never thought of the omen of the knife that had once fallen and
quivered in the floor between us.

"'Twere 'is snuff-box as done it!" said Simon, staring very hard
at his horse's ears, as we jogged along the road.  "'E were a-goin'
upstairs for it, an' slipped, 'e did.  'Simon,' says he, as I
lifted of 'im in my arms, 'Simon,' says 'e, quiet like, 'I be
done for at last, lad--this poor old feyther o' yourn'll never go
a-climbin' up these stairs no more,' says 'e--'never--no--more.'"

After this Simon fell silent, and I likewise, until we reached
the village.  Before "The Bull" was a group who talked with
hushed voices and grave faces; even Old Amos grinned no more.

The old man lay in his great four-post bed, propped up with
pillows, and with Prue beside him, to smooth his silver hair with
tender fingers, and Black George towering in the shade of the
bed-curtains, like a grieving giant.

"'Ere I be, Peter," said the old man, beckoning me feebly with
his hand, "'ere I be--at the partin' o' the ways, an' wi' summ'at
gone wrong wi' my innards!  When a man gets so old as I be, 'is
innards be like glass, Peter, like glass--an' apt to fly all to
pieces if 'e goes a-slippin' an' a-slidin' downstairs, like me."

"Are you in pain?" I asked, clasping his shrivelled hand.

"Jest a twinge, now an' then, Peter--but--Lord! that bean't
nothin' to a man the likes o' me--Peter--"

"You always were so hale and hearty," I nodded, giving him the
usual opening he had waited for.

"Ay, so strong as a bull, that I were! like a lion in my youth
--Black Jarge were nought to me--a cart 'orse I were."

"Yes," said I, "yes," and stooped my head lower over the feeble
old hand.

"But arter all, Peter, bulls pass away, an' lions, an' cart
'orses lose their teeth, an' gets wore out, for 'all flesh is
grass'--but iron's iron, bean't it, Peter--rusts it do, but 'tis
iron all the same, an' lasts a man out--even such a 'earty chap
as I were?"

"Sometimes," said I, without looking up.

"An' I be very old an' tired, Peter; my 'eart be all wore out wi'
beatin' an' beatin' all these years--'tis a wonder as it didn't
stop afore now--but a--a--stapil, Peter, don't 'ave no 'eart to
go a-beatin' an' a-wearin' of itself away?"

"No, Ancient."

"So 'ere be I, a-standin' in the Valley o' the Shadow, an'
waitin' for God's Angel to take my 'and for to show me the way.
'Tis a darksome road, Peter, but I bean't afeared, an' there be a
light beyond Jordan-water.  No, I aren't afeared to meet the God
as made me, for 'the Lord is merciful--and very kind,' an' I
don't s'pose as 'E'll be very 'ard on a old, old man as did 'is
best, an' wi' a 'eart all tired an' wore away wi' beatin'--I be
ready, Peter only--"

"Yes, Ancient?"

"Oh, Peter!--it be that theer old stapil--as'll go on rustin'
away an' rustin' away arter the old man as watched it so is laid
in the earth, an' forgot about--"

"No," said I, without looking up, but slipping my hand into my
pocket; "no, Ancient--"

"Peter--Oh, Peter!--do 'ee mean--?"

"I mean that, although it had no heart, the staple was tired and
worn out--just as you are, and so I brought it to you," and I
slipped the rusty bit of iron into the old man's trembling palm.

"O Lord--!" he began in a fervent voice, "O dear Lord!--I got
it, Lord--th' owd stapil--I be ready to come to Thee, an' j'yful
--j'yful! an' for this mercy, an' benefit received--blessed be Thy
name.  Amen!"

He lay very quiet for a while, with the broken staple clasped to
his breast, and his eyes closed.

"Peter," said he suddenly, "you won't 'ave no one to bring you
noos no more--why, Peter! be 'ee cryin'--for me?  'Tis true 't
were me as found ye, but I didn't think as you'd go to cry tears
for me--I be goin' to tak' t' owd stapil wi' me, Peter, all along
the road--an', Peter--"

"Yes, Ancient?"

"Be you quite sure as you aren't a dook?"

"Quite sure."

"Nor a earl?"

"No, Ancient."

"Not even a--barrynet?"

"No, Ancient."

"Ah, well!--you be a man, Peter, an' 'tis summ'at to ha' found a
man--that it be."

And now he feebly beckoned us all nearer.

"Children," said he, "I be a old an' ancient man I be goin' on
--across the river to wait for you--my blessin' on ye.  It be a
dark, dark road, but I've got t' owd stapil, an' there--be a
light beyond--the river."

So, the Ancient sighed, and crossed the dark River into the Land
of Light Eternal.




CHAPTER XLII

HOW SIR MAURICE KEPT HIS WORD


Night, with a rising moon, and over all things a great quietude,
a deep, deep silence.  Air, close and heavy, without a breath to
wake the slumbering trees; an oppressive stillness, in which
small sounds magnified themselves, and seemed disproportionately
loud.

And presently, as I went upon my way, I forgot the old man
sleeping so peacefully with the rusty staple clasped to his
shrunken breast, and thought only of the proud woman who had
given her life into my keeping, and who, henceforth, would walk
with me, hand in hand, upon this Broad Highway, over rough
places, and smooth--even unto the end.  So I strode on, full of a
deep and abiding joy, and with heart that throbbed and hands that
trembled because I knew that she watched and waited for my
coming.

A sound broke upon the stillness--sudden and sharp--like the
snapping of a stick.  I stopped and glanced about me--but it had
come and gone--lost in the all-pervading calm.

And presently, reaching the leafy path that led steeply down into
the Hollow, I paused a moment to look about me and to listen
again; but the deep silence was all unbroken, save for the
slumberous song of the brook, that stole up to me from the
shadows, and I wondered idly what that sudden sound might have
been.  So I began to descend this leafy path, and went on to meet
that which lay waiting for me in the shadows.

It was dark here among the trees, for the moon was low as yet,
but, every now and then, she sent a kindly ray through some
opening amid the leaves, so that as I descended the path I seemed
to be wading through small, limpid pools of radiance.

But all at once I stopped--staring at something which lay at the
edge of one of these pools--a white claw--a hand whose fingers,
talon-like, had sunk deep and embedded themselves in the turf.
And, beyond this gleaming hand, was an arm, and beyond that
again, something that bulked across my path, darker than the
shadows.

Running forward, I stood looking down at that which lay at my
feet--so very still; and stooped suddenly, and turned it over
that I might see the face; and, seeing it, started back in
shuddering horror.  For, in those features--hideous with blood,
stained and blackened with powder, I recognized my cousin--Sir
Maurice Vibart.  Then, remembering the stick that had snapped, I
wondered no more, but a sudden deadly faintness came upon me so,
that I leaned weakly against a tree near by.

A rustling of leaves--a shuddering breath, and, though I did not
raise my head, I knew that Charmian was there.

"Oh, Peter!" she whispered, "oh, Peter!" and that was all, but,
moved by something in her tone, I glanced up.  Her eyes were wide
and staring--not at me, but at that which lay between us--her
face was pallid; even her lips had lost their color, and she
clasped one hand upon her bosom--the other was hidden in the
folds of her gown hidden as I remembered to have seen it once
before, but now it struck me with a horrible significance.
Wherefore I reached out and caught that hidden hand, and drew the
weapon from her nerveless fingers, holding it where the light
could play upon it.  She started, shivered violently, and covered
her eyes, while I, looking down at the pistol in my hand, saw
that it had lately been discharged.

"He has kept his word!" she whispered; "he has kept his word!"

"Yes, Charmian--he has kept his word!"

"Oh, Peter!" she moaned, and stretched out her hands towards me,
yet she kept her face turned from that which lay across the path
between us, and her hands were shaking pitifully.  "Peter?" she
cried with a sudden break in her voice; but I went on wiping the
soot from the pistol-barrel with the end of my neckerchief.
Then, all at once, she was beside me, clasping my arm, and she
was pleading with me, her words coming in a flood.

"No, Peter, no--oh, God!--you do not think it--you can't--you
mustn't.  I was alone--waiting for you, and the hours passed--and
you didn't come--and I was nervous and frightened, and full of
awful fancies.  I thought I heard some one--creeping round the
cottage.  Once I thought some one peered in at the lattice, and
once I thought some one tried the door.  And so--because I was
frightened, Peter, I took that--that, and held it in my hand,
Peter.  And while I sat there--it seemed more than ever--that
somebody was breathing softly--outside the door.  And so, Peter,
I couldn't bear it any more--and opened the lattice--and fired
--in the air--I swear it was in the air.  And I stood there--at
the open casement--sick with fear, and trying to pray for you
--because I knew he had come back--to kill you, Peter, and, while
I prayed, I heard another shot--not close, but faint--like the
snapping of a twig, Peter--and I ran out--and--oh, Peter!--that
is all--but you believe--oh!--you believe, don't you, Peter?"

While she spoke, I had slipped the pistol into my pocket, and now
I held out my hands to her, and drew her near, and gazed into the
troubled depths of her eyes.

"Charmian!" said I, "Charmian--I love you! and God forbid that I
should ever doubt you any more."

So, with a sigh, she sank in my embrace, her arms crept about my
neck, and our lips met, and clung together.  But even then--while
I looked upon her beauty, while the contact of her lips thrilled
through me--even then, in any mind, I saw the murderous pistol in
her hand--as I had seen it months ago.  Indeed, it almost seemed
that she divined my thought, for she drew swiftly back, and
looked up at me with haggard eyes.

"Peter?" she whispered, "what is it--what is it?"

"Oh, Charmian!" said I, over and over again, "I love you--I
love you."  And I kissed her appealing eyes, and stayed her
questioning lips with my kisses.  "I love you more than my
life--more than honor--more than my soul; and, because I so
love you--to-night you must leave me--"

"Leave you?--ah no, Peter--no--no, I am your wife--I must stay
with you--to suffer and share your troubles and dangers--it is
my right--my privilege.  Let us go away together, now--anywhere
--anywhere, only let us be together--my--husband."

"Don't!" I cried, "don't!  Do you think it is so easy to remain
here without you--to lose you so soon--so very soon?  If I only
loved you a little less!  Ah! don't you see--before the week is
out, my description will be all over England; we should be
caught, and you would have to stand beside me in a court of
justice, and face the shame of it--"

"Dear love!--it would be my pride--my pride, Peter, to face them
all--to clasp this dear hand in mine--"

"Never!" I cried, clenching my fists; "never!  You must leave me;
no one must know Charmian Brown ever existed--you must go!"

"Hush!" she whispered, clasping me tighter, "listen--some one is
coming!"  Away to the right, we could hear the leaves rustling,
as though a strong wind passed through them; a light flickered,
went out, flickered again, and a voice hailed faintly:

"Hallo!"

"Come," said Charmian, clasping my hand, "let us go and meet him."

"No, Charmian, no--I must see this man--alone.  You must leave
here, to-night-now.  You can catch the London Mail at the cross
roads.  Go to Blackheath--to Sir Richard Anstruther--he is my
friend--tell him everything--"

She was down at my feet, and had caught my hand to her bosom.

"I can't!" she cried, "I can't go--and leave you here alone.  I
have loved you so--from the very first, and it seems that each
day my love has grown until it is part of me.  Oh, Peter!--don't
send me away from you--it will kill me, I think--"

"Better that than the shame of a prison!" I exclaimed, and, while
I spoke, I lifted her in my arms.  "Oh!--I am proud--proud to
have won such a love as yours--let me try to be worthy of it.
Good-by, my beloved!" and so I kissed her, and would have turned
away, but her arms clung about me.

"Oh, Peter!" she sobbed, "if you must go--if you will go, call
me--your wife--just once, Peter."

The hovering light was much nearer now, and the rustle of leaves
louder, as I stooped above her cold hands, and kissed their
trembling fingers.

"Some day," said I, "some day, if there is a just God in heaven,
we shall meet again; perhaps soon, perhaps late.  Until then, let
us dream of that glorious, golden some day, but now--farewell,
oh, beloved wife!"

With a broken cry, she drew my head down upon her breast, and
clasped it there, while her tears mingled with her kisses, and
so--crying my name, she turned, and was lost among the leaves.




CHAPTER XLIII

HOW I SET OUT TO FACE MY DESTINY


The pallid moon shone down pitilessly upon the dead, white face
that stared up at me through its grime and blood, with the same
half-tolerant, half-amused contempt of me that it had worn in
life; the drawn lips seemed to mock me, and the clenched fists
to defy me still; so that I shivered, and turned to watch the
oncoming light that danced like a will-o'-the-wisp among the
shadows.  Presently it stopped, and a voice hailed once more:

"Hallo!"

"Hallo!" I called back; "this way--this way!"  In a little while
I saw the figure of a man whom I at once recognized as the
one-time Postilion, bearing the lanthorn of a chaise, and, as he
approached, it struck me that this meeting was very much like our
first, save for him who lay in the shadows, staring up at me with
unwinking eyes.

"So ho!" exclaimed the Postilion as he came up, raising his
lanthorn that he might view me the better; "it's you again, is
it?"

"Yes," I nodded.

"Well, I don't like it," he grumbled, "a-meeting of each other
again like this, in this 'ere ghashly place--no, I don't like it
--too much like last time to be nat'ral, and, as you know, I can't
abide onnat'ralness.  If I was to ax you where my master was,
like as not you'd tell me 'e was--"

"Here!" said I, and, moving aside, pointed to the shadow.

The Postilion stepped nearer, lowering his lanthorzs.  then
staggered blindly backward.

"Lord!" he whimpered, "Lord love me!" and stood  staring, with
dropped jaw.

"Where is your chaise?"

"Up yonder--yonder--in the lane," he mumbled, his eyes still
fixed.

"Then help me to carry him there."

"No, no--I dursn't touch it--I can't--not me--not me!"

"I think you will," said I, and took the pistol from my pocket.

"Ain't one enough for to-night?" he muttered; "put it away--I'll
come--I'll do it--put it away."  So I dropped the weapon back
into my pocket while the Postilion, shivering violently, stooped
with me above the inanimate figure, and, with our limp burden
between us, we staggered and stumbled up the path, and along the
lane to where stood a light traveling chaise.

"'E ain't likely to come to this time, I'm thinkin'!" said the
Postilion, mopping the sweat from his brow and grinning with
pallid lips, after we had got our burden into the vehicle; "no,
'e ain't likely to wake up no more, nor yet 'curse my 'ead off'
--this side o' Jordan."

"No," I answered, beginning to unwind my neckcloth.

"Nor it ain't no good to go a-bandagin' and a-bindin' of 'im up
--like you did last time."

"No," said I; "no."  And stepping into the chaise, I muffled that
disfigured face in my neckcloth; having done which, I closed the
door.

"What now?" inquired the Postilion.

"Now you can drive us to Cranbrook."

"What--be you a-comin' too?"

"Yes," I nodded; "yes, I am coming too."

"Lord love me!" he exclaimed, and a moment later I heard him
chirruping to his horses; the whip cracked and the chaise lurched
forward.  Whether he had some wild notion that I might attempt to
descend and make my escape before we reached our destination, I
cannot say, but he drove at a furious pace, taking corners at
reckless speed, so that the chaise lurched and swayed most
violently, and, more than once, I was compelled to hold that
awful figure down upon the seat before me, lest it should slide
to the floor.  On we sped, past hedge and tree, by field and
lonely wood.  And ever in my ears was the whir of the wheels, the
drumming of hoofs, and the crack of the whip; and ever the
flitting moonbeams danced across that muffled face until it
seemed that the features writhed and gibed at me, beneath the
folds of the neckerchief.

And so at last came lights and houses, and the sound of excited
voices as we pulled up before the Posting House at Cranbrook.
Looking from the window, I saw a ring of faces with eyes that
gleamed in the light of the lanthorns, and every eye was fixed on
me, and every foot gave back a step as I descended from the
chaise.  And, while I stood there, the Postilion came with two
white-faced ostlers, who, between them, bore a heavy burden
through the crowd, stumbling awkwardly as they went; and, as
men saw that which they carried, there came a low, deep sound
--wordless, inarticulate, yet full of menace.  But, above this
murmur rose a voice, and I saw the Postilion push his way to the
steps of the inn, and turn there, with hands clenched and raised
above his head.

"My master--Sir Maurice Vibart--is killed--shot to death
--murdered down there in the 'aunted 'Oller!" he cried, "and,
if you axes me who done it, I says to you--'e did--so 'elp me
God!" and speaking, he raised his whip and pointed at me.

Once more there rose that inarticulate sound of menace, and once
more all eyes were fixed upon me.

"'E were a fine gen'man!" said a voice.

"Ah! so gay an' light-'earted!" said another.

"Ay, ay--a generous, open open-'anded gen'man!" said a third.

And every moment the murmur swelled, and grew more threatening;
fists were clenched, and sticks flourished, so that, instinctively,
I set my back against the chaise, for it seemed they lacked only
some one to take the initiative ere they fell upon me.

The Postilion saw this too, for, with a shout, he sprang forward,
his whip upraised.  But, as he did so; the crowd was burst
asunder, he was caught by a mighty arm, and Black George stood
beside me, his eyes glowing, his fists clenched, and his hair and
beard bristling.

"Stand back, you chaps," he growled, "stand back or I'll 'urt
some on ye; be ye all a lot o' dogs to set on an' worry one as is
all alone?"  And then, turning to me, "What be the matter wi' the
fools, Peter?"

"Matter?" cried the Postilion; "murder be the matter--my master
be murdered--shot to death--an' there stands the man as done it!"

"Murder?" cried George, in an altered voice; "murder?"  Now, as
he spoke, the crowd parted, and four ostlers appeared, bearing a
hurdle between them, and on the hurdle lay a figure, an elegant
figure whose head and face were still muffled in my neckerchief.
I saw George start, and, like a flash, his glance came round to
my bare throat, and dismay was in his eyes.

"Peter?" he murmured; then he laughed suddenly and clapped his
hand down upon my shoulder.  "Look 'ee, you chaps," he cried,
facing the crowd, "this is my friend Peter--an honest man an' no
murderer, as 'e will tell ye 'isself--this is my friend as I'd go
bail for wi' my life to be a true man; speak up, Peter, an' tell
'em as you 'm an honest man an' no murderer."  But I shook my
head.

"Oh, Peter!" he whispered, "speak! speak!"

"Not here, George," I answered; "it would be of no avail--besides,
I can say nothing to clear myself."

"Nothin', Peter?"

"Nothing, George.  This man was shot and killed in the Hollow--I
found him lying dead--I found the empty pistol, and the
Postilion, yonder, found me standing over the body.  That is all
I have to tell."

"Peter," said he, speaking hurriedly beneath his breath,

"Oh, Peter!--let's run for it--'twould be main easy for the likes
o' you an' me--"

"No, George," I answered; "it would be worse than useless.  But
one thing I do ask of you--you who know me so much better than
most--and it is, that you will bid me good-by, and--take my hand
once more, George here before all these eyes that look upon me as
a murderer, and--"

Before I had finished he had my hand in both of his--nay, had
thrown one great arm protectingly about me.

"Why, Peter--" he began, in a strangely cracked voice, "oh! man
as I love!--never think as I'd believe their lies, an'--Peter
--such fighters as you an' me! a match for double their number
--let's make a bolt for it--ecod!  I want to hit somebody.
Never doubt me, Peter--your friend--an' they'd go over like
skittles like skittles, Peter--"

The crowd, which had swelled momentarily, surged, opened, and a
man on horseback pushed his way towards me, a man in some
disorder of dress, as though he had clothed himself in a hurry.

Rough hands were now laid upon me; I saw George's fist raised
threateningly, but caught it in my grasp.

"Good-by," said I, "good-by, George, and don't look so downcast,
man."  But we were forced apart, and I was pushed and pulled and
hustled away, through a crowd of faces whose eyes damned me
wherever I looked, along panelled passage ways, and into a long,
dim room, where sat the gentleman I had seen on the horse, busily
tying his cravat, to whom I delivered up the pistol, and answered
divers questions as well as I might, and by whom, after much
jotting of notes and memoranda, I was delivered over to four
burly fellows, who, with deep gravity, and a grip much tighter
than was necessary, once more led me out into the moonlit street,
where were people who pressed forward to stare into my face, and
people who leaned out of windows to stare down upon my head, and
many more who followed at my heels.

And thus, in much estate, I ascended a flight of worn stone steps
into the churchyard, and so--by a way of tombs and graves--came
at last to the great square church-tower, into which I was
incontinently thrust, and there very securely locked up.




CHAPTER XLIV

THE BOW STREET RUNNERS


It was toward evening of the next day that the door of my prison
was opened, and two men entered.  The first was a tall,
cadaverous-looking individual of a melancholy cast of feature,
who, despite the season, was wrapped in a long frieze coat
reaching almost to his heels, from the pocket of which projected
a short staff, or truncheon.  He came forward with his hands in
his pockets, and his bony chin on his breast, looking at me under
the brim of a somewhat weather-beaten hat--that is to say, he
looked at my feet and my hands and my throat and my chin, but
never seemed to get any higher.

His companion, on the contrary, bustled forward, and, tapping me
familiarly on the shoulder, looked me over with a bright,
appraising eye.

"S'elp me, Jeremy!" said he, addressing his saturnine friend,
"s'elp me, if I ever see a pore misfort'nate cove more to my mind
an' fancy--nice an' tall an' straight-legged--twelve stone if a
pound--a five-foot drop now--or say five foot six, an' 'e'll go
off as sweet as a bird; ah! you'll never feel it, my covey--not a
twinge; a leetle tightish round the windpipe, p'r'aps--but, Lord,
it's soon over.  You're lookin' a bit pale round the gills, young
cove, but, Lord! that's only nat'ral too."  Here he produced from
the depths of a capacious pocket something that glittered beneath
his agile fingers.  "And 'ow might be your general 'ealth, young
cove?" he went on affably, "bobbish, I 'ope--fair an' bobbish?"
As he spoke, with a sudden, dexterous motion, he had snapped
something upon my wrists, so quickly that, at the contact of the
cold steel, I started, and as I did so, something jingled
faintly.

"There!" he exclaimed, clapping me on the shoulder again, but
at the same time casting a sharp glance at my shackled wrists
--"there--now we're all 'appy an' comfortable!  I see as you're a
cove as takes things nice an' quiet, an'--so long as you do--I'm
your friend--Bob's my name, an' bobbish is my natur'.  Lord!--the
way I've seen misfort'nate coves take on at sight o' them
'bracelets' is something out-rageous!  But you--why, you're a
different kidney--you're my kind, you are what do you say,
Jeremy?"

"Don't like 'is eye!" growled that individual.

"Don't mind Jeremy," winked the other; "it's just 'is
per-werseness.  Lord! 'e is the per-wersest codger you ever see!
Why, 'e finds fault wi' the Pope o' Rome, jest because 'e's in
the 'abit o' lettin' coves kiss 'is toe--I've 'eard Jeremy work
'isself up over the Pope an' a pint o' porter, till you'd 'ave
thought--"

"Ain't we never a-goin' to start?" inquired Jeremy, staring out
of the window, with his back to us.

"And where," said I, "where might you be taking me?"

"Why, since you ax, my covey, we 'm a-takin' you where you'll be
took good care on, where you'll feed well, and 'ave justice done
on you--trust us for that.  Though, to be sure, I'm sorry to take
you from such proper quarters as these 'ere--nice and airy--eh,
Jeremy?"

"Ah!--an' wi' a fine view o' the graves!" growled Jeremy, leading
the way out.

In the street stood a chaise and four, surrounded by a pushing,
jostling throng of men, women, and children, who, catching sight
of me between the Bow Street Runners, forgot to push and jostle,
and stared at me with every eye and tooth they possessed, until I
was hidden in the chaise.

"Right away!" growled Jeremy, shutting the door with a bang.

"Whoa!" roared a voice, and a great, shaggy golden head was
thrust in at the window, and a hand reached down and grasped
mine.

"A pipe an' 'baccy, Peter--from me; a flask o' rum--Simon's best,
from Simon; an' chicken sang-widges, from my Prue."  This as he
passed in each article through the window.  "An' I were to say,
Peter, as we are all wi' you--ever an' ever, an' I were likewise
to tell 'ee as 'ow Prue'll pray for 'ee oftener than before, an'
--ecod!" he broke off, the tears running down his face, "there
were a lot more, but I've forgot it all, only, Peter, me an'
Simon be goin' to get a lawyer chap for 'ee, an'--oh, man, Peter,
say the word, an' I'll have 'ee out o' this in a twinklin' an'
we'll run for it--"

But, even as I shook my head, the postboy's whip cracked, and the
horses plunged forward.

"Good-by, George!" I cried, "good-by, dear fellow!" and the last
I saw of him was as he stood rubbing his tears away with one fist
and shaking the other after the chaise.




CHAPTER XLV

WHICH CONCERNS ITSELF, AMONG OTHER MATTERS, WITH THE BOOTS OF THE
SATURNINE JEREMY


"A bottle o' rum!" said the man Bob, and taking it up, very
abstracted of eye, he removed the cork, sniffed at it, tasted it,
took a gulp, and handed it over to his companion, who also looked
at, sniffed at, and tasted it.  "And what d'ye make o' that,
Jeremy?"

"Tasted better afore now!" growled Jeremy, and immediately took
another pull.

"Sang-widges, too!" pursued the man Bob, in a ruminating tone,
"an' I always was partial to chicken!" and, forthwith, opening
the dainty parcel, he helped himself, and his companion also.

"What d'ye make o' them, Jeremy?" he inquired, munching.

"I've eat wuss!" rumbled Jeremy, also munching.

"Young cove, they does you credit," said the man Bob, nodding to
me with great urbanity, "great credit--there ain't many
misfort'nates as can per-jooce such sang-widges as them, though,
to be sure, they eats uncommon quick 'old 'ard there, Jeremy--"
But, indeed, the sandwiches were already only a memory, wherefore
his brow grew black, and he glared at the still munching Jeremy,
who met his looks with his usual impenetrable gloom.

"A pipe and 'bacca!" mused the man Bob, after we had ridden some
while in silence, and, with the same serene unconsciousness of
manner, he took the pipe, filled it, lighted it, and puffed with
an air of dreamy content.

"Jeremy is a good-ish sort," he began, with a complacent flourish
of the pipe, "a good-ish sort, but cross-grained--Lord! young
cove, 'is cross-grainedness is ekalled only by 'is per-werseness,
and 'cause why?--'cause 'e don't smoke--(go easy wi' the rum,
Jeremy!) there's nothin' like a pipe o' 'bacca to soothe such
things away (I got my eye on ye, Jeremy!)--no, there's nothin'
like a pipe o' 'bacca.  Look at me--I were the per-wersest infant
that ever was, till I took to smokin', and to-day, whatever I am,
I ain't per-werse, nor yet cross-grained, and many a misfort'nate
cove, as is now no more--'as wept over me at partin'--"

"They generally always do!" growled Jeremy, uncorking the
rum-bottle with his teeth.

"No, Jerry, no," returned the other, blowing out a cloud of
smoke; "misfort'nates ain't all the same--(arter you wi' that
bottle!)--you 'ave Cryers, and Laughers, and Pray-ers, and Silent
Ones, and the silent coves is the dangerousest--(arter you wi'
the bottle, Jeremy!)--now you, my covey," he went on, tapping my
hand gently with his pipe-stem, "you ain't exactly talkative, in
fact--not wishin' no offense, I might say as you was inclined to
be one o' the Silent Ones.  Not as I 'olds that again' you--far
from it, only you reminds me of a young cove as 'ad the misfort'n
to get 'isself took for forgery, and who--arter me a-talkin' and
a-chattin' to 'im in my pleasant way went and managed to commit
sooicide--under my very nose--which were 'ardly nice, or even
respectable, considerin'--(arter you wi' the bottle, Jeremy!)"

Jeremy growled, held up the bottle to the failing light of
evening, measured its contents with his thumb, and extended it
unwillingly towards his comrade's ready hand; but it never got
there, for, at that instant, the chaise lurched violently--there
was a cry, a splintering of glass, a crash, and I was lying, half
stunned, in a ditch, listening to the chorus of oaths and cries
that rose from the cloud of dust where the frightened horses
reared and plunged.

How long I remained thus I cannot say, but, all at once, I found
myself upon my feet, running down the road, for, hazy though my
mind yet was, I could think only of escape, of liberty, and
freedom--at any price--at any cost.  So I ran on down the road,
somewhat unsteadily as yet, because my fall had been a heavy one,
and my brain still reeled.  I heard a shout behind me--the sharp
crack of a pistol, and a bullet sang over my head; and then I
knew they were after me, for I could hear the patter of their
feet upon the hard road.

Now, as I ran, my brain cleared, but this only served me to
appreciate the difficulty of eluding men so seasoned and hardy as
my pursuers; moreover, the handcuffs galled my wrists, and the
short connecting chain hampered my movements considerably, and I
saw that, upon this straight level, I must soon be run down, or
shot from behind.

Glancing back, I beheld them some hundred yards, or so, away,
elbows in, heads up, running with that long, free stride that
speaks of endurance.  I increased the pace, the ground flew
beneath me, but, when I glanced again, though the man Bob had
dropped back, the saturnine Jeremy ran on, no nearer, but no
farther than before.

Now, as I went, I presently espied that for which I had looked
--a gate set in the midst of the hedge, but it was closed, and
never did a gate, before or since, appear quite so high and
insurmountable; but, with the desperation of despair, I turned,
ran at it, and sprang, swinging my arms above my head as I did
so.  My foot grazed the top bar--down I came, slipped, stumbled,
regained my balance, and ran on over the springy turf.  I heard a
crash behind me, an oath, a second pistol barked, and immediately
it seemed that a hot iron seared my forearm, and glancing down, I
saw the skin cut and bleeding, but, finding it no worse, breathed
a sigh of thankfulness, and ran on.

By that leap I had probably gained some twenty yards; I would
nurse my strength, therefore.  If I could once gain the woods!
How far off were they?--half-a-mile, a mile?--well, I could run
that easily, thanks to my hardy life.  Stay! what was that sound
behind me--the fall of flying feet, or the throbbing of my own
heart?  I turned my head; the man Jeremy was within twelve yards
of me--lean and spare, his head thrust forward, he ran with the
long, easy stride of a greyhound.

So it was to be a question of endurance?  Well, I had caught my
second wind by now.  I set my teeth, and, clenching my fists,
lengthened my stride.

And now, indeed, the real struggle began.  My pursuer had long
ago abandoned his coat, but his boots were heavier and clumsier
than those I wore; but then, again, my confining shackles seemed
to contract my chest; and the handcuffs galled my wrists cruelly.

On I went, scattering flocks of scampering sheep, past meditative
cows who started up, puffing out snorts of perfume; scrambling
through hedges, over gate and stile and ditch, with eyes upon the
distant woods full of the purple gloom of evening, and, in my
ears, the muffled thud! thud! thud! thud! of the pursuit,
sometimes seeming much nearer, and sometimes much farther off,
but always the same rhythmic, remorseless thud! thud! thud! thud!

On, and ever on, climbing steep uplands, plunging down
precipitous slopes, past brawling brooks and silent pools all red
and gold with sunset, past oak and ash and thorn on and on, with
ever those thudding footfalls close behind.  And, as we ran, it
seemed to me that our feet beat out a kind of cadence--his heavy
shoes, and my lighter ones.

Thud! thud!--pad! pad!--thud! thud!--pad! pad! until they would
suddenly become confused, and mingle with each other.

One moment it seemed that I almost loved the fellow, and the next
that I bitterly hated him.  Whether I had gained or not, I could
not tell; to look back was to lose ground.

The woods were close now, so close that I fancied I heard the
voice of their myriad leaves calling to me--encouraging me.  But
my breath was panting thick and short, my stride was less sure,
my wrists were raw and bleeding, and the ceaseless jingle of my
chain maddened me.

Thud!--thud!--untiring, persistent--thud!--thud!--the pulse at my
temples throbbed in time with it, my breath panted to it.  And
surely it was nearer, more distinct--yes, he had gained on me in
the last half-mile--but how much?  I cast a look over my
shoulder; it was but a glance, yet I saw that he had lessened the
distance between us by half.  His face shone with sweat--his
mouth was a line--his nostrils broad and expanded--his eyes
staring and shot with blood, but he ran on with the same long
easy stride that was slowly but surely wearing me down.

We were descending a long, grassy slope, and I stumbled, more
than once, and rolled in my course, but on came those remorseless
footfalls--thud!--thud!--thud!--thud!--strong and sure as ever.
He was nearing me fast--he was close upon me--closer--within
reach of me.  I could hear his whistling breaths, and then, all
at once, I was down on hands and knees; he tried to avoid me
--failed, and, shooting high over me, thudded down upon the grass.

For a moment he lay still, then, with a groan, he rolled over,
and propping himself on his arm, thrust a hand into his bosom;
but I hurled myself upon him, and, after a brief struggle,
twisted the pistol from his grasp, whereupon he groaned again.

"Hurt?" I panted.

"Arm broke, I think," he growled, and forthwith burst out into a
torrent of curses.

"Does it--hurt--so much?" I panted.

"Ah! but it--ain't that," he panted back; "it's me--a-lettin' of
you--work off--a mouldy--old trick on me--like--that there--"

"It was my only chance," said I, sitting down beside him to
regain my wind.

"To think," he growled, "o' me bein' took in by a--"

"But you are a great runner!" said I.

"A great fool, you mean, to be took in by a--"

"You have a long walk back, and your arm will be painful--"

"And serve me right for bein' took in by--"

"If you will lend me your neckerchief, I think I can make your
arm more comfortable," said I.  He ceased cursing to stare at me,
slowly and awkwardly unwound the article in question, and passed
it to me.  Thereupon, having located the fracture, I contrived a
rough splint with a piece of wood lying near; which done, he
thanked me, in a burst of profanity, and rose.

"I've see worse coves nor you!" said he, "and one good turn
desarvin' another--lie snug all day, and travel by night, and
keep to the byroads--this ain't no common case, there'll be a
thousand pound on your 'ead afore the week's out--so look spry,
my cove!" saying which, he nodded, turned upon his heel, and
strode away, cursing to himself.

Now, presently, as I went, I heard the merry ring and clink of
hammer and anvil, and, guided by the sound, came to a tumbledown
smithy where was a man busily at work, with a shock-headed boy at
the bellows.  At sight of me, the smith set down his hammer and
stared openmouthed, as did also the shock-headed boy.

"How long would it take you to file off these shackles?" I
inquired, holding out my hands.

"To--to file 'em off?"

"Yes."

"Why, that--that depends--"

"Then do it--as soon as you can."  Upon this, the man turned his
back to me and began rummaging among his tools, with his head
very near that of the shock-headed boy, until, having found a
file suitable to the purpose, he set to work upon my handcuffs.
But he progressed so slowly, for one reason and another, that I
began to grow impatient; moreover, noticing that the shock-headed
boy had disappeared, I bade him desist.

"A cold chisel and hammer will be quickest," said I; "come, cut
me off this chain--here, close up to the rivets."  And, when he
had done this, I took his file, and thrusting it beneath my coat,
set off, running my hardest, leaving him to stare after me, with
his eyes and mouth wider than ever.

The sun was down when I reached the woods, and here, in the kind
shadows, I stayed awhile to rest, and rid myself of my handcuffs;
but, when I felt for the file to do so--it was gone.




CHAPTER XLVI

HOW I CAME TO LONDON


Justly to narrate all that befell me during my flight and journey
to London, would fill many pages, and therefore, as this book of
mine is already of a magnitude far beyond my first expectations,
I shall hurry on to the end of my story.

Acting upon the advice of the saturnine Jeremy, I lay hidden by
day, and traveled by night, avoiding the highway.  But in so
doing I became so often involved in the maze of cross-roads,
bylanes, cow-paths, and cart-tracks, that twice the dawn found me
as completely lost as though I had been set down in the midst of
the Sahara.  I thus wasted much time, and wandered many miles out
of my way; wherefore, to put an end to these futile ramblings, I
set my face westward, hoping to strike the highroad somewhere
between Tonbridge and Sevenoaks; determined rather to run the
extra chance of capture than follow haphazard these tortuous and
interminable byways.

It was, then, upon the third night since my escape that, faint
and spent with hunger, I saw before me the welcome sight of a
finger-post, and hurrying forward, eager to learn my whereabouts,
came full upon a man who sat beneath the finger-post, with a
hunch of bread and meat upon his knee, which he was eating by
means of a clasp-knife.

Now I had tasted nothing save two apples all day, and but little
the day before--thus, at sight of this appetizing food, my hunger
grew, and increased to a violent desire before which prudence
vanished and caution flew away.  Therefore I approached the man,
with my eyes upon his bread and meat.

But, as I drew nearer, my attention was attracted by something
white that was nailed up against the finger-post, and I stopped
dead, with my eyes riveted by a word printed in great black
capitals, and stood oblivious alike of the man who had stopped
eating to stare at me, and the bread and meat that he had set
down upon the grass; for what I saw was this:

                        G.  R.
                        MURDER
                   L500------REWARD

     WHEREAS, PETER SMITH, blacksmith, late of
     SISSINGHURST, in the county of Kent,
     suspected of the crime of WILFUL MURDER,
     did upon the Tenth of August last, make his
     escape from his gaolers, upon the Tonbridge
     road, somewhere between SISSINGHURST and
     PEMBRY; the above REWARD, namely, FIVE HUNDRED
     POUNDS, will be paid to such person, or persons
     who shall give such INFORMATION as shall lead
     to the ARREST, and APPREHENSION of the aforesaid
     PETER SMITH.  In the furtherance of which, is
     hereunto added a just and close description of
     the same--VIZ.--He is six foot tall, and a
     sizable ROGUE.  His hair, black, his eyes dark
     and piercing.  Clad, when last seen, in a worn
     velveteen jacket, kneebreeches buckled at the
     knees, gray worsted stockings, and patched shoes.
     The coat TORN at the RIGHT shoulder.  Upon his
     wrists, a pair of steel HANDCUFFS.  Last seen
     in the vicinity of PEMBRY.

While I yet stared at this, I was conscious that the man had
risen, and now stood at my elbow; also, that in one hand his
carried a short, heavy stick.  He stood very still, and with bent
head, apparently absorbed in the printed words before him, but
more than once I saw his eyes gleam in the shadow of his hat-brim,
as they turned to scan me furtively up and down.  Yet he did not
speak or move, and there was something threatening, I thought, in
his immobility.  Wherefore I, in turn, watched him narrowly from
the corner of my eye, and thus it chanced that our glances met.

"You seem thoughtful?" said I.

"Ah!--I be that."

"And what might you be thinking?"

"Why--since you ax me, I was thinkin' as your eye was mighty
sharp and piercin'."

"Ah!" said I; "and what more?"

"That your coat was tore at the shoulder."

"So it is," I nodded; "well?"

"You likewise wears buckled breeches, and gray worsted
stockings."

"You are a very observant man!" said I.

"Though, to be sure," said he, shaking his head, "I don't see no
'andcuffs."

"That is because they are hidden under my sleeves."

"A-h-h!" said he, and I saw the stick quiver in his grip.

"As I said before, you are a very observant man!" said I, watching
the stick.

"Well, I've got eyes, and can see as much as most folk," he
retorted, and here the stick quivered again.

"Yes," I nodded; "you also possess legs, and can probably walk
fast?"

"Ah!--and run, too, if need be," he added significantly.

"Then suppose you start."

"Start where?"

"Anywhere, so long as you do start."

"Not wi'out you, my buck!  I've took a powerful fancy to you, and
that there five hundred pounds"--here his left hand shot out and
grasped my collar--"so s'posin' you come along o' me.  And no
tricks, mind--no tricks, or--ah!--would ye?"  The heavy stick
whirled up, but, quick as he, I had caught his wrist, and now
presented my pistol full in his face.

"Drop that stick!" said I, pressing the muzzle of the weapon
lightly against his forehead as I spoke.  At the touch of the
cold steel his body suddenly stiffened and grew rigid, his eyes
opened in a horrified stare, and the stick clattered down on the
road.

"Talking of fancies," I pursued, "I have a great mind to that
smock-frock of yours, so take it off, and quick about it."  In a
fever of haste he tore off the garment in question, and, he
thrusting it eagerly upon me, I folded it over my arm.

"Now," said I, "since you say you can run, supposing you show me
what you can do.  This is a good straight lane--off with you and
do your best, and no turning or stopping, mind, for the moon is
very bright, and I am a pretty good shot."  Hardly waiting to
hear me out, the fellow set off up the lane, running like the
wind; whereupon, I (waiting only to snatch up his forgotten bread
and meat) took to my heels--down the lane, so that, when I
presently stopped to don the smock-frock, its late possessor had
vanished as though he had never been.

I hurried on, nevertheless, eating greedily as I went, and, after
some while, left the narrow lane behind, and came out on the
broad highway that stretched like a great, white riband, unrolled
beneath the moon.  And here was another finger-post with the
words

"To Sevenoaks, Tonbridge, and the Wells.--To Bromley and London."

And here, also, was another placard, headed by that awful word:
MURDER--which seemed to leap out at me from the rest.  And, with
that word, there rushed over me the memory of Charmian as I had
seen her stand--white-lipped, haggard of eye, and--with one hand
hidden in the folds of her gown.

So I turned and strove to flee from this hideous word, and, as I
went, I clenched my fists and cried within myself: "I love her
--love her--no doubt can come between us more--I love her--love
her--love her!"  Thus I hurried on along the great highroad, but,
wherever I looked, I saw this most hateful word; it shone out
palely from the shadows; it was scored into the dust at my feet;
even across the splendor of the moon, in jagged characters, I
seemed to read that awful word: MURDER.

And the soft night-wind woke voices to whisper it as I passed;
the somber trees and gloomy hedgerows were full of it; I heard it
in the echo of my step--MURDER! MURDER!  It was always there,
whether I walked or ran, in rough and stony places, in the deep,
soft dust, in the dewy, tender grass--it was always there,
whispering at my heels, and refusing to be silenced.

I had gone on, in this way, for an hour or more, avoiding the
middle of the road, because of the brilliance of the moon, when I
overtook something that crawled in the gloom of the hedge, and
approaching, pistol in hand, saw that it was a man.

He was creeping forward slowly and painfully on his hands and
knees, but, all at once, sank down on his face in the grass, only
to rise, groaning, and creep on once more; and, as he went, I
heard him praying:

"Lord, give me strength--O Lord, give me strength.  Angela!
Angela! It is so far--so far--" And groaning, he sank down again,
upon his face.

"You are ill!" said I, bending over him.

"I must reach Deptford--she's buried at Deptford, and I shall
die to-night--O Lord, give me strength!" he panted.

"Deptford is miles away," said I.

Now, as I spoke, he lifted himself upon his hands and stared up
at me.  I saw a haggard, hairy face, very thin and sunken, but a
fire burned in the eyes, and the eyes seemed, somehow, familiar.

"You!" he cried, and spat up in the air towards me; "devil!" he
cried, "Devil Vibart."  I recoiled instinctively before the man's
sudden, wild ferocity, but, propping himself against the bank, he
shook his hand at me, and laughed.

"Devil!" he repeated; "shade!--ghost of a devil!--have you come
back to see me die?"

"Who are you?" I cried, bending to look into the pale, emaciated
face; "who are you?"

"A shadow," he answered, passing a shaking hand up over his face
and brow, "a ghost--a phantom--as you are; but my name was
Strickland once, as yours was Devil Vibart.  I am changed of
late--you said so in the Hollow, and--laughed.  You don't laugh
now, Devil Vibart, you remember poor John Strickland now."

"You are the Outside Passenger!" I exclaimed, "the madman who
followed and shot at me in a wood--"

"Followed?  Yes, I was a shadow that was always behind you
--following and following you, Satan Vibart, tracking and
tracking you to hell and damnation.  And you fled here, and you
fled there, but I was always behind you; you hid from me among
lowly folk, but you could not escape the shadow.  Many times I
would have killed you--but she was between--the Woman.  I came
once to your cottage; it was night, and the door opened beneath
my hand--but your time was not then.  But--ha!--I met you among
trees, as I did once before, and I told you my name--as I did
once before, and I spoke of her--of Angela, and cried her name
--and shot you--just here, above the brow; and so you died,
Devil Vibart, as soon I must, for my mission is accomplished--"

"It was you!" I cried, kneeling beside him," it was your hand
that shot Sir Maurice Vibart?"

"Yes," he answered, his voice growing very gentle as he went on,
"for Angela's sake--my dead wife," and, fumbling in his pocket,
he drew out a woman's small, lace-edged handkerchief, and I saw
that it was thickened and black with blood.  "This was hers," be
continued, "in her hand, the night she died--I had meant to lay
it on her grave--the blood of atonement--but now--"

A sudden crash in the hedge above; a figure silhouetted against
the sky; a shadowy arm, that, falling, struck the moon out of
heaven, and, in the darkness, I was down upon my knees, and
fingers were upon my throat.

"Oh, Darby!" cried a voice, "I've got him--this way--quick--oh,
Darb--"  My fist drove into his ribs; I struggled up under a
rain of blows, and we struck and swayed and staggered and struck
--trampling the groaning wretch who lay dying in the ditch.  And
before me was the pale oval of a face, and I smote it twice with
my pistol-butt, and it was gone, and I--was running along the
road.

"Charmian spoke truth!  O God, I thank thee!"

I burst through a hedge, running on, and on--careless alike of
being seen, of capture or escape, of prison or freedom, for in my
heart was a great joy.

I was conscious of shouts and cries, but I heeded them no more,
listening only to the song of happiness my heart was singing:

"Charmian spoke truth, her hands are clean.  O God, I thank
thee!"

And, as I went, I presently espied a caravan, and before it a
fire of sticks, above which a man was bending, who, raising his
head, stared at me as I approached.  He was a strange-looking
man, who glared at me with one eye and leered jocosely with the
other; and, being spent and short of breath, I stopped, and
wiping the sweat from my eyes I saw that it was blood.

"How--is Lewis?" I panted.

"What," exclaimed the man, drawing nearer, "is it you?--James!
but you're a picter, you are--hallo!" he stopped, as his glance
encountered the steel that glittered upon my wrist; while upon
the silence the shouts swelled, drawing near and nearer.

"So--the Runners is arter you, are they, young feller?"

"Yes," said I; "yes.  You have only to cry out, and they will
take me, for I can fight no more, nor run any farther; this knock
on the head has made me very dizzy."

"Then--take a pull at this 'ere," said he, and thrust a flat
bottle into my hand.  The fiery spirit burned my throat, but
almost immediately my strength and courage revived.

"Better?"

"Much better," I answered, returning the bottle, "and I thank
you--"

"Don't go for to thank _me_, young feller," said he, driving the
cork into the bottle with a blow of his fist, "you thank that
young feller as once done as much for me--at a fair.  An' now
--cutaway--run!--the 'edge is good and dark, up yonder--lay low
a bit, and leave these damned Runners to me."  I obeyed without
more ado, and, as I ran up the lane, I heard him shouting and
swearing as though engaged in a desperate encounter; and, turning
in the shadow of the hedge, I saw him met by two men, with whom,
still shouting and gesticulating excitedly, he set off, running
--down the lane.

And so I, once more, turned my face London-wards.

The blood still flowed from the cut in my head, getting often
into my eyes, yet I made good progress notwithstanding.  But,
little by little, the effect of the spirits wore off, a
drowsiness stole over me, my limbs felt numbed and heavy.  And
with this came strange fancies and a dread of the dark.
Sometimes it seemed that odd lights danced before my eyes, like
marsh-fires, and strange, voices gabbled in my ears, furiously
unintelligible, with laughter in a high-pitched key; sometimes I
cast myself down in the dewy grass, only to start up again,
trembling, and run on till I was breathless; but ever I struggled
forward, despite the throbbing of my broken head, and the gnawing
hunger that consumed me.

After a while, a mist came on, a mist that formed itself into
deep valleys, or rose in jagged spires and pinnacles, but
constantly changing; a mist that moved and writhed within itself.
And in this mist were forms, nebulous and indistinct, multitudes
that moved in time with me, and the voices seemed louder than
before, and the laughter much shriller, while repeated over and
over again, I caught that awful word: MURDER, MURDER.

Chief among this host walked one whose head and face were muffled
from my sight, but who watched me, I knew, through the folds,
with eyes that stared fixed and wide.

But now, indeed, the mist seemed to have got into my brain, and
all things were hazy, and my memory of them is dim.  Yet I recall
passing Bromley village, and slinking furtively through the
shadows of the deserted High Street, but thereafter all is blank
save a memory of pain and toil and deadly fatigue.

I was stumbling up steps--the steps of a terrace; a great house
lay before me, with lighted windows here and there, but these I
feared, and so came creeping to one that I knew well, and whose
dark panes glittered palely under the dying moon.  And now I took
out my clasp-knife, and, fumbling blindly, put back the catch (as
I had often done as a boy), and so, the window opening, I
clambered into the dimness beyond.

Now as I stumbled forward my hand touched something, a long, dark
object that was covered with a cloth, and, hardly knowing what I
did, I drew back this cloth and looked down at that which it had
covered, and sank down upon my knees, groaning.  For there,
staring up at me, cold, contemptuous, and set like marble, was
the smiling, dead face of my cousin Maurice.

As I knelt there, I was conscious that the door had opened, that
some one approached, bearing a light, but I did not move or heed.

"Peter?--good God in heaven!--is it Peter?" I looked up and into
the dilated eyes of Sir Richard.  "Is it really Peter?" he
whispered.

"Yes, sir--dying, I think."

"No, no--Peter--dear boy," he stammered.  "You didn't know--you
hadn't heard--poor Maurice--murdered--fellow--name of Smith--!"

"Yes, Sir Richard, I know more about it than most.  You see, I am
Peter Smith."  Sir Richard fell back from me, and I saw the
candle swaying in his grasp.

"You?" he whispered, "you?  Oh, Peter!--oh, my boy!"

"But I am innocent--innocent--you believe me--you who were my
earliest friend--my good, kind friend--you believe me?" and I
stretched out my hands appealingly, but, as I did so, the light
fell gleaming upon my shameful wristlets; and, even as we gazed
into each other's eyes, mute and breathless, came the sound of
steps and hushed voices.  Sir Richard sprang forward, and,
catching me in a powerful hand, half led, half dragged me behind
a tall leather screen beside the hearth, and thrusting me into a
chair, turned and hurried to meet the intruders.

They were three, as I soon discovered by their voices, one of
which I thought I recognized.

"It's a devilish shame!" the first was saying; "not a soul here
for the funeral but our four selves--I say it's a shame--a
burning shame!"

"That, sir, depends entirely on the point of view," answered the
second, a somewhat aggressive voice, and this it was I seemed to
recognize.

"Point of view, sir?  Where, I should like to know, are all those
smiling nonentities--those fawning sycophants who were once so
proud of his patronage, who openly modelled themselves upon him,
whose highest ambition was to be called a friend of the famous
'Buck' Vibart where are they now?"

"Doing the same by the present favorite, as is the nature of
their kind," responded the third; "poor Maurice is already
forgotten."

"The Prince," said the harsh voice, "the Prince would never have
forgiven him for crossing him in the affair of the Lady Sophia
Sefton; the day he ran off with her he was as surely dead--in a
social sense--as he is now in every sense."

Here the mist settled down upon my brain once more, and I heard
nothing but a confused murmur of voices, and it seemed to me that
I was back on the road again, hemmed in by those gibbering
phantoms that spoke so much, and yet said but one word: "Murder."

"Quick--a candle here--a candle--bring a light--" There came a
glare before my smarting eyes, and I struggled up to my feet.

"Why--I have seen this fellow's face somewhere--ah!--yes, at an
inn--a hang-dog rogue--I threatened to pull his nose, I remember,
and--by Heaven!--handcuffs!  He has been roughly handled, too!
Gentlemen, I'll lay my life the murderer is found--though how he
should come here of all places--extraordinary.  Sir Richard--you
and I, as magistrates--duty--"  But the mist was very thick, and
the voices grew confused again; only I knew that hands were upon
me, that I was led into another room, where were lights that
glittered upon the silver, the decanters and glasses of a supper
table.

"Yes," I was saying, slowly and heavily; "yes, I am Peter Smith
--a blacksmith--who escaped from his gaolers on the Tonbridge
Road--but I am innocent--before God--I am innocent.  And now--do
with me as you will--for I am--very weary--"

Sir Richard's arm was about me, and his voice sounded in my ears,
but as though a great way off:

"Sirs," said he, "this is my friend--Sir Peter Vibart."  There
was a moment's pause, then--a chair fell with a crash, and there
rose a confusion of excited voices which grew suddenly silent,
for the door had opened, and on the threshold stood a woman, tall
and proud and richly dressed, from the little dusty boot that
peeped beneath her habit to the wide-sweeping hat-brim that
shaded the high beauty of her face.  And I would have gone to her
but that my strength failed me.

"Charmian!"

She started, and, turning, uttered a cry, and ran to me.

"Charmian," said I; "oh, Charmian!" And so, with her tender arms
about me, and her kisses on my lips, the mist settled down upon
me, thicker and darker than ever.




CHAPTER XLVII

IN WHICH THIS HISTORY IS ENDED


A bright room, luxuriously appointed; a great wide bed with
carved posts and embroidered canopy; between the curtained
windows, a tall oak press with grotesque heads carved thereon,
heads that leered and gaped and scowled at me.  But the bed and
the room and the oak press were all familiar, and the grotesque
heads had leered and gaped and frowned at me before, and haunted
my boyish dreams many and many a night.

And now I lay between sleeping and waking, staring dreamily at
all these things, till roused by a voice near by, and starting
up, broad awake, beheld Sir Richard.

"Deuce take you, Peter!" he exclaimed; "I say--the devil fly away
with you, my boy!--curse me!--a nice pickle you've made of
yourself, with your infernal Revolutionary notions--your digging
and blacksmithing, your walking-tours--"

"Where is she, Sir Richard?" I broke in; "pray, where is she?"

"She?" he returned, scratching his chin with the corner of a
letter he held; "she?"

"She whom I saw last night--"

"You were asleep last night, and the night before."

"Asleep?--then how long have I been here?"

"Three days, Peter."

"And where is she--surely I have not dreamed it all--where is
Charmian?"

"She went away--this morning."

"Gone!--where to?"

"Gad, Peter!--how should I know?"  But, seeing the distress in my
face, he smiled, and tendered me the letter.  "She left this 'For
Peter, when he awoke'--and I've been waiting for Peter to wake
all the morning."

Hastily I broke the seal, and, unfolding the paper with tremulous
hands read:

"DEAREST, NOBLEST, AND MOST DISBELIEVING OF PETERS,
--Oh, did you think you could hide your hateful suspicion from
me--from me who know you so well?  I felt it in your kiss, in the
touch of your strong hand, I saw it in your eyes.  Even when I
told you the truth, and begged you to believe me, even then, deep
down in your heart you thought it was my hand that had killed Sir
Maurice, and God only knows the despair that filled me as I
turned and left you.

"And so, Peter--perhaps to punish you a little, perhaps because I
cannot bear the noisy world just yet, perhaps because I fear you
a little--I have run away.  But I remember also how, believing me
guilty, you loved me still, and gave yourself up, to shield me,
and, dying of hunger and fatigue--came to find me.  And so,
Peter, I have not run so very far, nor hidden myself so very
close, and if you understand me as you should your search need
not be so very long.  And dear, dear Peter, there is just one
other thing, which I hoped that you would guess, which any other
would have guessed, but which, being a philosopher, you never did
guess.  Oh, Peter--I was once, very long ago it seems, Sophia
Charmian Sefton, but I am now, and always was, Your Humble
Person,

"CHARMIAN."

The letter fell from my fingers, and I remained staring before me
so long that Sir Richard came and laid his hand on my shoulder.

"Oh, boy!" said he, very tenderly; "she has told me all the
story, and I think, Peter, I think it is given to very few men to
win the love of such a woman as this."

"God knows it!" said I.

"And to have married one so very noble and high in all things
--you should be very proud, Peter."

"I am," said I; "oh, I am, sir."

"Even, Peter--even though she be a--virago, this Lady Sophia--or
a termagant--"

"I was a great fool in those days," said I, hanging my head, "and
very young!"

"It was only six months ago, Peter."

"But I am years older today, sir."

"And the husband of the most glorious woman--the most--oh, curse
me, Peter, if you deserve such a goddess!"

"And--she worked for me!" said I; "cooked and served and mended
my clothes--where are they?" I cried, and sprang out of bed.

"What the deuce--"began Sir Richard.

"My clothes," said I, looking vainly about; "my clothes--pray,
Sir Richard, where are they?"

"Burnt, Peter."

"Burnt?"

"Every blood-stained rag!" he nodded; "her orders."

"But--what am I to do?"

Sir Richard laughed, and, crossing to the press, opened the door.

"Here are all the things you left behind you when you set out
to--dig, and--egad!--make your fortune.  I couldn't let 'em go
with all the rest--so I--er--had 'em brought here, to--er--to
keep them for you--ready for the time when you should grow tired
of digging, and come back to me, and--er--oh, dammit!--you
understand--and Grainger's waiting to see you in the library
--been there hours--so dress yourself.  In Heaven's name, dress
yourself!" he cried, and hurried from the room.

It was with a certain satisfaction that I once more donned
buckskin and spurred boots, and noticed moreover how tight my
coat was become across the shoulders; yet I dressed hastily, for
my mind was already on the road, galloping to Charmian.

In the library I found Sir Richard, and Mr. Grainger, who greeted
me with his precise little bow.

"I have to congratulate you, Sir Peter," he began, "not only on
your distinguished marriage, and accession to fortune, but upon
the fact that the--ah--unpleasantness connecting a certain Peter
Smith with your unfortunate cousin's late decease has been
entirely removed by means of the murderer's written confession,
placed in my hands some days ago by the Lady Sophia."

"A written confession--and she brought it to you?"

"Galloped all the way from Tonbridge, by Gad!" nodded Sir
Richard.

"It seems," pursued Mr. Grainger, "that the--ah man, John
Strickland, by name, lodged with a certain preacher, to whom, in
Lady Vibart's presence, he confessed his crime, and willingly
wrote out a deposition to that effect.  It also appears that the
man, sick though he was, wandered from the Preacher's cottage,
and was eventually found upon the road, and now lies in Maidstone
gaol, in a dying condition."

Chancing, presently, to look from the window, I beheld a groom
who led a horse up and down before the door; and the groom was
Adam, and the horse--

I opened the window, and, leaning out, called a name.  At the
sound of my voice the man smiled and touched his hat, and the
mare ceased her pawing and chafing, and turned upon me a pair of
great, soft eyes, and snuffed the air, and whinnied.  So I leapt
out of the window, and down the steps, and thus it was that I met
"Wings."

"She be in the pink o' condition, sir," said Adam proudly; "Sir
Richard bought 'er--"

"For a song!" added the baronet, who, with Mr. Grainger, had
followed to bid me good-by.  "I really got her remarkably cheap,"
he explained, thrusting his fists deep into his pockets, and
frowning down my thanks.  But, when I had swung myself into the
saddle, he came and laid his hand upon my knee.

"You are going to--find her, Peter?"

"Yes, sir."

"And you know--where to look?"

"I think so--"

"Because, if you don't--I might--"

"I shall go to a certain cottage," said I tentatively.

"Then you'd better go, boy--the mare's all excitement--good-by,
Peter--and cutting up my gravel most damnably--good-by!"  So
saying, he reached up and gripped my hand very hard, and stared
at me also very hard, though the tears stood in his eyes.  "I
always felt very fatherly towards you, Peter--and--you won't
forget the lonely old man--come and see me now and then both of
you, for it does get damnably lonely here sometimes, and oh,
curse it!  Goodby! dear lad."  So he turned, and walked up the
steps into his great, lonely house.

"O Wings! with thy slender grace, and tireless strength, if ever
thou didst gallop before, do thy best to-day!  Spurn, spurn the
dust 'neath thy fleet hoofs, stretch thy graceful Arab neck, bear
me gallantly to-day, O Wings, for never shalt thou and I see its
like again."

Swift we flew, with the wind before, and the dust behind, past
wayside inns where besmocked figures paused in their grave
discussions to turn and watch us by; past smiling field and
darkling copse; past lonely cottage and village green; through
Sevenoaks and Tonbridge, with never a stop; up Pembry hill, and
down, galloping so lightly, so easily, over that hard, familiar
road, which I had lately tramped with so much toil and pain; and
so, as evening fell, to Sissinghurst.

A dreamy, sleepy place is Sissinghurst at all times, for its few
cottages, like its inn, are very old, and great age begets
dreams.  But, when the sun is low, and the shadows creep out,
when the old inn blinks drowsy eyes at the cottages, and they
blink back drowsily at the inn, like the old friends they are;
when distant cows low at gates and fences; when sheep-bells
tinkle faintly; when the weary toiler, seated sideways on his
weary horse, fares, homewards, nodding sleepily with every
plodding hoof-fall, but rousing to give one a drowsy "good
night," then who can resist the somnolent charm of the place,
save only the "Bull" himself, snorting down in lofty contempt--as
rolling of eye, as curly of horn, as stiff as to tail as any
indignant bull ever was, or shall be.

But as I rode, watching the evening deepen about me, soft and
clear rose the merry chime of hammer and anvil, and, turning
aside to the smithy, I paused there, and, stooping my head,
looked in at the door.

"George!" said I.  He started erect, and, dropping hammer and
tongs, came out, running, then stopped suddenly, as one abashed.

"Oh, friend!" said I, "don't you know me?"

"Why--Peter--" he stammered, and broke off.

"Have you no greeting for me, George?"

"Ay, ay--I heerd you was free, Peter, and I was glad--glad,
because you was the man as I loved, an' I waited--ay, I've been
waitin' for 'ee to come back.  But now you be so changed--so fine
an' grand--an' I be all black wi' soot from the fire--oh, man! ye
bean't my Peter no more--"

"Never say that, George--never say that," I cried, and, leaping
from the saddle, I would have caught his hand in mine, but he
drew back.

"You be so fine an' grand, Peter, an' I be all sooty from the
fire!" he repeated.  "I'd like to just wash my 'ands first."

"Oh, Black George!" said I, "dear George."

"Be you rich now, Peter?"

"Yes, I suppose so."

"A gentleman wi' 'orses an' 'ouses an' servants?"

"Well--what of it?"

"I'd--like to--wash my 'ands first, if so be you don't mind,
Peter."

"George," said I, "don't be a fool!" Now, as we stood thus,
fronting each other in the doorway, I heard a light step upon the
road behind me, and, turning, beheld Prudence.

"Oh, Prue, George is afraid of my clothes, and won't shake hands
with me!"  For a moment she hesitated, looking from one to the
other of us--then, all at once, laughing a little and blushing a
little, she leaned forward and kissed me.

"Why, George!" said she, still blushing, "how fulish you be.  Mr.
Peter were as much a gentleman in his leather apron as ever he is
in his fine coat--how fulish you be, George!"  So proud George
gave me his hand, all grimy as it was, rejoicing over me because
of my good fortune and mourning over me because my smithing days
were over.

"Ye see, Peter, when men 'as worked together--and sorrowed
together--an' fou't together--an' knocked each other down--like
you an' me--it bean't so easy to say 'good-by'--so, if you must
leave us--why--don't let's say it."

"No, George, there shall be no 'good-bys' for either one of us,
and I shall come back--soon.  Until then, take my mare--have her
made comfortable for me, and now--good night--good night!"

And so, clasping their loving hands, I turned away, somewhat
hurriedly, and left them.

There was no moon, but the night was luminous with stars, and, as
I strode along, my eyes were often lifted to the "wonder of the
heavens," and I wondered which particular star was Charmian's and
which mine.

Reaching the Hollow, I paused to glance about me, as I ever did,
before descending that leafy path; and the shadows were very
black and a chill wind stirred among the leaves, so that I
shivered, and wondered, for the first time, if I had come right
--if the cottage had been in Charmian's mind when she wrote.

Then I descended the path, hurrying past a certain dark spot.
And, coming at last within sight of the cottage, I paused again,
and shivered again, for the windows were dark and the door shut.
But the latch yielded readily beneath my hand, so I went in, and
closed and barred the door behind me.

For upon the hearth a fire burned with a dim, red glow that
filled the place with shadows, and the shadows were very deep.

"Charmian!" said I, "oh, Charmian, are you there have I guessed
right?"  I heard a rustle close beside me, and, in the gloom,
came a hand to meet and clasp my own; wherefore I stooped and
kissed those slender fingers, drawing her into the fireglow; and
her eyes were hidden by their lashes, and the glow of the fire
seemed reflected in her cheeks.

"The candles were so--bright, Peter," she whispered.

"Yes."

"And so--when I heard you coming--"

"You heard me?"

"I was sitting on the bench outside, Peter."

"And, when you heard me--you put the candles out?"

"They seemed so--very bright, Peter."

"And shut the door?"

"I only--just--closed it, Peter."  She was still wrapped in her
cloak, as she had been when I first saw her, wherefore I put back
the hood from her face.  And behold! as I did so, her hair fell
down, rippling over my arm, and covering us both in its splendor,
as it had done once before.

"Indeed--you have glorious hair!" said I.  "It seems wonderful to
think that you are my wife.  I can scarcely believe it--even yet!"

"Why, I had meant you should marry me from the first, Peter."

"Had you?"

"Do you think I should ever have come back to this dear solitude
otherwise?"

Now, when I would have kissed her, she turned her head aside.

"Peter."

"Yes, Charmian?"

"The Lady Sophia Sefton never did gallop her horse up the steps
of St. Paul's Cathedral."

"Didn't she, Charmian?"

"And she couldn't help her name being bandied from mouth to
mouth, or 'hiccoughed out over slopping wineglasses,' could she?"

"No," said I, frowning; "what a young fool I was!"

"And, Peter--"

"Well, Charmian?"

"She never was--and never will be--buxom, or strapping--will she?
'buxom' is such a--hateful word, Peter!  And you--love her?
--wait, Peter--as much as ever you loved Charmian Brown?"

"Yes," said I; "yes--"

"And--nearly as much as--your dream woman?"

"More--much more, because you are the embodiment of all my
dreams--you always will be Charmian.  Because I honor you for
your intellect; and worship you for your gentleness, and spotless
purity; and love you with all my strength for your warm, sweet
womanhood; and because you are so strong, and beautiful, and
proud--"

"And because, Peter, because I am--just--your loving--Humble
Person."

And thus it was I went forth a fool, and toiled and suffered and
loved, and, in the end, got me some little wisdom.

And thus did I, all unworthy as I am, win the heart of a noble
woman whose love I pray will endure, even as mine will, when we
shall have journeyed to the end of this Broad Highway, which is
Life, and into the mystery of the Beyond.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Broad Highway, by Jeffery Farnol





Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Tiffany Vergon, Charles Aldarondo, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





THE BOY RANCHERS ON THE TRAIL

OR

_The Diamond X After Cattle Rustlers_

By WILLARD F. BAKER




CONTENTS

     I THE ROUND-UP

    II A CURIOUS INSTRUMENT

   III STARTLING NEWS

    IV THE SCRATCHED SAFE

     V THE BROKEN BOTTLE

    VI MISSING STEERS

   VII FOUR EYES

  VIII THROWING THE ROPE

    IX THE FIRE

     X SERIOUS QUESTIONS

    XI THE WATCH TOWER

   XII IN SPITE OF ALL

  XIII THE SIGNAL

   XIV FOUR EYES-NO EYES

    XV A BIG RAID

   XVI ON THE TRAIL

  XVII WILD COUNTRY

 XVIII THE BOILING SPRING

   XIX IN A MAZE

    XX A SURPRISE

   XXI IN PURSUIT

  XXII BUD'S DISCOVERY

 XXIII THE FIGHT

  XXIV A DESPERATE CHANCE

   XXV LIEUTENANT WAYNE




THE BOY RANCHERS ON THE TRAIL




CHAPTER I

THE ROUND-UP


"Come on, Nort! It's your turn to cut out the next one!"

"S'pose I make a mux of it, Bud!"

"Shucks! You won't do that! You've roped a calf before!"

"Yes, but not at a big round-up like this. If I make a fizzle the
fellows will give me the laugh!"

"What if they do? Everybody knows you haven't been at it long,
and you've got to make a start. Besides, anybody's likely to make
a mistake. That's why they put rubbers on the ends of pencils.
Ride in now and snake out the next one, Nort!"

"All right, Bud! Here goes!"

Blaze, the pony Nort Shannon was riding toward the bunch of
cattle gathered at Diamond X ranch for the big, spring round-up,
leaped forward at the sound of his master's voice, and in
response to the little jerk of the reins and the clap of heels
against his sides. Into the herd of milling, turning and twisting
cattle the intelligent animal made his way, needing hardly any
guidance from Nort. The lad, by a mere touch, corrected the
course of Blaze slightly, and in a moment he was heading for a
calf which bawled loudly.

"Get him, Nort!" cried a voice from among the cowboys looking on.

"Don't get me fussed, Dick!" Nort shouted back to his brother,
who sat astride his pony near Bud Merkle. "It'll be your turn
next!"

Into the herd he wormed his way on Blaze, dodging here and there,
but with his eyes ever on the calf he hoped to cut out so it
could be branded. Nort leaned forward in his saddle, and then his
cousin and brother, eagerly watching from outside the herd, saw
the boy rancher's hand shoot up.

Through the air the rope went, turning, twisting, writhing and
uncoiling like a snake. In an instant it had flipped around the
hind legs of a calf.

"Good!" yelled Dick.

"Even Babe couldn't 'a' done better!" complimented Bud,
enthusiastically.

"'Tisn't over yet!" gasped Nort, for he had hard work ahead of
him, and the dust raised by thousands of hoofs was choking. "Wait
'till I get it to the branding corral!"

He leaned over in his other stirrup, causing the lariat to pull
taut and, the next instant the calf flopped on its side.

"Snake him out, Blaze!" cried Nort to his pony, and the animal
turned and dragged the prostrate calf along over the ground, an
operation not as cruel as it sounds as the surface was inches
thick in soft dust, like flour.

"That's the boy, Nort!" called his cousin Bud. "I knew you could
do it! Now then, Dick! Let's see how you'll make out!"

"I can't throw a rope as good as Nort," answered the stouter lad,
as he urged his pony, Blackie, into the herd. "But here goes!"

Meanwhile Nort had dragged the calf he had cut out to the corral
where the branding was going on. Two cowboys, stationed there for
the purpose, leaped forward and threw the calf over on its side,
for it had managed to struggle to its feet when Nort ceased
dragging it. One man twisted a front leg of the struggling
creature back in a hammerlock and knelt on its neck. The other
took hold of the upper hind leg, and with this hold prevented the
calf from sprawling along on the ground.

"Sit on him!" called Mr. Merkel, owner of Diamond X and other
ranches. He was superintending the round-up of his herds and
those entrusted to Bud, Nort and Dick in the first business
venture of the boy ranchers. "Sit on him!" yelled Bud's father.

Accordingly the men sat on the calf, thus, with the holds they
had secured, keeping it under restraint with the least possible
pain to the small creature.

"Branding iron!" sang out Slim Degnan, foreman of the ranch.

A little blaze was flickering on the ground, not far from where
the calf Nort had cut out was thrown and held. In a moment the
fire-tender had seized the branding iron, and, a second or two
later, it was being pressed on the calf's flank.

The creature bawled loudly, and kicked out, thereby nearly
throwing off the men who were sitting on it. But the branding was
all over in a moment, and the men leaped up, releasing the
animal.

The calf stood, dazed for the time being, after it had scrambled
to its feet, and then trotted out of the corral, lashing its side
with its little tail. Plainly branded on it now, never to be
completely effaced, was the mark of the ownership of Mr. Merkel--
an X inside a diamond.

"Next!" called the branders:

"Here comes Dick!" shouted Bud, as Nort rode up beside him. "And
he got his calf!" "Good!" exclaimed the brother. "I guess we're
learning the business!"

"Surest thing you know!" asserted the son of the owner of Diamond
X. "I told you it wasn't so hard, and you've done the same thing
before."

"But not at such a big round-up," remarked Nort, as he prepared
to ride in again and cut out another calf.

"Yes, it is big," admitted Bud, as he made ready for his share in
the affair--his task being the same as that of his cousins--to
cut out the calves for branding purposes. "It sure is a big
round-up."

It had been in progress for days. Twice a year on the big,
western ranches, the cattle are driven in from the outlying
ranges, to be tallied, inspected, marked and shipped away. The
spring and fall round-ups are always busy seasons at any ranch.

During the times between round-ups the new calves attained their
growth, but they needed to have branded into their hides the
marks of their owners. Then, too, some yearlings escaped branding
at times, either by remaining out of sight at the round-up, or in
the attending confusion.

Unbranded calves who had partly attained their growth, were
termed "mavericks," and when the herds of different owners
mingled, there was, usually, a division of the mavericks, since
it could not be accurately told who owned them.

The title maverick was derived from a stock man of that name,
whose practice was to claim _all_ unbranded calves in a
herd. His cowboys would ride about, cutting out the unmarked
animals, with the cool statement:

"That's a maverick," meaning that it belonged to their "boss."

And so the name has commonly become associated with any half-
grown, unbranded calf.

Mr. Merkel was the owner of several ranches, Square M, Triangle B
and Diamond X, not to mention Diamond X Second, or Flume Valley,
of which his son Bud, and the latter's cousins, Norton and
Richard Shannon, were the nominal proprietors.

The cattle from Flume Valley, or "Happy Valley" as Bud called it
after the mystery of the underground water was solved, were in
the round-up with the others from his father's ranches.

For days preceding the lively doings I have just described, the
cowboys, called in from distant ranges, had driven the cattle
toward the central assembling point--the corrals at Diamond X.

Slowly the longhorns, the shorthorns and cattle with no horns at
all, had been "hazed" in from their feeding grounds toward
Diamond X. The cow punchers had galloped hard all day, and they
had ridden herd at night, to keep the animals from straying. At
night this was not so hard, for the animals were glad to rest
during the darkness.

But during the day there was always some steer--often more than
one--that wanted to run away from the herd. As this might start a
stampede it was necessary to drive the "striker" back, and this
was, often enough, a difficult task.

Bud, Nort and Dick had borne their share of this difficult round-
up task, and now, when the thousand or more of steers, calves and
mavericks had been gathered at Diamond X, the work of tallying
them, branding those that were without marks and shipping away
the best was well under way.

In and out of the herd rode the boy ranchers, doing their best
alongside of more seasoned "punchers." Calves were cut out,
thrown and branded, to be quickly released and again mingle with
the herd.

  "Oh, I'm Captain Jinks,
   Of the Horse Marines!"

One of the cowboys, wiping the dust and sweat from his face, with
his big, red silk handkerchief, or, rather, neckerchief, started
this song. It was taken up by half a score of loud voices.

"Yi-yippy!" came in stentorian tones from Yellin' Kid. "This is
the life!"

But as, just then, his pony slipped and he missed the throw he
made for a calf, it is doubtful if Yellin' Kid felt as gay as he
sounded.

"Hot work; eh, boys?" asked Mr. Merkel, when Dick, Nort and Bud
rode past to get drinks of water.

"But it's great, all the same!" answered Dick, with shining
eyes--eyes that gleamed amid a face dark with the tan of the
western sun and grimy with the dust of the western plains.

"Glad you like it!" commented the proprietor of Diamond X as he
kept on with his tallying. "How they coming, Slim?" he asked his
foreman.

"Couldn't be better! Old Buck Tooth is doing a heap sight more
than I ever dreamed a Zuni could."

"Bud said that his old Indian helper was up to snuff!" commented
Mr. Merkel. "I'm glad to know it. Heard anything from Double Z?"
he asked, and there was an anxious note in his voice.

"No, Hank and his gang seem to have quieted down after what I
told 'em!"

"Well, I hope he doesn't make trouble for Bud and the boys.
They're going back to Happy Valley to-night." "So I understand.
Oh, shucks! Don't worry about Hank! He's all talk--he and that
blustery foreman of his, Ike Johnson!"

There had been a dispute between the cowboys of Diamond X and
those of Double Z, a ranch owned by the notorious Hank Fisher, a
few days before the round-up, the subject of dispute being the
ownership of certain mavericks. It had ended with the triumph of
Slim Degnan, foreman of Mr. Merkel's holdings.

And so the round-up went on, the heat, the dust, the noise and
confusion increasing as calf after calf, maverick after maverick,
was branded, and the steers to be shipped were cut out, to be
hazed over to the railroad stock yards.

And yet, with all the seeming confusion, there was order and
system in the work.

"Well, I guess this is the last," remarked Mr. Merkel to his son,
as Bud, with his cousins, rode slowly up to the ranch house, when
the final calf had been cut out and the tally made. "You boys
going back after grub?"

"Yep," answered Bud, but there was no enthusiasm in his voice.
He, like his cousins, was too tired. For the day had been a
grueling one, with the heat and hard work.

"You sure did make out a whole lot better than I ever thought you
would," said Mr. Merkel, as he rode along with his son and
nephew's. "Putting water into that valley made a big difference."

"I should say so!" exclaimed Bud. "Our stock will lay over
anything you will ship from any of your three ranches, Dad!"

"I wouldn't wonder but what you are right, Bud! Well, let's wash
up and eat."

One by one the cowboys drifted in, some singing ranch songs in
spite of their weariness. Bud and his cousins were through with
their meal first, and, having persuaded his sister, Nell, to pack
a basket of doughnuts, pie and cheese for him, Bud signalled to
his cousins to join him out at the pony corral.

"Let's get an early start back to Happy Valley," he urged. "It's
a long enough ride, anyhow."

"You said it!" commented Nort.

"Well, there's one thing we don't have to worry about, and that
is not finding any water running into the reservoir," added Dick,
as he slipped in through the gate and caught one of his ponies--
not Blackie, who was tired out from the round-up. Each cow
puncher, including the boy ranchers, had several animals in his
"string."

"No, I guess, since we solved the mystery of the water supply,
we'll have no more trouble," agreed Bud.

The boy ranchers rode over the trail to their own camp--it was
actually a camp, for permanent ranch buildings had not yet been
erected in Happy Valley, though some were projected. Tents formed
the abiding place of our heroes, and as they were only there
during the summer months the canvas shelters served very well,
indeed.

The moon rose, shining down from a starlit sky, as the rough but
faithful and sturdy cow ponies ambled along. Now the boy ranchers
would be down in some swale, or valley, and again topping one of
the foothills which led to Buffalo Ridge or Snake Mountain,
between which elevations lay Happy Valley, where the cattle of
Diamond X Second were quartered.

"There she is--the old camp," murmured Dick, as they started down
the slope which led to the collection of tents erected against
the earthen and stone bank of the reservoir.

"And maybe I won't hit the hay!" exclaimed Bud, with a yawn. "We
don't have to get up to-morrow until we're ready."

"Oh, boy!" cried Nort in delight.

They rode forward, and were almost at their camp when Bud, who
had trotted ahead, pulled his pony to a sudden stop and cried
out:

"Hold on there! Who are you and where are you going?"

At the same moment his cousins saw the moon gleaming on the .45
gun which Bud drew from his holster.




CHAPTER II

A CURIOUS INSTRUMENT


"What's the matter, Bud?" asked Dick, as he urged his animal
forward in a jump, until he was beside his cousin,

"Some one's up there around the tunnel entrance," responded Bud
Merkel. "I saw 'em dodge back out of the light." Then, raising
his voice, he cried: "Come on, now! None of your tricks! I've got
you covered!"

"I don't see any one," spoke Nort.

"They're there, all right," asserted Bud. "Come on, fellows," he
exclaimed, "we'll have to look into this. There was trouble
enough with getting water to stay in Happy Valley, without
letting some Greaser in to queer the works again! Come on!"

He and his cousins rode their horses up the rather steep and
winding trail that led from the bottom of the reservoir to the
top, where a big iron pipe, sticking out under the mountain like
the head of some great serpent, brought from the distant Pocut
River a stream, without which it would have been impossible to
raise cattle in the valley the boy ranchers claimed as particularly
their own.

"Who you reckon it is?" asked Nort, as his pony scrambled up
between the animals of Dick and Bud.

"Oh, some prowler that may have been rustling our grub while we
were over at the round-up," was the answer.

"They couldn't get any cattle, for there aren't any to get,"
observed Dick. This was true, as all the animals had been driven
from Happy Valley over to Diamond X. Later such as were not
shipped away, and many of the calves and mavericks would be
returned to fatten up and grow in readiness for the spring
tallying.

"I don't just like this!" murmured Bud, as he again urged his
pony forward. "Have your guns ready, fellows!"

And while they are thus riding toward the place where a strange
tunnel pierced Snake Mountain, I shall take this opportunity to
present, more formally than I have yet had a chance to do, my new
readers to the boy ranchers. For that is what Bud Merkel, and
Nort and Dick Shannon called themselves, being that, in fact.

Bud was a western lad, the son of Henry Merkel, who had been a
ranchman all his mature years. He lived at Diamond X ranch, with
his wife and daughter Nell. Some time before this present story
opens Bud's cousins from the east had come to spend the summer
with him, while their father and his wife made a trip to South
America.

Nort and Dick, though "tenderfeet" at the beginning, had quickly
fallen into the ways of the west, and in the first volume of this
series, "The Boy Ranchers," I was privileged to tell you how they
helped solve a mystery that revolved around Diamond X.

This mystery had to do with two college professors, and a
strange, ancient animal. But it would not be fair to my new
readers to disclose, here, all the secrets of that book.

So successful was the first summer which Nort and Dick spent at
their uncle's ranch, that they were allowed to repeat it the
following season. But this time there was a change. As related in
the second volume, "The Boy Ranchers in Camp," Mr. Merkel had, by
utilizing an ancient underground water-course beneath Snake
Mountain, and by making a dam in Pocut River, brought water to a
distant valley he owned.

This valley was originally called Buffalo Wallow, the source of
the name being obvious. But once water was brought through the
underground course, and piped to a reservoir, whence it could be
distributed to drinking troughs for the cattle, and also used to
irrigate the land, it enabled a fine crop of fodder to be grown.
With the bringing of the water to Buffalo Wallow, or Flume
Valley, as Bud called the place, it was possible to do what had
never been done before--raise cattle there. Bud's father let him
take this valley ranch as his own, and Nort and Dick were boy
partners associated with their western cousin, Mr. Shannon
putting up part of the needed capital to make the start for his
sons.

All would have gone well except for the mysterious stoppage of
the flow of water, which stoppage, if continued, would mean
disaster.

How the water fight at Diamond X Second (as the valley ranch was
sometimes called) ended, and how the strange mystery was solved,
is the story in the second volume, and I absolutely refuse to go
into more details about it here. It would not be playing the game
square.

At any rate the water was finally turned back into the
underground tunnel, and then, in order to better guard this vital
necessity, Mr. Merkel had the entrance to the tunnel boarded up--
egress being possible only when heavy doors, at either end, were
unlocked.

I might say that while the tunnel was the old water-course of a
vanished river, the shaft under the mountain appeared, in.
ancient times, to have been used by the Aztecs, or some Mexican
tribes, for hiding their store of gold away from the Spaniards.
There were secret passages and rooms in the tunnel, to say
nothing of hidden water gates.

Who had constructed these, and what actual use had been made of
them was, of course, lost in the dim and ancient past. But that
it was the Aztecs, or some allied race, was the statement of
learned men who examined the tunnel.

After the water fight at Diamond X Second had terminated in favor
of the boy ranchers, and great copper levers that operated the
hidden water gates had been removed, the tunnel was boarded up,
and was now seldom entered.

But now, as Bud and his cousins rode back from the big round-up,
and the western lad had, as he thought, seen some one sneaking
about the forbidden gate, there was a feeling of apprehension in
the hearts of himself and cousins.

They had now reached the top level of the reservoir which held a
storage supply of water. The reservoir was a great semi-circular
bank of earth and atones, wide enough on top for two to ride
abreast.

"I don't see any one," remarked Nort, straining his eyes to
pierce the gloom and shadows into which the face of the tunnel
and the locked gate were thrown by the moonlight and clouds.

"Nor I," added Dick.

"Well, I saw some one!" insisted Bud. "It was a man, as sure as
snakes, and he seemed to be trying to open the big gate."

This gate was made of heavy bolted planks and was set on hinges
in a jamb of other planks and boards that closed the reservoir
end of the tunnel water-course. A similar barrier and big door
was at the Pocut River end.

"Well, if he was here, he seems to be gone," observed Nort "Maybe
it was a sheep herder, Bud."

"Well, if any of that gentry think they can drive their flock
over here, and water their woolies at my expense, they're
mistaken," declared Bud with emphasis. "Sheep men have to be, I
reckon, but they're out of place in a cow country. Hello, there!"
he called, loudly. "Come on out and show yourself!"

But there was no answer, and the only sound, aside from the
creaking of the damp saddle leathers, was the splashing of water
as it flowed from the big pipe and into the reservoir.

"Guess he lit out," observed Bud, thrusting his gun back into the
holster.

"Or else you didn't see him," chuckled Nort. "Maybe your eyes are
full of dust, same as mine are, from that round-up."

"Oh, I saw somebody all right!" declared Bud. "Might 'a' been one
of Buck Tooth's Indian friends making a call, but--"

He suddenly ceased speaking and leaned over in his saddle to gaze
earnestly at something on the ground. It was something that
glittered and shone in the mystic moonlight as Nort and Dick
could see. "What's that?" inquired the latter.

In answer Bud slipped from his saddle and picked up the object
which the moonlight had revealed.

"What in the world is this?" asked the boy rancher, as he held up
a curious instrument. "Is this the start of another mystery!"




CHAPTER III

STARTLING NEWS


Leaping from their saddles, Nort and Dick hurried to the side of
their cousin, chum and partner in the ranch venture. Eagerly they
looked over his shoulder while he examined the strange object he
had picked up, almost at the very door leading into the
mysterious tunnel.

The instrument--for such it seemed to be--consisted of a shiny,
nickeled part, which was what had reflected the moonlight, thus
attracting Bud's attention to it. In addition there were two
flexible tubes, of soft rubber, joining into one where they met
the shiny metal.

The two tubes each terminated in hard rubber ends, pierced with a
tiny hole, and on the end of the single tube was a bright metal
disk. The whole formed a strange object, picked up as it was from
the ground, and especially when the boy ranchers feared they had
some cause for alarm.

"What in the world is it?" asked Bud, as he dangled it in front
of his cousins. "I never saw anything like it before. Wait! I
have it! Yellin' Kid said he was going to send to Kansas City for
a flute he could play on. This must be part of it! He dropped it
here; though that couldn't 'a' been him sneaking around the
tunnel. But this is Yellin' Kid's musical instrument all right!
Oh, won't I rag him, though! I wonder which end you blow in?"

"That isn't a musical instrument!" declared Nort, taking it from
Bud's hand.

"Not What is it then?" asked the western ranch lad.

"It's a stethoscope," declared Nort.

"Whew! x I didn't know Yellin' Kid could play one of
_them_!" exclaimed Bud. "He must be more musical than any of
us thought!"

"'Tisn't musical, I tell you!" cried Nort, half laughing. "This
is a _stethoscope_--it's what a doctor listens to your lungs
or heart with when you're sick."

"He never listened to mine!" boasted Bud, "at least not since I
can remember, for I've never been sick."

"Well, I have," admitted Nort, "and so has Dick. You remember Dr.
Thompson using one of these, don't you?" he asked his stout
brother.

"Sure I do! And there's some other name for it besides plain
stethoscope," declared Dick. "It's a long word--bi--di--"

"Binaural stethoscope! That's it!" broke in Nort. "I remember,
now. I thought I'd never be able to say those words, but they
come back to me now. Binaural stethoscope."

"'Tisn't good to eat, or shoot with, is it!" asked Bud, as he
again took the instrument and turned it over and over in his
hands.

"Eat! Shoot!" laughed Nort. "No, I tell you it's to listen to
your heart beats, or lungs. Binaural means, simply, that it's
fixed so you can listen with both ears at the same time. And
stethoscope comes from two Greek words, stethos, the breast, and
skopen, to view. It means, literally, to view inside the chest,
but of course the doctors who use the stethoscope don't really do
that. They only listen through the ear pieces--these," and he
held up the two rubber tubes ending in hard nipples, pierced with
small holes.

"What's the other end for!" asked Bud, indicating the shiny disk
of metal that dangled from the single tube.

"That's the part the doctor holds on your chest or over your
heart," Dick answered. "Sometimes the doctor puts it to your back
to listen to your breathing from that side."

"Well, who in the world would have a--a binaural stethoscope out
here!" asked Bud. "Yon reckon Doc. Tunison dropped it!" he went
on, referring to the local veterinarian. "Shucks no! Cow doctors
don't use 'em, not that I ever heard of," declared Nort. "Though
Doc. Tunison is up to date."

"He sure was in discovering that it was germs which caused the
epidemic outbreak in our stock last year," remarked Bud.

"Yes, we got out of that mighty lucky," chimed in Dick. "What's
become of Pocut Pete?" he asked, referring to a scoundrel of a
cowboy.

"Oh, Del Pinzo and Hank Fisher had pull enough to get him out of
jail, after he'd served only part of his term for infecting our
stock," said Bud. He had reference to something which is
explained in the volume immediately preceding this. Del Pinzo was
a notorious Mexican half-breed who, more than once, had made
trouble for the boy ranchers. Hank Fisher was the owner of Double
Z ranch, adjoining that of Square M, one of Mr. Merkel's, and
also adjoining Happy Valley. Pocut Pete was believed to be a tool
of these two unscrupulous men, and Del Pinzo had at his command
Several Greasers who slipped back and forth over the Mexican
border, not far from which were located the holdings of Mr.
Merkel and the boy ranchers.

"Well, this is a stethoscope all right," went on Nort, as Bud
turned toward his pony, with the evident intention of mounting.

"And I'd give a lot to know what it's doing here, and who dropped
it," spoke Bud. "Let's look around a little more. I'm not at all
satisfied with this. I sure saw, some one here, and this proves
it," and he stuffed the doctor's instrument into his pocket.

"It doesn't prove that the man you saw--or thought you just saw--
sneaking around here dropped it," spoke Nort. "We've been away
for a week, and it may have been dropped any day within that
time."

"Yes," agreed Bud. "But who was monkeying around here as we rode
back to camp? That's what I want to know!"

However, search as the boy ranchers did, they found no midnight
visitor. All was quiet at their camp, save for the distant howl
of a coyote, and the splash of the water into the reservoir. All
the stock had been driven away from Happy Valley to the big
round-up at Diamond X, but soon the fertile glade would again be
dotted with hungry cattle.

"Well, I reckon we'll have to give up," said Bud, when a thorough
search had been made, and no one discovered.

"The tunnel door doesn't show any signs of an attempt having been
made to bust it; does it?" asked Dick.

"Not as far as I can see, in this light," Bud replied. "We'll
take a stroll up here in the morning," he went on as he thrust
the stethoscope into his pocket. "Now for a little grub, and then
to hit the hay. Oh, boy! But I to tired!"

So were the others, and after rummaging among their camp stores,
and eating some crackers and canned peaches, the boys, having
picketed their horses, turned in, rolled up in their blankets,
and were asleep almost as soon as their heads were on the
pillows, which were, as a matter of fact, stuffed with hay.

An examination, next morning, disclosed nothing more in the
neighborhood of the tunnel entrance than their own and, their
ponies' feet marks, until Bud, with an exclamation, pointed to
several cigarette stubs on the ground, and a number of half-
burned matches.

"Some one was here last night--or yesterday!" he declared. "And
they stood in this one spot for some time--either resting or
spying."

"What would they be spying on!" asked Dick.

"Search me!" frankly admitted Bud. "But since we had that water
fight I'm suspicious of everything. Those cigarette stubs are
fresh, and were dropped last night, or yesterday. None of us use
'em, and though some of our cow punchers do they haven't been
here lately enough to have left this fresh evidence. The stubs
are new ones."

"Well, maybe there was some one here last night," said Dick.

"I'm positive of it!" declared Bud. "Let's take another look at
the big door lock."

Even a close inspection, however, failed to disclose any signs of
the great portal, or its heavy padlock having been tampered with.
Nor were there any marks tending to show where an effort had been
made to force boards off the frame in which the door was set.

"Well, we'll just have to wait," said Bud, as he turned to go
back down to the tents. "Hello," he suddenly added, as he gazed
off up the valley. "Here comes somebody, riding like all
possessed, too!"

The boy ranchers watched the approach of the solitary horseman,
and, as he drew nearer Bud exclaimed:

"It's Buck Tooth!"

It was, in fact, that same Zuni Indian, who had been engaged as a
sort of camp cook and ranch hand by Bud's father, later being
transferred to Bud's service. Buck Tooth was devoted to the boy
ranchers.

"What's matter, Buck! What for you ride so _pronto_
fashion!" asked Bud as the Indian, a superb horseman, drew rein
close to the boy ranchers. "You race, maybe, Buck Tooth!"

"Yep--race tell you bad news!" half--grunted the Zuni.

"Bad news!" faltered Bud. "Is it my mother--dad---"

"Them all well," said Buck Tooth. "But got bad news all same. You
see anybody out here?" and he slipped from his saddle to rest his
almost winded steed.




CHAPTER IV

THE SCRATCHED SAFE


Eagerly the boy ranchers gathered about Buck Tooth. The Indian,
as if rather ashamed of the hurry and emotion that had possessed
him, grew quieter as he threw the reins down over his pony's
head, as an intimation to the animal not to stray. Then the Zuni
turned toward Bud and his cousins.

"This is the second time you gave me bad news, Buck," remarked
the western lad. "Remember?"

"How?" asked the Indian sharply.

"I say this is the second time you've brought news of something
bad. You were the first to tell me about the water stopping in
the reservoir. And from then on we had some rousing times; didn't
we, fellows?" asked Bud, turning to his chums.

"That's right!" assented Nort.

"But what's going on now?" Dick wanted to know.

"You said it!" exclaimed Bud. "I should let Buck Tooth tell it,
instead of keeping him gassing away about the past. What's the
row, Buck?"

"Robbers!" was the Indian's answer.

"Robbers? At Diamond X?" cried Bud.

"Did they get anything?" Dick wanted to know.

"Anybody hurt?" asked Nort.

"Get some money--nobody hurt only Babe--him get broken leg,"
half-grunted the Indian.

"Babe has a broken leg in a fight with robbers?" gasped Bud.
"Shoot it along a little faster, Buck! I'm sorry I didn't let you
ride harder at first. How much did they get? Was it rustlers, and
I'll bet a cookie with a raisin in that Del Pinzo and his gang
had a hand in the fracas! Did Babe shoot any of 'em?"

"Babe him try--but too fat," said the Indian, with as near to a
chuckle as ever he achieved, "Fall down--bust leg. Your
_padre_ no can tell how much money gone, but big iron box
not opened."

"Oh, they didn't get to the safe, then!" exclaimed Bud with
relief in his voice. For he knew, at this season of the spring
round-up, that many thousands of dollars, from the sale of
cattle, were often kept in his father's safe. "But go ahead,
Buck! Tell us more about it. Step on her! Give her the gas! Open
the throttle!"

"Hu?" grunted the Zuni, questioningly. "I step on somet'ing?"
"You're only mixing him up!" declared Nort "Let him take his own
time, Bud."

"If I do he'll be until noon giving us the facts. And if the
robbers looted dad's office, even if they didn't get the safe
open, they may have lit out with a tidy sum, and we ought to take
the trail after 'em. That's what Buck came here for, likely! To
get us on the chase from this end. Go ahead! Shoot!" he
requested, meaning a verbal fire, not actual.

Whether Buck Tooth would have succeeded, under these confusing
directions, in making a quick, dear statement of the matter is a
question that was not settled. For, just as the Indian was about
to resume, Dick looked off toward the distant hills, which lined
the trail between Diamond X proper, and Happy Valley, and the lad
exclaimed:

"Here comes one of the robbers now, riding like Sam Hill!"

Bud and Nort leaped to the side of their partner, their hands on
their weapons, but, after a glimpse of the approaching horseman,
having shaded his eyes with his hands, Bud cried:

"That isn't a robber! It's Yellin' Kid. I know his riding. I
reckon he's come to give us the straight of it!"

Which proved to be the case.

"Buck outrode me," admitted Yellin' Kid as he drew rein, and his
voice was not as loud as usual. "We started at th' same time,
shortly after midnight when th' break was made, but that Indian's
cayuse shore can step some! An' Buck can ride--let me tell you!"

"You shot a ringer that time!" asserted Bud. "But what happened!
And is Babe badly hurt!"

"No! He just twisted his ankle gettin' out of his bunk in a hurry
t' take a pot shot at th' bunch that tried to hold us up. Doc.
Tunison says he'll be all right in a week."

"But Tunison is a horse doctor!" objected Bud, for Babe, the fat
assistant foreman of Diamond X, was a prime favorite with him and
his cousins.

"Yes, shore he is! Why not? A horse doctor for a cow puncher!"
chuckled Yellin' Kid. "But here's the yarn."

Thereupon, having turned his pony out to graze with the Indian's,
Yellin' Kid told the boys what had happened.

"We started some of the cattle from th' round-up brandin' over to
th' railroad," the cowboy stated, "an' followin' th' usual
preliminaries we all settled down for th' night, after you
fellows rode off. An' let me tell you I was glad t' hit my bunk!

"Well, some time near midnight we, out in th' bunkhouse, was
roused up by shootin' from your father's bungalow, Bud. Course
that couldn't mean but one thing, an' we all got our guns an'
rushed out, natcherally. But all we saw was a bunch ridin' off in
th' darkness, your father firin' at 'em, Bud.

"Come t' find out, your mother had been woke up by a noise in th'
office where th' safe was. She called your father an' he took a
look, with his gun, of course. He saw a man in a mask tryin' t'
open th' strong box, and your dad gave th' usual countersign.

"But th' burglar wheeled, an' popped one at your dad, not hittin'
him I'm glad t' say, an' out th' winder he jumped, th' burglar, I
mean. Then the rest of th' gang, which was waitin', rode off,
shootin' some, as your dad was doin'.

"Come t' find out, they'd got a few hundred dollars from the desk
where your dad left th' cash, Bud, but th' main part was in th'
safe, an' _that_ they couldn't get open. Course soon as we
knowed what was up we organized a posse, an' started off--all but
Babe. He fell--or rolled--out of his bunk an' twisted his leg,
somehow.

"Anyhow, Buck an' I was told off t' ride this way, partly t' let
you fellers know what had happened, an' partly t' see if there
was any trace of th' skunks what robbed your dad down here in
Happy Valley. How about it? Seen anybody?"

"Well, yes, we did see some one sneaking around here when we
arrived last evening," Bud answered. "But that was long before
the robbery."

"And tell him what we found!" urged Dick

"Oh, yes, a stethoscope," went on Bud. "But that has nothing to
do with the matter. Maybe some doctor, or medical student, is out
here for his health, and dropped it as he rode over our place."

"What's a slitherscope!" asked Yellin' Kid. "Anything like a
Triceratops?"

"No!" laughed Nort. "We'll show you. But say, what can we do
toward getting these robbers?"

"We've got t' trail 'em," spoke the older cowboy, as he turned to
go to the tents with the boy ranchers, Buck Tooth following with
the two half-winded ponies. "Soon as I get my breath----"

"That's right!" interrupted Bud. "Come on up and sit down. I'll
make you some coffee. I forgot you'd ridden all night."

"Half of it, anyhow," asserted Yellin' Kid. "An' I rode hard! But
so did Buck Tooth, only you'd hardly know it. He sure can make
his cayuse cover th' ground!"

Indeed the Indian showed little signs of the hard riding he had
accomplished between midnight and dawn. And when he and Yellin'
Kid were having a belated morning cup of coffee further details
of the story were told.

Who the robbers were, and how many there were in the gang that
attempted to force the safe at Diamond X, were matters left to
further enlightenment. Mr. Merkel had only seen one in his
office, bending over the safe, and this one had fled at the
command of "hands up!" Then the others had raced away, amid a
fusillade of shots which they returned.

It was so dark--the moon of the early night having been clouded
over--that the direction taken by the robbers had not been
ascertained.

"They probably scattered," declared Yellin' Kid. "It would be th'
safest way--for them! But there's a chance some might 'a' come
this way, so your dad wanted you t' be on the watch."

"We will!" declared Bud. "And when some of the boys come back on
the job here, and we get our allotment of cattle so things settle
down to normal, I'm going back to the ranch and have a talk with
dad."

"'Twouldn't be a bad idea," agreed Yellin' Kid. "But where's that
mouth organ you said you found?"

"A stethoscope," laughed Bud. "Here it is," and he exhibited the
medical instrument.

"Hum!" mused the cowboy. "It might be a burglar tool for all I'd
know the difference. But now, if it's agreeable t' you fellers,
let's have a look around. Maybe some of them burglars got a chunk
of lead in him and he's hidin' out around here."

However, a search in the vicinity of Happy Valley camp disclosed
nothing, and then Bud and his cousins set about getting back into
the routine that had been interrupted by the round-up.

"The first thing we've got to do," Bud declared, "is to mend that
break in the telephone line. If that had been working last night
you could have called us up, Kid, instead of you and Buck having
to ride out here."

"Yes, we wished th' line was working" admitted the cowboy. "But
it wouldn't have been of much use, it seems. Them burglars didn't
come out this way. However, it's just as well t' have it fixed."

There was a system of telephones connecting Bud's camp with his
father's main ranch and also the two branch ones, and the system
was likewise hooked-up with the long distance. But a recent wind,
just before the round-up, had blown down some poles in Happy
Valley, putting Bud's line out of commission. This was why he and
his chums could not be reached by wire from Diamond X.

The poles were set up in the next few days, when some cowboys
arrived to again take up their duties with Bud, Nort and Dick;
for the cattle not sold were again sent back to the valley range
to fatten for the fall, and they needed to be looked after.

Meanwhile, a search of the surrounding country had failed to
disclose any trace of the robbers, and their identity remained
hidden. They had gotten away with about $500, missing a much
larger sum in the safe. The authorities were notified, and a
posse scoured the region, but fruitlessly.

"Let's have a look at the safe they tried to open, Dad," begged
Bud, when he and his cousins had ridden over to pay a week-end
visit to the home ranch. "Did they try to drill it for an
explosive?"

"I don't believe so, son. In fact, I haven't looked at the safe
very closely, except to notice that it was all right. And I took
the money out of it over to the bank next day."

Bud and his cousins looked at the strong box in which Mr. Merkel
kept his money and valuable papers. It was a large, old-fashioned
safe, proof from any fire that might visit the ranch, and beyond
the ability of ordinary burglars to open, without the use of
explosives or special tools.

And as Bud leaned over to look at the heavy door he saw something
that caused him to ask:

"Were these here before the attempted robbery, Dad?"

"What there, Bud?"

"These scratches on the front of the door. It does look as if
they tried to drill the safe!"

Bud pointed to several parallel marks on the steel door. The
scratches were deep in the paint, and seemed to radiate toward
the shiny nickel dial of the combination. "Scratches!" repeated
Mr. Merkel, coming over to look. "No, I never noticed them
before. Why, she is clawed up some," he admitted. "But I can't
say that they haven't been there since I got the safe, which was
just before the round-up. Yes, she sure is clawed up some," and
he spoke as if some mountain lion had done the damage to his
strong box.

But here Bud's sister, Nell, took a hand in the proceedings.

"Those scratches are new ones--they were made by the burglar,"
declared the girl, whom Nort and Dick thought the prettiest they
had ever seen. "I know, for I dusted your office, Dad, the day
the round-up ended, and the door was as shiny then as a new
penny."

"Then the burglar did it," decided Bud. "And it shows we have to
deal with a regular gang of safe robbers, instead of just
ordinary cattle rustlers!"




CHAPTER V

THE BROKEN BOTTLE


Bud's opinion, expressed with such conviction, coupled with the
fact that Nell, his sister, was sure the safe had not been
scratched the day before the robbery, made it look as though men
practiced in the evil art of burglary had been at work.

"When I saw the fellow, bending over my safe," said Mr. Merkel,
"it appeared to me he was only trying to work the combination. I
have a hard job, myself, remembering how to do it, account of the
safe being a new one. And I was so surprised, at first, that I
just stood there, like a locoed steer, watching him. Then I let
out a yell, told him to throw his hands up, and things began to
happen."

"But, instead of just trying to open your safe, by working the
combination, same as I've heard of burglars doing by filing down
their fingers with sandpaper to make 'em sensitive, he was
getting ready to blow it open," declared Bud.

"Does look so. She sure is clawed!" commented Mr. Merkel again.

"Mercy! It's a wonder we weren't all blown up in our sleep!"
exclaimed Bud's mother. "You boys'll stay to dinner," she added,
as if glad to change the subject.

"We aimed to," said Bud with a grin at his cousins. "We manage
pretty well most times, with what we cook, and what Buck Tooth
hands out in the grub line. But we sure do like a home-feed once
in a while."

"Or twice!" added Nort, while Dick nodded his agreement.

But though it was evident that some professional burglar had
endeavored to open the Merkel safe, that was all the conclusion
which could be arrived at. No additional clues were found and,
for a time, matters settled down into the ordinary run at Diamond
X.

Summer was coming, with its heat, and Bud was glad there would be
no interruption in the water supply that flowed into Happy Valley
from the Pocut River, coming through the ancient underground
passage.

"For we'll need plenty of water in hot weather," he told Jus
cousins.

At Diamond X Second, as the outfit of the boy ranchers was often
called, was now a goodly herd of animals eating the rich, Johnson
grass and other fodder, getting fattened in readiness for sale in
the fall, when there would be another round-up.

Besides Bud, Nort and Dick, there was now, at the camp in the
valley, Buck Tooth the Zuni Indian, Yellin' Kid and Snake Purdee,
two efficient and veteran cow punchers who had been transferred
from Diamond X First, meaning by that the main ranch.

While Bud was a true son of the west, and while Nort and Dick
had, some time ago, passed out of the tenderfoot class, still Mr.
Merkel felt that his son and his nephews needed the aid and
guidance of cattlemen older than themselves. So the "outfit," as
the aggregation at a ranch is called, was quite a happy family.

"If we could only catch those burglars, and get back your dad's
money, I'd feel better, though," declared Snake Purdee, as he
rode in from the Diamond X ranch one day, to announce, among
other news items, that Babe, the fat assistant foreman, was able
to be about again.

"Yes," agreed Bud. "It isn't so much the money loss, as it is the
knowledge that such a bunch of men is loose in a neighborhood.
Del Pinzo and that Hank Fisher bunch are bad enough, but I don't
believe they had a hand in this."

"I wouldn't put it past them!" stated Yellin' Kid in his usual,
loud tones. "Th' skunks!"

"But dad said he didn't recognize the fellow he surprised at his
safe," spoke Bud. "Of course he didn't have much chance. But if
it had been Del Pinzo--"

"Don't worry!" broke in Snake Purdee. "That Greaser wouldn't do a
job like that himself; or Hank Fisher, either. They'd get some
one else to take the risk. However, what's th' use gassin' about
it? I guess the money's gone for good. But I'm glad they didn't
get th' safe open!"

"So'm I," chimed in Bud. "Some of our cash would have vanished
then." For he and his cousins had a share in the money received
from the sale of steers at round-up time.

So, following the robbery at Diamond X, matters quieted down. Bud
still kept the stethoscope, and word of the finding of the
strange instrument traveled to other ranches. It was called by
such a variety of names (the cowboys having twisted the original
and proper one) until the boy ranchers had difficulty, at times,
in understanding the reference when they were asked about it.

But no one claimed it, and no trace was found of the person who,
it was presumed, had dropped it the night our heroes saw some one
disappear near the boarded-up entrance to the ancient tunnel.

"Come on, let's try a bit of shooting!" proposed Nort one
evening, when grub had been served at the camp, and he and his
brother were left with Buck Tooth. Snake and Yellin' Kid had
ridden off on an all-night tour of duty, to a, distant part of
the ranch. A choice bunch of steers had started to wander farther
off than Bud thought it was wise to let them. They were,
evidently, in search of another variety of fodder, but that could
not save them from some passing band of Greasers, or other cattle
thieves.

"Haze 'em back this way," Bud had requested his two cowboys.
"They'll be safer over here."

So Yellin' Kid and Snake had ridden away as the early evening
shadows were falling and, to pass the time until the hour for
seeking their bunks, the boy ranchers sought some amusement.
Shooting at a mark was one form, and Nort and Dick were
endeavoring to become as expert as their western cousin in the
use of the .45.

"Shooting suits me," agreed Bud. "I'll soon have to cut down my
handicap if you fellows keep on the way you're going," for in the
tests of skill Bud had always discounted his own ability in order
to be fair.

"Well, don't scale it down too much," begged Dick. "Nort hasn't
got me skinned, but I'm not up to you."

"Well, let's see how you'll do," suggested Bud.

As a mark a bottle was stuck on a stick which was thrust into the
ground at the foot of the sloping bank which enclosed the
reservoir. Shooting against this earthen bank insured that no
wild bullets would injure any one.

"You go first, Bud," suggested Dick. "We want to get a line on
you."

Accordingly Bud walked to the marked-off place, drew his heavy
revolver, raised it and brought it down on the mark--the bottle
on the stick. There was a sharp crack, followed instantly by the
tinkle of glass, and that bottle was no more.

"Busted it clean!" cried Nort. "I wish I could do that!"

Another flask was provided, and Nort shot at this. His aim was
fairly good, but he was allowed to go five feet nearer than Bud
had stood, that distance being the western lad's handicap. But
Nort only chipped away part of the bottom of the bottle with his
first shot, and it took three to shatter it completely,

"Watch me do better than that!" cried Dick, as he took his place
where his brother had stood, and raised his gun. "I'll crack it
first shot!"

His weapon was still in the air, and he had not brought it to a
level with the bottle when there sounded, from somewhere out in
the valley back of where the boy ranchers stood, the sound of a
shot.

The bullet zipped viciously over their heads, and, as they
instinctively ducked, they heard the crash of the broken bottle.




CHAPTER VI

MISSING STEERS


Like a flash Bud, who had been standing beside Nort, to watch
the effect of Dick's try, turned and faced outward to view the
darkening valley, whence had come the sound of that shot. Nort
turned also, but Dick seemed to think one of his companions had
played a trick on him.

"That isn't fair!" cried the stout lad. "What'd you want to go
and bust that bottle for, Nort?"

"I didn't do it!" asserted his brother.

"Nor I," added Bud in a low voice. "The shot came from out
there," and he indicated the long and fertile valley, over which
the purple evening shadows were falling. "Duck, fellows!" he
suddenly cried, and he pulled Nort beside him in the grass.

Dick, who caught the words of warning, and saw what his cousin
had done, also dropped down, so that, a second or two after the
firing of the strange shot that had shattered the bottle, only
the heads of the boy ranchers showed above the grass, and then
only slightly. "What's the idea?" asked Dick, as silence followed
the measure of safety.

"Whoever it was that fired might shoot again," replied End.

"Who was it?" asked Nort.

"That's what we've got to find out," answered Bud in a low voice.

"Could it have been either Snake or Yellin' Kid, riding back and
breaking that bottle over our heads, to show what good shots they
were?" asked Dick.

"No, I hardly think so," replied his cousin. "They're both good
shots, all right, and they could have broken that flask from the
distance it was broken. But they wouldn't throw a scare into us
this way. Besides, they haven't any time to fool around. They
have an all-night ride ahead of them."

"What makes you think the bottle was busted from some distance,
Bud!" Dick wanted to know.

"The way the bullet sounded," was the answer. "It was almost
spent when it got here, but it had force enough to break the
glass, and would have damaged us if it hit us. I thought whoever
played that fool trick might try another shot, so I yanked you
down, Nort."

"Glad you did! I might not have thought of it. But whoever it was
doesn't seem to be going to shoot again."

"No," agreed Bud, after a little period of silence, during which
no other menacing crack of a weapon was heard. "But we'll wait a
little longer."

Through the fast-gathering darkness the boys looked out from
their semi-hiding places across the valley. No wisp of smoke, and
no movement of horse or rider was to be observed. And silence
once more settled down on Happy Valley--not quite so happy as it
had been. For, following the clearing-up of the mystery of the
water supply, new and sinister events seemed pending for the boy
ranchers.

But, as yet, there were only straws, showing which way the evil
wind was blowing.

"Could it have been a chance shot?" asked Dick, raising himself a
little to get a better look.

"That bullet was aimed straight for the bottle, over our heads,"
declared Bud. "It was no chance shot."

"One of ours couldn't have glanced, could it?" Dick wanted to
know.

"Surely not!" affirmed Bud. "Why, no one had shot for some time.
I'd just put the new bottle on the stick for you."

"Yes, and I was just going to shoot, when somebody took the
bullet out of my gun, so to speak," went on Dick, grimly jesting.

"Do you think they were shooting at--us?" asked Nort,
hesitatingly.

Bud did not answer for the moment, and when he did it was to say,
as he suddenly arose:

"If they did I'm going to give 'em another chance. And I'm going
to do some shooting on my own account!" He had his gun in his
hand, for he had so held it since he had shattered the first
bottle, and now it was grasped in readiness for instant action.

"We're with you!" cried Nort and Dick, as they emerged from their
recumbent positions in the grass, and hastened to the side of
their cousin.

But though they looked across the valley, now half shrouded in
gloom, and up and down, as far as they could see, no one was in
sight. Here and there were small herds of their cattle. Back at
the camp tents Buck Tooth was performing his evening duties, or
"chores," as Bud called them. The Indian paid no attention to the
shooting, for he knew the boys had gone to practice, and he could
not be expected to realize that one of the shots was, possibly, a
hostile one.

I use the word "possibly" with reason, for, as yet, there was
nothing to show that it was not either an accident, or had not
been fired by some passing cowboy who, from a distance, seeing
the bottle on a stick, could not resist a chance to "take a
crack" at it. And yet this last theory would seem to be a poor
one. For if the shot had been a joke the one who had fired it
would, in all reason, it appeared, have shown himself soon after.

"No one seems to show up," remarked Nort at length, in a low
voice.

"Then we'd better look for 'em before it gets too dark," declared
Bud. "Come on! Let's get our horses."

"Isn't it taking a chance, riding out to look for some one who
may have fired at us purposely?" asked Dick.

"Yes," agreed Bud, after a moment's thought, "but life out west
is all more or less of a chance and risk. You take a risk, every
time you ride at more than a foot-pace, of your pony stepping
into some prairie dog's hole and not only laming himself, but
killing you. But you don't stop riding on that account."

"No," agreed Nort.

"And we take a chance every time we ride herd," went on Bud. "The
steers may stampede, and before we can get 'em to milling, they
may rush over us. But I notice neither of you ever back out of
that job; do you?"

"No," agreed Nort, adding: "Well, then, I reckon going after this
unknown shooter isn't taking such a long chance."

"I'm with you!" exclaimed Dick.

Briefly telling Buck Tooth what had happened, the boy ranchers
rode off at a fast pace, to take advantage of what little light
of day remained. They headed, as nearly as they could ascertain
it, in the direction whence the single shot had come. But it is
hardly needless to say they found no one, and no sign that could
be construed into a tangible clue.

"We'll tell Snake and Yellin' Kid about it when they come back,"
decided Bud, as he and his cousins returned to camp when darkness
had completely fallen. For it was useless, after that, to search
for the perpetrator of the joke.

Or was it a joke?

That is what the boy ranchers asked themselves more than once.

Contrary to their half-formed expectations, the night passed
quietly. There was no disturbance among the cattle, and no
midnight visitors invaded the camp. But, for all this, the slumbers
of our heroes were not easy. Perhaps they had premonitions of
coming disaster.

For disaster came, with the return, early on the morning of the
next day, of Snake and Yellin' Kid.

"They're after you, Bud!" shouted the cowboy with the loud voice.
"They're after you!"

"Who?" asked Bud, as he and his cousins came out to meet the
cowboys.

"Rustlers!" was the grim answer. "There's a lot of your steers
missin' from that far herd! Rustlers, Bud! Rustlers!"




CHAPTER VII

FOUR EYES


For a moment Bud Merkel seemed unable to comprehend the bad news
thus brought to him by his cowboy helpers and friends. Nort and
Dick, also, were shocked by the intelligence. But Bud quickly
recovered. Perhaps it was because of his heritage of the west--
the ability to face danger and disaster with grim courage, part
of his father's stock in trade.

"Rustlers, eh?" repeated Bud, and his voice was steadier than
Yellin' Kid or Snake Purdee expected to find it. "Did they get
many?"

"Quite a bunch," answered Yellin' Bad. "We rounded up as many as
we could, and--"

"You mean you rounded up the _rustlers_?" asked Nort,
eagerly.

"No, what was left of the steers," answered Snake. "Guess we
wouldn't be back here alone--that is, just us two, if we'd had a
run-in with the rascals. We didn't see 'em, but we did find
traces of 'em. What are you going to do, Bud? Get on their
trail?"

"Let's talk it over, first," suggested the boy rancher, and he looked
at Nort and Dick, for they were partners with him on this venture of
trying to raise cattle in Happy Valley--which would have been
almost a desert save for the water that came through the strange
mountain tunnel.

"Tell us about it," urged Dick.

"Well, there isn't so much to tell," replied Yellin' Kid, his
voice a bit lower, now that there was serious business afoot.
"Snake an' I started there, to haze back th' steers as you; told
us, Bud. But when we'd rounded up th' herd, drivin' 'em in from
where a lot of 'em had strayed, we saw, right away, that th'
count was short. First we thought a bunch was hidin' out on us,
but we made a pretty good search an' then we got th' evidence."

"The evidence?" exclaimed Nort.

"Yes, we saw where the rustlers had been at work. They must 'a'
been there a day before we arrived. They probably cut out a good
bunch of cattle an' drove 'em off. But they didn't drive 'em
all."

"What makes you think so?" asked Bud. "Do you mean that we have a
few left?" and he laughed uneasily.

"Oh, there's more'n a _few_," said Snake. "But by evidence
Kid means we saw where they'd been blurrin' the brand--the
Diamond X brand!"

"Oh, they're doing that; are they?" asked Bud, sharply.

"Yes, we found th' ashes of two or three brandin' fires," went on
Yellin' Kid, "an' we picked up th' broken handle of a brandin'
iron. No marks on it, like there was on the other," he said,
referring to the time one of the irons from Double Z had been
found on the range of the boy ranchers. "But we brought it along,
anyhow," and he exhibited a broken and charred piece of wood.

"But we found more than that," he continued. "We found one steer
they'd killed, for beef likely, after they'd blurred th' brand.
There wasn't much left. What th' rustlers didn't take th'
buzzards did. But there was enough of th' hide left to show what
work they were up to--blurring th' brand."

This, as you have learned from the previous books of this series,
consists in burning some other mark over the legitimate brand on
cattle, so that the original one can not be made out. Then the
animal may be claimed by whoever has it. Blurring a brand, that
is, making it illegible, or changing one brand into another, are
two of the methods used by unscrupulous men to steal cattle.

The boy ranchers well understood what was meant by the news
brought them by the two cowboys. The next thing to decide on was
what course to pursue. "Did they leave any trail?" asked Bud.

"Well, we didn't stop t' hunt for it, as long as it wasn't a
plain one," Snake answered. "Likely we could 'a' picked it up.
But as long as there had been a raid we decided th' best thing t'
do was t' save th' rest of th' cattle, an' then come an' tell
you, Bud."

"How many cattle do you think they took?" asked Nort.

"Oh, I should say fifty," answered Yellin Kid, "includin' th' one
they killed for beef. Probably they blurred th' brands on th'
others an' drove 'em off--an' I shouldn't be a bit s'prised," he
went on, "but what we'd find most of your cattle, Bud, walkin'
around on Double Z."

"Hank Fisher; eh?" exclaimed Dick.

"Yes, an' that slick Mexican half-breed of his, Del Pinzo!"
declared Snake. "Anyhow, they got away with a bunch of your
steers, Bud, an' now what are we goin' t' do? Are we goin' t' sit
back an' let 'em laugh at us?"

"Not much!" declared the boy rancher. "But let's get this
straight. I wonder why they didn't drive off the whole herd while
they were at it?"

"Probably it was too big a contract for 'em," remarked Yellin'
Kid. "An' then, too, they might not 'a' had men enough, or th'
cattle may 'a' stampeded."

"An' maybe they was scared off," added Snake.

"Yes," agreed his partner on the ride from which they had just
returned, "that may have been so. Somethin' may have scared th'
rustlers. But if I get a chance at 'em, I'll throw a bigger scare
int' 'em!" and he significantly tapped the grim .45 at his hip.

"Any trace of which way they went?" asked Bud.

"There is--up to a certain point," admitted Snake.

"What do you mean?" the boy rancher asked.

"Well, I mean we could trace the cattle down the valley up to
that low place between the hills-a sort of pass. And then all
trace of 'em was lost."

"Lost!" repeated Nort.

"Yes, sir, lost!" declared Snake. "You couldn't see any more
signs of 'em than if they'd been lifted up in one of them flying
machines and histed up over the mountain! That's th' funny part
of this raid."

"There have been some other queer things around here," said Dick.
"There was that bottle last night."

"What was that?" asked Snake, quickly.

"There was some promiscuous shooting around here last night,"
said Bud. "I'll tell you about it as soon as we get the straight
of this rustler business. Maybe there's some connection. But I
wonder----"

He was interrupted by a voice singing, and the song was one of
the usual cowboy refrains, though the voice was rather better
than usual.

At first the boy ranchers thought it might be Old Billee Dobb
who, with Buck Tooth, had been out to a distant part of the
valley to see if he could get on the track of a mountain lion which
had been killing cattle. But a glance showed the approaching
singer, who was also a rider, to be a stranger. He sat astride a big,
black horse, much larger than the ordinary cow pony, and as he
approached the camp the sun glinted in curious fashion on his face.

"Four eyes!" exclaimed Snake, meaning, thereby, that the stranger
wore glasses. The rising sun had reflected on their lens. On came
"Four Eyes," singing as he advanced, until, when he came within
hailing distance, he drew rein, saluted the assembled company
with a half-military gesture and called out:

"Any chance of a job here?"




CHAPTER VIII

THROWING THE ROPE


Silence followed this greeting and question, and then the two boy
ranchers, and their cowboy friends, waited for Bud to speak, he
being, in a sense, the head of the new organization. Though Dick
and Nort held equal shares, purchased for them by their father,
the two lads who had lived so long in the east deferred to the
boy of the west in this matter, thinking, naturally, that he
would better be able to handle it.

"Looking for a place?" asked Bud, genially enough, as he surveyed
the newcomer, from the top of his broad-brimmed range hat to the
pawing hoofs of his black steed, for the horse was impatiently
digging in the dirt.

"Yep!" was the answer. "I'm looking for a place." The voice was
pleasant, and there was none of that clipping off of the final
"g" in his words, so common a practice among most of the cowboys.
Perhaps they didn't have time to use the proper endings. "I'm
dead anxious to ride for some outfit," went on "Four Eyes," as he
had been dubbed and as he came to be called, as long as he
remained with Diamond X Second. "Your father sent me over here,"
he added.

"My father!" exclaimed Bud. "Do you know him? I don't know you!"
he added quickly, for he sensed that the stranger, in some
manner, had managed to pick him from all the others as the son of
the proprietor of Diamond X.

"I don't claim to know your father, only having met him once,
when I rode up, yesterday, to ask for a job," went on Four Eyes.
"I slept out last night--back there," he added with a wave of 'is
quirt in the direction of Diamond X. "Had supper with the boys at
your father's ranch, and he told me you might be needing some
one. If you don't----" He paused suggestively, evidently ready to
ride on and try his luck elsewhere if there was no chance in the
valley.

"I may need some one," Bud said. In fact, he was in need of an
additional hand, and since this latest action on the part of
rustlers he wanted help more than ever, for he was about to put
into execution a plan for getting on the trail of these
marauders. "But how'd you know who I was?" he asked, anxious to
ascertain how the stranger had picked him out, as distinguished
from Nort or Dick.

"Oh, your father looks like you," was the easy answer, given with
a laugh, in which Snake, Yellin' Kid and the boy ranchers joined.
"When he said he didn't need any riders, adding that perhaps you
might, I decided to take a chance."

"All right. I can use another hand--or, rather, _we_ can,"
and Bud waved his hand toward his cousins. "You can turn your
pony into the corral," he added, "and we'll give you something to
eat--unless you've had breakfast?" he questioned.

"Not so much but what I can eat more. Thanks! My name's Henry
Mellon. I've ridden some for Curly Q and Long L if you want any
references."

"I reckon my dad sized you up all right," spoke Bud.

"I reckon he did!" laughed Henry Mellon, or Four Eyes, as I shall
call him, following the custom of the others on the ranch. "I
wouldn't want to try to put anything over on him."

"It isn't exactly healthy," agreed Bud, for his father bore an
enviable reputation for finding out the truth about matters in
that "cow country."

"Ever ride for Double Z?" asked Yellin' Kid, and the loud tone's
of his voice appeared to startle the newcomer.

"Why, no," was the answer. "I can't say that I have. One of Mr.
Merkel's ranches?" he asked.

"No. It's Hank Fisher's place," spoke Snake. "Glad to meet up
with you," he added, riding forward and extending his hand.
"That's quite a hoss you got there. Beckon he can go some!"

"Well, he doesn't take dust from many," was the cautious
admission, as the new cowboy shook hands all around. "He'll be
glad of a rest, though, for I've ridden hard lately. I suppose I
can use another?" he asked Bud.

"Sure," was the answer. "Snake here, or Yellin' Kid, will show
you which ones you can add to your string. See you later,
fellows," Bud called to his cowboy helpers, as he motioned to
Nort and Dick to follow him to their own private tent.

"What do you think of it, Bud?" asked Nort, when they were alone,
and the new cowboy was being made to feel at home by Snake,
Yellin' Kid, and Old Billee, who had by this time ridden in. The
smell of cooking arose from the tent that Buck Tooth had turned
into a kitchen.

"You mean him?" and Bud nodded toward where the cowboys were
congregated in friendly talk.

"No, I mean about the rustlers."

"Oh, they're bad! No question about it--they're _bad!_"
declared Bud. "As soon as we get a chance we'll ride over and
take a look at the place. It doesn't seem reasonable that they
can drive a bunch of cattle off down the valley, and then have
all traces of 'em disappear as if they'd gone up in an airship."

"That's right!" chimed in Dick. "Do you s'pose this Four Eyes saw
the rustlers?"

"He didn't come from that direction," declared the western lad.

"He _says_ he didn't," spoke Nort. And when Nort accented
that one word Bud looked at his cousin quickly.

"Don't you believe what he says?" Bud asked.

"All the same I'd call up your father," went on Nort.

Bud hesitated a moment and then said:

"I will! No use taking chances. He may be all right, but it won't
do any harm to know it. I like his looks, though we don't often
get a cowboy with glasses. I'll call dad!"

Which he did, on the telephone, learning from his father that Mr.
Merkel knew nothing about the stranger, though he "sized him up,"
as being all right.

But Mr. Merkel had done more than this. He had called, on the
telephone, or had been in communication, otherwise, with the late
employers of Henry Mellon, and the cowboy was well spoken of. He
was a reliable hand, it was said.

"So we don't have to worry about _him_," Bud told his
cousins. "But we do have to take some action about these
rustlers! Hang 'em! I wish they were all bottled up in the
tunnel!"

"That's right!" chimed in Dick.

"Are we going on their trail?" asked Nort.

"If we can pick it up," agreed Bud. "Anyhow, we'll take a ride
over that way. What with cattle missing, and queer shots being
fired behind your back, we're likely to be in for as lively a
time as when we had the water fight!"

"Or locating a Triceratops!" added Nort with a laugh.

After breakfast, and the finishing of the usual "chores" about
camp, the boy ranchers prepared to ride over and look at the
place where the raid had been made. "What cattle had not been
taken--and it was only a small part of the herd that had been
driven off--were now nearer the camp headquarters, having been
hazed over by Snake and Yellin' Kid. Mr. Merkel had been told of
the theft, and had advised prompt action on the part of his son
and nephews.

"Four Eyes seems to be making himself right at home," remarked
Dick, as the three boys started toward the corral, intending to
saddle their ponies and ride over to the scene of the cattle-
rustling operations.

"Yes," agreed Bud.

Henry Mellon was in the midst of Old Billee, Buck Tooth, Snake
and Yellin' Kid, and, as the boy ranchers watched, they saw N
Four Eyes twirling his lariat above his head.

"What's he doing?" asked Dick.

"Oh, just showing 'em some fancy roping," Bud answered.

"Let's go over," suggested Nort. "I'd like to get on to a few
tricks, myself."

They found Four Eyes attempting some of the more difficult feats
of rope throwing. After twirling his lasso about his head, the
rope forming a perfect circle, he changed the direction from
horizontal to perpendicular, and nimbly leaped backward and
forward through the swiftly circling lariat.

Snake tried this, but his spurs caught and there was a queer mix-
up of man and rope. Snake could equal the newcomer's feat in
twirling the rope around his head horizontally, but failed, as
did Yellin' Kid, in the other trick.

"It's just a knack," said Four Eyes, modestly enough. "I had a
lot of spare time, and I practiced some of these fancy twists. I
can rope four horses at once."

"Yes you can--not!" challenged Snake.

"I'll prove it--of course they have to be going in the same
direction," stipulated the new cowboy.

"Even with that I doubt it," went on Snake. "I've heard of that,
but I never saw it done."

"If you fellows will ride past me I'll rope you all," and Four
Eyes indicated Snake, Yellin' Kid, Old Billee and Buck Tooth.
They mounted horses, and as Bud, Nort and Dick watched, the
newcomer prepared for the test.




CHAPTER IX

THE FIRE


"Sat when!" called Snake to the spectacle-wearing cowboy, as the
reptile-fearing cow puncher and his companions prepared to let
themselves be roped by the new arrival--providing he could do it.

"I'll be ready in a moment," remarked Henry Mellon, and Bud and
his cousins could not but note how differently he spoke from the
average run of ranch hands.

"More like one of those college professors who were after the
ten-million-year-old Triceratops," remarked Nort, commenting on
the talk.

"Yes, he is a bit cultured in his speech," assented Bud. "Guess
he hasn't been out west long."

"Then how can he be such a wonderful roper?" Dick wanted to know,
for there was no doubt about the ability of Four Eyes, even if he
had not yet made good oh his boast of putting his lariat around
four galloping horses at once.

"Oh, well, it comes natural to some people," said Bud, "and then,
too, he may have been in Mexico. Some of the Greasers are pretty
slick with the horsehair. But let's watch."

By this time the four cow punchers, counting Buck Tooth as one,
for the Indian was a good herdsman, had lined themselves up about
a hundred feet from where Four Eyes sat on his horse--not the
same black one he had ridden in, but another, of Bud's stock,
that had been assigned him.

"Ready?" asked Yellin' Kid.

"All ready! Come a running!" shouted Four Eyes, and even here he
did not drop a "g."

In an instant the four horses were in motion, coming together, in
line, down the stretch which the newcomer faced. In another
moment Four Eyes had ridden across the path of the oncoming
steeds, and on the ground he spread out his lasso in a great
loop, leaning over in his saddle to do this. He retained hold of
the rope end that was fastened to his saddle, and then, having
spread the net, as it were, he pulled up on the opposite side of
the course down which the four were now thundering in a cloud of
dust.

"Can he do it?" asked Nort.

"He can that way--yes," Bud said. "It's a trick! I thought he was
going to make a throw."

"It's a good trick, though, if he does it," declared Dick.

In another instant all four horses ridden by the cowboys and the
Indian were within the spread-out loop of Four Eyes as it lay on
the ground. And then something happened.

With a mere twist of his wrist, as it seemed, Henry Mellon
snapped the outspread rope upward and, reining back his horse, he
suddenly pulled the lasso taut.

It was completely around the sixteen legs of the four horses,
holding them together, the rope itself being half way down from
the shoulder of each animal.

"He did it! By the great rattler and all the little rattlers, he
did it!" shouted Yellin' Kid, as he pulled his horse to a stop,
an example followed by the others. For though they might all
(save one, perhaps) have pulled out of the encircling rope, there
possibly would have been an accident. One, or more, of the horses
would have stumbled, or been pulled to the ground. And there was
no need of that in what was only a friendly contest.

"You did it!" declared Yellin' Kid, as Four Eyes loosed his rope
and it fell to the ground, the riders guiding their horses out of
the loop. "You shore did it!"

"But it was a trick!" declared Old Billee. "'Tw'an't straight
ropin'!"

"Yes, it's a trick, but not every one can do it," said the new
cowboy.

"Betcher I can!" declared Snake.

He tried--more than once, but failed. It was not as easy as it
looked, in spite of the fact that it was a trick.

"No one can throw, with any accuracy, a loop big enough to take
in four horses on the run," declared Four Eyes when it had been
demonstrated that he alone, of all the "bunch" at the Happy
Valley ranch, could do what he had done. "At least if they can,
I've never seen it. Two, maybe, or three, but not four. Putting
your rope on the ground, and snapping it up as the horses get in
it, is the only way I know."

"I wish you'd show me," spoke Nort.

"I will," promised Four Eyes. "You don't often have need for a
trick like it, but it may come in useful some day."

Then he showed the boys the knack of it, though it was evident
they were not going to master the "how" in a hurry.

Other feats in roping were indulged in by the cowboys, but none
was as expert as Four Eyes. He seemed to possess uncanny skill
with the lariat, though some of his tricks could be duplicated by
Snake, Yellin' Kid and even by the boy ranchers.

But life on a western ranch is not all fun and jollity, though as
much of this as possible is indulged in to make up for the
strenuous times that are ever present. So, after the roping
exhibition was over, and the newcomer had been assigned certain
duties, Bud, Nort and Dick rode down the valley, intending to
look over the place where the steers had been stolen, and the
carcass of one left as a grim reminder of the raid.

Otherwise all in Happy Valley was peaceful. The water was running
into the reservoir, through the pipes that connected with the
mysterious underground course, once utilized, it was thought, by
the ancient Aztecs.

Here and there, feeding on the rich bunch and Johnson grass, were
the cattle in which the boy ranchers were so vitally interested.
The most distant herd had been driven in by Snake and Yellin'
Kid--the herd on which the raid had been made. Like black specks
on the green floor of the valley were the cattle, dotted here and
there.

"If we have luck this season we ought to round up a good bunch
this fall," observed Bud, as he rode with his cousins.

"Yes," agreed Nort. "The water can't be shut off now, and we have
nothing to worry about."

"Except rustlers," put in Dick.

"And the fellow who broke the bottle for us," added Bud. "I'd
like to know who he was."

"It was a bit queer," Nort admitted. "But I believe it was some
passing cow puncher playing a joke on us. This cattle stealing is
no joke, though, and it's got to stop!"

"You let loose an earful that time," spoke Bud, in picturesque,
western slang. "We'll have to let the bottle-breaker wait for a
spell, until we size up this rustler question. We may have to get
up a sheriff's posse and clean out the rascals."

"If we can find 'em," grimly added Dick.

It was some distance to the place where Yellin' Kid and Snake
Purdee had seen evidences of the raid, and it was long past noon
when the boys reached it. They had stopped for "grub" on the way,
having carried with them some food. Water they could get from one
of the several concrete troughs that had been installed, the
fluid coming through pipes from the reservoir.

"Here's where they killed the steer, or yearling," Bud said,
pointing to a heap of bones.

It was all that remained from the feast of the buzzards.

"And here's where they started to drive off the cattle,
evidently," added Nort, pointing to where a plain trail, made by
the feet of many animals, led away from the ground that was more
generally trampled by a large herd.

"Let's follow it," urged Dick. "We want to see when it gets to
the disappearing point"

"That's right!" chimed in Bud.

They urged their ponies slowly along the trail left by the
rustlers. It seemed to go down the valley to the place where the
hills lowered on either side to form a sort of pass. It was in
this pass that the two cowboys said the trail was lost.

"We've got some distance to go, yet," observed Bud, as they
paused to look and make sure they had not lost the trail.

"And, after all, maybe we'll only find the same thing Snake and
Kid did--nothing!" said Nort.

"Well," began Bud, "we've got to get to the bottom of this, and
if we don't in one way we will----"

He was interrupted by a shout from Dick.

"Look!" cried the stout lad. "There's a fire! The grass is on
fire, Bud!"

The western lad gave a quick look in the direction Dick
indicated. It was off to the right from the trail they had been
following.

"It is a fire--regular prairie fire," Bud murmured.

"Could any of the reservation Indians be on the rampage and have
set it?" asked Nort.

"I don't know! We've got to find out about it!" shouted Bud.
"Come on, fellows!" And, wheeling his horse, he abandoned the
trail of the rustlers, and galloped toward the fire, followed by
Nort and Dick.




CHAPTER X

SERIOUS QUESTIONS


Some time before the boy ranchers reached the scene of the grass
fire toward which they were riding, they caught the smell of the
burning fodder. That it was only grass which was aflame they had
known before this, for that was all there was to ignite in that
section of the valley. There were no buildings as yet, tents
taking their place. Though Bud and his father planned to erect
substantial structures if this year was successful.

"A lot of good fodder going up in smoke, Bud!" yelled Nort, as he
rode beside his cousin.

"If it isn't any worse than that we're lucky," was the answer.

"How do you mean?" asked Dick.

"I mean if we don't lose any cattle. The grass isn't any good
after it dries up on the ground, the way this has. But if the
fire starts a stampede of cattle--that will mean a loss."

"Do you think that's what the game is?" asked Nort, encouraging
his pony, Blaze, by patting the animal's neck.

"I can't see what else it is, unless the fire started when some
one threw down a burning match or cigarette, and most cow
punchers aren't that careless. Our fellows wouldn't do it, and I
don't believe any other ranchers around here would, except on
purpose."

"You mean the Double Z bunch?" asked Dick.

"Sort of heading that way," replied Bud, significantly.

Together the boy ranchers rode on toward the fire, silently for a
time, the only sounds being the thud of their ponies' feet and
the creak of saddle leathers and stirrups. The smell of the
burning grass was more pronounced now, and the pall of black
smoke was rolling upward in a larger cloud.

"It's a big fire!" exclaimed Nort. "How can we stop it, Bud?"

"It will soon burn out," the western lad replied. "I happen to
know where this grass is. It's a place where we couldn't very
well bring water to, and if it doesn't rain much, as it hasn't
lately, the fodder gets as dry as tinder. There's a sort of
swale, or valley, filled with this dry grass and it's just
naturally burning itself off."

"Then no very great harm will be done; will there?" asked Dick.

"Not much, unless the cattle get frightened and start to
stampede. That's what I'm afraid of, and why I'm riding over
there. We can't hope to put out the fire." Owing to the fact that
the grass was so dry that no cattle would feed on it, there were
no steers in the immediate vicinity of the blaze Had the fodder
been cut it would have made excellent hay, but it would need to
be cut green to bring this about. As it was, the tall grass had
just naturally dried up as it attained its growth.

"It doesn't take even as much as a blaze like this to start a
stampede," said Bud, as he and his cousins rode nearer to the
burning grass, They could feel the heat of it, now. "It's queer
how frightened animals are of fire," went on the rancher's son.
"There must have been some wonderful sights out here, years ago,
when there were millions of buffalo, and when there were prairie
fires, miles in width, driving them before it."

"I should say so!" chimed in Nort. "I've read some of those
stories in Cooper's books. He's great; isn't he!"

"You delivered the goods that time!" remarked Bud.

"I wish the west was like that now," voiced Dick. "With Indians
and buffalo all over."

"There are a few Indians left yet," said Bud. "They're mostly on
reservations, except when they make a break, ride off and act up
bad. I guess we stock raisers are better off without the wild
Indians.

"As for the buffalo, they were mighty valuable, and if we could
raise them as well as cattle, we'd make a lot of money. The
government is trying to get several herds started, but it's no
easy task. Why, there are almost as many buffalo in New York city
as there is out west now."

"Where!" asked Nort, not thinking for the moment.

"In Bronx Park," answered Bud. "I haven't seen 'em but I've read
about 'em."

"Oh, yes. So have I," agreed Nort. "I forgot about them. Whew!
It's getting hot," he added, as a shift in the wind brought into
their faces a wave of heated and smoke-filled air.

"We'd better not keep on any nearer," decided Bud. "Let's ride
around to the other side, and see what we can see."

Accordingly they turned to the right, as the fire seemed less
fierce on that quarter, and continued on. They had been riding
over a stretch of the valley carpeted with rich, dark green and
fairly damp grass. Bud and his cousins knew that when the fire
reached this stretch it would die out for lack of fuel.

In fact the blaze, as they could see, was confined to an area
about a mile square, but of irregular shape. So far none of the
cattle in sight had shown more than momentary fear of the blaze.
They had run some distance from it and then stopped, sometimes
going on with their eating, and again pausing to look with fear-
widened eyes at the sight of the leaping tongues of fire.

"But we can't tell what's going on behind that smoke screen,"
declared Bud. "Some rustlers may have started it to hide their
work."

"Any of your men over in that direction?" asked Dick.

"They aren't supposed to be," Bud replied. "Of course some of 'em
may have ridden over when they saw the smoke, same as we did. But
I don't see how any of 'em could have reached here as soon as we
did."

Together they rode on, circling to the right to get around the
edge of the fire.

"She's dying out," observed Dick.

"Yes, it can't burn much longer," admitted Bud. "And no great
damage done, either, unless we find something we haven't yet
seen."

But when they had completed the circuit around the edge of the
blazing grass, and could ride across the fire-blackened area, and
behind what was still a thick screen of smoke, they saw something
which caused them great surprise.

This was not the sight of a bunch of stampeding cattle, though it
was what Bud and his cousins folly; expected to encounter. There
were some cattle on this side of the fire, but they had run far
enough away to be out of danger, and beyond where they could be
frightened into a frenzied rush.

"Look!" exclaimed Nort, pointing.

"Four Eyes!" exclaimed Dick.

"By the great horned toad and Zip Foster--yes!" agreed Bud, and
his cousins knew he must be stirred to unusual depths of feeling
to use this name. Zip Foster had not been mentioned in several
weeks. The mysterious personage, on whom Bud called in times of
great excitement, was almost a stranger, of late, in Happy
Valley. In fact Dick and Nort never could get Bud to talk about
Zip. But that is a story which will be told in its proper place,
and due season.

"It _is_ Four Eyes!" went on Bud, as he and his cousins
recognized in the form of a distant rider that of Henry Mellon,
the new cowboy. "And what he's doing here is more than I can
imagine. I'm going to find out, though!"

The spectacled cow puncher was riding swiftly along, on a course
that ran parallel to the direction of the fire. He was on the
edge of the burned area, and galloping-away from the boys. But he
was not beyond seeing or hailing distance.

"Hello there!" shouted Bud, dropping his reins and making a
megaphone of his hands.

Four Eyes heard the call--there was no doubt of that, for he
turned in his saddle and looked back. Then he must have seen the
boys, for he waved his hat at them. Next he pointed ahead, as if
to indicate that he was in pursuit of some one, and kept on,
never slacking his pace.

"Come on!" shouted the impulsive Nort. "Let's catch up to him!"

He was about to spur his pony forward, but Bud caught the bridle.

"No use," said the western lad. "He's too far ahead, and our
horses are too played out If he comes back well hear about it. If
he doesn't--"

"Why, don't you think he'll come back!" interrupted Pick.

"It wouldn't surprise me if he didn't," Bud answered. "There are
some queer things going on around here, and he may be one of 'em.
Though I haven't any reason to suspect him--yet!" he quickly
added.

"What are we going to do!" asked Dick, as he saw his cousin
slacking his pony's pace. "Shall we go on to the end of the
rustler's trail, or follow Four Eyes."

"Neither one," answered Bud. "At least not just yet," he added,
as he saw Nort and Dick look at him curiously. "Let Four Eyes go,
for the time being. He may have seen some cowboys he'd like to
interview about this fire, and be after them. Or he may not. As
for getting on the trail of the rustlers, we'd have to ride back
quite a distance to do that, and it would be dark when we picked
it up again. Too late to do anything."

"Are we going back to camp?" asked Dick.

"No, let's stay right here. We've got grub, and water isn't so
far off. We'll just camp out for the night."

"Suits me," assented Dick.

"Same here," agreed Nort.

It was something the boys had often done. They carried blankets
and tarpaulins on their saddles, ready for this emergency, and
they "packed" sufficient rations for several substantial, if not
elaborate, meals. They had a coffee pot, a frying pan, bacon and
prepared flour, and flapjacks were within their range of
abilities as cooks.

Pausing to note that the fire was rapidly dying out, that there
was no cattle stampede in their vicinity, and noting that Four
Eyes was now almost out of sight, the boy ranchers rode on to the
nearest water-hole, and there prepared to spend the night, though
it was still several hours until darkness should fall. But the
horses were tired, for they had been run hard after the fire, and
the boys decided to rest them. The lads, themselves, were fresh
enough to have kept on, had there been occasion for it.

"Well, I'm glad this was no worse," observed Bud, as they sat
down, having picketed their steeds, and looked at the receding
pall of smoke. "I only hope the fellows at camp won't be
worried."

"I guess they know we can take care of ourselves--at least we
have so far," spoke Nort.

"Yes," agreed Bud. "You fellows have done pretty well since you
came out here--you aren't tenderfeet any longer, not by all the
shots that ever broke bottles."

"Say, what do you think of that, anyhow?" asked Dick, as he
chewed reflectively on a bit of grass.

"I don't know what to think," asserted Bud. "There are a lot of
serious questions we have to settle if we're going to keep on
with this ranch."

"Why, we are going to keep on, aren't we?" asked Nort.

"I should say so!" cried Bud. "We're going to stick here,
rustlers or not! And those are the only fellows I'm worrying
about," and he tossed a lump of dirt in the fire which Dick was
starting.

"Are there always rustlers to worry about on a ranch?" asked
Nort.

"More or less," answered his cousin. "Especially when you have a
place so near Double Z. I don't accuse Hank Fisher of being a
rustler, exactly," he went on, "though I think Del Pinzo is.
That's been proved, but it didn't do much good, for he broke jail
and they can't seem to land him."

"What makes Hank Fisher and that Double Z bunch so sore at you?"
asked Dick.

"I guess it's because we're beating them at the cattle game,"
answered Bud. "And because dad dammed the Pocut River and took
some water for this valley. As if that hurt Hank!" he added. "But
he makes that an excuse. However, I'll fight him to the finish!"

"And we're with you!" added Dick and Nort.

After supper they sat around the fire, talking of various
matters. But ever and again the question troubled them of whether
or not they could get on the trail of the rustlers. And, too,
they wondered what could be the object of Four Eyes.

Night settled down, quiet save for the occasional snorting of the
ponies. The boys wrapped themselves in their blankets and crawled
between their tarpaulins with their feet to the smouldering fire.
They talked until drowsiness stole over them and then, having
decided to maintain no watch, they all three slumbered.

What time it was that Bud awakened he did not know. But awaken he
did, and suddenly.

And the cause of his awakening was the sound of a horse rapidly
ridden, and, evidently, approaching the place where he and his
cousins had camped for the night.

"Who's there?" cried Bud suddenly, and without preface. Under the
blanket his hand sought his weapon.

"Who's there!"




CHAPTER XI

THE WATCH TOWER


Quickly the galloping hoofbeats came to a pause. With a motion of
his foot, as he sat up amid his blanket and tarpaulin, Bud kicked
into the fire a stick of greasewood which flared up, revealing a
rider on a panting horse standing over the boy ranchers, all
three of whom were now awake.

"Four Eyes!" cried Bud, for the flaring fire had revealed that
cowboy. He had accepted his nickname in perfect grace.

"That's who," was the good-natured answer. "I saw the fire as I
was riding back, and I thought you'd be here."

"Where were you riding _to_?" asked Bud, pointedly, his
fingers releasing their grip on the .45 under the blanket. "I
thought you were with Old Billee."

"I was supposed to be," answered Four Eyes, "until my horse got
out of the corral and Billee said I could trail him. That's what
I was doing when I saw you behind the fire. I knew it was almost
burned out, so I didn't stop, or come back to explain."

"Yes, the fire didn't amount to much, though how it was started
is another question," said Bud. "You say your black horse got
out?"

"Yes, jumped the corral fence. He's a bad one at that."

"You didn't get him back," observed Nort, for he and Dick, as
well as Bud, had noticed that the new cow puncher bestrode one of
the extra ponies kept at the camp corral for use in relieving the
regular animals.

"No, he got clean away," and Henry Mellon did not seem to worry
much about it. "All I have to say," he went on, "is that some one
will get a mighty good mount, outside of his habit of jumping out
of corrals."

"You may get him back--if whoever picks him up knows where he
belongs," said Bud. For in that cow country it was still regarded
as a great crime to steal a horse, or keep one known to belong to
some one else.

"Oh, I'll prospect a bit farther for him tomorrow, maybe," said
Four Eyes. "I didn't want to ride too far this evening, so I
turned back. Did you get on any trail of the rustlers?" he asked,
for he had been aware of the object of the boys' ride.

"We switched off to come over to the fire," said Bud. "Did you
notice anything about it?"

"It was burning pretty good when I struck here, from over at your
camp," was the answer. "I saw that it wasn't likely to do much
damage, so I didn't ride back to tell Billee and the others."

"Did you see any one suspicious?" Bud went on, getting up and
putting more wood on the fire.

"No, I didn't," answered Four Eyes, quietly. "Of course anyone
would have had time to start the fire, and get well away before I
arrived on the scene--judging by the way it was burning," he
said. "Though I can't see what object anyone could have, and I'm
inclined to think a passing cow puncher--not one of your crowd
but some one else--may have flipped a cigarette butt into the
grass where it smouldered for some time."

"That may have happened," Bud admitted. "As for an object, if the
fire had stampeded the cattle it would have given some bunch of
Greasers or rustlers a chance to get away with a few steers."

"Oh, yes, of course," agreed Four Eyes. "Well, I didn't see
anybody. Guess I may as well turn in here. No use riding back to
the camp to-night. It'll soon be morning."

"That's right, turn in," invited Bud. His suspicions had
vanished.

"There's some cold coffee if you want it," added Nort.

"Guess I'll put it on to heat," said Henry Mellon. "It's a bit
chilly."

"What time is it?" asked Dick, as the cowboy stirred up the
embers and set the blackened coffee pot on over some stones that
had been made into a rude fireplace.

"Two o'clock," announced Four Eyes, with a glance at his watch.

The boy ranchers watched him idly as he made and drank the
coffee, munching some hard crackers he carried in one of his
pockets. Then, rolling up in their blankets, the quartette went
to sleep.

Morning came, in due course, without any untoward incidents
having occurred. The boys looked across the fire-swept area to
where, beyond it, many cattle could be observed grazing. There
was no further vestige of fire. The heavy dew had extinguished
the last, smouldering spark.

"Well, I'm going back to the camp," announced Four Byes, as they
got the simple breakfast. And how appetizing was that aroma of
sizzling bacon and strong coffee! "Want me to tell 'em anything
for you!" he asked Bud.

"Tell 'em about the fire," was the request. "And say we're going
on the trail of the rustlers. We'll be back to-day, though,
around night, for we haven't grub enough to carry us farther."

"What you going to do about your horse?" asked Dick.

"What can I do?" asked Henry Mellon, in turn. "I can't spend all
my time hunting him, when I've got to ride herd."

"We'll be on the lookout," Nort said.

"Hope you have luck," commented the strange cowboy, as he took
off his glasses and wiped them on his silk neckerchief. "I'm lost
without Cinder, though this pony isn't so bad," and he patted the
neck of the animal he was riding.

A little later the boy ranchers were taking a short cut across
the fire-blackened strip, to get on the trail of the men who had
driven off their cattle, while Four Eyes turned the head of his
pony toward camp.

"Well, it looks as if this was where the trail ended," announced
Bud, several hours later.

"Mighty funny, to come to an end so suddenly," commented Dick.

The three boys had reached one end of the many small valleys into
which the larger vale was divided. They had been following the
trail of the cattle that had been driven off--it was plain enough
until they reached a rocky and shale-covered defile between two
small hills. Then, for some reason or other, all "sign" came to
an abrupt end. There were no further marks of hoofs in the earth,
and none of the ordinary marks to indicate that cattle and horses
had been beyond a certain point.

"It's just as Snake said," observed Dick. "They must have driven
the animals here and then lifted them over the hill in an
aeroplane."

"They couldn't!" declared Nort.

"I know they couldn't. But how else do you account for it?" asked
his brother.

"They may have driven 'em through the pass, and then scattered
dirt and stones over the trail to hide it," suggested Bud.

"Let's look a little farther then," remarked Dick.

They did, but without discovering any clues. It was as though the
rustlers had driven the cattle to the bottom of a rocky and bush-
covered slope, and then as if the side of the hill had suddenly
opened, providing a way through.

"Like some old fairy yarn!" declared Bud. "This gets me!"

"If we could only have gotten on the trail of the rascals sooner,
Bud, we might have learned the secret," spoke Nort. "We ought to
keep better watch!"

"How could we?" asked Bud. "We shoot off on the trail, now, as
soon as we hear of anything."

"Yes, but we ought to get on the jump quicker," insisted his
cousin. "If we had an airship, for instance!" and he laughed at
the impracticability of his remark.

"You can see pretty nearly the whole of the valley from the top
of Snake Mountain," spoke Dick, when he and Bud had joined in the
laugh at Nort's airship idea. "If one of us could be up there--"

"We'd have to be there all the while!" interrupted Bud. "There's
no telling when the rustlers will come. Talk about being on the
watch! It's all right to say so, but how you going to work it?"

Dick suddenly uttered an exclamation.

"What's the matter?" his brother wanted to know. "See a snake?"

"No, but I've got the idea! A watch tower! Why not build one at
our camp--or up on the side of the hill back of the reservoir? We
could make it of logs--high enough to give us a good view. It
wouldn't be much of a trick to climb up in the watch tower three
or four times a day and survey the place. A watch tower is the
thing, Bud!"




CHAPTER XII

IN SPITE OF ALL


Nort and Bud stared at Dick for several seconds without making
any remark. They were sitting on their ponies, completely baffled
by the manner in which the trail of the rustlers had suddenly
"petered out." And they had been about to turn and go back to
camp when Dick made his enthusiastic remark.

"A watch tower?" repeated Bud.

"Sure!" declared his cousin. "We used to build 'em when I
belonged to the Boy Scouts. Remember, Nort?"

"Sure! It begins to come back to me. We used to bind saplings
together and make quite a high perch. The idea was that you might
be able to see your way if you got lost," he explained to Bud.

"Not a bad idea, either," commented the western lad. "I begin to
see your drift, as the wind said to the snowstorm. You mean to
build a sort of high platform up by the reservoir, Dick?"

"Yes, a watch tower of logs, strong enough to hold one or two
fellows. You could make ladders so's we could reach the top
platform, or we could scramble up if we left hand and foot holds
where we lopped the branches off saplings." "That's right!" cried
Bud, now almost as enthusiastic as was his cousin. "And with a
good pair of glasses, or a telescope such as dad has at the
ranch, we could see all over the valley."

"Let's make it!" cried Nort, and the matter was settled as
quickly as that.

Something of the excitement that had moved them must have been
visible on the faces of the boys when they returned to camp, for
Old Billee, greeting them in the absence of the other cowboys,
asked:

"Did you land 'em, Bud?"

"Who; the rustlers? No. Couldn't see where they'd vanished to any
more than, as one of the boys said, as if an airship had been
used. But we got an idea, Billee."

"They're valuable--sometimes," agreed the veteran cow puncher
cautiously.

"We hope this one is going to be!" frankly laughed Bud. "We're
going to build a watch tower, and take turns staying up in it
with a telescope. We can see almost the whole valley if we get
high enough, and as there aren't many patches of woodland where
the rascals can hide, we hope to spot the rustlers as soon as
they begin their tricks."

"Well, you may do it," and again the cowboy was very cautious. "I
never heard of cattle rustlers bein' caught that way, but when
other means fail, try suthin' diffrunt! We'll tackle th' tower!"

And as the other cowboys, even Four Eyes, pronounced the scheme
worth trying, it was put into operation. Mr. Merkel, to whom Bud
communicated his idea over the telephone, rather laughed at it.

"How about nights?" asked the ranchman. "No matter how high you
are up after dark you can't see any better."

"But most of the raids of the rustlers have been in daylight,"
declared Bud.

"It's about fifty-fifty," his father told him. "However, it won't
do any harm to try it. Only don't fall off that watch tower of
yours. I'll come out and look at it when you get it done."

The boy ranchers and their cow punchers started work the next
day. Dick and Nort remembered, in a dim way, how, as Boy Scouts,
they had helped erect towers, hastily constructed of saplings.
Their recalled knowledge, together with the natural adaptability
and skill of the cowboys, finally succeeded in there being
evolved, and erected, on the aide of the valley rather a
pretentious tower. "It must look like an oil well derrick from a
distance," observed Nort, when it was al most completed.

"What do we care how it looks, if it does the trick?" retorted
Bud. "From that perch, and with this telescope dad let me take, I
can tell the color of a cow clear to the end of our valley."

There was no question but what the watch tower did provide an
excellent vantage point. From its top platform, reached by rude
ladders, any unusual movement in the entire valley could be seen
during the day.

It was planned that the boys--and by this I mean the hired
cowboys also--should take turns in being on watch in the tower
during certain periods each day. A schedule was drawn up by Bud
and his cousins, and put into operation as soon as the tower was
completed.

"And now we'll catch the rustlers at work!" boasted Bud.

But alas for their hopes! In spite of all their precautions, and
setting at naught the hard work of constructing the tower, there
was another raid on the cattle in Happy Valley, about a week
after the wooden perch had been set up.

It was not a disastrous raid, and only a half score of steers
were driven off from one of the more distant herds. But the raid
took place, and at night. It was discovered one morning, just as
Bud was going up into the tower, where a seat and sheltered place
had been built.

"They fooled us, Bud," said Old Billee, riding in from a distant
part of the valley.

"Fooled us? How?"

"They let us watch by day, an' they come an' robbed by night!
Another bunch of steers gone!"

"Well--by Zip Foster!" cried Bud, slamming his hat down on the
ground. "I'm getting tired of this!"




CHAPTER XIII

THE SIGNAL


"What's the matter?" cried Dick, hastening from the tent where he
had been making a new loop on his lariat, in preparation for
practicing some of the stunts worked by Four Eyes.

"Have you discovered something from the tower?" asked Nort.

"Yes, I've discovered that the tower isn't any good!" exclaimed
Bud with emphasis. "Oh, it isn't your fault, Dick," he went on,
as he saw that his cousin looked a bit crestfallen. "The tower is
all right."

"Then you saw some rustlers from it?" asked Nort.

"No, that's the trouble," said Bud, ruefully. "We didn't see them
but they were here all right--last night. Tell us about it,
Billee," he requested.

"Well, there isn't an awful lot to tell," said the veteran cow
puncher. "I was just prospectin' around, over on that new growth
of Johnson grass, like you told me to, an' I saw where a steer
had been killed, an' they had eat most of it, too, by th' signs."

"You mean the rustlers?" asked Nort.

"Rustlers, Greasers, Del Pinzo's bunch--anything you like t' call
'em," asserted Billee. "Somebody, that hadn't any right t' do it,
druv off our cattle!"

"And I say it's about time it was stopped!" declared Bud with as
great positiveness as before. This time he picked up the hat he
had dashed to the ground and dusted it off. "I'm going to do
something desperate!" he declared.

"What, son?" asked Old Billee mildly. "They's allers been
rustlers in this cow country, an' they'll allers be some, I
reckon. Course if you can git 'em in th' _act_, they's nothin' t' do
but shoot 'em up. But when you can't git 'em--"

"That's what I'm going to do!" declared Bud. "I'm going to get on
the trail of these rustlers and clean 'em out! Tell us more about
it, Billee. No use getting up in the watch tower now," he added,
gloomily enough. "We've got other work cut out for us. Go ahead,
Billee! Shoot!"

"Let me give you a word of advice first, Buddy boy," spoke the
veteran cowboy as he slowly got off his pony, an act of grace for
which the animal was, doubtless, duly thankful. Billee was no
featherweight, though he was as active as need be, in spite of
his bulk.

"What's the advice?" asked Bud good-naturedly. His first hot
anger was beginning to cool.

"Well, my advice is to leave these rustler alone," said Old
Billee. "They's allers been rustlers here an' they'll allers be
here. Every cow country has 'em. They're like th' old pirates
that used t' hold up th' ships. Taking tribute, so t' speak."

"But our country didn't pay that tribute long!" exclaimed Dick,
remembering the brilliant exploits of Decatur against the
corsains of Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli. "'Millions for defense,
but not a cent for tribute'!" quoted Dick in a ringing voice.

"That's what I say!" chimed in Nort.

"Well, it _is_ tribute, in a way," admitted Old Billee. "I
was going t' say if you'd let th' rustlers make off with a few
steers now an' then it would save trouble. They're used t' takin'
a few. But if you fight 'em then they'll make a big raid with a
big gang, an' mebby, take all you got, Bud!"

"I'd like to see 'em try it!" cried the western lad. "And I won't
sit by and have my cattle stolen; will we, fellows?" he appealed
to his cousins.

"Not on your life!" declared Nort and Dick.

"Well, I shore do like t' hear you talk that-a-way," said Old
Billee. "I didn't think you'd do it. Course it ain't no fun t'
sit still an' let these onery Greasers walk off with your cattle.
But, as I say, it's sometimes easier'n 'tis t' fight 'em. Lots of
th' ranchmen do pay tribute in a way. Your father was one of th'
fust t' fight 'em, Bud, but even he has sorter give up now, an'
he don't raise no terrible row when a few of his steers get hazed
off."

"Well, dad has more, and losing a few doesn't put a crimp in
him," said Bud. "It's different with us, and I'm not going to
stand it. Zip Foster wouldn't and I'm not going to!" and again he
dashed his hat on the ground, thereby startling Billee's horse.

"Say, why don't you get Zip Foster over to help chase the
rustlers?" asked Dick, slyly nudging Nort. They had long been
trying to get Bud to a "show down" on the identity of this
mysterious personage.

"Oh, I reckon we can do it ourselves," and Bud seemed to regret
mentioning the name of his favorite.

"Just what are you aimin' t' do, son?" asked Billee, as Snake and
Yellin' Kid rode up, ready for their day's work out on the range
among the cattle.

"I don't exactly know, but it's going to be something and
something hard!" asserted Bud. "Are there any clues over there,
Billee, to give us a lead?"

"Not many, Bud. Just th' usual. They come onto a few scattered
steers, killed one roasted what they wanted of it, slipped off
the hide an' left th' rest t' th' buzzards. Then they druv off
th' remainder. I didn't foller th' trail, for I could see they
was half a dozen rustlers in th' bunch, an' it ain't exactly
healthy for one man t' trail a crowd like that even if he was a
two-gun man, which I don't lay no claim t' bein' no how,"
concluded the veteran modestly. They all knew he would be brave
enough in an even fight. But they all recognized the fact that it
would have been foolish for him, alone, to have attempted to
trail a gang of desperate men.

"Well, I'm going to see what we can do," Bud declared. "If you've
sized up all there was to see over there, Billee," and he nodded
in the direction of the latest raid on Diamond X Second, "there's
no use in me going over. I think I'll go have a talk with dad,"
he concluded. "I want action!"

"So do we!" added Dick.

"Then come along!" invited his cousin.

A little later the boy ranchers were riding out of the valley, on
their way to the main ranch of Diamond X. They would not be back
until late that night, or, possibly, until the following morning,
for Bud wanted to have a good, long talk with his father, and
decide on some plan of action, that would drive out the rustlers
and keep them away.

As Old Billee had said, probably an older and more experienced
rancher would have put up with a few losses for the sake of peace
and quietness. But Bud, like most lads of his age, was impulsive.
And, as he had said, the loss of even a few steers meant possible
failure to him and his cousins, just starting in the ranch
business as they were.

"Was that a black one?" suddenly asked Bud, as Nort's horse shied
at something.

"A black what!" Nort wanted to know.

"A black jack rabbit that ran across the trail in front of you
just now," Bud resumed. "If it was, it will bring bad luck, as
Old Billee would say," and he laughed.

"No, it was a sort of gray one, part white," Nort answered, for
it was one of those immense hares that had leaped across the
trail, almost under the feet of his pony.

"That means we'll have part bad luck and part good," declared
Dick.

And some hours later, when they had reached Bud's home, and Nell
was serving peach pie and glasses of milk to the boy ranchers,
Nort paused long enough in his eating to remark:

"_This_ is the good luck, Bud."

"You declaimed something that time!" agreed his brother.

Mr. Merkel listened to what Bud and his cousins told them of the
raids on Happy Valley.

"Well, you haven't suffered any more than the average ranchman,
just starting in," said Bud's father. "The rustlers always seem
to pick on a newcomer."

"Well, they'll find I'm a sort of prickly pear to pick on!"
asserted Bud. "Dad, can't we clean out these rascals?"

"Well, it's your ranch, Bud! You can do anything you like, within
reason, but I wouldn't like to see you take any foolish risks."

"There's got to be some risks," declared Bud. "I'm not looking to
get out of 'em. But don't you think it would be a good thing if
we could get rid of this Del Pinzo gang for good?"

"Sure, Bud. I'll give you all the help I can, and I'll spare you
one or two more men if you need 'em--for a time, that is, as
we're pretty busy here."

"All right. When we're ready I'll call on you," said Bud, as
though he had great plans in preparation. As a matter of fact, as
he admitted later, he really did not know what he was going to
do, but he was not going to admit that to his father. In other
words he was "putting up a bluff," and I have some reason for
suspecting that Mr. Merkel knew this. However he gave no sign. In
spite of the pie, cake and other good things set out by Nell and
Mrs. Merkel, Bud and his chums decided to ride back to their camp
that night. It was dark at the start, but the moon would be up
later, and the trail was well known.

The boy ranchers rode leisurely along, for there was no special
hurry in getting back. It might reasonably be supposed that the
rustlers would not again make a raid within a few days at least.
And Old Billee, Yellin' Kid, Snake Purdee and Four Eyes, to say
nothing of Buck Tooth, were well able to look after matters in
Happy Valley.

And thus proceeding at a foot pace, it was well after midnight
when the boys started down the last slope that led into the
valley proper. In daylight it would have been possible, from this
part of the trail, to have observed the tents and the reservoir.
But now all was shrouded in darkness.

No, not altogether darkness, for as the boys rode forward there
suddenly glimmered in the gloom a light, high up in the air. At
first Bud thought it was a star, but a moment later as it moved
from side to side, and then up and down, he exclaimed:

"Look, fellows! A signal!"

"Signal!" repeated Dick.

"Yes. Over at our camp! See! There's a light on our watch tower."

"Maybe there's been another raid!" said Nort.

"Or going to be one!" spoke Bud, grimly.




CHAPTER XIV

FOUR EYES--NO EYES


Thudding along, their ponies seemingly as eager to reach the
ranch camp as were the boys themselves, Bud, Nort and Dick raced
toward the mysterious light. For that it was mysterious they all
agreed, and that it was flashing from the top of the watch tower
they had built to spy for rustlers was another conclusion.

"Do you s'pose it can be Old Billee, or Yellin' Kid signalling to
us?" asked Nort, as he galloped between Bud and Dick.

"They wouldn't know we were coming," Bud answered. "I said we
might not be back until to-morrow."

"That's so. But who do you think is signalling?" asked Dick.

"And who are they signalling to?" Nort wanted to know. "That's
what we've got to find out," spoke Bud, grimly. "And it's what
we're going to find out in a short time! Come on, Sock!" he
called to his pony. "This is only exercise for you!"

Indeed the animals had not been hard pressed, and this burst of
speed was rather a relief than anything else. Together the boy
ranchers hastened toward their camp.

For some time the lantern--it was evidently that and not a
torch--was waved to and fro, parallel to the horizon, and again up
and down. It was so evidently a signal, or a series of them, that the
boys no longer questioned this theory.

But who the signaller was, and to whom he was flashing his
message in the dark night--those were other questions. And they
were questions that needed answering.

"It must be one of our men," remarked Bud. "No one else could get
into camp and climb the tower without a row being raised."

"How do you know there hasn't been a row?" asked Dick.

"What do you mean?" countered Bud.

"I mean there may have been a fight," Dick went on. "Maybe the
rustlers have surprised our camp, put Yellin' Kid and the rest of
our bunch out of business and are signalling to the main crowd to
come up and drive off the cattle. I might as well say that as
think it," he added. "And that's what I've been thinking the last
few minutes."

This dire suggestion struck Bud and Nort silent for a moment. And
then, more because he did not want to believe it, than because he
did not believe it possible, Bud exclaimed: "I don't believe any
such thing!"

"I don't want to believe it!" said Nort. "But of course there may
have been a fight."

"If there was, there's a lot of dead Greasers and rustlers
scattered around, you can depend on that!" declared Bud, grimly.

"Yes, I reckon Old Billee, Snake and the rest would give a good
account of themselves," asserted Dick.

"And they wouldn't be taken by surprise, either," added Nort.

"Not likely," affirmed his cousin.

Again they directed their gaze toward the flashing signal on the
tower. Once more they saw it slowly raised and lowered, and then
swept from side to side.

"Are they spelling out a message in Morse or Continental code?"
asked Bud.

"It does look like the Morse," said Nort. "We learned that when
we were Boy Scouts. I can make out some letters, but they don't
spell anything that has any sense to it."

"Maybe it's in Spanish," suggested Bud, who was not familiar with
the method of spelling words by flags or lanterns. "There's a lot
of Greasers around here who don't know anything but Spanish."

"That's so," agreed Nort. "I didn't think of that. I'll try and
catch what the next word is, and maybe you'll know it, Bud," for
the western lad understood some of the language of Mexico.

But just when Nort was directing his attention to the signal
flashes Dick, who had ridden on a little ahead, suddenly called:

"Is that a fire?"

They looked to where he pointed and, for a moment, thought it was
another blaze in the dried grass. For the eastern skyline that
had been only dimly seen was now outlined in a red flare.

"It is a fire!" asserted Nort.

"It's the moon rising!" said Bud.

And so it proved. The moon was coming up, big, round and red,
and, when below the horizon, cast a reflection not unlike a fire.
The boys laughed with relieved spirits as they rode on. But when
Nort next directed his attention to the flashing lantern it was
no longer signalling. In the direction of the watch tower there
was only blackness, for the moon's rays had not yet reached it.

"Looks as if they'd quit," said Dick.

"Maybe they thought the moonlight would give 'em away," suggested
Nort.

"We'll soon know about it," declared Bud, with grim meaning.

They were now within a short distance of the tents, gleaming
white in the moonbeams. From one of the larger canvas shelters
shone a ruddy light, showing dark figures within. And then was
borne to the ears of the boys the sound of laughter.

"That doesn't seem to indicate a raid or fight," spoke Nort.

"You can't be sure," Bud remarked. "We'd better be careful. Let's
dismount and go on foot."

They left their ponies, throwing the reins over the heads of the
animals, and cautiously approached the tents of the cow punchers
on foot. This tent was, practically, the "bunk house," the
assembling place of the men after their hours of work. But before
the boys reached this their approach was evidently heard. For a
figure came to the flap and a challenging voice called:

"Who's there?"

"Old Billee!" cried Bud, as he and his chums recognized the
tones, and with the recognition came a sense of relief.

"Oh, you're back; are you, Bud?" asked the veteran cowboy. "I
thought I heard some one."

"Who's up on the watch tower with a lantern?" called Bud, once it
was certain that no disaster had occurred.

"Watch tower?" repeated Yellin' Kid, coming to the flap to stand
beside Old Billee.

"Lantern?" added Snake.

"Somebody's signalling," went on Bud.

"You'd better come out and we'll have a look. Are you all here?"

"All of us," answered Old Billee. "Come on, Four Eyes!" he cried.
"Tumble out of your bunk. There's somethin' doin'!"

"Four Eyes must have gone to bed early," said Bud to his cousins
as they stood outside the tent. For Billee's call indicated that
the spectacled cowboy had retired.

"Hi! Four Eyes!" shouted Yellin' Kid, in a voice that would have
awakened the proverbial Seven Sleepers. "Turn out!"

There was a moment's pause, during which Buck Tooth came up to
the bunk tent from his own special nook for sleeping. And then,
the voice of Snake Purdee announced:

"Four Eyes isn't here!"

"Isn't here!" repeated Billee. "Why, I saw him turn in a while
ago, when we started t' play cards."

"He isn't here now," declared Snake. "His bunk is empty, and he
didn't go out the front way, I'll wager on that. There's
something queer going on all right!"




CHAPTER XV

A BIG RAID


Into the bunk tent of the older cowboys crowded the young ranch
lads. Doubt, suspicion and wonder mingled in their minds, and
foremost of all were two outstanding matters--the mysterious
signalling light, and the disappearance of Four Eyes--if, indeed,
that individual had really taken himself off.

"Are you sure he was here?" asked Bud, when, after the first
break of surprise, questions were in order.

"Sure," replied Yellin' Kid. "We all come in here, after th'
chores was done, t' have a friendly game of cards an' smoke. We
didn't look for you back until late, if at all."

"And was Four Eyes with you then?" asked Nort.

"You couldn't exactly say he was _with_ us," replied Snake.
"An' yet he wasn't _away_ from us. He pretended he didn't
want t' play cards, an' he said he was so doggoned tired an'
sleepy that he was goin' t' turn in. I told him that bein' in th'
same tent with a whisperin' infant like Yellin' Kid, wasn't
perzactly healthy for sleep, but Four Eyes said he didn't mind.
So he turned int' his bunk, an' pulled th' covers tip over his
head, though I don't see how he stood it, for it isn't winter,
not by a long shot, an' this place was full of smoke. Anyhow he
done it, an' t' keep th' light out of his eyes, so he said, he
pulled a chair up in front of his bunk like you see it now, an'
stuck his coat over it."

Snake pointed to a chair, now twisted awry from in front of the
cot that the missing cowboy had occupied. His coat, draped over
the back, effectually screened him from observation when lying on
the bed.

"He did that so's he could slip out an' get away!" spoke Yellin'
Kid, justifying the sarcastic name of "whispering infant," that
Snake had bestowed on him.

"But how did he get out?" asked Dick.

"And what for?" Bud wanted to know,

"He got out this way!" said Old Billee quietly, as he leaned over
the cot and pushed with his hand against the side of the tent. A
right-angled opening was disclosed, cut with a sharp knife. The
loose point was at the bottom, and once Four Eyes had slipped
out, the cut flap hung down in place, not disclosing, in the dim
light, that the canvas had been cut.

"He got out that way," went on Old Billee, "because th' tent
sides, bein' fast t' th' board floor, wouldn't let him crawl out
very easy. He's a slick one, Four Eyes is!"

"But why should he slip out this way? Did he do anything? And who
was doing that signalling?" exclaimed Bud.

"I reckon you'll find, son, that the signallin' an' th' vamoosin'
of our late friend Four Eyes had some connection," spoke Old
Billee. "We, bein' intent on our game of cards, didn't know
nothin' at all 'bout it till you fellows rode up. Now it's about
time we got int' action!"

"You win!" declared Yellin' Kid loudly. "There's suthin' queer
prospectin' around these diggings an' I'd like t' know what it
is!"

"I guess we all would," spoke Bud. "And we'd better start right
in to find out about it. Come on, boys," he called to his
cousins, but the older cow punchers took the invitation to
themselves also, and soon, with lanterns and flashlights (which
handy little contrivances the boy ranchers nearly always carried)
they began the search.

First they made sure that Four Eyes was playing no trick on them
by hiding under one of the cots in the bunk tent. Though, as Bud
pointed out, it would pass the bounds of fun to have cut the
canvas shelter as it was cut.

But no trace of Four Eyes was to be found.

"He's gone, hide, hair, horns, brand an' everythin'!" was the way
Old Billee expressed it.

"How about his horse?" asked Nort.

"He didn't get his black one back," remarked Snake. "But he may
have sort of helped himself to one of yours, Bud."

This was found to be the case when the corral was visited. It
could hardly have been expected, in that country of great
distances, that the missing cowboy would not take a horse.

"And now let's have a look at the tower," suggested Bud, when a
rapid survey, under the fitful moonlight, had been made in the
vicinity of the camp, and no trace of the missing man discovered.
"Some one was signalling from up there, and it must have been
Four Eyes."

"It _could_ have been some one else," suggested Dick, not
because he believed that, but because he wanted to sift all the
evidence and get to the bottom of matters.

"Yes, it may have been a wandering cowboy, Greaser or some
Indian, far from his native reservation," Bud admitted. "But I'm
saying it was Four Eyes, though why he did it I can't imagine."

Nor could any of the others. Or, if they had a theory, they did
not give voice to it, though, afterward, one and all said they
had associated the missing cowboy with the rustlers.

But a search on and near the hastily-built watch tower disclosed
nothing. On the top platform, whence, doubtless, the signalling
lantern had been waved, no light was found. There were burned
matches and cigarette stubs, to be sure, but these were as much
the discarded property of Yellin' Kid or Snake, as of Four Eyes,
for they all had taken turns doing sentry duty, and, as it was
lonesome up on the high perch, smoking was indulged in.

"Well, he's away, and that's all there is to it," said Bud, when
the search was over. "Now all we've got to do is to wait for
something to happen."

"Do you think something will happen?" asked Nort.

"Well, things have been happening ever since we came out here,"
observed Dick. "First it was the finding of the Triceratops. Then
it was the water fight in the mysterious tunnel, and now it's the
rustlers after our cattle. Isn't that enough to happen?"

"Oh, yes," admitted Nort. "But I thought Bud meant something
special was about due."

"It wouldn't surprise me if it did happen," declared the western
lad. "But I wasn't thinking of anything out of the usual. Only
the combination--Four Eyes missing and us seeing the light makes
me suspicious. So I'm ready for anything."

"And I'm ready for my bunk!" declared Dick, with a yawn. "It's
most morning! Let's turn in!"

They did, but none of the boy ranchers rested well, for they were
too worried.

What did it all mean? And what events portended? These were
questions they wished soon would be answered.

The morning did not bring the return of Four Eyes, nor in the
better light were any more clues discovered at the Watch Tower.
Looking from its height, over the peaceful valley, the boy
ranchers saw nothing evil, and there was no hint of coming
disaster other than in the suspicions engendered by the recent
strange happenings.

"Do you suppose that signalling could have meant an Indian
uprising?" asked Nort.

"Cracky! If it does we'll have to fight 'em, won't we?" asked
Dick, with sparkling eyes.

"I don't imagine the Indians around here have any notion of
rising," said Bud. "They have done such things, years ago, but I
doubt if they have enough spirit left for it now. They are too
well satisfied with their lot. But of course it's possible,
though Buck Tooth says he doesn't look for anything of the sort.
But then he's been with white men so long he isn't really much of
an Indian any more."

"Well, if there's any Indian fighting to be done I want to do my
share!" declared Dick, and his brother nodded in confirmation.

But as several days passed, and nothing more happened than the
usual hard work on the ranch, the apprehensions of the boys began
to disappear. They made inquiries about Four Eyes, but no one on
the neighboring ranches had seen him. Mr. Merkel expressed
himself as greatly disappointed in the character of the cowboy he
had sent to his son.

"Maybe you got off lucky, with only a cut tent," the ranchman
observed. "But better be on your guard, son."

"We will, Dad," replied the western lad.

It was about a week after the signal lights had been observed,
the disappearance of Four Eyes coinciding, that, as Bud and his
cousins were eating "grub" in camp one noon, they heard shots
fired off to the north, and in the direction of the trail between
Happy Valley and Diamond X ranch.

"What's that?" asked Nort, starting from his seat.

"Stampede, maybe," suggested Dick, for the boys knew that the
older cowboys were in that direction, rounding up a small herd
which had been purchased and that was to be shipped east.
 Bud hurried to the entrance of the tent and what he saw caused
him to cry:

"Come on, boys! It's the rustlers again! They're making a raid!
Get your guns!"

In less time than you would have deemed possible, unless you had
seen it, the boy ranchers were in the saddle, and were galloping
toward the scene of the shooting. The sounds were more plain,
now, and as they straightened out on the trail they could see
where a fight was in progress.




CHAPTER XVI

ON THE TRAIL


Yellin' kid, Old Billee and Snake Purdee were standing off the
attacks of more than double their number. This was the spectacle
that greeted Bud, Nort and Dick as they swept up the trail and
toward the sound and sight of the firing. For now they could see
the little puffs of smoke which preceded the discharges of the
guns. Light, traveling faster than sound, brought to the eyes of
the boys the puffs of burned gunpowder before the report echoed.

"This is the meaning of that night-signalling!" cried Nort, as he
galloped beside his cousin.

"Looks so," was the answer. "They're getting bold and desperate
to try to rustle our stock in the day time."

"You said it!" exclaimed Dick, as he looked to make sure he had a
good supply of cartridges.

As the boy ranchers drew nearer the scene of the conflict they
could observe that the herd, which their cowboys had been driving
in, was now in confusion. And no wonder, with more than half a
score of wildly-excited men riding among them, shouting and
firing heavy revolvers.

For distant shouts borne to the ears of our heroes told of the
excitement under way. As nearly as Bud, Nort and Dick could tell
from their vantage point, eight or ten Mexicans, Greasers or
other undesirable characters, had swept down from the north on
Old Billee, Snake and Yellin' Kid as the latter were hazing the
cattle along to the trail which led to the distant railroad
station. Naturally the cowboys of Happy Valley had turned on
their attackers and the fight resulted.

It was evidently the intention of the rustlers (for of their
character there was little doubt) to drive off as many of the
Diamond X Second stock as possible. And if they had to kill or
maim the watchers it meant little to them.

But, so far, none seemed to have been seriously hurt, for no
horses were running around with empty saddles, and no bodies were
prostrate on the ground. I think, if the truth were known, that
the first shooting on both sides was so wild that no one thought
to take accurate aim, which is difficult on the back of a rushing
cow pony, and with a heavy .45 gun.

It was, essentially, a running fight and Bud, Dick and Nort were
urging their ponies forward as rapidly as possible to get their
share of it. However, they were not destined to come to close
grips with the enemy. For as they drew nearer to the scene of
conflict, their guns out, and eager in their own hearts for
action, yelling encouragement to their comrades, the boy ranchers
saw their foes suddenly swing away.

This sudden giving up on the part of the rustlers was due either
to a signal from one of their number that the raid was a failure,
or else they saw reinforcements, in the persons of the boys, and
had no desire for a more nearly even battle.

At any rate, with wild yells, the rustlers pulled up their
ponies, and turned off down the trail, riding at break-neck
speed. Yellin' Kid and Snake, with shouts of defiance, swept
after them, and might have caught them except for what happened
to Old Billee. The veteran suddenly reeled in his saddle, and
would have fallen, except that, as he lagged behind his two
companions, Bud rushed up to him and held him in place.

"Are you hit, Billee?" Bud cried.

"Only just a scratch, but it seems like it took th' tucker out o'
me mighty suddin," gasped the old man. "Beckon I'd better get
down. I'd 'a' fallen if you hadn't rid up, Bud."

"That's what I thought when I saw you reel."

By the time Bud, with his cousins, was helping Old Billee to the
ground, Yellin' Kid and Snake turned and saw what had happened.
They then gave up all thoughts of pursuing the retreating
rustlers and came riding back, winded and excited, but none the
worse for their encounter with the rascals.

"Did they get you, Billee?" asked Snake, a gleam in his eyes that
portended no good to the perpetrators of the deed if he ever
caught them.

"Only a scratch," said the old cowboy, but rather faintly. He put
his hand to his side, and quickly opening his garments, as he sat
on the ground, his friends saw that the wound was more than that.

However, the bullet had glanced off the ribs, and aside from
having lost considerable blood, which accounted for his weakness,
Old Billee was little the worse off.

"I think we got one of 'em," announced Snake. "I saw him holdin'
pretty desprit like t' his saddle."

"What started it? Who were they?" asked Bud, as the last of the
raiders swept out of sight amid the rolling hills of the valley.

"Oh, some of Del Pinzo's gang, you can make sure of that," said
Yellin' Kid. "They just rid down on us an' started t' fire. We
saw what their game was all right, an' come back at 'em. They
didn't get one steer, Bud!" he added, proudly enough.

"That's good," said the boy rancher.

"But they did an awful lot of shootin'," added Snake. "I thought
sure we'd all be hit, but Old Billee was th' only one what got
it. I never heard so much Fourth of July since I was a kid."

"It was a lot of shooting, according to the results," spoke Bud,
as he watched Snake bandaging Billee's wound, for the cowboys
carried a primitive first-aid kit. "I wonder if that meant
anything?"

"What do you mean?" asked Nort.

But Bud did not answer.

Making sure that none of the cattle had been hit, and managing,
after rather strenuous work, in quieting the herd, the boy
ranchers and their friends started back toward camp, Old Billee
taking it as easily as possible, for his side was getting stiff
and painful.

While they were yet some distance away from the white tents that
corresponded to the usual ranch buildings, Bud and his companions
saw riding toward them a solitary figure.

"It's Buck Tooth," declared Dick.

"And if he doesn't bear evil tidings I miss my guess," murmured
Bud.

Evil tidings they were, in very truth. For as the Zuni came near
enough he was seen to be much excited. Drawing rein, he made a
sweeping, comprehensive gesture with one hand, toward the south
end of the valley, and exclaimed: "All gone!"

"What's all gone?" asked Bud, a great fear clutching at his
heart.

"Cattle!" answered the Indian. "Rustlers drive 'em all 'way,
while you shootin' off there!" and he pointed toward the scene of
the recent conflict.

For an instant Bud said nothing. Then, with trembling lips, which
alone betrayed his feeling, he remarked:

"That was it! They divided their gang and started a fake fight up
at one end, to draw us there, while they worked against our big
herd at the other end. It was a slick piece of work. No wonder
they shot more than they hit. They wanted to keep us away from
the south of the valley."

"I guess you've struck it, Bud," said Snake, grimly. "They sure
fooled us, an' I never smelled a rat! Whew!"

Bud, with lips that were firmer now, touched spurs to his pony
and hastened toward the tents and corral.

"What you aimin' to do?" called Yellin' Kid after him.

"I'm going to get on the trail of those rustlers," grimly
announced Bud Merkel, "and I'm not coming back until I land 'em!
Come on, fellows," he called to his cousins. "Let's pack up for a
long hike on the trail!"




CHAPTER XVII

WILD COUNTRY


Following after Bud, his cousins and the older cowboys swept
along toward the home camp--to the tents which served the
purposes of ranch buildings. Yellin' Kid trotted beside Old
Billee, who, however, now that his bullet-scarred side had been
bandaged, rode with more ease.

"What you goin' t' stop for?" asked Snake, when he saw Bud
turning in toward the corral where spare ponies were kept.
"Aren't you going after the rustlers?"

"Yes, when we get packed up for a long ride!" Bud answered
grimly. "What's the good of riding over just to look at the place
where they drove off our cattle? I can see that any time. What I
want to do is to get on their trail."

"And not give up until we land 'em!" added Nort.

"That's talking!" cried his brother. "Did you see any of 'em,
Buck Tooth?" he asked the Indian, beside whom he was riding.

"Me see too many," was the grim answer, which explained why the
Zuni had probably not gone in pursuit. "They ride like what you
call--jack-rabbits."

"They can't keep that pace up long," declared Bud, as he slipped
from the saddle, having turned his horse into the corral. "They
can start the steers off with a hip-hurrah, but they'll have to
slow down if they don't want to kill 'em, and that wouldn't pay.
They'd get some fresh beef and the hides, but they'd waste more
than they'd get out of it."

"What do you imagine they really plan to do, and who are they?"
asked Dick, as he and his brother followed Bud to their own
special tent.

"I can only guess who they are, and your guess is as good as
mine," the western lad answered.

"Then I'll say Del Pinzo and the Hank Fisher gang," ventured
Nort.

"And I'll agree," replied Bud. "They have two motives, now, for
working against us. One because we've beaten 'em in two innings--
the time of the Triceratops and in the underground river game.
But getting our cattle--or the cattle of any other rancher--is
reward enough in itself at the price beef is selling for now.
They want to make a lot of money, and ruin us because we've come
to Happy Valley. But they'll find that we can bat a little, too,"
added Bud, carrying out the simile of a baseball game. "And it's
going to be our turn at the plate mighty soon!"

"The sooner the better," declared Nort, and his brother nodded in
agreement.

When Old Billee's wound had been further attended to, with the
more adequate remedies kept in camp, there was a gathering of the
"clan," so to speak, in the tent where the boys and their cowboy
helpers usually ate.

"Then you aren't going to chase over to where they drove off your
cattle right away; is that it, Bud?" asked Snake.

"I don't see any use," said the young western ranch lad. "All
we'd see would be the marks of the trail, and they'll stay for
some time, if it doesn't rain, which isn't likely. What I want to
do is to pack enough grub--and other things," he added significantly
with a motion toward his .45, "for a long trip. We've got to get at the
bottom of how they drive off our cattle, and manage to get them out
of the valley without leaving a trace.

"That's the puzzle we have to solve, as we found out about the
hidden water. Up to now the raids of Del Pinzo and his crowd--
assuming that they are the ones--have been small. They're the
kind that's always going on, and a lot of the cattlemen, and Dad
among 'em, seem to shut their eyes to the thefts. I'm not going
to do that. But what I started to say was that, up to now, the
raids have been small ones. Very likely they thought we wouldn't
make much fuss over the steers we lost.

"But this is a big raid, and the others were only leading up to
it. They played to get us out of the south end of the valley, and
away from our big herd so they could drive it off unmolested."

"And they sure did it," added Nort.

"But they haven't gotten clear away yet!" snapped out Bud. "We're
going to take after them! They can't go fast with a big bunch of
cattle, and we're bound to catch them sooner or later!"

"They'll probably put up a fight," observed Old Billee, who was
feeling much easier, now.

"That's what I'm counting on, and that's why I don't want any
slip-up!" exclaimed Bud. "I'm going to call on Dad for some
reinforcements."

"Oh, we can handle that Del Pinzo gang!" boasted Yellin' Kid.

"We could if they'd fight fair and even, maybe," assented Bud.
"But they'll be on the lookout for trouble, now, and they'll have
a big gang of Greasers with them. And while, ordinarily, one
cowboy is a match for half a dozen of the ornery Mexicans, you've
got to be on the watch for treachery. There's no use tackling
this thing unless we have a big enough crowd to meet the biggest
bunch Del Pinzo can muster."

"Well, there's some sense in that," admitted Snake. "I'm not
afraid of any bunch of rustlers that Hank Fisher can scare up,"
he went on, "but it isn't a man's personal feelings we got to
consider. It's for the good of this ranch. And, as Bud says, we
want to make a clean-up this inning."

"That's why I'm going to have help," Bud remarked, as he went to
call his father on the telephone.

Mr. Merkel whistled when he heard the disastrous news.

"I didn't think they'd go at it wholesale, that way, Bud," he
told his son over the wire. "But you've got the right idea. Go
after 'em and clean 'em up! When you take the trail don't turn
back until you've finished the job. I'll send you as many men as
I can spare, Slim Degnan with 'em!"

"Slim? That's good!" cried Bud. "Now we'll make a clean up. But
don't get worried, Dad, if you don't hear from us in several
days, or a couple of weeks. We'll probably be out of the reach of
a telephone."

"Yes, I realize that! Well, good luck to you. When you going to
start?"

"First thing in the morning. Old Billee was shot up a little, so
I'll leave him and Buck Tooth to look after what cattle we have
left. Can Slim and the others get here in time to start in the
morning?"

"They can if I send them over in the jitney which will be
quicker, and save them some hard riding. Have you got ponies
enough for them?"

"Yes, plenty. Get 'em over here in the gasolene gig and we'll do
the rest!" laughed Bud, though he was in anything but a laughing
mood, His mind was grimly set on getting back his cattle, and in
punishing the evil gang of rustlers that was dominating that
section of the "cow country," as ranch localities are sometimes
called.

Immediately on hanging up the receiver, Bud Merkel started in on
a busy time. Nor were his cousins less engaged. Once the boy
ranchers bad determined to "hit the trail," they planned to "do
the trick up brown," as Nort expressed it.

Bud proved himself to be well fitted for the task in hand, in
spite of his youth. But he had been well trained by his father,
and life on Diamond X had put him in trim for hard fighting. It
was not the first time he had had to do with cattle raids, though
it was his own first experience on a large scale, and he was
vitally interested. He followed the plans he had seen his father
put into operation more than once.

Saddles, girths and lariats were looked to, as were all the
various trappings of the ponies, without which the raid could not
be undertaken in that country of far distances. Then it was
necessary to pack sufficient "grub" to last for at least a week,
in case no provisions could be come upon.

As for shelter, each man, and by that term I also include the boy
ranchers, had a pair of blankets and a tarpaulin to spread under
him on the ground. The days were hot, but the nights were cool in
spite of camp fires.

Of course each one "packed a gun," some of the cowboys two, and
there was no lack of ammunition.

Old Billee felt badly at not being able to go. But his wound was
giving him more pain than he liked to admit, and after vainly
protesting that he simply must go, he agreed that perhaps it was
best for him to remain behind.

In the "jitney," as Mr. Merkel dubbed his auto, several cowboys
from Diamond X (including the veteran foreman Slim) reached Happy
Valley in due season. They were fitted out with ponies, and after
the situation had been talked over, and every precaution against
failure taken, they were ready to start early on the morning
following the big raid.

The outfit of the boy ranchers had been sadly depleted by the
descent of the unscrupulous gang, and what cattle remained had
been driven to the feeding grounds in the vicinity of the
reservoir, where Buck Tooth, Old Billee and one man from Diamond
X could watch over them.

"Are we all ready?" asked Bud, as he and his cousins, followed in
example by the older cowboys vaulted to saddles.

"I reckon so," announced Slim, as he slewed around his holster
with its newly-oiled .45.

"Let's go!" said Bud, briefly, and away they started.

They made trail, first, to the scene of the raid. As Bud and the
others had anticipated, there were plenty of signs showing where
the cattle had been driven off. A large herd was missing, and it
must have taken a number of rustlers to have rounded them up and
started them toward Double Z, or whatever place was to be used to
change, or blur the brands, so the cattle could be sold to some
innocent purchaser, perhaps. Though there were not wanting, in
that country, not-so-innocent-purchasers of rustled cattle.

"They'll have to keep near grass and water," said Slim, as he
rode along with Bud and his cousins. "So we'll do the same."

"Yes, they can't make a dry drive very far," Bud agreed. "They
followed this range, it seems."

On reaching the scene of the raid the trail led off to the left,
along a tow mountain range or wild and rugged peaks, some,
evidently, of volcanic origin. At the foot of this range was
grass in plenty, and, occasionally, a water hole, made possible
by the fact that End's father had brought the waters of the Pocut
River to the valley by means of the tunnel flume.

"The trail's plain enough for a blind man to follow," said
Yellin' Kid, who rode beside Snake.

"But it's going to get harder in a little while," spoke Snake.
"We're getting into wilder country, and rocks don't take much of
an impression. See, it's peterin' out now."

He pointed to the surface of the ground over which they were then
traveling. The grass and earth were more and more scanty, and in
some places there were patches of shale and rock, on which even
an iron-shod hoof would leave no mark.

"Yes, it's a wild country," agreed Bud. "I've never been over as
far as this, and I don't believe our cattle ever get here. There
isn't enough feed," he added, as he looked around.

The cavalcade was now in a sort of narrow gorge, or gully, with
rocky walls on either side, and only scant vegetation on the
bottom, where some bunch grass grew. The water seemed to have
disappeared.

"They can't drive cattle on a trail like this very far," said
Slim, looking about with critical eyes.

"And yet they did come in this gulch," said Bud, for the "signs"
were still plain.

"Oh, yes, they've been here," agreed Slim. "It sure is a queer
trail they picked. I don't see--"

He did not finish the sentence. Somewhere In that lonely and wild
section of Happy Valley a single shot rang out, making the echoes
vibrate loudly, and awakening a distant coyote, who sent up a
mournful howl.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE BOILING SPRING


"What's that?" asked Bud suddenly, his voice seeming almost as
loud as that of Yellin' Kid's. The horses had been reined to a
halt as soon as the shot sounded, and there was stillness which
made the boy rancher's exclamation appear more vociferous than
would otherwise have been the case. "What's that?" asked Bud
again.

"Some one fired," answered Nort.

"Brilliant!" chuckled Dick. "Bright answer!"

"Almost as bright as my question," conceded Bud, who was willing
to admit when he had "pulled a bloomer," as some Englishmen might
term it. "It was a shot, though," he added. "I wonder if we'll
hear any more?"

They all paused, in listening attitudes; the boy ranchers, the
cowboys associated with them in the Happy Valley venture and the
others sent with Slim to help run down the rustlers, on whose
trail they now were.

But no further firing followed in the three or four minutes they
waited there in that lonely gorge, the only sounds being those
caused by the restless movements of the steeds.

"I wonder if some one shot at us, or if that was a signal!"
remarked Nort, as Bud gave the sign to advance.

"I didn't hear any bullet singin' out this way," drawled Slim.
"Not that I'm hankerin' to," he quickly added.

"Then it might have been a signal," went on Nort.

"What makes you say that?" Bud questioned.

"Because it would seem that if the rustlers are ahead of us,
trying their best to get far enough away, or to get to some
secret hiding place, that they might leave some behind, on the
trail, to give warning when we show up," went on Nort.

"Yes, that might be so," slowly admitted Bud. "In fact I think it
was, probably, a signal, and it may have been given by the same
one who gave signals before."

"What do you mean?" asked Dick.

"I mean Four Eyes, and the lantern flashes we saw from the watch
tower that night we rode in," Bud answered. "I believe Four Eyes
was and still is, in with the rustlers, and that he gave a signal
to show that everything was ready for the raid."

"But the raid didn't take place until some time after we saw
those flashing lights," said Dick.

"It takes some time to get a cattle-rustling gang together,"
declared Bud. "I wish we could find Four Eyes."

His gaze roved the sides of the lonely gorge, and sought to
pierce the maze of the trail ahead. But as it wound in and out,
following the windings of the defile, he could not see far in
that direction.

"If it was Four Eyes, he played his game mighty slick!" declared
Yellin' Kid. "He fooled us all, includin' your paw, Bud!"

"Well, if we get on his trail, and can connect him with the
rustlers, which it won't be hard to do, I'm thinking, he won't
play any more tricks," declared the western lad vindictively and
with righteous anger. "But if that was a warning shot, and that's
what it seems it must have been, we'd better take some precautions
ourselves."

"Such as what-like?" asked Slim, willing to let Bud take the
lead, as the search for the rustlers was distinctly an affair of
the boy ranchers.

"We ought not to go ahead, all in a bunch," decided Bud. "We may
run into a bunch of Greasers at some turn of the trail, and if we
have scouts out we can handle the situation better."

"I was going to suggest it," said Slim, "but I thought you'd
think of it yourself, Bud, being as you're your paw's son."

Bud was pleased at the implied compliment, and, a little later,
as they advanced, they were divided into three small parties,
with rear and vanguard, to insure against a surprise in back,
which might easily happen.

And so they advanced through the defile, keeping watch on both
sides of the trail. There were still evidences that a herd of
cattle had been driven along the rocky defile, but because of the
rocky floor, if such it may be called, the signs were faint, and
only an experienced westerner could have picked them up. But the
boy ranchers were accompanied by experienced cow punchers, who
knew every trick of the trail.

Bud had insisted that it was one of his rights to ride in the
advance guard, with Yellin' Kid, and it was while they were
performing this duty, of watching for a surprise, that they saw,
just around the bend of the trail, some wisps of white vapor
floating up.

"There they are!" exclaimed Bud in a hoarse whisper, pointing.
"They've stopped there--or some of 'em have. Or maybe it's the
person who fired the warning shot."

"Might be," admitted Yellin' Kid, toning his voice down somewhat
to suit the occasion. "Better let me get off and crawl ahead,
Bud. I'm used to that. You hold the horses."

Bud realized the sense of this proposition, and he held the reins
of the Kid's horse, while that cow puncher slipped from the
saddle, and, on all fours, crept toward the wall of rock which
rose abruptly at a turn of the trail shutting off a view beyond.

Bud watched Yellin' Kid closely, the lad's hand on the butt of
his .45, and occasionally he glanced back to catch the first
glimpse of the main party, so he might warn them. He saw the
wisps of vapor rising and floating toward him.

"Not much smoke," mused Bud. "They're using very dry wood--
regular Indian trick. I wonder----"

A moment later he heard Yellin' Kid shout, and it was such a cry
as indicated pain. Yet Bud had heard no shot.

"I wonder if they knifed him?" was the thought that flashed into
Bud's brain. He cast caution to the winds and galloped forward,
making a great racket, and casting loose the reins of the Kid's
steed.

The sight that met Bud's eyes was enough to startle him, though
it was not what he expected to see.

For he beheld Yellin' Kid standing in front of a pillar of white
vapor, or, rather, the cowboy was dancing about, holding one hand
in the other, and using excited slang at a rate that soon would
exhaust his vocabulary, Bud thought.

But, more strange than anything else, was the fact that there was
no sign of a fire, to cause the white vapor, nor was there any
indication that anyone besides Yellin' Kid and Bud were in the
immediate neighborhood. No rustlers had started the blaze which
caused the white clouds to drift upward.

"What's the matter, Kid?" asked Bud, as he saw that something had
happened. "Where's the fire?"

"Under there!" and the cowboy pointed to the ground. "Keep away
from it. Don't go near that spring, an' whatever you do, don't
put your hand in. I did, an' I'm sorry for it!"

"Spring! Fire! What is it, anyhow!" asked Bud, as he slid from
the saddle and ran forward.

"It's a boilin' spring, that's what it is!" declared Yellin' Kid.
"Boilin' hot an' it near took th' skin from my hand! What you see
is steam--not smoke! Horned toads and hoop-skirts! It's as hot as
Buck Tooth's tea kettle! Look out for the boilin' spring!"




CHAPTER XIX

IN A MAZE


Bud stood in amazement looking at Kid and listening to what the
excited cowboy was saying. Then the gaze of the western boy
rancher turned toward a depression in the ground, whence arose
what he and Yellin' Kid had thought was smoke but which, in
reality, was steam from a hot spring.

"A boiler, eh?" repeated Bud. "First I ever knew we had any so
near Happy Valley."

"Me, either," went on Kid. "I suspicioned what it was when I got
close and couldn't smell any wood burnin'. Then I put my hand
out, but the steam fooled me. I didn't know the top of the water
was so close, an' I dipped right down into it. Whew! It was hot!"

"Did it scald you?" asked Bud.

"Pretty nigh it," answered the cowboy, exhibiting a very red
hand.

At this moment a noise behind the two attracted their attention.
They turned to see pointed at them the black openings of two .45
guns, and they had glimpses of eager eyes looking over the sights
of the weapons. "Don't shoot! I'll come down!" laughed Bud, in
imitation of what was the current saying concerning the famous
Davy Crockett.

"What is it?" asked Nort, owner of one of the menacing guns, as
he arose and slid his .45 into the holster.

"Did they get away?" Dick wanted to know, as he stood beside his
brother. The two boys had left the main body and worked their way
up to join the vanguard, in the persons of Bud and Kid.

"There wasn't anyone to get away," Bud answered grimly. "It was
only a boiling spring, and we took the steam of it for smoke."

"Boiling spring!" cried Nort. "I never saw one before."

"Me, either," added his brother, and together they looked at the
depression in the ground, filled with scalding hot water. At
times it bubbled up, like some great kettle over a fire, and then
the steam was as thick as the smoke at some camp fire when green
wood is used. Again the spring was comparatively quiet.

"I've seen 'em before," remarked Bud, "though I didn't know we
had any so near Happy Valley. There's lots of 'em out in the
Yellowstone Park region, and in other places, some not many miles
from here."

"Any volcanoes?" asked Nort.

"Or geysers?" Dick queried.

"Not that I know of," Bud answered. "You don't need volcanoes to
make boiling springs, though I suppose the hot water must be
boiled over some internal fire beneath the earth's surface. And
these same fires do, sometimes, make volcanoes.

"But I've never seen any volcanoes around here; have you,
fellows?" and he appealed to the cowboys.

"Not since I came up from Mexico," one answered. "I was close to
one there. And I've seen Old Faithful, and some of the other
geysers in the Yellowstone."

"They put soap in some to make 'em spout, don't they?" asked
Dick, who remembered to have read something to that effect.

"So I've heard," the cowboy said, "though it isn't supposed to be
done. It sort of wears out the geyser, I believe, though I don't
know much about such things. Anyhow, I don't know of any around
here, though I have seen a few boiling springs, farther to the
south."

"Yes, I have, too," Bud admitted. "Well, here's one, and she sure
is hot," he added, as a sudden activity on the part of the
phenomenon sent up another cloud of steam. "We could boil eggs
there if we had any."

"We brought some along," Dick said, "but they're hard-boiled
already. No use doing the job over. Say, but this is interesting!" he
added, as the spring suddenly spouted up a little way, almost like
a miniature geyser.

"It would be more interesting if we could get closer on the trail
of that gang of cattle thieves, and take away our steers," said
Bud. "I wonder if the poor animals hurried in here for water, and
couldn't drink it because it was hot?" He recalled days of
helping haze cattle on long trails, when the creatures were
tormented by thirst, and he knew how they suffered.

"There are a few signs that they've been in here," remarked Slim,
as the party was gathered around the boiling spring. "But they
aren't here now."

"Not much use in us staying here, either," commented Bud, as he
looked around on the bleak and cheerless prospect. Except for the
boiling spring there was no sign of natural life. All about were
great and small rocks, piles of shale and jagged stones, as
though the place had been swept by a prehistoric fire. They were
in one of the twists and turns of the rocky defile, and it was a
rocky pass, with no trees or grass growing except near the top,
and these appeared to be a sort of overgrowth from the grass and
foliage growing down above.

"No, they didn't stop here long," declared Yellin' Kid. "They
passed on, an' that's what we got to do."

"Might as well stay here and have grub, now we're dismounted,"
suggested Nort.

The idea was voted a good one, and was soon put into operation.
They ate and talked of what had passed and what lay before them.
Of the latter they could only conjecture, but it is safe to say
that not one of them in his wildest imagination ever conjectured
such an ending to their trailing as actually occurred.

"Well, let's get on," called Bud, when appetites had been
satisfied--that is all but those of the horses. There was no
grass for them, though they did manage to drink some of the water
from the boiling spring where it had collected in little pools,
and had cooled. But this would never have sufficed for hundreds
of cattle.

Once more they were on the way, and shortly afterward they left
the grim and rocky defile for a more fertile region, where there
was grass for the animals. But they were still down between a
range of high hills which towered on either side.

The trail twisted and turned, this way and that, winding back and
forth. But ever there was to be seen, here and there, signs that
the herd of cattle had been driven this way. Faint the signs
were, at times, and at last they disappeared altogether.

"Where have they gone?" asked Nort.

"Looks like they dropped down a hole, but there isn't any hole
here," said Yellin' Kid.

"Oh, we'll pick the trail up later on," suggested Bud.

But even as they started off once more Bud, who had just
consulted a compass he carried, uttered a cry of amazement.

"What's the matter?" asked Slim.

"We're going the wrong way," declared Bud. "We're heading north
instead of south. We're all turned around! Something's wrong!"




CHAPTER XX

A SURPRISE


Some of those in the rear, who had heard Bud's exclamation, but
who had not clearly heard what he said, came crowding up. Among
them was Snake Purdee, and his eyes sparkled with hidden emotion
as he inquired:

"Did you see any rattlers? This is just the place for 'em!"

"Yes, we came acrost a nest of baby ones what had lost their
mother, an' they're countin' on you t' bring 'em up on th'
bottle!" laughed Slim. The men, more or less, poked fun at Snake
because of his great fear of reptiles, and Slim could not forego
this chance.

But Snake understood the game, and realized that he had nothing
to fear. He shot a look at Slim, however, which indicated that
there would be an attempt, later, to get even.

"What's wrong?" asked Slim, for in his endeavor to play a joke on
Snake he had not paid much attention to what Bud was saying.

"We're all turned around," spoke the western lad. "All in a maze.
We started out, heading south, and we've kept, generally, to that
direction ever since. But now we're heading back north. Looks
like we'd lost the trail."

Slim and some of the more experienced cowboys studied the trail
for several minutes. Surely it did seem to "peter out," as
Yellin' Kid expressed it, though it had been fairly plain up to
this point.

"They couldn't get up on either side," declared Nort, looking at
the steep, rocky walls which hemmed the trailers in right and
left.

"And they haven't gone on ahead, for there isn't a sign," added
Dick, who had ridden up the defile for some little distance,
returning to make his report. "Nothing short of an air ship could
have lifted up a bunch of cattle from this gorge and set 'em down
farther on."

"Unless they went through a hole in one of the side walls,"
suggested Slim, "like that underground river you fellows
discovered in the tunnel."

"There are no side passages here," declared Bud. And he seemed to
hold the correct view of it, the others agreeing, after a careful
inspection of the rocky and shale-covered walls on either hand.
"It looks just as if they came up to this point and--vanished!"

"Pretty slick work--I'll give Del Pinzo credit for that," said
Slim, as if it were already established that the wily Greaser
halfbreed had made the descent on Happy Valley. "How he and his
bunch could haze cattle this far into a rocky pass, an' then make
'em disappear, gets me!"

"It shore do!" shouted Yellin' Kid.

"But that doesn't change the fact that we're all switched
around," declared Bud. "We're going north instead of south!"

"Not so hard to account for that," said Snake. "This vale just
naturally twists and turns like a windin' river. I wouldn't
wonder but what we'd been going north other times, only you never
noticed your compass, Bud."

"Well, maybe so," admitted the boy rancher, rather dubiously.
"But it looks as if we were back-trailing, instead of keeping on
after those rascals."

"We're keeping on all right!" asserted Slim. "By some hook or
crook they've fooled us, but we haven't passed 'em, that's
certain, and they must be somewhere up ahead. It would take Rocky
Mountain goats to scramble up there," he added, motioning toward
the steep walls of the gorge. "Some trick ponies might do it, but
no cattle ever could, unless they're like some of them Swiss
cheese brand I seen in pictures!"

"Then do you think we should keep on?" asked Dick.

"I shore do!" declared the foreman.

"Forward march!" cried Bud, with a little laugh. "We want to get
our cattle back, and catch the rustlers who took 'em!"

And so, though all signs of the trail seemed to have vanished,
they kept on. Night saw them in even a wilder region, though
there was a spring of water--not boiling this time--and some
grass for the animals. So it was decided to camp there and take
up the search in the morning.

They were in the enemy's country in every sense of the word, and
could afford to take no chances. So after a fire had been built,
and coffee made, bacon and flapjacks being the other items on the
bill of fare, the men and boys were told off into watches.

Bud and Slim, Nort and Snake, and Dick and Yellin' Kid were
assigned to divide the night among them working as partners in
the order named. The others were to be allowed to roll up and get
what sleep they could, Bud and Slim taking the first watch.

That passed off uneventfully, as did the vigil of Nort and Snake,
nothing more important occurring than the distant howls of the
coyotes.

When it was the turn of Dick and Yellin' Kid they rolled out,
albeit sleepy and tired, to stand guard until morning, when the
trail would again be taken up.

"Zimmy! But it's chilly!" said Kid in a low voice, as lie tossed
some wood on the fire and wrapped his blanket more closely about
him.

"Yes, it always is just before sunrise," added Dick. "I wonder
what we'll find after daylight?"

"I hope we find that ornery bunch!" murmured Yellin' Kid, keeping
down his voice so as not to awaken the sleepers.

"So do I," said Dick.

Then they sat about the fire, occasionally strolling around the
improvised camp, to make sure that none of their enemies were
creeping up on them in the darkness.

The stars shone clear and bright in the sky above, and
occasionally a little wind swept up the dismal defile. Now and
then a loose stone rattled down the sides of shale and volcanic
rock, and at such times Dick, and even Yellin' Kid started, and
felt for their guns. But all the alarms were false ones.

That is, the watchers decided they were, for no sight was had of
anyone until Dick, after a stroll about the fire, suddenly
started back and whispered to Yellin' Kid:

"Isn't that a head looking up over that rock?"

The Kid glanced to where Dick directed his gaze, and, in an
instant, the cowboy had his weapon out and leveled. His finger
was even pressing the trigger when he laughed silently and thrust
the .45 back in its leather case. "Why didn't you shoot?" asked
Dick.

"It was an owl," answered Kid. "It was his ears you seen stickin'
up! Listen!"

And, a moment later, there was the mournful hooting of the
nocturnal bird, which had flown away, but on such downy-feathered
wings that it made no sound.

"An owl!" murmured Dick. Then he was glad he had not shot first,
as he had intended. He would only have awakened the others and
been laughed at for his pains. Sometimes, he reflected, it was
better to hold your fire, even in the west, that region of quick
action.

Soon there was a little grayish, pinkish light to be observed
over the edge of the eastern hill. It grew slowly, and daylight
came, though it was some time before the sun itself was seen, so
deep were the searchers down in the defile.

After breakfast they set out again, looking carefully for signs
of the rustlers, but they saw none, and at last they decided
that, in some mysterious manner, their quarry had given them the
slip.

"Though I don't see how they did it," declared Slim, somewhat
vexed that he and his men were not better able to pick up the
trail.

"There must be some side passage--like that!" suddenly declared
Yellin' Kid, leaping from his horse and then, as suddenly
disappearing from the sight of his companions. "Hey! What's the
idea! Where'd he go?" asked Snake.

"In this side passage," answered Yellin' Kid, as suddenly
reappearing. "Look, here's a crack, or fissure in the rock, I saw
it from where I sat on my pony. It goes off from th' main trail,
but I can't see where it leads."

They all dismounted and investigated. As the Kid had said, it was
a traverse defile, opening out of the main one and almost at
right angles. The opening was concealed behind a great pinnacle
of rock, so that the cleft was only visible from a certain point,
and it was at this point that the Kid saw it.

"Where does it go to?" asked Bud as they entered, single file. It
was only wide enough for that.

"We've got to follow and see!" said Slim.

"If there was a place like that, back where we discovered we were
in a maze, it would have been easy enough for the rustlers to
have driven the cattle through, one at a time," observed Nort.

"But there wasn't any such place!" declared Bud. "We made sure of
that. But where does this lead?"

That was what they all conjectured, and they were soon to learn.
As they rode along, the side cleft widened, until there was room
enough for three to ride abreast. And it was while thus
progressing that Dick, who was in the lead with Slim and Snake,
made a surprising discovery. He rode around a turn in the new
trail, and at the sight of something beyond, in the smaller,
rocky defile, he set up such a shout as brought all his
companions to his side.

"What is it?" shouted Bud.

"Look!" answered Dick, pointing. "Del Pinzo and big gang!"




CHAPTER XXI

IN PURSUIT


Two deep-throated shouts echoed amid the winding mazes of the
small canyon leading off from the main gulch that the boy
ranchers and their friends had been following. One shout followed
closely on that of Dick, announcing his amazing discovery. The
other came from the band of rascals whose hiding place had at
last been spied out, and by a mere chance at that.

One shout was that of joyful anticipation, and this came from
Bud, Dick, Nort and the friends from Diamond X. This shout had in
it an anticipation of righteous punishment to be inflicted on
those who had stolen the cattle.

The other shout was of baffled rage that their hiding place had
been discovered. This shout came from Del Pinzo and his gang.

For it was the lawless Mexican half-breed and his followers,
numbering in all more than two score, whom Dick had seen as he
made the turn in that winding and narrow gorge. At a place where
the rocky defile flared out, making a sort of amphitheatre there
were gathered about a spring of water, their horses tethered
where they could crop the scanty herbage, the crowd of which our
friends had long been in pursuit.

Following the two shouts--one of pleased discovery and the other
of baffled rage at being discovered--there was quick action.

"Here they are!" shouted Bud, as soon as he had joined Dick, and
had seen what the latter had fairly stumbled upon. "Here's the
Del Pinzo crowd!"

Up came riding Nort, Slim, Snake and the others.

"Oh, boy! We've got 'em just where we want 'em," was the
exclamation of Yellin' Kid. And I leave you to judge in what tone
he uttered the words.

"Unlimber, boys!" called Slim Degnan, grimly and significantly as
he whipped out his .45. "There's likely to be action!"

"Hold on! Wait a minute!" counseled Snake, as Bud and his cousins
were about to urge their horses forward. The cowboy reached out,
and his hand fell with a firm grip on the bridle of Bud's steed.

"What's the idea?" asked that boy rancher. "Now we've found the
rascals, can't we go in and clean 'em up?"

"That's natural Bud, most natural," conceded Snake. "But what's
th' use runnin' your head in a bee's nest if yon can git th'
honey some other way?"

"You mean it won't be safe to ride up to 'em and fight 'em?'?"
asked Nort.

"Somethin' like that, yes, son," answered the cowboy. "I think
Del Pinzo an' his crowd have been waitin' for just such a chance
as this. They'd ask nothin' better than t' have us rush 'em, an'
then they'd have a good excuse for sayin', afterward, that they
popped us off in self-defense."

"Snake's right!" declared Yellin' Kid, modulating his voice
somewhat. "We'd better play this hand cautious like."

Seeing that this was the sentiment of the more experienced men,
Bud and his cousins held back, and a moment later, urged by the
cowboys, the ranch lads had turned aside and the whole body of
pursuers had retreated to a position somewhat away from the turn
of the trail where Dick had looked through the defile and had
seen the rascals encamped.

"What's the next move?" asked Nort, as the party gathered
together, giving their horses a breathing spell, for which the
animals were, doubtless, very thankful.

"We'd better look for some shelter," advised Snake, "an' then see
what we can do toward learnin' th' intentions of this bunch of
bad actors."

"You mean sort of spy 'em out?" asked Dick.

"That's it," chimed in Yellin' Kid. "If this is goin' to be a
fight, an' it shore looks as if there was, we want to take all
th' advantage we can. They outnumber us two to one!"

This was true enough. The fleeting glimpse our friends had of the
outlaws, through the crack in the rocky wall, showed that there
were more than two score under the leadership of the unscrupulous
Del Pinzo.

Following the skilful advice of the cowboys, Bud and his cousins
took their places behind some sheltering rocks, leading their
horses in with them, for much depended on their mounts. Without
them it meant giving up the chase. And even if one pony was
killed or wounded, it meant that its owner would have to make his
way back on foot, which was neither pleasant nor safe.

"Get your guns ready," said Slim. "There's going to be action,
but not just yet. We want this to be a winnin' fight if we can
make it so."

Once within comparative shelter, and feeling somewhat calmer
after the first wild excitement, Bud, Nort and Dick looked to
their older companions for further advice.

"Somebody's got t' go back t' that crack, unbeknownst t' them
scoundrels, an' see what they're doin'," decided Slim.

"S'pose they're there yet?" asked Bud.

"Either that, or they've taken the alarm an' are on their way, or
they're doin' just what we are--gittin' ready for a fight," said
the foreman grimly. "An' what it is they're doin' we want t'
know. Snake, you're pretty good at Indian tactics. S'pose you
sneak up there an' take a look in."

"All right," was the ready answer.

Of course Bud, Nort and Dick, each and every one of them, wished
they had been selected for this duty. But while they were rapidly
learning the ways of the west, in dealing with desperate
characters, it was better at this time to have an experienced man
spy out the movements of Del Pinzo and his gang. This Snake set
out to do.

"An' while he's gone, th' rest of us want t' sort of make up our
minds what t' do," said Slim. "If that bunch is gettin' ready
t'rush us, same as we may be able to do on our own hook, we want
t' have some plan of action."

So a sort of council of war was held, during the absence of
Snake, who was soon lost to sight among the rocks, the cowboy
making his way in a crouching, crawling position that almost
resembled the reptiles he so feared and hated.

There was some low-voiced talk among the remaining cowboys, in
which talk Bud and his cousins had no part. For a moment the lads
feared there was some scheme afoot to put them in places of
safety, out of danger so to speak. And the boy ranchers weren't
going tamely to submit to this.

"I say, Slim," exclaimed Bud, with this fear in mind, "we are
going to do our share in this fighting, you know!"

"Shore I know it!" grunted the foreman. "You'll have all th'
scrappin' you want, if these fellows don't vamoose without firin'
a shot! We was just talkin' of the best place t' put you."

"Oh," murmured Bud, "all right."

After some little talk, and a survey of the ground to which the
pursuers had retreated in order to make a temporary stand, each
person's position was designated, and then guns were loosed in
holsters and the supply of cartridges was looked to.

"As soon as Snake comes back we'll know what t' do," Slim said.

"He ought to be along soon now," remarked Dick.

Hardly had he spoken than there was a noise among the loose rocks
and boulders some distance up the gulch--in the direction the
spying-out cowboy had taken.

"Here he comes!" exclaimed Bud, and his hand went to his gun, for
it was very possible that Snake would be pursued, and have to
retreat on the run.

However the alarm proved to be a false one, for, after waiting
some time, Snake not having appeared, it was surmised that some
rock had become loose and rolled down the steep side of the
gulch.

The waiters and watchers were just beginning to get a bit
worried, and Bud was on the point of suggesting that he be
allowed to go look for Snake, when the cowboy came back.

So quietly did he approach, and so unexpected was his appearance
that Nort and Dick, on whose side of the improvised "fort" Snake
first showed himself, were startled.

"If that had been any of the Del Pinzo crowd they'd have been on
top of us before we knew it," confessed Nort.

"Not much!" laughed Bud. "Slim has seen Snake coming along this
last three minutes; haven't you, Slim?"

"Yep! I noticed him, but I didn't say anythin'," acknowledged the
foreman. "I seen that he was alone. But what's the verdict,
Snake?" he asked, anxiously. "Are they gittin' ready t' come at
us here, or are they leavin'?"

"Neither one," was the answer, "but they're gettin' ready to do
suthin! They're all in a bunch in the middle of that place,
holdin' a confab, I reckon. It's hard to say what they are up to.
But I got a hunch that if we rushed 'em we could throw a scare
int' 'em, anyhow."

"Do you think they know we're here?" asked Bud.

"Oh, sure!" was the answer. "At least they saw us an' heard us
when we reached that crack. But of course they can only guess
what we're up to now, when we didn't rush 'em first shot. They
might have known, though, what our plans was, if I hadn't cracked
their spy on the head!" said Snake, calmly.

"You did what?" asked Slim.

"Just as I got t' th' place where I could look in," went on the
cowboy, "I saw one of them Greasers up t' the same trick I was
tryin' to pull off. He was sneakin' down this way, but I saw him
first. Caught a glimpse of his head around the edge of a rock; I
just reached out with my gun and tapped him on the noodle."

"Kill him?" asked Dick.

"No. Guess not. Just stretched him out so he can't go back an'
tell any tales for a time. Now the way I figger it is this:
They'll be waitin' for a report on what their spy sees, same as
you was waitin' for me t' come back. Only their spy won't show up
for a couple o' hours, an' that gives us a chance to act."

"What had we better do?" asked Yellin' Kid.

"Rush 'em!" instantly decided Snake. "Let's git t' that openin'
as quiet as we can, an' rush right for 'em! This rest has
freshened our horses, an' we're in better shape now."

"Not so much so, as far as horses go," dubiously declared Slim.
"They're pretty badly spent, and can't do much racin'. But I
guess maybe it is better for us t' get into action, instid of
waitin' for that bunch t' come here. As Snake says, they'll be
lookin' for their spy t' come back, an' maybe we can take 'em
unawares."

So, after some further talk, it was decided to mount again, ride
to the opening that led from the main trail into the hiding place
of the outlaws, and boldly attack them.

True, our friends were outnumbered, but they had right on their
side, and this sometimes makes a difference. Also they would have
a little advantage, they hoped, in making the attack somewhat
unexpectedly. For though Del Pinzo and his crowd knew the
ranchmen were in the neighborhood they would, as Snake believed,
await the return of the spy they had sent out, before doing
anything.

"An' that spy won't come t' his senses very soon," declared the
avenging cowboy. "When he does he'll have an awful headache!"

As quietly as possible they made their way to the opening. Slim,
as a sort of captain, was in advance of the others and looked in.
He came back to say:

"They're gettin' ready for suthin'! They're all standin' near
their horses, an' seem to be plannin' a move. Get ready t' rush
in when I give the word!"

There was a final look to arms and saddle leathers, and then the
foreman cried:

"Get into action!" at the same time spurring forward his pony, an
example followed by all the others as they rushed into the
defile.

And action there was, but not exactly of the kind the boy
ranchers and their friends anticipated. For Del Pinzo (easily
recognized among the lesser lights of rascaldom) with his
followers, after their first angry shouts, leaped for their
horses. And their agility in that respect spoke well for their
preparedness. In an instant, it seemed, every one of the two
score, and more, was in saddle, and headed out of the defile.
They were retreating--riding away from the following avengers,
and going, it seemed, further into the maze of winding clefts
amid the mountains.

To the credit of Del Pinzo--if credit it be and if he be entitled
to get credit--he rode at the rear, not starting his horse until
all his men had raced away ahead of him.

And then, as Bud, Dick and the others pressed into the defile
after them, the Greaser turned and fired once, but with such
quick action that eye could scarce follow the motion of his hand
and weapon.

There was a sharp crack and the hat of Yellin' Kid, who rode
immediately behind Bud, sailed off his head, at the same time
that a bullet zipped viciously over the pursuers.

"Close call that, Kid!" remarked Snake, leaning over as his horse
galloped forward, and picking up his friend's hat.

"Close nothin'!" snapped out Yellin' Kid. "That was fancy
shootin'! If Del Pinzo wanted to get me he could 'a' done it. He
can mark out th' pips on a ten spot card with his eyes shut,
almost! He shot my hat off just to show he wasn't aimin' t' spill
no innocent blood! But wait until I get him! I'll make him sweat
for that! A hole through brim an' crown! Why couldn't he be
decent about it an' make it one?" grumbled Yellin' Kid as Snake
handed him the hat.

"Never mind that!" shouted Slim Degnan. "If we're going t' get
them fellers we got t' ride!"

That was evident, for even as he spoke Del Pinzo, the last of the
outlaws, disappeared around a turn in the defile. He was "hazing"
his men along to some other hiding place, it appeared. And he and
his rascally followers seemed to know their ground, for they rode
at break-neck pace, without fear of what lay beyond and unseen.
It is likely they had traveled that route before.

Another advantage lay with the rustlers. Their horses were fresh,
for from the negligent attitudes assumed by the men when Dick had
discovered them, it was evident they had been at ease for some
time, whereas the pursuers had been on the trail a long time, and
the way had been rough and stony.

So it is nothing to the discredit of the boy ranchers that they
and their friends were distanced in the first wild rush following
the discovery and alarm.

"Come on!" cried Bud. "Come on!" and he and Dick for the moment
were in the lead, the canyon being wide enough, here, for several
to ride abreast. "We've got to get 'em!"

"And we won't stop until we do!" added his cousin.

But they reckoned not with the roughness of the way, the start
the rustlers had, their fresher horses and the fact that Del
Pinzo and his crowd were more familiar with the trail than were
the boy ranchers. So though our heroes rode on as fast as they
could go with comparative safety, they did not, for some time at
least, again come within sight of the enemy.

"Wait there! Hold on a little!" finally called Slim to Bud, Dick
and Nort, who, in their youthful and natural eagerness, had
forged to the front in a bunch. "Pull up! This isn't a hundred
yard dash! It's going to be a long race!"

Bud was beginning to believe this, and some of his first
exuberance was disappearing. He was getting more cool-headed.

"Let's take it a bit easy," he said to Nort and Dick. "I guess
we've got a long trail to follow."

"But we've got to get 'em!" declared Dick.

"You got rid of something that time!" commented his brother,
meaningly, if slangily. "We're going to make 'em give back our
cattle!"

"Say!" suddenly cried Bud. "That's the queer part of it! Where
are the steers?"

And for the first time it occurred to the minds of the boy
ranchers that of that quarry they had come most in search of they
had had not a glimpse. Not a steer was in sight!

Something of the amazement they felt must have been depicted on
their faces, for when Slim rode up to where the boy ranchers had
halted he asked:

"What's the matter?"

"Where are the cattle?" asked Bud, shouting almost as loudly as
Yellin' Kid would have done. "Did you notice they didn't have a
one with them, Slim?"

"Yes. Are you just waking up to that, Bud?"

"I reckon I am. But what does it mean?"

"It means that there's a deeper game being played than we have
any idea of, son. We've got to go some to get to the bottom!"




CHAPTER XXII

BUD'S DISCOVERY


Once it became evident that catching the rustlers was likely to
be the work of a long chase on the trail, the whole party of
pursuers came to a halt beside the boy ranchers. And after some
rapid talk of what might lay beyond their stopping place, in a
lonely, wild and desolate section of the defile, the conversation
switched to what had surprised Bud and his cousins--the absence
of the cattle.

"I s'posed they were driving the steers ahead of 'em all along,"
admitted North "They drove the animals off our ranch, and I
didn't think but what they were hazing 'em along to some place
where they could change or blur the brands, and then sell 'em."

"That's what I thought, too," acknowledged Dick.

"Well, I must say I didn't think much about it," confessed Bud.
"When I saw Del Pinzo and his gang in there all I wanted to do
was to come to hand-grips with 'em. I forgot all about the
cattle. But after we'd chased along a bit I did begin to wonder
where my animals were--_our_ animals, I should say," he
corrected himself with a glance at his cousins. However, they
understood.

"They must have gotten the cattle over to Double Z, or wherever
it is they dispose of 'em," suggested Dick.

"They couldn't--not in this short time," declared Slim. "We
followed 'em too close. Besides, there isn't a sign of any cattle
having been here, nor in that place where we surprised th' head
Greaser and his gang. Not a sign of cattle!"

He looked up and down the gorge, as did the other cowboys. But
not even the sharpest eye could detect the faintest "sign" of the
steers having been driven along the passage.

"They must have them hidden somewhere," said Dick. "We'd better
go back to the place where the sign petered out. There must be
some opening there out of the main canyon."

"If there is it's so well hid that it takes sharper eyes than
I've got to find it," declared Snake, and he was noted for his
far-seeing and clear vision.

"Go _back_!" exclaimed North impulsively. "We aren't going
back, are we, until we get Del Pinzo and his gang?"

"Shoot 'em up--that's what I advise!" cried Yellin' Kid. There
was a moment's pause, and Bud spoke.

"We're got two things to do," said the boy rancher. "One is to
get our cattle back, and the other is to nab the rustlers. But
it's more important to get the cattle, I think.

"If we don't do that our ranch experiment will be a failure," he
went on. "But, of course, for the sake of other ranchers, it
would be a mighty good thing if we could put Del Pinzo and his
rustler crowd out of business."

"Can't we do both?" asked Nort.

"That's what I was coming to," his cousin continued. "If we can
get on the trail of the hidden steers--for hidden they are, I'm
sure--we can haze them back to the valley. Then we can keep on
after this crowd," and he nodded toward the winding trail that
led down the narrow defile.

"Then you think we'd better go back!" asked Dick.

"Let's see what Slim says" answered Bud. Naturally he would turn
to his father's foreman for advice.

"Oh, you're leavin' it t' me, are you?" asked Slim, as he
finished rolling his cigarette, a feat he could accomplish with
one hand. Then he lighted it, took a satisfying puff and went on:
"If you ask my advice I'd say to go back an' see if you can't
locate the cattle. As Bud remarks, they're dollars an' cents. Th'
rustlers aren't, though it would be a mighty good stunt t' wipe
'em off th' face of this cow country. But maybe we can attend to
_them_ later."

"Turn back she is!" exclaimed Bud, accepting, as did the others,
the advice of Slim as being final. "We'll see if we can find the
cattle, and then haze them to a safe place. After that we'll nab
Del Pinzo and his bunch--if we can," he added, as a saving
clause.

"Suits me!" remarked Yellin' Kid, taking off his hat and looking
at the two bullet holes. "That nabbin' part is what I want t'
play at," and his grin suggested that when he and the Greaser met
there would be some interesting happenings.

It having been thus decided that the pursuit would be abandoned
for the time being, a sort of council of war was held to settle
on the next course.

"I say grub!" exclaimed Bud, knowing that the suggestion would
come with better grace from him than from some of the men who
were working for him and his father. "Let's eat!"

There was no debate on this question and when the ponies had
been turned loose to graze on what scanty grass they could find,
a fire was made and preparations started for feeding the hungry
posse. For they were that--both hungry and a posse, bent on the
capture of the lawless rustlers. Though, for the time, righteous
revenge was given over to the more practical side of the
question--getting back the cattle.

Probably you do not need to be told that little time was wasted
over the meal, simple as it was. Cowboys, on the trail, or
otherwise engaged in their work of the ranch or range, do not
spend much time over the pleasures of the appetite. There is a
time for feasting, and a time for chasing cattle rustlers, and
there was no sense in combining the two. That, evidently, was the
thought in the minds of Bud and his friends, for they hurried
through their eating, and, having rested the horses, were soon in
saddles again.

"Now," remarked Bud, talking the matter over with Slim, "what is
the best plan?"

"To get back, as fast as we can, t' th' place where we saw th'
last signs of th' cattle," was the foreman's answer. "The
unravelin' of th' skein of mystery, t' use a poetical expression,
Bud, is there!"

They all agreed with this view of it, and after a short ride down
the defile, to see, if by chance, any of the Del Pinzo crowd
might be in evidence, or returning, the back trail was taken.

"We aren't going to discover much this day," observed Bud, as he
rode slowly along between Nort and Dick.

"Why, did you see a black rabbit?" Nort asked, remembering what
had happened when a similar incident occurred, just before the
strange events narrated in the chapter preceding this.

"No, I didn't see a black jack," Bud answered. "But it won't be
long until dark, for we don't get the full benefit of the
afternoon sun down in this gorge. And we can't do anything except
by daylight. No use looking for sign in the dark."

"That's right," agreed Nort. "But I was afraid it was a black
rabbit you'd seen."

"As if we didn't have enough bad luck without that," commented
Dick. "It's as bad, losing your herd as it is not to have enough
water to give 'em what they need," and he referred to the time
when, by the efforts of this same Del Pinzo, the supply for the
reservoir of Happy Valley was cut off.

"Oh, well, it might be worse," observed Bud, with a sort of
cheerful, philosophical air, for he was of rather a happy
disposition.

"How?" asked Snake, for he was rather "sore" because Del Pinzo
and the rustlers had escaped. Perhaps Snake felt that he might
have gone in and captured the outlaws single-handed when he was
on the lone spying expedition.

"Well, I might never have had any cattle for those fellows to
steal," went on Bud. "But say, boys," he went on, as they came to
a place where the trail seemed to divide. "Let's take this other
road back. It looks a bit easier, and we want to favor the ponies
all we can."

"Go ahead," advised Slim, to whom Bud looked for confirmation of
his plan. "Anything that makes it easier for th' horses makes it
more sure for us. And we may have a long hunt ahead of us."

The care taken by the boy ranchers and their friends of their
animals was not exaggerated, nor unusual. In the West so much
depends on a man's horse--his comfort and very life, often--that
it is a foolish fellow, indeed, who will not bestow at least some
thought and care on his horse. The animal becomes a trusted
companion and friend to the cowboys and prospectors.

So, in order, as he hoped, to provide an easier means of getting
back to the place they wished to reach, Bud led the way along a
different trail on the retreat.

It was practically a retreat, though one they had selected for
themselves, since the outlaws had distanced them.

It was rather a dejected bunch of boy ranchers and their friends
that were now back-trailing. There was not much talk, after the
excitement of the attack which had "petered out," and even Bud,
gay and cheerful as he usually was, now seemed to have little to
say.

It was Dick who startled them all by suddenly exclaiming:

"Look ahead there! Isn't that a man on the trail?" He, with Nort
and Bud were in advance of the others. Dick pointed toward the
place where he thought he saw something suspicious.

"I don't glimpse anything," observed Nort.

"Nor I," said his cousin.

"He's gone now," Dick stated. "But I did see some one, and I'm
almost sure it was a Greaser. Looked just like one of their
hats."

"What is it!" called Slim, for he caught snatches of the rather
excited talk of the boys.

"Dick thought he saw one of the Del Pinzo gang," answered Bud.

"Maybe he's the fellow I cracked on the head," suggested Snake.
For they had lost sight of that individual in the mad rush into
the canyon, and had not seen him when they turned back.

"Say, wouldn't it be a good thing to capture him?" asked Bud
eagerly. "We could make him tell where the others are, and where
our cattle are hidden."

"If we can get him," conceded Slim.

"There he is again!" cried Dick. "Come on, fellows!"

Disregarding, or forgetting the travel-weary horses, the ranch
lad urged his own steed ahead at as rapid a pace as the animal
could be induced to develop in a spurt.

"Take it easy!" advised Nort to his brother, but he might as well
have called to the wind, for Dick was off and away.

"I don't see anything!" cried Bud, and though he had looked
eagerly forward at Dick's call he had glimpsed neither hat nor
face of any personage who might be suspected of being one of the
Del Pinzo gang.

But, even with that, Bud was not going to miss a chance to be in
at the finish of whatever was about to happen, so he spurred his
animal forward.

"Come on, boys!" cried Slim to his comrades. "We can't let those
youngsters tackle this game alone--'specially when if there's one
of the rustlers there may be more. _Pronto_!"

He galloped forward, as did the others, along the new trail that
Bud had suggested taking. But Dick was in the lead, and, in a few
seconds, was out of sight beyond an outcropping ledge of rock,
which narrowed the trail at this particular point.

"Watch your step there, boys!" cried Snake, as he saw What was
likely to prove a bad turning. "I don't see how Dick got around
it as he did, taking it at the gallop," he went on.

And, as it happened, Dick had not exactly made it, for when Bud
and Nort reached the dangerous turn, slightly after Dick had
disappeared abound it, they saw no sight of their companion.

"Pull up!" cried Bud sharply. "There's something wrong!" Nort was
beginning to think so himself, and he hauled his steed back with
such good will and energy that the animal was almost on its
haunches.

"Where in the world did he go?" cried Bud.

Nort asked the same question, for there lay the narrow trail
before them, running along a ledge, with a shelving bank of shale
and sand on one side and a towering face of rock on the other.

Snake Purdee raced at such speed around the turn, in spite of his
own admonition to the boy ranchers, that the cowboy nearly ran
down Bud and Nort.

"Where's Dick?" cried Snake, at once aware that the stout lad was
not in sight.

"He's vamoosed--somewhere," said Bud. "Maybe he met-up with that
Greaser and----"

At that moment, however, there came a cry, unmistakably of
distress, seemingly from some distance ahead and down below the
high and narrow trail on which the party had come to a halt.

"There's Dick now!" cried Nort, recognizing his brother's voice.

"Where in the world is he?" asked Bud, looking about.

In answer Snake pointed down the sloping bank of shale and sand,
and there, at the bottom, was Dick, half buried in the soft
material, and his horse, with twisted saddle, was standing near
by, looking rather the worse for wear. And if the countenance of
the animal had been visible it would doubtless have shown pained
surprise.

"What's' the matter? What you doing down there?" called Nort to
his brother, as Dick proceeded to extricate himself from the sand
and shale that covered him almost to his neck.

"You don't s'pose I'm down here for fun, do you?" floated up the
somewhat sarcastic answer. "I came around that turn too fast and
the horse just sat down at the edge and slid here. It's lucky I'm
not killed!"

"It sure is!" agreed Slim. "You want to take a strange trail
easy, boy. Are you hurt--or your horse?"

Dick was about two hundred feet below them at the foot of the
slope. He got up and limped over to his animal.

"Guess he's all right," was the reply.

"How about you?" asked Bud, for Dick had followed the real
westerner's habit of looking first to his steed.

"Oh, I'm scratched up a bit, and lame," was the rueful reply,
"but I guess nothing is busted unless it's one of my girths."

The others watched him, while he straightened his saddle, which
had slipped around under the horse. Then Dick called up:

"It's all right. I can ride him, I reckon," which he proved by
vaulting into the saddle.

"How am I going to get back up there, though?" he asked. "It's as
slippery as an iceberg." "You can't get up," Snake called down.
"Don't try it. The trail up here goes along the same direction as
the one down there. Keep on it until we join you."

Which Dick did, his pony, fortunately, proving to have suffered
no injuries in the unexpected slide down the hill. And thus, by a
narrow margin, was an accident diverted. For had the slope down
which Dick plunged, because of taking the turn too suddenly, been
of rock, both he and the horse might have been badly hurt, if not
killed.

"Keep a lookout for that Greaser," called Dick up to his chums
above him.

"I don't believe you saw any," retorted Slim. "There aren't any
signs of him here."

Nor were there, though the cowboys made careful scrutiny. And
afterward Dick admitted that he might have mistaken the
fluttering of a bush for the hat of someone he thought a member
of Del Pinzo's gang. In a short time the upper path merged into
the trail below, and Dick rejoined his friends, exhibiting some
scratches sustained in his perilous slide.

Together the posse rode on, making a trail back to the main
defile, and out of the one down which the Greaser and his gang
had turned, where they had been discovered by Dick. And then
Bud's prediction came true. The sun, which never shone directly
into the main canyon for any great length of time, began to set,
bringing gloom into the defile long before it would make its
appearance on the level country up above.

Seeing the gathering darkness, Slim advised calling a halt, and
this was done several miles beyond the place where the last trace
of the stolen cattle had been observed.

"Shall we camp here!" asked Bud, deferring to the foreman, as was
natural under the circumstances.

"We've got grass and water," Slim remarked, indicating a spring
toward which, even then, some of the horses were hastening.
"Water for the ponies and us, grass for the animals, and there
ought to be some grub left."

"There is," said Snake Purdee, who had assumed, or been given (it
did not much matter which) the office of commissary. "We brought
along plenty."

"And we may need it before we reach the end of the trail,"
remarked Bud. "I don't believe it's going to be easy to find
where those cattle disappeared to."

"There's only two ways, or at th' most three, in which they could
be kept away from us," said Slim, as he slid from his saddle.

"What are they?" asked Dick, who, like his brother, was always
eager to learn from a true son of the West, such as was the
foreman of Diamond X.

"Well," Slim resumed, "they've either been driven down some side
passage, or gorge, such like as we found Del Pinzo in, or they
were back-tracked to th' open an' driven off there th' same night
they was run off."

"That might be," admitted Bud. "I didn't think of a back track."

"Well, I did," Slim said, "but the signs of it was so faint I
passed it up."

A back trail, I might explain, is where an animal, or several of
them, or even a human, for that matter, turns and retraces the
way first traveled. A fox, fleeing before the hounds, will often
do this, and as the scent does not indicate the direction in
which Reynard is running, the dogs are often deceived.

But in the case of the fox the imprints of the animal's paws are
so light that perhaps only with a microscope could it be told
when he had "back-tracked." Except, of course, in some place
where soft mud might retain the impression of both trails.

In the case of a large body of cattle, also, though the scent
would not be relied upon, it would be difficult for the casual,
or, in some cases, even the trained observer, to say where the
herd had been turned and driven back over the same course
originally taken.

Thus pursuers would be baffled. And when to this is added the
fact that the floor of the gorge was of rock, in the main, which
did not take, or retain, any impressions, the puzzle was all the
more difficult to solve.

"Well, we'll see what happens in the morning," observed Bud, as
preparations for the camp went on.

The usual watches were set that night, two of the posse being
constantly on guard. It was rather nervous work for the boy
ranchers, especially Nort and Dick, as they started at every
chance sound which seemed to echo so loudly in the darkness. And
once Dick, who was taking the tour of duty with Yellin' Kid,
suddenly fired at an object he saw moving.

It was only a luckless coyote, as was evidenced by the howl of
pain that followed the report of Dick's gun, and then the night
was made hideous and sleepless, for the time, by the chorus of
weird howls from the other slinking beasts who were hanging
about, hoping for something to eat.

However, it was nearly morning when Dick did his shooting, and a
little later they all turned out for an early breakfast, the odor
of the coffee and sizzling bacon producing an aroma finer than
that of the most costly French perfume.

"And now for the day's work!" exclaimed Bud, when they were once
more ready to set off on the trail.

"And may we find something!" was the fervent petition of Dick.

Off they started, refreshed by the night's halt and eager for
what lay before them.

I shall not weary you by a recital of all the minor incidents of
the day, how they found many false trails and leads, several of
which at first seemed promising, but all of which led to nothing.

It was Bud who made the real discovery which, eventually, led to
the solving of the mystery. Bud had alighted from his pony, when
the halt was made for the noonday lunch, and was climbing up the
side of the rocky hill which extended for miles and formed one
wall of the gorge.

"Looking for gold?" asked Dick, as he saw his cousin pick up and
examine several rocks.

"Sure!" was the laughing answer. "Might find the bones of another
Triceratops, too!"

Bud reached forward to pick up something else, and a rock slipped
from beneath his foot. He had been resting heavily on it, and the
sudden lurch threw him backward. To save himself he clutched at
the nearest object, which happened to be a bush growing in the
side of the hill. For a moment it seemed that this would save the
lad from at least sliding down the declivity, but the bush was
not deeply rooted and, in another moment pulled out in the ranch
boy's hands. He flung up his arms, and almost toppled over
backward, but managed to throw himself forward, and then he slid
down several feet.

"Hurt!" called up Dick, ready to hasten to his cousin's aid.

"No, but my shoes are full of gravel. Next time I come up a place
like this I----"

Bud suddenly ceased speaking, and began to scramble up the side
of the shale-covered hill almost as fast as he had slid down.
Then, as he reached the place whence the bush had pulled out he
seemed to be looking into some crevice or opening.

A moment later he turned, looked down on the party gathered in
the defile below him, and shouted:

"I've found 'em! I've found 'em! Here they are, in one of the
queerest places you can imagine! Come up here and look!"




CHAPTER XXIII

THE FIGHT


Scrambling up the side of the gorge, slipping and sliding back,
almost like the frog in the well, Dick, Nort and the cowboys
reached Bud's side. He maintained his footing only by constantly
working his way upward, for the shale, at this point, was almost
like fine sand, and kept slipping down, taking the boy rancher
with it. But there were bushes growing here and there, and by
holding to these, taking care not to pull them out by the roots,
Bud managed to stay about where he had been when he made the
amazing discovery.

For it was an amazing discovery, as all the others admitted when
they reached his side, and looked through the fissure which had
been disclosed when Bud pulled out the big bush by which he tried
to save himself a fall.

"What is it?' cried Nort.

"And where are they?" demanded Dick.

"It's our cattle! They're inside there--a place like a football
stadium only there aren't any seats," explained Bud, breathlessly.
By this time he was surrounded by the others, all maintaining a
precarious foothold in the shifting shale. And what they saw
caused them all to join with Bud in wondering amazement.

For there, in what was a great natural bowl of the earth, with
partly sloping green sides, and with a floor covered by grass,
with a pool of sparkling water in the centre, were the missing
cattle! The whole of the big herd that had been driven away from
Happy Valley was there, it seemed. There they were, in that vast,
natural amphitheatre with food and water at hand, and, apparently,
as content as when they grazed on the range of the boy ranchers.

"By all the rattlers that ever rattled!" cried Snake. "We sure
have found 'em!"

"And they're all right, too!" added Yellin' Kid, as he gazed
through the crack which had been opened when Bud pulled out the
bush. For it was only through the crack that they were able to
view the steers contentedly feeding and drinking within that vast
bowl. That is what it was--bowl much more immense in size than
the one where Yale battles with Princeton and Harvard. More
immense than the Palmer Stadium at Old Nassau. The walls towered
higher, and it was greater in diameter. It was almost a perfect
bowl in shape--that is as perfect as so natural a formation could
be.

"But how did the cattle ever get in there!" exclaimed Nort.

"And how are we going to get them out?" asked Dick.

For it seemed, at first sight, that there was no entrance or
egress. And certainly nothing could get in over the top, or out
that way. For though the sides of the great, natural bowl were
green up to a certain distance, beyond that, and between the rim
and a point half way down, they were almost perpendicular in
straightness. And, being of rock, they would, it seemed, afford
scarcely a foot or hand-hold for the most expert "human fly."

"There must be a way in," declared Slim.

"And out, too," added Yellin' Kid. "Those rustlers never would
have driven th' steers in here unless there was some way of
getting 'em out."

"But what is this place, anyhow!" asked Nort. "It looks like the
Yale bowl, but it never could have been built by man."

"It wasn't," said Bud. "It's the crater of an extinct volcano. It
has been filled up, with land-slides, probably, and the winds and
the birds have brought grass seeds here, year after year, until
it makes a regular corral for cattle. There's water, too, which
isn't surprising. That's what it is, an old volcano crater. I
heard there was one around here, but I never had time to look for
it."

"Yes, I've heard of it myself," admitted Slim, "but I didn't think
it was like this. Let's have another look."

Dick and Nort moved aside to give the foreman a place of
advantage, and when he had looked through a spot where the crack
was wider he said: "I see where they can get th' cattle out.
Here, take a look, Bud," and Slim handed the ranch lad a pair of
field glasses that had been brought along in case of emergency.
They were of value now.

"Down at th' far end, and a little to the left of centre," Slim
directed Bud's gaze. "There's a sort of fence of trees piled up.
That's th' entrance all right--or one of 'em."

"You're right!" agreed Bud when he had taken a careful
observation. "But is there more than one!"

"Must be," said Slim. "The rustlers never drove th' cattle in
away around _there_. They sent 'em in from _this_ end. Th' trail
ends right here, an' it's here where th' rustlers drove th'  cattle in."

"But where?" asked Bud. "There isn't a sign of an opening!"

"Because they closed it after them," went on the foreman. "I
begin to see it now. There must have been a break in the wall of
the old crater right about here. They drove th' cattle in an' it
was an easy matter t' let some of th' dirt slide down an' fill it
up again. Let's take a look with a view t' seein' if I'm right."
It is easier to find a clue when you know just what you are
looking for. And it did not take long for the experienced eyes of
the cow punchers to discover where earth and shale from above had
been recently dislodged and allowed to slide down to cover what
must have been the same sort of natural opening into the side of
the wall as that at the far end, closed by a fence of trees. This
was to keep the cattle in without men being needed to ride herd.

"Yes, it does look as if they'd taken 'em in here," said Bud,
when it was found that the trail of the steers led to the foot of
the crater wall, where all signs stopped. "If we had looked up a
little, instead of sticking so close to the ground, we might have
seen this clue before."

"All in good time," observed Slim. "The question is, now, how can
we get in there?"

"It will be easy enough," suggested Nort. "All you'll have to do
will be to enlarge the crack we looked through."

"That's all right for us getting inside that crater," observed
Dick, "but what about our horses? They can't scramble up there."

"Then what can we do?" asked Bud. "Ride around to the other
entrance?"

"That would take too long," answered the foreman. "I fancy that
Del Pinzo and his gang are on their way to this natural corral
now, t' drive out th' cattle they stole from us. We've got t' get
ahead of 'em!"

"But how?" Bud wanted to know.

"I think we can dig out enough of th' shale an' dirt they slid
int' th' opening, so that we can get th' horses through," Slim
answered. "We ought t' have shovels, but we can use sticks t' dig
with. It will take longer, but it's the best we can do."

Little time was lost in putting this plan into operation. With a
hatchet, which formed part of their camp equipment, some strong
poles were cut from one of the few trees that grew on the slope
of the gorge, and with these digging operations began. It was
slow work, but many hands were engaged and soon an opening was
made so that entrance could be had to the original crack in the
rocky side of the bowl. For it was by this crack that the cattle
had been driven in. And the crack had only been partly filled
with broken rock and earth to conceal it from view.

"Yes, they did come in this way!" cried Bud as he and the others
urged their horses through the opening and into the bowl proper--
the crater of the extinct volcano. "Look, plenty of signs!" There
was no doubt of it. The rustlers had driven the cattle into the
defile, hazed them along until they reached the opening into this
great natural hiding place, and then the rest was easy.

The animals had been run into this solitary place, passing
through the narrow, fissure-like opening in the rocky wall, a
crack similar to, but larger, than the opening through which Bud
had made his discovery. Then shale and dirt had been started, in
a miniature avalanche, down the side of the slope, effectually
hiding the means by which the cattle were secreted away.

"No wonder we thought an airship had been used," commented Dick.

Before them lay the vast crater of the old volcano, inactive for
centuries. Nature had covered the hard lava with a layer of soil
in which grew rich grass. And nature had further made the place
an ideal corral for cattle by supplying a large spring of water.
It was a "rustler's paradise," to quote Slim Degnan.

As the boy ranchers rode into the amphitheatre, the cattle at the
far end, and in the middle, stopped grazing to look at them.

"We're friends of yours!" called Bud, waving his hat in the joy
at finding his lost stock.

"Yes, but here come some fellows who aren't!" shouted Yellin'
Kid.

"Where?" asked Bud, quickly.

"There!" Kid pointed to the far end of the crater, if one may use
the word "end" in referring to a circular bowl.

The cowboy posse saw, riding at top speed into the great
depression, a crowd of men, who, as they came nearer, could be
recognized as the Del Pinzo gang. The Greaser leader was not in
evidence, however.

"They're after the cattle!" cried Nort.

"Well, they won't get 'em without a fight!" shouted Bud.

He drew his weapon, an example followed by the others, and as the
two parties, one representing law and order and the other the
wild, reckless element, started toward each other, the fight
began.




CHAPTER XXIV

A DESPERATE CHANCE


"Come on, fellows; Come on!" yelled Bud, as he clapped his heels
against the sides of his pony and rushed toward the rustlers.
"Give 'em all they got coming!"

"We're with you!" cried Nort.

"A fight to the finish!" shouted Dick.

The boy ranchers had their weapons out, as, indeed, had every one
of the following cowboys. Nor was Del Pinzo's gang a whit behind
in this, though their lawless leader did not seem to be present.
The sun gleamed on the flashing ornaments of silver worn by some
of the Mexican Greasers as they rode to the fray.

"Don't ride too far, Bud!" called Slim, for the boys were
inclined to be reckless.

"We've got to ride 'em down or they'll have all the cattle out of
that far opening before we get there!" Bud answered. And, as he
replied he fired one shot in the air, over the heads of the
enemy. For Bud bore in mind his father's injunction, not to shoot
to wound unless it was absolutely necessary. And Bud thought
perhaps a strong show of force would awe the rustlers, causing
them to retreat.

However, they were in too strong force for this. And as the boy
ranchers and their friends rode on into the vast, natural,
volcanic bowl, and were able to take note of their foes, they saw
that the rustlers outnumbered them two to one.

Bud's shot--the first of the fight--was the signal for general
firing, though, as usual in such engagements, the initial
fusilade was wild on both sides; mercifully so, it seemed
ordered, for no one was hurt by the opening volley.

"There's going to be a hot time!" shouted Yellin' Kid, as he
spurred forward. "And I don't see th' skunk that spoiled my hat!
Where is he?"

"Del Pinzo would rather his men'd get th' lickin's!" answered
Snake. "He's hidin' out, I reckon."

"I'd like to find his hole!" said Yellin' Kid.

The clashing forces were nearer each other now, with the bunch of
Happy Valley steers in between, but off to one side. In order
that you may better understand what follows, and the positions of
the contending parties, I will explain the situation briefly.

The boy ranchers and their friends had ridden in on what I might
call the north end of the volcanic crater, in which bowl the
rustlers had hidden the cattle. The opening by which the cattle
had been placed in the bowl had been closed by a slide of dirt
and shale but this had been partly cleared away by our friends so
they could ride through the crack.

At what may be termed the south end of the crater was a larger
opening, wide enough, in fact, for several horsemen to ride
abreast or a large herd of cattle to be driven through. This
opening had been roughly fenced off to keep in the cattle. And it
was through this opening that the rustlers had ridden, advancing
to meet the force of the boy ranchers coming from the north.

The cattle had been feeding in the centre of the bowl, but as the
two parties began the fight, the steers drew off to the west. It
was evidently the intention of the rustlers to take out the
cattle if possible. Whether they could succeed in driving them
away in spite of the pursuit of the rightful owners, or whether
they hoped to hide them in some other secret place did not
develop.

At any rate, here were the two contending parties racing toward
each other, and firing as they galloped forward. And when they
were all out in the open it was evident that the rustlers far
outnumbered the boy ranchers and their friends.

One thing, however, was in favor of Bud and the others with him.
They had advanced farther into the bowl than had the rustlers,
and were past the centre when the actual fray began. Using the
illustration of a football game, to which I am tempted because of
the location of the fray, I might remark that the ball was now
over the centre line and well into the enemy's territory. It was
up to Bud and his followers to rush it over for a touchdown.

But the rustlers were not going to give up without a sharp fight.
They had come to take away the cattle, and this they now
endeavored to do. Several Greasers separated from the main body
and began to circle around with the evident intention of cutting
out a bunch of steers, to drive them to the larger opening, where
the fence had been torn down.

"We've got to stop that!" shouted Slim. "Here, Snake, you and Kid
ride over and see what you can do!"

The two cowboys, shouting at the tops of their voices, wheeled to
one side and started toward half a dozen Greasers. The odds were
not so great as they seemed, for right and justice were on the
side of the cowboys.

Suddenly Dick, who was riding between Bud and Nort, gave a little
cry, and his weapon dropped from his right hand, on which a spot
of blood appeared.

"Hit?" asked Nort.

"Only a scratch," Dick answered. He halted his pony, snatched his
neckerchief off and, with the help of his brother, bound up the
wound. It was decidedly more than a scratch, being a deep cut
where a glancing bullet had hit, and Dick's hand would be out of
commission for some time.

"But I can fire with my left," he added, a feat to which he was
equal, "and Star guides by knee pressure." He was riding a pony
he had taught to obey directions by means of pressure of the
cowboy's knees on either side. And Dick had been practicing left
hand shooting for some time. His gun restored to him, he rode on
with his brother and cousin.

With sudden yells, accompanied by as sudden a rush, a band of the
Greasers now rode straight for Bud, Dick, Nort and some of the
Diamond X outfit with our heroes. So fierce was the attack, and
in such numbers, that there was nothing for our friends to do but
retreat, for the time being at least.

This attack took place in a part of the bowl where there were a
large number of immense boulders scattered. Seeing that these
formed a natural protection, or breastwork, Bud called to his
cousins and the men to get behind the stones.

"Make the horses lie down!" was his advice. "We'll fight Indian
fashion!"

And, at this point, at least, this became the style of the
battle. The Greasers rode fast, endeavoring to cut off Bud and
his party, but the latter reached the haven of rocks first, and
with the horses on their sides, positions the steeds were glad
enough to assume, doubtless, the advantage was on the side of the
boy ranchers.

They were protected by rocks, from behind which they could fire,
while the enemy was in the open. But the enemy far outnumbered
our friends, and the latter, for the time being, were in the
position of persons besieged.

For, no sooner had the Greasers seen what was the object of Bud
and his followers, than the lawless ones took such small shelter
as they could find, some behind their prostrate horses, and began
firing at the boy ranchers' party. And as the renegade Mexicans
were, in a number of cases, armed with rifles, the odds against
Bud and his chums were increased. True, the Greasers were not
good marksmen, but a rifle in the hands of even a poor shooter is
often more than a match for a .45 revolver in the hands of an
expert.

"Pick 'em off!" cried Bud, as bullets zinged their way in among
the rocks behind which he and his friends were hidden. "Pick 'em
off, but don't expose yourself!"

This was good advice if it could have been followed, but to fire
effectively it was necessary for those of the Diamond X outfit to
take aim over, or to one side, of the rocks, and when this was
done, some part of the body was exposed. At such times the
watching Greasers fired.

It was now an actual state of siege as far as Bud and his
immediate companions were concerned, and they were outnumbered.
Several of Bud's party, including Nort this time, had been
slightly wounded. But, in turn, they had wounded some Greasers,
too, one vitally, as was learned later.

Meanwhile, Snake and Kid were having their own troubles with the
party of Greasers they had been sent off to intercept and prevent
from driving off the cattle. More Mexicans had joined their
comrades, and Kid and Snake were obliged to beat a retreat,
joining Slim and his forces, who were fighting the main, and
larger body of rustlers.

And it was while these two separate fights were going on, and
while the Greasers that had forced Kid and Snake to retire were
gathering together a bunch of cattle to drive out of the main
opening, that Dick, who was readjusting the bandage on his hand,
saw something that made his heart sink.

This was a sight of another body of Greasers riding into the bowl
from the south end--a body of Mexican horsemen led by Del Pinzo
himself.

"I guess it's all up with us now," said Dick to his brother,
calling the latter's attention to the reinforcements of the
enemy. "That's what that half-breed was hanging back for. He
wanted to get us well mixed up, and now he'll drive off the
cattle."

"Whew!" whistled Nort. "It does look that way. What we going to
do, Dick?"

The two brothers were behind a great boulder, off to one side.
Bud and some of the cowboys were replying to a brisk fire on the
part of the besieging Greasers.

For a moment, after having tied the bandage on his hand, Dick did
not answer. Then, as if an inspiration came to him, he said:

"It's only a chance, Nort, and a desperate chance at that. But
maybe we can do it! Did you ever read Kipling's 'Drums of the
Fore and Aft'?"

"Sure! But what's that got to do with this?"

"A lot. You and I are going to be the 'Drums' and these are going
to play the tune," and he tapped his .45. "Come on," he added,
motioning to his brother. "As I said, it's a desperate chance,
but it may do the trick!"




CHAPTER XXV

LIEUTENANT WAYNE


Not to mystify you, when there is no need for it, I will say that
the scheme Dick had hit upon was simple enough. If you recall
Kipling's famous story you know that two drummer boys, of a
British regiment in India, when the main body was being defeated
by a horde of natives, slipped quietly off to one side, and, by
hiding behind rocks, played the fife and beat the drum to such
advantage that the heathens thought another regiment was
approaching to take them in the rear, while the British force was
so heartened by hearing the familiar strains that they rallied,
the retreat was stopped and the day won.

Dick and Nort had no fife or drum, and, if they had possessed
those instruments, it is doubtful if they could have performed on
them with any credit to themselves.

Each of them was slightly wounded, but they possessed their guns
and had a plentiful supply of ammunition, and it was Dick's idea
to use this. "We'll slide out, crawl along that gully there," and
he pointed to Nort the one he meant, "and we'll take 'em on the
flank. By keeping behind the rocks, and firing fast, we can make
'em think, maybe, that another force is coming."

"You well said it--_maybe_," murmured Nort. "But at that,
the idea isn't so bad. They may hold us here all day, and with
Slim and his bunch having their hands full, it looks as if the
cattle would be driven off."

For while some of the rustlers were holding Bud and his band in
check behind the rocks, and while others were fighting Slim and
his cowboys, still others were driving the cattle toward the
opening in the old volcano bowl. It was Dick's idea that if by a
cross fire on the part of himself and his brother, hidden among
the rocks, they could scare away the band besieging Bud and his
friends, a diversion might be created which would rout the enemy.
At any rate, it was worth trying.

Bud was busy, as Nort and Dick slipped off, tying a bandage on
the arm of one of the cowboys who had been shot. And the brothers
were glad to try their desperate venture unnoticed, for they did
not want to explain. And they did not want to be observed going
away, as it looked a little like desertion in the face of the
enemy. But, for the time being, there was a lull in the fighting.
The Greasers who had been holding Bud's force behind the rocks,
had quieted down. The fighting between Slim and his cowboys out
in the open, however, was going on fiercely, and several had
fallen on both sides.

Once Dick and Nort were down in a gully, off to the right of the
rocks behind which the band had taken shelter, the eastern lads
were screened from observation, both by their friends and by the
Greasers.

"Cut along, North!" advised Dick, and, in spite of their wounds,
the boy ranchers ran in crouching positions, their guns in
readiness.

It did not take them long to reach a point which they regarded as
favorable for the trick they were going to play--for it was
nothing more nor less than a trick. If they could succeed, by
quick firing, in deceiving the enemy, and causing a retreat, a
sudden rush on the part of Bud and his friends might turn the
scale.

"All ready?" asked Dick of his brother, as they reached some
sheltering rocks on the flank of the party besieging Bud.

"Wait until I lay a lot of cartridges ready on the ground. It
will be easier to reload them."

"Good idea. I'll do the same."

It was rather awkward for Dick, with his wounded right hand, to
reload his gun, but he could manage after a fashion, though not
so well as Nort, whose hurt was in his upper left arm. The lads
saw to it that their weapons were ready, with a goodly supply of
cartridges in front of them. Nort looked across at Dick, behind
the sheltering rock, and at a nod from the latter they both began
firing.

The effect on the Greasers, poorly screened as they were, was
instantaneous. Several leaped to their feet and turned in
surprise toward the sound of firing on their flank. These made
good targets, and by firing at them Dick and Nort brought more
than one to the ground.

Bud and his companions, hearing the firing in a new direction,
where, as yet they did not know they had supporters, were also
taken by surprise, but it was of another nature.

"Come on! Rush 'em!" yelled Bud, when he had looked around, and,
missing Dick and Nort, guessed what had happened. "We've got 'em
in a cross fire now! Rush 'em!"

But the Greasers, disheartened by the firing of Dick and Nort on
their flank, did not stop to be rushed. Those who were able
leaped up and ran toward their horses, which had strayed off to
one side. Bud and his party emerged from behind the rocks, firing
as they rushed the enemy.

"This is the stuff, Dick!" shouted Nort, as he reloaded his gun
and sent another fusilade of bullets into the ranks of the now
retreating Greasers.

"I'm glad it worked!" remarked the proposer of the Kipling
scheme. "Now we can go help Slim and his bunch. They're having
trouble!"

Indeed the tide of battle did seem to be turning against the
foreman and his forces. They were outnumbered, and had lost
several cowboys, by wounds if not by death--just which it was
impossible to determine then. And, meanwhile, the other Greasers,
under the leadership of the wily Del Pinzo, were hazing the
cattle toward the main entrance.

"Good work, boys! Great work!" Bud greeted his cousins with as he
rode out to meet them, when the besieging Greasers had been
routed by the cross fire of the two lads. "How'd you think of
it?"

"It was Dick," spoke Nort.

"It was Kipling!" Dick answered.

"Get mounted and join us!" Bud requested. "We've got to help
Slim!"

This was evident, as the foreman and his cowboys were now hard
pressed. But as Nort and Dick rejoined Bud, having leaped to
their saddles they, as well as the others from Diamond X caught
sight of something which, for the moment made them sick at heart.

For the sight was that of another body of horsemen riding into
the old volcano bowl. On they cantered, the sun glinting on their
arms.

"More of Del Pinzo's rustlers!" burst out Bud. "We may as well
give up! They're too many for us!"

But he did not pull rein, intending it seemed, to fight it out to
the bitter end. A cry from Dick was the cause of wonderment. He
pointed to the new body of advancing horsemen.

"Look! Look!" Dick shouted. "Those aren't Greasers! They aren't
rustlers or Del Pinzo's gang! They're United States troopers! By
all the jack rabbits that ever jumped we've got the rustlers now!
The United States cavalry is on the job!"

And a moment later, as the notes of a bugle gave a musical order,
causing the advancing troop to deploy to right and left, it was
evident that the tide of battle had turned in favor of the boy
ranchers and their friends.

For the newcomers were, in reality, a troop of United States
regulars, and with a dash and vim, exceeded nowhere in the world,
and among no other fighters, this band of grim-faced men entered
into action. Carbines were unslung and their short and ugly bark
was added to the din.

"Come on, fellows!"

"Now we've got 'em!"

"Over the line!"

"Touchdown!"

These were only a few of the excited shouts of the boy ranchers
themselves, while the cowboys of Diamond X riding into the fray
with new hearts, sent up their shrill, yipping yells. It was all
over then but the shouting, so to speak. The Greasers were fairly
trapped--Del Pinzo and all his gang. In vain they attempted to
ride around and escape by the main entrance. But the troopers had
stationed a guard there, and the bowl was "bottled up." One or
two Greasers, sneaking around to the north, did manage to escape
through the crack by which Bud and his friends had entered,
though the main body was captured and the cattle saved.

"Whew, but that was hot work!" commented Bud, toward sundown,
when the rustlers had been caught, disarmed and corraled under
guard.

"You told the truth for once," remarked Dick, whose wound had
been rebandaged by the surgeon accompanying the troopers.

"And I guess this is the end of Del Pinzo," remarked Nort, for
the outlaw Greaser half-breed had been caught red-handed, so to
speak.

"I hope so," mused Bud. "But we paid a price for it."

"And so did they," observed Slim. "We accounted for quite a few,
but I'm sorry for our boys." Several of the Diamond X outfit had
been grievously wounded, and one was killed outright. But the
casualties on the side of the enemy were greater.

The fight was over. The cattle of the boy ranchers were saved,
and the rustlers captured. Tired horses were staked out near
grass and water, and while the cavalry established their camp,
Bud and his friends began to wonder how it was the troopers had
arrived in the nick of time.

"Well, it was more by chance than anything else," said Captain
Parker, who was in command. "We'd been on the trail of these
outlaws for some time, and finally we saw a chance to corner
them. It was due to the work of Lieutenant Wayne that we were
able so to effectually bag them here, though. He has been on
scout duty in this section for some time, endeavoring to get information
so that we might round up this gang."

"Lieutenant Wayne," repeated Bud, wonderingly.

"Yes, here he comes now. He says he knows you boys."

"Knows us!" murmured Dick, as a trooper approached, saluting his
superior and smiling at the boy ranchers. "Yes, don't you know
me?" asked Lieutenant Wayne, holding out his hand to Bud.
"Perhaps if I had on my glasses, you would be better able to----"

"Four Eyes!" burst out Nort. "At least--I beg your pardon--Henry--er--Mr.
Mellon--Lieutenant Wayne!" he stammered.

"Yes, Four Eyes!" was the laughing answer of the trooper. "Those
glasses were only fakes! I wore them as a sort of disguise, and
very effectual they were, it seems."

"Four Eyes!" gasped Bud. "And were you in the United States
cavalry all the while?"

"Yes, on scout, or detached duty," was the answer. "The
government has had many complaints of this band of Del Pinzo's
rustlers, and we were detailed to put them out of business. I was
assigned to go on duty as a cowboy, which wasn't so hard, as I
had been one nearly all my life before joining the army. I worked
on several ranches, picking up bits of information here and
there, and I completed all I needed to get in Happy Valley," he
added.

"And we never tumbled!" remarked Dick.

"Glad you didn't!" laughed Lieutenant Wayne, to give him his
proper title. "I thought you were suspicious of me, more than
once, though," he said.

"We were, after you built that signal lantern on the watch tower--you
did do that, didn't you?" asked Bud.

"Yes, but only as a decoy for the rustlers. I managed to overhear
some of their plans, and part of their scheme called for a light
on the tower when the time was ripe for a raid on your cattle,
boys. So I flashed the signal myself, and, indirectly, it led to
this capture today. For I joined my troop right after that, and
we have been rounding the rascals up ever since.

"We knew they had made a big raid at your place, but we didn't
know where they had hidden the cattle until I happened to think
of this old crater, which I discovered one day when I was working
for you, Bud. So we made our way here and--well, this is the end,
I believe," he added, as he looked over at the bunch of miserable
prisoners.

"I hope it's the end," said Bud. "We want to get back to
business. And I'm sorry we suspected you, Lieutenant."

"Oh, that's all right. In fact, I'm glad you did. It shows I
lived up to the character I was supposed to represent."

There is little more to tell. That night, around the campfire
many things, hitherto a mystery, were explained. The stethoscope
the boys found was the property of Lieutenant Wayne. He had
dropped it when paying a secret visit to Happy Valley. He had
intended to pose as a doctor to deceive the rustlers, but, on
losing the stethoscope he gave up that plan. It is needless to
say that he had nothing to do with the robbery at Diamond X, the
real thieves never being discovered. Lieutenant Wayne apologized
for cutting his way from Bud's tent the night he disappeared
after the signal from the tower. This was the only way he could
disappear and accomplish his plans, he said. And it was he who
had fired and broken the bottle, and had also fired mysterious
signal shots, in order to play up to his character of being in
with the rustlers.

"Though the bottle-breaking was only a joke I indulged in," he
admitted, "I'm sorry it worried you so."

The soldier, of course, had nothing to do with the prairie fire,
and who set it, if it was set, was not discovered. Lieutenant
Wayne finally recovered his black horse Cinder, the animal having
made its way back to Curly Q ranch, where the officer once posed
as a cowboy.

The cattle first stolen by the rustlers were not recovered, but
it was found that when they seemed they had been spirited off in
an airship they had been merely back-tracked and hidden until an
opportune time to dispose of them. Del Pinzo's gang was in
hiding, waiting for a chance to drive off the main body of
steers, when they were surprised by our heroes. Whether Hank
Fisher was in with the rustlers was not decided, though
suspicions pointed toward him. The outlaws were sentenced to long
terms after being captured by the troopers, and their secret
meeting place, having been discovered, was destroyed.

After these explanations had been made, it was decided not to try
to drive the cattle out of the crater until the next day.

The night passed without incident, though none of the boy
ranchers turned in early. They were too excited, and they wanted
to talk over what had happened.

The existence of the old crater was not generally known, but Del
Pinzo and his rustlers appeared to have the secret of it. They
had driven off Bud's cattle, put them into the natural corral and
then filled in, with dirt, the only entrance visible from the
defile trail leading from Happy Valley. They intended to use the
larger opening out of the bowl, to the south, to get the cattle
away. But their plans were frustrated.

The next day the troopers drove off before them the discomfitted
Del Pinzo and his disheartened followers, Yellin' Kid taking the
Mexican's elaborate hat to replace the cowboy's with the bullet
holes. Lieutenant Wayne said farewell to the boy ranchers,
promising to come and see them again, in his real character.

The wounded were transported as tenderly as possible out of the
main egress from the bowl, it being impractical to use the other.
And it was from this larger entrance, after the fence had been
torn away, that the cattle were driven, by a long winding trail
amid the mountains back to Happy Valley. Only a few were lost by
the raid, which was the largest ever perpetrated by the rustlers
in that part of the country.

"But I guess, now that the troopers have Del Pinzo, and not the
local authorities with their flimsy town jails, that this Greaser
won't be foot-loose for some time," observed Bud, when, once
more, the boy ranchers were back in camp.

"I don't want to hear his name again," murmured Dick, nursing his
wounded hand.

"And to think that Four Eyes was working in our interests when we
thought him a spy! That was pretty good!" laughed Nort.

"Yes, it all worked out pretty well," spoke Bud. "And do you know
what I'd like to do? I'd like Dad to buy that old volcano crater
for us. It would be a peach of a place where we could winter a
herd of cattle, and have 'em fat for spring selling. I'm going to
speak to him about it," he concluded.

"Well, you can speak right now, for here he comes, and your
mother and sister, too," added Dick, as Mr. Merkel's auto chugged
down the trail from Diamond X.

"Well, boys, I hear you beat Del Pinzo at his own game!" greeted
the rancher, while Nell expressed her sorrow at Dick's wound, to
the somewhat jealous regard of Nort, whose hurt was more slight.

"Yes, he's where he won't blur any more brands right away," Bud
answered. "But it looked like touch and go for a while. The
troopers came just in time!"

"Well, you fellows seem to know how to take care of yourselves
and the cattle," observed Bud's father. "Guess I'll turn one of
my main ranches over to you. What say?"

But the boys did not answer. They were busy eating slices of a
large chocolate cake that Nell had brought over. This is reason
enough, isn't it? However, the adventures of our heroes did not
end with the capture of the rustlers. And those of you who wish
to follow them further may do so in the next volume of this
series which will be entitled: "The Boy Ranchers Among the
Indians; or Trailing the Yaquis." In that volume we shall meet
many of our old friends again, and, should Bud permit it, I may
tell you about Zip Foster. But with the capture of Del Pinzo, and
his rustlers, this book is finished.

THE END






End of Project Gutenberg's The Boy Ranchers on the Trail, by Willard F. Baker





This Project Gutenberg Etext of Beechcroft at Rockstone by Charlotte M
Yonge was prepared by Sandra Laythorpe, laythorpe@tiscali.co.uk.  A
web page for Charlotte M Yonge will be found at
www.menorot.com/cmyonge.htm.





BEECHCROFT AT ROCKSTONE

by

Charlotte M Yonge




CHAPTER I.  A DISPERSION



'A telegram!  Make haste and open it, Jane; they always make me so
nervous!  I believe that is the reason Reginald always _will_
telegraph when he is coming,' said Miss Adeline Mohun, a very pretty,
well preserved, though delicate-looking lady of some age about forty,
as her elder sister, brisk and lively and some years older, came into
the room.

'No, it is not Reggie.  It is from Lily.  Poor Lily!  Jasper---
accident---Come.'

'Poor dear Lily!  Is it young Jasper or old Jasper, I wonder?'

'If it were young Jasper she would have put Japs.  I am afraid it is
her husband.  If so, she will be going off to him.  I must catch the
11.20 train.  Will you come, Ada?'

'Oh no; I should be knocked up, and on your hands.  The suspense is
bad enough at home.'

'If it is old Jasper, we shall see in the paper to-day.  I will send
it down to you from the station.  Supposing it is Sir Jasper, and she
wants to go out to him, we must take in some of the children.'

'Oh!  Dear little Primrose would be nice enough, but what should we
do with that Halfpenny woman?  If we had the other girls, I suppose
they would be at school all day; but surely some might go to
Beechcroft.  And mind, Jane, I will not have you overtasking
yourself!  Do not take any of them without having Gillian to help
you.  That I stipulate.'

Jane Mohun seemed as if she did not hear as these sentences were
uttered at intervals, while she stood dashing off postcards at her
davenport.  Then she said, on her way to the door---

'Don't expect me to-night.  I will send Fanny to ask one of the
Wellands to come in to you, and telegraph if I bring any one home
with me.'

'But, Jane dear--'

However, the door was shut, and by the time Miss Adeline had reached
her sister's room, the ever-ready bag was nearly packed.

'I only wanted to say, dear Jane, that you must give my love to dear
Lily.  I am grieved---grieved for her; but indeed you must not
undertake anything rash.'  (A shake of the head, as the shoes went
into their neat bag.)  'Do not let her persuade you to stay at
Silverfold in her absence.  You cannot give up everything here'

'Yes, yes, Ada, I know it does not suit you.  Never fear.'

'It is not that, but you are much too useful here to drop everything,
especially now every one is away.  I would willingly sacrifice
myself, but--'

'Yes, I know, Ada dear.  Now, good-bye, and take care of yourself,
and don't be nervous.  It may mean only that young Japs has twisted
his little finger.'

And with a kiss, Miss Mohun ran downstairs as fast and lightly as if
her years had been half their amount, and accomplished her orders to
Fanny---otherwise Mrs. Mount---a Beechcroft native, who, on being left
a widow, had returned to her former mistresses, bringing with her a
daughter, who had grown up into an efficient housemaid.  After a few
words with her, Miss Mohun sped on, finding time at the station to
purchase a morning paper just come down, and to read among the
telegrams---


                                           'COLOMBO, Sept. 3rd.
'Lieutenant-General Sir Jasper Merrifield, G.C.B., has been thrown
from his horse, and received severe injuries.'


She despatched this paper to her sister by a special messenger, whom
she had captured by the way, and was soon after in the train,
knitting and pondering.

At Silverton station she saw the pony carriage, and in it her niece
Gillian, a girl not quite seventeen, with brown eyes showing traces
of tears.

'Mamma knew you would come,' she said.

'You have heard direct, of course.'

'Yes; Claude telegraphed.  The horse fell over a precipice.  Papa's
leg and three ribs are broken.  Not dangerous.  That is all it says;
and mamma is going out to him directly.'

'I was quite sure she would.  Well, Gillian, we must do the best we
can.  Has she any plans?'

'I think she waited for you to settle them.  Hal is come; he wanted
to go with her, but she says it will cost too much, and besides,
there is his Ordination in Advent.'

'Has she telegraphed to your uncles?'

'To Beechcroft and to Stokesley; but we don't quite know where Uncle
Reginald is.  Perhaps he will see the paper.'

Gillian's tears were flowing again, and her aunt said---

'Come, my dear, you must not give way; you must do all you can to
make it better for your mother.'

'I know,' she answered.  'Indeed, I didn't cry till I sat waiting,
and it all came over me.  Poor papa! and what a journey mamma will
have, and how dreadful it will be without her!  But I know that it is
horrid of me, when papa and my sisters must want her so much more.'

'That's right---quite right to keep up before her.  It does not sound
to me so bad, after all; perhaps they will telegraph again to stop
her.  Did Claude ask her to come out?'

'Oh no!  There were only those few words.'

No more could be learnt till the pony stopped at the door, and Hal
ran out to hand out his aunt, and beg her privately to persuade his
mother to take him, or, if she would not consent to that, at least to
have Macrae, the old soldier-servant, with her---it was not fit for
her to travel alone.

Lady Merrifield looked very pale, and squeezed her sister close in
her arms as she said---

'You are my great help, Jenny.'

'And must you go?'

'Yes, certainly.'

'Without waiting to hear more?'

'There is no use in losing time.  I cannot cross from Folkestone till
the day after to-morrow, at night.  I must go to London to-morrow,
and sleep at Mrs. Merrifield's.'

'But this does not seem to me so very bad.'

'Oh, no, no! but when I get there in three weeks' time, it will be
just when I shall be most wanted.  The nursing will have told on the
girls, and Jasper will be feeling weary of being laid up, and wanting
to take liberties.'

'And what will you be after such a journey?'

'Just up to keeping him in order.  Come, you have too much sense to
expostulate, Jenny.'

'No; you would wear yourself to fiddle-strings if you stayed at home.
I only want you to take Hal, or Macrae.'

'Hal is out of the question, I would not interfere with his
preparation on any account.  Macrae would be a very costly article;
and, moreover, I want him to act major-domo here, unless you would,
and that I don't dare to hope for.'

'No, you must not, Lily; Ada never feels well here, nor always at
Brighton, and Emily would be too nervous to have her without me.
But we will take as many children as you please, or we have room
for.'

'That is like you, Jenny.  I know William will offer to take them in
at home, but I cannot send them without Miss Vincent; and she cannot
leave her mother, who has had a sort of stroke.  Otherwise I should
try leaving them here while I am away, but the poor old lady is in no
state for it---in fact, I doubt her living long.'

'I know; you have been governess by yourself these last weeks; it
will be well to relieve her.  The best way will be for us to take
Mysie and Valetta, and let them go to the High School; and there is a
capital day-school for little boys, close to St. Andrew's, for
Fergus, and Gillian can go there too, or join classes in whatever she
pleases.'

'My Brownie!  Have you really room for all those?'

'Oh yes!  The three girls in the spare room and dressing-room, and
Fergus in the little room over the porch.  I will write to Fanny; I
gave her a hint.'

'And I have no doubt that Primrose will be a delight to her aunt
Alethea, poor little dear!  Yes, that makes it all easy, for in the
holidays I know the boys are sure of a welcome at the dear old home,
or Hal might have one or two of them at his Curacy.'

The gong sounded for the melancholy dinner that had to go on all the
same, and in the midst all were startled by the arrival of a
telegram, which Macrae, looking awestruck, actually delivered to
Harry instead of to his mistress; but it was not from Ceylon.  It was
from Colonel Mohun, from Beechcroft: 'Coming 6.30.  Going with you.
Send children here.'

Never were twenty words, including addresses, more satisfactory.  The
tears came, for the first time, to Lady Merrifield's eyes at the
kindness of her brothers, and Harry was quite satisfied that his
uncle would be a far better escort than himself or Macrae.  Aunt Jane
went off to send her telegram home and write some needful letters,
and Lady Merrifield announced her arrangements to those whom they
concerned.

'Oh! mamma, don't,' exclaimed Valetta; 'all the guinea-pigs will
die.'

'I thought,' said Gillian, 'that we might stay here with Miss Vincent
to look after us.'

'That will not do in her mother's state.  Mrs. Vincent cannot be
moved up here, and I could not lay such a burthen on them.'

'We would be very good,' said Val.

'That, I hope, you will be any way; but I think it will be easier at
Rockstone, and I am quite sure that papa and I shall be better
satisfied about you.'

'Mayn't we take Quiz!' asked Fergus.

'And Rigdum Funnidos?' cried Valetta.

'And Ruff and Ring?' chimed in Mysie.

'My dear children, I don't see how Aunt Jane can be troubled with any
more animals than your four selves.  You must ask her, only do not be
surprised or put out if she refuses, for I don't believe you can keep
anything there.'

Off the three younger ones went, Gillian observing, 'I don't see how
they can, unless it was Quiz; but, mamma, don't you think I might go
to Beechcroft with Primrose?  I should be so much quieter working for
the examination there, and I could send my exercises to Miss Vincent;
and then I should keep up Prim's lessons.'

'Your aunt Alethea will, I know, like doing that, my dear; and I am
afraid to turn those creatures loose on the aunts without some one to
look after them and their clothes.  Fanny will be very helpful; but
it will not do to throw too much on her.'

'Oh!  I thought they would have Lois---'

'There would not be room for her; besides that, I don't think it
would suit your aunts.  You and Mysie ought to do all the mending for
yourselves and Fergus, and what Valetta cannot manage.  I know you
would rather be at Beechcroft, my dear; but in this distress and
difficulty, some individual likings must be given up.'

'Yes, mamma.'

Lady Merrifield looked rather dubiously at her daughter.  She had
very little time, and did not want to have an argument, nor to elicit
murmurs, yet it might be better to see what was in Gillian's mind
before it was too late.  Mothers, very fond of their own sisters,
cannot always understand why it is not the same with their daughters,
who inherit another element of inherited character, and of another
generation, and who have not been welded together with the aunts in
childhood.  'My dear,' she said, 'you know I am quite ready to hear
if you have any real reasonable objection to this arrangement.'

'No, mamma, I don't think I have,' said Gillian thoughtfully.  'The
not liking always meeting a lot of strangers, nor the general bustle,
is all nonsense, I know quite well.  I see it is best for the
children, but I should like to know exactly who is to be in authority
over them.'

'Certainly Aunt Jane,' replied Lady Merrifield.  'She must be the
ultimate authority.  Of course you will check the younger ones in
anything going wrong, as you would here, and very likely there will
be more restrictions.  Aunt Ada has to be considered, and it will be
a town life; but remember that your aunt is mistress of the house,
and that even if you do think her arrangements uncalled for, it is
your duty to help the others to submit cheerfully.  Say anything you
please fully and freely in your letters to me, but don't let there be
any collisions of authority.  Jane will listen kindly, I know, in
private to any representation you may like to make, but to say before
the children, "Mamma always lets them," would be most mischievous.'

'I see,' said Gillian.  'Indeed, I will do my best, mamma, and it
will not be for very long.'

'I hope and trust not, my dear child.  Perhaps we shall all meet by
Easter---papa, and all; but you must not make too sure.  There may be
delays.  Now I must see Halfpenny.  I cannot talk to you any more, my
Gillyflower, though I am leaving volumes unsaid.

Gillian found Aunt Jane emerging from her room, and beset by her
three future guests.

'Aunt Jane, may we bring Quiz?'

'And Rigdum Funnidos and Lady Rigdum?'

'And Ruff and Ring?  They are the sweetest doves in the world.'

'Doves!  Oh, Mysie, they would drive your aunt Ada distracted, with
coo-roo-roo at four o'clock in the morning, just as she goes off to
sleep.'

'The Rigdums make no noise but a dear little chirp,' triumphantly
exclaimed Valetta.

'Do you mean the kittens?  We have a vacancy for one cat, you know.'

Oh yes, we want you to choose between Artaxerxes and the Sofy.  But
the Rigdums are the eldest pair of guinea-pigs.  They are so fond of
me, that I know poor old Funnidos will die of grief if I go away and
leave him.'

'I sincerely hope not, Valetta, for, indeed, there is no place to put
him in.'

'I don't think he would mind living in the cellar if he only saw me
once a day,' piteously pleaded Valetta.

'Indeed, Val, the dark and damp would surely kill the poor thing, in
spite of your attentions.  You must make up your mind to separation
from your pets, excepting the kitten.'

Valetta burst out crying at this last drop that made the bucket
overflow, but Fergus exclaimed:  'Quiz!  Aunt Jane!  He always goes
about with us, and always behaves like a gentleman, don't you,
Quizzy?' and the little Maltese, who perfectly well understood that
there was trouble in the air, sat straight up, crossed his paws, and
looked touchingly wistful.

'Poor dear little fellow!' said Aunt Jane; 'yes, I knew he would be
good, but Kunz would be horribly, jealous, you see; he is an only
dog, and can't bear to have his premises invaded.'

'He ought to be taught better,' said Fergus gravely.

'So he ought,' Aunt Jane confessed; 'but he is too old to begin
learning, and Aunt Ada and Mrs. Mount would never bear to see him
disturbed.  Besides, I really do not think Quiz would be half so well
off there as among his own friends and places here, with Macrae to
take care of him.'  Then as Fergus began to pucker his face, she
added, 'I am really very sorry to be so disagreeable.'

'The children must not be unreasonable,' said Gillian sagely, as she
came up.

'And I am to choose between Xerxes and Artaxerxes, is it?' said Aunt
Jane.

'No, the Sofy,' said Mysie.  'A Sofy is a Persian philosopher, and
this kitten has got the wisest face.'

'Run and fetch them,' suggested her aunt, 'and then we can choose.
Oh,' she added, with some relief at the thought, 'if it is an object
to dispose of Cockie, we could manage him.'

The two younger ones were gratified, but Gillian and Mysie both
exclaimed that Cockie's exclusive affections were devoted to Macrae,
and that they could not answer for his temper under the separation.
To break up such a household was decidedly the Goose, Fox, and
Cabbage problem.  As Mysie observed, in the course of the search for
the kittens, in the make-the-best-of-it tone, 'It was not so bad as
the former moves, when they were leaving a place for good and all.'

'Ah, but no place was ever so good as this,' said poor Valetta.

'Don't be such a little donkey,' said Fergus consequentially.  'Don't
you know we are going to school, and I am three years younger than
Wilfred was?'

'It is only a petticoat school,' said Val, 'kept by ladies.'

'It isn't.'

'It is; I heard Harry say so.'

'And yours is all butchers and bakers and candlestick makers.'

On which they fell on each other, each with a howl of defiance.
Fergus grabbed at Val's pigtail, and she was buffeting him vehemently
when Harry came out, held them apart, and demanded if this were the
way to make their mother easy in leaving them.

'She said it was a pet-pet-petticoat school,' sobbed Fergus.

'And so it ought to be, for boys that fight with girls.'

'And he said mine was all butchers and bakers and candlestick
makers,' whined Valetta.

'Then you'd better learn manners, or they'll take you for a tramp,'
observed Harry; but at that moment Mysie broke in with a shout at
having discovered the kittens making a plaything of the best library
pen-wiper, their mother, the sleek Begum, abetting them, and they
were borne off to display the coming glories of their deep fur to
Aunt Jane.

Her choice fell upon the Sofy, as much because of the convenience of
the name as because of the preternatural wisdom of expression
imparted by the sweep of the black lines on the gray visage.  Mr.
Pollock's landlady was to be the happy possessor of Artaxerxes, and
the turbulent portion of the Household was disposed of to bear him
thither, and to beg Miss Hacket to give Buff and Ring the run of her
cage, whence they had originally come, also to deliver various
messages and notes.

By the time they returned, Colonel Mohun was met in the hall by his
sister.  'Oh, Reggie, it is too good in you!' were the words that
came with her fervent kiss.  'Remember how many years I have been
seasoned to being "cockit up on a baggage waggon."  Ought not such an
old soldier as I to be able to take care of myself?'

'And what would your husband say to you when you got there?  And
should not I catch it from William?  Well, are you packing up the
youthful family for Beechcroft, except that at Rotherwood they are
shrieking for Mysie?'

'I know how good William and Alethea would be.  This child,' pointing
to Primrose, who had been hanging on her all day in silence, 'is to
go to them; but as I can't send Miss Vincent, educational advantages,
as the advertisements say, lie on the side of Rockstone; so Jenny
here undertakes to be troubled with the rabble.'

'But Mysie?  Rotherwood met me at the station and begged me to obtain
her from you.  They really wish it.'

'He does, I have no doubt.'

'So does Madame la Marquise.  They have been anxious about little
Phyllis all the summer.  She was languid and off her feed in London,
and did not pick up at home as they expected.  My belief is that it
is too much governess and too little play, and that a fortnight here
would set her up again.  Rotherwood himself thinks so, and Victoria
has some such inkling.  At any rate, they are urgent to have Mysie
with the child, as the next best thing.'

'Poor dear little Fly!' ejaculated Lady Merrifield; 'but I am afraid
Mysie was not very happy there last year.'

'And what would be the effect of all the overdoing?' said Miss Mohun.

'Mysie is tougher than that sprite, and I suppose there is some
relaxation,' said Lady Merrifield.

'Yes; the doctors have frightened them sufficiently for the present.

'I suppose Mysie is a prescription, poor child,' said her aunt, in a
tone that evoked from her brother---

'Jealous, Jenny?'

'Well, Jane,' said Lady Merrifield, 'you know how thankful I am to
you and Ada, but I am inclined to let it depend on the letters I get
to-morrow, and the way Victoria takes it.  If it is really an earnest
wish on that dear little Fly's account, I could not withstand old
Rotherwood, and though Mysie might be less happy than she would be
with you, I do not think any harm will be done.  Everything there is
sound and conscientious, and if she picks up a little polish, it
won't hurt her.'

'Shall you give her the choice?'

'I see no good in rending the poor child's mind between two
affections, especially as there will be a very short time to decide
in, for I shall certainly not send her if Victoria's is a mere duty
letter.'

'You are quite right there, Lily,' said the Colonel.  'The less
choice the greater comfort.'

'Well done, sir soldier,' said his sister Jane.  'I say quite right
too; only, for my own sake, I wish it had been Valetta.'

'So no doubt does she,' said the mother; 'but unluckily it isn't.
And, indeed, I don't think I wish it.  Val is safer with you.  As
Gillian expressed it the other day, "Val does right when she likes
it; Mysie does right when she knows it."'

'You have the compliment after all, Jane,' said the Colonel.  'Lily
trusts you with the child she doesn't trust!'

There was no doubt the next morning, for Lady Rotherwood wrote an
earnest, affectionate letter, begging for Mysie, who, she said, had
won such golden opinions in her former visit that it would be a real
benefit to Phyllis, as much morally as physically, to have her
companionship.  It was the tenderest letter that either of the
sisters had ever seen from the judicious and excellent Marchioness,
full of warm sympathy for Lady Merrifield's anxiety for her husband,
and betraying much solicitude for her little girl.

'It has done her good,' said Jane Mohun.  'I did not think she had
such a soft spot.'

'Poor Victoria,' said Lady Merrifield, 'that is a shame.  You know
she is an excellent mother.'

'Too excellent, that's the very thing,' muttered Aunt Jane.  'Well,
Mysie's fate is settled, and I dare say it will turn out for the
best.'

So Mysie was to go with Mrs. Halfpenny and Primrose to Beechcroft,
whence the Rotherwoods would fetch her.  If the lady's letter had
been much less urgent, who could have withstood her lord's
postscript: 'If you could see the little pale face light up at the
bare notion of seeing Mysie, you would know how grateful we shall be
for her.'

Mysie herself heard her destiny without much elation, though she was
very fond of Lady Phyllis, and the tears came into her eyes at the
thought of her being unwell and wanting her.

'Mamma said we must not grumble,' she said to Gillian; 'but I shall
feel so lost without you and Val.  It is so unhomish, and there's
that dreadful German Fraulein, who was not at home last time.'

'If you told mamma, perhaps she would let you stay,' returned
Gillian.  'I know I should hate it, worse than I do going to
Rockstone and without you.'

'That would be unkind to poor Fly,' said Mysie.  'Besides, mamma said
she could not have settling and unsettling for ever.  And I shall see
Primrose sometimes; besides, I do love Fly.  It's marching orders,
you know.'

It was Valetta who made the most objection.  She declared that it was
not fair that Mysie, who had been to the ball at Rotherwood, should
go again to live with lords and ladies, while she went to a nasty
day-school with butchers' and bakers' daughters.  She hoped she
should grow horridly vulgar, and if mamma did not like it, it would
be her own fault!

Mrs. Halfpenny, who did not like to have to separate Mysie's clothes
from the rest after they were packed, rather favoured this
naughtiness by observing: 'The old blue merino might stay at home.
Miss Mysie would be too set up to wear that among her fine folk.  Set
her up, that she should have all the treats, while her own Miss
Gillian was turned over to the auld aunties!'

'Nonsense, nurse,' said Gillian.  'I'm much better pleased to go and
be of some use!  Val, you naughty child, how dare you make such a
fuss?' for Valetta was crying again.

'I hate school, and I hate Rockstone, and I don't see why Mysie
should always go everywhere, and wear new frocks, and I go to the
butchers and bakers and wear horrid old ones.'

'I wish you could come too,' said Mysie; 'but indeed old frocks are
the nicest, because one is not bothered to take so much care of them;
and lords and ladies aren't a bit better to play with than, other
people.  In fact, Ivy is what Japs calls a muff and a stick.'

Valetta, however, cried on, and Mysie went the length of repairing to
her mother, in the midst of her last notes and packings, to entreat
to change with Val, who followed on tip-toe.

'Certainly not,' was the answer from Lady Merrifield, who was being
worried on all sides, 'Valetta is not asked, and she is not behaving
so that I could accept for her if she were.'

And Val had to turn away in floods of tears, which redoubled on being
told by the united voices of her brothers and sisters that they were
ashamed of her for being so selfish as to cry for herself when all
were in so much trouble about papa.

Lady Merrifield caught some of the last words.  'No, my dear,' she
said.  'That is not quite just or kind.  It is being unhappy that
makes poor Val so ready to cry about her own grievances.  Only, Val,
come here, and remember that fretting is not the way to meet such
things.  There is a better way, my child, and I think you know what I
mean.  Now, to help you through the time in an outer way, suppose you
each set yourself some one thing to improve in while I am away.
Don't tell me what it is, but let me find out when I come home.'
With that she obeyed an urgent summons to speak to the gardener.

'I shall!  I shall,' cried little Primrose, 'write a whole copy-book
in single lines!  And won't mamma be pleased?  What shall you do,
Fergus? and Val? and Mysie?'

'I shall get to spin my peg-top so as it will never tumble down, and
will turn an engine for drawing water,' was the prompt answer of
Fergus.

'What nonsense!' said Val; 'you'd better settle to get your long
division sums right.'

'That s girls' stuff,' replied Fergus; 'you'd better settle to leave
off crying for nothing.'

'That you had!' said several voices, and Val very nearly cried again
as she exclaimed: 'Don't be all so tiresome.  I shall make mamma a
beautiful crewel cushion, with all the battles in history on it.  And
won't she be surprised!'

'I think mamma meant more than that,' said Mysie.

'Oh, Mysie, what shall you do?' asked Primrose.

'I did think of getting to translate one of mamma's favourite German
stories quite through to her without wanting the dictionary or
stumbling one bit,' said Mysie; 'but I am sure she meant something
better and better, and I'm thinking what it is---Perhaps it is making
all little Flossie Maddin's clothes, a whole suit all oneself---Or
perhaps it is manners.  What do you think, Gill?'

'I should say most likely it was manners for you,' volunteered Harry,
'and the extra you are most likely to acquire at Rotherwood.'

'I'm so glad,' said Mysie.

'And you, Gill,' inquired Primrose, 'what will you do?  Mine is a
copy-book, and Fergus's is the spinning-top-engines, and rule of
three; and Val's is a crewel battle cushion and not crying; and
Mysie's is German stories and manners; and what's yours, Gill?'

'Gill is so grown up, she is too good to want an inside thing'
announced Primrose.

'Oh, Prim, you dear little thing,' cried both elder brother and
sister, as they thought with a sort of pang of the child's opinion of
grown-up impeccability.

'Harry is grown up more,' put in Fergus; 'why don't you ask him?'

'Because I know,' said Primrose, with a pretty shyness, and as they
pressed her, she whispered, 'He is going to be a clergyman.'

There was a call for Mysie and Val from upstairs, and as the younger
population scampered off, Gillian said to her brother---

'Is not it like "occupy till I come"?'

'So I was thinking,' said Harry gravely.  'But one must be as young
as Mysie to throw one's "inside things" into the general stock of
resolutions.'

'Yes,' said Gillian, with uplifted eyes.  'I do---I do hope to do
something.'

Some great thing was her unspoken thought---some great and excellent
achievement to be laid before her mother on her return.  There was a
tale begun in imitation of Bessie Merrifield, called "Hilda's
Experiences".  Suppose that was finished, printed, published,
splendidly reviewed.  Would not that be a great thing?  But alas, she
was under a tacit engagement never to touch it in the hours of study.




CHAPTER II.  ROCKQUAY



The actual moment of a parting is often softened by the confusion of
departure.  That of the Merrifield family took place at the junction,
where Lady Merrifield with her brother remained in the train, to be
carried on to London.

Gillian, Valetta, and Fergus, with their aunt, changed into a train
for Rockstone, and Harry was to return to his theological college,
after seeing Mysie and Primrose off with nurse on their way to the
ancestral Beechcroft, whence Mysie was to be fetched to Rotherwood.
The last thing that met Lady Merrifield's eyes was Mrs. Halfpenny
gesticulating wildly, under the impression that Mysie's box was going
off to London.

And Gillian's tears were choked in the scurry to avoid a smoking-
carriage, while Harry could not help thinking---half blaming himself
for so doing---that Mysie expended more feeling in parting with Sofy,
the kitten, than with her sisters, not perceiving that pussy was the
safety-valve for the poor child's demonstrations of all the sorrow
that was oppressing her.

Gillian, in the corner of a Rockstone carriage, had time for the full
heart-sickness and tumult of fear that causes such acute suffering to
young hearts.  It is quite a mistake to say that youth suffers less
from apprehension than does age; indeed, the very inexperience and
novelty add to the alarms, where there is no background of anxieties
that have ended happily, only a crowd of examples of other people's
misfortunes.  The difference is in the greater elasticity and power
of being distracted by outward circumstances; and thus lookers-on
never guess at the terrific possibilities that have scared the
imagination, and the secret ejaculations that have met them.  How
many times on that brief journey had not Gillian seen her father
dying, her sisters in despair, her mother crushed in the train,
wrecked in the steamer, perishing of the climate, or arriving to find
all over and dying of the shock; yet all was varied by speculations
on the great thing that was to offer itself to be done, and the
delight it would give, and when the train slackened, anxieties were
merged in the care for bags, baskets, and umbrellas.

Rockstone and Rockquay had once been separate places---a little
village perched on a cliff of a promontory, and a small fishing
hamlet within the bay, but these had become merged in one, since
fashion had chosen them as a winter resort.  Speculators blasted away
such of the rocks as they had not covered with lodging-houses and
desirable residences.  The inhabitants of the two places had their
separate churches, and knew their own bounds perfectly well; but to
the casual observer, the chief distinction between them was that
Rockstone was the more fashionable, Rockquay the more commercial,
although the one had its shops, the other its handsome crescents and
villas.  The station was at Rockquay, and there was an uphill drive
to reach Rockstone, where the two Miss Mohuns had been early
inhabitants---had named their cottage Beechcroft after their native
home, and, to justify the title, had flanked the gate with two copper
beeches, which had attained a fair growth, in spite of sea winds,
perhaps because sheltered by the house on the other side.

The garden reached out to the verge of the cliff, or rather to a low
wall, with iron rails and spikes at the top, and a narrow, rather
giddy path beyond.  There was a gate in the wall, the key of which
Aunt Jane kept in her own pocket, as it gave near access to certain
rocky steps, about one hundred and thirty in number, by which, when
in haste, the inhabitants of Rockstone could descend to the lower
regions of the Quay.

There was a most beautiful sea-view from the house, which compensated
for difficulties in gardening in such a situation, though a very
slight slope inwards from the verge of the cliff gave some protection
to the flower-beds; and there was not only a little conservatory
attached to the drawing-room at the end, but the verandah had glass
shutters, which served the purpose of protecting tender plants, and
also the windows, from the full blast of the winter storms.  Miss
Mohun was very proud of these shutters, which made a winter garden of
the verandah for Miss Adeline to take exercise in.  The house was
their own, and, though it aimed at no particular beauty, had grown
pleasant and pretty looking by force of being lived in and made
comfortable.

It was a contrast to its neighbours on either side of its pink and
gray limestone wall.  On one side began the grounds of the Great
Rockstone Hotel; on the other was Cliff House, the big and seldom-
inhabited house of one of the chief partners in the marble works,
which went on on the other side of the promontory, and some people
said would one day consume Rockstone altogether.  It was a very fine
house, and the gardens were reported to be beautifully kept up, but
the owner was almost always in Italy, and had so seldom been at
Rockstone that it was understood that all this was the ostentation of
a man who did not know what to do with his money.

Aunt Adeline met the travellers at the door with her charming
welcome.  Kunz, all snowy white, wagged his tight-curled tail amid
his barks, at sight of Aunt Jane, but capered wildly about the Sofy's
basket, much to Valetta's agony; while growls, as thunderous as a
small kitten could produce, proceeded therefrom.

'Kunz, be quiet,' said Aunt Jane, in a solemn, to-be-minded voice,
and he crouched, blinking up with his dark eye.

'Give me the basket.  Now, Kunz, this is our cat.  Do you hear?  You
are not to meddle with her.'

Did Kunz really wink assent---a very unwilling assent?

'Oh, Aunt Jane!' from Val, as her aunt's fingers undid the cover of
the basket.

'Once for all!' said Aunt Jane.

'M-m-m-m-ps-pss-psss!' from the Sofy, two screams from Val and
Fergus, a buffeting of paws, a couple of wild bounds, first on a
chair-back, then on the mantelpiece, where, between the bronze
candlestick and the vase, the Persian philosopher stood hissing and
swearing, while Kunz danced about and barked.

'Take her down, Gillian,' said Aunt Jane; and Gillian, who had some
presence of mind, accomplished it with soothing words, and, thanks to
her gloves, only one scratch.

Meantime Miss Mohun caught up Kunz, held up her finger to him,
stopped his barks; and then, in spite of the 'Oh, don'ts,' and even
the tears of Valetta, the two were held up---black nose to pink nose,
with a resolute 'Now, you are to behave well to each other, from Aunt
Jane.

Kunz sniffed, the Sofy hissed; but her claws were captive.  The dog
was the elder and more rational, and when set down again took no more
notice of his enemy, whom Valetta was advised to carry into Mrs.
Mount's quarters to be comforted and made at home there; the united
voice of the household declaring that the honour of the Spitz was as
spotless as his coat!

Such was the first arrival at Rockstone, preceding even Aunt
Adeline's inquiries after Mysie, and the full explanation of the
particulars of the family dispersion.  Aunt Ada's welcome was not at
all like that of Kunz.  She was very tender and caressing, and
rejoiced that her sister could trust her children to her.  They
should all get on most happily together, she had no doubt.

True-hearted as Gillian was, there was something hopeful and
refreshing in the sight of that fair, smiling face, and the touch of
the soft hand, in the room that was by no means unfamiliar, though
she had never slept in the house before.  It was growing dark, and
the little fire lighted it up in a friendly manner.  Wherever Aunt
Jane was, everything was neat; wherever Aunt Adeline was, everything
was graceful.  Gillian was old enough to like the general prettiness;
but it somewhat awed Val and Fergus, who stood straight and shy till
they were taken upstairs.  The two girls had a very pretty room and
dressing-room---the guest chamber, in fact; and Fergus was not far
off, in a small apartment which, as Val said, 'stood on legs,' and
formed the shelter of the porch.

'But, oh dear! oh dear!' sighed Val, as Gillian unpacked their
evening garments, 'Isn't there any nice place at all where one can
make a mess?'

'I don't know whether the aunts will ever let us make a mess,' said
Gillian; 'they don't look like it.'

At which Valetta's face puckered up in the way only too familiar to
her friends.

'Come, don't be silly, Val.  You won't have much time, you know; you
will go to school, and get some friends to play with, and not want to
make messes here.'

'I hate friends!'

'Oh, Val!'

'All but Fly, and Mysie is gone to her.  I want Mysie.'

So in truth did Gillian, almost as much as her mother.  Her heart
sank as she thought of having Val and Fergus to save from scrapes
without Mysie's readiness and good humour.  If Mysie were but there
she should be free for her 'great thing.'  And oh! above all, Val's
hair---the brown bush that Val had a delusion that she 'did' herself,
but which her 'doing' left looking rather worse than it did before,
and which was not permitted in public to be in the convenient tail.
Gillian advanced on her with the brush, but she tossed it and
declared it all right!

However, at that moment there was a knock.  Mrs. Mount's kindly face
and stout form appeared.  She had dressed Miss Ada and came to see
what she could do for the young people, being of that delightful
class of old servants who are charmed to have anything young in the
house, especially a boy.  She took Valetta's refractory mane in hand,
tied her sash, inspected Fergus's hands, which had succeeded in
getting dirty in their inevitable fashion, and undertook all the
unpacking and arranging.  To Val's inquiry whether there was any
place for making 'a dear delightful mess' she replied with a curious
little friendly smile, and wonder that a young lady should want such
a thing.

'I'm afraid we are all rather strange specimens of young ladies,'
replied Gillian; 'very untidy, I mean.'

'And I'm sure I don't know what Miss Mohun and Miss Ada will say'
said good Mrs. Mount.

'What's that?  What am I to say?' asked Aunt Jane, coming into the
room.

But, after all, Aunt Jane proved to have more sympathy with 'messes'
than any of the others.  She knew very well that the children would
be far less troublesome if they had a place to themselves, and she
said, 'Well, Val, you shall have the boxroom in the attics.  And
mind, you must keep all your goods there, both of you.  If I find
them about the house, I shall---'

'Oh, what, Aunt Jane?'

'Confiscate them,' was the reply, in a very awful voice, which
impressed Fergus the more because he did not understand the word.

'You need not look so much alarmed, Fergus,' said Gillian; 'you are
not at all the likely one to transgress.'

'No,' said Valetta gravely.  'Fergus is what Lois calls a regular old
battledore.'

'I won't be called names,' exclaimed Fergus.

'Well, Lois said so---when you were so cross because the poker had got
on the same side as the tongs!  She said she never saw such an old
battledore, and you know how all the others took it up.'

'Shuttlecock yourself then!' angrily responded Fergus, while both
aunt and sister were laughing too much to interfere.

'I shall call you a little Uncle Maurice instead,' said Aunt Jane.
'How things come round!  Perhaps you would not believe, Gill, that
Aunt Ada was once in a scrape, when she was our Mrs. Malaprop, for
applying that same epithet on hearsay to Maurice.'

This laugh made Gillian feel more at home with her aunt, and they
went up happily together for the introduction to the lumber-room, not
a very spacious place, and with a window leading out to the leads.
Aunt Jane proceeded to put the children on their word of honour not
to attempt to make an exit thereby, which Gillian thought
unnecessary, since this pair were not enterprising.

The evening went off happily.  Aunt Jane produced one of the old
games which had been played at the elder Beechcroft, and had a
certain historic character in the eyes of the young people.  It was
one of those variations of the Game of the Goose that were once held
to be improving, and their mother had often told them how the family
had agreed to prove whether honesty is really the best policy, and
how it had been agreed that all should cheat as desperately as
possible, except 'honest Phyl,' who _couldn't_; and how, by some
extraordinary combination, good for their morals, she actually was
the winner.  It was immensely interesting to see the identical much-
worn sheet of dilapidated pictures with the padlock, almost close to
the goal, sending the counter back almost to the beginning in search
of the key.  Still more interesting was the imitation, "in very
wonderful drawing, devised by mamma, of the career of a true knight---
from pagedom upwards---in pale watery Prussian-blue armour, a crimson
scarf, vermilion plume, gamboge spurs, and very peculiar arms and
legs.  But, as Valetta observed, it must have been much more
interesting to draw such things as that than stupid freehand lines
and twists with no sense at all in them.

Aunt Ada, being subject to asthmatic nights, never came down to
breakfast, and, indeed, it was at an hour that Gillian thought
fearfully early; but her Aunt Jane was used to making every hour of
the day available, and later rising would have prevented the two
children from being in time for the schools, to which they were to go
on the Monday.  Some of Aunt Jane's many occupations on Saturday
consisted in arranging with the two heads of their respective
schools, and likewise for the mathematical class Gillian was to join
at the High School two mornings in the week, and for her lessons on
the organ, which were to be at St. Andrew's Church.  Somehow Gillian
felt as if she were as entirely in her aunt's hands as Kunz and the
Sofy had been!

After the early dinner, which suited the invalid's health, Aunt Jane
said she would take Valetta and Fergus to go down to the beach with
the little Varleys, while she went to her district, leaving Gillian
to read to Aunt Ada for half an hour, and then to walk with her for a
quiet turn on the beach.

It was an amusing article in a review that Gillian was set to read,
and she did it so pleasantly that her aunt declared that she looked
forward to many such afternoon pastimes, and then, by an easier way
than the hundred and a half steps, they proceeded down the hill, the
aunt explaining a great deal to the niece in a manner very gratifying
to a girl beginning to be admitted to an equality with grown-up
people.

'There is our old church,' said Aunt Ada, as they had a glimpse of a
gray tower with a curious dumpy steeple.

'Do you go to church there!'

'I do---always.  I could not undertake the hill on Sundays; but Jane
takes the school-children to the St. Andrew's service in the
afternoon.'

'But which is the parish church?'

'In point of fact, my dear; it is all one parish.  Good morning, Mr.
Hablot.  My niece, Miss Gillian Merrifield.  Yes, my sister is come
home.  I think she will be at the High School.  He is the vicar of
St. Andrew's,' as the clergyman went off in the direction of the
steps.

'I thought you said it was all one parish.'

'St. Andrew's is only a district.  Ah, it was all before your time,
my dear.'

'I know dear Uncle Claude was the clergyman here, and got St.
Andrew's built.'

'Yes, my dear.  It was the great work and thought with him and Lord
Rotherwood in those days that look so bright now,' said Aunt Ada.
'Yes, and with us all.'

'Do tell me all about it,' entreated Gillian; and her aunt, nothing
loth, went on.

'Dear Claude was only five-and-twenty when he had the living.  Nobody
would take it, it was such a neglected place.  All Rockquay down
there had grown up with only the old church, and nobody going to it.
It was a great deal through Rotherwood.  Some property here came to
him, and he was shocked at the state of things.  Then we all thought
the climate might be good for dear Claude, and Jane came to live with
him and help him, and look after him.  You see there were a great
many of us, and Jane---well, she didn't quite get on with Alethea, and
Claude thought she wanted a sphere of her own, and that is the way
she comes to have more influence than any one else here.  And as I am
always better in this air than anywhere else, I came soon after---even
before my dear fathers death.  And oh! what an eager, hopeful time it
was, setting everything going, and making St. Andrew's all we could
wish!  We were obliged to be cautious at the old church, you know,
because of not alarming the old-fashioned people.  And so we are
still---'

'Is that St. Andrew's?  Oh, it is beautiful.  May I look in?'

'Not now, my dear.  You will see it another time.'

'I wish it were our church.'

'You will find the convenience of having one so near.  And our
services are very nice with our present rector, Mr. Ellesmere, an
excellent active man, but his wife is such an invalid that all the
work falls on Jane.  I am so glad you are here to help her a little.
St. Andrew's has a separate district, and Mr. Hablot is the vicar;
but as it is very poor, we keep the charities all in one.  Rotherwood
built splendid schools, so we only have an infant school for the
Rockstone children.  On Sunday, Jane assembles the older children
there and takes them to church; but in the afternoon they all go to
the National Schools, and then to a children's service at St.
Andrew's.  She gets on so well with Mr. Hablot---he was dear Claude's
curate, you see, and little Mrs. Hablot was quite a pupil of ours.
What do you think little Gerald Hablot said---he is only five---"Isn't
Miss Mohun the most consultedest woman in Rockquay?"'

'I suppose it is true,' said Gillian, laughing, but rather awestruck.

'I declare it makes me quite giddy to count up all she has on her
hands.  Nobody can do anything without her.  There are so few
permanent inhabitants, and when people begin good works, they go
away, or marry, or grow tired, and then we can't let them drop!'

'Oh! what's that pretty spire, on the rise of the other hill?'

'My dear, that was the Kennel Mission Chapel, a horrid little hideous
iron thing, but Lady Flight mistook and called it St. Kenelm's, and
St. Kenelm's it will be to the end of the chapter.'  And as she
exchanged bows with a personage in a carriage, 'There she is, my
dear.'

'Who?  Did she build that church?'

'It is not consecrated.  It really is only a mission chapel, and he
is nothing but a curate of Mr. Hablot's,' said Aunt Ada, Gillian
thought a little venomously.

She asked, 'Who?'

'The Reverend Augustine Flight, my dear.  I ought not to say anything
against them, I am sure, for they mean to be very good; but she is
some City man's widow, and he is an only son, and they have more
money than their brains can carry.  They have made that little place
very beautiful, quite oppressed with ornament---City taste, you know,
and they have all manner of odd doings there, which Mr. Hablot
allows, because he says he does not like to crush zeal, and he thinks
interference would do more harm than good.  Jane thinks he ought not
to stand so much, but---'

Gillian somehow felt a certain amusement and satisfaction in finding
that Aunt Jane had one disobedient subject, but they were interrupted
by two ladies eagerly asking where to find Miss Mohun, and a few
steps farther on a young clergyman accosted them, and begged that
Miss Mohun might be told the hour of some meeting.  Also that 'the
Bellevue Church people would not co-operate in the coal club.'

Then it was explained that Bellevue Church was within the bounds of
another parish, and had been built by, and for, people who did not
like the doctrine at the services of St. Andrew's.

By this time aunt and niece had descended to the Marine esplanade, a
broad road, on one side of which there was a low sea wall, and then
the sands and rocks stretched out to the sea, on the other a broad
space of short grass, where there was a cricket ground, and a lawn-
tennis ground, and the volunteers could exercise, and the band played
twice a week round a Russian gun that stood by the flagstaff.

The band was playing now, and the notes seemed to work on Gillian's
feet, and yet to bring her heart into her throat, for the last time
she had heard that march was from the band of her father's old
regiment, when they were all together!

Her aunt was very kind, and talked to her affectionately and
encouragingly of the hopes that her mother would find her father
recovering, and that it would turn out after all quite an expedition
of pleasure and refreshment.  Then she said how much she rejoiced to
have Gillian with her, as a companion to herself, while her sister
was so busy, and she was necessarily so much left alone.

'We will read together, and draw, and play duets, and have quite a
good account of our employment to give,' she said, smiling.

'I shall like it very much,' said Gillian heartily.

'Dear child, the only difficulty will be that you will spoil me, and
I shall never be able to part with you.  Besides, you will be such a
help to my dear Jane.  She never spares herself, you know, and no one
ever spares her, and I can do so little to help her, except with my
head.'

'Surely here are plenty of people,' said Gillian, for they were in
the midst of well-dressed folks, and Aunt Ada had more than once
exchanged nods and greetings.

'Quite true, my dear; but when there is anything to be done, then
there is a sifting!  But now we have you, with all our own Lily's
spirit, I shall be happy about Jane for this winter at least.

They were again interrupted by meeting a gentleman and lady, to whom
Gillian was introduced, and who walked on with her aunt conversing.
They had been often in India, and made so light of the journey that
Gillian was much cheered.  Moreover, she presently came in sight of
Val and Fergus supremely happy over a castle on the beach, and
evidently indoctrinating the two little Varleys with some of the
dramatic sports of Silverfold.

Aunt Ada found another acquaintance, a white moustached old
gentleman, who rose from a green bench in a sunny corner, saying,
'Ah, Miss Mohun, I have been guarding your seat for you.'

'Thank you, Major Dennis.  My niece, Miss Merrifield.'

He seemed to be a very courteous old gentleman, for he bowed, and
made some polite speech about Sir Jasper, and, as he was military,
Gillian hoped to have heard some more about the journey when they sat
down, and room was made for her; but instead of that he and her aunt
began a discussion of the comings and goings of people she had never
heard of, and the letting or not letting of half the villas in
Rockstone; and she found it so dull that she had a great mind to go
and join the siege of Sandcastle.  Only her shoes and her dress were
fitter for the esplanade than the shore with the tide coming in; and
when one has just begun to buy one's own clothes, that is a
consideration.

At last she saw Aunt Jane's trim little figure come out on the sands
and make as straight for the children as she could, amid greetings
and consultations, so with an exclamation, she jumped up and went
over the shingle to meet them, finding an endeavour going on to make
them tolerably respectable for the walk home, by shaking off the
sand, and advising Val to give up her intention of dragging home a
broad brown ribbon of weed with a frilled edge, all polished and
shiny with wet.  She was not likely to regard it as such a curiosity
after a few days' experience of Rockquay, as her new friends told
her.

Kitty Varley went to the High School, which greatly modified
Valetta's disgust to it, for the little girls had already vowed to be
the greatest chums in the world, and would have gone home with arms
entwined, if Aunt Jane had not declared that such things could not be
done in the street, and Clem Varley, with still more effect,
threatened that if they were such a pair of ninnies, he should squirt
at them with the dirtiest water he could find.

Valetta had declared that she infinitely preferred Kitty to Fly, and
Kitty was so flattered at being adopted by the second cousin of a
Lady Phyllis, and the daughter of a knight, that she exalted Val
above all the Popsys and Mopsys of her present acquaintance, and at
parting bestowed on her a chocolate cream, which tasted about equally
of salt water and hot hand---at least if one did not feel it a
testimonial of ardent friendship.

Fergus and Clement had, on the contrary, been so much inclined to
punch and buffet one another, that Miss Mohun had to make them walk
before her to keep the peace, and was by no means sorry when the gate
of 'The Tamarisks' was reached, and the Varleys could be disposed of.

However, the battery must have been amicable, for Fergus was crazy to
go in and see Clement's little pump, which he declared 'would do it'-
--an enigmatical phrase supposed to refer to the great peg-top-
perpetual-motion invention.  He was dragged away with difficulty on
the plea of its being too late by Aunt Jane, who could not quite turn
two unexpected children in on Mrs. Varley, and had to effect a cruel
severance of Val and Kitty in the midst of their kisses.

'Sudden friendships,' said Gillian, from the superiority of her age.

'I do not think you are given that way,' said Aunt Jane.

'Does the large family suffice for all of you?  People are so
different,' added Aunt Ada.

'Yes,' said Gillian.  'We have never been in the way of caring for
any outsider.  I don't reckon Bessie Merrifield so---nor Fly Devereux,
nor Dolores, because they are cousins.'

'Cousins may be everything or nothing,' asserted Miss Mohun.  'You
have been about so much that you have hardly had time to form
intimacies.  But had you no friends in the officers' families?'

'People always retired before their children grew up to be
companionable, said Gillian.  'There was nobody except the Whites.
And that wasn't exactly friendship.'

'Who were they?' said Aunt Jane, who always liked to know all about
everybody.

'He rose from the ranks,' said Gillian.  'He was very much respected,
and nobody would have known that he was not a gentleman to begin
with.  But his wife was half a Greek.  Papa said she had been very
pretty; but, oh! she had grown so awfully fat.  We used to call her
the Queen of the White Ants.  Then Kally---her name was really
Kalliope---was very nice, and mamma got them to send her to a good
day-school at Dublin, and Alethea and Phyllis used to have her in to
try to make a lady of her.  There used to be a great deal of fun
about their Muse, I remember; Claude thought her very pretty, and
always stood up for her, and Alethea was very fond of her.  But soon
after we went to Belfast, Mr. White was made to retire with the rank
of captain.  I think papa tried to get something for him to do; but I
am not sure whether he succeeded, and I don't know any more about
them.'

'Not exactly friendship, certainly,' said Aunt Jane, smiling.  'After
all, Gillian, in your short life, you have had wider experiences than
have befallen your old aunts!'

'Wider, perhaps, not deeper, Jane,' suggested Miss Adeline.

And Gillian thought---though she felt it would be too sentimental to
say---that in her life, persons and scenes outside her own family had
seemed to 'come like shadows and so depart'; and there was a general
sense of depression at the partings, the anxiety, and the being
unsettled again when she was just beginning to have a home.




CHAPTER III.  PERPETUAL MOTION



If Fergus had not yet discovered the secret of perpetual motion,
Gillian felt as if Aunt Jane had done so, and moreover that the
greater proportion of parish matters were one vast machine, of which
she was the moving power.

As she was a small spare woman, able to do with a very moderate
amount of sleep, her day lasted from 6 A.M. to some unnamed time
after midnight; and as she was also very methodical, she got through
an appalling amount of business, and with such regularity that those
who knew her habits could tell with tolerable certainty, within
reasonable limits, where she would be found and what she would be
doing at any hour of the seven days of the week.  Everything she
influenced seemed to recur as regularly as the motions of the great
ruthless-looking engines that Gillian had seen at work at Belfast;
the only loose cog being apparently her sister Adeline, who quietly
took her own way, seldom came downstairs before eleven o'clock, went
out and came in, made visits or received them, wrote letters, read
and worked at her own sweet will.  Only two undertakings seemed to
belong to her---a mission working party, and an Italian class of young
ladies; and even the presidency of these often lapsed upon her
sister, when she had had one of those 'bad nights' of asthma, which
were equally sleepless to both sisters.  She was principally useful
by her exquisite needlework, both in church embroidery and for sales;
and likewise as the recipient of all the messages left for Miss
Mohun, which she never forgot, besides that, having a clear sensible
head, she was useful in consultation.

She was thoroughly interested in all her sister's doings, and always
spoke of herself as the invalid, precluded from all service except
that of being a pivot for Jane, the stationary leg of the compasses,
as she sometimes called herself.  This repose, together with her
prettiness and sweetness of manner, was very attractive; especially
to Gillian, who had begun to feel herself in the grip of the great
engine which bore her along without power of independent volition,
and with very little time for 'Hilda's Experiences'.

At home she had gone on harmoniously in full acquiescence with
household arrangements; but before the end of the week the very same
sensations came over her which had impelled her and Jasper into
rebellion and disgrace, during the brief reign of a very strict daily
governess, long ago at Dublin.  Her reason and sense approved of all
that was set before her, and much of it was pleasant and amusing; but
this was the more provoking by depriving her of the chance of
resistance or the solace of complaint.  Moreover, with all her time
at Aunt Jane's disposal, how was she to do her great thing?
Valetta's crewel battle cushion had been reduced to a delicious
design of the battle of the frogs and mice, drawn by Aunt Ada, and
which she delighted in calling at full length 'the Batrachyomachia,'
sparing none of the syllables which she was to work below.  And it
was to be worked at regularly for half an hour before bed-time.
Trust Aunt Jane for seeing that any one under her dominion did what
had been undertaken!  Only thus the spontaneity seemed to have
departed, and the work became a task.  Fergus meanwhile had set his
affections on a big Japanese top he had seen in a window, and was
eagerly awaiting his weekly threepence, to be able to complete the
purchase, though no one but Valetta was supposed to understand what
it had to do with his 'great thing.'

It was quite pleasant to Gillian to have a legitimate cause of
opposition when Miss Mohun made known that she intended Gillian to
take a class at the afternoon Sunday-school, while the two children
went to Mrs. Hablot's drawing-room class at St. Andrew's Vicarage,
all meeting afterwards at church.

'Did mamma wish it?' asked Gillian.

'There was no time to mention it, but I knew she would.'

'I don't think so,' said Gillian.  'We don't teach on Sundays, unless
some regular person fails.  Mamma likes to have us all at home to do
our Sunday work with her.'

'Alas, I am not mamma!  Nor could I give you the time.'

'I have brought the books to go on with Val and Ferg.  I always do
some of their work with them, and I am sure mamma would not wish them
to be turned over to a stranger.'

'The fact is, that young ladies have got beyond Sunday-schools!'

'No, no, Jane,' said her sister; 'Gillian is quite willing to help
you; but it is very nice in her to wish to take charge of the
children.'

'They would be much better with Mrs. Hablot than dawdling about here
and amusing themselves in the new Sunday fashion.  Mind, I am not
going to have them racketing about the house and garden, disturbing
you, and worrying the maids.'

'Aunt Jane!' cried Gillian indignantly, 'you don't think that is the
way mamma brought us up to spend Sunday?'

'We shall see,' said Aunt Jane; then more kindly, 'My dear, you are
right to use your best judgment, and you are welcome to do so, as
long as the children are orderly and learn what they ought.'

It was more of a concession than Gillian expected, though she little
knew the effort it cost, since Miss Mohun had been at much pains to
set Mrs. Hablot's class on foot, and felt it a slight and a bad
example that her niece and nephew should be defaulters.  The motive
might have worked on Gillian, but it was a lower one, therefore
mentioned.

She had seen Mrs. Hablot at the Italian class, and thought her a mere
girl, and an absolute subject of Aunt Jane's stumbling pitifully,
moreover, in a speech of Adelchi's; therefore evidently not at all
likely to teach Sunday subjects half so well as herself!

Nor was there anything amiss on that first Sunday.  The lessons were
as well and quietly gone through as if with mamma, and there was a
pleasant little walk on the esplanade before the children's service
at St. Andrew's; after which there was a delightful introduction to
some of the old books mamma had told them of.

They were all rather subdued by the strangeness and newness of their
surroundings, as well as by anxiety.  If the younger ones were less
anxious about their parents than was their sister, each had a plunge
to make on the morrow into a very new world, and the Varleys'
information had not been altogether reassuring.  Valetta had learnt
how many marks might be lost by whispering or bad spelling, and how
ferociously cross Fraulein Adler looked at a mistake in a German
verb; while Fergus had heard a dreadful account of the ordeals to
which Burfield and Stebbing made new boys submit, and which would be
all the worse for him, because he had a 'rum' Christian name, and his
father was a swell.

Gillian had some experience through her elder brothers, and suspected
Master Varley of being guilty of heightening the horrors; so she
assured Fergus that most boys had the same sort of Christian names,
but were afraid to confess them to one another, and so called each
other Bill and Jack.  She advised him to call himself by his surname,
not to mention his father's title if he could help it, and, above
all, not to seem to mind anything.

Her own spirits were much exhilarated the next morning by a note from
Harry, the recipient of all telegrams, with tidings that the doctors
were quite satisfied with Sir Jasper, and that Lady Merrifield had
reached Brindisi.

There was great excitement at sight of a wet morning, for it appeared
that an omnibus came round on such occasions to pick up the scholars;
and Valetta thought this so delightful that she danced about
exclaiming, 'What fun!' and only wishing for Mysie to share it.  She
would have rushed down to the gate umbrellaless if Aunt Jane had not
caught and conducted her, while Gillian followed with Fergus.  Aunt
Jane looked down the vista of young faces---five girls and three boys-
--nodding to them, and saying to the senior, a tall damsel of fifteen,

'Here are my children, Emma.  You will take care of them, please.
You are keeping order here, I suppose?'

There was a smile and bow in answer as the door closed, and the
omnibus jerked away its ponderous length.

'I'm sorry to see that Stebbing there,' observed the aunt, as she
went back; 'but Emma Norton ought to be able to keep him in order.
It is well you have no lessons out of the house to-day, Gillian.'

'Are you going out then?'

'Oh yes!' said Miss Mohun, running upstairs, and presently coming
back with a school-bag and a crackling waterproof cloak, but pausing
as she saw Gillian at the window, nursing the Sofy, and gazing at the
gray cloud over the gray sea.  'You are not at a loss for something
to do,' she said, 'you said you meant to write to your mother.'

'Oh yes!' said Gillian, suddenly fretted, and with a sense of being
hunted, 'I have plenty to do.'

'I see,' said Miss Mohun, turning over the books that lay on the
little table that had been appropriated to her niece, in a way that,
unreasonably or not, unspeakably worried the girl, 'Brachet's French
Grammar---that's right.  Colenso's Algebra---I don't think they use
that at the High School.  Julius Caesar---you should read that up in
Merivale.'

'I did,' said Gillian, in a voice that very nearly said, 'Do let them
alone.'

'Well, you have materials for a very useful, sensible morning's work,
and when Ada comes down, very likely she will like to be read to.'

Off went the aunt, leaving the niece stirred into an absolute desire,
instead of spending the sensible morning, to take up 'Near
Neighbours', and throw herself into an easy-chair; and when she had
conscientiously resisted that temptation, her pen would hover over
'Hilda's Experiences', even when she had actually written 'Dearest
Mamma.'  She found she was in no frame to write such a letter as
would be a comfort to her mother, so she gave that up, and made her
sole assertion of liberty the working out of a tough double equation
in Colenso, which actually came right, and put her in such good
humour that she was no longer afraid of drumming the poor piano to
death and Aunt Ada upstairs to distraction, but ventured on learning
one of the Lieder ohne Worte; and when her Aunt Ada came down and
complimented her on the sounds that had ascended, she was complacent
enough to write a very cheerful letter, whilst her aunt was busied
with her own.  She described the Sunday-school question that had
arisen, and felt sure that her father would pronounce his Gill to be
a sensible young woman.  Afterwards Miss Adeline betook herself to a
beautiful lily of church embroidery, observing, as Gillian sat down
to read to her Alphonse Karr's Voyage autour de mon Jardin, that it
was a real pleasure to listen to such prettily-pronounced French.
Kunz lay at her feet, the Sofy nestled in Gillian's lap, and there
was a general sense of being rubbed down the right way.

By and by there loomed through the rain two dripping shiny forms
under umbrellas strongly inclined to fly away from them---Miss Mohun
and Mr. Grant, the junior curate, whom she had brought home to
luncheon.  Both were full of the irregularities of the two churches
of Bellevue and St. Kenelm's on the recent harvest-thanksgiving
Sunday.  It was hard to tell which was most reprobated, what St.
Kenelm's did or what Bellevue did not do.  If the one blew trumpets
in procession, the other collected the offertory in a warming-pan.
Gillian had already begun to find that these misdoings supplied much
conversation at Beechcroft Cottage, and began to get half weary, half
curious to judge for herself of all these enormities; nor did she
feel more interested in the discussion of who had missed church or
school, and who needed tickets for meat, or to be stirred up to pay
for their coal club.

At last she heard, 'Well, I think you might read to her, Gillian!
Oh! were not you listening?  A very nice girl near here, a pupil
teacher, who has developed a hip complaint, poor child.  She will
enjoy having visits from you, a young thing like herself.'

Gillian did not like it at all, but she knew that it would be wrong
to refuse, and answered, 'Very well,' with no alacrity---hoping that
it was not an immediate matter, and that something might happen to
prevent it.  But at that moment the sun came out, the rain had
ceased, and there were glistening drops all over the garden; the
weather quarter was clear, and after half an hours rest after dinner
Aunt Jane jumped up, decreeing that it was time to go out, and that
she would introduce Gillian to Lilian Giles before going on to the
rest of her district.

She gathered a few delicate flowers in the little conservatory, and
put them in a basket with a peach from the dessert, then took down a
couple of books from the shelf.  Gillian could not but acquiesce,
though she was surprised to find that the one given to her was a
translation of Undine.

'The child is not badly off,' explained Miss Mohun.  'Her father is a
superior workman.  She does not exactly want comforts, but she is
sadly depressed and disappointed at not being able to go on with her
work, and the great need is to keep her from fretting over her
troubles, and interested in something.'

Gillian began to think of one of the graceful hectic invalids of whom
she had read, and to grow more interested as she followed Aunt Jane
past the old church with the stout square steeple, constructed to
hold, on a small side turret window, a light for the benefit of ships
at sea.  Then the street descended towards the marble works.  There
was a great quarry, all red and raw with recent blasting, and above,
below, and around, rows of new little stuccoed, slated houses, for
the work-people, and a large range of workshops and offices fronting
the sea.  This was Miss Mohun's district, and at a better-looking
house she stopped and used the knocker.

That was no distinction; all had doors with knockers and sash
windows, but this was a little larger, and the tiny strip of garden
was well kept, while a beautiful myrtle and pelargonium peeped over
the muslin blind; and it was a very nice-looking woman who opened the
door, though she might have been the better for a cap.  Aunt Jane
shook hands with her, rather to Gillian's surprise, and heard that
Lily was much the same.

'It is her spirits are so bad, you see, Miss Mohun,' she added, as
she ushered them into a somewhat stuffy little parlour, carpeted and
bedecked with all manner of knick-knacks, photographs, and framed
certificates of various societies of temperance and providence on the
gaily-papered walls.  The girl lay on a couch near the fire, a sallow
creature, with a big overhanging brow, made heavier by a dark fringe,
and an expression that Gillian not unjustly decided was fretful,
though she smiled, and lighted up a little when she saw Miss Mohun.

There was a good deal said about her bad nights, and her appetite,
and how the doctor wanted her to take as much as she could, and how
everything went against her---even lardy cake and roly-poly pudding
with bacon in it!

Miss Mohun put the flowers on the little table near the girl, who
smiled a little, and thanked her in a languid dreary manner.  Finding
that she had freshly been visited by the rector, Miss Mohun would not
stop for any serious reading, but would leave Miss Merrifield to read
a story to her.

'And you ought to get on together,' she said, smiling.  'You are just
about the same age, and your names rhyme--Gillian and Lilian.  And
Gillians mother is a Lily too.'

This the young lady lid not like, for she was already feeling it a
sort of presumption in the girl to bear a name so nearly resembling
her mother's.  She had seen a little cottage poverty, and had had a
class of little maidservants; but this level of life which is in no
want, keeps a best parlour, and does not say ma'am, was quite new to
her, and she did not fancy it.  When the girls were left together,
while Mrs. Giles returned to her ironing, Gillian was the shyer of
the two, and began rather awkwardly and reluctantly---

'Miss Mohun thought you would like to hear this.  It is a sort of
German fairy tale.'

Lilian said, 'Yes, Miss Merrifield' in a short dry tone, completing
Gillian's distaste, and she began to read, not quite at her best, and
was heartily glad when at the end of half an hour Mrs. Giles was
heard in parley with another visitor, so that she had an excuse for
going away without attempting conversation.  She was overtaken by the
children on their way home from their schools, where they had dined.
They rushed upon her, together with the two Varleys, who wanted to
take them home to tea; and Gillian giving her ready consent, Fergus
dashed home to fetch his beloved humming-top, which was to be
introduced to Clement Varley's pump, and in a few minutes they were
off, hardly vouchsafing an answer to such comparatively trifling
inquiries as how they were placed at their schools.

Gillian found, however, that neither of her aunts was pleased at her
having consented to the children's going out without reference to
their authority.  How did she suppose they were to come home?

'I did not think, can't they be fetched?' said Gillian, startled.

'It is not far,' said Adeline, pitying her.  'One of the maids---'

'My dear Ada!' exclaimed Aunt Jane.  'You know that Fanny cannot go
out at night with her throat, and I never will send out those young
girls on any account.'

'Can't I go?' said Gillian desperately.

'Are not you a young girl?  I must go myself.'

And go she did at a quarter to eight, and brought home the children,
looking much injured.  Gillian went upstairs with them, and there was
an outburst.

'It was horrid to be fetched home so soon, just as there was a chance
of something nice; when all the tiresome big ones had gone to dress,
and we could have had some real fun,' said Valetta.

'Real fun!  Real sense!' said Fergus.

'But what had you been about all this time?'

'Why, their sisters and a man that was there _would_ come and drink
tea in the nursery, where nobody wanted them, and make us play their
play.

'Wasn't that nice?  You are always crying out for Harry and me to
come and play with you.'

'Oh, it wasn't like that,' said Val, 'you play with us, and they only
pretended, and played with each other.  It wasn't nice.'

'Clem said it was---forking,' said Fergus.

'No, spooning,' said Val.  'The dish ran after the spoon, you know.'

'Well, but you haven't told me about the schools,' said Gillian, in
elder sisterly propriety, thinking the subject had better be
abandoned.

'Jolly, jolly, scrumptious!' cried Fergus.

'Oh! Fergus, mamma doesn't like slang words.  Jasper doesn't say
them.'

'Not at home, but men say what they like at school, and the 'bus was
scrumptious and splendiferous!'

'I'm sure it wasn't,' said Valetta; 'I can't bear being boxed up with
horrid rude boys.'

'Because you are only a girl!'

'Now, Gill, they shot with---'

'Val, if you tell---'

'Telling Gill isn't telling.  Is it, Gill?'

She assented.

'They did, Gill.  They shot at us with pea-shooters,' sighed the
girl.

'Oh! it was jolly, jolly, jolly!' cried the boy.  'Stebbing hit the
girl who made the sour face on her cheeks, and they all squealed, and
the cad looked in and tried to jaw us.'

'But that dreadful boy shot right into his mouth,' said Val, while
Fergus went into an ecstasy of laughter.  'Wasn't it a shame, Gill?'

'Indeed it was' said Gillian.  'Such ungentlemanly boys ought not to
be allowed in the omnibus.'

'Girls shouldn't be allowed in the 'bus, they are so stupid,' said
Fergus.  'That one---as cross as old Halfpenny---who was she, Val?'

'Emma Norton!  Up in the highest form!'

'Well, she is a prig, and a tell-tale-tit besides; only Stebbing said
if she did, her junior would catch it.'

'What a dreadful bully he must be!' exclaimed Gillian.

I'll tell you what,' said Fergus, in a tone of profound admiration,
'no one can hold a candle to him at batting!  He snowballed all the
Kennel choir into fits, and he can brosier old Tilly's stall, and go
on just the same.'

'What a greedy boy!' exclaimed Val.

'Disgusting,' added Gillian.

'You're girls,' responded Fergus, lengthening the syllable with
infinite contempt; but Valetta had spirit enough to reply, 'Much
better be a girl than rude and greedy.'

'Exactly,' said Gillian; 'it is only little silly boys who think such
things fine.  Claude doesn't, nor Harry, nor Japs.'

'You know nothing about it,' said Fergus.

'Well, but you've never told me about school---how you are placed, and
whom you are under.'

'Oh! I'm in middle form, under Miss Edgar.  Disgusting!  It's only
the third form that go up to Smiler.  She knows it is no use to try
to take Stebbing and Burfield.'

'And, Gill,' added Val, 'I'm in second class too, and I took three
places for knowing where Teheran was, and got above Kitty Varley and
a girl there two years older than I am, and her name is Maura.'

'Maura, how very odd!  I never heard of any one called Maura but one
of the Whites,' said Gillian.  'What was her surname?'

This Valetta could not tell, and at the moment Mrs. Mount came up
with intent to brush Miss Valetta's hair, and to expedite the going
to bed.

Gillian, not very happy about the revelations she had heard, went
downstairs, and found her younger aunt alone, Miss Mohun having been
summoned to a conference with one of her clients in the parish room.
In her absence Gillian always felt more free and communicative, and
she had soon told whatever she did not feel as a sort of confidence,
including Valetta's derivation of spooning, and when Miss Mohun
returned it was repeated to her.

'Yes,' was her comment, 'children's play is a convenient cover to the
present form of flirtation.  No doubt Bee Varley and Mr. Marlowe
believe themselves to have been most good-natured.'

'Who is he, and will it come to anything?' asked Aunt Ada, taking her
sister's information for granted.

'Oh no, it is nothing.  A civil service man, second cousin's brother-
in-law's stepson.  That's quite enough in these days to justify
fraternal romping.'

'I thought Beatrice Varley a nice girl.'

'So she is, my dear.  It is only the spirit of the age, and, after
all, this deponent saith not which was the dish and which was the
spoon.  Have the children made any other acquaintances, I wonder?
And how did George Stebbing comport himself in the omnibus?  I was
sorry to see him there; I don't trust that boy.'

'I wonder they didn't send him in solitary grandeur in the brougham,'
said Miss Ada.

Gillian held the history of the pea-shooting as a confidence, even
though Aunt Jane seemed to have been able to see through the omnibus,
so she contented herself with asking who George Stebbing was.

'The son of the manager of the marble works; partner, I believe.'

'Yes,' said Aunt Ada. 'the Co. means Stebbing primarily.'

'Is he a gentleman?'

'Well, as much as old Mr. White himself, I suppose.  He is come up
here---more's the pity---to the aristocratic quarter, if you please,'
said Aunt Jane, smiling, 'and if garden parties are not over, Mr.
Stebbing may show you what they can be.'

'That boy ought to be at a public school,' said her sister.  'I hope
he doesn't bully poor little Fergus.'

'I don't think he does,' said Gillian.  'Fergus seemed rather to
admire him.'

'I had rather hear of bullying than patronage in that quarter,' said
Miss Mohun.  'But, Gillian, we must impress on the children that they
are to go to no one's house without express leave.  That will avoid
offence, and I should prefer their enjoying the society of even the
Varleys in this house.'

Did Aunt Jane repent of her decision on the Thursday half-holiday
granted to Mrs. Edgar's pupils, when, in the midst of the working
party round the dining-room table, in a pause of the reading, some
one said, 'What's that!'---and a humming, accompanied by a drip, drop,
drip, drop, became audible?

Up jumped Miss Mohun, and so did Gillian, half in consternation, half
to shield the boy from her wrath.  In a few moments they beheld a
puddle on the mat at the bottom of the oak stairs, while a stream was
descending somewhat as the water comes down at Lodore, while Fergus's
voice could be heard above---

'Don't, Varley!  You see how it will act.  The string of the humming-
top moves the pump handle, and that spins.  Oh!'

'Master Fergus!  Oh---h, you bad boy!'

The shriek was caused by the avenging furies who had rushed up the
back stairs just as Miss Mohun had darted up the front, so as to
behold, on the landing between the two, the boys, one spinning the
top, the other working the pump which stood in its own trough of
water, receiving a reckless supply from the tap in the passage.  The
maid's scream of 'What will your aunt say?' was answered by her
appearance, and rush to turn the cock.

'Don't, don't, Aunt Jane,' shouted Fergus; 'I've almost done it!
Perpetual motion.'  He seemed quite unconscious that the motion was
kept up by his own hands, and even dismay could not turn him from
being triumphant.

'Oh! Miss Jane,' cried Mrs. Mount, 'if I had thought what they boys
was after.'

'Mop it up, Alice,' said Aunt Jane to the younger girl.  'No don't
come up, Ada; it is too wet for you.  It is only a misdirected
experiment in hydraulics.'

'I told him not,' said Clement Varley, thinking affairs serious.

'Fergus, I am shocked at you,' said Gillian sternly.  'You are
frightfully wet.  You must be sent to bed.'

'You must go and change,' said Aunt Jane, preventing the howl about
to break forth.  'My dear boy, that tap must be let alone.  We can't
have cataracts on the stairs.'

'I didn't mean it, Aunt Jane; I thought it was an invention,' said
Fergus.

'I know; but another time come and ask me where to try your
experiments.  Go and take off those clothes; and you, Clement, you
are soaking too.  Run home at once.'

Gillian, much scandalised, broke out---

'It is very naughty.  At home, he would be sent to bed at once.'

'I am not Mrs. Halfpenny, Gillian,' said Aunt Jane coldly.

'Jane has a soft spot for inventions, for Maurice's sake,' said her
sister.

'I can't confound ingenuity and enterprise with wanton mischief, or
crush it out for want of sympathy,' said Miss Mohun.  'Come, we must
return to our needles.'

If Aunt Jane had gone into the state of wrath to be naturally
expected, Gillian would have risen in arms on her brother's behalf,
and that would have been much pleasanter than the leniency which made
her views of justice appear like unkindness.

This did not dispose her to be the better pleased at an entreaty from
the two children to be allowed to join Mrs. Hablot's class on Sunday.
It appeared that they had asked Aunt Jane, and she had told them that
their sister knew what their mother would like.

'But I am sure she would not mind,' said Valetta.  'Only think, she
has got a portfolio with pictures of everything all through the
Bible!'

'Yes,' added Fergus, 'Clem told me.  There are the dogs eating
Jezebel, and such a jolly picture of the lion killing the prophet.
I do want to see them!  Varley told me!'

'And Kitty told me,' added Valetta.  'She is reading such a book to
them.  It is called The Beautiful Face, and is all about two children
in a wood, and a horrid old grandmother and a dear old hermit, and a
wicked baron in a castle!  Do let us go, Gillyflower.

'Yes,' said Fergus; 'it would be ever so much better fun than poking
here'

'You don't want fun on Sunday.'

'Not fun exactly, but it is nicer.'

'To leave me, the last bit of home, and mamma's own lessons.'

'They ain't mamma's,' protested Fergus; but Valetta was touched by
the tears in Gillian's eyes, kissed her, and declared, 'Not that.'

Whether it were on purpose or not, the next Sunday was eminently
unsuccessful; the Collects were imperfect, the answers in the
Catechism recurred to disused babyish blunders; Fergus twisted
himself into preternatural attitudes, and Valetta teased the Sofy to
scratching point, they yawned ferociously at The Birthday, and would
not be interested even in the pony's death.  Then when they went out
walking, they would not hear of the sober Rockstone lane, but
insisted on the esplanade, where they fell in with the redoubtable
Stebbing, who chose to patronise instead of bullying 'little Merry'---
and took him off to the tide mark---to the agony of his sisters, when
they heard the St. Andrew's bell.

At last, when the tempter had gone off to higher game, Fergus's
Sunday boots and stockings were such a mass of black mud that Gillian
had to drag him home in disgrace, sending Valetta into church alone.
She would have put him to bed on her own responsibility, but she
could not master him; he tumbled about the room, declaring Aunt Jane
would do no such thing, rolled up his stockings in a ball, and threw
them in his sister's face.

Gillian retired in tears, which she let no one see, not even Aunt
Ada, and proceeded to record in her letter to India that those
dreadful boys were quite ruining Fergus, and Aunt Jane was spoiling
him.

However, Aunt Jane, having heard what had become of the youth, met
him in no spoiling mood; and though she never knew of his tussle with
Gillian, she spoke to him very seriously, shut him into his own room,
to learn thoroughly what he had neglected in the morning, and allowed
him no jam at tea.  She said nothing to Gillian, but there were
inferences.

The lessons went no better on the following Sunday; Gillian could
neither enforce her authority nor interest the children.  She avoided
the esplanade, thinking she had found a nice country walk to the
common beyond the marble works; but, behold, there was an outbreak of
drums and trumpets and wild singing.  The Salvation Army was marching
that way, and, what was worse, yells and cat-calls behind showed that
the Skeleton Army was on its way to meet them.  Gillian, frightened
almost out of her wits, managed to fly over an impracticable-looking
gate into a field with her children, but Fergus wanted to follow the
drum.  After that she gave in.  The children went to Mrs. Hablot, and
Gillian thought she saw 'I told you so' in the corners of Aunt Jane's
eyes.

It was a further offence that her aunt strongly recommended her going
regularly to the High School instead of only attending certain
classes.  It would give her far more chance of success at the
examination to work with others and her presence would be good for
Valetta.  But to reduce her to a schoolgirl was to be resented on
Miss Vincent's account as well as her own.




CHAPTER IV.  THE QUEEN OF THE WHITE ANTS



The High School was very large.  It stood at present at the end of a
budding branch of Rockquay, where the managers, assisted by the funds
advanced by Lord Rotherwood and that great invisible potentate, the
head of the marble works, had secured and adapted a suitable house,
and a space round it well walled in.

The various classes of students did not see much of each other,
except those who were day boarders and spent the midday recreation
time together.  Even those in the same form were only together in
school, as the dressing-room of those who dined there was separate
from that of the others, and they did not come in and out at the same
time.  Valetta had thus only really made friends with two or three
more Rockstone girls of about her own age besides Kitty Yarley, with
whom she went backwards and forwards every day, under the escort
provided in turn by the families of the young ladies.

Gillian's studies were for three hours in the week at the High
School, and on two afternoons she learnt from the old organist at
Rockstone Church.  She went and came alone, except when Miss Mohun
happened to join her, and that was not often, 'For,' said that lady
to her sister, 'Gillian always looks as if she thought I was acting
spy upon her.  I wish I could get on with that girl; I begin to feel
almost as poor Lily did with Dolores.'

'She is a very good girl,' said Miss Adeline.

'So she is; and that makes it all the more trying to be treated like
the Grand Inquisitor.'

'Shall I speak to her?  She is always as pleasant as possible with
me.'

'Oh no, don't.  It would only make it worse, and prevent you from
having her confidence.'

'Ah, Jane, I have often thought your one want was gentleness,' said
Miss Ada, with the gesture of her childhood---her head a little on one
side.  'And, besides, don't you know what Reggie used to call your
ferret look?  Well, I suppose you can't help it, but when you want to
know a thing and are refraining from asking questions, you always
have it more or less.'

'Thank you, Ada.  There's nothing like brothers and sisters for
telling one home-truths.  I suppose it is the penalty of having been
a regular Paul Pry in my childhood, in spite of poor Eleanor making
me learn "Meddlesome Matty" as soon as I could speak.  I always _do_
and always _shall_ have ringing in my ears---


          '"Oh! what a pretty box is this,
            I'll open it," said little Miss.'


'Well, you know you always do know or find out everything about
everybody, and it is very useful.'

'Useful as a bloodhound is, eh?'

'Oh no, not that, Jenny.'

'As a ferret, or a terrier, perhaps.  I suppose I cannot help that,
though,' she added, rather sadly.  'I have tried hard to cure the
slander and gossip that goes with curiosity.  I am sorry it results
in repulsion with that girl; but I suppose I can only go on and let
her find out that my bark, or my eye, is worse than my bite.'

'You are so good, so everything, Jenny,' said Adeline, 'that I am
sure you will have her confidence in time, if only you won't poke
after it.'

Which made Miss Mohun laugh, though her heart was heavy, for she had
looked forward to having a friend and companion in the young
generation.

Gillian meantime went her way.

One morning, after her mathematical class was over, she was delayed
for about ten minutes by the head mistress, to whom she had brought a
message from her aunt, and thus did not come out at noon at the same
time as the day scholars.  On issuing into the street, where as yet
there was hardly any traffic, except what was connected with the two
schools, she perceived that a party of boys were besetting a little
girl who was trying to turn down the cross road to Bellevue, barring
her way, and executing a derisive war-dance around her, and when she,
almost crying, made an attempt to dash by, pulling at her plaited
tail, with derisive shouts, even Gillian's call, 'Boys, boys, how can
you be so disgraceful!' did not check them.  One made a face and put
his tongue out, while the biggest called out, 'Thank you, teacher,'
and Gillian perceived to her horror, that they were no street boys,
but Mrs. Edgar's, and that Fergus was one of them.  That he cried in
dismay, 'Don't, Stebbing!  It's my sister,' was no consolation, as
she charged in among them, catching hold of her brother, as she said,

'I could not believe that you could behave in such a disgraceful
manner!'

All the other tormentors rushed away headlong, except Stebbing, who,
in some compunction, said---

'I beg your pardon, Miss Merrifield, I had no notion it was you.'

'You are making it no better,' said Gillian.  'The gentlemen I am
used to know how to behave properly to any woman or girl.  My father
would be very sorry that my brother has been thrown into such
company.'

And she walked away with her head extremely high, having certainly
given Master Stebbing a good lesson.  Fergus ran after her.  'Gill,
Gill, you won't tell.'

'I don't think I ever was more shocked in my life,' returned Gillian.

'But, Gill, she's a nasty, stuck-up, conceited little ape, that Maura
White, or whatever her ridiculous name is.  They pretend her father
was an officer, but he was really a bad cousin of old Mr. White's
that ran away; and her mother is not a lady---a great fat disgusting
woman, half a nigger; and Mr. White let her brother and sister be in
the marble works out of charity, because they have no father, and she
hasn't any business to be at the High School.'

'White, did you say?  Maura White!' exclaimed Gillian.  'Captain
White dead!  Oh, Fergus! it must be Captain White.  He was in the
dear old Royal Wardours, and papa thought so much of him!  To think
of your going and treating his daughter in that shocking way!'

'It was what Stebbing said,' gruffly answered Fergus.

'If you let yourself be led by these horrid cads---'

'He is no such thing!  He is the crack bat of Edgar's---'

'A boy is a cad who can't behave himself to a girl because she is
poor.  I really think the apology to me was the worst part or the
matter.  He only treats people well when he sees they can take care
of themselves.'

'I'll tell him about Captain White,' said Fergus, a little abashed.

'Yes.  And I will get the aunts to call on Mrs. White, and that may
help them to a better level among these vulgar folk.'

'But you won't---' said Fergus, with an expressive pause.

'I won't get you into trouble, for I think you are sorry you treated
one of our own in such a manner.'

'I wouldn't, indeed, if I had known.'

'I shall only explain that I have found out whom Maura belongs to.
I should go and see them at once, only I must make Val find out where
she lives.'

So Gillian returned home, communicating the intelligence with some
excitement that she had discovered that Valetta's schoolmate, Maura
White, was none other than the daughter of her father's old fellow-
soldier, whose death shocked her greatly, and she requested to go and
call on Mrs. White as soon as she could learn her abode.

However, it seemed to be impossible that any one should live in
Rockstone unknown to Aunt Jane.

'White?' she said.  'It can't be the Whites down by Cliffside.  No;
there's a father there, though he generally only comes down for
Sunday.'

'I am sure there are some Whites on the Library list,' said Miss Ada.

'Oh yes; but she washes!  I know who they must be.  I know in
Bellevue there are some; but they go to the Kennel Church.  Didn't
you come home, Ada, from that function you went to with Florence,
raving about the handsome youth in the choir?'

'Oh yes, we thought it such an uncommon, foreign face, and he looked
quite inspired when he was singing his solo.'

'Yes; I found out that his name was White, a clerk or something in
the marble works, and that he had a mother and sister living at
Bellevue.  I did see the sister when I went to get the marble girls
into the G.F.S., but she said something foolish about her mother not
liking it.'

'Yes; nobody under the St. Kenelm influence ever will come into the
G.F.S.'

'But what is she doing?' asked Gillian.  'Do you mean Kalliope?'

'I suppose I do.  I saw a rather nice-looking young woman in the
department where they make Florentine mosaic, and I believe they said
she was Miss White, but she cut me off very short with her mother, so
I had no more to do with her.'

'I am sure mamma would wish me to call on Mrs. White,' said Gillian.

'There's no reason against it,' said Aunt Jane. 'I will go with you
the first day I can.'

When would that be, wondered Gillian.  She told Valetta to talk to
Maura and learn the name of the house; and this was ascertained to be
3 Ivinghoe Terrace, Bellevue Road, but Val had very little
opportunity of cultivating the acquaintance of town girls, who did
not stay to dinner, as she had to go home immediately after school,
under Emma Norton's escort, and perhaps she was not very ardent in
the cause, for Kitty Varley and her other friends did not like the
child, and she was more swayed by them than perhaps she liked to
confess to her sister.

Each morning at breakfast Gillian hoped that Aunt Jane would lay out
her day so as to call on Mrs. White; but first there was the working
party, then came the mothers' meeting, followed by afternoon tea at
Mrs. Hablot's for some parish council.  On the third day, which might
have been clear, 'a miserable creature,' as Gillian mentally called
her, wrote to beg the Misses Mohun to bring themselves and her niece
to make up a lawn-tennis set, since some one had failed.  Gillian
vainly protested that she did not care about lawn tennis, and could
not play unless Jasper was her partner; and Aunt Jane so far sided
with her as to say it was very inconvenient, and on such short notice
they ought not to be expected. But Aunt Ada clearly wanted to go; and
so they went.  It was a beautiful place, but Gillian could not enjoy
herself, partly because she knew so few of the people, but more
because she was vexed and displeased about the Whites.  She played
very badly; but Aunt Jane, when pressed into the service, skipped
about with her little light figure and proved herself such a splendid
player, doing it so entirely con amore, that Gillian could not but
say to herself, 'She was bent on going; it was all humbug her
pretending to want to refuse.'

That afternoon's dissipation had made it needful to do double work
the next day, and Gillian was again disappointed.  Then came
Saturday, when Miss Mohun was never available, nor was she on Monday;
and when it appeared that she had to go to a meeting at the Cathedral
town on Tuesday, Gillian grew desperate, and at her tete-a-tete meal
with Aunt Ada, related the whole history of the Whites, and her great
desire to show kindness to her father's old brother-officer's family,
and how much she was disappointed.

Miss Adeline was touched, and indeed, fond as she was of her sister,
she could not help being flattered by Gillian's preference and
confidence.

'Well, my deal, this is a nice day, not too hot or too cold; I do not
see why I should not walk down with you and call.  If I find it too
far, we can take a cab to go back.'

'Oh, thank you, Aunt Ada; it is very very kind of you, and there is
no knowing when Aunt Jane may be able to go.  I don't like to close
up my Indian letter till I can say I have seen them.'

Gillian fidgeted a good deal lest, before her aunt's postprandial
repose was over, visitors should come and put a stop to everything,
and she looked ready to cut the throat of a poor lady in a mushroom
hat, who came up to leave a message for Miss Mohun about a possible
situation for one of her class of boys.

However, at last they started, Kunz and all, Miss Adeline quite
infected by Gillian's excitement.

'So your father and mother were very fond of them.'

'Papa thought very highly of him, and was very sorry he had to
return,' said Gillian.

'And she was a beautiful Greek.'

Gillian began to be quite afraid of what she might have said.

'I don't think she is more than half Greek,' she said.  'I believe
her mother was a Gorfiote, but her father was English or Irish.  I
believe he kept a shop in Malta.'

'Quite a mixture of nationalities then, and no wonder she is
beautiful.  That youth had a very striking profile; it quite reminded
me of a gem as I saw it against the dark pillar.'

'I did not say she was very beautiful now,' said Gillian, feeling a
qualm as she recollected the Queen of the White Ants, and rather
oddly divided between truthfulness, fear of alarming her aunt into
turning back, and desire of giving her a little preparation.

'Ah! those southern beauties soon go on.  Some one told me that Lord
Byron's "Maid of Athens," whose portrait I used to think the
loveliest thing in the world, became a great stout woman, but was
quite a mother to all the young Englishmen about.  I remember I used
to try to hold my head and keep my eyelids down like the engraving in
an old book that had been my mother's.'

'Oh! I think I have seen it at Beechcroft,' said Gillian, very much
amused, for she now perceived whence arose Aunt Ada's peculiar turn
of the head and droop of the eyelashes, and how the conscious
affectation of childhood had become unconsciously crystallised.

She grew more and more anxious as they found some difficulty in
making out Ivinghoe Terrace, and found it at last to be a row of
rather dilapidated little houses, apparently built of lath and
stucco, and of that peculiar meanness only attained by the modern
suburb.  Aunt Ada evidently did not like it at all, and owned herself
almost ready to turn back, being sure that Valetta must have made
some mistake.  Gillian repeated that she had always said the Whites
were very poor, but she began to feel that her impatience had misled
her, and that she would have been better off with the aunt who was
used to such places, and whose trim browns and crimsons were always
appropriate everywhere, rather than this dainty figure in delicate
hues that looked only fit for the Esplanade or the kettledrum, and
who was becoming seriously uneasy, as Kunz, in his fresh snowiness,
was disposed to make researches among vulgar remains of crabs and
hakes, and was with difficulty restrained from disputing them with a
very ignoble and spiteful yellow cur of low degree.

No. 3, with its blistered wall and rusty rail, was attained, Kunz was
brought within the enclosure, and Gillian knocked as sharply and fast
as she could, in the fear that her aunt might yet turn about and
escape.

The door was opened with a rapidity that gave the impression that
they had been watched, but it was by a very untidy-looking small
maid, and the parlour into which they were turned had most manifestly
been lately used as the family dining-room, and was redolent of a
mixture of onion, cabbage, and other indescribable odours.

Nobody was there, except a black and white cat, who showed symptoms
of flying at Kunz, but thought better of it, and escaped by the
window, which fortunately was open, though the little maid would have
shut it, but for Miss Adeline's gasping and peremptory entreaty to
the contrary.  She sat on the faded sofa, looking as if she just
existed by the help of her fan and scent-bottle, and when Gillian
directed her attention to the case of clasps and medals and the
photograph of the fine-looking officer, she could only sigh out,
'Oh, my dear!'

There was a certain air of taste in the arrangement of the few
chimney-piece ornaments, and Gillian was pleased to see the two large
photographs of her father and mother which Captain White had so much
valued as parting gifts.  A few drawings reminded her of the School
of Art at Belfast, and there was a vase of wild flowers and ferns
prettily arranged, but otherwise everything was wretchedly faded and
dreary.

Then came the opening of the door, and into the room rolled, rather
than advanced, something of stupendous breadth, which almost took
Gillian's breath away, as she durst not look to see the effect on her
aunt.  If the Queen of the White Ants had been stout before, what was
she now?  Whatever her appearance had been in the days of comparative
prosperity, with a husband to keep her up to the mark, and a desire
to rank with the officers' wives, she had let everything go in
widowhood, poverty, and neglect; and as she stood panting in her old
shiny black alpaca, the only thing Gillian recalled about her like
old times was the black lace veil thrown mantilla fashion over her
head; but now it was over a widow's cap, and a great deal rustier
than of old.  Of the lovely foreigner nothing else remained except
the dark eyes, and that sort of pasty sallow whiteness that looks at
if for generations past cold water and fresh air had been unknown.
There was no accent more interesting in her voice than a soupcon of
her Irish father as she began, 'I am sorry to have kept the lady so
long waiting.  Was it about the girl's character that you came?'

'Oh no, Mrs. White, interrupted Gillian, her shyness overpowered by
the necessity of throwing herself into the breach.  'Don't you
remember me?  I am Gillian Merrifield, and this is my aunt, Miss
Adeline Mohun.'

The puffy features lighted up into warmth.  'Little Miss Gillian!
And I am proud to see you!  My little Maura did tell me that Miss
Valetta was in her class at the High School; but I thought there was
no one now who would come near the poor widow.  And is your dear
mamma here, Miss Gillian, and are she and your papa quite well?'

Gillian could hardly believe in such dense remoteness that her
father's accident should be unknown, but she explained all, and met
with abundant sympathy, the dark eyes filled with tears, and the
voice broke into sobs, as Mrs. White declared that Sir Jasper and
Lady Merrifield had been the best friends she ever had in her life.

But oh! that the handkerchief had been less grimy with which she
mopped her eyes, as she spoke of the happy days that were gone!
Gillian saw that poor Aunt Ada was in an agony to get away, and
hurried out her questions for fear of being stopped.  'How was
Kalliope---was she at home?'

'Oh no, poor Kally, she is the best girl in the world.  I always say
that, with all my sorrows, no one ever was more blest in their
children than poor little me.  Richard, my eldest, is in a lawyer's
office at Leeds.  Kally is employed in the art department, just as a
compliment to her relation, Mr. White.  Quite genteel, superior work,
though I must say he does not do as much for us as he might.  Such a
youth as my Alexis now was surely worthy of the position of a
gentleman.'

The good lady was quite disposed to talk; but there was no making
out, through her cloud of confused complaints, what her son and
daughter were actually doing; and Aunt Ada, while preserving her
courtesy, was very anxious to be gone, and rose to take leave at the
first moment possible, though after she was on her feet Mrs. White
detained her for some time with apologies about not returning her
visit.  She was in such weak health, so unequal to walking up the
cliff, that she was sure Miss Mohun would excuse her, though Alexis
and Kally would be perfectly delighted to hear of Miss Gillian's
kindness.

Gillian had not made out half what she wanted to know, nor effected
any arrangement for seeing Kalliope, when she found herself out in
the street, and her aunt panting with relief.  'My dear, that woman!
You don't mean that your mother was fond of her.'

'I never said mamma was fond of her.'

'My dear, excuse me.  It was the only reason for letting you drag me
here.  I was almost stifled.  What a night I shall have!'

'I am very sorry, Aunt Ada, but, indeed, I never said that mamma was
fond of her, only that papa thought very highly of her husband, and
wished us to be kind to her.'

'Well, you gave me that impression, whether you wished it or not!
Such a hole; and I'm sure she drinks gin!'

'Oh no, aunt!'

'I can't be mistaken!  I really was afraid she was going to kiss
you!'

'I do wish I could have made out about Alexis and Kalliope.'

'Oh, my dear, just working like all the lot, though she shuffled
about it.  I see what they are like, and the less you see of them the
better.  I declare I am more tired than if I had walked a mile.  How
am I ever to get up the hill again?'

'I am sorry, aunt,' said Gillian.  'Will you take my arm?  Perhaps we
may meet Kalliope, if the marble people come out at four or five.
What's that bell?' as a little tinkle was heard.

'That's St. Kenelm's!  Oh! you would like to go there, and it would
rest me; only there's Kunz.'

'I should like to see it very much,' said Gillian.

'Well,' said Aunt Ada, who certainly seemed to have something of the
'cat's away' feeling about her, and, moreover, trusted to avoid
meeting Kalliope.  'Just round the corner here is Mrs. Webb's, who
used to live with us before she married, Kunz will be happy with her.
Won't he, my doggie, like to go and see his old Jessie?'

So Kunz was disposed of with a very pleasant, neat-looking woman, who
begged Miss Adeline to come and have some tea after the service.

It was really a beautiful little church--'a little gem' was exactly
the term that suggested itself---very ornate, and the chief lack being
of repose, for there seemed not an inch devoid of colour or carving.
There was a choir of boys in short surplices and blue cassocks, and a
very musical service, in the course of which it was discovered to be
the Feast of St. Remigius, for after the Lesson a short discourse was
given on the Conversion of Clovis, not forgetting the sacred ampulla.

There were about five ladies present and six old women, belonging to
a home maintained by Lady Flight.  The young priest, her son, had a
beautiful voice, and Gillian enjoyed all very much, and thought the
St. Andrew's people very hard and unjust; but all this went out of
her head in the porch, for while Lady Flight was greeting Miss Mohun
with empressement, and inviting her to come in to tea, Gillian had
seen a young woman who had come in late and had been kneeling behind
them.

Turning back and holding out her hands, she exclaimed---

'Kalliope!  I so wanted to see you.'

'Miss Gillian Merrifield,' was the response.  'Maura told me you were
here, but I hardly hoped to see you.'

'How can I see you?  Where are you?  Busy?'

'I am at the marble works all day---in the mosaic department.  Oh,
Miss Gillian, I owe it all to Miss Merrifield's encouraging me to go
to the School of Art.  How is she?  And I hope you have good accounts
of Sir Jasper?'

'He is better, and I hope my mother is just arriving.  That's why we
are here; and Alethea and Phyllis are out there.  They will want to
know all about you.'

At that moment Aunt Adeline looked round, having succeeded in
persuading Lady Flight that she had another engagement.  She saw a
young woman in a shabby black dress, with a bag in her hand, and a
dark fringe over a complexion of clear brown, straight features, to
whom Gillian was eagerly talking.

'Ah!' she said, as Mr. Flight now came up from the vestry; 'do you
know anything of that girl?'

'Second-rate people, somewhere in Bellevue,' said the lady.

'The brother is my best tenor,' said Mr. Flight.  'She is very often
at St. Kenelm's, but I do not know any more of her.  The mother
either goes to Bellevue or nowhere.  They are in Bellevue Parish.'

This was quite sufficient answer, for any interference with parochial
visiting in the Bellevue district was forbidden.

Aunt Ada called to Gillian, and when she eagerly said, 'This is
Kalliope, aunt,' only responded with a stiff bow.

'I do not know what these people might have been, Gillian,' she said,
as they pursued their way to Mrs. Webb's; 'but--they must have sunk
so low that I do not think your mother can wish you to have anything
to do with them.

'Oh, Aunt Ada!  Kalliope was always such a good girl!'

'She has a fringe.  And she would not belong to the G.F.S.,' said
Aunt Ada.  'No, my dear, I see exactly the sort of people they are.
Your aunt Jane might be useful to them, if they would let her, but
they are not at all fit for you to associate with.'

Gillian chafed inwardly, but she was beginning to learn that Aunt Ada
was more impenetrable than Aunt Jane, and, what was worse, Aunt Jane
always stood by her sister's decision, whether she would have herself
originated it or not.

When the elder aunt came home, and heard the history of their day,
and Gillian tried to put in a word, she said---

'My dear, we all know that rising from the ranks puts a man's family
in a false position, and they generally fall back again.  All this is
unlucky, for they do not seem to be people it is possible to get at,
and now you have paid your kind act of attention, there is no more to
be done till you can hear from Ceylon about them.'

Gillian was silenced by the united forces of the aunts.

'It really was a horrid place,' said Aunt Ada, when alone with her
sister; 'and such a porpoise of a woman!  Gillian should not have
represented her as a favourite.'

'I do not remember that she did so,' returned Aunt Jane.  'I wish she
had waited for me.  I have seen more of the kind of thing than you
have, Ada.'

'I am sure I wish she had.  I don't know when I shall get over the
stifling of that den; but it was just as if they were her dearest
friends.'

'Girls will be silly!  And there's a feeling about the old regiment
too.  I can excuse her, though I wish she had not been so impatient.
I fancy that eldest daughter is really a good girl and the mainstay
of the family.'

'But she would have nothing to do with you or the G.F.S.'

'If I had known that her father had been an officer, I might have
approached her differently.  However, I will ask Lily about their
antecedents, and in six weeks we shall know what is to be done about
them.'




CHAPTER V.  MARBLES



Six weeks seem a great deal longer to sixteen than to six-and-forty,
and Gillian groaned and sighed to herself as she wrote her letters,
and assured herself that so far from her having done enough in the
way of attention to the old soldier's family, she had simply done
enough to mark her neglect and disdain.

'Grizzling' (to use an effective family phrase) under opposition is a
grand magnifier; and it was not difficult to erect poor Captain White
into a hero, his wife into a patient sufferer, and Alethea's kindness
to his daughter into a bosom friendship; while the aunts seemed to be
absurdly fastidious and prejudiced.  'I don't wonder at Aunt Ada,'
she said to herself; 'I know she has always been kept under a glass
case; but I thought better things of Aunt Jane.  It is all because
Kalliope goes to St. Kenelm's, and won't be in the G.F.S.'

And all the time Gillian was perfectly unaware of her own family
likeness to Dolores.  Other matters conduced to a certain spirit of
opposition to Aunt Jane.  That the children should have to use the
back instead of the front stair when coming in with dusty or muddy
shoes, and that their possessions should be confiscated for the rest
of the day when left about in the sitting-rooms and hall, were
contingencies she could accept as natural, though they irritated her;
but she agreed with Valetta that it was hard to insist on half an
hour's regular work at the cushion, which was not a lesson, but play.
She was angered when Aunt Jane put a stop to some sportive passes and
chatter on the stairs between Valetta and Alice Mount, and still more
so when her aunt took away Adam Bede from the former, as not
desirable reading at eleven years old.

It was only the remembrance of her mother's positive orders that
withheld Gillian from the declaration that mamma always let them read
George Eliot; and in a cooler moment of reflection she was glad she
had abstained, for she recollected that _always_ was limited to
mamma's having read most of Romola aloud to her and Mysie, and to her
having had Silas Marner to read when she was unwell in lodgings, and
there was a scarcity of books.

Such miffs about her little sister were in the natural order of
things, and really it was the 'all pervadingness,' as she called it
in her own mind, of Aunt Jane that chiefly worried her, the way that
the little lady knew everything that was done, and everything that
was touched in the house; but as long as Valetta took refuge with
herself, and grumbled to her, it was bearable.

It was different with Fergus.  There had been offences certainly;
Aunt Jane had routed him out of preparing his lessons in Mrs. Mount's
room, where he diversified them with teaching the Sofy to beg, and
inventing new modes of tying down jam pots.  Moreover, she had
declared that Gillian's exemplary patience was wasted and harmful
when she found that they had taken three-quarters of an hour over
three tenses of a Greek verb, and that he said it worse on the
seventh repetition than on the first.  After an evening, when Gillian
had gone to a musical party with Aunt Ada, and Fergus did his lessons
under Aunt Jane's superintendence, he utterly cast off his sister's
aid.  There was something in Miss Mohun's briskness that he found
inspiring, and she put in apt words or illustrations, instead of only
rousing herself from a book to listen, prompt, and sigh.  He found
that he did his tasks more thoroughly in half the time, and rose in
his class; and busy as his aunt was, she made the time not only for
this, but for looking over with him those plates of mechanics in the
Encyclopaedia, which were a mere maze to Gillian, but of which she
knew every detail, from ancient studies with her brother Maurice.  As
Fergus wrote to his mother, 'Aunt Jane is the only woman who has any
natural _scence_.'

Gillian could not but see this as she prepared the letters for the
post, and whatever the ambiguous word might be meant for, she had
rather not have seen it, for she really was ashamed of her secret
annoyance at Fergus's devotion to Aunt Jane, knowing how well it was
that Stebbing should have a rival in his affections.  Yet she could
not help being provoked when the boy followed his aunt to the doors
of her cottages like a little dog, and waited outside whenever she
would let him, for the sake of holding forth to her about something
which wheels and plugs and screws were to do.  Was it possible that
Miss Mohun followed it all?  His great desire was to go over the
marble works, and she had promised to take him when it could be done;
but, unfortunately, his half-holiday was on Saturday, when the
workmen struck off early, and when also Aunt Jane always had the
pupil-teachers for something between instruction and amusement.

Gillian felt lonely, for though she got on better with her younger
than her elder aunt, and had plenty of surface intercourse of a
pleasant kind with both, it was a very poor substitute for her
mother, or her elder sisters, and Valetta was very far from being a
Mysie.

The worst time was Sunday, when the children had deserted her for
Mrs. Hablot, and Aunt Ada was always lying down in her own room to
rest after morning service.  She might have been at the Sunday-
school, but she did not love teaching, nor do it well, and she did
not fancy the town children, or else there was something of
opposition to Aunt Jane.

It was a beautiful afternoon, of the first Sunday in October, and she
betook herself to the garden with the 'Lyra Innocentium' in her hand,
meaning to learn the poem for the day.  She wandered up to the rail
above the cliff, looking out to the sea.  Here, beyond the belt of
tamarisks and other hardy low-growing shrubs which gave a little
protection from the winds, the wall dividing the garden of Beechcroft
Cottage from that of Cliff House became low, with only the iron-
spiked railing on the top, as perhaps there was a desire not to
overload the cliff.  The sea was of a lovely colour that day, soft
blue, and with exquisite purple shadows of clouds, with ripples of
golden sparkles here and there near the sun, and Gillian stood
leaning against the rail, gazing out on it, with a longing, yearning
feeling towards the dear ones who had gone out upon it, when she
became conscious that some one was in the other garden, which she had
hitherto thought quite deserted, and looking round, she saw a figure
in black near the rail. Their eyes met, and both together exclaimed---

'Kalliope!'---'Miss Gillian!  Oh, I beg your pardon!'

'How did you come here?  I thought nobody did!'

'Mr. White's gardener lets us walk here.  It is so nice and quiet.
Alexis has taken the younger ones for a walk, but I was too much
tired.  But I will not disturb you---'

'Oh! don't go away.  Nobody will disturb us, and I do so want to know
about you all.  I had no notion, nor mamma either, that you were
living here, or---'

'Or of my dear father's death!' said Kalliope, as Gillian stopped
short, confused.  'I did write to Miss Merrifield, but the letter was
returned.'

'But where did you write?'

'To Swanage, where she had written to me last.'

'Oh! we were only there for six weeks, while we were looking for
houses; I suppose it was just as the Wardours were gone to Natal
too?'

'Yes, we knew they were out of reach.'

'But do tell me about it, if you do not mind.  My father will want to
hear.'

Kalliope told all in a calm, matter-of-fact way, but with a strain of
deep suppressed feeling.  She was about twenty-three, a girl with a
fine outline of features, beautiful dark eyes, and a clear brown
skin, who would have been very handsome if she had looked better fed
and less hardworked.  Her Sunday dress showed wear and adaptation,
but she was altogether ladylike, and even the fringe that had
startled Aunt Ada only consisted of little wavy curls on the temples,
increasing her classical look.

'It was fever---at Leeds.  My father was just going into a situation
in the police that we had been waiting for ever so long, and there
were good schools, and Richard had got into a lawyer's office, when
there began a terrible fever in our street---the drains were to blame,
they said---and every one of us had it, except mother and Richard, who
did not sleep at home.  We lost poor little Mary first, and then papa
seemed to be getting better; but he was anxious about expense, and
there was no persuading him to take nourishment enough.  I do believe
it was that.  And he had a relapse---and---'

'Oh, poor Kalliope!  And we never heard of it!'

'I did feel broken down when the letter to Miss Merrifield came
back,' said Kalliope.  'But my father had made me write to Mr. James
White---not that we had any idea that he had grown so rich.  He and my
father were first cousins, sons of two brothers who were builders;
but there was some dispute, and it ended by my father going away and
enlisting.  There was nobody nearer to him, and he never heard any
more of his home; but when he was so ill, he thought he would like to
be reconciled to "Jem," as he said, so he made me write from his
dictation.  Such a beautiful letter it was, and he added a line at
the end himself.  Then at last, when it was almost too late, Mr.
White answered.  I believe it was a mere chance---or rather
Providence---that he ever knew it was meant for him, but there were
kind words enough to cheer up my father at the last.  I believe then
the clergyman wrote to him.'

'Did not he come near you?'

'No, I have never seen him; but there was a correspondence between
him and Mr. Moore, the clergyman, and Richard, and he said he was
willing to put us in the way of working for ourselves, if---if---we
were not too proud.'

'Then he did it in an unkind way,' said Gillian.

'I try to think he did not mean to be otherwise than good to us.  I
told Mr. Moore that I was not fit to be a governess, and I did not
think they could get on without me at home, but that I could draw
better than I would do anything else, and perhaps I might get
Christmas cards to do, or something like that.  Mr. Moore sent a card
or two of my designing, and then Mr. White said he could find work
for me in the mosaic department here; and something for my brothers,
if we did not give ourselves airs.  So we came.'

'Not Richard?' said Gillian, who remembered dimly that Richard had
not been held in great esteem by her own brothers.

'No; Richard is in a good situation, so it was settled that he should
stay on there.'

'And you---'

'I am in the mosaic department.  Oh, Miss Gillian, I am so grateful
to Miss Merrifield.  Don't you remember her looking at my little
attempts, and persuading Lady Merrifield to get mother to let me go
to the School of Art?  I began only as the girls do who are mere
hands, and now I have to prepare all the designs for them, and have a
nice little office of my own for it.  Sometimes I get one of my own
designs taken, and then I am paid extra.'

'Then do you maintain them all?'

'Oh no; we have lodgers, the organist and his wife,' said Kalliope,
laughing, 'and Alexis is in the telegraph office, at the works;
besides, it turned out that this house and two more belong to us, and
we do very well when the tenants pay their rents.'

'But Maura is not the youngest of you,' said Gillian, who was rather
hazy about the family.

'No, there are the two little boys.  We let them go to the National
School for the present.  It is a great trial to my poor mother, but
they do learn well there, and we may be able to do something better
for them by the time they are old enough for further education.'

Just then the sound of a bell coming up from the town below was a
warning to both that the conversation must be broken off.  A few
words---'I am so glad to have seen you,' and 'It has been such a
pleasure'---passed, and then each hastened down her separate garden
path.

'Must I tell of this meeting?'  Gillian asked herself.  'I shall
write it all to mamma and Alethea, of course.  How delightful that
those lessons that Kalliope had have come to be of so much use!  How
pleased Alethea will be!  Poor dear thing!  How much she has gone
through!  But can there be any need to tell the aunts?  Would it not
just make Aunt Ada nervous about any one looking through her sweet
and lovely wall?  And as to Aunt Jane, I really don't see that I am
bound to gratify her passion for knowing everything.  I am not
accountable to her, but to my own mother.  My people know all about
Kalliope, and she is prejudiced.  Why should I be unkind and
neglectful of an old fellow-soldier's family, because she cannot or
will not understand what they really are?  It would not be the
slightest use to tell her the real story.  Mrs. White is fat, and
Kalliope has a fringe, goes to St. Kenelm's, and won't be in the
G.F.S., and that's enough to make her say she does not believe a word
of it, or else to make it a fresh ground for poking and prying, in
the way that drives one distracted!  It really is quite a satis-
faction to have something that she can't find out, and it is not
underhand while I write every word of it to mamma.'

So Gillian made her conscience easy, and she did write a long and
full account of the Whites and their troubles, and of her
conversation with Kalliope.

In the course of that week Fergus had a holiday, asked for by some
good-natured visitor of Mrs. Edgar's.  He rushed home on the previous
day with the news, to claim Aunt Jane's promise; and she undertook so
to arrange matters as to be ready to go with him to the marble works
at three o'clock.  Valetta could not go, as she had her music lesson
at that time, and she did not regret it, for she had an idea that
blasting with powder or dynamite was always going on there.  Gillian
was not quite happy about the dynamite, but she did not like to
forego the chance of seeing what the work of Kalliope and Alexis
really was, so she expressed her willingness to join the party, and
in the meantime did her best to prevent Aunt Ada from being driven
distracted by Fergus's impatience, which began at half-past two.

Miss Mohun had darted out as soon as dinner was over, and he was
quite certain some horrible cad would detain her till four o'clock,
and then going would be of no use.  Nevertheless he was miserable
till Gillian had put on her hat, and then she could do nothing that
would content him and keep him out of Aunt Ada's way, but walk him up
and down in the little front court with the copper beeches, while she
thought they must present to the neighbours a lively tableau of a
couple of leopards in a cage.

However, precisely as the clock struck three, Aunt Jane walked up to
the iron gate.  She had secured an order from Mr. Stebbing, the
managing partner, without which they would not have penetrated beyond
the gate where 'No admittance except on business' was painted.

Mr. Stebbing himself, a man with what Valetta was wont to call a
grisly beard, met them a little within the gate, and did the honours
of the place with great politeness.  He answered all the boy's
questions, and seemed much pleased with his intelligence and
interest, letting him see what he wished, and even having the
machinery slacked to enable him to perceive how it acted, and most
delightful of all, in the eyes of Fergus, letting him behold some
dynamite, and explaining its downward explosion.  He evidently had a
great respect for Miss Mohun, because she entered into it all, put
pertinent questions, and helped her nephew if he did not understand.

It was all dull work to Gillian, all that blasting and hewing and
polishing, which made the place as busy as a hive.  She only wished
she could have seen the cove as once it was, with the weather-beaten
rocks descending to the sea, overhung with wild thrift and bramble,
and with the shore, the peaceful haunts of the white sea-birds;
whereas now the fresh-cut rock looked red and wounded, and all below
was full of ugly slated or iron-roofed sheds, rough workmen, and
gratings and screeches of machinery.

It was the Whites whom she wanted to see, and she never came upon the
brother at all, nor on the sister, till Mr. Stebbing, perhaps
observing her listless looks, said that they were coming to what
would be more interesting to Miss Merrifield, and took them into the
workrooms, where a number of young women were busy over the very
beautiful work by which flowers and other devices were represented by
inlaying different coloured marbles and semi-precious stones in black
and white, so as to make tables, slabs, and letter-weights, and
brooches for those who could not aspire to the most splendid and
costly productions.

Miss Mohun shook hands with 'the young ladies' within the magic
circle of the G.F.S., and showed herself on friendly terms of
interest with all.  From a little inner office Miss White was
summoned, came out, and met an eager greeting from Gillian, but
blushed a little, and perhaps had rather not have had her unusual
Christian name proclaimed by the explanation---

'This is Kalliope White, Aunt Jane.'

Miss Mohun shook hands with her, and said her niece had been much
pleased at the meeting, and her sister would be glad to hear of her,
explaining to Mr. Stebbing that Captain White had been a brother-
officer of Sir Jasper Merrifield.

Kalliope had a very prettily-shaped head, with short hair in little
curls and rings all over it.  Her whole manner was very quiet and
unassuming, as she explained and showed whatever Mr. Stebbing wished.
It was her business to make the working drawings for the others, and
to select the stones used, and there could be no doubt that she was a
capable and valuable worker.

Gillian asked her to show something designed by herself, and she
produced an exquisite table-weight, bearing a spray of sweet peas.
Gillian longed to secure it for her mother, but it was very
expensive, owing to the uncommon stones used in giving the tints, and
Mr. Stebbing evidently did not regard it with so much favour as the
jessamines and snowdrops, which, being of commoner marbles, could be
sold at a rate fitter for the popular purse.  Several beautiful
drawings in her office had been laid aside as impracticable, 'unless
we had a carte blanche wedding order,' he said, with what Gillian
thought a sneer.

She would gladly have lingered longer, but this was a very dull room
in Fergus's estimation, and perhaps Aunt Jane did not desire a long
continuance of the conversation under Mr. Stebbing's eyes, so Gillian
found herself hurried on.

Mr. Stebbing begged Miss Mohun to come in to his wife, who would have
tea ready, and this could not be avoided without manifest incivility.
Fergus hoped to have been introduced to the haunts of his hero, but
Master George was gone off in attendance on his brother, who was
fishing, and there was nothing to relieve the polite circle of the
drawing-room---a place most aesthetically correct, from cornice to the
little rugs on the slippery floor.  The little teacups and the low
Turkish table were a perfect study to those who did not---like Fergus-
--think more of the dainty doll's muffins on the stand, or the long-
backed Dachshund who looked for them beseechingly.

Mrs. Stebbing was quite in accordance with the rest, with a little
row of curls over her forehead, a terra-cotta dress, and a chain of
watch cocks, altogether rather youthful for the mother of a grown-up
son, engaged in his father's business.

She was extremely civil and polite, and everything went well except
for a certain stiffness.  By and by the subject of the Whites came
up, and Mr. Stebbing observed that Miss Merrifield seemed to know
Miss White.

'Oh yes,' said Gillian eagerly; 'her father was in my father's
regiment, the Royal Wardours.'

'A non-commissioned officer, I suppose,' said Mrs. Stebbing.

'Not for a good many years,' said Gillian.  'He was lieutenant for
six years, and retired with the rank of captain.'

'I know they said he was a captain,' said Mrs. Stebbing; 'but it is
very easy to be called so.'

'Captain White was a real one,' said Gillian, with a tone of offence.
'Every one in the Royal Wardours thought very highly of him.'

'I am sure no one would have supposed it from his family,' said Mrs.
Stebbing.  'You are aware, Miss Mohun, that it was under disgraceful
circumstances that he ran away and enlisted.'

'Many a youth who gets into a scrape becomes an excellent soldier,
even an officer,' said Miss Mohun.

'Exactly so,' said Mr. Stebbing.  'Those high-spirited lads are the
better for discipline, and often turn out well under it.  But their
promotion is an awkward thing for their families, who have not been
educated up to the mark.'

'It is an anomalous position, and I have a great pity for them,' said
Miss Mohun.  'Miss White must be a very clever girl.'

'Talented, yes,' said Mr. Stebbing.  'She is useful in her
department.

'That may be,' said Mrs. Stebbing; 'but it won't do to encourage her.
She is an artful, designing girl, I know very well---'

'Do you know anything against her?' asked Miss Mohun, looking volumes
of repression at Gillian, whose brown eyes showed symptoms of glaring
like a cat's, under her hat.

'I do not speak without warrant, Miss Mohun.  She is one of those
demure, proper-behaved sort that are really the worst flirts of all,
if you'll excuse me.'

Most thankful was Miss Mohun that the door opened at that moment to
admit some more visitors, for she saw that Gillian might at any
moment explode.

'Aunt Jane,' she exclaimed, as soon as they had accomplished their
departure, 'you don't believe it?'

'I do not think Miss White looks like it,' said Miss Mohun.  'She
seemed a quiet, simple girl.'

'And you don't believe all that about poor Captain White?'

'Not the more for Mrs. Stebbing's saying so.'

'But you will find out and refute her.  There must be people who
know.'

'My dear, you had better not try to rake up such things.  You know
that the man bore an excellent character for many years in the army,
and you had better be satisfied with that,' said Miss Jane for once
in her life, as if to provoke Gillian, not on the side of curiosity.

'Then you do believe it!' went on Gillian, feeling much injured for
her hero's sake, and wearing what looked like a pertinacious pout.

'Truth compels me to say, Gillian, that the sons of men, even in a
small way of business, are not apt to run away and enlist without
some reason.'

'And I am quite sure it was all that horrid old White's fault.'

'You had better content yourself with that belief.'

Gillian felt greatly affronted, but Fergus, who thought all this very
tiresome, broke in, after a third attempt---

'Aunt Jane, if the pulley of that crane---'

And all the way home they discussed machinery, and Gillian's heart
swelled.

'I am afraid Gillian was greatly displeased with me,' said Miss Mohun
that evening, talking it over with her sister.  'But her captain
might have a fall if she went poking into all the gossip of the place
about him.'

'Most likely whatever he did would be greatly exaggerated,' said
Adeline.

'No doubt of it!  Besides, those young men who are meant by nature
for heroes are apt to show some Beserkerwuth in their youth, like
Hereward le Wake.'

'But what did you think of the girl?'

'I liked her looks very much.  I have seen her singing in the
choruses at the choral society concert, and thought how nice her
manner was.  She does justice to her classical extraction, and is
modest and ladylike besides.  Mrs. Stebbing is spiteful!  I wonder
whether it is jealousy.  She calls her artful and designing, which
sounds to me very much as if Master Frank might admire the damsel.
I have a great mind to have the two girls to tea, and see what they
are made of.'

'We had much better wait till we hear from Lily.  We cannot in the
least tell whether she would wish the acquaintance to be kept up.
And if there is anything going on with young Stebbing, nothing could
be more unadvisable than for Gillian to be mixed up in any nonsense
of that sort.'




CHAPTER VI.  SINGLE MISFORTUNES NEVER COME ALONE



On Sunday, Gillian's feet found their way to the top of the garden,
where she paced meditatively up and down, hoping to see Kalliope; and
just as she was giving up the expectation, the slender black figure
appeared on the other side of the railings.

'Oh, Miss Gillian, how kind!'

'Kally, I am glad!'

Wherewith they got into talk at once, for Lady Merrifield's safe
arrival and Sir Jasper's improvement had just been telegraphed, and
there was much rejoicing over the good news.  Gillian had nearly made
up her mind to confute the enemy by asking why Captain White had left
Rockquay; but somehow when it came to the point, she durst not make
the venture, and they skimmed upon more surface subjects.

The one point of union between the parishes of Rockstone and Rockquay
was a choral society, whereof Mr. Flight of St. Kenelm's was a
distinguished light, and which gave periodical concerts in the
Masonic Hall.  It being musical, Miss Mohun had nothing to do with it
except the feeling it needful to give her presence to the
performances.  One of these was to take place in the course of the
week, and there were programmes in all the shops, 'Mr. Alexis White'
being set down for more than one solo, and as a voice in the glees.

'Shall not you sing?' asked Gillian, remembering that her sisters had
thought Kalliope had a good ear and a pretty voice.

'I?  Oh, no!'

'I thought you used to sing.'

'Yes; but I have no time to keep it up.'

'Not even in the choruses?'

'No, I cannot manage it'---and there was a little glow in the clear
brown cheek.

'Does your designing take up so much time?'

'It is not that, but there is a great deal to do at home in after
hours.  My mother is not strong, and we cannot keep a really
efficient servant.'

'Oh! but you must be terribly hard-worked to have no time for
relaxation.'

'Not quite that, but---it seems to me,' burst out poor Kalliope, 'that
relaxation does nothing but bring a girl into difficulties---an
unprotected girl, I mean.'

'What do you mean?' cried Gillian, quite excited; but Kalliope had
caught herself up.

'Never mind, Miss Gillian; you have nothing to do with that kind of
thing.'

'But do tell me, Kally; I do want to be your friend,' said Gillian,
trying to put her hand through.

'There's nothing to tell,' said Kalliope, smiling and evidently
touched, but still somewhat red, 'only you know when a girl has
nobody to look after her, she has to look after herself.'

'Doesn't Alexis look after you?' said Gillian, not at all satisfied
to be put off with this truism.

'Poor Alex!  He is younger, you know, and he has quite enough to do.
Oh, Miss Gillian, he is such a very dear, good boy.'

'He has a most beautiful voice, Aunt Ada said.'

'Yes, poor fellow, though he almost wishes he had not.  Oh dear I
there's the little bell!  Good-bye, Miss Merrifield, I must run, or
Mrs. Smithson will be gone to church, and I shall be locked in.'

So Gillian was left to the enigma why Alexis should regret the beauty
of his own voice, and what Kalliope could mean by the scrapes of
unprotected girls.  It did not occur to her that Miss White was her
elder by six or seven years, and possibly might not rely on her
judgment and discretion as much as she might have done on those of
Alethea.

Meantime the concert was coming on.  It was not an amusement that
Aunt Ada could attempt, but Miss Mohun took both her nieces, to the
extreme pride and delight of Valetta, who had never been, as she
said, 'to any evening thing but just stupid childish things, only
trees and magic-lanterns'; and would not quite believe Gillian, who
assured her in a sage tone that she would find this far less
entertaining than either, judging by the manner in which she was wont
to vituperate her music lesson.

'Oh! but that's only scales, and everybody hates them!  And I do love
a German band.'

'Especially in the middle of lesson-time,' said Gillian.

However, Fergus was to spend the evening with Clement Varley; and
Kitty was to go with her mother and sister, the latter of whom was to
be one of the performers; but it was decreed by the cruel authorities
that the two bosom friends would have their tongues in better order
if they were some chairs apart; and therefore, though the members of
the two families at Beechcroft and the Tamarisks were consecutive,
Valetta was quartered between her aunt and Gillian, with Mrs. Varley
on the other side of Miss Mohun, and Major Dennis flanking Miss
Merrifield.  When he had duly inquired after Sir Jasper, and heard of
Lady Merrifield's arrival, he had no more conversation for the young
lady; and Valetta, having perceived by force of example that in this
waiting-time it was not like being in church, poured out her
observations and inquiries on her sister.

'What a funny room!  And oh! do look at the pictures!  Why has that
man got on a blue apron?  Freemasons!  What are Freemasons?  Do they
work in embroidered blue satin aprons because they are gentlemen?
I'll tell Fergus that is what he ought to be; he is so fond of making
things---only I am sure he would spoil his apron.  What's that curtain
for?  Will they sing up there?  Oh, there's Emma Norton just come in!
That must be her father.  That's Alice Gidding, she comes to our
Sunday class, and do you know, she thought it was Joseph who was put
into the den of lions.  Has not her mother got a funny head?'

'Hush now, Val.  Here they come,' as the whole chorus trooped in and
began the 'Men of Harlech.'

Val was reduced to silence, but there was a long instrumental
performance afterwards, during which bad examples of chattering
emboldened her to whisper---

'Did you see Beatrice Varley?  And Miss Berry, our singing-mistress---
and Alexis White?  Maura says---'

Aunt Jane gave a touch and a frown which reduced Valetta to silence
at this critical moment; and she sat still through a good deal, only
giving a little jump when Alexis White, with various others, came to
sing a glee.

Gillian could study the youth, who certainly was, as Aunt Ada said,
remarkable for the cameo-like cutting of his profile, though perhaps
no one without an eye for art would have remarked it, as he had the
callow unformed air of a lad of seventeen or eighteen, and looked shy
and grave; but his voice was a fine one, and was heard to more
advantage in the solos to a hunting song which shortly followed.

Valetta had been rather alarmed at the applause at first, but she
soon found out what an opportunity it gave for conversation, and
after a good deal of popping her head about, she took advantage of
the encores to excuse herself by saying, 'I wanted to see if Maura
White was there.  She was to go if Mrs. Lee---that's the lodger---would
take her.  She says Kally won't go, or sing, or anything, because---'

How tantalising! the singers reappeared, and Valetta was reduced to
silence.  Nor could the subject be renewed in the interval between
the parts, for Major Dennis came and stood in front, and talked to
Miss Mohun; and after that Valetta grew sleepy, and nothing was to be
got out of her till all was over, when she awoke into extra
animation, and chattered so vehemently all the way home that her aunt
advised Gillian to get her to bed as quietly as possible, or she
would not sleep all night, and would be good for nothing the next
day.

Gillian, however, being given to think for herself in all cases of
counsel from Aunt Jane, thought it could do no harm to beguile the
brushing of the child's hair by asking why Kalliope would not come to
the concert.

'Oh, it's a great secret, but Maura told me in the cloakroom.  It is
because Mr. Frank wants to be her---to be her---her admirer,' said
Valetta, cocking her head on one side, and adding to the already
crimson colour of her cheeks.

'Nonsense, Val, what do you and Maura know of such things?'

'We aren't babies, Gill, and it is very unkind of you, when you told
me I was to make friends with Maura White; and Kitty Varley is quite
cross with me about it.'

'I told you to be kind to Maura, but not to talk about such foolish
things.'

'I don't see why they should be foolish.  It is what we all must come
to.  Grown-up people do, as Lois says.  I heard Aunt Ada going on
ever so long about Beatrice Varley and that gentleman.'

'It is just the disadvantage of that kind of school that girls talk
that sort of undesirable stuff.  Gillian said to herself; but
curiosity, or interest in the Whites, prompted her to add, 'What did
she tell you?'

'If you are so cross, I shan't tell you.  You hurt my head, I say.'

'Come, Val, I ought to know.'

'It's a secret.'

'Then you should not have told me so much.'

Val laughed triumphantly, and called her sister Mrs. Curiosity, and
at that moment Aunt Jane knocked at the door, and said Val was not to
talk.

Val made an impatient face and began to whisper, but Gillian had too
much proper feeling to allow this flat disobedience, and would not
listen, much as she longed to do so.  She heard her little sister
rolling and tossing about a good deal, but made herself hard-hearted
on principle, and acted sleep.  On her own judgment, she would not
waken the child in the morning, and Aunt Jane said she was quite
right, it would be better to let Val have her sleep out, than send
her to school fretful and half alive.  'But you ought not to have let
her talk last night.'

As usual, reproof was unpleasing, and silenced Gillian.  She hoped to
extract the rest of the story in the course of the day.  But before
breakfast was over Valetta rushed in with her hat on, having
scrambled into her clothes in a hurry, and consuming her breakfast in
great haste, for she had no notion either of losing her place in the
class, or of missing the discussion of the entertainment with Kitty,
from whom she had been so cruelly parted.

Tete-a-tetes were not so easy as might have been expected between two
sisters occupying the same room, for Valetta went to bed and to sleep
long before Gillian, and the morning toilette was a hurry; besides,
Gillian had scruples, partly out of pride and partly out of
conscientiousness, about encouraging Valetta in gossip or showing her
curiosity about it.  Could she make anything out from Kalliope
herself?  However, fortune favoured her, for she came out of her
class only a few steps behind little Maura; and as some of Mr.
Edgar's boys were about, the child naturally regarded her as a
protector.

Maura was quite as pretty as her elders, and had more of a southern
look.  Perhaps she was proportionably precocious, for she returned
Gillian's greeting without embarrassment, and was quite ready to
enter into conversation and show her gratification at compliments
upon her brother's voice.

'And does not Kalliope sing?  I think she used to sing very nicely in
the old times.'

'Oh yes,' said Maura; 'but she doesn't now.'

'Why not?  Has not she time?'

'That's not all' said Maura, looking significant, and an interro-
gative sound sufficed to bring out---'It is because of Mr. Frank.'

'Mr. Frank Stebbing?'

'Yes.  He was always after her, and would walk home with her after
the practices, though Alexis was always there.  I know that was the
reason for I heard la mamma mia trying to persuade her to go on with
the society, and she was determined, and would not.  Alex said she
was quite right, and it is very tiresome of him, for now she never
walks with us on Sunday, and he used to come and give us bonbons and
crackers.'

'Then she does not like him?'

'She says it is not right or fitting, because Mr. and Mrs. Stebbing
would be against it; but mamma said he would get over them, if she
would not be so stupid, and he could make her quite a lady, like an
officer's daughter, as we are.  Is it not a pity she won't, Miss
Gillian?'

'I do not know.  I think she is very good,' said Gillian.

'Oh! but if she would, we might all be well off again,' said little
worldly-minded Maura; 'and I should not have to help her make the
beds, and darn, and iron, and all sorts of horrid things, but we
could live properly, like ladies.'

'I think it is more ladylike to act uprightly,' said Gillian.

Wherewith, having made the discovery, and escorted Maura beyond the
reach of her enemies, she parted with the child, and turned
homewards.  Gillian was at the stage in which sensible maidens have a
certain repugnance and contempt for the idea of love and lovers as an
interruption to the higher aims of life and destruction to family
joys.  Romance in her eyes was the exaltation of woman out of reach,
and Maura's communications inclined her to glorify Kalliope as a
heroine, molested by a very inconvenient person, 'Spighted by a fool,
spighted and angered both,' as she quoted Imogen to herself.

It would be a grand history to tell Alethea of her friend, when she
should have learnt a little more about it, as she intended to do on
Sunday from Kalliope herself, who surely would be grateful for some
sympathy and friendship.  Withal she recollected that it was Indian-
mail day, and hurried home to see whether the midday post had brought
any letters.  Her two aunts were talking eagerly, but suddenly broke
off as she opened the door.

'Well, Gillian---' began Aunt Ada.

'No, no, let her see for herself,' said Aunt Jane.

'Oh!  I hope nothing is the matter?' she exclaimed, seeing a letter
to herself on the table.

'No; rather the reverse.'

A horrible suspicion, as she afterwards called it, came over Gillian
as she tore open the letter.  There were two small notes.  The first
was---


'DEAR LITTLE GILL---I am going to give you a new brother.  Mother will
tell you all.---Your loving sister,
                                        'P. E. M.'


She gasped, and looked at the other.


'DEAREST GILLIAN---After all you have heard about Frank, perhaps you
will know that I am very happy.  You cannot guess how happy, and it
is so delightful that mamma is charmed with him.  He has got two
medals and three clasps.  There are so many to write to, I can only
give my poor darling this little word.  She will find it is only
having another to be as fond of her as her old Alley.'


Gillian looked up in a bewildered state, and gasped 'Both!'

Aunt Jane could not help smiling a little, and saying, 'Yes, both at
one fell swoop.'

'It's dreadful,' said Gillian.

'My dear, if you want to keep your sisters to yourself, you should
not let them go to India, said Aunt Ada.

'They said they wouldn't!  They were quite angry at the notion of
being so commonplace,' said Gillian.

'Oh, no one knows till her time comes!' said Aunt Jane.

Gillian now applied herself to her mother's letter, which was also
short.


'MY DEAREST GILLYFLOWER---I know this will be a great blow to you, as
indeed it was to me; but we must not be selfish, and must remember
that the sisters' happiness and welfare is the great point.  I wish I
could write to you more at length; but time will not let me,
scattered as are all my poor flock at home.  So I must leave you to
learn the bare public facts from Aunt Jane, and only say my especial
private words to you.  You are used to being brevet eldest daughter
to me, now you will have to be so to papa, who is mending fast, but,
I think, will come home with me.  Isn't that news?
                                        'Your loving mother.'


'They have told you all about it, Aunt Jane!' said Gillian.

'Yes; they have been so cruel as not even to tell you the names of
these robbers?  Well, I dare say you had rather read my letter than
hear it.'

'Thank you very much, Aunt Jane!  May I take it upstairs with me?'

Consent was readily given, and Gillian had just time for her first
cursory reading before luncheon.


'DEAREST JENNY---Fancy what burst upon me only the day after my
coming---though really we ought to be very thankful.  You might
perhaps have divined what was brewing from the letters.  Jasper knew
of one and suspected the other before the accident, and he says it
prevented him from telegraphing to stop me, for he was sure one or
both the girls would want their mother.  Phyllis began it.  Hers is a
young merchant just taken into the great Underwood firm.  Bernard
Underwood, a very nice fellow, brother to the husband of one of Harry
May's sisters---very much liked and respected, and, by the way, an
uncommonly handsome man.  That was imminent before Jasper's accident,
and the letter to prepare me must be reposing in Harry's care.  Mr.
Underwood came down with Claude to meet me when I landed, and I
scented danger in his eye.  But it is all right---only his income is
entirely professional, and they will have to live out here for some
time to come.

'The other only spoke yesterday, having abstained from worrying his
General.  He is Lord Francis Somerville, son to Lord Liddesdale, and
a captain in the Glen Lorn Highlanders, who have not above a couple
of years to stay in these parts.  He was with the riding party when
Jasper fell, and was the first to lift him; indeed, he held him all
the time of waiting, for poor Claude trembled too much.  He was an
immense help through the nursing, and they came to know and depend on
him as nothing else would have made them do; and they proved how
sincerely right-minded and good he is.  There is some connection with
the Underwoods, though I have not quite fathomed it.  There is no
fear about home consent, for it seems that he is given to outpourings
to his mother, and had heard that if he thought of Sir Jasper
Merrifield's daughter his parents would welcome her, knowing what Sir
J. is.  There's for you! considering that we have next to nothing to
give the child, and Frank has not much fortune, but Alethea is
trained to the soldierly life, and they will be better off than
Jasper and I were.

'The worst of it is leaving them behind; and as neither of the
gentlemen can afford a journey home, we mean to have the double
wedding before Lent.  As to outfit, the native tailors must be
chiefly trusted to, or the stores at Calcutta, and I must send out
the rest when I come home.  Only please send by post my wedding veil
(Gillian knows where it is), together with another as like it as may
be.  Any slight lace decorations to make us respectable which suggest
themselves to you and her might come; I can't recollect or mention
them now.  I wish Reginald could come and tell you all, but the poor
fellow has to go home full pelt about those Irish.  Jasper is writing
to William, and you must get business particulars from him, and let
Gillian and the little ones hear, for there is hardly any time to
write.  Phyllis, being used to the idea, is very quiet and matter-of-
fact about it.  She hoped, indeed, that I guessed nothing till I was
satisfied about papa, and had had time to rest.  Alethea is in a much
more April condition, and I am glad Frank waited till I was here on
her account and on her father's.  He is going on well, but must keep
still.  He declares that being nursed by two pair of lovers is highly
amusing.  However, such homes being found for two of the tribe is a
great relief to his mind.  I suppose it is to one's rational mind,
though it is a terrible tug at one's heart-strings.  You shall hear
again by the next mail.  A brown creature waits to take this to be
posted.---
                                       Your loving sister,
                                                       L. M.'


Gillian came down to dinner quite pale, and to Aunt Ada's kind 'Well,
Gillian?' she could only repeat, 'It is horrid.'

'It is hard to lose all the pretty double wedding,' said Aunt Ada.

'Gillian does not mean that,' hastily put in Miss Mohun.

'Oh no,' said Gillian; 'that would be worse than anything.'

'So you think,' said Aunt Jane; 'but believe those who have gone
through it all, my dear, when the wrench is over, one feels the
benefit.'

Gillian shook her head, and drank water.  Her aunts went on talking,
for they thought it better that she should get accustomed to the
prospect; and, moreover, they were so much excited that they could
hardly have spoken of anything else.  Aunt Jane wondered if Phyllis's
betrothed were a brother of Mr. Underwood of St. Matthew's,
Whittingtown, with whom she had corresponded about the consumptive
home; and Aunt Ada regretted the not having called on Lady Liddesdale
when she had spent some weeks at Rockstone, and consoled herself by
recollecting that Lord Rotherwood would know all about the family.
She had already looked it out in the Peerage, and discovered that
Lord Francis Cunningham Somerville was the only younger son, that his
age was twenty-nine, and that he had three sisters, all married, as
well as his elder brother, who had children enough to make it
improbable that Alethea would ever be Lady Liddesdale.  She would
have shown Gillian the record, but received the ungracious answer,
'I hate swells.'

'Let her alone, Ada,' said Aunt Jane; 'it is a very sore business.
She will be better by and by.'

There ensued a little discussion how the veil at Silverfold was to be
hunted up, or if Gillian and her aunt must go to do so.

'Can you direct Miss Vincent?' asked Miss Mohun.

'No, I don't think I could; besides, I don't like to set any one to
poke and meddle in mamma's drawers.'

'And she could hardly judge what could be available,' added Miss Ada.

'Gillian must go to find it,' said Aunt Jane; 'and let me see, when
have I a day?  Saturday is never free, and Monday--I could ask Mrs.
Hablot to take the cutting out, and then I could look up Lily's
Brussels---'

There she caught a sight of Gillian's face.  Perhaps one cause of the
alienation the girl felt for her aunt was, that there was a certain
kindred likeness between them which enabled each to divine the
other's inquiring disposition, though it had different effects on the
elder and younger character.  Jane Mohun suspected that she had on
her ferret look, and guessed that Gillian's disgusted air meant that
the idea of her turning over Lady Merrifield's drawers was almost as
distasteful as that of the governess's doing it.

'Suppose Gillian goes down on Monday with Fanny,' she said.  'She
could manage very well, I am sure.'

Gillian cleared up a little.  There is much consolation in being of a
little importance, and she liked the notion of a day at home, a quiet
day, as she hoped in her present mood, of speaking to nobody.  Her
aunt let her have her own way, and only sent a card to Macrae to
provide for meeting and for food, not even letting Miss Vincent know
that she was coming.  That feeling of not being able to talk about it
or be congratulated would wear off, Aunt Jane said, if she was not
worried or argued with, in which case it might become perverse
affectation.

It certainly was not shared by the children.  Sisters unseen for
three years could hardly be very prominent in their minds.  Fergus
hoped that they would ride to the wedding upon elephants, and Valetta
thought it very hard to miss the being a bridesmaid, when Kitty
Varley had already enjoyed the honour.  However, she soon began to
glorify herself on the beauty of Alethea's future title.

'What will Kitty Varley and all say?' was her cry.

'Nothing, unless they are snobs, as girls always are,' said Fergus.

'It is not a nice word,' said Miss Adeline.

'But there's nothing else that expresses it, Aunt Ada,' returned
Gillian.

'I agree to a certain degree,' said Miss Mohun; 'but still I am not
sure what it does express.'

'Just what girls of that sort are,' said Gillian.  'Mere worshippers
of any sort of handle to one's name.'

'Gillian, Gillian, you are not going in for levelling,' cried Aunt
Adeline.

'No,' said Gillian; 'but I call it snobbish to make more fuss about
Alethea's concern than Phyllis's---just because he calls himself
Lord--'

'That is to a certain degree true,' said Miss Mohun.  'The worth of
the individual man stands first of all, and nothing can be sillier or
in worse taste than to parade one's grand relations.'

'To parade, yes,' said Aunt Adeline; 'but there is no doubt that good
connections are a great advantage.'

'Assuredly,' said Miss Mohun.  'Good birth and an ancestry above
shame are really a blessing, though it has come to be the fashion to
sneer at them.  I do not mean merely in the eyes of the world, though
it is something to have a name that answers for your relations being
respectable.  But there are such things as hereditary qualities, and
thus testimony to the existence of a distinguished forefather is
worth having.'

'Lily's dear old Sir Maurice de Mohun to wit,' said Miss Adeline.
'You know she used to tease Florence by saying the Barons of
Beechcroft had a better pedigree than the Devereuxes.'

'I'd rather belong to the man who made himself,' said Gillian.

'Well done, Gill!  But though your father won his own spurs, you
can't get rid of his respectable Merrifield ancestry wherewith he
started in life.'

'I don't want to.  I had rather have them than horrid robber
Borderers, such as no doubt these Liddesdale people were.'

There was a little laughing at this; but Gillian was saying in her
own mind that it was a fine thing to be one's own Rodolf of Hapsburg,
and in that light she held Captain White, who, in her present state
of mind, she held to have been a superior being to all the
Somervilles---perhaps to all the Devereuxes who ever existed.




CHAPTER VII.  AN EMPTY NEST



There had been no injunctions of secrecy, and though neither Miss
Mohun nor Gillian had publicly mentioned the subject, all Rockquay
who cared for the news knew by Sunday morning that Lady Merrifield's
two elder daughters were engaged.

Gillian, in the course of writing her letters, had become somewhat
familiarised with the idea, and really looked forward to talking it
over with Kalliope.  Though that young person could hardly be termed
Alethea's best friend, it was certain that Alethea stood foremost
with her, and that her interest in the matter would be very loving.

Accordingly, Kalliope was at the place of meeting even before
Gillian, and anxiously she looked as she said---

'May I venture---may I ask if it is true?'

'True?  Oh yes, Kally, I knew you would care.'

'Indeed, I well may.  There is no expressing how much I owe to dear
Miss Alethea and Lady Merrifield, and it is such a delight to hear of
them.'

Accordingly, Gillian communicated the facts as she knew them, and
offered to give any message.

'Only my dear love and congratulations,' said Kalliope, with a little
sigh.  'I should like to have written, but---'

'But why don't you, then?'

'Oh no; she would be too much engaged to think of us, and it would
only worry her to be asked for her advice.'

'I think I know what it is about,' said Gillian.

'How?  Oh, how do you know?  Did Mr. Flight say anything?'

'Mr. Flight?' exclaimed Gillian.  'What has he to do with it?'

'It was foolish, perhaps; but I did hope he might have helped Alexis,
and now he seems only to care for his music.'

'Helped him!  How?"

'Perhaps it was unreasonable, but Alexis has always been to good
schools.  He was getting on beautifully at Leeds, and we thought he
would have gained a scholarship and gone on to be a clergyman.  That
was what his mind has always been fixed upon.  You cannot think how
good and devoted he is,' said Kalliope with a low trembling voice;
'and my father wished it very much too.  But when the break-up came,
Mr. White made our not being too fine, as he said, to work, a sort of
condition of doing anything for us.  Mr. Moore did tell him what
Alexis is, but I believe he thought it all nonsense, and there was
nothing to be done.  Alexis--dear fellow---took it so nicely, said he
was thankful to be able to help mother, and if it was his duty and
God's will, it was sure to come right; and he has been plodding away
at the marble works ever since, quite patiently and resolutely, but
trying to keep up his studies in the evening, only now he has worked
through all his old school-books.'

'And does not Mr. Flight know that I will help him?'

'Well, Mr. Flight means to be kind, and sometimes seems to think much
of him; but it is all for his music, I am afraid.  He is always
wanting new things to be learnt and practised, and those take up so
much time; and though he does lend us books, they are of no use for
study, though they only make the dear boy long and long the more to
get on.'

'Does not Mr. Flight know?'

'I am not sure.  I think he does; but in his ardour for music he
seems to forget all about it.  It does seem such a pity that all
Alexis's time should be wasted in this drudgery.  If I could only be
sure of more extra work for my designs, I could set him free; and if
Sir Jasper were only at home, I am sure he would put the boy in the
way of earning his education.  If it were only as a pupil teacher, he
would be glad, but then he says he ought not to throw all on me.'

'Oh, he must be very good!' exclaimed Gillian.  'I am sure papa will
help him!  I wish I could.  Oh!'---with a sudden recollection---'I
wonder what books he wants most.  I am going to Silverfold to-morrow,
and there are lots of old school-books there of the boys', doing
nothing, that I know he might have.'

'Oh, Miss Gillian, how good of you!  How delighted he would be!'

'Do you know what he wants most?'

'A Greek grammar and lexicon most of all,' was the ready answer.  'He
has been trying to find them at the second-hand shop ever so long,
but I am afraid there is no hope of a lexicon. They are so large and
expensive.'

'I think there is an old one of Jasper's, if he would not mind its
back being off, and lots of blots.'

'He would mind nothing.  Oh, Miss Gillian, you can't think how happy
he will be.

'If there is anything else he wants very much, how could he let me
know?' mused Gillian.  'Oh, I see!  What time are you at the works?'

'Alex is there at seven; I don't go till nine.'

'I am to be at the station at 8.40.  Could you or Maura meet me there
and tell me?'

To this Kalliope agreed, for she said she could be sure of getting to
her post in time afterwards, and she seemed quite overjoyed.  No one
could look at her without perceiving that Alexis was the prime
thought of her heart, and Gillian delighted her by repeating Aunt
Adeline's admiration of his profile, and the general opinion of his
singing.

'I am so sorry you have had to give it up,' she added.

'It can't be helped,' Kalliope said; 'and I really have no time.'

'But that's not all,' said Gillian, beginning to blush herself.

'0h!  I hope there's no gossip or nonsense about _that_,' cried
Kalliope, her cheeks flaming.

'Only---'

'Not Maura?  Naughty little girl, I did not think she knew anything.
Not that there is anything to tell,' said Kalliope, much distressed;
'but it is dreadful that there should be such talk.'

'I thought it was _that_ you meant when you said you wanted advice.'

'No one could advise me, I am afraid,' said the girl.  'If we could
only go away from this place!  But that's impossible, and I dare say
the fancy will soon go off!'

'Then you don't care for him?'

'My dear Miss Gillian, when I have seen _gentlemen_!' said Kalliope,
in a tone that might have cured her admirer.

They had, however, talked longer than usual, and the notes of the
warning bell came up, just when Gillian had many more questions to
ask, and she had to run down the garden all in a glow with eagerness
and excitement, so that Aunt Ada asked if she had been standing in
the sea wind.  Her affirmative was true enough, and yet she was
almost ashamed of it, as not the whole truth, and there was a
consciousness about her all the afternoon which made her soon regret
that conversation was chiefly absorbed by the younger one's
lamentations that they were not to accompany her to Silverfold, and
by their commissions.  Fergus wanted a formidable amount of precious
tools, and inchoate machines, which Mrs. Halfpenny had regarded as
'mess,' and utterly refused to let his aunts be 'fashed' with; while
Valetta's orders were chiefly for the visiting all the creatures, so
as to bring an exact account of the health and spirits of Rigdum
Funnidos, etc., also for some favourite story-books which she wished
to lend to Kitty Varley and Maura White.

'For do you know, Gill, Maura has never had a new story-book since
mamma gave her Little Alice and her Sister, when she was seven years
old!  Do bring her Stories They Tell Me, and On Angel's Wings.'

'But is not that Mysie's?'

'Oh yes, but I know Mysie would let her have it.  Mysie always let
Maura have everything of hers, because the boys teased her.'

'I will bring it; but I think Mysie ought to be written to before it
is lent.'

'That is right, Gillian,' said Miss Mohun; 'it is always wiser to be
above-board when dealing with other people's things, even in
trifles.'

Why did this sound like a reproach, and as if it implied suspicion
that Gillian was not acting on that principle?  She resented the
feeling.  She knew she might do as she liked with the boys' old
books, for which they certainly had no affection, and which indeed
her mother had talked of offering to some of those charities which
have a miscellaneous appetite, and wonderful power of adaptation of
the disused.  Besides, though no one could have the least objection
to their being bestowed on the Whites, the very fact of this being
her third secret meeting with Kalliope was beginning to occasion an
awkwardness in accounting for her knowledge of their needs.  It was
obvious to ask why she had not mentioned the first meeting, and this
her pride would not endure.  She had told her parents by letter.
What more could be desired?

Again, when she would not promise to see either Miss Vincent or the
Miss Hackets, because 'she did not want to have a fuss,' Aunt Jane
said she thought it a pity, with regard at least to the governess,
who might feel herself hurt at the neglect, 'and needless secrets are
always unadvisable.'

Gillian could hardly repress a wriggle, but her Aunt Ada laughed,
saying, 'Especially with you about, Jenny, for you always find them
out.'

At present, however, Miss Mohun certainly had no suspicion.  Gillian
was very much afraid she would think proper to come to the station in
the morning; but she was far too busy, and Gillian started off in the
omnibus alone with Mrs. Mount in handsome black silk trim, to be
presented to Mr. Macrae, and much enjoying the trip, having been well
instructed by Fergus and Valetta in air that she was to see.

Kalliope was descried as the omnibus stopped, and in a few seconds
Gillian had shaken hands with her, received the note, and heard the
ardent thanks sent from Alexis, and which the tattered books---even if
they proved to be right---would scarcely deserve.  He would come with
his sister to receive the parcel at the station on Gillian's return---
at 5.29, an offer which obviated any further difficulties as to
conveyance.

Mrs. Mount was intent upon the right moment to run the gauntlet for
the tickets; and had it been otherwise, would have seen nothing
remarkable in her charge being accosted by a nice-looking ladylike
girl.  So on they rushed upon their way, Gillian's spirits rising in
a curious sense of liberty and holiday-making.

In due time they arrived, and were received by Macrae with the pony
carriage, while the trees of Silverfold looked exquisite in their
autumn red, gold, and brown.

But the dreariness of the deserted house, with no one on the steps
but Quiz, and all the furniture muffled in sheets, struck Gillian
more than she had expected, though the schoolroom had been wakened up
for her, a bright fire on the hearth, and the cockatoo highly
conversational, the cats so affectionate that it was difficult to
take a step without stumbling over one of them.

When the business had all been despatched, the wedding veil
disinterred, and the best Brussels and Honiton safely disposed in a
box, when an extremely dilapidated and much-inked collection of
school-books had been routed out of the backstairs cupboard (commonly
called Erebus) and duly packed, when a selection of lighter
literature had been made with a view both to Valetta and Lilian; when
Gillian had shown all she could to Mrs. Mount, visited all the
animals, gone round the garden, and made two beautiful posies of
autumn flowers, one for her little sister and the other for Kalliope,
discovered that Fergus's precious machine had been ruthlessly made
away with, but secured his tools,---she found eating partridge in
solitary grandeur rather dreary work, though she had all the bread-
sauce to herself, and cream to her apple tart, to say nothing of
Macrae, waiting upon her as if she had been a duchess, and conversing
in high exultation upon the marriages, only regretting that one
gentleman should be a civilian; he had always augured that all his
young ladies would be in the Service, and begging that he might be
made aware of the wedding-day, so as to have the bells rung.

To express her own feelings to the butler was not possible, and his
glee almost infected her.  She was quite sorry when, having placed a
choice of pears and October peaches before her, he went off to
entertain Mrs. Mount; and after packing a substratum of the fruit in
the basket for the Whites, she began almost to repent of having
insisted on not returning to Rockstone till the four o'clock train,
feeling her solitary liberty oppressive; and finally she found
herself walking down the drive in search of Miss Vincent.

She had to confess to herself that her aunt was quite right, and that
the omission would have been a real unkindness, when she saw how worn
and tired the governess looked, and the brightness that flashed over
the pale face at sight of her.  Mrs. Vincent had been much worse, and
though slightly better for the present was evidently in a critical
state, very exhausting to her daughter.

Good Miss Hacket at that moment came in to sit with her, and send the
daughter out for some air; and it was well that Gillian had had some
practice in telling her story not too disconsolately, for it was
received with all the delight that the mere notion of a marriage
seems to inspire, though Phyllis and Alethea had scarcely been seen
at Silverfold before they had gone to India with their father.

Miss Hacket had to be content with the names before she hastened up
to the patient; but Miss Vincent walked back through the paddock with
Gillian, talking over what was more personally interesting to the
governess, the success of her own pupils, scattered as they were, and
comparing notes upon Mysie's letters.  One of these Miss Vincent had
just received by the second post, having been written to announce the
great news, and it continued in true Mysie fashion:---


'Cousin Rotherwood knows all about them, and says they will have a
famous set of belongings.  He will take me to see some of them if we
go to London before mamma comes home.  Bernard Underwood's sister is
married to Mr. Grinstead, the sculptor who did the statue of Mercy at
the Gate that Harry gave a photograph of to mamma, and she paints
pictures herself.  I want to see them; but I do not know whether we
shall stay in London, for they do not think it agrees with Fly.  I do
more lessons than she does now, and I have read through all Autour de
mon Jardin.  I have a letter from Dolores too, and she thinks that
Aunt Phyllis and all are coming home to make a visit in England for
Uncle Harry to see his father, and she wishes very much that they
would bring her; but it is not to be talked about for fear they
should be hindered, and old Dr. May hear of it and be disappointed;
but you won't see any one to tell.'


'There, what have I done?' exclaimed Miss Vincent in dismay.  'But I
had only just got the letter, and had barely glanced through it.'

'Besides, who would have thought of Mysie having any secrets?' said
Gillian.

'After all, I suppose no harm is done; for you can't have any other
connection with these Mays.'

'Oh yes, there will be; for I believe a brother of this man of
Phyllis's married one of the Miss Mays, and I suppose we shall have
to get mixed up with the whole lot.  How I do hate strangers!  But
I'll take care, Miss Vincent, indeed I will.  One is not bound to
tell one's aunts everything like one's mother.'

'No,' said Miss Vincent decidedly, 'especially when it is another
person's secret betrayed through inadvertence.'  Perhaps she thought
Gillian looked dangerously gratified, for she added: 'However, you
know poor Dolores did not find secrecy answer.'

'Oh, there are secrets and secrets, and aunts and aunts!' said
Gillian.  'Dolores had no mother.'

'It makes a difference,' said Miss Vincent.  'I should never ask you
to conceal anything from Lady Merrifield.  Besides, this is not a
matter of conduct, only a report.'

Gillian would not pursue the subject.  Perhaps she was a little
disingenuous with her conscience, for she wanted to carry off the
impression that Miss Vincent had pronounced concealment from her
aunts to be justifiable; and she knew at the bottom of her heart that
her governess would condemn a habit of secret intimacy with any one
being carried on without the knowledge of her hostess and guardian
for the time being,---above all when it was only a matter, of waiting.

It is a fine thing for self-satisfaction to get an opinion without
telling the whole of the facts of the case, and Gillian went home in
high spirits, considerably encumbered with parcels, and surprising
Mrs. Mount by insisting that two separate packages should be made of
the books.

Kalliope and Alexis were both awaiting her at the station, their
gratitude unbounded, and finding useful vent by the latter fetching a
cab and handing in the goods.

It was worth something to see how happy the brother and sister
looked, as they went off in the gaslight, the one with the big brown
paper parcel, the other with the basket of fruit and flowers; and
Gillian's explanation to Mrs. Mount that they were old friends of her
soldiering days was quite satisfactory.

There was a grand unpacking.  Aunt Ada was pleased with the late
roses, and Aunt Jane that there had been a recollection of Lilian
Giles, to whom she had thought her niece far too indifferent.
Valetta fondled the flowers, and was gratified to hear of the ardent
affection of the Begum and the health of Rigdum, though Gillian was
forced to confess that she had not transferred to him the kiss that
she had been commissioned to convey.  Nobody was disappointed except
Fergus, who could not but vituperate the housemaids for the
destruction of his new patent guillotine for mice, which was to have
been introduced to Clement Varley.  To be sure it would hardly ever
act, and had never cut off the head of anything save a dandelion, but
that was a trifling consideration.

A letter from Mysie was awaiting Gillian, not lengthy, for there was
a long interval between Mysie's brains and her pen, and saying
nothing about the New Zealand report.  The selection of lace was much
approved, and the next day there was to be an expedition to endeavour
to get the veil matched as nearly as possible.  The only dangerous
moment was at breakfast the next day, when Miss Mohun said---

'Fanny was delighted with Silverfold.  Macrae seems to have been the
pink of politeness to her.'

'She must come when the house is alive again,' said Gillian.  'What
would she think of it then!'

'Oh, that would be perfectly delicious,' cried Valetta.  'She would
see Begum and Rigdum---'

'And I could show her how to work the lawn cutter,' added Fergus.

'By the bye,' said Aunt Jane, 'whom have you been lending books to?'

'Oh, to the Whites,' said Gillian, colouring, as she felt more than
she could wish.  'There were some old school-books that I thought
would be useful to them, and I was sure mamma would like them to have
some flowers and fruit.'

She felt herself very candid, but why would Aunt Jane look at those
tell-tale cheeks.

Sunday was wet, or rather 'misty moisty,' with a raw sea-fog
overhanging everything---not bad enough, however, to keep any one
except Aunt Ada from church or school, though she decidedly
remonstrated against Gillian's going out for her wandering in the
garden in such weather; and, if she had been like the other aunt,
might almost have been convinced that such determination must be for
an object.  However, Gillian encountered the fog in vain, though she
walked up and down the path till her clothes were quite limp and
flabby with damp.  All the view that rewarded her was the outline of
the shrubs looming through the mist like distant forests as
mountains.  Moreover, she got a scolding from Aunt Ada, who met her
coming in, and was horrified at the misty atmosphere which she was
said to have brought in, and insisted on her going at once to change
her dress, and staying by the fireside all the rest of the afternoon.

'I cannot think what makes her so eager about going out in the
afternoon,' said the younger aunt to the elder.  'It is impossible
that she can have any reason for it.'

'Only Sunday restlessness,' said Miss Mohun, 'added to the reckless
folly of the "Bachfisch" about health.'

'That's true,' said Adeline, 'girls must be either so delicate that
they are quite helpless, or so strong as to be absolutely weather-
proof.'

Fortune, however, favoured Gillian when next she went to Lily Giles.
She had never succeeded in taking real interest in the girl, who
seemed to her to be so silly and sentimental that an impulse to
answer drily instantly closed up all inclination to effusions of
confidence.  Gillian had not yet learnt breadth of charity enough to
understand that everybody does not feel, or express feeling, after
the same pattern; that gush is not always either folly or
insincerity; and that girls of Lily's class are about at the same
stage of culture as the young ladies of whom her namesake in the
Inheritance is the type.  When Lily showed her in some little
magazine the weakest of poetry, and called it so sweet, just like
'dear Mr. Grant's lovely sermon, the last she had heard.  Did he not
look so like a saint in his surplice and white stole, with his holy
face and beautiful blue eyes; it was enough to make any one feel good
to look at him,' Gillian simply replied, 'Oh, _I_ never think of the
clergyman's looks,' and hurried to her book, feeling infinitely
disgusted and contemptuous, never guessing that these poor verses,
and the curate's sermons and devotional appearance were, to the young
girl's heart, the symbols of all that was sacred, and all that was
refined, and that the thought of them was the solace of her lonely
and suffering hours.  Tolerant sympathy is one of the latest lessons
of life, and perhaps it is well that only


          'The calm temper of our age should be
           Like the high leaves upon the holly-tree,'


for the character in course of formation needs to be guarded by
prickles.

However, on this day Undine was to be finished, for Gillian was in
haste to begin Katharine Ashton, which would, she thought, be much
more wholesome reality, so she went on later than usual, and came
away at last, leaving her auditor dissolved in tears over poor
Undine's act of justice.

As Mrs. Giles, full of thanks, opened the little garden-gate just as
twilight was falling, Gillian beheld Kalliope and Alexis White coming
up together from the works, and eagerly met and shook hands with
them.  The dark days were making them close earlier, they explained,
and as Kalliope happened to have nothing to finish or purchase, she
was able to come home with her brother.

Therewith Alexis began to express, with the diffidence of extreme
gratitude, his warm thanks for the benefaction of books, which were
exactly what he had wanted and longed for.  His foreign birth enabled
him to do this much more prettily and less clumsily than an English
boy, and Gillian was pleased, though she told him that her brother's
old ill-used books were far from worthy of such thanks.

'Ah, you cannot guess how precious they are to me!' said Alexis.
'They are the restoration of hope.'

'And can you get on by yourself?' asked Gillian.  'Is it not very
difficult without any teacher?'

'People have taught themselves before,' returned the youth, 'so I
hope to do so myself; but of course there are many questions I long
to ask.'

'Perhaps I could answer some,' said Gillian; 'I have done some
classics with a tutor.'

'Oh, thank you, Miss Merrifield,' he said eagerly.  'If you could
make me understand the force of the aorist.

It so happened that Gillian had the explanation at her tongue's end,
and it was followed by another, and another, till one occurred which
could hardly be comprehended without reference to the passage, upon
which Alexis pulled a Greek Testament out of his pocket, and his
sister could not help exclaiming---

'Oh, Alexis, you can't ask Miss Merrifield to do Greek with you out
in the street.'

Certainly it was awkward, the more so as Mrs. Stebbing just then
drove by in her carriage.

'What a pity!' exclaimed Gillian.  'But if you would set down any
difficulties, you could send them to me by Kalliope on Sunday.'

'Oh, Miss Merrifield, how very good of you!' exclaimed Alexis, his
face lighting up with joy.

But Kalliope looked doubtful, and began a hesitating 'But---'

'I'll tell you of a better way!' exclaimed Gillian.  'I always go
once a week to read to this Lilian Giles, and if I come down
afterwards to Kalliope's office after you have struck work, I could
see to anything you wanted to ask.'

Alexis broke out into the most eager thanks.  Kalliope said hardly
anything, and as they had reached the place where the roads diverged,
they bade one another good-evening.

Gillian looked after the brother and sister just as the gas was being
lighted, and could almost guess what Alexis was saying, by his
gestures of delight.  She did not hear, and did not guess how
Kalliope answered, 'Don't set your heart on it too much, dear fellow,
for I should greatly doubt whether Miss Gillian's aunts will consent.
Oh yes, of course, if they permit her, it will be all right.

So Gillian went her way feeling that she had found her 'great thing.'
Training a minister for the Church!  Was not that a 'great thing'?




CHAPTER VIII.  GILLIAN'S PUPIL



Gillian was not yet seventeen, and had lived a home life totally
removed from gossip, so that she had no notion that she was doing a
more awkward or remarkable thing than if she had been teaching a
drummer-boy.  She even deliberated whether she should mention her
undertaking to her mother, or produce the grand achievement of Alexis
White, prepared for college, on the return from India; but a sense
that she had promised to tell everything, and that, while she did so,
she could defy any other interference, led her to write the design in
a letter to Ceylon, and then she felt ready to defy any censure or
obstructions from other Quarters.

Mystery has a certain charm.  Infinite knowledge of human nature was
shown in the text, 'Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in
secret is pleasant'; and it would be hard to define how much
Gillian's satisfaction was owing to the sense of benevolence, or to
the pleasure of eluding Aunt Jane, when, after going through her
chapter of Katharine Ashton, in a somewhat perfunctory manner, she
hastened away to Miss White's office.  This, being connected with the
showroom, could be entered without passing through the gate with the
inscription---'No admittance except on business.'  Indeed, the office
had a private door, which, at Gillian's signal, was always opened to
her.  There, on the drawing-desk, lay a Greek exercise and a
translation, with queries upon the difficulties for Gillian to
correct, or answer in writing.  Kalliope had managed to make that
little room a pleasant place, bare as it was, by pinning a few of her
designs on the walls, and always keeping a terracotta vase of flowers
or coloured leaves upon the table.  The lower part of the window she
had blocked with transparencies delicately cut and tinted in
cardboard---done, as she told Gillian, by her little brother Theodore,
who learnt to draw at the National School, and had the same turn for
art as herself.  Altogether, the perfect neatness and simplicity of
the little room gave it an air of refinement, which rendered it by no
means an unfit setting for the grave beauty of Kalliope's countenance
and figure.

The enjoyment of the meeting was great on both sides, partly from the
savour of old times, and partly because there was really much that
was uncommon and remarkable about Kalliope herself.  Her father's
promotion had come exactly when she and her next brother were at the
time of life when the changes it brought would tell most on their
minds and manners.  They had both been sent to schools where they had
associated with young people of gentle breeding, which perhaps their
partly foreign extraction, and southern birth and childhood, made it
easier for them to assimilate.  Their beauty and brightness had led
to a good deal of kindly notice from the officers and ladies of the
regiment, and they had thus acquired the habits and ways of the class
to which they had been raised.  Their father, likewise, had been a
man of a chivalrous nature, whose youthful mistakes had been the
outcome of high spirit and romance, and who, under discipline,
danger, suffering, and responsibility, had become earnestly
religious.  There had besides been his Colonel's influence on him,
and on his children that of Lady Merrifield and Alethea.

It had then been a piteous change and darkening of life when, after
the crushing grief of his death, the young people found themselves in
such an entirely different stratum of society.  They were ready to
work, but they could not help feeling the mortification of being
relegated below the mysterious line of gentry, as they found
themselves at Rockquay, and viewed as on a level with the clerks and
shop-girls of the place.  Still more, as time went on, did they miss
the companionship and intercourse to which they had been used.  Mr.
Flight, the only person in a higher rank who took notice of them, and
perceived that there was more in them than was usual, was after all
only a patron---not a friend, and perhaps was not essentially enough
of a gentleman to be free from all airs of condescension even with
Alexis, while he might be wise in not making too much of an approach
to so beautiful a girl as Kalliope.  Besides, after a fit of
eagerness, and something very like promises, he had apparently let
Alexis drop, only using him for his musical services, and not doing
anything to promote the studies for which the young man thirsted, nor
proposing anything for the younger boys, who would soon outgrow the
National School.

Alexis had made a few semi-friends among the musical youth of the
place; but there was no one to sympathise with him in his studious
tastes, and there was much in his appearance and manners to cause the
accusation of being 'stuck-up'---music being really the only point of
contact with most of his fellows of the lower professional class.

Kalliope had less time, but she had, on principle, cultivated kindly
terms with the young women employed under her.  Her severe style of
beauty removed her from any jealousy of her as a rival, and she was
admired---almost worshipped---by them as the glory of the workshop.
They felt her superiority, and owned her ability; but nobody there
was capable of being a companion to her.  Thus the sister and brother
had almost wholly depended upon one another; and it was like a breath
from what now seemed the golden age of their lives when Gillian
Merrifield walked into the office, treating Kalliope with all the
freedom of an equal and the affection of an old friend.  There was
not very much time to spare after Gillian had looked at the
exercises, noted and corrected the errors, and explained the
difficulties or mistakes in the translation from Testament and
Delectus, feeling all the time how much more mastery of the subject
her pupil had than Mr. Pollock's at home had ever attained to.

However, Kalliope always walked home with her as far as the opening
of Church Cliff Road, and they talked of the cleverness and goodness
of the brothers, except Richard at Leeds, who never seemed to be
mentioned; how Theodore kept at the head of the school, and had hopes
of the drawing prize, and how little Petros devoured tales of
battles, and would hear of nothing but being a soldier.  Now and
then, too, there was a castle in the air of a home for little Maura
at Alexis's future curacy.  Kalliope seemed to look to working for
life for poor mother, while Theodore should cultivate his art.
Oftener the two recalled old adventures and scenes of their
regimental days, and discussed the weddings of the two Indian
sisters.

Once, however, Kalliope was obliged to suggest, with a blushing
apology, that she feared Gillian must go home alone, she was not
ready.

'Can't I help you? what have you to do?'

Kalliope attempted some excuse of putting away designs, but presently
peeped from the window, and Gillian, with excited curiosity, imitated
her, and beheld, lingering about, a young man in the pink of fashion,
with a tea-rose in his buttonhole and a cane in his hand.

'Oh, Kally,' she cried, 'does he often hang about like this waiting
for you?'

'Not often, happily.  There! old Mr. Stebbing has come out, and they
are walking away together.  We can go now.'

'So he besets you, and you have to keep out of his way,' exclaimed
Gillian, much excited.  'Is that the reason you come to the garden
all alone on Sunday?'

'Yes, though I little guessed what awaited me there,' returned
Kalliope; 'but we had better make haste, for it is late for you to be
returning.'

It was disappointing that Kalliope would not discuss such an
interesting affair; but Gillian was sensible of the danger of being
so late as to cause questions, and she allowed herself to be hurried
on too fast for conversation, and passing the two Stebbings, who, no
doubt, took her for a 'hand.'

'Does this often happen?' asked Gillian.

'No; Alec walks home with me, and the boys often come and meet me.
Oh, did I tell you that the master wants Theodore to be a pupil-
teacher?  I wish I knew what was best for him.'

'Could not he be an artist?'

'I should like some one to tell me whether he really has talent worth
cultivating, dear boy, or if he would be safer and better in an
honourable occupation like a school-master.'

'Do you call it honourable?'

'Oh yes, to be sure.  I put it next to a clergyman's or a doctor's
life.'

'Not a soldier's?'

'That depends,' said Kalliope.

'On the service he is sent upon, you mean?  But that is his
sovereign's look-out.  He "only has to obey, to do or die."'

'Yes, it is the putting away of self, and possible peril of life,
that makes all those grandest,' said Kalliope, 'and I think the
schoolmaster is next in opportunities of doing good.'

Gillian could not help thinking that none of all these could put away
self more entirely than the girl beside her, toiling away her beauty
and her youth in this dull round of toil, not able to exercise the
instincts of her art to the utmost, and with no change from the
monotonous round of mosaics, which were forced to be second rate, to
the commonest household works, and the company of the Queen of the
White Ants.

Gillian perceived enough of the nobleness of such a life to fill her
with a certain enthusiasm, and make her feel a day blank and
uninteresting if she could not make her way to the little office.

One evening, towards the end of the first fortnight, Alexis himself
came in with a passage that he wanted to have explained.  His sister
looked uneasy all the time, and hurried to put on her hat, and stand
demonstratively waiting, telling Gillian that they must go, the
moment the lesson began to tend to discursive talk, and making a most
decided sign of prohibition to her brother when he showed a
disposition to accompany them.

'I think you are frightfully particular, Kally,' said Gillian, when
they were on their way up the hill.  'Such an old friend, and you
there, too.'

'It would never do here!  It would be wrong,' answered Kalliope, with
the authority of an older woman.  'He must not come to the office.'

'Oh, but how could I ever explain to him?  One can't do everything in
writing.  I might as well give up the lessons as never speak to him
about them.'

There was truth in this, and perhaps Alexis used some such arguments
on his side, for at about every third visit of Gillian's he dropped
in with some important inquiry necessary to his progress, which was
rapid enough to compel Gillian to devote some time to preparation, in
order to keep ahead of him.

Kalliope kept diligent guard, and watched against lengthening the
lessons into gossip, and they were always after hours when the hands
had gone away.  The fear of being detected kept Gillian ready to
shorten the time.

'How late you are!' were the first words she heard one October
evening on entering Beechcroft Cottage; but they were followed by
'Here's a pleasure for you!'

'It's from papa himself!  Open it!  Open it quick,' cried Valetta,
dancing round her in full appreciation of the honour and delight.

Sir Jasper said that his daughter must put up with him for a
correspondent, since two brides at once were as much as any mother
could be supposed to undertake.  Indeed, as mamma would not leave
him, Phyllis was actually going to Calcutta, chaperoned by one of the
matrons of the station, to make purchases for both outfits, since
Alethea would not stir from under the maternal wing sooner than she
could help.

At the end came, 'We are much shocked at poor White's death. He was
an excellent officer, and a good and sensible man, though much
hampered with his family.  I am afraid his wife must be a very
helpless being.  He used to talk about the good promise of one of his
sons---the second, I think.  We will see whether anything can be done
for the children when we come home.  I say we, for I find I shall
have to be invalided before I can be entirely patched up, so that
mamma and I shall have a sort of postponed silver wedding tour, a new
variety for the old folks "from home."'

'Oh, is papa coming home?' cried Valetta.

'For good!  Oh, I hope it will be for good,' added Gillian.

'Then we shall live at dear Silverfold all the days of our life,'
added Fergus.

'And I shall get back to Rigdum.'

'And I shall make a telephone down to the stables,' were the cries of
the children.

The transcendent news quite swallowed up everything else for some
time; but at last Gillian recurred to her father's testimony as to
the White family.

'Is the second son the musical one?' she was asked, and on her
affirmative, Aunt Jane remarked, 'Well, though the Rev. Augustine
Flight is not on a pinnacle of human wisdom, his choir practices,
etc., will keep the lad well out of harm's way till your father can
see about him.'

This would have been an opportunity of explaining the youth's aims
and hopes, and her own share in forwarding them; but it had become
difficult to avow the extent of her intercourse with the brother and
sister, so entirely without the knowledge of her aunts.  Even Miss
Mohun, acute as she was, had no suspicions, and only thought with
much satisfaction that her niece was growing more attentive to poor
Lilian Giles, even to the point of lingering.

'I really think, she said, in consultation with Miss Adeline, 'that
we might gratify that damsel by having the White girls to drink tea.'

'Well, we can add them to your winter party of young ladies in
business.'

'Hardly.  These stand on different ground, and I don't want to hurt
their feelings or Gillian's by mixing them up with the shopocracy.'

'Have you seen the Queen of the White Ants?'

'Not yet; but I mean to reconnoitre, and if I see no cause to the
contrary, I shall invite them for next Tuesday.'

'The mother?  You might as well ask her namesake.'

'Probably; but I shall be better able to judge when I have seen her.'

So Miss Mohun trotted off, made her visit, and thus reported, 'Poor
woman! she certainly is not lovely now, whatever she may have been;
but I should think there was no harm in her, and she is effusive in
her gratitude to all the Merrifield family.  It is plain that the
absent eldest son is the favourite, far more so than the two useful
children at the marble works; and Mr. White is spoken of as a sort of
tyrant, whereas I should think they owed a good deal to his kindness
in giving them employment.'

'I always thought he was an old hunks.'

'The town thinks so because he does not come and spend freely here;
but I have my doubts whether they are right.  He is always ready to
do his part in subscriptions; and the employing these young people as
he does is true kindness.'

'Unappreciated.'

'Yes, by the mother who would expect to be kept like a lady in
idleness, but perhaps not so by her daughter.  From all I can pick
up, I think she must be a very worthy person, so I have asked her and
the little schoolgirl for Tuesday evening, and I hope it will not be
a great nuisance to you, Ada.'

'Oh no,' said Miss Adeline, good humouredly, 'it will please Gillian,
and I shall be interested in seeing the species, or rather the
variety.'

'Var Musa Groeca Hibernica Militaris,' laughed Aunt Jane.

'By the bye, I further found out what made the Captain enlist.'

'Trust you for doing that!' laughed her sister.

'Really it was not on purpose, but old Zack Skilly was indulging me
with some of his ancient smuggling experiences, in what he evidently
views as the heroic age of Rockquay.  "Men was men, then," he says.
"Now they be good for nought, but to row out the gentlefolks when the
water is as smooth as glass."  You should hear the contempt in his
voice.  Well, a promising young hero of his was Dick White, what used
to work for his uncle, but liked a bit of a lark, and at last hit one
of the coastguard men in a fight, and ran away, and folks said he had
gone for a soldier.  Skilly had heard he was dead, and his wife had
come to live in these parts, but there was no knowing what was true
and what wasn't.  Folks would talk!  Dick was a likely chap, with
more life about him than his cousin Jem, as was a great man now, and
owned all the marble works, and a goodish bit of the town.  There was
a talk as how the two lads had both been a courting of the same maid,
that was Betsy Polwhele, and had fallen out about her, but how that
might be he could not tell.  Anyhow, she was not wed to one nor
t'other of them, but went into a waste and died.'

'I wonder if it was for Dick's sake.  So Jem was not constant
either.'

'Except to his second love.  That was a piteous little story too.'

'You mean his young wife's health failing as soon as he brought her
to that house which he was building for her, and then his taking her
to Italy, and never enduring to come back here again after she and
her child died.  But he made a good thing of it with his quarries in
the mountains.'

'You sordid person, do you think that was all he cared for!'

'Well, I always thought of him as a great, stout, monied man, quite
incapable of romance and sensitiveness.'

'If so, don't you think he would have let that house instead of
keeping it up in empty state!  There is a good deal of character in
those Whites.'

'The Captain is certainly the most marked man, except Jasper, in that
group of officers in Gillian's photograph-book.'

'Partly from the fact that a herd of young officers always look so
exactly alike---at least in the eyes of elderly spinsters.'

'Jane!'

'Let us hope so, now that it is all over.  This same Dick must have
had something remarkable about him, to judge by the impression he
seems to have left on all who came in his way, and I shall like to
see his children.'

'You always do like queer people.'

'It is plain that we ought to take notice of them,' said Miss Mohun,
'and it is not wholesome for Gillian to think us backward in kindness
to friends about whom she plainly has a little romance.'

She refrained from uttering a suspicion inspired by her visit that
there had been more 'kindnesses' on her niece's part than she could
quite account for.  Yet she believed that she knew how all the girl's
days were spent; was certain that the Sunday wanderings never went
beyond the garden, and, moreover, she implicitly trusted Lily's
daughter.

Gillian did not manifest as much delight and gratitude at the
invitation as her aunts expected.  In point of fact, she resented
Aunt Jane's making a visit of investigation without telling her, and
she was uneasy lest there should have been or yet should be a dis-
closure that should make her proceedings appear clandestine.  'And
they are not!' said she to herself with vehemence.  'Do I not write
them all to my own mother?  And did not Miss Vincent allow that one
is not bound to treat aunts like parents?'

Even the discovery of Captain White's antecedents was almost an
offence, for if her aunt would not let her inquire, why should she do
so herself, save to preserve the choice morceau for her own superior
intelligence?  Thus all the reply that Gillian deigned was, 'Of
course I knew that Captain White could never have done anything to be
ashamed of.'

The weather was too wet for any previous meetings, and it was on a
wild stormy evening that the two sisters appeared at seven o'clock at
Beechcroft Cottage.  While hats and waterproofs were being taken off
upstairs, Gillian found opportunity to give a warning against
mentioning the Greek lessons.  It was received with consternation.

'Oh, Miss Merrifield, do not your aunts know?'

'No.  Why should they?  Mamma does.'

'Not yet.  And she is so far off!  I wish Miss Mohun knew!  I made
sure that she did,' said Kalliope, much distressed.

'But why?  It would only make a fuss.'

'I should be much happier about it.'

'And perhaps have it all upset.'

'That is the point.  I felt that it must be all right as long as Miss
Mohun sanctioned it; but I could not bear that we should be the means
of bringing you into a scrape, by doing what she might disapprove
while you are under her care.'

'Don't you think you can trust me to know my own relations?' said
Gillian somewhat haughtily.

'Indeed, I did not mean that we are not infinitely obliged to you,'
said Kalliope.  'It has made Alexis another creature to have some
hope, and feel himself making progress.'

'Then why do you want to have a fuss, and a bother, and a chatter?
If my father and mother don't approve, they can telegraph.'

With which argument she appeased or rather silenced Kalliope, who
could not but feel the task of objecting alike ungracious and
ungrateful towards the instructor, and absolutely cruel and unkind
towards her brother, and who spoke only from a sense of the treachery
of allowing a younger girl to transgress in ignorance.  Still she was
conscious of not understanding on what terms the niece and aunts
might be, and the St. Kenelm's estimate of the Beechcroft ladies was
naturally somewhat different from that of the St. Andrew's
congregation.  Miss Mohun was popularly regarded in those quarters as
an intolerable busybody, and Miss Adeline as a hypochondriacal fine
lady, so that Gillian might perhaps reasonably object to put herself
into absolute subjection; so, though Kalliope might have a
presentiment of breakers ahead, she could say no more, and Gillian,
feeling that she had been cross, changed the subject by admiring the
pretty short curly hair that was being tied back at the glass.

'I wish it would grow long,' said Kalliope. 'But it always was rather
short and troublesome, and ever since it was cut short in the fever,
I have been obliged to keep it like this.'

'But it suits you,' said Gillian.  'And it is exactly the thing now.'

'That is the worst of it.  It looks as if I wore it so on purpose.
However, all our hands know that I cannot help it, and so does Lady
Flight.'

The girl looked exceedingly well, though little Alice, the maid,
would not have gone out to tea in such an ancient black dress, with
no relief save a rim of white at neck and hands, and a tiny silver
Maltese cross at the throat.  Maura had a comparatively new gray
dress, picked out with black.  She was a pretty creature, the Irish
beauty predominating over the Greek, in her great long-lashed brown
eyes, which looked radiant with shy happiness.  Miss Adeline was
perfectly taken by surprise at the entrance of two such uncommon
forms and faces, and the quiet dignity of the elder made her for a
moment suppose that her sister must have invited some additional
guest of undoubted station.

Valetta, who had grown fond of Maura in their school life, and who
dearly loved patronising, pounced upon her guest to show her all
manner of treasures and curiosities, at which she looked in great
delight; and Fergus was so well satisfied with her comprehension of
the principles of the letter balance, that he would have taken her
upstairs to be introduced to all his mechanical inventions, if the
total darkness and cold of his den had not been prohibitory.

Kalliope looked to perfection, but was more silent than her sister,
though, as Miss Mohun's keen eye noted, it was not the shyness of a
conscious inferior in an unaccustomed world, but rather that of a
grave, reserved nature, not chattering for the sake of mere talk.

Gillian's photograph-book was well looked over, with all the brothers
and sisters at different stages, and the group of officers.  Miss
Mohun noted the talk that passed over these, as they were identified
one by one, sometimes with little reminiscences, childishly full on
Gillian's part, betraying on Kalliope's side friendly acquaintance,
but all in as entirely ladylike terms as would have befitted Phyllis
or Alethea.  She could well believe in the words with which Miss
White rather hastened the turning of the page, 'Those were happy
days---I dare not dwell on them too much!'

'Oh, I like to do so!' cried Gillian.  'I don't want the little ones
ever to forget them.'

'Yes---you!  But with you it would not be repining.'

This was for Gillian's ear alone, as at that moment both the aunts
were, at the children's solicitation, engaged on the exhibition of a
wonderful musical-box---Aunt Adeline's share of her mother's wedding
presents---containing a bird that hovered and sung, the mechanical
contrivance of which was the chief merit in Fergus's eyes, and which
had fascinated generations of young people for the last sixty years.
Aunt Jane, however, could hear through anything---even through the
winding-up of what the family called 'Aunt Ada's Jackdaw,' and she
drew her conclusions, with increasing respect and pity for the young
girl over whose life such a change had come.

But it was not this, but what she called common humanity, which
prompted her, on hearing a heavy gust of rain against the windows, to
go into the lower regions in quest of a messenger boy to order a
brougham to take the guests home at the end of the evening.

The meal went off pleasantly on the whole, though there loomed a
storm as to the ritual of St. Kenelm's; but this chiefly was owing to
the younger division of the company, when Valetta broke into an
unnecessary inquiry why they did not have as many lights on the altar
at St. Andrew's as at St. Kenelm's, and Fergus put her down with
unceremoniously declaring that Stebbing said Flight was a donkey.

Gillian came down with what she meant for a crushing rebuke, and the
indignant colour rose in the cheeks of the guests; but Fergus
persisted, 'But he makes a guy of himself and a mountebank.'

Aunt Jane thought it time to interfere.  'Fergus,' she said, 'you had
better not repeat improper sayings, especially about a clergyman.'

Fergus wriggled.

'And,' added Aunt Ada, with equal severity, 'you know Mr. Flight is a
very kind friend to little Maura and her sister.'

'Indeed he is,' said Kalliope earnestly; and Maura, feeling herself
addressed, added, 'Nobody but he ever called on poor mamma, till Miss
Mohun did; no, not Lady Flight.'

'We are very grateful for his kindness,' put in Kalliope, in a
repressive tone.

'But,' said Gillian, 'I thought you said he had seemed to care less
of late.'

'I do not know,' said Miss White, blushing; 'music seems to be his
chief interest, and there has not been anything fresh to get up since
the concert.'

'I suppose there will be for the winter,' said Miss Mohun, and
therewith the conversation was safely conducted away to musical
subjects, in which some of the sisters' pride and affection for their
brothers peeped out; but Gillian was conscious all the time that
Kalliope was speaking with some constraint when she mentioned Alexis,
and that she was glad rather to dwell on little Theodore, who had
good hopes of the drawing prize, and she seriously consulted Miss
Mohun on the pupil-teachership for him, as after he had passed the
seventh standard he could not otherwise go on with his education,
though she did not think he had much time for teaching.

'Would not Mr. White help him further?' asked Miss Mohun.

'I do not know.  I had much rather not ask,' said Kalliope.  'We are
too many to throw ourselves on a person who is no near relation, and
he has not seemed greatly disposed to help.'

'Your elder brother?'

'Oh, poor Richard, he is not earning anything yet.  I can't ask him.
If I only knew of some school I could be sure was safe and good and
not too costly, Alexis and I would try to manage for Theodore after
the examination in the spring.'

The Woodward schools were a new light to her, and she was eagerly
interested in Miss Mohun's explanations and in the scale of terms.

Meantime Miss Adeline got on excellently with the younger ones, and
when the others were free, proposed for their benefit a spelling
game.  All sat round the table, made words, and abstracted one
another's with increasing animation, scarcely heeding the roaring of
the wind outside, till there was a ring at the bell.

'My brother has come for us,' said Kalliope.

'Oh, but it is not fit for you to walk home,' said Miss Mohun.  'The
brougham is coming by and by; ask Mr. White to come in,' she added,
as the maid appeared with the message that he was come for his
sisters.

There was a confusion of acknowledgments and disclaimers, and word
was brought back that Mr. White was too wet to come in.  Miss Mohun,
who was not playing, but prompting Fergus, jumped up and went out to
investigate, when she found a form in an ancient military cloak,
trying to keep himself from dripping where wet could do mischief.
She had to explain her regret at his having had such a walk in vain;
but she had taken alarm on finding that rain was setting in for the
night, and had sent word by the muffin-boy that the brougham would be
wanted, contriving to convey that it was not to be paid for.

Nothing remained to be said except thanks, and Alexis emerged from
the cloak, which looked as if it had gone through all his father's
campaigns, took off his gaiters, did his best for his boots, and,
though not in evening costume, looked very gentleman-like and
remarkably handsome in the drawing-room, with no token of awkward
embarrassment save a becoming blush.

Gillian began to tremble inwardly again, but the game had just ended
in her favour, owing to Fergus having lost all his advantages in Aunt
Jane's absence, besides signalising himself by capturing Maura's
'bury,' under the impression that an additional R would combine that
and straw into a fruit.

So the coast being cleared, Miss Adeline greatly relieved her niece's
mind by begging, as a personal favour, to hear the song whose renown
at the concert had reached her; and thus the time was safely spent in
singing till the carriage was announced, and good-nights exchanged.

Maura's eyes grew round with delight, and she jumped for joy at the
preferment.

'Oh!' she said, as she fervently kissed Valetta, 'it is the most
delightful evening I ever spent in the whole course of my life,
except at Lady Merrifield's Christmas-tree!  And now to go home in a
carriage!  I never went in one since I can remember!'

And Kalliope's 'Thank you, we have enjoyed ourselves very much,' was
very fervent.

'Those young people are very superior to what I expected,' said Aunt
Adeline.  'What fine creatures, all so handsome; and that little
Maura is a perfect darling.'

'The Muse herself is very superior,' said Miss Mohun.  'One of those
home heroines who do the work of Atlas without knowing it.  I do not
wonder that the marble girls speak of her so enthusiastically.'

How Gillian might have enjoyed all this, and yet she could not,
except so far that she told herself that thus there could be no
reasonable objection made by her aunts to intercourse with those whom
they so much admired.

Yet perhaps even then she would have told all, but that, after having
bound over Kalliope to secrecy, it would be awkward to confess that
she had told all.  It would be like owning herself in the wrong, and
for that she was not prepared.  Besides, where would be the secrecy
of her 'great thing'?




CHAPTER IX.  GAUGING AJEE



Without exactly practising to deceive, Gillian began to find that
concealment involved her in a tangled web; all the more since Aunt
Jane had become thoroughly interested in the Whites, and was
inquiring right and left about schools and scholarships for the
little boys.

She asked their master about them, and heard that they were among his
best scholars, and that their home lessons had always been carefully
attended to by their elder brother and sister.  In fact, he was most
anxious to retain Theodore, to be trained for a pupil-teacher, the
best testimony to his value!  Aunt Jane came home full of the
subject, relating what the master said of Alexis White, and that he
had begun by working with him at Latin and mathematics; but that they
had not had time to go on with what needed so much study and
preparation.

'In fact, said Miss Mohun, 'I have a suspicion that if a certificated
schoolmaster could own any such thing, the pupil knew more than the
teacher.  When your father comes home, I hope he will find some way
of helping that lad.'

Gillian began to crimson, but bethought herself of the grandeur of
its being found that she was the youth's helper.  'I am glad you have
been lending him books,' added Aunt Jane.

What business had she to know what had not been told her?  The sense
of offence drove back any disposition to consult her.  Yet to teach
Alexis was no slight task, for, though he had not gone far in Greek,
his inquiries were searching, and explaining to him was a different
thing from satisfying even Mr. Pollock.  Besides, Gillian had her own
studies on hand.  The Cambridge examinations were beginning to assume
larger proportions in the Rockquay mind, and 'the General Screw
Company,' as Mr. Grant observed, was prevailing.

Gillian's knowledge was rather discursive, and the concentration
required by an examination was hard work to her, and the time for it
was shortened by the necessity of doing all Alexis's Greek exercises
and translations beforehand, and of being able to satisfy him why an
error was not right, for, in all politeness, he always would know why
it did not look right.  And there was Valetta, twisting and groaning.
The screw was on her form, who, unless especially exempted, were to
compete for a prize for language examination.

Valetta had begun by despising Kitty Varley for being excepted by her
mother's desire and for not learning Latin; but now she envied any
one who had not to work double tides at the book of Caesar that was
to be taken up, and Vercingetorix and his Arverni got vituperated in
a way that would have made the hair of her hero-worshipping mother
fairly stand on end.

But then Lilias Mohun had studied him for love of himself, not for
dread of failure.

Gillian had been displeased when Fergus deserted her for Aunt Jane as
an assistant, but she would not have been sorry if Valetta had been
off her hands, when she was interrupted in researches after an idiom
in St. John's Gospel by the sigh that this abominable dictionary had
no verb oblo, or in the intricacies of a double equation by despair
at this horrid Caesar always hiding away his nominatives out of
spite.

Valetta, like the American child, evidently regarded the Great Julius
in no other light than as writer of a book for beginners in Latin,
and, moreover, a very unkind one; and she fully reciprocated the
sentiment that it was no wonder that the Romans conquered the world,
since they knew the Latin grammar by nature.

Nor was Gillian's hasty and sometimes petulant assistance very
satisfactory to the poor child, since it often involved hearing 'Wait
a minute,' and a very long one, 'How can you be so stupid?'  'I told
you so long ago'; and sometimes consisted of a gabbling translation,
with rapidly pointed finger, very hard to follow, and not quite so
painstaking as when Alexis deferentially and politely pointed out the
difficulties, with a strong sense of the favour that she was doing
him.

Not that these personal lessons often took place.  Kalliope never
permitted them without dire necessity, and besides, there was always
an uncertainty when Gillian might come down, or when Alexis might be
able to come in.

One day when Aunt Jane had come home with a story of how one of her
'business girls' had confessed to Miss White's counsel having only
just saved her from an act of folly, it occurred to Aunt Adeline to
say---

'It is a great pity you have not her help in the G.F.S.'

'I did not understand enough about her before, and mixed her up with
the ordinary class of business girls.  I had rather have her a member
for the sake of example; but if not, she would be a valuable
associate.  Could not you explain this to her without hurting her
feelings, as I am afraid I did, Gill?  I did not understand enough
about her when I spoke to her before.'

Gillian started.  The conversation that should have been so pleasant
to her was making her strangely uncomfortable.

'I do not see how Gill is to get at her,' objected the other aunt.
'It would be of no great use to call on her in the nest of the Queen
of the White Ants.  I can't help recollecting the name, it was so
descriptive.'

'Yes; it was on her mother's account that she refused, and of course
her office must not be invaded in business hours.'

'I might call on her there before she goes home,' suggested Gillian,
seeing daylight.

'You cannot be walking down there at dusk, just as the workmen come
away' exclaimed Aunt Ada, making the colour so rush into Gillian's
cheeks that she was glad to catch up a screen.

'No,' said Miss Mohun emphatically; 'but I could leave her there at
five o'clock, and go to Tideshole to take old Jemmy Burnet his
jersey, and call for her on the way back.'

'Or she could walk home with me,' murmured the voice behind the
screen.

Gillian felt with dismay that all these precautions as to her escort
would render her friend more scrupulous than ever as to her visits.
To have said, 'I have several times been at the office,' would have
been a happy clearance of the ground, but her pride would not bend to
possible blame, nor would she run the risk of a prohibition.  'It
would be the ruin of hope to Alexis, and mamma knows all,' said she
to herself.

It was decided that she should trust to Kalliope to go back with her,
for when once Aunt Jane get into the very fishy hamlet of Tideshole,
which lay beyond the quarries, there was no knowing when she might
get away, since


          'Alike to her were time and tide,
           November's snow or July's pride.'


So after a few days, too wet and tempestuous for any expedition, they
set forth accompanied by Fergus, who rushed in from school in time to
treat his aunt as a peripatetic 'Joyce's scientific dialogues.'
Valetta had not arrived, and Gillian was in haste to elude her,
knowing that her aunt would certainly not take her on to Tideshole,
and that there would be no comfort in talking before her; but it was
a new thing to have to regard her little sister in the light of a
spy, and again she had to reason down a sense of guiltiness.
However, her aunt wanted Valetta as little as she did; and she had
never so rejoiced in Fergus's monologue, 'Then this small fly-wheel
catches into the Targe one, and so--- Don't you see?' ---only pausing
for a sound of assent.

Unacquainted with the private door, Miss Mohun entered the office
through the showroom, exchanging greetings with the young saleswomen,
and finding Miss White putting away her materials.

Shaking hands, Miss Mohun said---

'I have brought your friend to make a visit to you while I go on to
Tideshole.  She tells me that you will be kind enough to see her on
her way home, if you are going back at the same time.'

'I shall be delighted,' said Kalliope, with eyes as well as tongue,
and no sooner were she and Gillian alone together than she joyfully
exclaimed---

'Then Miss Mohun knows!  You have told her.

'No---'

'Oh!' and there were volumes in the intonation.  'I was alarmed when
she came in, and then so glad if it was all over.  Dear Miss
Merrifield---'

'Call me Gillian; I have told you to do so before!  Phyllis is Miss
Merrifield, and I won't be so before my time,' said Gillian,
interrupting in a tone more cross than affectionate.

'I was going to say,' pursued Kalliope, 'that the shock her entrance
gave to me proved all the more that we cannot be treating her
properly.

'Never mind that!  I did not come about that.  She is quite taken
with you, Kally, and wants you more than ever to be a Friendly Girl,
because she thinks it would be so good for the others who are under
you.'

'They have told me something about it,' said Kalliope thoughtfully.

'She fancied' added Gillian, 'that perhaps she did not make you
understand the rights of it, not knowing that you were different from
the others.'

'Oh no, it was not that,' said Kalliope.  'Indeed, I hope there is no
such nonsense in me.   It was what my dear father always warned us
against; only poor mamma always gets vexed if she does not think we
are keeping ourselves up, and she had just been annoyed at---
something, and we did not know then that it was Lady Merrifield's
sister.'

This was contradictory, but it was evident that, while Kalliope
disowned conceit of station for herself, she could not always cross
her mother's wishes.  It was further elicited that if Lady Flight had
taken up the matter there would have been no difficulty.  Half a year
ago the Flights had seemed to the young Whites angelic and
infallible, and perhaps expectations had been founded on their
patronage; but there had since been a shadow of disappointment, and
altogether Kalliope was less disposed to believe that my Lady was
correct in pronouncing Miss Mohun's cherished society as
'dissentish,' and only calculated for low servant girls and ladies
who wished to meddle in families.

Clanship made Gillian's indignation almost bring down the office, and
her eloquence was scarcely needed, since Kalliope had seen the value
to some of her 'hands' from the class, the library, the recreation-
room, and the influence of the ladies, above all, the showing them
that it was possible to have variety and amusement free from vulgar
and perilous dissipation; but still she hesitated.  She had no time,
she said; she could not attend classes, and she was absolutely
necessary at home in the evenings; but Gillian assured her that
nothing was expected from her but a certain influence in the right
direction, and the showing the younger and giddier that she did not
think the Society beneath her.

'I see all that,' said Kalliope; 'I wish I had not been mistaken at
first; but, Miss Mer---Gillian, I do not see how I can join it now.'

'Why not?  What do you mean?'

Kalliope was very unwilling to speak, but at last it came.

'How can I do this to please your aunt, who thinks better of me than
I deserve, when---Oh! excuse me---I know it is all your kindness---but
when I am allowing you to deceive her---almost, I mean---'

'Deceive!  I never spoke an untrue word to my aunt in my life,' said
Gillian, in proud anger; 'but if you think so, Miss White, I had
better have no more to do with it.'

'I feel,' said Kalliope, with tears in her eyes, 'as if it might be
better so, unless Miss Mohun knew all about it.'

'Well, if you think so, and like to upset all your brother's hopes---'

'It would be a terrible grief to him, I know, and I don't undervalue
your kindness, indeed I don't; but I cannot be happy about it while
Miss Mohun does not know.  I don't understand why you do not tell
her.'

'Because I know there would be a worry and a fuss.  Either she would
say we must wait for letters from mamma, or else that Alexis must
come to Beechcroft, and all the comfort would be over, and it would
be gossiped about all over the place.  Can't you trust me, when I
tell you I have written it all to my own father and mother, and
surely I know my own family best?'

Kalliope looked half convinced, but she persisted---

'I suppose you do; only please, till there is a letter from Lady
Merrifield, I had rather not go into this Society.'

'But, Kally, you don't consider.  What am I to say to my aunt?  What
will she think of you?'

'I can't help that!  I cannot do this while she could feel I was
conniving at what she might not like.  Indeed, I cannot.  I beg your
pardon, but it goes against me.  When shall you be able to hear from
Lady Merrifield?'

'I wrote three weeks ago.  I suppose I shall hear about half-way
through December, and you know they could telegraph if they wanted to
stop it, so I think you might be satisfied.'

Still Kalliope could not be persuaded, and finally, as a sort of
compromise, Gillian decided on saying that she would think about it
and give her answer at Christmas; to which she gave a reluctant
assent, with one more protest that if there were no objection to the
lessons, she could not see why Miss Mohun should not know of them.

Peace was barely restored before voices were heard, and in came
Fergus, bringing Alexis with him.  They had met on the beach road in
front of the works, and Fergus, being as usual full of questions
about a crane that was swinging blocks of stone into a vessel close
to the little pier, his aunt had allowed him to stay to see the work
finished, after which Alexis would take him to join his sister.

So it came about that they all walked home together very cheerfully,
though Gillian was still much vexed under the surface at Kalliope's
old-maidish particularity.

However, the aunts were not as annoyed at the delay as she expected.
Miss Mohun said she would look out some papers that would be
convincing and persuasive, and that it might be as well not to enrol
Miss White too immediately before the Christmas festivities, but to
wait till the books were begun next year.  Plans began to prevail for
the Christmas diversions and entertainments, but the young
Merrifields expected to have nothing to do with these, as they were
to meet the rest of the family at their eldest uncle's house at
Beechcroft; all except Harry, who was to be ordained in the Advent
Ember week, and at once begin work with his cousin David Merrifield
in the Black Country.  Their aunts would not go with them, as
Beechcroft breezes, though her native air, were too cold for Adeline
in the winter, and Jane could leave neither her, nor her various
occupations, and the festivities of all Rockstone.

It is not easy to say which Gillian most looked forward to: Mysie's
presence, or the absence of the supervision which she imagined
herself to suffer from, because she had set herself to shirk it.  She
knew she should feel more free.  But behold! a sudden change,
produced by one morning's letters.

'It is a beastly shame!'

'Oh, Fergus!  That's not a thing to say,' cried Valetta.

'I don't care!  It is a beastly shame not to go to Beechcroft, and be
poked up here all the holidays.'

'But you can't when Primrose has got the whooping-cough.'

'Bother the whooping-cough.'

'And welcome; but you would find it bother you, I believe.'

'I shouldn't catch it.  I want Wilfred, and to ride the pony, and see
the sluice that Uncle Maurice made.'

'You couldn't if you had the cough.'

'Then I should stay there instead of coming back to school!  I say it
is horrid, and beastly, and abominable, and---'

'Come, come, Fergus,' here put in Gillian, 'that is very wrong.'

'You don't hear Gill and me fly out in that way,' added Valetta,
'though we are so sorry about Mysie and Fly.'

'Oh, you are girls, and don't know what is worth doing.  I _will_ say
it is beast---'

'Now don't, Fergus; it is very rude and ungrateful to the aunts.
None of us like having to stay here and lose our holiday; but it is
very improper to say so in their own house, and I thought you were so
fond of Aunt Jane.'

'Aunt Jane knows a thing or two, but she isn't Wilfred.'

'And Wilfred is always teasing you.'

'Fergus is quite right,' said Miss Mohun, who had been taking off her
galoshes in the vestibule while this colloquy was ending in the
dining-room; 'it is much better to be bullied by a brother than made
much of by an aunt, and you know I am very sorry for you all under
the infliction.'

'Oh, Aunt Jane, we know you are very kind, and---' began Gillian.

'Never mind, my dear; I know you are making the best of us, and I am
very much obliged to you for standing up for us.  It is a great
disappointment, but I was going to give Fergus a note that I think
will console him.'

And out of an envelope which she had just taken from the letter-box
she handed him a note, which he pulled open and then burst out,
'Cousin David!  Hurrah!  Scrumptious!' commencing a war-dance at the
same moment.

'What is it?  Has David asked you?' demanded both his sisters at the
same moment.

'Hurrah!  Yes, it is from him. "My dear Fergus, I hope"---hurrah---
"Harry, mm---mm---mm---brothers, 20th mm---mm.  Your affectionate cousin,
David Merrifield."'

'Let me read it to you,' volunteered Gillian.

'Wouldn't you like it?'

'How can you be so silly, Ferg?  You can't read it yourself.  You
don't know whether he really asks you.'

Fergus made a face, and bolted upstairs to gloat, and perhaps peruse
the letter, while Valetta rushed after him, whether to be teased or
permitted to assist might be doubtful.

'He really does ask him,' said Aunt Jane.  'Your cousin David, I
mean.  He says that he and Harry can put up all the three boys
between them, and that they will be very useful in the Christmas
festivities of Coalham.'

'It is very kind of him,' said Gillian in a depressed tone.

'Fergus will be very happy.'

'I only hope he will not be bent on finding a coal mine in the garden
when he comes back,' said Aunt Jane, smiling; 'but it is rather
dreary for you, my dear.  I had been hoping to have Jasper here for
at least a few days.  Could he not come and fetch Fergus?'

Gillian's eyes sparkled at the notion; but they fell at once, for
Jasper would be detained by examinations until so late that he would
only just be able to reach Coalham before Christmas Day.  Harry was
to be ordained in a fortnight's time to work under his cousin, Mr.
David Merrifield, and his young brothers were to meet him immediately
after.

'I wish I could go too,' sighed Gillian, as a hungry yearning for
Jasper or for Mysie took possession of her.

'I wish you could,' said Miss Mohun sympathetically; 'but I am afraid
you must resign yourself to helping us instead.'

'Oh, Aunt Jane, I did not mean to grumble.  It can't be helped, and
you are very kind.'

'Oh, dear!' said poor Miss Jane afterwards in private to her sister,
'how I hate being told I am very kind!  It just means, "You are a not
quite intolerable jailor and despot," with fairly good intentions.'

'I am sure you are kindness itself, dear Jenny,' responded Miss
Adeline.  'I am glad they own it!  But it is very inconvenient and
unlucky that that unjustifiable mother should have sent her child to
the party to carry the whooping-cough to poor little Primrose, and
Mysie, and Phyllis.'

'All at one fell swoop!  As for Primrose, the worthy Halfpenny is
quite enough for her, and Lily is well out of it; but Fly is a little
shrimp, overdone all round, and I don't like the notion of it for
her.'

'And Rotherwood is so wrapped up in her.  Poor dear fellow, I hope
all will go well with her.'

'There is no reason it should not.  Delicate children often have it
the most lightly.  But I am sorry for Gillian, though, if she would
let us, I think we could make her happy.'

Gillian meantime, after her first fit of sick longing for her brother
and sister, and sense of disappointment, was finding some consolation
in the reflection that had Jasper discovered her instructions to
Alexis White, he would certainly have 'made no end of a row about
it,' and have laughed to scorn the bare notion of her teaching Greek
to a counting-house clerk!  But then Jasper was wont to grumble and
chafe at all employments---especially beneficent ones---that interfered
with devotion to his lordly self, and on the whole, perhaps he was
safer out of the way, as he might have set on the aunts to put a stop
to her proceedings.  Of Mysie's sympathy she was sure, yet she would
have her scruples about the aunts, and she was a sturdy person, hard
to answer---poor Mysie, whooping away helplessly in the schoolroom at
Rotherwood!  Gillian felt herself heroically good-humoured and
resigned.  Moreover, here was the Indian letter so long looked for,
likely by its date to be an answer to the information as to Alexis
White's studies.  Behold, it did not appear to touch on the subject
at all!  It was all about preparations for the double wedding,
written in scraps by different hands, at different times, evidently
snatched from many avocations and much interruption.  Of mamma there
was really least of all; but squeezed into a corner, scarcely
legible, Gillian read, 'As to lessons, if At. J. approves.'  It was
evidently an afterthought; and Gillian _could_, and chose to refer it
to a certain inquiry about learning the violin, which had never been
answered---for the confusion that reigned at Columbo was plainly
unfavourable to attending to minute details in home letters.

The longest portions of the despatch were papa's, since he was still
unable to move about.  He wrote:---'Our two "young men" think it
probable you will have invitations from their kith and kin.  If this
comes to pass, you had better accept them, though you will not like
to break up the Christmas party at Beechcroft Court.'

There being no Christmas party at Beechcroft Court, Gillian, in spite
of her distaste to new people, was not altogether sorry to receive a
couple of notes by the same post, the first enclosed in the second,
both forwarded from thence.


                                           'VALE LESTON PRIORY,
                                             '9th December.

'MY DEAR MISS MERRIFIELD---We are very anxious to make acquaintance
with my brother Bernard's new belongings, since we cannot greet our
new sister Phyllis ourselves.  We always have a family gathering at
Christmas between this house and the Vicarage, and we much hope that
you and your brother will join it.  Could you not meet my sister,
Mrs. Grinstead, in London, and travel down with her on the 23rd?  I
am sending this note to her, as I think she has some such proposal to
make.---Yours very sincerely,
                                           'WILMET U. HAREWOOD.'


The other letter was thus---


                                         'BROMPTON, 10th December.

'MY DEAR GILLIAN---It is more natural to call you thus, as you are
becoming a sort of relation---very unwillingly, I dare say---for "in
this storm I too have lost a brother."  However, we will make the
best of it, and please don't hate us more than you can help.  Since
your own home is dispersed for the present, it seems less outrageous
to ask you to spend a Christmas Day among new people, and I hope we
may make you feel at home with us, and that you will enjoy our
beautiful church at Vale Leston.  We are so many that we may be less
alarming if you take us by driblets, so perhaps it will be the best
way if you will come up to us on the 18th or 19th, and go down with
us on the 23rd.  You will find no one with us but my nephew---almost
son---Gerald Underwood, and my niece, Anna Vanderkist, who will be
delighted to make friends with your brother Jasper, who might perhaps
meet you here.  You must tell me all about Phyllis, and what she
would like best for her Cingalese home.---Yours affectionately,

                                           GERALDINE GRINSTEAD.


Thus then affairs shaped themselves.  Gillian was to take Fergus to
London, where Jasper would meet them at the station, and put the
little boy into the train for Coalham, whither his brother Wilfred
had preceded him by a day or two.

Jasper and Gillian would then repair to Brompton for two or three
days before going down with Mr. and Mrs. Grinstead to Vale Leston,
and they were to take care to pay their respects to old Mrs.
Merrifield, who had become too infirm to spend Christmas at
Stokesley.

What was to happen later was uncertain, whether they were to go to
Stokesley, or whether Jasper would join his brothers at Coalham, or
come down to Rockstone with his sister for the rest of the holidays.
Valetta must remain there, and it did not seem greatly to distress
her; and whereas nothing had been said about children, she was better
satisfied to stay within reach of Kitty and mamma, and the Christmas-
trees that began to dawn on the horizon, than to be carried into an
unknown region of 'grown-ups.'

While Gillian was not only delighted at the prospect of meeting
Jasper, her own especial brother, but was heartily glad to make a
change, and defer the entire question of lessons, confessions, and
G.F.S. for six whole weeks.  She might get a more definite answer
from her parents, or something might happen to make explanation to
her aunt either unnecessary or much more easy---and she was safe from
discovery.  But examinations had yet to be passed.




CHAPTER X.  AUT CAESAR AUT NIHIL



Examinations were the great autumn excitement.  Gillian was going up
for the higher Cambridge, and Valetta's form was under preparation
for competition for a prize in languages.  The great Mr. White, on
being asked to patronise the High School at its first start, four
years ago, had endowed it with prizes for each of the four forms for
the most proficient in two tongues.

As the preparation became more absorbing, brows were puckered and
looks were anxious, and the aunts were doubtful as to the effect upon
the girls' minds or bodies.  It was too late, however, to withdraw
them, and Miss Mohun could only insist on air and exercise, and
permit no work after the seven-o'clock tea.

She was endeavouring to chase cobwebs from the brains of the students
by the humours of Mrs. Nickleby, when a message was brought that Miss
Leverett, the head-mistress of the High School, wished to speak to
her in the dining-room.  This was no unusual occurrence, as Miss
Mohun was secretary to the managing committee of the High School.
But on the announcement Valetta began to fidget, and presently said
that she was tired and would go to bed.  The most ordinary effect of
fatigue upon this young lady was to make her resemble the hero of the
nursery poem---


          'I do not want to go to bed,
           Sleepy little Harry said.'


Nevertheless, this willingness excited no suspicion, till Miss Mohun
came to the door to summon Valetta.

'Is there anything wrong!' exclaimed sister and niece together.

'Gone to bed!  Oh!  I'll tell you presently.  Don't you come,
Gillian.'

She vanished again, leaving Gillian in no small alarm and vexation.

'I wonder what it can be,' mused Aunt Ada.

'I shall go and find out!' said Gillian, jumping up, as she heard a
door shut upstairs.

'No, don't,' said Aunt Ada, 'you had much better not interfere.'

'It is my business to see after my own sister,' returned Gillian
haughtily.

'I see what you mean, my dear,' said her aunt, stretching out her
hand, kindly; 'but I do not think you can do any good.  If she is in
a scrape, you have nothing to do with the High School management, and
for you to burst in would only annoy Miss Leverett and confuse the
affair.  Oh, I know your impulse of defence, dear Gillian; but the
time has not come yet, and you can't have any reasonable doubt that
Jane will be just, nor that your mother would wish that you should be
quiet about it.'

'But suppose there is some horrid accusation against her!' said
Gillian hotly.

'But, dear child, if you don't know anything about it, how can you
defend her?'

'I ought to know!'

'So you will in time; but the more people there are present, the more
confusion there is, and the greater difficulty in getting at the
rights of anything.''

More by her caressing tone of sympathy than by actual arguments,
Adeline did succeed in keeping Gillian in the drawing-room, though
not in pacifying her, till doors were heard again, and something so
like Valetta crying as she went upstairs, that Gillian was neither to
have nor to hold, and made a dash out of the room, only to find her
aunt and the head-mistress exchanging last words in the hall, and as
she was going to brush past them, Aunt Jane caught her hand, and
said---

'Wait a moment, Gillian; I want to speak to you.'

There was no getting away, but she was very indignant.  She tugged at
her aunt's hand more than perhaps she knew, and there was something
of a flouncing as she flung into the drawing-room and demanded---

'Well, what have you been doing to poor little Val?'

'We have done nothing,' said Miss Mohun quietly.  'Miss Leverett
wanted to ask her some questions.  Sit down, Gillian.   You had
better hear what I have to say before going to her.  Well, it appears
that there has been some amount of cribbing in the third form.'

'I'm sure Val never would,' broke out Gillian.  And her aunt
answered---

'So was I; but---'

'Oh---'

'My dear, do hush,' pleaded Adeline.  'You must let yourself listen.'

Gillian gave a desperate twist, but let her aunt smooth her hand.

'All the class---almost---seem to have done it in some telegraphic way,
hard to understand,' proceeded Aunt Jane.  'There must have been some
stupidity on the part of the class-mistress, Miss Mellon, or it could
not have gone on; but there has of late been a strong suspicion of
cribbing in Caesar in Valetta's class.  They had got rather
behindhand, and have been working up somewhat too hard and fast to
get through the portion for examination.  Some of them translated too
well--used terms for the idioms that were neither literal, nor could
have been forged by their small brains; so there was an examination,
and Georgie Purvis was detected reading off from the marks on the
margin of her notebook.'

'But what has that to do with Val?'

'Georgie, being had up to Miss Leverett, made the sort of confession
that implicates everybody.'

'Then why believe her?' muttered Gillian.  But her aunt went on---

'She said that four or five of them did it, from the notes that
Valetta Merrifield brought to school.'

'Never!' interjected Gillian.

'She said,' continued Miss Mohun, 'it was first that they saw her
helping Maura White, and they thought that was not fair, and insisted
on her doing the same for them.'

'It can't be true!  Oh, don't believe it!' cried the sister.

'I grieve to remind you that I showed you in the drawer in the
dining-room chiffonier a translation of that very book of Caesar that
your mother and I made years ago, when she was crazy upon
Vercingetorix.'

'But was that reason enough for laying it upon poor Val?'

'She owned it.'

There was a silence, and then Gillian said---

'She must have been frightened, and not known what she was saying.'

'She was frightened, but she was very straightforward, and told
without any shuffling.  She saw the old copy-books when I was showing
you those other remnants of our old times, and one day it seems she
was in a great puzzle over her lessons, and could get no help or
advice, because none of us had come in.  I suppose you were with
Lilian, and she thought she might just look at the passage.  She
found Maura in the same difficulty, and helped her; and then Georgie
Purvis and Nelly Black found them out, and threatened to tell unless
she showed them her notes; but the copying whole phrases was only
done quite of late in the general over-hurry.'

'She must have been bullied into it,' cried Gillian.  'I shall go and
see about her.'

Aunt Ada made a gesture as of deprecation; but Aunt Jane let her go
without remonstrance, merely saying as the door closed---

'Poor child!  Esprit de famille!'

'Will it not be very bad for Valetta to be petted and pitied?'

'I don't know.  At any rate, we cannot separate them at night, so it
is only beginning it a little sooner; and whatever I say only
exasperates Gillian the more.  Poor little Val, she had not a formed
character enough to be turned loose into a High School without Mysie
to keep her in order.'

'Or Gillian.'

'I am not so sure of Gillian.  There's something amiss, though I
can't make out whether it is merely that I rub her down the wrong
way.  I wonder whether this holiday time will do us good or harm!
At any rate, I know how Lily felt about Dolores.'

'It must have been that class-mistress's fault.'

'To a great degree; but Miss Leverett has just discovered that her
cleverness does not compensate for a general lack of sense and
discipline.  Poor little Val---perhaps it is her turning-point!'

Gillian, rushing up in a boiling state of indignation against
everybody, felt the family shame most acutely of all; and though, as
a Merrifield, she defended her sister below stairs, on the other hand
she was much more personally shocked and angered at the disgrace than
were her aunts, and far less willing to perceive any excuse for the
culprit.

There was certainly no petting or pitying in her tone as she stood
over the little iron bed, where the victim was hiding her head on her
pillow.

'Oh, Valetta, how could you do such a thing?  The Merrifields have
never been so disgraced before!'

'Oh, don't, Gill!  Aunt Jane and Miss Leverett were---not so angry---
when I said---I was sorry.'

'But what will papa and mamma say?'

'Must they---must they hear?'

'You would not think of deceiving them, I hope.'

'Not deceiving, only not telling.'

'That comes to much the same.'

'You can't say anything, Gill, for you are always down at Kal's
office, and nobody knows.'

This gave Gillian a great shock, but she rallied, and said with
dignity, 'Do you think I do not write to mamma everything I do?'

It sufficed for the immediate purpose of annihilating Valetta, who
had just been begging off from letting mamma hear of her proceedings;
but it left Gillian very uneasy as to how much the child might know
or tell, and this made her proceed less violently, and more
persuasively, 'Whatever I do, I write to mamma; and besides, it is
different with a little thing like you, and your school work.  Come,
tell me how you got into this scrape.'

'Oh, Gill, it was so hard!  All about those tiresome Gauls, and there
were bits when the nominative case would go and hide itself, and
those nasty tenses one doesn't know how to look out, and I knew I was
making nonsense, and you were out of the way, and there was nobody to
help; and I knew mamma's own book was there---the very part too---
because Aunt Jane had shown it to us, so I did not think there was
any harm in letting her help me out of the muddle.'

'Ah! that was the beginning.'

'If you had been in, I would not have done it.  You know Aunt Jane
said there was no harm in giving a clue, and this was mamma.'

'But that was not all.'

'Well, then, there was Maura first, as much puzzled, and her brother
is so busy he hasn't as much time for her as he used to have, and it
does signify to her, for perhaps if she does not pass, Mr. White may
not let her go on at the High School, and that would be too dreadful,
for you know you said I was to do all I could for Maura.  So I marked
down things for her and she copied them off, and then Georgie and
Nelly found it out, and, oh! they were dreadful!  I never knew it was
wrong till they went at me.  And they were horrid to Maura, and said
she was a Greek and I a Maltese, and so we were both false, and
cheaty, and sly, and they should tell Miss Leverett unless I would
help them.'

'Oh!  Valetta, why didn't you tell me?'

'I never get to speak to you, said Val.  'I did think I would that
first time, and ask you what to do, but then you came in late, and
when I began something, you said you had your Greek to do, and told
me to hold my tongue.'

'I am very sorry,' said Gillian, feeling convicted of having
neglected her little sister in the stress of her own work and of the
preparation for that of her pupil, who was treading on her heels;
'but indeed, Val, if you had told me it was important, I should have
listened.'

'Ah I but when one is half-frightened, and you are always in a
hurry,' sighed the child.  And, indeed, I did do my best over my own
work before ever I looked; only those two are so lazy and stupid,
they would have ever so much more help than Maura or I ever wanted;
and at last I was so worried and hurried with my French and all the
rest, that I did scramble a whole lot down, and that was the way it
was found out.  And I am glad now it is over, whatever happens.'

'Yes, that is right,' said Gillian, 'and I am glad you told no
stories; but I wonder Emma Norton did not see what was going on.'

'Oh, she is frightfully busy about her own.'

'And Kitty Varley?'

'Kitty is only going up for French and German.  Miss Leverett is so
angry.  What do you think she will do to me, Gill?  Expel me?'

'I don't know---I can't guess.  I don't know High School ways.'

It would be so dreadful for papa and mamma and the boys to know,'
sobbed Valetta.  'And Mysie! oh, if Mysie was but here!'

'Mysie would have been a better sister to her,' said Gillian's
conscience, and her voice said, 'You would never have done it if
Mysie had been here.'

'And Mysie would be nice,' said the poor child, who longed after her
companion sister as much for comfort as for conscience.  'Is Aunt
Jane very very angry?' she went on; 'do you think I shall be
punished?'

'I can't tell.  If it were I, I should think you were punished enough
by having disgraced the name of Merrifield by such a dishonourable
action.'

'I---I didn't know it was dishonourable.'

'Well,' said Gillian, perhaps a little tired of the scene, or mayhap
dreading another push into her own quarters, 'I have been saying what
I could for you, and I should think they would feel that no one but
our father and mother had a real right to punish you, but I can't
tell what the School may do.  Now, hush, it is of no use to talk any
more.  Good-night; I hope I shall find you asleep when I come to
bed.'

Valetta would have detained her, but off she went, with a
consciousness that she had been poor comfort to her little sister,
and had not helped her to the right kind of repentance.  But then
that highest ground---the strict rule of perfect conscientious
uprightness---was just what she shrank from bringing home to herself,
in spite of those privileges of seniority by which she had impressed
poor Valetta.

The worst thing further that was said that night, when she had
reported as much of Valetta's confidence as she thought might soften
displeasure, was Aunt Ada's observation: 'Maura!  That's the White
child, is it not?  No doubt it was the Greek blood.'

'The English girls were much worse,' hastily said Gillian, with a
flush of alarm, as she thought of her own friends being suspected.

'Yes; but it began with the little Greek,' said Aunt Ada.  'What a
pity, for she is such an engaging child!  I would take the child away
from the High School, except that it would have the appearance of her
being dismissed.

'We must consider of that,' said Aunt Jane.  'There will hardly be
time to hear from Lilias before the next term begins.  Indeed, it
will not be so very long to wait before the happy return, I hope.'

'Only two months,' said Gillian; 'but it would be happier but for
this.'

'No,' said Aunt Jane.  'If we made poor little Val write her
confession, and I do the same for not having looked after her better,
it will be off our minds, and need not cloud the meeting.'

'The disgrace!' sighed Gillian; 'the public disgrace!'

'My dear, I don't want to make you think lightly of such a thing. It
was very wrong in a child brought up as you have all been, with a
sense of honour and uprightness; but where there has been no such
training, the attempt to copy is common enough, for it is not to be
looked on as an extraordinary and indelible disgrace.  Do you
remember Primrose saying she had broken mamma's heart when she had
knocked down a china vase?  You need not be in that state of mind
over what was a childish fault, made worse by those bullying girls.
It is of no use to exaggerate.  The sin is the thing---not the outward
shame.'

'And Valetta told at once when asked,' added Aunt Ada.

'That makes a great difference.'

'In fact, she was relieved to have it out,' said Miss Mohun.  'It is
not at all as if she were in the habit of doing things underhand.'

Everything struck on Gillian like a covert reproach.  It was pain and
shame to her that a Merrifield should have lowered herself to the
common herd so as to need these excuses of her aunts, and then in the
midst of that indignation came that throb of self-conviction which
she was always confuting with the recollection of her letter to her
mother.

She was glad to bid good-night and rest her head.

The aunts ended by agreeing that it was n