mplexion as to keep a horse. And Mrs. Lewin was
infinitely useful at this juncture, since she called every day at St.
James's Street, to carry a lace cravat, or a ribbon, or a flask of essence
to the invalid languishing in lodgings there, and visited by all the town,
except Fareham and his wife. De Malfort had lain for a fortnight at Lady
Castlemaine's house, alternately petted and neglected by his fair hostess,
as the fit took her, since she showed herself ever of the chameleon breed,
and hovered betwixt angel and devil. His surgeon told him in confidence
that when once his wound was healed enough to allow his removal, the sooner
he quitted that feverish company the better it would be for his chance of a
speedy convalescence. So, at the end of the second week, he was moved in
a covered litter to his own lodgings, where his faithful valet, who had
followed his fortunes since he came to man's estate, was quite capable of
nursing him.

The town soon discovered the breach between Lord Fareham and his friend--a
breach commented upon with many shoulder-shrugs, and not a few coarse
innuendoes. Lady Lucretia Topham insisted upon making her way to the sick
man's room, in the teeth of messages delivered by his valet, which, even to
a less intelligent mind than Lady Lucretia's, might have conveyed the fact
that she was not wanted. She flung herself on her knees by De Malfort's
bed, and wept and raved at the brutality which had deprived the world of
his charming company--and herself of the only man she had ever loved. De
Malfort, fevered and vexed at her intrusion, and at this renewal of fires
long burnt out, had yet discretion enough to threaten her with his dire
displeasure if she betrayed the secret of his illness.

"I have sworn Dangerfield and Masaroon to silence," he said. "Except
servants, who have been paid to keep mute, you are the only other witness
of our quarrel; and if the story becomes town talk, I shall know whose busy
tongue set it going--and then--well, there are things I might tell that
your ladyship would hardly like the world to know."

"Traitor! If your purse has accommodated me once in a way when luck has
been adverse----"

"Oh, madam, you cannot think me base enough to blab of a money transaction
with a lady. There are secrets more tender--more romantic."

"Those secrets can be easily denied, wretch. However, I know you would not
injure me with a husband so odious and tyrannical that I stood excused in
advance for inconstancy when I stooped to wed country manners and stubborn
ignorance. Indeed, mon ami, if you will but take pains to recover, I will
never breathe a word about the duel; but if--if--" a sob indicated the
tragic possibility which Lady Lucretia dared not put into words--"I will do
all that a weak woman can do to get Fareham hanged for murder. There has
never been a peer hanged in England, I believe. He should be the first."

"Dear soul, there need be no hanging! I have been on the mending hand for a
week, or my doctors would not have let you upstairs. There, go, my pretty
Lucrèce; but if your milliner or your shoemaker is pressing, there are a
few jacobuses in the right-hand drawer of yonder escritoire, and you may
as well take them as leave them for my valet to steal. He is one of those
excellent old servants who make no distinctions, and he robs me as freely
as he robbed my father before me."

"Mrs. Lewin is always pressing," sighed Lady Lucretia. "She made me a gown
like that of Lady Fareham's, for which you were all eyes. I ordered
the brocade to please you; and now I am wearing it when you are not at
Whitehall. Well, as you are so kind, I will be your debtor for another
trifling loan. It is wicked to leave money where it tempts a good servant
to dishonesty. Ah, Henri"--she was pocketing the gold as she talked--"if
ten years of my life could save you ten days of pain and fever, how gladly
would I give them to you!"

"Ah, douce, if there were a market for the exchange of such commodities,
what a roaring trade would be done there! I never loved a woman yet but she
offered me her life, or an instalment of it."

"I have emptied your drawer," laughing coyly. "There is just enough to keep
Lewin in good humour till you are well again, and we can be partners at
basset."

"It will be very long before I play basset in London."

"Oh, but indeed you will soon be well."

"Well enough to change the scene, I hope. It needs change of places and
persons to make life bearable. I long to be at the Louvre again, to see a
play by Molière's company, as only they can act, instead of the loathsome
translations we get here, in which all that there is of wit and charm in
the original is transmuted to coarseness and vulgarity. When I leave this
bed, Lucrèce, it will be for Paris."

"Why, it will be ages before you are strong enough for such a journey."

"Oh, I will risk that. I hate London so badly, that to escape from it will
work a miraculous cure for me."

       *       *       *       *       *

An armed neutrality! Even the children felt the change in the atmosphere of
home, and nestled closer to their aunt, who never changed to them.

"Father mostly looks angry," Henriette complained, "and mother is always
unhappy, if she is not laughing and talking in the midst of company; and
neither of them ever seems to want me. I wish I was grown up, so that I
could be maid of honour to the Queen or the Duchess, and live at Whitehall.
Mademoiselle told me that there is always life and pleasure at Court."

"Your father does not love the Court, dearest, and mademoiselle should be
wiser than to talk to you of such things, when she is here to teach you
dancing and French literature."

"Mademoiselle" was a governess lately imported from Paris, recommended by
Mademoiselle Scudéry, and full of high-flown ideas expressed in high-flown
language. All Paris had laughed at Molière's _Precieuses Ridicules_; but
the Précieuses themselves, and their friends, protested that the popular
farce was aimed only at the low-born imitators of those great ladies who
had originated the school of superfine culture and romantic aspirations.

"Sapho" herself, in tracing her own portrait with a careful and elaborate
pencil, told the world how shamefully she had been imitated by the spurious
middle-class Saphos, who set up their salons, and vied with the sacred
house of Rambouillet, and the privileged coterie of the Rue de Temple.

Lady Fareham had not ceased to believe in her dear, plain, witty Scudéry,
and was delighted to secure a governess of her choosing, whereby Papillon,
who loved freedom and idleness, and hated lessons of all kinds, was set
down to write themes upon chivalry, politeness, benevolence, pride, war,
and other abstractions; or to fill in bouts-rimés, by way of enlarging her
acquaintance with the French language, which she had chattered freely all
her life. Mademoiselle insisted upon all the niceties of phraseology as
discussed in the Rue Saint Thomas du Louvre.

There had been a change of late in Fareham's manner to his sister-in-law,
a change refreshing to her troubled spirit as mercy, that gentle dew from
heaven, to the criminal. He had been kinder; and though he spent very few
of his hours with the women of his household, he had talked to Angela
somewhat in the friendly tone of those fondly remembered days at Chilton,
when he had taught her to row and ride, to manage a spirited palfrey and
fly a falcon, and had been in all things her mentor and friend. He seemed
less oppressed with gloom as time went on, but had his sullen fits still,
and, after being kind and courteous to wife and sister, and playful with
his children, would leave them suddenly, and return no more to the saloon
or drawing-room that evening. Yet on the whole the sky was lightening. He
ignored Hyacinth's resentment, endured her pettishness, and was studiously
polite to her.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was on Lady Fareham's visiting-day, deep in that very severe winter,
that some news was told her which came like a thunder-clap, and which it
needed all the weak soul's power of self-repression to suffer without
swooning or hysterics.

Lady Sarah Tewkesbury, gorgeous in velvet and fur, her thickly painted
countenance framed in a furred hood, entered fussily upon a little coterie
in which Masaroon, vapouring about the last performance at the King's
theatre, was the principal figure.

"There was a little woman spoke the epilogue," he said, "a little creature
in a monstrous big hat, as large and as round as a cart-wheel, which vastly
amused his Majesty."

"The hat?"

"Nay, it was woman and hat. The thing is so small it might have been
scarce noticed without the hat, but it has a pretty little, insignificant,
crumpled face, and laughs all over its face till it has no eyes, and then
stops laughing suddenly, and the eyes shine out, twinkling and dancing like
stars reflected in running water, and it stamps its little foot upon the
stage in a comic passion--and--_nous verrons_. It sold oranges in the pit,
folks tell me, a year ago. It may be selling sinecures and captaincies in a
year or two, and putting another shilling in the pound upon land."

"Is it that brazen little comedy actress you are talking of, Masaroon?"
Lady Sarah asked, when she had exchanged curtsies with the ladies of the
company, and established herself on the most comfortable tabouret, near
Lady Fareham's tea-table; "Mrs. Glyn--Wynn--Gwyn? I wonder a man of wit can
notice such a vulgar creature, a she-jack-pudden, fit only to please the
rabble in the gallery."

"Ay, but there is a finer sort of rabble--a rabble of quality--beginning
with his Majesty, that are always pleased with anything new. And this
little creature is as fresh as a spring morning. To see her laugh, to hear
the ring of it, clear and sweet as a skylark's song! On my life, madam, the
town has a new toy; and Mrs. Gwyn will be the rage in high quarters. You
should have seen Castlemaine's scowl when Rowley laughed, and ducked under
the box almost, in an ecstasy of amusement at the huge hat."

"Lady Castlemaine's brow would thunder-cloud if his Majesty looked at a fly
on a window-pane. But she has something else to provoke her frowns to-day."

"What is that, chère dame?" asked Hyacinth, snatching a favourite fan from
Sir Ralph, who was teasing one of the Blenheims with African feathers that
were almost priceless.

"The desertion of an old friend. The Comte de Malfort has left England."

Lady Fareham turned livid under her rouge. Angela ran to her and leant
over her, upon a pretence of rescuing the fan and chiding the dogs; and so
contrived to screen her sister's change of complexion from the malignity of
her dearest friends.

"Left England! Why, he is confined to his bed with a fever!" Hyacinth said
faintly, when she had somewhat recovered from the shock.

"Nay, it seems that he began to go abroad last week, but would see no
company, except a confidential friend or so. He left London this morning
for Dover."

"No doubt he has business in Burgundy, where his estate is, and at Paris,
where he is of importance at the Court," said Hyacinth, as lightly as she
could; "but I'll wager anything anybody likes that he will be in London
again in a month."

"I'll take you for those black pearls in your ears, ma mie," said Lady
Sarah. "His furniture is to be sold by auction next week. I saw a bill on
the house this afternoon. It is sudden! Perhaps the Castlemaine had become
too exacting!"

"Castlemaine!" faltered Hyacinth, agitated beyond her power of
self-control. "Why, what is she to him more than she is to other men?"

"Very little, perhaps," said Sir Ralph, and then everybody laughed, and
Hyacinth felt herself sitting among them like a child, understanding
nothing of their smiles and shrugs, the malice in their sly interchange of
glances.

She sat among them feeling as if her heart were turned to stone. He had
left the country without even bidding her farewell--her faithful slave,
upon whose devotion she counted as surely as upon the rising of the sun.
Whatever her husband might do to separate her from this friend of her
girlhood, she had feared no defection upon De Malfort's part. He would
always be near at hand, waiting and watching for the happier days that were
to smile upon their innocent loves. She had written to him every day during
his illness. Good Mrs. Lewin had taken the letters to him, and had brought
her his replies. He had not written so often, or at such length, as she,
and had pleaded the languor of convalescence as his excuse; but all his
billets-doux had been in the same delicious hyperbole, the language of
the Pays du Tendre. She sat silent while her visitors talked about him,
plucking a reputation as mercilessly as a kitchen wench plucks a fowl. He
was gone. He had left the country deep in debt. It was his landlord who
had stuck up that notice of a sale by auction. Tailors and shoemakers,
perruquiers and perfumers were bewailing his flight.

So much for the sordid side of things. But what of those numerous affairs
of the heart--those entanglements which had made his life one long
intrigue?

Lady Sarah sat simpering and nodding as Masaroon whispered close in her
ear.

Barbara? Oh, that was almost as old as the story of Antony and Cleopatra.
She had paid his debts--and he had paid hers. Their purse had been in
common. And the handsome maid of honour? Ah, poor silly soul! That was a
horrid, ugly business, and his Majesty's part in it the horridest. And Mrs.
Levington, the rich silk mercer's wife? That was a serious attachment. It
was said that the husband attempted poison, when De Malfort refused him the
satisfaction of a gentleman. And the poor woman was sent to die of _ennui_
and rheumatism in a castle among the Irish bogs, where her citizen husband
had set up as a landed squire.

The fine company discussed all these foul stories with gusto, insinuating
much more than they expressed in words. Never until to-day had they spoken
so freely of De Malfort in Lady Fareham's presence; but the story had got
about of a breach between Hyacinth and her admirer, and it was supposed
that any abuse of the defaulter would be pleasant in her ears. And then,
he was ruined and gone; and there is no vulture's feast sweeter than to
banquet upon a departed rival's character.

Hyacinth listened in dull silence, as if her sensations were suddenly
benumbed. She felt nothing but a horrible surprise. Her lover--her platonic
lover--that other half of her mind and heart--with whom she had been in
such tender sympathy, in unison of spirit, so subtle that the same thoughts
sprang up simultaneously in the minds of each, the same language leapt to
their lips, and they laughed to find their words alike. It had been only a
shallow woman's shallow love--but trivial woes are tragedies for trivial
minds; and when her guests had gradually melted away, dispersing themselves
with reciprocal curtsies and airy compliments, elegant in their modish
iniquity as a troop of vicious fairies--Hyacinth stood on the hearth where
they had left her, a statue of despair.

Angela went to her, when the stately double doors had closed on the last
of the gossips and lackeys, and they two were alone amidst the spacious
splendour. The younger sister hugged the elder to her breast, and kissed
her, and cried over her, like a mother comforting her disappointed child.

"Don't heed that shameful talk, dearest. No character is safe with them. Be
sure Monsieur de Malfort is not the reprobate they would make him. You have
known him nearly all your life. You know him too well to judge him by the
idle talk of the town."

"No, no; I have never known him. He has always worn a mask. He is as false
as Satan. Don't talk to me--don't kiss me, child. You have smeared my face
horribly with your kisses and tears. Your pity drives me mad. How can you
understand these things--you who have never loved any one? What can you
know of what women feel? There, silly fool! you are trembling as if I had
hit you," as Angela withdrew her arms suddenly, and stood aloof. "I have
been a virtuous wife, sister, in a town where scarce one woman in ten is
true to her marriage vows. I have never sinned against my husband; but I
have never loved him. Henri had my heart before I knew what the word, love
meant; and in all these years we have loved each other with the purest,
noblest affection--at least he made me believe my love was reciprocated.
We have enjoyed a most exquisite communion of thought and feeling. His
letters--you shall read his letters some day--so noble, so brilliant--all
poetry, and chivalry, and wit. I lived upon his letters when fate parted
us. And when he followed us to England, I thought it was for my sake that
he came--only for me. And to hear that he was her lover--hers--that woman!
To know that he came to me--with sweetest words upon his lips--knelt to
kiss the tips of my fingers--as if it were a privilege to die for--from
her arms, from her caresses--the wickedest woman in England--and the
loveliest!"

"Dear Hyacinth, it was a childish dream--and you have awakened! You will
live to be glad of being recalled from falsehood to truth. Your husband is
worth fifty De Malforts, did you but know it. Oh, dearest, give him your
heart who ought to be its only master. Indeed he is worthy. He stands
apart--an honourable, nobly thinking man in a world that is full of
libertines. Be sure he deserves your love."

"Don't preach to me, child! If you could give me a sleeping-draught
that would blot out memory for ever--make me forget my childhood in the
Marais--my youth at St. Germain--the dances at the Louvre--all the days
when I was happiest: why, then, perhaps, you might make me in love with
Lord Fareham."

"You will begin a new life, sister, now De Malfort is gone."

"I will never forgive him for going!" cried Hyacinth, passionately.
"Never--never! To give me no note of warning! To sneak away like a thief
who had stolen my diamonds! To fly for debt, too, and not come to me for
money! Why have I a fortune, if not to help those I love? But--if he was
that woman's lover--I will never see his face again--never speak his
name--never--from the moment I am convinced of that hellish treason--never!
Her lover! Lady Castlemaine's! We have laughed at her, together! Her lover!
And there were other women those spiteful wretches talked about just now--a
tradesman's wife! Oh, how hateful, how hateful it all is! Angela, if it is
true, I shall go mad!"

"Dearest, to you he was but a friend--and though you may be sorry he was so
great a sinner, his sins cannot concern your happiness----"

"What! not to know him a profligate? The man to whom I gave a chaste
woman's love! Angela, that night, in the ruined abbey, I let him kiss me.
Yes, for one moment I was in his arms--and his lips were on mine. And he
had kissed her--the same night perhaps. Her tainted kisses were on his
lips. And it was you who saved me! Dear sister, I owe you more than life--I
might have given myself to everlasting shame that night. God knows! I was
in his power--her lover--judging all women, perhaps, by his knowledge of
that----"

The epithet which closed the sentence was not a word for a woman's lips;
but it was wrung from the soreness of a woman's wounded heart.

Hyacinth flung herself distractedly into her sister's arms.

"You saved me!" she cried, hysterically. "He wanted me to go to Dover with
him--back to France--where we were so happy. He knelt to me, and I refused
him; but he prayed me again and again; and if you had not come to rescue
me, should I have gone on saying no? God knows if my courage would have
held out. There were tears in his eyes. He swore that he had never loved
any one upon this earth as he loved me. Hypocrite! Deceiver--liar! He loved
that woman! Twenty times handsomer than ever I was--a hundred times more
wicked. It is the wicked women that are best loved, Angela, remember that.
Oh, bless you for coming to save me! You saved Fareham's life in the plague
year. You saved me from everlasting misery. You are our guardian angel!"

"Ah, dearest, if love could guard you, I might deserve that name----"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was late in the same evening that Lady Fareham's maid came to her
bed-chamber to inquire if she would be pleased to see Mrs. Lewin, who had
brought a pattern of a new French bodice, with her humble apologies for
waiting on her ladyship so late.

Her ladyship would see Mrs. Lewin. She started up from the sofa where she
had been lying, her forehead bound with a handkerchief steeped in Hungary
water. She was all excitement.

"Bring her here instantly!" she said, and the interval necessary to conduct
the milliner up the grand staircase and along the gallery seemed an age to
Hyacinth's impatience.

"Well? Have you a letter for me?" she asked, when her woman had retired,
and Mrs. Lewin had bustled and curtsied across the room.

"In truly, my lady; and I have to ask your ladyship's pardon for not
bringing it early this morning, when his honour gave it to me with his own
hand out of 'his travelling carriage. And very white and wasted he looked,
dear gentleman, not fit for a voyage to France in this severe weather. And
I was to carry you his letter immediately; but, eh, gud! your ladyship,
there was never such a business as mine for surprises. I was putting on my
cloak to step out with your ladyship's letter, when a coach, with a footman
in the royal undress livery, sets down at my door, and one of the Duchess's
women had come to fetch me to her Highness; and there I was kept in her
Highness's chamber half the morning, disputing over a paduasoy for the
Shrove Tuesday masquerade--for her Highness gets somewhat bulky, and is
not easy to dress to her advantage or to my credit--though she is a beauty
compared with the Queen, who still hankers after her hideous Portuguese
fashions----"

"And employs your rival, Madame Marifleur----"

"Marifleur! If your ladyship knew the creature as well as I do, you'd call
her Sally Cramp."

"I never can remember a low English name. Marifleur seems to promise all
that there is of the most graceful and airy in a ruffled sleeve and a
ribbon shoulder-knot."

"I am glad to see your ladyship is in such good spirits," said the
milliner, wondering at Lady Fareham's flushed cheeks and brilliant eyes.

They were brilliant with a somewhat glassy brightness, and there was a
touch of hysteria in her manner. Mrs. Lewin thought she had been drinking.
Many of her customers ended that way--took to cognac and ratafia, when
choicer pleasures were exhausted and wrinkles began to show through their
paint.

Hyacinth was reading De Malfort's letter as she talked, moving about the
room a little, and then stopping in front of the fireplace, where the light
from two clusters of wax candles shone down upon the finely written page.

Mrs. Lewin watched her for a few minutes, and then produced some pieces of
silk out of her muff.

"I made so bold as to bring your ladyship some patterns of Italian silks
which only came to hand this morning," she said. "There is a cherry-red
that would become your ladyship to the T."

"Make me a gown of it, my excellent Lewin--and good night to you."

"But sure your ladyship will look at the colour? There is a pattern of
amber with gold thread might please you better. Lady Castlemaine has
ordered a Court mantua----"

Lady Fareham rang her hand-bell with a vehemence that suggested anger.

"Show Mrs. Lewin to her coach," she said shortly, when her woman appeared.
"When you have done that you may go to bed; I want nothing more to-night."

"Mrs. Kirkland has been asking to see your ladyship."

"I will see no one to-night. Tell Mrs. Kirkland so, with my love."

She ran to the door when the maid and milliner were gone, and locked it,
and then ran back to the fireplace, and flung herself down upon the rug to
read her letter.

"Chérie, when this is handed to you, I shall be sitting in my coach on the
dull Dover road, with frost-clouded windows and a heart heavier than your
leaden skies. Loveliest of women, all things must end; and, despite your
childlike trust in man's virtue, you could scarce hope for eternity to a
bond that was too strong for friendship and too weak for love. Dearest, had
you given yourself that claim upon love and honour which we have talked of,
and which you have ever refused, no lesser power than death should have
parted us. I would have dared all, conquered all, for my dear mistress.
But you would not. It was not for lack of fervid prayers that the statue
remained a statue; but a man cannot go on worshipping a statue for ever. If
the Holy Mother did not sometimes vouchsafe a sign of human feeling, even
good Catholics would have left off kneeling to her image.

"Or, shall I say, rather, that the child remains a child--fresh, and pure,
and innocent, and candid, as in the days when we played our _jeu de volant_
in your grandmother's garden--fit emblem of the light love of our future
years. You remained a child, Hyacinth, and asked childish love-making from
a man. Dearest, accept a cruel truth from a man of the world--it is only
the love you call guilty that lasts. There is a stimulus in sin and mystery
that will fan the flame of passion and keep love alive even for an inferior
object. The ugly women know this, and make lax morals a substitute for
beauty. An innocent intrigue, a butterfly affection like ours, will seldom
outlive the butterfly's brief day. Indeed, I sometimes admire at myself as
a marvel of constancy for having kept faith so long with a mistress who has
rewarded me so sparingly.

"So, my angel, I am leaving your foggy island, my cramped London lodgings,
and extortionate London tradesmen, on whom I have squandered so much of my
fortune that they ought to forgive me for leaving a margin of debt, which I
hope to pay the extortioners hereafter for the honour of my name. I doubt
if I shall ever revisit England. I have tasted all London pleasures, till
familiarity has taken the taste out of them; and though Paris may be only
London with a difference, that difference includes bluer skies, brighter
streets and gardens, and all the originals of which you have here the
copies. There, at least, I shall have the fashion of my peruke and my
speech at first hand. Here you only adopt a mode when Paris begins to tire
of it.

"Farewell, then, dearest lady, but let it be no tragical or eternal
parting, since your fine house in the Rue de Touraine will doubtless be
honoured with your presence some day. You have only to open a salon there
in order to be the top of the mode. Some really patrician milieu is needed
to replace the antique court of the dear old Marquise, and to extinguish
the Scudéry, whose Saturdays grow more vulgar every week. Yes, you will
come to Paris, bringing that human lily, Mrs. Angela, in your train; and I
promise to make you the fashion before your house has been open a month.
The wits and Court favourites will go where I bid them. And though your
dearest friend, Madame de Longueville, has retired from the world in
which she was more queenly than the Queen, you will find Mademoiselle de
Montpensier as faithful as ever to mundane pleasures, and, after having
refused kings and princes, slavishly devoted to a colonel of dragoons who
does not care a straw for her.

"Louise de Bourbon, a woman who can head a revolt and fire a cannon, would
think no sacrifice too great for a cold-hearted schemer like Lauzun--yet
you who swore you loved me, when the coach was waiting that would have
carried me to paradise, and made us one for all this life, could suffer a
foolish girl to separate us in the very moment of triumphant union. You
were mine, Hyacinth; heart and mind were consenting, when your convent-bred
sister surprised us, and all my hopes of bliss expired in a sermon. And now
I can but say, with that witty rhymester, whom everybody in London quotes--

    'Love in your heart as idly burns,
    As fire in antique Roman urns.'

"Good-bye, which means 'God be with you.' I know not if the fear of Him was
in your mind when you sacrificed your lover to that icy abstraction women
call virtue. The Romans had but one virtue, which meant the courage that
dares; and to me the highest type of woman would be one whose bold spirit
dared and defied the world for love's sake. These are the women history
remembers, and whom the men who live after them worship. Cleopatra,
Mary Stuart, Diana of Poictiers, Marguerite de Valois, la Chevreuse, la
Montbazon! Think you that these became famous by keeping their lovers at a
distance?

"'Go, lovely rose!'

"How often I have sung those lines, and you have listened, and nothing
has come of it; except time wasted, smiles, sighs, and tears, that ever
promised, and ever denied. Beauty, too choice to be kind, adieu!

"DE MALFORT."

When she had read these last words, she crushed the letter in her palm,
clenching her fingers over it till the nails wounded the delicate flesh;
and then she opened her hand, and employed herself in smoothing out the
crumpled paper, as if her life depended on making the letter readable
again. But her pains could not undo what her passion had done; and finding
this, she tossed the ragged paper into the flames, and began to walk about
the room in a distracted fashion, giving a little hysterical cry every now
and then, and clasping her hands upon her forehead.

Anger, humiliation, wounded love, wounded vanity, disappointment,
disillusion, were all in that cry, and in the passionate beating of her
heart, her stifled breath, her clenched hands.

"He was laughing when he wrote that letter--I am sure he was laughing.
There was not one serious moment, not one pang at leaving me! He has been
laughing at me ever since he came to London. I have been his fool, his
amusement. Other women have had his love, the guilty love that he praises!
He has come to me straight from their wicked houses, their feasting, and
riot, and drunkenness--has come and pretended to love poetry, and Scudéry's
romances, and music, and innocent conversation--come to rest himself after
dissolute pleasures, bringing me the leavings of that hellish company! And
I have reviled such women, and he has pretended an equal horror of them;
and he was their slave all the time, and went from me to them, and made a
jest of me for their amusement I know his biting raillery. And he was at
the play-house day after day, where I could not go, sitting side by
side with his Jezebels, laughing at filthy comedies, and at me that was
forbidden to appear there. He had pleasures of which I knew nothing; and
when I fancied our inmost souls moved in harmony, his thoughts were full of
wanton women and their wanton jests, and he smiled at my childishness, and
fooled me as children are fooled."

The thought was distraction. She plucked out handfuls of her pale gold
hair, the pretty blonde hair which had been almost as famous in Paris as
Beaufort's or Madame de Longueville's yellow locks. The thought of De
Malfort's ridicule cut her like a whalebone whip. She had fancied herself
his Beatrice, his Laura, his Stella--a being to be worshipped as reverently
as the stars, to make her lover happy with smiles and kindly words, to
stand for ever a little way off, like a goddess in her temple, yet near
enough to be adored.

And fondly believing this to be her mission, having posed for the
character, and filled it to her own fancy, she found that she had only
been a dissolute man's dupe all the time; and no doubt had been the
laughing-stock of her acquaintance, who looked at the game.

"And I was so proud of his devotion--I carried my slave everywhere with me.
Oh, fool, fool, fool!"

And then--the poor little brains being disordered by passionate
regrets--wickedest ideas ran riot in the confusion of a mind not wide
enough to hold life's large passions. She began to be sorry that she was
not like those other women--to hate the modesty that had lost her a lover.

To be like Barbara Castlemaine! That was woman's only royalty. To rule with
sovereign power over the hearts and senses of men. A King for her lover,
constant in inconstancy, always going back to her from every transient
fancy--her property, her chattel; and the foremost wits and dandies of the
age for her servants, her Court of adorers, whom she ruled with frowns
or smiles, as her humour prompted. To be daring, profuse, reckless,
tyrannical; to suffer no control of heaven or men--yes, that was, indeed,
to be a Queen! And compared with such empire, the poor authority of the
Précieuse, dictating the choice of adjectives, condemning pronouns,
theorising upon feelings and passions of which in practice she knows
nothing, was a thing for scornfullest laughter.




CHAPTER XX.

PHILASTER.


January was nearly over, the memorial service for the martyred King was
drawing near, and royalty and fashion had deserted Whitehall for Hampton
Court; yet the Farehams lingered at their riverside mansion. His lordship
had business in London, while Sir Denzil Warner, who came to Fareham House
daily, was also detained in the city by some special attraction, which made
hawk and hound, and even his worthy mother's company, indifferent to him.

Lady Fareham had an air of caring for neither town nor country, but on the
whole preferred town.

"London has become a positive desert--and the smoke from the smouldering
ruins poisons the garden and terrace whenever there is an east wind," she
complained. "But Oxfordshire would be a worse desert--and I believe I
should die of the spleen in a week, if I trusted myself in that great
rambling Abbey. I can just suffer life in London; so I suppose I had best
stay till his lordship has finished his business, about which he is so
secret and mysterious."

Denzil was more devoted, more solicitous to please than ever; and had a
better chance of pleasing now that most of her ladyship's fine visitors
had left town. He read aloud to Hyacinth and her sister as they worked--or
pretended to work--at their embroidery frames. He played the organ, and
sang duets with Angela. He walked with her on the terrace, in the cold,
bleak afternoon, and told her the news of the town--not the scandals and
trivialities which alone interested Lady Fareham, but the graver facts
connected with the state and the public welfare--the prospects of war or
peace, the outlook towards France and Spain, Holland and Sweden, Andrew
Marvel's last speech, or the last grant to the King, who might be relied
on to oppose no popular measure when his lieges were about to provide a
handsome subsidy or an increase of his revenue.

"We are winning our liberties from him," Denzil said.

"For the mess of pottage we give, the money he squanders on libertine
pleasures, England is buying freedom. Yet why, in the name of common sense,
maintain this phantom King, this Court which shocks and outrages every
decent Englishman's sense of right, and maintains an ever-widening hotbed
of corruption, so that habits and extravagances once unknown beyond that
focus of all vice, are now spreading as fast as London; and wherever there
are bricks and mortar there are profligacy and irreligion? Can you wonder
that all the best and wisest in this city regret Cromwell's iron rule, the
rule of the strongest, and deplore that so bold a stroke for liberty should
have ended in such foolish subservience to a King of whom we knew nothing
when we begged him to come and reign over us?"

"But if you win liberty while he is King, if wise laws are established--"

"Yes; but we might have been noble as well as free. There is something so
petty in our resumed bondage. Figure to yourself a thoroughbred horse that
had kicked off the traces, and stood free upon the open plain with arched
neck and lifted nostrils, sniffing the morning air! and behold he creeps
back to his harness, and makes himself again a slave! We had done with
the Stuarts, at the cost of a tragedy, and in ten years we call them back
again, and put on the old shackles; and for common sense, religion, and
freedom, we have the orgies of Whitehall, and the extravagance of Lady
Castlemaine. It will not last, Angela; it cannot last. I was with his
lordship in Artillery Row last night, and we talked with the blind sage who
would sacrifice the remnant of his darkened days in the cause of liberty."

"Sir Denzil, I hope you are not plotting mischief--you and my brother,"
Angela said anxiously. "You are so often together; and his lordship has
such a preoccupied air."

"No, no, there is no conspiring; but there is plenty of discontent. It
would need but little to fire the train. Can any man in his senses be happy
when he sees his country, which ten years ago was at the pinnacle of
power and renown, sinking to the appanage of a foreign sovereign; England
threatened with a return to Rome; honest men forbidden to preach the
gospel; and innocent seekers after truth hounded off to gaol, to rot
among malefactors, because they have dared to worship God after their own
fashion?"

"Where was your liberty of conscience under the Protectorate, when the
Liturgy was forbidden as if it were an unholy thing, when the Anglican
priests were turned out of their pulpits, and the Anglican service
tolerated in only one church in all this vast London?" Angela asked
indignantly.

"That was a revolt of deep thinkers against a service which has all the
mechanical artifice of Romanism without its strong appeal to the heart and
the senses--dry, empty, rigid--a repetition of vain phrases. If I am ever
to bow my neck beneath the Church's yoke, let me swallow the warm-blooded
errors of Papacy rather than the heartless formalism of English
Episcopacy."

"But what can you or Fareham--or a few good men like you--do to change
established things? Remember Venner's plot, and how many lives were wasted
on that foolish, futile attempt. You can only hazard your lives, die on the
scaffold. Or would you like to see civil war again; the nation divided into
opposite camps; Englishmen fighting with Englishmen? Can you forget that
dreadful last year of the Rebellion? I was only a little child; but it is
branded deep on my memory. Can you forget the murder of the King? He was
murdered; let Mr. Milton defend the deed as he can with his riches of big
words. I have wept over the royal martyr's own account of his sufferings."

"Over Dr. Gauden's account, that is to say. 'Eikon Basilike' was no more
written by Charles than by Cromwell. It was a doctored composition--a
churchman's spurious history, trumped up by Charles's friends and
partisans, possibly with the approval of the King himself. It is a fine
piece of special pleading in a bad cause."

"You make me hate you when you talk so slightingly of that so ill-used
King. You will make me hate you more if you lead Fareham into danger by
underhand work against the present King."

"Lies Fareham's safety so very near your heart?"

"It lies in my heart," she answered, looking at him, and defying him with
straight, clear gaze. "Is he not my sister's husband, and to me as a
brother? Do you expect me to be careless about his fate? I know you are
leading him into danger. Some mischief must come of these visits to Mr.
Milton, a Republican outlaw, who has escaped the penalty of his treasonous
pamphlets only because he is blind and old and poor. I doubt there is
danger in all such conferences. Fareham is at heart a Republican. It would
need little persuasion to make him a traitor to the King."

"You have it in your power to make me so much your slave, that I would
sacrifice every patriotic aspiration at your bidding, Angela," Denzil
answered gravely.

"I know not if this be the time to speak, or if, after waiting more than a
year, I may not even now be premature. Dearest girl, you know that I love
you--that I haunt this house only because you live here; that I am in
London only because my star shines there; that above all public interests
you rule my life. I have exercised a prodigious patience, only because I
have a prodigious resolution. Is it not time for me to reap my reward?"

"Oh, Denzil, you fill me with sorrow! Have I not said everything to
discourage you?"

"And have I not refused to be discouraged? Angela, I am resolved to
discover the reason of your coldness. Was there ever a young and lovely
woman who shut love out of her heart? History has no record of such an
one. I am of an appropriate age, of good birth and good means, not
under-educated, not brutish, or of repulsive face and figure. If your heart
is free I ought to be able to win it. If you will not favour my suit, it
must be because there is some one else, some one who came before me, or who
has crossed my path, and to whom your heart has been secretly given."

She had turned from red to pale as he spoke. She stood before him in the
winter light, with her colour changing, her hands tightly clasped, her eyes
cast down, and tears trembling on the long dark lashes.

"You have no right to question me. It is enough for you to have my honest
answer. I esteem you, but I do not love you; and it distresses me when you
talk of love."

"There is some one else, then! I knew it. There is some one else. For me
you are marble. You are fire for him. He is in your heart. You have said
it"

"How dare you----" she began.

"Why should I shrink from warning you of your danger? It is Fareham you
love. I have seen you tremble at his touch--start at the sound of his
footstep--that step you know so well. His footstep? Why, the very air he
breathes carries to you the consciousness of his approach. Oh, I have
watched you both, Angela; and I know, I know. Jealous pangs have racked me,
day after day; yet I have hung on. I have been very patient. 'She knows not
the sinful impulses of her own heart,' I said, 'knows not in her purity how
near she goes to a fall. Here, in her sister's house, passionately loved by
her sister's husband! She calls him 'brother,' whose eyes cannot look at
her without telling their story of wicked love. She walks on the edge of
a precipice--self-deceived. Were I to abandon her she might fall. My
affection is her only safeguard; and by winning her to myself I shall
snatch her from the pit of hell.'"

It was the truth he was telling her. Yes; even when Fareham was harshest,
she had been dimly conscious that love was at the root of his unkindness.
The coldness that had held them apart since that midnight meeting had been
ice over fire. It was jealousy that had made him so angry. No word of love,
directly spoken, had ever offended her ear; but there had been many a
speech of double meaning that had set her wondering and thinking.

And, oh! the guilt of it, when an honourable man like Denzil set her sin
before her, in plain language. She stood aghast at her own wickedness. That
which had been a sin of thought only, a secret sorrow, wrestled with in
many an hour of heartfelt prayer, with all the labour of a soul that sought
heavenly aid against earthly temptation, was conjured into hideous reality
by Denzil's plain speech. To love her sister's husband, to suffer his
guilty love, to know gladness only in his company, to be exquisitely happy
were he but in the same room with her--to sink to profoundest melancholy
when he was absent. Oh, the sin of it! In what degree did her guilt differ
from that of the women of the Court, who had each her open secret in some
base intrigue that all the world knew and laughed at? She had been kept
aloof from that libertine crew; but was she any better than they? Was
Fareham, who openly scorned the royal debauchee, was he any better than the
King?

She remembered how he had talked of Lord Sandwich, making excuses for a
perverted love. She had heard him speak of other offenders in the same
strain. He had been ever ready to recognise fatality where a good Catholic
would have perceived only sin.

"Angela, believe me, you are drifting helmless in perilous waters," Denzil
urged, while she stood beside him in mute distress. "Let me be your strong
rock. Only give me the promise of your hand. I can be patient still. I will
give time for love to grow. Grant me but the right to guard you from the
danger of an unholy passion that is always near you in this house."

"You pretend to be his lordship's friend, and you speak slander of him."

"I am his friend. I could find it in my heart to pity him for loving you.
Indeed, it has been in friendship that I have tried to interest him in a
great national question--to wean him from his darling sin. But were you my
wife he should never cross our threshold. The day that made us one should
make you and Fareham strangers. It is for you to choose, Angela, between
two men who love you--one near your own age, free, God-fearing; the other
nearly old enough to be your father, bound by the tie which your Church
deems indissoluble, whose love is insult and pollution, and can but end in
shame and despair. It is for you to choose between honest and dishonest
love."

"There is a nobler choice open to me," she said, more calmly than she had
yet spoken, and with a pale dignity in her countenance that awed him. A
thrill of admiration and fear ran along his nerves as he looked at her. She
seemed transfigured. "There is a higher and better love," she said. "This
is not the first time that I have considered a sure way out of all
my difficulties. I can go back to the convent where, in my dear Aunt
Anastasia, I saw so splendid an example of a holy life hidden from the
world."

"Life buried in a living grave!" cried Denzil, horror-stricken at the idea
of such a sacrifice. "Free-will and reason obscured in a cloud of incense!
All the great uses of a noble life brought down to petty observances and
childish mummeries, prayers and genuflections before waxen relics and
dressed-up madonnas. Oh, my dearest girl, next worst only to the dominion
of sin is the slavery of a false religion. I would have thee free as
air--free and enlightened--released from the trammels of Rome, happy in
thyself and useful to thy fellow-creatures."

"You see, Sir Denzil, even if we loved each other, we could never think
alike," Angela said, with a gentle sadness. "Our minds would always dwell
far apart. Things that are dear and sacred to me are hateful to you."

"If you love me I could win you to my way of thinking," he said.

"You mean that if I loved you I should love you better than I love God?"

"Not so, dear. But you would open your mind to the truth. St. Paul
sanctified union between Christian and pagan, and deemed the unbelieving
wife sanctified by the believing husband. There can be no sin, therefore,
despite my poor mother's violent opinions, in the union of those who
worship the same God, and whose creed differs only in particulars. 'How
knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife?' Indeed, love, I
doubt not my power to wean you from the errors of your early education."

"Cannot you see how wide apart we are? Every word you say widens the gulf
betwixt us. Indeed, Sir Denzil, you had best remain my friend. You can be
nothing else."

She turned from him almost impatiently. Young, handsome, of a frank and
generous nature, he yet lacked the gifts that charm women; or at least this
one woman was cold to him. It might be that in his own nature there was a
coldness, a something wanting, the fire we miss in that great poet of the
age, whose verse could rise to themes transcendent, but never burnt with
the white heat of human passion.

Papillon came flying along the terrace, her skirts and waving tresses
spread wide in the wind, a welcome intruder.

"What are you and Sir Denzil doing in the cold? I have news for my dear,
dearest auntie. My lord is in a good humour, and _Philaster_ is to be acted
by the Duke's servants, and her ladyship's footmen are keeping places for
us in the boxes. I have only seen three plays in my life, and they were all
sad ones. I wish _Philaster_ was a comedy. I should like to see _Love in a
Tub_. That must be full of drollery. But his honour likes only grave plays.
Be brisk, auntie! The coach will be at the door directly. Come and put on
your hood. His lordship says we need no masks. I should have loved to wear
a mask. Are you coming to the play, Sir Denzil?"

"I know not if I am bidden, or if there be a place for me."

"Why, you can stand with the fops in the pit, and you can buy us some China
oranges. I heard Lady Sarah tell my mother that the new little actress with
the pretty feet was once an orange-girl, who lived with Lord Buckhurst.
Why did he have an orange-girl to live with him? He must be vastly fond of
oranges. I should love to sell oranges in the pit, if I could be an actress
afterwards. I would rather be an actress than a duchess. Mademoiselle
taught me Chiméne's tirades in Corneille's _Cid_. I learn quicker than any
pupil she ever had. Monsieur de Malfort once said I was a born actress,"
pursued Papillon, as they walked to the house.

_Philaster!_ That story of unhappy love--so pure, patient, melancholy,
disinterested. How often Angela had hung over the page, in the solitude of
her own chamber! And to hear the lines spoken to-day, when a tempest of
emotion had been raised in her breast, with Fareham by her side; to meet
his glances at this or that moment of the play, when the devoted girl was
revealing the secret of her passionate heart. Yet never was love freer from
taint of sin, and the end of the play was in no wise tragic. That pure
affection was encouraged and sanctified by the happy bride. Bellario was
not to be banished, but sheltered.

Alas! yes; but this was love unreturned. There was no answering warmth on
Philaster's part, no fire of passion to scathe and destroy; only a gentle
gratitude for the girl's devotion--a brother's, not a lover's regard.

She found Fareham and her sister in the hall, ready to step into the coach.

"I saw the name of your favourite play on the posts as I walked home," he
said; "and as Hyacinth is always teasing me for denying her the play-house,
I thought this was a good opportunity for pleasing you both."

"You would have pleased me more if you had offered me the chance of seeing
a new comedy," his wife retorted, pettishly.

"Ah, dearest, let us not resume an old quarrel. The play-wrights of
Elizabeth's age were poets and gentlemen. The men who write for us are
blackguards and empty-headed fops. We have novelty, which is all most of us
want, a hundred new plays in a year, of which scarce one will be remembered
after the year is out."

"Who wants to remember? The highest merit in a play is that it should be a
reflection of to-day; and who minds if it be stale to-morrow? To hold the
mirror up to nature, doesn't your Shakespeare say? And what more transient
than the image in a glass? A comedy should be like one's hat or one's gown,
the top of the mode to-day, and cast off and forgotten, in a week."

"That is what our fine gentlemen think; who are satisfied if their wit gets
three days' acceptance, and some substantial compliment from the patron to
whom they dedicate their trash."

His lordship's liveries and four grey horses made a stir in Lincoln's Inn
Fields, and startled the crowd at the doors of the New Theatre; and within
the house Lady Fareham and her sister divided the attention of the pit
with their royal highnesses the Duke and Duchess, who no longer amused
or scandalised the audience by those honeymoon coquetries which had
distinguished their earlier appearances in public. Duchess Anne was growing
stout, and fast losing her beauty, and Duke James was imitating his
brother's infidelities, after his own stealthy fashion; so it may be that
Clarendon's daughter was no more happy than her sister-in-law the Queen,
nor than her father the Chancellor, over whom the shadows of royal
disfavour were darkening.

Lady Fareham lolled languidly back in her box, and let all the audience see
her indifference to Fletcher's poetic dialogue. Angela sat motionless, her
hands clasped in her lap, entranced by that romantic story, and the acting
which gave life and reality to that poetic fable, as well it might when the
incomparable Betterton played Philaster. Fareham stood beside his wife,
looking down at the stage, and sometimes, as Angela looked up, their eyes
met in one swift flash of responsive thought; met and glanced away, as if
each knew the peril of such meetings--

    "If it be love
    To forget all respect of his own friends
    In thinking on your face."

Was it by chance that Fareham sighed as those lines were spoken? And
again--

    "If, when he goes to rest (which will not be),
    'Twixt every prayer he says he names you once."

And again, was it chance that brought that swift, half-angry, questioning
look upon her from those severe eyes in the midst of Philaster's tirade?--

    "How heaven is in your eyes, but in your hearts
    More hell than hell has; how your tongues, like scorpions,
    Both heal and poison; how your thoughts are woven
    With thousand changes in one subtle web,
    And worn so by you. How that foolish man
    That reads the story of a woman's face,
    And dies believing it is lost for ever."

It was Angela whose eyes unconsciously sought his when that passage
occurred which had written itself upon her heart long ago at Chilton when
she first read the play--

    "Alas, my lord, my life is not a thing
    Worthy your noble thoughts; 'tis not a life,
    'Tis but a piece of childhood thrown away."

What was her poor life worth--so lonely even in her sister's house--so
desolate when his eyes looked not upon her in kindness? After having lived
for two brief summers and winters in his cherished company, having learnt
to know what a proud, honourable man was like, his disdain of vice, his
indifference to Court favour, his aspirations for liberty; after having
known him, and loved him with silent and secret love, what better could she
do than bury herself within convent walls, and spend the rest of her days
in praying for those she loved? Alas, he had such need that some faithful
soul should soar heavenward in supplication for him who had himself so weak
a hold upon the skies! Alas, to think of him as unbelieving, putting his
trust in the opinions of infidels like Hobbes and Spinoza, rather than
leaning on that Rock of Ages the Church of St. Peter.

If she could not live for him--if it were a sin even to dwell under the
same roof with him--she could at least die for him--die to the world of
pleasure and folly, of beauty and splendour, die to friendship and love;
sink all individuality under the monastic rule; cease to be, except as
a part in a great organisation, an atom acting and acted upon by higher
powers; surrendering every desire and every hope that distinguished her
from the multitude of women vowed to a holy life.

    "Never, sir, will I
    Marry; it is a thing within my vow."

The voice of the actress sounded silver-clear as Bellario spoke her last
speech, finishing her story of a love which can submit to take the lower
place, and asks but little of fate.

    "It is a thing within my vow."

The line repeated itself in Angela's mind as Denzil met them at the door,
and handed her into the coach.

Should she prove of weaker stuff than the sad Eufrasia, and accept a
husband she did not love? This humdrum modern age allowed of no romance.
She could not stain her face with walnut juice, and disguise herself as
a footboy, and live unknown in his service, to wait upon him when he was
weary, to nurse him when he was sick. Such a life she would have deemed
exquisitely happy; but the hard everyday world had no room for such
dreams. In this unromantic age Dion's daughter would be recognised within
twenty-four hours of her putting on male attire. The golden days of poetry
were dead. Una would find no lion to fawn at her feet. She would be mobbed
in the Strand.

"Oh, that it could have been!" thought Angela, as the coach jolted and
rumbled through the narrow ways, and shaved awkward corners with its
ponderous wheels, and got its horses entangled with other noble teams, to
the provocation of much ill-language from postillions, and flunkeys, and
linkmen, for it was dark when they came out of the theatre, and a thick
mist was rising from the river, and flambeaux were flaring up and down the
dim narrow thoroughfares.

"They light the streets better in Paris," complained Hyacinth. "In the Rue
de Touraine we had a lamp to every house."

"I like to see the links moving up and down," said Papillon; "'tis ever so
much prettier than lanterns that stand still--like that one at the corner."

She pointed to a small round lamp that made a bubble of light in an abyss
of gloom.

"Here the lamps stink more than they light," said Hyacinth. "How the coach
rocks--those blockheads will end by upsetting it. I should have been twice
as well in my chair."

Angela sat in her place, lost in thought, and hardly conscious of the
jolting coach, or of Papillon's prattle, who would not be satisfied till
she had dragged her aunt into the conversation.

"Did you not love the play, and would you not love to be a princess like
Arethusa, and to wear such a necklace? Mother's diamonds are not half as
big."

"Pshaw, child, 'twas absolute glass--arrant trumpery."

"But her gown was not trumpery. It was Lady Castlemaine's last birthday
gown. I heard a lady telling her friend about it in the seat next mine.
Lady Castlemaine gave it to the actress; and it cost three hundred
pounds--and Lady Castlemaine is all that there is of the most extravagant,
the lady said, and old Rowley has to pay her debts--(who is old Rowley, and
why does he pay people's debts?)--though she is the most unscrupulous--I
forget the word--in London."

"You see, madam, what a good school the play-house is for your child," said
Fareham grimly.

"I never asked you to take our child there."

"Nay, Hyacinth; but a mother should enter no scene unfit for her daughter's
innocence."

"Oh, my lord, your opinions are of the Protectorate. You would be better in
New England--tilling your fields reclaimed from the waste."

"Yes, I might be better there, reclaimed from the waste--of London life.
Strange that your talk should hit upon New England. I was thinking of that
New World not an hour ago at the play--thinking what a happy innocent life
a man might lead there, were he but young and free, with one he loved."

"Innocent, yes; happy, no; unless he were a savage or a peasant," Hyacinth
exclaimed disdainfully. "We that have known the grace and beauty of life
cannot go back to the habits of our ancestors, to eat without forks, and
cover our floors with rushes instead of Persian carpets."

"The beauty and grace of life--houses that are whited sepulchres, banquets
where there is no love."

The coach stopped before the tall Italian doorway, and Fareham handed out
his wife and sister in silence; but there was one of the party to whom it
was unnatural to be mute.

Papillon sprang off the coach step into her father's arms.

"Sweetheart, why are you so sad?" she asked. "You look more unhappy than
Philaster when he thought his lady loved him not."

She would not be put off, but hung about him all the length of the
corridor, to the door of his room, where he parted from her with a kiss on
her forehead.

"How your lips burn!" she cried. "I hope you are not sickening for the
plague. I dreamt last night that the contagion had come back; and that our
new glass coach was going about with a bell collecting the dead."

"Thou hadst eaten too much supper, sweet. Such dreams are warnings against
excess of pies and jellies. Go, love; I have business."

"You have always business now. You used to let me stay with you--even when
you was busy," Henriette remonstrated, dejectedly, as the sonorous oak door
closed against her.

Fareham flung himself into his chair in front of the large table, with
its heaped-up books and litter of papers. Straight before him there lay
Milton's pamphlet--a publication of ten years ago; but he had been reading
it only that morning--"The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce."

There were sentences which seemed to him to stand out upon the page, almost
as if written in fire; and to these he recurred again and again, brooding
over and weighing every word. "....Neither can this law be of force to
engage a blameless creature to his own perpetual sorrow, mistaken for his
expected solace, without suffering charity to step in and do a confessed
good work of parting those whom nothing holds together but this of God's
joining, falsely supposed against the express end of his own ordinance....
'It is not good,' said He, 'that man should be alone; I will make him a
helpmeet for him.' From which words, so plain, less cannot be concluded,
nor is by any learned interpreter, than that in God's intention a meet and
happy conversation is the chiefest and noblest end of marriage.... Again,
where the mind is unsatisfied, the solitariness of man, which God had
namely and principally ordered to prevent by marriage, hath no remedy, but
lies in a worse condition than the loneliest single life; for in single
life the absence and remoteness of a helper might inure him to expect his
own comforts out of himself, or to seek with hope; but here the continual
sight of his deluded thoughts, without cure, must needs be to him, if
especially his complexion incline him to melancholy, a daily trouble and
pain of loss, in some degree like that which reprobates feel."

He closed the book, and started up to pace the long, lofty room, full of
shadow, betwixt the light of the fire and that one pair of candles on his
reading desk.

"Reprobate! Yes. Am not I a reprobate, and the worst, plotting against
innocence? New England," he repeated to himself. "How much the name
promises. A new world, a new life, and old fetters struck off. God, if it
could be done! It would hurt no one--no one--except perhaps those children,
who might suffer a brief sorrow--and it would make two lives happy that
must be blighted else. Two lives! Am I so sure of her? Yes, if eyes speak
true. Sure as of my own fond passion. The contagion, quotha! I have
suffered that, sweet, and know its icy sweats and parching heats; but
'tis not so fierce a fever as that devilish disease, the longing for your
company."




CHAPTER XXI.

GOOD-BYE, LONDON.


Sitting in her own room before supper, a letter was brought to Angela--a
long letter, closely written, in a neat, firm hand she knew very well.

It was from Denzil Warner; a letter full of earnest thought and warm
feeling, in which he pursued the subject of their morning's discourse.

"We were interrupted before I had time to open my heart to you, dearest,"
he wrote; "and at a moment when we had touched on the most delicate
point in our friendship--the difference in our religious education and
observance. Oh, my beloved, let not difference in particulars divide two
hearts that worship the same God, or make a barrier between two minds that
think alike upon essentials. The Christ who died for you is not less my
Saviour because I love not to obtrude the dressed-up image of His earthly
mother between His Godhead and my prayers. In the regeneration of baptism,
in the sanctity of marriage, in the resurrection of the body, and the
life of the world to come, in the reality of sin and the necessity for
repentance, I believe as truly as any Papist living. Let our lives be but
once united, who knows how the future may shape and modify our minds and
our faith? I may be brought to your way of thinking, or you to mine. I will
pledge myself never to be guilty of disrespect to your religion, or to
unkindly urge you to any change in your observances. I am not one of those
who have exchanged one tyranny for another, and who, released from the
dominion of Rome, have become the slave of the Covenant. I have been taught
by one who, himself deeply religious, would have all men free to worship
God by the light of their own conscience; and to my wife, that dearer half
of my soul, I would allow perfect freedom. I suffer from the lack of poetic
phrases with which to embellish the plain reality of my love; but be sure,
Angela, that you may travel far through the world, and receive many a
flowery compliment to your beauty, yet meet none who will love you as
faithfully as I have loved you for this year last past, and as I doubt I
shall love you--happy or unfortunate in my wooing--for all the rest of my
life. Think, dearest, whether it were not wise on your part to accept the
chaste and respectful homage of a suitor who is free to love and cherish
you, and thus to shield yourself from the sinful pursuit of one who offends
Heaven and dishonours you whenever he looks at you with the eyes of a
lover. I would not write harshly of a man whose very sin I pity, and whom
I believe not wholly vile; but for him, as for me, that were a happy day
which should make you my wife, and thus end the madness of unholy hopes. I
would again urge that Lady Fareham desires our union with all a sister's
concern for you, and more than a friend's tenderness to me.

"I beseech your pardon and indulgence for my rough words of this morning.
God forbid that I should impute one unworthy thought to her whose virtues I
honour above all earthly merit. If your heart inclines towards one whom it
were misery for you to love, I know that it must be with an affection pure
and ethereal as the love of the disguised girl in Fletcher's play. But, ah,
dearest angel, you know not the peril in which you walk. Your innocent mind
cannot conceive the audacious height to which unholy love may climb in a
man's fiery nature. You cannot fathom the black depths of such a character
as Fareham--a man as capable of greatness in evil as of distinction in
good. Forget not whose fierce blood runs in those veins. Can you doubt his
audacity in wrong-doing, when you remember that he comes of the same stock
which produced that renegade and tyrant, Thomas Wentworth--a man who would
have waded deep in the blood of a nation to reach his desired goal, all the
history of whose life was expressed by him in one word--'thorough'?

"Do you consider what that word means to a man over whose heart sin has
taken the upper hand? Thorough! How resolute in evil, how undaunted and
without limit in baseness, is he who takes that word for his motto! Oh, my
love, there are dragons and lions about thy innocent footsteps--the dragons
of lust, the lions of presumptuous love. Flee from thy worst enemy,
dearest, to the shelter of a heart which adores thee; lean upon a breast
whose pulses beat for thee with a truth that time cannot change.

"Thine till death,

"WARNER."

Angela tore up the letter in anger. How dared he write thus of Lord
Fareham? To impute sinful passions, guilty desires--to enter into another
man's mind, and read the secret cipher of his thoughts and wishes with
an assumed key, which might be false? His letter was a bundle of false
assumptions. What right had he to insist that her brother-in-law cared for
her with more than the affection authorised by affinity? He had no right.
She hated him for his insolent letter. She scorned the protection of his
love. She had her refuge and her shelter in a holier love than his. The
doors of the old home would open to her at a word.

She sat on a low stool in front of the hearth, while the pile of ship
timber on the andirons burnt itself out and turned from red to grey. She
sat looking into the dying fire and recalling the pictures of the past;
the dull grey convent rooms and formal convent garden; the petty rules and
restrictions; the so-frequent functions--low mass and high, benedictions,
vespers--the recurrent sound of the chapel bell. The few dull books,
permitted in the hour of so-called recreation; the sombre grey gown,
which was the only relief from perpetual black; the limitations of
that colourless life. She had been happy with the Ursulines under her
kinswoman's gentle sway. But could she be happy with the present Superior,
whose domineering temper she knew? She had been happy in her ignorance of
the outer world; but could she be happy again in that grey seclusion--she
who had sat at the banquet of life, who had seen the beauty and the variety
of her native land? To be an exile for the rest of her days, in the
hopeless gloom of a Flemish convent, among the heavy faces of Flemish nuns!

In the intensity of introspective thought she had forgotten one who had
forbidden that gloomy seclusion, and to whom it would be as natural for
her to look for protection and refuge as to convent or husband. From her
thoughts to-night the image of her wandering father had been absent. His
appearances in her life had been so rare and so brief, his influence on her
destiny so slight, that she was forgetful of him now in this crisis of her
fate.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was within a week of that evening that the sisters were startled by the
arrival of their father, unannounced, in the dusk of the winter afternoon.
He had come by slow stages from Spain, riding the greater part of the
journey--like Howell, fifty years earlier--attended only by one faithful
soldier-servant, and enduring no small suffering, and running no slight
risk, upon the road.

"The wolves had our provender on more than one occasion," he told them.
"The wonder is they never had us or our hackneys. I left Madrid in July,
not long after the death of my poor friend Fanshawe. Indeed, it was his
friendship and his good lady's unvarying courtesy that took me to the
capital. We had last met at Hampton Court, with the King, shortly before
his Majesty's so ill-advised flight; and we were bosom-friends then. And
so, he being dead of a fever early in the summer, I had no more to do but
to travel slowly homeward, to end my days in my own chimney-corner, and to
claim thy promise, Angela, that thou wouldst keep my house, and comfort my
declining years."

"Dear father!" Angela murmured, hanging over him as he sat in the
high-backed velvet chair by the fire, while her ladyship's footmen set
a table near him, with wine and provisions for an impromptu meal, Lady
Fareham directing them, and coming between-whiles to embrace her father in
a flutter of spirits, the firelight shining on her flame-coloured velvet
gown and primrose taffety petticoat, her pretty golden curls and sparkling
Sévigné, her ruby necklace and earrings, and her bright restless eyes.

While the elder sister was all movement and agitation, the younger stood
calm and still beside her father's chair, her hands clasped in his, her
thoughtful eyes looking down at him as he talked, stopping now and then in
his story of adventures to eat and drink.

He looked much older than when he surprised her in the Convent garden. His
hair and beard, then iron grey, were now silver white. He wore his own
hair, which was abundant, and a beard cut after the fashion she knew in the
portraits of Henri Quatre. His clothes also were of that style, which lived
now only in the paintings of Vandyke and his school.

"How the girl looks at me!" Sir John said, surprising his daughter's
earnest gaze. "Does she take me for a ghost?"

"Indeed, sir, she may well fancy you have come back from the other world
while you wear that antique suit," said Hyacinth. "I hope your first
business to-morrow will be to replenish your wardrobe by the assistance
of Lord Rochester's tailor. He is a German, and has the best cut for a
justau-corps in all the West End. Fareham is shabby enough to make a wife
ashamed of him; but his clothes are only too plain for his condition. Your
Spanish cloak and steeple hat are fitter for a travelling quack doctor than
for a gentleman of quality, and your doublet and vest might have come out
of the ark."

"If I change them, it will be but to humour your vanity, sweetheart,"
answered her father. "I bought the suit in Paris three years ago, and
I swore I would cast them back upon the snip's hands if he gave me any
new-fangled finery. But a riding-suit that has crossed the Pyrenees and
stood a winter's wear at Montpelier--where I have been living since
October--can scarce do credit to a fine lady's saloon; and thou art finest,
I'll wager, Hyacinth, where all are fine."

"You would not say that if you had seen Lady Castlemaine's rooms. I would
wager that her gold and silver tapestry cost more than the contents of my
house."

"Thou shouldst not envy sin in high places, Hyacinth."

"Envy! I envy a----"

"Nay, love, no bad names! 'Tis a sorry pass England has come to when the
most conspicuous personage at her Court is the King's mistress. I was with
Queen Henrietta at Paris, who received me mighty kindly, and bewailed with
me over the contrast betwixt her never-to-be-forgotten husband and his
sons. They have nothing of their father, she told me, neither in person nor
in mind. 'I know not whence their folly comes to them!' she cried. It would
have been uncivil to remind her that her own father, hero as he was, had
set no saintly example to royal husbands; and that it is possible our
princes take more of their character from their grandfather Henry than from
the martyr Charles. Poor lady, I am told she left London deep in debt,
after squandering her noble income of these latter years, and that she has
sunk in the esteem of the French court by her alliance with Jermyn."

"I can but wonder that she, above all women, should ever cease to be a
widow."

"She comes of a light-minded race and nation, Angela; and it is easy to her
to forget; or she would not easily forget that so-adoring husband whose
fortunes she ruined. His most fatal errors came from his subservience to
her. When I saw her in her new splendour at Somerset House, all smiles and
gaiety, with youth and beauty revived in the sunshine of restored fortune,
I could but remember all he was, in dignity and manly affection, proud and
pure as King Arthur in the old romance, and all she cost him by womanish
tyrannies and prejudices, and difficult commands laid upon him at a
juncture of so exceeding difficulty."

The sisters listened in respectful silence. The old cavalier cut a fresh
slice of chine, sighed, and continued his sermon.

"I doubt that while we, the lookers on, remember, they, the actors, forget;
for could the son of such a noble victim wallow in a profligate court,
surrender himself to the devilish necromancies of vicious women and viler
men, if he remembered his father's character, and his father's death? No;
memory must be a blank, and we, who suffered with our royal master, are
fools to prate of ingratitude or neglect, since the son who can forget such
a father may well forget his father's servants and friends. But we will not
talk of public matters in the first hour of our greeting. Nor need I prate
of the King, since I have not come back to England to clap a periwig over
my grey hairs, and play waiter upon Court favour, and wear out the back
of my coat against the tapestry at Whitehall, standing in the rear of the
crowd, to have my toes trampled upon by the sharp heels of Court ladies,
and an elbow in my stomach more often than not. I am come, like Wolsey,
girls, to lay my old bones among you. Art thou ready, Angela? Hast thou
had enough of London, and play-houses, and parks; and wilt thou share thy
father's solitude in Buckinghamshire?"

"With all my heart, sir."

"What! never a sigh for London pleasures? Thou hast the great lady's air
and carriage in that brave blue taffety. The nun I knew three years ago has
vanished. Can you so lightly renounce the splendour of this house, and your
sister's company, to make a prosing old father happy?"

"Indeed, sir, I am ready to go with you."

"How she says that--with what a countenance of woeful resignation! But I
will not make the Manor Moat too severe a prison, dearest. You shall visit
London, and your sister, when you will. There shall be a coach and a team
of stout roadsters to pull it when they are not wanted for the plough. And
the Vale of Aylesbury is but a long day's journey from London, while 'tis
no more than a morning's ride to Chilton."

"I could not bear for her to be long away from me," said Hyacinth. "She is
the only companion I have in the world."

"Except your husband."

"Husbands such as mine are poor company. Fareham has a moody brow, and a
mind stuffed with public matters. He dines with Clarendon one day, and with
Albemarle another; or he goes to Deptford to grumble with Mr. Evelyn; or he
creeps away to some obscure quarter of the town to hob-nob with Milton,
and with Marvel, the member for Hull. I doubt they are all of one mind in
abusing his Majesty, and conspiring against him. If I lose my sister I
shall have no one."

"What, no one; when you have Henriette, who even three years ago had
shrewdness enough to keep an old grandfather amused with her impertinent
prattle?"

"Grandfathers are easily amused by children they see as seldom as you have
seen Papillon. To have her about you all day, with her everlasting chatter,
and questions, and remarks, and opinions (a brat of twelve with opinions),
would soon give you the vapours."

"I am not so subject to vapours as you, child. Let me look at you, now the
candles are lighted."

The footmen had lighted clusters of wax candles on either side the tall
chimney-piece.

Sir John drew his elder daughter to the light, and scrutinised her face
with a father's privilege of uncompromising survey.

"You paint thick enough, i' conscience' name, though not quite so thick as
the Spanish señoras. They are browner than you, and need a heavier hand
with white and red. But you are haggard under all your red. You are not the
woman I left in '65."

"I am near two years older than the woman you left; and as for paint, there
is not a woman over twenty in London who uses as little red and white as I
do."

"What has become of Fareham to-night?" Sir John asked presently, when
Hyacinth had picked up her favourite spaniel to nurse and fondle, while
Angela had resumed her occupation at an embroidery frame, and a reposeful
air as of a long-established domesticity had fallen upon the scene.

"He is at Chilton. When he is not plotting he rushes off to Oxfordshire
for the hunting and shooting. He loves buglehorns and yelping curs,
and huntsmen's cracked voices, far before the company of ladies or the
conversation of wits."

"A man was never meant to sit in a velvet chair and talk fine. It is all
one for a French Abbé and a few old women in men's clothing to sit round
the room and chop logic with a learned spinster like Mademoiselle Scudéry;
but men must live _sub Jove_, unless they are statesmen or clerks. They
must have horses and hounds, gun and spaniel, hawk or rod. I am glad
Fareham loves sport. And as for that talk of conspiring, let me not hear it
from thee, Hyacinth. 'Tis a perilous discourse to but hint at treason;
and your husband is a loyal gentleman who loves, and"--with a wry
face--"reveres--his King."

"Oh, I was only jesting. But, indeed, a man who so disparages the things
other people love must needs be a rebel at heart. Did you hear of Monsieur
de Malfort while you were at Paris?"

The inquiry was made with that over-acted carelessness which betrays hidden
pain; but the soldier's senses had been blunted by the rough-and-tumble of
an adventurer's life, and he was not on the alert for shades of feeling.

Angela accepted her father's return, with the new duties it imposed upon
her, as if it had been a decree of Heaven. She put aside all consideration
of that refuge which would have meant so complete a renunciation and
farewell. On her knees that night, in the midst of fervent prayers, her
tears streamed fast at the thought that, secure in the shelter of her
father's love, in the peaceful solitude of her native valley, she could
look to a far-off future when she and Fareham might meet with out fear of
sin, when no cloud of passion should darken his brotherly affection for
her; when his heart, now estranged from holy things, would have returned to
the faith of his ancestors, reconciled to God and the Church. She could but
think of him now as a fallen angel--a wanderer who had strayed far from the
only light and guide of human life, and was thus a mark for the tempter.
What lesser power than Satan's could have so turned good to evil; the
friendship of a brother to the base passion which had made so wide a gulf
between them; and which must keep them strangers till he was cured of his
sin? Only to diabolical possession could she ascribe the change that had
come over him since those happy days when she had watched the slow dawn
of health upon his sunken cheeks, when he and she had travelled together
through the rich autumn woods, along the pleasant English roads, and when,
in the leisure of the slow journey, he had poured out his thoughts to her,
the story of his life, his opinions, expatiating in fraternal confidence
upon the things he loved and the things he hated. And at Chilton, she
looked back and remembered his goodness to her, the pains he had taken in
choosing horses for her to ride, their long mornings on the river with
Henriette, their hawking parties, and in all his tender brotherly care of
her. The change in him had come about by almost imperceptible degrees:
but it had been chiefly marked by a fitful temper that had cut her to the
quick; now kind; now barely civil; courting her company to-day; to-morrow
avoiding her, as if there were contagion in her presence. Then, after
the meeting at Millbank, there had come a coldness so icy, a sarcasm so
cutting, that for a long time she had thought he hated as much as he
despised her. She had withered in his contempt. His unkindness had
overshadowed every hour of her life, and the longing to cry out to him
"Indeed, sir, your thoughts wrong me. I am not the wretch you think,"
had been almost too much for her fortitude. She had felt that she must
exculpate herself, even though in so doing she should betray her sister.
But honour, and affection for Hyacinth, had prevailed; and she had bent her
shoulders to the burden of undeserved shame. She had sat silent and abashed
in his presence, like a guilty creature.

Sir John Kirkland spent a week at Fareham House, employed in choosing a
team of horses, suitable alike for the road and the plough, looking
out, among the coachmakers, for a second-hand travelling carriage, and
eventually buying a coach of Lady Fanshawe's, which had been brought from
Madrid with the rest of her very extensive goods and chattels.

One need scarce remark that it was not one of the late Ambassador's state
carriages, his ruby velvet coach, with fringes that cost three hundred
pounds, or his brocade carriage, but a coach that had been built for the
everyday use of his suite.

Sir John also bought a little plain silver, in place of that fine
collection of silver and parcel-gilt which had been so willingly sacrificed
to royal necessities; and though he breathed no sigh over past losses, some
bitter thoughts may have come across his cheerfulness as he heard of the
splendour and superabundance of Lady Castlemaine's plate and jewels, or of
the ring worth six hundred pounds lately presented to a pretty actress.

In a week he was ready for Buckinghamshire; and Angela had her trunks
packed, and had bid good-bye to her London friends, amidst the chatter of
Lady Fareham's visiting-day, and the clear, bell-like clash of delicate
china tea-cups--miniature bowls of egg-shell porcelain, without handles,
and to be held daintily between the tips of high-bred fingers.

There was a chorus of courteous bewailing at the notion of Mrs. Kirkland's
departure.

Sir Ralph Masaroon pretended to be in despair.

"Is it not bad enough to have had the coldest winter my youth can remember?
But you must needs take the sun from our spring. Why, the maids of honour
will count for handsome when you are gone. What's that Butler says?--

    'The twinkling stars begin to muster,
    And glitter with their borrowed lustre.'

But what's to become of me without the sun? I shall have no one to
side-glass in the Ring."

"Indeed, Sir Ralph, I did not know that you ever side-glassed me!"

"What, you have suffered my devotion to pass unperceived? When I have
broken half a dozen coach windows in your service, rattling a glass down
with a vehemence which would have startled a Venus in marble to turn and
recognise an adorer! Round and round the Ring I have driven for hours, on
the chance of a look. Nay, marble is not so coy as froward beauty! And at
the Queen's chapel have I not knelt at the Mass morning after morning, at
the risk of being thought a Papist, for the sake of seeing you at prayers;
and have envied the Romish dog who handed you the aspersoir as you went
out? And you to be unconscious all the time!"

"Nay, 'tis so much happier for me, Sir Ralph, since you have given me a
reserve of gratified vanity that will last me a year in the country, where
I shall see nothing but ploughmen and bird-boys."

"Look out for the scarecrows in Sir John's fields, for the odds are you
will see me some day disguised as one."

"Why disguised?" asked his friend Mr. Penington, who had lately produced a
comedy that had been acted three afternoons at the Duke's Theatre, and one
evening at Court, which may be taken as a prosperous run for a new play.

Lady Sarah Tewkesbury held forth on the pleasures of a country life, and
lamented that family connections and the necessity of standing well with
the Court constrained her to spend the greater part of her existence in
town.

"I am like Milton," she said. "I adore a rural life. To hear the cock--

    'From his watchtower in the skies,
    When the horse and hound do rise.'

Oh, I love buttercups and daisies above all the Paris finery in the
Exchange; and to steep one's complexion in May-dew, and to sup on a
syllabub or a dish of frumenty--so cheap, too, while it costs a fortune but
to scrape along in London."

"The country is well enough for a month at hay-making, to romp with a bevy
of London beauties in the meadows near Tunbridge Wells, or to dance to
a couple of fiddles on the Common by moonlight," said Mr. Penington;
whereupon all agreed that Tunbridge Wells, Epsom, Doncaster, and Newmarket
were the only country possible to people of intellect.

"I would never go further than Epsom, if I had my will," said Sir Ralph;
"for I see no pleasure in Newmarket for a man who keeps no running-horses,
and has no more interest in the upshot of a race than he might have in
a maggot match on his own dining-table, did he stake high enough on the
result."

"But my sister is not to be buried in Buckinghamshire all the year round,"
explained Hyacinth. "I shall fetch her here half a dozen times in a season;
and her shortest visits must be long enough to take the country freshness
out of her complexion, and save her from becoming a milkmaid."

"Gud, to see her freckled!" cried Penington. "I could as soon imagine
Helen with a hump. That London pallor is the choicest charm in a girl
of quality--a refined sickliness that appeals to the heart of a man of
feeling, an 'if-you-don't-lend-me-your-arm-I-shall-swoon' sort of air. Your
country hoyden, with her roses-and-cream complexion, and open-air manners,
is more shocking than Medusa to a man of taste."

The talk drifted to other topics at the mention of Buckingham, who had but
lately been let out of the Tower, where he and Lord Dorchester had been
committed for scuffling and quarrelling at the Canary Conference.

"Has your ladyship seen the Duke and Lord Dorchester since they came out of
the house of bondage?" asked Lady Sarah. "I think Buckingham was never so
gay and handsome, and takes his imprisonment as the best joke that ever
was, and is as great at Court as ever."

"His Majesty is but too indulgent," said Masaroon, "and encourages the Duke
to be insolent and careless of ceremony. He had the impertinence to show
himself at chapel before he had waited on his Majesty."

"Who was very angry and forbade him the Court," said Penington. "But
Buckingham sent the King one of his foolish, jesting letters, capped with
a rhyme or two; and if you can make Charles Stuart laugh you may pick his
pocket----"

"Or seduce his mistress----"

"Oh, he will forgive much to wit and gaiety. He learnt the knack of taking
life easily, while he led that queer, shifting life in exile. He was a
cosmopolitan and a soldier of fortune before he was a King _de facto;_ and
still wears the loose garments of those easy, beggarly days, when he had
neither money nor care. Be sure he regrets that roving life--Madrid, Paris,
the Hague--and will never love a son as well as little Monmouth, the child
of his youth."

"What would he not give to make that base-born brat Prince of Wales?
Strange that while Lord Ross is trying to make his offspring illegitimate
by Act of Parliament, his master's anxieties should all tend the other
way."

"Don't talk to me of Parliament!" cried Lady Sarah; "the tyranny of the
Rump was nothing to them. Look at the tax upon French wines, which will
make it almost impossible for a lady of small means to entertain her
friends. And an Act for burying us all in woollen, for the benefit of the
English trade in wool."

"But, indeed, Lady Sarah, it is we of the old faith who have most need to
complain," said Lady Fareham, "since these wretches make us pay a double
poll-tax; and all our foreign friends are being driven away for the same
reason--just because the foolish and the ignorant must needs put down the
fire to the Catholics."

"Indeed, your ladyship, the Papists have had an unlucky knack at lighting
fires, as Smithfield and Oxford can testify," said Penington; "and perhaps,
having no more opportunity of roasting martyrs, it may please some of
your creed to burn Protestant houses, with the chance of cooking a few
Protestants inside 'em."

       *       *       *       *       *

Angela had drawn away from the little knot of fine ladies and finer
gentlemen, and was sitting in the bay window of an ante-room, with
Henriette and the boy, who were sorely dejected at the prospect of losing
her. The best consolation she could offer was to promise that they should
be invited to the Manor Moat as soon as she and her father had settled
themselves comfortably there--if their mother could spare them.

Henriette laughed outright at this final clause.

"Spare us!" she cried. "Does she ever want us? I don't think she knows when
we are in the room, unless we tread upon her gown, when she screams out
'Little viper!' and hits us with her fan."

"The lightest touch, Papillon; not so hard as you strike your favourite
baby."

"Oh, she doesn't hurt me; but the disrespect of it! Her only daughter, and
nearly as high as she is!"

"You are an ungrateful puss to complain, when her ladyship is so kind as to
let you be here to see all her fine company."

"I am sick of her company, almost always the same, and always talking about
the same things. The King, and the Duke, and the General, and the navy;
or Lady Castlemaine's jewels, or the last new head from Paris, or her
ladyship's Flanders lace. It is all as dull as ditch-water now Monsieur de
Malfort is gone. He was always pleasant, and he let me play on his guitar,
though he swore it excruciated him. And he taught me the new Versailles
coranto. There's no pleasure for any one since he fell ill and left
England."

"You shall come to the Manor. It will be a change, even though you hate the
country and love London."

"I have left off loving London. I have had too much of it. If his lordship
let us go to the play-house often it would be different. Oh, how I
loved Philaster--and that exquisite page! Do you think I could act that
character, auntie, if his lordship's tailor made me such a dress?"

"I think thou hast impudence for anything, dearest."

"I would rather act that page than Pauline in _Polyeucte_, though
Mademoiselle swears I speak her tirades nearly as well as an actress she
once saw at the Marais, who was too old and fat for the character. How I
should love to be an actress, and to play tragedy and comedy, and
make people cry and laugh! Indeed, I would rather be anything than a
lady--unless I could be exactly like Lady Castlemaine."

"Ah, Heaven forbid!"

"But why not? I heard Sir Ralph tell mother that, let her behave as badly
as she may, she will always be atop of the tree, and that the young sparks
at the Chapel Royal hardly look at their prayer-books for gazing at her,
and that the King----"

"Ah, sweetheart, I want to hear no more of her!"

"Why, don't you like her? I thought you did not know her. She never comes
here."

"Are there any staghounds in the Vale of Aylesbury?" asked the boy, who had
been looking out of the window, watching the boats go by, unheeding his
sister's babble.

"I know not, love; but there shall be dogs enough for you to play with,
I'll warrant, and a pony for you to ride. Grandfather shall get them for
his dearest."

Sir John was fond of Henriette, whom he looked upon as a marvel of
precocious brightness; but the boy was his favourite, whom he loved with an
old man's half-melancholy affection for the creature which is to live and
act a part in the world when he, the greybeard, shall be dust.




CHAPTER XXII.

AT THE MANOR MOAT.


Solid, grave, and sober, grey with a quarter of a century's neglect, the
Manor House, in the valley below Brill, differed in every detail from the
historical Chilton Abbey. It was a moated manor house, the typical house of
the typical English squire; an E-shaped house, with a capacious roof that
lodged all the household servants, and clustered chimney-stacks that
accommodated a great company of swallows. It had been built in the reign
of Henry the Seventh, and was coeval with its distinguished neighbour, the
house of the Verneys, at Middle Claydon, and it had never served any other
purpose than to shelter Englishmen of good repute in the land. Souvenirs
of Bosworth field--a pair of huge jack-boots, a two-handed sword, and a
battered helmet--hung over the chimney-piece in the low-ceiled hall; but
the end of the civil war was but a memory when the Manor House was built.
After Bosworth a slumberous peace had fallen on the land, and in the
stillness of this secluded valley, sheltered from every bleak wind by
surrounding hills and woods, the gardens of the Manor Moat had grown into
a settled beauty that made the chief attraction of a country seat which
boasted so little of architectural dignity, or of expensive fantasy in
moulded brick and carved stone. Plain, sombre, with brick walls and heavy
stone mullions to low-browed windows, the Manor House stood in the midst
of gardens such as the modern millionaire may long for, but which only the
grey old gardener Time can create.

There was more than a mile of yew hedge, eight feet high, and three
feet broad, walling in flower garden and physic garden, the latter the
particular care of the house-mothers of previous generations, the former a
paradise of those old flowers which bloom and breathe sweet odours in the
pages of Shakespeare, and jewel the verse of Milton. The fritillary here
opened its dusky spotted petals to drink the dews of May; and here, against
a wall of darkest green, daffodils bloomed unruffled by March winds.

Verily a garden of gardens; but when Angela came there in the chill
February there were no flowers to welcome her, only the long, straight
walks beside those walls of yew, and the dark shining waters of the moat
and the fish-pond, reflecting the winter sun; and over all the scene a
quiet as of the grave.

A little colony of old servants had been left in the house, which had
escaped confiscation, albeit the property of a notorious Malignant, perhaps
chiefly on account of its insignificance, the bulk of the estate having
been sold by Sir John in '44, when the king's condition was waxing
desperate, and money was worth twice its value to those who clung to hope,
and were ready to sacrifice their last jacobus in the royal cause. The poor
little property--shrunk to a home-farm of ninety acres, a humble homestead,
and the Manor House--may have been thought hardly worth selling; or Sir
John's rights may have been respected out of regard for his son-in-law,
who, on the maternal side, had kindred in high places under the
Commonwealth, a fact of which Hyacinth occasionally reminded her husband,
telling him that he was by hereditary instinct a rebel and a king-slayer.

The farm had been taken to by Sir John's steward, a man who in politics was
of the same easy temper as the Vicar of Bray in religion, and was a staunch
Cromwellian so long as Oliver or Richard sat at Whitehall, or would have
tossed up his cap and cheered for Monk, as Captain-General of Great
Britain, had he been called upon to till his fields and rear his stock
under a military despotism. It mattered little to any man living at ease in
a fat Buckinghamshire valley what King or Commonwealth ruled in London, so
long as there was a ready market at Aylesbury or Thame for all the farm
could produce, and civil war planted neither drake nor culverin on Brill
Hill.

The old servants had vegetated as best they might in the old house, their
wages of the scantiest; but to live and die within familiar walls was
better than to fare through a world which had no need of them. The younger
members of the household had scattered, and found new homes; but the
grey-haired cook was still in her kitchen; the old butler still wept over
his pantry, where a dozen or so of spoons, and one battered tankard of
Heriot's make, were all that remained of that store of gold and silver
which had been his pride forty years ago, when Charles was bringing home
his fair French bride, and old Thames at London was alight with fire-works
and torches, and alive with music and singing, as the city welcomed its
young Queen, and when Reuben Holden was a lad in the pantry, learning to
polish a salver or a goblet, and sorely hectored by his uncle the butler.

Reuben, and Marjory, the old cook, famous in her day as any _cordon-bleu_,
were the sole representatives of the once respectable household; but a
couple of stout wenches had been hired from the cluster of labourers'
hovels that called itself a village; and these had been made to drudge as
they had never drudged before in the few days of warning which prepared
Reuben for his master's return.

Fires had been lighted in rooms where mould and mildew had long prevailed;
wainscots had been scrubbed and polished till the whole house reeked
of bees-wax and turpentine, to a degree that almost overpowered those
pervading odours of damp and dry rot, which can curiously exist together.
The old furniture had been made as bright as faded fabrics and worm-eaten
wood could be made by labour; and the leaping light of blazing logs,
reflected on the black oak panelling, gave a transient air of cheerfulness
to the spacious dining-parlour where Sir John and his daughter took their
first meal in the old home. And if to Angela's eye, accustomed to the
Italian loftiness of the noble mansions on the Thames, the broad oak
crossbeams seemed coming down upon her head, there was at least an air of
homely snugness in the low darkly coloured room.

On that first evening there had been much to interest and engage her. She
had the old house to explore, and dim childish memories to recall. Here was
the room where her mother died, the room in which she herself had first
seen the light--perhaps not until a month or so after her birth, since
the seventeenth-century baby was not flung open-eyed into her birthday
sunshine, but was swaddled and muffled in a dismal apprenticeship to life.
The chamber had been hung with "blacks" for a twelvemonth, Reuben told her,
as he escorted her over the house, and unlocked the doors of disused rooms.

The tall bedstead with its red and yellow stamped velvet curtains and
carved ebony posts looked like an Indian temple. One might expect to
see Buddha squatting on the embroidered counterpane--the work of half a
lifetime. When the curtains were drawn back, a huge moth flew out of the
darkness, and spun and wheeled round the room with an awful humming noise,
and to the superstitious mind might have suggested a human soul embodied in
this phantasmal greyness, with power of sound in such excess of its bulk.

"Sir John never used the room after her ladyship's death," Reuben
explained, "though 'tis the best bed-chamber. He has always slept in the
blue room, which is at the furthest end of the gallery from the room that
has been prepared for madam. We call that the garden room, and it is mighty
pretty in summer."

In summer! How far it seemed to summer-time in Angela's thoughts! What a
long gulf of nothingness to be bridged over, what a dull level plain to
cross, before June and the roses could come round again, bringing with them
the memory of last summer; and the days she had lived under the same roof
with Fareham, and the evenings when they had sat in the same room, or
loitered on the terrace, pausing now and then beside an Italian vase of
gaudy flowers to look at this or that, or to watch the mob on the river;
and those rare golden days, like that at Sayes Court, which she had spent
in some excursion with Fareham and Henriette.

"I hope madam likes the chamber we have prepared for her?" the old man
said, as she stood dreaming.

"Yes, my good friend, it is very comfortable. My woman complained of the
smoky chimney in her chamber; but no doubt we shall mend that by-and-by."

"It would be strange if a gentlewoman's servant found not something to
grumble about," said Reuben; "they have ever less work to do than any one
else in the house, and ever make more trouble than their mistresses. I'll
settle the hussy, with madam's leave."

"Nay, pray, Mr. Reuben, no harshness. She is a willing, kind-hearted girl,
and we shall find plenty of work for her in this big house where there are
so few servants."

"Oh, there's work enough for sure, if she'll do it, and is no fine city
madam that will scream at sight of a mouse, belike."

"She is a girl I had out of Oxfordshire."

"Oh, if she comes out of Oxfordshire, from his lordship's estate, I dare
swear she is a good girl. I hate your London trash; and I think the great
fire would have been a blessing in disguise if it had swept away most of
such trumpery."

"Oh, sir, if a Romanist were to say as much as that!" said Angela,
laughing.

"Oh, madam, I am not one of they fools that say because half London was
burnt the Papishes must have set it on fire. What good would the burning of
it do 'em, poor souls? And now they are to pay double taxes, as if it was
a sure thing their faggots kindled the blaze. I know how kind and sweet a
soul a Papish may be, though she do worship idols; for I had the honour to
serve your ladyship's mother from the hour she first entered this house
till the day I smuggled the French priest by the back stairs to carry her
the holy oils. Ah! she was a noble and lovely lady. Madam's eyes are of her
colour; and, indeed, madam favours her mother more than my Lady Fareham
does."

"Have you seen Lady Fareham of late years?"

"Ay, madam, she came here in her coach-and-six the summer before the
pestilence, with her two beautiful children, and a party of ladies and
gentlemen. They rode here from his Grace of Buckingham's new mansion by
the Thames--Clefden, I think they call it; and they do say his Grace do so
lavish and squander money in the building of it, that belike he will be
ruined and dead before his palace be finished. There were three coaches
full, with servants and what not. And they brought wine, and capons ready
dressed, and confectionery, and I helped to serve a collation for them in
the garden. And after they had feasted merrily, with a vast quantity of
sparkling French wine, they all rushed through the house like madcaps,
laughing and chattering, regular French magpies, for there was more of 'em
French than English, her ladyship leading them, till she comes to the door
of this room, and finds it locked, and she begins to thump upon the panels
like a spoilt child, and calls, 'Reuben, Reuben, what is your mystery? Sure
this must be the ghost-chamber! Open, open, instantly.' And I answered her
quietly, ''Tis the chamber where that sweet angel, your ladyship's mother,
lay in state, and it has never been opened to strangers since she died.'
And all in the midst of her mirth, the dear young lady burst out weeping,
and cried, 'My sweet, sweet mother! I remember the last smile she gave me
as if it was yesterday.' And then she dropped on her knees and crossed
herself, and whispered a prayer, with her face close against the door;
and I knew that she was praying for her lady-mother, as the way of your
religion is, madam, to pray for the dead; and sure, though it is a simple
thing, it can do no harm; and to my thinking, when all the foolishness is
taken out of religion the warmth and the comfort seem to go too; for I know
I never used to feel a bit more comfortable after a two hours' sermon, when
I was an Anabaptist."

"Are you not an Anabaptist now, Reuben?"

"Lord forbid, madam! I have been a member of the Church of England ever
since his Majesty's restoration brought the Vicar to his own again, and
gave us back Christmas Day, and the organ, and the singing-boys."

Angela's life at the Manor was so colourless that the first blossoming of a
familiar flower was an event to note and to remember. Life within convent
walls would have been scarcely more tranquil or more monotonous. Sir John
rode with his hounds three or four times a week, or was about the fields
superintending the farming operations, walking beside the ploughman as he
drove his furrow, or watching the scattering of the seed. Or he was in
the narrow woodlands which still belonged to him, and Angela, taking her
solitary walk at the close of day, heard his axe ringing through the wintry
air.

It was a peaceful, and should have been a pleasant, life, for father and
for daughter. Angela told herself that God had been very good to her in
providing this safe haven from tempestuous seas, this quiet little world,
where the pulses of passion beat not; where existence was like a sleep, a
gradual drifting away of days and weeks, marked only by the changing note
of birds, the deepening umber on the birch, the purpling of beech buds, and
the starry celandine shining out of grassy banks that had so lately been
obliterated under the drifted snow.

"I ought to be happy," she said to herself of a morning, when she rose from
her knees, and stood looking across the garden to the grassy hills beyond,
while the beads of her rosary slipped through her languid fingers--"I ought
to be happy."

And then she turned from the sunny window with a sigh, and went down the
dark, echoing staircase to the breakfast parlour, where her own little
silver chocolate-pot looked ridiculously small beside Sir John's quart
tankard, and where the crisp, golden rolls, baked in the French fashion
by the maid from Chilton, who had been taught by Lord Fareham's _chef_,
contrasted with the chine of beef and huge farmhouse loaf that accompanied
the knight's old October.

After all his Continental wanderings Sir John had come back to substantial
English fare with an unabated relish; and Angela had to sit down, day after
day, to a huge joint and an overloaded dish of poultry, and to reassure her
father when he expressed uneasiness because she ate so little.

"Women do not want much food, sir. Martha's rolls, and our honey, and the
conserves old Marjory makes so well, are better for me than the meat which
suits your heartier appetite."

"Faith, child, if I played no stouter a part at table than you do, I should
soon be fit to play living skeleton at Aylesbury Fair. And I dubitate as to
your diet-loaves and confectionery suiting you better than a slice of chine
or sirloin, for you have a pale cheek and a pensive eye that smite me to
the heart. Indeed, I begin to question if I was kind to take you from all
the pleasures of the town to be mewed up here with a rusty old soldier."

"Indeed, sir, I could be happier nowhere than here. I have had enough of
London pleasures; and I was meditating upon returning to the convent, when
you came to put an end to all my perplexities; and, sir, I think God sent
you to me when I most needed a father's love."

She went to him and knelt by his chair, hiding her tearful eyes against the
cushioned arm. But, though he could not see her face, he heard the break in
her voice, and he bent down and lifted her drooping head on his breast, and
kissed the soft brown hair, and embraced her very tenderly.

"Sweetheart, thou hast all a father's love, and it is happiness to me to
have thee here; but old as I am, and with so little cunning to read a
maiden's heart, I can read clear enough to know thou art not happy.
Whisper, dearest. Is it a sweetheart who sighs for thy favours far off, and
will not beard this old lion in his den? My gentle Angela would make no ill
choice. Fear not to trust me, my heart. I will love whom you love, favour
whom you favour. I am no tyrant, that my sweet daughter should grow pale
with keeping secrets from me."

"Dear father, you are all goodness. No, there is no one--no one! I am happy
with you. I have no one in the world but you, and, in a so much lesser
degree of love, my sister and her children--"

"And Fareham. He should be to you as a brother. He is of a black
melancholic humour, and not a man whom women love; but he has a heart of
gold, and must regard you with grateful affection for your goodness to him
when he was sick. Hyacinth is never weary of expatiating upon your devotion
in that perilous time."

"She is foolish to talk of services I would have given as willingly to a
sick beggar," Angela answered, impatiently.

Her face was still hidden against her father's breast; but she lifted her
head presently, and the pale calmness of her countenance reassured him.

"Well, it is uncommon strange," he said, "if one so fair has no sweetheart
among all the sparks of Whitehall."

"Lord Fareham hates Whitehall. We have only attended there at great
festivals, when my sister's absence would have been a slight upon her
Majesty and the Duchess."

"But my star, though seldom shining there, should have drawn some
satellites to her orbit. You see, dearest, I can catch the note of Court
flattery. Nay, I will press no questions. My girl shall choose her own
partner; provided the man is honest and a loyal servant of the King. Her
old father shall set no stumbling-block in the high-road to her happiness.
What right has one who is almost a pauper to stipulate for a wealthy
son-in-law?"




CHAPTER XXIII.

PATIENT, NOT PASSIONATE.


The quiet days went on, and the old Cavalier settled down into a tranquil
happiness, which comforted his daughter with the feeling of duty
prosperously fulfilled. To make this dear old man happy, to be his
companion and friend, to share in his rides and rambles, and of an evening
to play the games he loved on the old shovel-board in the hall, or an
old-fashioned game at cards, or backgammon beside the fire in the panelled
parlour, reconciled her to the melancholy of an existence from which hope
had vanished like a light extinguished. It seemed to her as if she had
dropped back into the old life with her great-aunt. The Manor House was
just a little gayer than the Flemish Convent--for the voices and footsteps
of the few inhabitants had a freer sound, which made the few seem more
populous than the many. And then there were the dogs. What a powerful
factor in home life those four-footed friends were! Out-of-doors a stone
barn had been turned into a kennel for five couple of foxhounds; indoors a
couple of setters, sent by a friend over sea from Waterford, had insinuated
themselves into the parlour, where they established themselves as household
favourites, to the damage of those higher hereditary qualities which fitted
them for distinction with the guns. Indeed, the old Knight was too fond of
his fireside companions to care very much if he missed a bird now and then
because Cataline was over-fed or Caesar disobedient. They stood sentinel on
each side of his chair at dinner, like supporters to a coat-of-arms. Angela
had her own particular favourite in a King Charles's spaniel. It was the
very dog which had first greeted her in the silence of the plague-stricken
house. She had chosen this one from the canine troop when her sister
offered her the gift of a dog at parting, though Hyacinth had urged her to
take something younger than this, which was over five years old.

"He will die just when you love him best," she said.

"Nay; but such partings must come. I love this one because he was with me
in fear and sadness. He used to cling to me, and look up and lick my face,
as if he were telling me to hope, when my brother seemed marked for death."

"Poor Fareham! Did you desire every dog in the house--and my spaniels are
of the same breed as the King's, and worth fifty pound apiece--you have
a right to take them. But, indeed, I would rather you chose a younger
dog--and with a shorter nose; but, of course, if you like this one
best----"

Angela held by her first choice, and Ganymede was the companion of all her
hours, walked and lived with her, and slept on a satin cushion at the foot
of her spacious four-post bed, and fretted and whined if she left him shut
in an empty room for half an hour; yet with all his refinements, and his
air of being as dainty a gentleman as any spark of quality, he had a gross
passion for the kitchen, and after nibbling sweet cakes delicately out
of his mistress's taper fingers, he would waddle through a labyrinth of
passages, and find his way to the hog-tub, there to wallow in slush and
broken victuals, till he all but drowned himself in a flood of pot-liquor.
It was hard to reconcile so much beauty and grace, such eloquent eyes and
satin coat, with tastes and desires so vulgar; and Angela sighed over him
when a scullion brought him to her, greasy and penitent, to crouch at her
feet, and deprecate her disgust with an abject tail.

Oh, tranquil, duteous life, how fair it might have seemed, as spring
advanced, and the garden smiled with the promise of summer, were it not for
that aching sense of loss, the some one missing, whose absence made all
things grey and cold!

Yes, she knew now, fully realising as she had never done before, how long
and how utterly her life had been influenced by an affection which even to
contemplate was mortal sin. Yet to extinguish memory was not within her
power. She looked back and remembered how Fareham's protecting love had
enfolded her with its gentle warmth, in those happy days at Chilton; how
all she knew of poetry and the drama, of ethics and philosophy, had been
learnt from him. She recalled his evident delight in opening the rich
treasures of a mind which he had never ceased to cultivate, even amidst the
vicissitudes of a soldier's life, in making her familiar with the writers
he loved, and teaching her to estimate, and to discuss them. And in
all their talk together he had been for the most part careful to avoid
disparagement of the religion in which she believed--so that it was only
some chance revelation of the infidel's narrow outlook that reminded her of
his unbelief.

Yes, his love had been round her like an atmosphere; and she had been
exquisitely happy while that unquestioning affection was hers. On her part
there had been neither doubt nor fear. It seemed the most natural thing in
the world that he should be fond of her and she of him. Affinity had made
them brother and sister; and then they had been together in sickness and in
peril of death. It might be true, as he himself had affirmed, that her
so happy arrival had saved his life; since just those hours between the
departure of his attendants and the physician's evening visit may have been
the crisis of his disease.

Well, it was past--the exquisite bliss, the unconscious sin, the
confidence, the danger. All had vanished into the grave of irrecoverable
days.

She had heard nothing from Denzil since she left London, nor had she
acknowledged his letter. Her silence had doubtless angered him, and all
was at an end between them, and this was what she wished. Hyacinth and her
children were at Chilton, whence came letters of complaining against the
dulness of the country, where his lordship hunted four times a week, and
spent all the rest of his time in his library, appearing only "at our
stupid heavy meals; and that not always, since on his hunting days he is
far afield when I have to sit down to the intolerable two-o'clock dinner,
and make a pretence of eating--as if anybody with more intellectuals than
a sheep could dine; or as if appetite came by staring at green fields! You
remember how in London supper was the only meal I ever cared for. There
is some grace in a repast that comes after conversation and music, or the
theatre, or a round of visits--a table dazzling with lights, and men and
women ready to amuse, and be amused. But to sit down in broad daylight,
when one has scarce swallowed one's morning chocolate, and face a
sweltering sirloin, or open a smoking veal pie! Indeed, dearest, our whole
method of feeding smacks of a vulgar brutishness, more appropriate to a
company of Topinambous than to persons of quality. Why, oh, why must these
reeking hecatombs load our tables, when they might as easily be kept out of
sight upon a buffet? The spectacle of huge mountains of meat, the steam and
odour of rank boiled and roast under one's very nostrils, change appetite
to nausea, and would induce a delicate person to rise in disgust and fly
from the dining-room. Mais, je ne fais que divaguer; and almost forget what
it was I was so earnest to tell thee when I began my letter.

"Sir Denzil Warner has been over here, his ostensible motive a civil
inquiry after my health; but I could see that his actual purpose was to
hear of you. I told him how happily your simple soul has accommodated
itself to an almost conventual seclusion, and a very inferior style of
living--whereupon he smiled his rapture, and praised you to the skies.
'Would that she could accommodate herself to my house as easily,' he said;
'she should have every indulgence that an adoring husband could yield her.'
And then he said much more, but as lovers always sing the same repetitive
song, and have no more strings to their lyre than the ancients had before
Mercury expanded it, I confess to not listening over carefully, and will
leave you to imagine the eloquence of a manly and honourable love. Ah,
sweetheart! you do wrong to reject him. Thou hast a quiet soothing
prettiness of thine own, but art no blazing star of beauty, like the
Stewart, to bring a King to thy feet--he would have married her if poor
Catherine had not disappointed him by her recovery--and to take a Duke as
_pis aller_. Believe me, love, it were wise of you to become Lady Warner,
with an unmortgaged estate, and a husband who, in these Republican times,
may rise to distinction. He is your only earnest admirer; and a love so
steadfast, backed by a fortune so respectable, should not be discarded
lightly."

Over all these latter passages in her sister's letter Angela's eye ran
with a scornful carelessness. Her womanly pride revolted at such petty
schooling--that she should be bidden to accept this young man gratefully,
because he was her only suitor. No one else had ever cared for her pale
insignificance. She looked at her clouded image in the oblong glass that
hung on the panel above her secrétaire, and whose reflection made any
idea of her own looks rather speculative than precise. It showed her a
thoughtful face, too pale for beauty; yet she could but note the harmony of
lines which recalled that Venetian type familiar to her eye in the Titians
and Tintorets at Fareham House.

"I doubt I am good-looking enough for any one to be satisfied with the
outward semblance who valued the soul within," she thought, as she turned
from the glass with a mournful sigh.

It was not of Denzil she was thinking, but of that other who in slow
contemplative days in the library where he had taught her what books
she ought to love, and where she might never more enter, must naturally
sometimes remember her, and cast some backward thoughts to the hours they
had spent together.

Hyacinth's letter of matronly counsel was but a week old when Sir
John surprised his daughter one morning, as they sat at table, by the
announcement of a visitor to stay in the house.

"You will order the west room to be got ready, Angela, and bid Marjory Cook
serve us some of her savourest dishes while Sir Denzil stays here."

"Sir Denzil!"

"Yes, ma mie, Sir Denzil! Ventregris, the girl stares as if I had said Sir
Bevis of Southampton, or Sir Guy of Warwick! I knew this young gentleman's
father before the troubles--an honest man, though he took the wrong side He
paid for his perversity with his life; so we'll say requiescat. The young
man is a fine young man, whom I would fain have something nearer to me than
he is. So at a hint from your sister I have asked him to bring his fishing
tackle and whip our streams for a May trout or two. He may catch a finer
fish than trout, perhaps, while he is a-fishing; if you will be his guide
through the meadows."

"Father, how could you----"

"Ah! thou art a sly one, fair mistress. Who was it told me there was no
one? 'No one, dear father, and indeed, sir, I was thinking of the convent
when you came to London,' while here was as handsome a spark as one would
meet in a day's march, sighing and dying for you."

"Father, I do protest to you----" she began, with a pale distressed look
that vouched for her earnestness; but the Knight had his face in the
tankard, and set it down only to pursue his own train of thought.

"If it had not have been for that little bird at Chilton you might have
hoodwinked me as blind as ever gerfalcon was hooded. Well, the young man
will be here before evening. I would not force your inclinations, but it is
the dearest desire of my heart to see you happily married before I blow out
the candle, and bid my last good night. And a man of honour, handsome and
of handsomest fortune, is not to be slighted."

Angela's spirit rose against this recurrence of her sister's sermon.

"If Sir Denzil is coming to this house as my suitor, I will go to Louvain
without an hour's delay that I can help," she said resolutely.

"Why, what a vixen! Nay, dearest, there is no need for that angry flush.
The young man is too courteous to plague you with unwelcome civilities.
I saw him in London at the tennis court, and was friendly to him for his
father's memory, knowing nothing of his desire to be my son-in-law. He is a
fine player at that royal game, and a fine man. He comes here this evening
as my friend; and if you please to treat him disdainfully, I cannot help
it. But, indeed, I wonder as much as your sister why you should not
reciprocate this gentleman's love."

"When you were young, father, did you love the first comer; only because
she was handsome and civil?"

"No, child; I had seen many handsome women before I met your mother. She
came over in '35 with the Marquise, who had been lady of honour to Queen
Marie before the Princess Henriette married our King, and Queen Henriette
was fond of her, and invited her to come to London, and she divided her
life between the two countries till the troubles, when she was one of the
first to scamper off, as you know. My wife was little more than a child
when I saw her at Court, hiding behind her mother's large sleeves. I had
seen handsomer women; but she was the first whose face went straight to
my heart. And it has dwelt there ever since," he concluded, with a sudden
break in his voice.

"Then you can comprehend, dear sir, that a man may be honourable, and
courteous, and handsome, and yet not win a woman's love."

"Ah, it is not the man; it is love that should win, sweetheart. Love is
worthy of love. When that is the true coin it should buy its reward. Indeed
I have rarely seen it otherwise. Love begets love. Louise de la Vallière is
not the handsomest woman at the French Court. Her complexion has suffered
from small-pox, and she has a defective gait; but the King discovered a so
fond and romantic attachment to his person, a love ashamed of loving, the
very poetry of affection; and that discovery made him her slave. The Court
beauties--sultanas splendid as Vashti--look on in angry wonder. Louise is
adored because she began by adoring. Mind, I do not praise or excuse her,
for 'tis a mortal sin to love a married man, and steal him from his wife.
Foolish child, how your cheek crimsons! I do wrong to shock your innocence
with my babble of a King's mistress."

Denzil arrived at sunset, on horseback, with a mounted servant in
attendance, carrying his saddle-bags and fishing tackle. It was but a short
day's ride from Oxford. Fareham's rides with the hounds must have brought
him sometimes within a few miles of the Manor Moat Hyacinth and her
children might have ridden over in their coach; and indeed she had promised
her sister a visit in more than one of her letters. But there had been
always something to postpone the expedition--company at home, or bad
weather, or a fit of the vapours--so that the sisters had been as much
asunder as if the elder had been in Yorkshire or Northumberland.

Denzil brought news of the household at Chilton. Lady Fareham was as
charming as ever, and though she had complained very often of bad health,
she had been so lively and active whenever the whim took her, riding with
hawk and hound, visiting about the neighbourhood, driving into Oxford, that
Denzil was of opinion her ailments were of the spirits only, a kind of
rustic malady to which most fine ladies were subject, the nostalgia of
paving-stones and oil lamps. Henriette--she now insisted upon discarding
her nick-name--was less volatile than in London, and missed her aunt
sorely, and quarrelled with mademoiselle, who was painfully strict upon all
points of speech and manners. George's days of unalloyed idleness were also
ended, for the Roman Catholic priest was now a resident in the house as
the little boy's tutor, besides teaching 'Henriette the rudiments, and
instructing her in her mother's religion.

Denzil told them even of the guests he had met at the Abbey; but of the
master of the house his lips spoke not, till Sir John questioned him.

"And Fareham? Has he that same air of not belonging to the family which I
remarked of him in London?"

"His lordship has ever an air of being aloof from everybody," Denzil
answered gravely. "He is solitary even in his sports, and his indoor life
is mostly buried in a book."

"Ah, those books, they will be the ruin of nations! As books multiply,
great actions will grow less. Life's golden hours will be wasted in
dreaming over the fancies of dead men; and the world will be over-full of
brooding philosophers like Descartes, or pamphleteers like your friend Mr.
Milton."

"Nay, sir, the world is richer for such a man as John Milton, who has
composed the grandest poem in our language--an epic on a scale and subject
as sublime as the Divine Comedy of Dante."

"I never saw Mr. Dante's comedy acted, and confess myself ignorant of its
merits."

"Comedy, sir, with Dante, is but a name. The Italian poem is an epic, and
not a play. Mr. Milton's poem will be given to the world shortly, though,
alas! he will reap little substantial reward for the intellectual labour
of years. Poetry is not a marketable commodity in England, save when it
flatters a royal patron, or takes the vulgarer form of a stage-play. But
this poem of Mr. Milton's has been the solace of his darkened life. You
have heard, perhaps, of his blindness?"

"Yes, he had to forego his office as Latin Secretary to that villain. To my
mind the decay of sight was a judgment upon him for having written against
his murdered King, even to the denial of his Majesty's own account of his
sufferings. But I confess that even if the man had been a loyal subject,
I have little admiration for that class; scribblers and pamphleteers,
brooders over books, crouchers in the chimney-corner, who have never
trailed a pike or slept under the open sky. And seeing this vast increase
of book-learning, and the arising of such men as Hobbes, to question our
religion--and Milton to assail monarchy--I can but believe those who
say that this old England has taken the downward bent; that, as we are
dwindling in stature, so we are decaying in courage and capacity for
action."

Denzil listened respectfully to the old man's disquisitions over his
morning drink; while Reuben stood at the sideboard carving a ham or a
round of powdered beef; and while Angela sipped her chocolate out of the
porcelain cup which Hyacinth had bought for her at the Middle Exchange,
where curiosities from China and the last inventions from Paris were always
to be had before they were seen anywhere else. Nothing could be more
reverential than the young man's bearing to his host, while his quiet
friendliness set Angela at her ease, and made her think that he had
abandoned his suit, and henceforward aspired only to such a tranquil
friendship as they had enjoyed at Chilton before any word of love had been
spoken.

Apart from the question of love and marriage, his presence was in no manner
displeasing to her; indeed, the long days in that sequestered valley lost
something of their grey monotony now that she had a companion in all her
intellectual occupations. Fondly as she loved her father, she had not been
able to hide from herself the narrowness of his education and the blind
prejudice which governed his ideas upon almost every subject, from politics
to natural history. Of the books which make the greater part of a solitary
life she could never talk to him; and it was here that she had so sorely
missed the counsellor and friend, who had taught her to love and to
comprehend the great poets of the past--Homer and Virgil, Dante and
Tasso, and the deep melancholy humour of Cervantes, and, most of all, the
inexhaustible riches of the Elizabethans.

Denzil was of a temper as thoughtful, but his studies had taken a different
direction. He was not even by taste or apprehension a poet. Had he been
called upon to criticise his tutor's compositions, he might, like Johnson,
have objected to the metaphoric turns of Lycidas, and have missed the
melody of lines as musical as the nightingale. In that great poem of which
he had been privileged to transcribe many of the finest passages from the
lips of the poet, he admired rather the heroic patience of the blind
author than the splendour of the verse. He was more impressed by the
schoolmaster's learning than by that God-given genius which lifted that one
Englishman above every other of his age and country. No, he was eminently
prosaic, had sucked prose and plain-thinking from his mother's breast; but
he was not the less an agreeable companion for a girl upon whose youth an
unnatural solitude had begun to weigh heavily.

All that one mind can impart to another of a widely different fibre, Denzil
had learnt from Milton in that most impressionable period of boyhood which
he had spent in the small house in Holborn, whose back rooms looked out
over the verdant spaces of Lincoln's Inn Fields, where Lord Newcastle's
palace had not yet begun to rise from its foundations, and where the
singing birds had not been scared away by the growth of the town. A theatre
now stood where the boy and a fellow-scholar had played trap and ball,
and the stately houses of Queen Street hard by were alive with rank and
fashion.

In addition to the classical curriculum which Milton had taught with the
solemn earnestness of one in whom learning is a religion, Denzil had
acquired a store of miscellaneous knowledge from the great Republican;
and most interesting among these casual instructions had been the close
acquaintance with nature gained in the course of many a rustic ramble in
the country lanes beyond Gray's Inn, or sauntering eastward along the banks
of the limpid Lee, or in the undulating meadows beside Sir Hugh Middleton's
river. Mixed with plain facts about plant or flower, animal or insect,
Milton's memory was stored with the quaint absurdities of the Hermetic
philosophy, that curious mixture of deep-reaching theories and old women's
superstitions, the experience of the peasant transmuted by the imagination
of the adept. Sound and practical as the poet had ever shown himself--save
where passion got the upper hand of common sense, as in his advocacy
of divorce--he was yet not entirely free from a leaning to Baconian
superstitions, and may, with Gesner, have believed that the pickerel weed
could engender pike, and that frogs could turn to slime in winter, and
become frogs again in spring. Whatever rags of old-world fatuity may have
lingered in that strong brain, he had been not the less a delightful
teacher, and had imparted an ardent love of nature to his little family of
pupils in that peripatetic school between hawthorn hedges or in the open
fields by the Lee.

And now, in quiet rambles with Angela, in the midst of a landscape
transfigured by that vernal beauty which begins with the waning of April,
and is past and vanished before the end of May, Denzil loved to expound the
wonders of the infinitesimal; the insect life that sparkled and hummed in
the balmy air, or flashed like living light among the dewy grasses; the
life of plant and flower, which seemed almost as personal and conscious a
form of existence; since it was difficult to believe there was no sense of
struggle or of joy in those rapid growths which shot out from a tangle of
dark undergrowth upward to the sunlight, no fondness in the wild vines that
clung so close to some patriarchal trunk, covering decay with the
beautiful exuberance of youth. Denzil taught her to realise the wonders of
creation--most wonderful when most minute--for beyond the picturesque
and lovely in nature, he showed her those marvels of order, and law, and
adaptation, which speak to the naturalist with a stronger language than
beauty.

There was a tranquil pleasure in these rustic walks, which beguiled her
into forgetfulness that this man had ever sought to be more to her than he
was now--a respectful, unobtrusive friend. Of London, and the tumultuous
life going on there, he had scarcely spoken, save to tell her that he meant
to stand for Henley at the next Parliament; nor had he alluded to the past
at Chilton; nor ever of his own accord had he spoken Lord Fareham's name;
indeed, that name was studiously avoided by them both; and if Denzil had
never before suspected Angela of an unhappy preference for one whom she
could not love without sin, he might have had some cause for such suspicion
in the eagerness with which she changed the drift of the conversation
whenever it approached that forbidden subject.

From his Puritanical bringing up, the theory of self-surrender and
deprivation ever kept before him, Denzil had assuredly learnt to possess
his soul in patience; and throughout all that smiling month of May, while
he whipped the capricious streams that wound about the valley, with Angela
for the willing companion of his saunterings from pool to pool, he never
once alarmed her by any hint of a warmer feeling than friendship; indeed,
he thought of himself sometimes as one who lived in an enchanted world,
where to utter a certain fatal word would be to break the spell; and
whatever momentary impulse or passionate longing, engendered by a look, a
smile, the light touch of a hand, the mere sense of proximity, might move
him to speak of his love, he had sufficient self-command to keep the fatal
words unspoken. He meant to wait till the last hour of his visit. Only when
separation was imminent would he plead his cause again. Thus at the worst
he would have lost no happy hours of her company. And, in the mean time,
since she was always kind, and seemed to grow daily more familiar and at
ease in his society, he dared hope that affection for him and forgetfulness
of that other were growing side by side in her mind.

In this companionship Angela learnt many of the secrets and subtleties of
the angler's craft, as acquired by her teacher's personal experience, or
expounded in that delightful book, then less than twenty years old, which
has ever been the angler's gospel. Often after following the meandering
water till a gentle weariness invited them to rest, Angela and Denzil
seated themselves on a sheltered bank and read their Izaak Walton together,
both out of the same volume, he pleased to point out his favourite passages
and to watch her smile as she read.

Before May was ended, she knew old Izaak almost as well as Denzil, and had
learnt to throw a fly, and to choose the likeliest spot and the happiest
hour of the day for a good trout; had learnt to watch the clouds and
cloud-shadows with an angler's keen interest; and had amused herself with
the manufacture of an artificial minnow, upon Walton's recipe, devoting
careful labour and all the resources of her embroidery basket--silks and
silver thread--to perfecting the delicate model, which, when completed, she
presented smilingly to Denzil, who was strangely moved by so childish a
toy, and had some difficulty in suppressing his emotion as he held the
glistening silken fish in his hands, and thought how her tapering fingers
had caressed it, and how much of her very self seemed, as he watched her,
to have been enwrought with the fabric. So poor, so trivial a thing; but
her first gift! If she had tossed him a flower, plucked that moment, he
would have treasured it all his life; but this, which had cost her so
much careful work, was far more than any casual blossom. Something of the
magnetism of her mind had passed into the silver thread drawn so daintily
through her rosy fingers--something of the soft light in her eyes had mixed
with the blended colours of the silk. Foolish fancies these, but in the
gravest man's love there is a vein of folly.

Sometimes they rode with Sir John, and in this way explored the
neighbourhood, which was rich in historical associations--some of the
remote past, as when King John kept Christmas at Brill; but chiefly of
those troubled times through which Sir John Kirkland had lived, an active
participator in that deadly drama. He showed them the site of the garrison
at Brill, and trod every foot of the earthworks to demonstrate how the hill
had been fortified. He had commanded in the defence against Hampden and
his greencoats--that regiment of foot raised in his pastoral shire, whose
standard bore on one side the watchword of the Parliament, "God with us,"
and on the other Hampden's own device, "_Vestigia nulla retrorsum_."

"'Twas a legend to frighten some of us, who had no Latin," said Sir John;
"but we put his bumpkin greencoats to the rout, and trampled that insolent
flag in the mire."

All was peaceful now in the hamlet on the hill. Women and children were
sitting upon sunny doorsteps, with their pillows on their knees and their
bobbins moving quickly in dexterous fingers, busy at the lace-making which
had been established in Buckinghamshire more than a century before by
Catherine of Aragon, whose dowry was derived from the revenues of Steeple
Claydon. The Curate had returned to the grey old church, and rural life
pursued its slumbrous course, scarce ruffled by rumours of maritime war,
or plague, or fire. They rode to Thame--a stage on the journey to Oxford,
Angela thought, as she noted the figures on a milestone, and at a flash her
memory recalled that scene in the gardens by the river, when Fareham had
spoken for the first time of his inner life, and she had seen the man
behind the mask. She thought of her sister, so fair, so sweet, charming in
her capriciousness even, yet not the woman to fill that unquiet heart,
or satisfy that sombre and earnest nature. It was not by many words that
Fareham had revealed himself. Her knowledge of his character and feelings
went deeper than the knowledge that words can impart. It came from that
constant unconscious study which a romantic girl devotes to the character
of the man who first awakens her interest.

Angela was grave and silent throughout the drive to Thame and the return
home, riding for the most part in the rear of the two men, leaving Denzil
to devote all his attention to Sir John, who was somewhat loquacious that
afternoon, stimulated by the many memories of the troubled time which the
road awakened. Denzil listened respectfully, and went never astray in his
answers, but he looked back very often to the solitary rider who kept at
some distance to avoid the dust.

Sometimes in the early morning they all went with the otter hounds, the
Knight on horseback, Denzil and Angela on foot, and spent two or three
very active hours before breakfast in rousing the otter from his holt, and
following every flash of his head upon the stream, with that briskness and
active enjoyment which seem a part of the clear morning atmosphere, the
inspiring breath of dewy fields and flowers unfaded by the sun. All that
there was of girlishness in Angela's spirits was awakened by those merry
morning scampers by the margin of the stream, which had often to be forded
by the runners, with but' little heed of wet feet or splashed petticoat.
The Parson and his daughters from the village of St Nicholas joined in the
sport, and were invited to the morning drink and substantial breakfast
afterwards, where the young ladies were lost in admiration of Angela's
silver chocolate-pot and porcelain cups, while their clerical father owned
to a distaste for all morning drinks except such as owed their flavour and
strength to malt and hops.

"If you had lived among green fields and damp marshes as long as I have,
miss, you would know what poor stuff your chocolate is to fortify a man's
bones against ague and rheumatism. I am told the Spaniards brought it from
Mexico, where the natives eat nothing else, from which comes the copper
colour of their skins."

       *       *       *       *       *

Denzi's visit lasted over a month, during which time he rode into
Oxfordshire twice, to see Lady Warner, stopping a night each time, lest
that worthy person should fancy herself neglected.

Sir John derived the utmost pleasure from the young man's company, who bore
himself towards his host with a respectful courtesy that had gone out of
fashion after the murder of the King, and was rarely met with in an age
when elderly men were generally spoken of as "old puts," and considered
proper subjects for "bubbling."

To Denzil the old campaigner opened his heart more freely than he had ever
done to any one except a brother in arms; and although he was resolute in
upholding the cause of Monarchy against Republicanism, he owned to the
natural disappointment which he had felt at the King's neglect of old
friends, and reluctantly admitted that Charles, sauntering along Pall Mall
with ruin at his heels, and the wickedest men and women in England for his
chosen companions, was not a monarch to maintain and strengthen the public
idea of the divinity that doth hedge a King.

"Of all the lessons danger and adversity can teach he has learnt but
one," said Sir John, with a regretful sigh. "He has learnt the Horatian
philosophy--to snatch the pleasures of the day, and care nothing what may
happen on the morrow. I do not wonder that predictions of a sudden end to
this globe of ours should have been bruited about of late; for if lust
and profaneness could draw down fire from heaven, London would be in as
perilous a case as Gomorrah. But I doubt such particular judgments belonged
but to the infancy of this world, when men believed in a Personal God,
interested in all their concerns, watchful to bless or to punish. We have
now but the God of Spinoza--a God who is in all things and everywhere about
us, of whom this Creation in which we move is but the garment--a Universal
Essence which should govern and inform all we are and all we do; but not
the Judge and Father of His people, to be reached by prayer and touched by
pity."

"Ah, sir, our life here and hereafter is encompassed with mystery. To think
is to be lost on the trackless ocean of doubt. The Papists have the easiest
creed, for they believe that which they are taught, and take the mysteries
of the unseen world at second hand from their Priests. A year ago, had I
been happy enough to win your daughter, I should have tried my hardest to
wean her from Rome; but I have lived and thought since then, and I have
come to see that Calvinism is a religion of despair, and that the doctrine
of Predestination involves contradictions as difficult to swallow as any
fable of the Roman Church."

"It is well that you should be prepared to let her keep her religion; for
I doubt she has a stubborn affection for the creed she learnt in her
childhood. Indeed, it was but the other day she talked of the cloister; and
I fear she has all the disposition to that religious prison in which her
great aunt lived contentedly for the space of a long lifetime. But it is
for you, Denzil, to cure her of that fancy, and to spare me the pain of
seeing my best-beloved child under the black veil."

"Indeed, sir, if a love as earnest as man ever experienced--"

"Yes, Denzil, I know you love her; and I love you almost as if you were my
very son. In the years that went by after Hyacinth was born, before the
beginning of trouble, I used to long for a son, and I am afraid I did
sometimes distress my dear wife by dwelling too persistently upon
disappointed hopes. And then came chaos--England in arms, a rebellious
people, a King put upon his defence--and I had leisure to think of none but
my royal master. And in the thick of the strife my poor lamb was born to
me--the bringer of my life's great sorrow--and there was no more thought of
sons. So, you see, friend, the place in my heart and home has waited empty
for you. Win but yonder shy dove to consent, and we shall be of one family
and of one mind, and I as happy as any broken-down campaigner in England
can be--content to creep to the grave in obscurity, forgotten by the Prince
whose father it is my dear memory to have served."

"You loved your King, sir, I take it, with a personal affection."

"Ah, Denzil, we all loved him. Even the common people--led as they were
by hectoring preachers of sedition, of no more truth or honesty than the
mountebanks that ply their knavish trade round Henry's statue on the Pont
Neuf--even they, the very rabble, had their hours of loyalty. I rode with
his Majesty from Royston to Hatfield, in '47, when the people filled the
midsummer air with his name, from hearts melting with love and pity. They
strewed the ways with boughs, and strewed the boughs with roses. So great
honour has been seldom shown to a royal captive."

"I take it that the lower class are no politicians, and loved their King
for his private virtues."

"Never was monarch worthier to be so esteemed. He was a man of deep
affections, and it was perhaps his most fatal quality where he loved
to love too much. I have no grudge against that beautiful and most
accomplished woman he so worshipped, and who was ever gracious to me; but I
cannot doubt that Henrietta Maria was his evil star. She had the fire and
daring of her father, but none of his care and affection for the people.
The daughter of the most beloved of kings had the instincts of a tyrant,
and was ever urging her too pliant husband to unpopular measures. She
wanted to set that little jewelled shoe of hers on the neck of rebellion,
when she should have held out her soft white hand to make friends of her
foes. Her beauty and her grace might have done much, had she inherited with
the pride of the Medici something of their finesse and suavity. But he
loved her, Denzil, forgave all her follies, her lavish spending and
wasteful splendour. 'My wife is a bad housekeeper,' I heard him say once,
when she was hanging upon his chair as he sat at the end of the Council
table. The palace accounts were on the table--three thousand pounds for
a masque--extravagance only surpassed by Nicholas Fouquet twenty years
afterwards, when he was squandering the public money. 'My wife is a bad
housekeeper,' his Majesty said gently, and then he drew down the little
French museau with a caressing hand, and kissed her in the presence of
those greybeards."

"His son is strangely unlike him in domestic matters."

"His son has the manners of a Frenchman and the morals of a Turk. He is a
despot to his wife and a slave to his mistress. There never was greater
cruelty to a woman than his Majesty's treatment of Catherine while she was
still but a stranger in the land, and when he forced his notorious paramour
upon her as her lady of honour. Of honour, quotha! There was sorry store of
honour in his conduct. He had need feel the sting of remorse t'other day
when the poor lady was thought to be on her death-bed--so gentle,
so affectionate, so broken to the long-suffering of consort-queens,
apologising for having lived to trouble him. Ned Hyde has given me the
whole story of that poor lady's subjugation, for he was behind the scenes,
and in their secrets. Poor soul! Blood rushed from her ears and nostrils
when that shameless woman was brought to her, and she was carried swooning
to her chamber. And then she was sullen, and the King threatened her, and
sent away all her Portuguese, save one ancient waiting woman. I grant
you they were ugly devils, fit to set in a field to frighten crows;
but Catherine loved them. Royal treatment for a Christian Queen from a
Christian King! Could the Sophy do worse? And presently the poor lady
yielded (as most women will, for at heart they are slavish and love to be
beaten), and after holding herself aloof for a long time--a sad, silent,
neglected figure where all the rest were loud and merry--she made friends
with the lady, and even seemed to fawn upon her."

"And now I dare swear the two women mingle their tears when Charles is
unfaithful to both; or Catherine weeps while Barbara curses. That would be
more in character. Fire and not water is her ladyship's element."

"Ah, Denzil, 'tis a curious change; and to have lived to see Buckingham
murdered, and Stafford sacrificed, and the Rebellion, and the Commonwealth,
and the Restoration, and the Plague, and the Fire, and to have skirmished
in the battles of Parliaments and Princes, t'other side the Channel, and
seen the tail of the Thirty Years' War, towns ruined, villages laid waste,
where Tilly passed in blood and fire, is to have lived through as wild a
variety of fortunes as ever madman invented in a dream."

       *       *       *       *       *

Denzil lingered at the Manor, urged again and again by his host to stay
over the day fixed for departure, and so lengthening his visit with a most
willing submission till late in June, when the silence of the nightingales
made sleep more possible, and the sunset was so late and the sunrise so
early that there seemed to be no such thing as night. He had made up his
mind to plead for a hearing in the hour of farewell; and it may have been
as much from apprehension of that fateful hour as even from the delight of
being in his mistress's company that he acceded with alacrity when Sir John
desired him to stay. But an end must come at last to all hesitations, and a
familiar verse repeated itself in his brain with the persistent iteration
of cathedral chimes--

    "He either fears his fate too much,
    Or his desert is small,
    Who fears to put it to the touch,
    And win or lose it all."

Sir John pushed him towards his fate with affectionate urgency.

"Never be dastardised by a girl's refusal, man," said the Knight, warm with
his morning draught, on that last day, when the guest's horses had been
fed for a journey, and the saddle-bags packed. "Don't let a simpleton's
coldness cow your spirits. The wench likes you; else she would scarce have
endured your long sermons upon weeds and insects, or been smiling and
contented in your company all these weeks. Take heart of grace, man; and
remember that though I am no tyrannical father to drag an unwilling bride
to the altar, I have all a father's authority, and will not have my dearest
wishes baulked by the capricious humours of a coquette."

"Not for worlds, sir, would I owe to authority what love cannot freely
grant--"

"Don't chop logic, Denzil. You want my daughter; and by God you shall have
her! Win her with pretty speeches if you can. If she turn stubborn she
shall have plain English from me. I have promised not to force her
inclination; but if I am driven to harsh measures 'twill be for her own
good I am severe. Ventregris! What can fortune give her better than a
handsome and virtuous husband?"

Angela was in the garden when Denzil went to take leave of her. She was
walking up and down beside a long border of June flowers, screened from
rough winds by those thick walls of yew which gave such a comfortable
sheltered feeling to the Manor gardens, while in front of flowers and turf
there sparkled the waters of a long pond or stew, stocked with tench and
carp, some among them as ancient and as greedy as the scaly monsters of
Fontainebleau.

The sun was shining on the dark green water and the gaudy flower-bed,
and Angela's favourite spaniel was running about the grass, barking his
loudest, chasing bird or butterfly with impotent fury, since he never
caught anything. At sight of Denzil he tore across the greensward, his
silky ears flying, and barked at him as if the young man's appearance in
that garden were an insufferable impertinence; but, on being taken up in
one strong hand, changed his opinion, and slobbered the face of the foe in
an ecstasy of affection.

"Soho, Ganymede, thou knowest I bear thee a good heart, plaything and mere
pretence of a dog as thou art," said Denzil, depositing their little bundle
of black-and-tan flossiness at Angela's feet.

He might have carried and nursed his mistress's favourite with pleasure
during any casual sauntering and random talk; but a man could hardly ask to
have his fate decided for good or ill with a toy spaniel in his arms.

"My horse is at the door, Angela, and I am come to bid you good-bye," he
said in a grave voice.

The words were of the simplest; but there was something in his tone that
told her all was not said. She paled at the thought of an approaching
conflict; for she knew her father was against her, and that there must be
hard fighting.

They walked the length of flower border and lawn in silence; and then, when
they were furthest from the house, and from the hazard of eyes looking out
of windows, he stopped suddenly, and took her unresisting hand, which lay
cold in his.

"Dearest, I have kept silence through all those blessed days in which you
and I have been together; but I have not left off loving you or hoping for
you. Things have changed since I spoke to you in London last winter. I have
a powerful advocate now whose pleading ought to prevail with you--a father
whose anxious affection urges what my passionate love so ardently desires.
Indeed, dear heart, if you will be kind, you can make a father and lover
happy with one breath. You have but to say 'Yes' to the prayer you know
of----"

"Alas! Denzil, I cannot. I am your true and faithful friend. If you were
sick and alone--as his lordship was--I would go to you and nurse you, as
your friend and sister. If you were poor and I were rich, I would divide my
fortune with you. I shall always think of you with affection--always take
pleasure in your society, if you will let me; but it must be as your
sister. You have no sister, Denzil--I no brother. Why cannot we be to each
other as brother and sister?"

"Only because from the hour when your beauty and sweetness began to grow
into my mind I have been your lover, and nothing else--your adoring lover.
I cannot change my fervent hope for the poor name of friend. I can never
again dare be to you what I have been in this happy season last past,
unless you will let me be more than I have been."

"Alas!"

Only that one word, with a sorrowful shake of the graceful head, covered
with feathery ringlets in the dainty fashion of that day, so becoming in
youth, so inappropriate to advancing years, when the rich profusion of
curls came straight from Chedreux, or some of his imitators, and baldness
was hidden by the spoils of the dead.

"Alas!"

No need for more than that sad dissyllable.

"Then I am no nearer winning this dear hand than I was at Fareham House?"
he said heartbrokenly, for he had built high hopes upon her kindness and
willing companionship in that Arcadian valley.

"I told you then that I should never marry. I have not changed my mind. I
never can change. I am to be Henriette's spinster aunt."

"And Fareham's spinster sister?" said Denzil. "I understand. We are neither
of us cured of our malady. It is my disease to love you in spite of your
disdain. It is your disease to love where you should not. Farewell!"

He was gone before she could reply. The livid anger of his face, the
deep resentment in his voice, haunted her memory, and made life almost
intolerable.

"My sin has found me out!" she said to herself, as she paced the garden
with the rapid steps that indicate a distempered spirit. "What right has he
to pry into the depths of my mind, and ferret out all that there is of evil
in my nature? Well, he goes the surest way to make me hate him. If ever he
comes here again, I will run away and hide from all who know me. I would
rather be a farm-servant, and rise at daybreak to work in the fields, than
endure his insolence."

She had to bear worse pain before Denzil had ridden far upon his journey;
for her father came to the garden to seek her, eager to know the result of
his _protégé's_ wooing.

"Well, sweetheart," he began, taking her to his bosom and kissing her. "Do
I salute the future Lady Warner?"

"No, sir; I am too well content with the name I inherit to desire any
other."

"That is gracefully said, chérie; but I want to see my ewe lamb happily
wedded. Has thy sweetheart stolen away without finding courage to ask the
question that has been on the tip of his tongue for the last six weeks?"

"He has been both importunate and impertinent, sir, and he has had his
answer. I hope I may never see him again."

"What! you have refused him? You must be mad!"

"No, sir; sober and sane enough to know when I am happy. I told you before
this gentleman came here that I did not mean to marry. Surely I am not so
unloving a daughter that I must be driven to take a husband, because my
father will not have me."

"Angela, it is for your own safety and welfare I would see you married.
What have you to succeed to when I am gone? An impoverished estate, in a
country that has seen such rough changes within a score of years that one
dare scarcely calculate upon a prolonged time of safety, even in this
sequestered valley. God only knows when cannon-balls may tear up our
fields, and bullets whistle through the copses. This Monarchy, restored
with such a clamorous approval, may endure no longer than the Commonwealth,
which was thought to be lasting. His Majesty's trivial life and gross
extravagance have disgusted and alarmed some who loved him dearly, and have
set the common people questioning whether the rough rule of the Protector
were not better than the ascendency of shameless women and dissolute men.
The pageantry of Whitehall may vanish like a parchment scroll in a furnace,
and Charles, who has tasted the sours of exile, may be again a wanderer,
dependent on the casual munificence of foreign states; and in such an evil
hour," continued the Knight, his mind straying from the contemplation of
his daughter's future to the memory of his own wrongs, "Charles Stuart
may remember the old puts who fought and suffered for his father, and how
scurvy a recompense they had for their services."

He reverted to Denzil's offer after a brief silence, Angela walking
dutifully by his side, prepared to suffer any harshness upon his part
without complaining.

"I love the young man, and he would be to me as a son," he said; "the
comrade and support of my old age. I am poor, as the world goes now; have
but just enough to live modestly in this retreat, where life costs but
little. He is rich, and can give you a handsome seat near your sister's
mansion; and a house in London if you desire one; less splendid, doubtless,
than Fareham's palace on the Thames, but more befitting the habits and
manners of an English gentleman's wife. He can give you hounds and hawks,
your riding-horses, and your coach-and-six. What more, in God's name, can
any reasonable woman desire?"

"Only one thing, sir. To live my own life in peace, as my conscience and my
reason bid me. I cannot love Denzil Warner, though of late I have grown
to like and respect him as a friend and most intelligent companion. Your
persistence is fast changing friendship into dislike; and the very name of
the man would speedily become hateful to me."

"Oh, I have done!" retorted Sir John. "I am no tyrant. You must take your
own way, mistress. I can but lament that Providence gave me only two
daughters, and one of them an arrant fool."

He left her in a huff, and had it not been for an astonishing event, which
convulsed town and country, and suspended private interests and private
quarrels in the excitement of public affairs, she would have heard much
more of his discontent.

The Dutch ships were at Chatham. English men-of-war were blazing at the
very mouth of the Thames, and there was panic lest the triumphant foe
should sail their fire-ships up the river to London, besiege the Tower,
relight the fire whose ashes were scarce grown cold, pillage, slaughter,
destroy--as Tilly had destroyed the wretched Provinces in the religious
war.

Here, in this sheltered haven, amidst green fields, under the lee of the
Brill, the panic and consternation were as intense as if the village of St.
Nicholas were the one spot the Dutch would make for after landing; and,
indeed, there were rustics who went to the placid scene where the infant
Thame rises in its cradle of reed and lily, half expectant of seeing
Netherlandish vessels stranded among the rushes.

The Dutch fleet was at Chatham. Ships were being sunk across the Medway, to
stop the invader.

Sheerness was to be fortified. London was in arms; and Brill remembered
its repulse of Hampden's regiment with a proud consciousness of being
invincible.

The Dutch fleet saved Angela many a paternal lecture; for Sir John rode
post-haste towards London, and did not return until the end of the month.

In London he found Hyacinth, much disturbed about her husband, who had
gone as volunteer with General Middleton, and was in command of a cavalry
regiment at Chatham.

"I never saw him in such spirits as when he left me," Lady Fareham told her
father. "I believe he is ever happiest when he breathes gunpowder."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir John's leave-taking had been curt and moody, for Angela's offence
rankled deep in his mind; and it was as much as he could do to command his
anger, even in bidding her good-bye.

"Did I not tell you that we live in troubled times, and that no man can
foresee the coming evil, or how great our woes and distractions may be?" he
asked, with a gloomy triumph. "Whoever thought to hear De Ruyter's guns at
Sheerness, or to see the Royal Charles led captive? Absit omen! Who knows
what destruction may come upon that other Royal Charles, for whose safety
we pray morning and night, and who lolls across a basset-table, perhaps,
with his wantons around him, while we are on our knees supplicating the
Creator for him? Who knows? We may have London in flames again, and a
conflagration more fatal than the last, thou obstinate wench, before thou
art a week older, and every able-bodied man called away from plough and
pasture to serve the King, and desolation and famine where plenty now
smiles at us. And is this a time in which to refuse a valiant and wealthy
protector, a lover as honest as ever God made; a pious, conforming
Christian, of unsullied name; a young man after my own pattern; a fine
horseman and a good farmer; one who loves a pack of hounds and a well-bred
horse, a flight of hawks and a match at bowls, better than to give chase to
a she-rake in the Mall, or to drink himself stark mad at a tavern in Covent
Garden with debauchees from Whitehall?"

Sir John prosed and grumbled to the last moment, but could not refuse to
bend down from his saddle and kiss the fair, pale face that looked at him
in piteous deprecation at the moment of parting.

"Well, keep a brave heart, Mistress Wilful. Thou art safe here yet awhile
from Dutch marauders. I go but to find out how much truth there is in these
panic rumours."

She begged him not to fatigue himself with too long stages, and went back
to the silent house, thankful to be alone in her despondency. She felt as
if the last page in her worldly life had been written. She had to turn
her thoughts backward to that quiet retreat where there would at least be
peace. She had promised her father that she would not return to the Convent
while he wanted her at home. But was that promise to hold good if he were
to embitter her life by urging her to a marriage that would only bring her
unhappiness?

She had ample leisure for thought in one summer day of a solitude so
absolute that she began to shiver in the sultry stillness of afternoon,
and scarce ventured to raise her eyes from her embroidery frame, lest some
shadowy presence, some ghost out of the dead past, should hover near,
watching her as she sat alone in scenes where that pale spirit had been
living flesh. The thought of all who had lived and died in that house--men
and women of her own race, whose qualities of mind and person she had
inherited--oppressed her in the long hours of silent reverie. Before
her first day of loneliness had ended, her spirits had sunk to deepest
melancholy; and in that weaker condition of mind she had begun to ask
herself whether she had any right to oppose her father's wishes by denying
herself to a suitor whom she esteemed and respected, and whose filial
affection would bring new sunshine into that dear father's declining years.
She had noted their manner to each other during Denzil's protracted visit,
and had seen all the evidences of a warm regard on both sides. She had too
complete a faith in Denzil's sterling worth to question the reality of any
feeling which his words and manner indicated. He was above all things a
man of truth and honesty. She was roaming about the gardens with her dog
towards noon in the second day of her solitude, when across the yew hedges
she saw white clouds of dust rising from the high-road, and heard
the clatter of hoofs and roll of wheels--a noise as of a troop of
cavalry--whereat Ganymede barked himself almost into an apoplexy, and
rushed across the grass like a mad thing.

A great cracking of whips and sound of voices, horses galloping, horses
trotting, dust enough to whiten all the hedges and greensward! Angela stood
at gaze, wondering if the Dutch were coming to storm the old house, or the
county militia coming to garrison it.

The Manor Moat was the destination of that clamorous troop, whoever they
were. Wheels and horses stopped sharply at the great iron gate in front of
the house, and the bell began to ring furiously, while other dogs, with
voices that resembled Ganymede's, answered his shrill bark with even
shriller yelpings.

Angela ran towards the gate, and was near enough to see it opened to
admit three black-and-tan spaniels, and one slim personage in a long
flame-coloured brocatelle gown and a large beaver hat, who approached with
stately movements, a small, pert nose held high, and rosy upper lip curled
in patrician disdain of common things, while a fan of peacock's plumage,
that flashed sapphire and emerald in the fierce noonday sun, was waved
slowly before the dainty face, scattering the tremulous life of summer that
buzzed and fluttered in the sultry air.

In the rear of this brilliant figure appeared a middle-aged person in
a grey silk gown and hood, and a negro page in the Fareham livery, a
waiting-woman, and a tall lackey, so many being the necessary adjuncts to
the Honourable Henrietta Maria Revel's state when she went abroad.

Angela ran to receive her niece with a cry of rapture, and the tall slip of
a girl in the flame-coloured frock was clasped to her aunt's heart with a
ruthless disregard of the beaver hat and cataract of ostrich plumage.

"Prends garde d'abimer mon chapeau, p'tite tante," cried Henriette, "'tis
one of Lewin's Nell Gwyn hats, and cost twenty guineas, without the buckle,
which I stole out of father's shoe t'other day. His lordship is so careless
about his clothes that he wore the shoes two days and never knew there was
a buckle missing, and those lazy devils his servants never told him. I
believe they meant to rook him of t'other buckle."

"Chatterer, chatterer, how happy I am to see thee! But is not your mother
with you?"

"Her ladyship is in London. Everybody of importance is scampering off to
London; and no doubt will be rushing back to the country again if the Dutch
take the Tower; but I don't think they will while my father is able to
raise a regiment."

"And mademoiselle"--with a curtsy to the lady in grey--"has brought you all
this long way through the heat to see me?"

"I have brought mademoiselle," Henrietta answered contemptuously, before
the Frenchwoman had finished the moue and the shrug which with her always
preceded speech; "and a fine plague I had to make her come."

"Madame will conceive that, in miladi's absence, it was a prodigious
inconvenience to order two coaches, and travel so far. His lordship's groom
of the chambers is my witness that I protested against such an outrageous
proceeding."

"Two coaches!" exclaimed Angela.

"A coach-and-six for me and my dogs and my gouvernante, and a
coach-and-four for my people," explained Henriette, who had modelled her
equipage and suite upon a reminiscence of the train which attended Lady
Castlemaine's visit to Chilton, as beheld from a nursery window.

"Come, child, and rest, out of the sun; and you, mademoiselle, must need
refreshment after so long a drive."

"Our progress through a perpetual cloud of dust and a succession of narrow
lanes did indeed suggest the torments of purgatory; but the happiness
of madame's gracious welcome is an all-sufficient compensation for our
fatigue," mademoiselle replied, with a deep curtsey.

"I was not tired in the least," asserted Henriette. "We stopped at the
Crown at Thame and had strawberries and milk."

"_You_ had strawberries and milk, mon enfant. I have a digestion which will
not allow such liberties."

"And our horses were baited, and our people had their morning drink," said
Henriette, with her grown-up air. "One ought always to remember cattle and
servants. May we put up our horses with you, auntie? We must leave you soon
after dinner, so as to be at Chilton by sunset, or mademoiselle will
be afraid of highwaymen, though I told Samuel and Peter to bring their
blunderbusses in case of an attack. Ma'amselle has no valuables, and at the
worst I should but have to give them my diamond buckle, and my locket with
his lordship's portrait."

Angela's cheeks flushed at that chance allusion to Fareham's picture. It
brought back a vision of the Convent parlour, and she standing there with
Fareham's miniature in her hand, wonderingly contemplative of the dark,
strong face. At that stage of her life she had seen so few men's faces;
and this one had a power in it that startled her. Did she divine, by some
supernatural foreknowledge, that this face held the secret of her destiny?

She went to the house, with Henriette's lissom form hanging upon her, and
the grey governess tripping mincingly beside them, tottering a little upon
her high heels.

Old Reuben had crept out into the sunshine, with a rustic footman following
him, and the cook was looking out at a window in the wing where kitchen and
servants' hall occupied as important a position as the dining-parlour and
saloon on the opposite side. A hall with open roof, wide double staircase,
and music gallery, filled the central space between the two projecting
wings, and at the back there was a banqueting-chamber or ball-room, where
in more prosperous days, the family had been accustomed to dine on all
stately occasions--a room now shabby and grey with disuse.

While the footman showed the way to the stables, Angela drew Reuben aside
for a brief consultation as to ways and means for a dinner that must be the
best the house could provide, and which might be served at two o'clock, the
later hour giving time for extra preparation. A capon, larded after the
French fashion, a pair of trouts, the finest the stream could furnish, or a
carp stewed in clary wine, and as many sweet kickshaws as cook's ingenuity
could furnish at so brief a notice. Nor were waiting-woman, lackey, and
postillions to be neglected. Chine and sirloin, pudding and beer must be
provided for all.

"There are six men besides the black boy," sighed Reuben; they will devour
us a week's provision of butcher's meat."

"If you have done your housekeeping, tante, let me go to your favourite
summer-house with you, and tell you my secrets. I am perishing for a
_tête-à-tête!_ Ma'amselle"--with a wave of the peacock fan--"can take a
siesta, and forget the dust of the road, while we converse."

Angela ushered mademoiselle to the pretty summer-parlour, looking out upon
a geometrical arrangement of flower-beds in the Dutch manner. Chocolate
and other light refreshments were being prepared for the travellers; but
Henrietta's impatience would wait for nothing.

"I have not driven along these detestable roads to taste your chocolate,"
she protested. "I have a world to say to you: en attendant, mademoiselle,
you will consider everything at your disposal in the house of my
grandfather, jusqu'à deux heures."

She sank almost to the ground in a Whitehall curtsy, rose swift as an
arrow, tucked her arm through Angela's, and pulled her out of the room,
paying no attention to the governess's voluble injunctions not to expose
her complexion to the sun, or to sit in a cold wind, or to spoil her gown.

"What a shabby old place it is!" she said, looking critically round her as
they went through the gardens. "I'm afraid you must perish with _ennui_
here, with so few servants and no company to speak of. Yes"--contemplating
her shrewdly, as they seated themselves in a stone temple at the end of the
bowling-green--"you are looking moped and ill. This valley air does not
agree with you. Well, you can have a much finer place whenever you choose.
A better house and garden, ever so much nearer Chilton. And you will
choose, won't you, dearest?" nestling close to her, after throwing off the
big hat which made such loving contact impossible.

"I don't understand you, Henriette."

"If you call me Henriette I shall be sure you are angry with me."

"No, love, not angry, but surprised."

"You think I have no right to talk of your sweetheart, because I am only
thirteen--and have scarce left off playing with babies--I have hated them
for ages, only people persist in giving me the foolish puppets. I know more
of the world than you do, auntie, after being shut in a Convent the best
part of your life. Why are you so obstinate, ma chérie, in refusing a
gentleman we all like?"

"Do you mean Sir Denzil?"

"Sans doute. Have you a crowd of servants?"

"No, child, only this one. But don't you see that other people's liking
has less to do with the question than mine? And if I do not like him well
enough to be his wife----"

"But you ought to like him. You know how long her ladyship's heart has been
set on the match; you must have seen what pains she took in London to have
Sir Denzil always about you. And now, after a most exemplary patience,
after being your faithful servant for over a year, he asks you to be his
wife, and you refuse, obstinately refuse. And you would rather mope here
with my poor old grandfather--in abject poverty--mother says 'abject
poverty'--than be the honoured mistress of one of the finest seats in
Oxfordshire."

"I would rather do what is right and honest, my dearest It is dishonest to
marry without love."

"Then half mother's fine friends must be dishonest, for I dare swear that
very few of them love their husbands."

"Henriette, you talk of things you don't know."

"Don't know! Why, there is no one in London knows more. I am always
listening, and I always remember. De Malfort used to say I had a plaguey
long memory, when I told him of things he had said a year ago."

"My dear, I love you fondly, but I cannot have you talk to me of what you
don't understand; and I am sorry Sir Denzil Warner had no more courtesy
than to go and complain of me to my sister."

"He did not come to Chilton to complain. Her ladyship met him on the way
from Oxford in her coach. He was riding, and she called to him to come
to the coach door. It was the day after he left you, and he was looking
miserable; and she questioned him, and he owned that his suit had been
rejected, and he had no further hope. My mother came home in a rage. But
why was she angry with his lordship? Indeed, she rated him as if it were
his fault you refused Sir Denzil."

Angela sat silent, and the hand Henriette was clasping grew cold as ice.

"Did my father bid you refuse him, aunt?" asked the girl, scrutinising her
aunt's countenance, with those dark grey eyes, so like Fareham's in their
falcon brightness.

"No, child. Why should he interfere? It is no business of his."

"Then why was mother so angry? She walked up and down the room in a
towering passion. 'This is your doing,' she cried. 'If she were not your
adoring slave, she would have jumped at so handsome a sweetheart. This is
your witchcraft. It is you she loves--you--you--you!' His lordship stood
dumb, and pointed to me. 'Do you forget your child is present?' he said. 'I
forget everything except that everybody uses me shamefully,' she cried.
'I was only made to be slighted and trampled upon.' His lordship made
no answer, but walked to the door in that way he ever has when he is
angered--pale, frowning, silent. I was standing in his way, and he gripped
me by the arm, and dragged me out of the room. I dare venture there is a
bruise on my arm where he held me. I know his fingers hurt me with their
grip; and I could hear my lady screaming and sobbing as he took me away.
But he would not let me go back to her. He would only send her women. 'Your
mother has an interval of madness,' he said; 'you are best out of her
presence.' The news of the Dutch ships came the same evening, and my father
rode off towards London, and my mother ordered her coach, and followed an
hour after. They seemed both distracted; and only because you refused Sir
Denzil."

"I cannot help her ladyship's foolishness, Papillon. She has no occasion
for any of this trouble. I am her dutiful, affectionate sister; but my
heart is not hers to give or to refuse."

"But was it indeed my father's fault? Is it because you adore him that you
refused Sir Denzil?"

"No--no--no. My affection for my brother--he has been to me as a
brother--can make no difference in my regard for any one else. One cannot
fall in love at another's ordering, or be happy with a husband of another's
choice. You will discover that for yourself, Papillon, perhaps, when you
are a woman."

"Oh, I mean to marry for wealth and station, as all the clever women do,"
said Papillon, with an upward jerk of her delicate chin. "Mrs. Lewin always
says I ought to be a duchess. I should like to have married the Duke of
Monmouth, and then, who knows, I might have been a Queen. The King's other
sons are too young for me, and they will never have Monmouth's chance. But,
indeed, sweetheart, you ought to marry Sir Denzil, and come and live near
us at Chilton. You would make us all happy."

"Ma tres chère, it is so easy to talk--but when thou thyself art a
woman----"

"I shall never care for such trumpery as love. I mean to have a grand
house--ever so much grander than Fareham House. Perhaps I may marry a
Frenchman, and have a salon, and all the wits about me on my day. I would
make it gayer than Mademoiselle de Scudery's Saturdays, which my governess
so loves to talk of. There should be less talk and more dancing. But
listen, p'tite tante," clasping her arms suddenly round Angela's neck, "I
won't leave this spot till you have promised to change your mind about
Denzil. I like him vastly; and I'm sure there's no reason why you should
not love him--unless you really are his lordship's adoring slave,"
emphasising those last words, "and he has forbidden you."

Angela sat dumb, her eyes fixed on vacancy.

"Why, you are like the lady in those lines you made me learn, who 'sat like
patience on a monument, smiling at grief.' Dearest, why so sad? Remember
that fine house--and the dairy that was once a chapel. You could turn it
into a chapel again if you liked, and have your own chaplain. His Majesty
takes no heed of what we Papists do--being a Papist himself at heart, they
say--though poor wretches are dragged off to gaol for worshipping in a
conventicle. What is a conventicle? Will you not change your mind, dearest?
Answer, answer, answer!"

The slender arms tightened their caress, the pretty little brown face
pressed itself against Angela's pale, cold cheek.

"For my sake, sweetheart, say thou wilt have him. I will go to see thee
every day."

"I have been here for months and you have not come, though I begged you in
a dozen letters."

"I have been kept at my book and my dancing lessons. Mademoiselle told her
ladyship that I was a monster of ignorance. I have been treated shamefully.
I could not have come to-day had my lady been at home; but I would not
brook a hireling's dictation. Voyons, p'tite tante, tu seras miladi Warner.
Dis, dis, que je te fasse mourir de baisers."

She was almost stifling her aunt with kisses in the intervals of her eager
speech.

"The last word has been spoken, Papillon. I have sent him away--and it was
not the first time. I had refused him before. I cannot call him back."

"But he shall come without calling. He is your adoring slave," cried
Henriette, leaping up from the stone bench, and clapping her hands in
an ecstasy. "He will need no calling. Dearest, dearest, most exquisite,
delectable auntie! I am so happy! And my mother will be content. And no one
shall ever say you are my father's slave."

"Henriette, if you repeat that odious phrase I shall hate you!"

"Now you are angry. God, what a frown! I will repeat no word that angers
you. My Lady Warner--sweet Lady Warner. I vow 'tis a prettier name than
Revel or Fareham."

"You are mad, Henriette! I have promised nothing."

"Yes, you have, little aunt. You have promised to drop a curtsy, and say
'Yes' when Sir Denzil rides this way. You sent him away in a huff. He will
come back smiling like yonder sunshine on the water. Oh, I am so happy! My
doing, all my doing!"

"It is useless to argue with you."

"Quite useless. Il n'y a pas de quoi. Nous sommes d'accord. I shall be
your chief bridesmaid. You must be married in her Majesty's chapel at St.
James's. The Pope will give his dispensation--if you cannot persuade Denzil
to change his religion. Were he my suitor I would twist him round my
fingers," with an airy gesture of the small brown hand.

There is nothing more difficult than to convince a child that she pleads in
vain for any ardently desired object. Nothing that Angela could say would
reconcile her niece to the idea of failure; so there was no help but to let
her fancy her arguments conclusive, and to change the bent of her thoughts
if possible.

It wanted nearly an hour of dinner-time, so Angela suggested an inspection
of the home farm, which was close by, trusting that Henriette's love of
animals would afford an all-sufficient diversion; nor was she disappointed,
for the little fine lady was quite as much at home in stable and cowshed as
in a London drawing-room, and spent a happy hour in making friends with
the live stock, from the favourite Hereford cow, queen of the herd, to the
smallest bantam in the poultry-yard.

To this rustic entertainment followed dinner, in the preparation of which
banquet Marjory Cook had surpassed herself; and Papillon, being by this
time seriously hungry, sat and feasted to her heart's content, discussing
the marrow pudding and the stewed carp with the acumen and authority of a
professed gourmet.

"I like this old-fashioned rustic diet," she said condescendingly.

She reproached her governess with not doing justice to a syllabub; but
showed herself a fine lady by her complaint at the lack of ice for her
wine.

"My grandfather should make haste and build an icehouse before next
winter," she drawled. "One can scarce live through this weather without
ice," fanning herself, with excessive languor.

"I hope, dear, thou wilt not expire on the journey home."

The coaches were at the gate before Papillon had finished dinner, and
Mademoiselle was in great haste to be gone, reminding her pupil that she
had travelled so far against her will and at the hazard of angering Madame
la Baronne.

"Madame la Baronne will be enraptured when she knows what I have done to
please her," answered Papillon, and then, with a last parting embrace,
hugging her aunt's fair neck more energetically than ever, she whispered,
"I shall tell Denzil. You will make us all happy."

A cloud of dust, a clatter of hoofs, Ma'amselle's screams as the carriage
rocked while she was mounting the steps, and with much cracking of whips
and swearing at horses from the postillions who had taken their fill of
home-brewed ale, hog's harslet, and cold chine, and, lo, the brilliant
vision of the Honourable Henrietta Maria and her train vanished in the dust
of the summer highway, and Angela went slowly back to the long green walk
beside the fish-pond, where she was in as silent a solitude, but for a
lingering nightingale or two, as if she had been in the palace of the
sleeping beauty. If all things slumbered not, there was at least as marked
a pause in life. The Dutch might be burning more ships, and the noise of
war might be coming nearer London with every hour of the summer day. Here
there was a repose as of the after-life, when all hopes and dreams and
loves and hates are done and ended, and the soul waits in darkness and
silence for the next unfolding of its wings.

Those hateful words, "your adoring slave," and all that speech of
Hyacinth's which the child had repeated, haunted Angela with an agonising
iteration. She had not an instant's doubt as to the scene being faithfully
reported. She knew how preternaturally acute Henriette's intellect had
become in the rarified atmosphere of her mother's drawing-room, how
accurate her memory, how sharp her ears, and how observant her eyes.
Whatever Henriette reported was likely to be to the very letter and spirit
of the scene she had witnessed. And Hyacinth, her sister, had put this
shame upon her, had spoken of her in the cruelest phrase as loving one whom
it was mortal sin to love. Hyacinth, so light, so airy a creature, whom her
younger sister had ever considered as a grown-up child, had yet been shrewd
enough to fathom her mystery, and to discover that secret attachment which
had made Denzil's suit hateful to her. "And if I do not consent to marry
him she will always think ill of me. She will think of me as a wretch who
tried to steal her husband's love--a worse woman than Lady Castlemaine--for
she had the King's affection before he ever saw the Queen's poor plain
face. His adoring slave!"

Evening shadows were around her. She had wandered into the woods, was
slowly threading the slender cattle tracks in the cool darkness; while that
passionate song of the nightingales rose in a louder ecstasy as the quiet
of the night deepened, and the young moon hung high above the edge of a
wooded hill.

"His adoring slave," she repeated, with her hands clasped above her
uncovered head.

Hateful, humiliating words! Yet there was a keen rapture in repeating them.
They were true words. His slave--his slave to wait upon him in sickness and
pain; to lie and watch at his door like a faithful dog; to follow him to
the wars, and clean his armour, and hold his horse, and wait in his tent
to receive him wounded, and heal his wounds where surgeons failed to cure,
wanting that intensity of attention and understanding which love alone can
give; to be his Bellario, asking nothing of him, hoping for nothing, hardly
for kind words or common courtesy, foregoing woman's claim upon man's
chivalry, content to be nothing--only to be near him.

If such a life could have been--the life that poets have imagined for
despairing love! It was less than a hundred years since handsome Mrs.
Southwell followed Sir Robert Dudley to Italy, disguised as a page. But
the age of romance was past. The modern world had only laughter for such
dreams.

That revelation of Hyacinth's jealousy had brought matters to a crisis.
Something must be done, Angela told herself, and quickly, to set her
right with her sister, and in her own esteem. She had to choose between a
loveless marriage and the Convent. By accepting one or the other she must
prove that she was not the slave of a dishonourable love.

Marriage or the Convent? It had been easy, contemplating the step from a
distance, to choose the Convent. But when she thought of it, to-night, amid
the exquisite beauty of these woods, with the moonlit valley lying at her
feet, the winding streams reflecting that silvery light, or veiled in a
pale haze--to-night, in the liberty and loveliness of the earth, the vision
of Convent walls filled her with a shuddering horror. To be shut in that
Flemish garden for ever; her life enclosed within the straight lines of
that long green alley leading to a dead wall, darkened over by flowerless
ivy. How witheringly dull the old life showed, looking back at it after
years of freedom and enjoyment, action and variety. No, no, no! She could
not bury herself alive, could not forego the liberty to wander in a wood
like this, to gaze upon scenes as beautiful as yonder valley, to read the
poets she loved, to see, perhaps, some day those romantic scenes which
she knew but as dreams--Florence, Vallombrosa--to follow the footsteps of
Milton, to see the Venice she had read of in Howell's Letters, to kneel at
the feet of the Holy Father, in the City of Cities. All these things would
be for ever forbidden to her if she chose the common escape from earthly
sorrow.

She thought of her whose example had furnished the theme of many a
discourse at the Convent, Mazarin's lovely niece, the Princess de Conti,
who, in the bloom of early womanhood, was awakened from the dream of this
life to the reality of Heaven, and had renounced the pleasures of the most
brilliant Court in the world for the severities of Port Royal. She thought
of that sublime heretic Ferrar, whose later existence was one long prayer.
Of how much baser a clay must she be fashioned when her too earthly heart
clung so fondly to the loveliness of earth, and shrank with aversion from
the prospect of a long life within those walls where her childhood had been
so peaceful and happy.

"How changed, how changed and corrupted this heart has become!" she
murmured, in her dejection, "when that life which was once my most ardent
desire now seems to me worse than the grave. Anything--any life of duty in
the world, rather than that living death."

She was in the garden next morning at six, after a sleepless night, and
she occupied herself till noon in going about among the cottagers carrying
those small comforts which she had been in the habit of taking them, and
listening patiently to those various distresses which they were very glad
to relate to her. She taught the children, and read to the sick, and
was able in this round of duties to keep her thoughts from dwelling too
persistently upon her own trouble. After the one o'clock dinner, at which
she offended old Reuben by eating hardly anything, she went for a woodland
ramble with her dogs, and it was near sunset when she returned to the
house, just in time to see two road-stained horses being led away from the
hall door.

Sir John had come home. She found him in the dining parlour, sitting gloomy
and weary looking before the table where Reuben was arranging a hasty meal.

"I have eaten nothing upon the road, yet I have but a poor stomach for
your bacon-ham," he said, and then looked up at his daughter with a moody
glance, as she went towards him.

"Dear sir, we must try to coax your appetite when you have rested a little.
Let me unbuckle your spurs and pull off your boots, while Reuben fetches
your easiest shoes."

"Nay, child, that is man's work, not for such fingers as yours. The boots
are nowise irksome--'tis another kind of shoe that pinches, Angela."

She knelt down to unbuckle the spur-straps, and while on her knees she
said--

"You look sad, sir. I fear you found ill news at London."

"I found such shame as never came before upon England, such confusion as
only traitors and profligates can know; men who have cheated and lied and
wasted the public money, left our fortresses undefended, our ships unarmed,
our sailors unpaid, half-fed, and mutinous; clamorous wives crying aloud in
the streets that their husbands should not fight and bleed for a King who
starved them. They have clapped the scoundrel who had charge of the Yard at
Chatham in the Tower--but will that mend matters? A scapegoat, belike, to
suffer for higher scoundrels. The mob is loudest against the Chancellor,
who I doubt is not to blame for our unreadiness, having little power of
late over the King. Oh, there has been iniquity upon iniquity, and men know
not whom most to blame--the venal idle servants, or the master of all."

"You mean that men blame his Majesty?"

"No, Angela. But when our ships were blazing at Chatham, and the Dutch
triumphing, the cry was 'Oh, for an hour of old Noll!' Charles has played
his cards so that he has made the loyalest hearts in England wish the
Brewer back again. They called him the Tiger of the Seas. We have no tigers
now, only asses and monkeys. Why, there was scarce a grain of sense left in
London. The beat of the drums calling out the train-bands seemed to have
stupefied the people. Everywhere madness and confusion. They have sunk
their richest argosies at Barking Creek to block the river; but the Dutch
break chains, ride over sunken ships, laugh our petty defences to scorn."

"Dear sir, this confusion cannot last."

"It will last as long as the world's history lasts. Our humiliation will
never be forgotten."

"But Englishmen will not look on idle. There must be brave men up in arms."

"Oh, there are brave men enough--Fairfax, Ingoldsby, Bethell, Norton. The
Presbyterians come to the front in our troubles. Your brother-in-law is
with Lord Middleton. There is no lack of officers; and regiments are being
raised. But our merchant-ships, which should be quick to help us, hang
back. Our Treasury is empty, and half the goldsmiths in London are
bankrupt. And our ships that are burnt, and our ships that are taken, will
not be conjured back again. The _Royal Charles_ carried off with insulting
triumph! Oh, child, it is not the loss that galls; it is the dishonour!"

He took a draught of claret out of the tankard which Angela placed at his
elbow, and she carved the ham for him, and persuaded him to eat.

"Is it the public misfortune that troubles you so sadly, sir?" she asked,
presently, when her father flung himself back in his chair with a heavy
sigh.

"Nay, Angela, I have my peck of trouble without reckoning the ruin of my
country. But my back is broad. It can bear a burden as well as any."

"Do you count a disobedient daughter among your cares, sir?"

"Disobedient is too harsh a word. I told you I would never force your
inclinations. But I have an obstinate daughter, who has disappointed me,
and well-nigh broken my spirit."

"Your spirit shall not rest broken if my obedience can mend it, sir," she
said gently, dropping on her knees beside his chair.

"What! has that stony heart relented! Wilt thou marry him, sweetheart? Wilt
give me a son as well as a daughter, and the security that thou wilt be
safe and happy when I'm gone?"

"No one can be sure of happiness, father; it comes strangely, and goes we
know not why. But if it will make your heart easier, sir, and Denzil be
still of the same mind----"

"His mind his rock, dearest. He swore to me that he could never change. Ah,
love, you have made me happy! Let the fleet burn, the _Royal Charles_
fly Dutch colours. Here, in this quiet valley, there shall be a peaceful
household and united hearts. Angela, I love that youth! Fareham, with all
his rank and wealth, has never been so dear to me. That black visage
repels love. But Denzil's countenance is open as the day. I can say 'Nunc
Dimittis' with a light heart. I can trust Denzil Warner with my daughter's
happiness."




CHAPTER XXIV.

"QUITE OUT OF FASHION."


Denzil received the good news by the hands of a mounted messenger in the
following forenoon.

The Knight had written, "Ride--ride--ride!" in the Elizabethan style, on
the cover of his letter, which contained but two brief sentences--

"Womanlike, she has changed her mind. Come when thou wilt, dear son."

And the son-in-law-to-be lost not an hour. He was at the Manor before
night-fall. He was a member of the quiet household again, subservient to
his mistress in everything.

"There are some words that must needs be spoken before we are agreed,"
Angela said, when they found themselves alone for the first time, in the
garden, on the morning after his return, and when Denzil would fain have
taken her to his breast and ratified their betrothal with a kiss. "I think
you know as well as I do that it is my father's wish that has made me
change."

"So long as you change not again, dear, I am of all men the happiest. Yes,
I know 'tis Sir John's wooing that won you, not mine. And that I have
still to conquer your heart, though your hand is promised me. Yet I do not
despair of being loved in as full measure as I love. My faith is strong in
the power of an honest affection."

"You may at least be sure of my honesty. I profess nothing but the desire
to be your true and obedient wife----"

"Obedient! You shall be my empress."

"No, no. I have no wish to rule. I desire only to make my father happy, and
you too, sir, if I can."

"Ah, my soul, that is so easy for you. You have but to let me live in your
dear company. I doubt I would rather be miserable with you than happy with
any other woman. Ill-use me if you will; play Zantippe, and I will be more
submissive than Socrates. But you are all mildness--perfect Christian,
perfect woman. You cannot miss being perfect as wife--and----"

Another word trembled on his lips; but he checked himself lest he should
offend, and the speech ended in a sob.

"My Angela, my angel!"

He took her to his heart, and kissed the fair brow, cold under his
passionate kisses. That word "angel" turned her to ice. It conjured back
the sound of a voice that it was sin to remember. Fareham had called her
so; not once, but many times, in their placid days of friendship, before
the fiery breath of passion had withered all the flowers in her earthly
paradise--before the knowledge of evil had clouded the brightness of the
world.

A gentle peace reigned at the Manor after Angela's betrothal. Sir John was
happier than he had been since the days of his youth, before the coming
of that cloud no bigger than a man's hand, when John Hampden's stubborn
resistance of a thirty-shilling rate had brought Crown and People face to
face upon the burning question of Ship-money, and kindled the fire that was
to devour England. From the hour he left his young wife to follow the King
to Yorkshire Sir John's existence had known little of rest or of comfort,
or even of glory. He had fought on the losing side, and had missed the
fame of those who fell and took the rank of heroes by an untimely death.
Hardship and danger, wounds and sickness, straitened means and scanty fare,
had been his portion for three bitter years; and then had come a period of
patient service, of schemes and intrigues foredoomed to failure; of going
to and fro, from Jersey to Paris, from Paris to Ireland, from Ireland
to Cornwall, journeying hither and thither at the behest of a shifty,
irresolute man, or a passionate, imprudent woman, as the case might be; now
from the King to the Queen, now from the Queen to this or that ally; futile
errands, unskilful combinations, failure on every hand, till the last fatal
journey, on which he was an unwilling attendant, the flight from Hampton
Court to Titchfield, when the fated King broke faith with his enemies in an
unfinished negotiation.

Foreign adventure had followed English hardships, and the soldier had
been tossed on the stormy sea of European warfare. He had been graciously
received at the French Court, but only to feel himself a stranger there,
and to have his English clothes and English accent laughed at by Gramont
and Bussy, and the accomplished St. Évremond, and the frivolous herd of
their imitators; to see even the Queen, for whom he had spent his
last jacobus, smile behind her fan at his bévues, and whisper to her
sister-in-law while he knelt to kiss the little white hand that had led a
King to ruin. Everywhere the stern Malignant had found himself outside the
circle of the elect. At the Hôtel de Rambouillet, in the splendid houses of
the newly built Place Royale, in the salons of Duchesses, and the taverns
of courtly roysterers and drunken poets, at Cormier's, or at the Pine
Apple, in the Rue de la Juiverie, where it was all the better for a
Christian gentleman not to understand the talk of the wits that flashed and
drank there. Everywhere he had been a stranger and aloof. It was only under
canvas, in danger and privation, that he lost the sense of being one
too many in the world. There John Kirkland found his level, shoulder to
shoulder with Condé and Turenne. The stout Cavalier was second to no
soldier in Louis' splendid army; was of the stamp of an earlier race even,
better inured to hardship than any save that heroic Prince, the Achilles
of his day, who to the graces of a modern courtier joined the temper of an
ancient Greek.

His daughter Hyacinth had given him the utmost affection which such a
nature could give; but it was the affection of a trained singing-bird, or
a pug-nosed spaniel; and the father, though he admired her beauty, and was
pleased with her caresses, was shrewd enough to perceive the lightness
of her disposition and the shallowness of her mind. He rejoiced in her
marriage with a man of Fareham's strong character.

"I have married thee to a husband who will know how to rule a wife," he
told her on the night of her wedding. "You have but to obey and to be
happy; for he is rich enough to indulge all your fancies, and will not
complain if you waste the gold that would pay a company of foot on the
decoration of your poor little person."

"The tone in which you speak of my poor little person, sir, can but remind
me how much I need the tailor and the milliner," answered Hyacinth,
dropping her favourite curtsy, which she was ever ready to practise at the
slightest provocation.

"Nay, petite chatte, you know I think you the loveliest creature at Saint
Germain or the Louvre, far surpassing in beauty the Cardinal's niece, who
has managed to set young Louis' heart throbbing with a boyish passion. But
I doubt you bestow too much care on the cherishing of a gift so fleeting."

"You have said the word, sir. 'Tis because it is so fleeting I must needs
take care of my beauty. We poor women are like the butterflies and the
roses. We have as brief a summer. You men, who value us only for our
outward show, should pardon some vanity in creatures so ephemeral."

"Ephemeral scarce applies to a sex which owns such an example as your
grandmother, who has lived to reckon her servants among the grandsons of
her earliest lovers."

"Not lived, sir! No woman lives after thirty. She can but exist, and dream
that she is still admired. La Marquise has been dead for the last twenty
years, but she won't own it. Ah, sir, c'est un triste supplice to _have
been_! I wonder how those poor ghosts can bear that earthly purgatory which
they call old age? Look at Madame de Sablé, par exemple, once a beauty, now
only a tradition. And Queen Anne! Old people say she was beautiful, and
that Buckingham risked being torn by wild horses--like Ravaillac--only
to kiss her hand by stealth in a moonlit garden; and would have plunged
England in war but for an excuse to come back to Paris. Who would go to war
for Anne's haggard countenance nowadays?"

Even in Lady Fareham's household the Cavalier soon began to fancy himself
an inhabitant too much; a dull, grey ghost from a tragical past. He could
not keep himself from talking of the martyred King, and those bitter years
through which he had followed his master's sinking fortunes. He told
stories of York and of Beverley; of the scarcity of cash which reduced his
Majesty's Court to but one table; of that bitter affront at Coventry; of
the evil omens that had marked the raising of the Standard on the hill at
Nottingham, and filled superstitious minds with dark forebodings, reminding
old men of that sad shower of rain that fell when Charles was proclaimed at
Whitehall, on the day of his accession, and of the shock of earthquake on
his coronation day; of Edgehill and Lindsey's death; of the profligate
conduct of the Cavalier regiments, and the steady, dogged force of their
psalm-singing adversaries; of Queen Henrietta's courage, and beauty, and
wilfulness, and her fatal influence upon an adoring husband.

"She wanted to be all that Buckingham had been," said Sir John, "forgetting
that Buckingham was the King's evil genius."

That lively and eminently artificial society of the Rue de Touraine soon
wearied of Sir John's reminiscences. King Charles's execution had receded
into the dim grey of history. He might as well have told them anecdotes
of Cinq Mars, or of the great Henri, or of Moses or Abraham. Life went
on rapid wheels in patrician Paris. They had Condé to talk about, and
Mazarin's numerous nieces, and the opera, that new importation from Italy,
which the Cardinal was bringing into fashion; while in the remote past of
half a dozen years back the Fronde was the only interesting subject, and
even that was worn threadbare; the adventures of the Duchess, the conduct
of the Prince in prison, the intrigues of Cardinal and Queen, Mademoiselle,
yellow-haired Beaufort, duels of five against five--all--all these were
ancient history as compared with young Louis and his passion for Marie de
Mancini, and the scheming of her wily uncle to marry all his nieces to
reigning princes or embryo kings.

And then the affectations and conceits of that elegant circle, the sonnets
and madrigals, the "bouts-rimés," the practical jokes, the logic-chopping
and straw-splitting of those ultra-fine intellects, the romances where the
personages of the day masqueraded under Greek or Roman or Oriental aliases,
books written in a flowery language which the Cavalier did not understand,
and full of allusions that were dark to him; while not to know and
appreciate those master-works placed him outside the pale.

He rejoiced in escaping from that overcharged atmosphere to the tavern, to
the camp, anywhere. He followed the exiled Stuarts in their wanderings,
paid his homage to the Princess of Orange, roamed from scene to scene, a
stranger and one too many wherever he went.

Then came the hardest blow of all--the chilling disillusion that awaited
many of Charles's faithful friends, who were not of such political
importance as to command their recompense. Neglect and forgetfulness were
Sir John Kirkland's portion; and for him and for such as he that caustic
definition of the Act of Indemnity was a hard and cruel truth. It was an
Act of Indemnity for the King's enemies and of oblivion for his friends.
Sir John's spirits had hardly recovered from the bitterness of disappointed
affection when he came back to the old home, though his chagrin was seven
years old. But now, in his delight at the alliance with Denzil Warner, he
seemed to have renewed his lease of cheerfulness and bodily vigour. He rode
and walked about the lanes and woods with erect head and elastic limbs. He
played bowls with Denzil in the summer evenings. He went fishing with his
daughter and her sweetheart. He revelled in the simple rustic life, and
told them stories of his boyhood, when James was King, and many a queer
story of that eccentric monarch and of the rising star, George Villiers.

"Ah, what a history that was!" he exclaimed. "His mother trained him as if
with a foreknowledge of that star-like ascendency. He was schooled to shine
and dazzle, to excel all compeers in the graces men and women admire. I
doubt she never thought of the mind inside him, or cared whether he had a
heart or a lump of marble behind his waist-band. He was taught neither to
think nor to pity--only to shine; to be quick with his tongue in half a
dozen languages, with his sword after half a dozen modes of fence. He could
kill his man in the French, or the Italian, or the Spanish manner. He was
cosmopolitan in the knowledge of evil. He had every device that can make a
man brilliant and dangerous. He mounted every rung of the ladder, leaping
from step to step. He ascended, swift as a shooting star, from plain
country gentleman to the level of princes. And he expired with an
ejaculation, astonished to find himself mortal, slain in a moment by the
thrust of a ten-penny knife. I remember as if it were yesterday how men
looked and spoke when the news came to London, and how some said this
murder would be the saving of King Charles. I know of one man at least who
was glad."

"Who was he, sir?" asked Denzil.

"He who had the greatest mind among Englishmen--Thomas Wentworth.
Buckingham had held him at a distance from the King, and his strong
passionate temper was seething with indignation at being kept aloof by
that silken sybarite--an impotent General, a fatal counsellor. After the
Favourite's death there came a time of peace and plenty. The pestilence had
passed, the war was over. Charles was happy with his Henriette and their
lovely children. Wentworth was in Ireland. The Parliament House stood still
and empty, doors shut, swallows building under the eaves. I look back, and
those placid years melt into each other like one long summer. And then,
again, as 'twere yesterday, I hear Hampden's drums and fifes in the
lanes, and see the rebels' flag with that hateful legend, 'Vestigia nulla
retrorsum,' and Buckinghamshire peasants are under arms, and the King and
his people have begun to hate and fear each other."

"None foresaw that the war would last so long or end in murder, I doubt,
sir," said Angela.

"Nay, child; we who were loyal thought to see that rabble withered by the
breath of kingly nostrils. A word should have brought them to the dust."

"There might be so easy a victory, perhaps, sir, from a King who knew how
to speak the right word at the right moment, how to comply graciously with
a just demand, and how to be firm in a righteous denial," replied Denzil;
"but with Charles a stammering speech was but the outward expression of a
wavering mind. He was a man who never listened to an appeal, but always
yielded to a threat, were it only loud enough."

The wedding was to be soon. Marriages were patched up quickly in the
light-hearted sixties. And here there was nothing to wait for. Sir John had
found Denzil compliant on every minor question, and willing to make his
home at the Manor during his mother's lifetime.

"The old lady would never stomach a Papist daughter-in-law," said Sir John;
and Denzil was fain to confess that Lady Warner would not easily reconcile
herself with Angela's creed, though she could not fail of loving Angela
herself.

"My daughter would have neither peace nor liberty under a Puritan's roof,"
Sir John said; "and I should have neither son nor daughter, and should be a
loser by my girl's marriage. You shall be as much master here, Denzil, as
if this were your own house--which it will be when I have moved to my last
billet. Give me a couple of stalls for my roadsters, and kennel room for my
dogs, and I want no more. You and Angela may introduce as many new fashions
as you like; dine at two o'clock, and sip your unwholesome Indian drink of
an evening. The fine ladies in Paris were beginning to take tea when I was
last there, though by the faces they made over the stuff it might have been
poison. I can smoke my pipe in the chimney-corner, and look on and admire
at the new generation. I shall not feel myself one too many at your
fireside, as I used sometimes in the Rue de Touraine, when those strutting
Gallic cocks were quizzing me."

       *       *       *       *       *

There were clouds of dust and a clatter of hoofs again in front of the
floriated iron gate; but this time it was not the Honourable Henriette who
came tripping along the gravel path on two-inch heels, but my Lady Fareham,
who walked languidly, with the assistance of a gold-headed cane, and who
looked pale and thin in her apple-green satin gown and silver-braided
petticoat.

She, too, came attended by a second coach, which was filled by her
ladyship's French waiting-woman, Mrs. Lewin, and a pile of boxes and
parcels.

"I'll wager that in the rapture and romance of your sweethearting you have
not given a thought to petticoats and mantuas," she said, after she had
embraced her sister, who was horrified at the sight of that painted
harridan from London.

Angela blushed at those words, "rapture and romance," knowing how little
there had been of either in her thoughts, or in Denzil's sober courtship.
Romance! Alas! there had been but one romance in her life, and that a
guilty one, which she must ever remember with remorse.

"Come now, confess you have not a gown ordered."

"I have gowns enough and to spare. Oh, sister! have you come so far to talk
of gowns? And that odious woman too! What brought her here?" Angela asked,
with more temper than she was wont to show.

"My sisterly kindness brought her. You are an ungrateful hussy for looking
vexed when I have come a score of miles through the dust to do you a
service."

"Ah, dearest, I am grateful to you for coming. But, alas! you are looking
pale and thin. Heaven forbid that you have been indisposed, and we in
ignorance of your suffering."

"No, I am well enough, though every one assures me I look ill; which is but
a civil mode of telling me I am growing old and ugly."

"Nay, Hyacinth, the former we must all become, with time; the latter you
will never be."

"Your servant, Sir Denzil, has taught you to pay antique compliments. Well,
now we will talk business. I had occasion to send for Lewin--my toilet was
in a horrid state of decay; and then it seemed to me, knowing your foolish
indifference, that even your wedding gown would not be chosen unless I
saw to it. So here is Lewin with Lyons and Genoa silks of the very latest
patterns. She has but just come from Paris, and is full of Parisian modes
and Court scandals. The King posted off to Versailles directly after his
mother's death, and has not returned to the Louvre since. He amuses
himself by spending millions on building, and making passionate love to
Mademoiselle la Vallière, who encourages him by pretending an excessive
modesty, and exaggerates every favour by penitential tears. I doubt his
attachment to so melancholy a mistress will hardly last a lifetime. She is
not beautiful; she has a halting gait; and she is no more virtuous than any
other young woman who makes a show of resistance to enhance the merit of
her surrender."

Hyacinth prattled all the way to the parlour, Mrs. Lewin and the
waiting-woman following, laden with parcels.

"Queer, dear old hovel!" she exclaimed, sinking languidly upon a tabouret,
and fanning herself exhaustedly, while the mantua-maker opened her boxes,
and laid out her sample breadths of richly decorated brocade, or silver and
gold enwrought satin. "How well I remember being whipped over my horn-book
in this very room! And there is the bowling green where I used to race with
the Italian greyhound my grandmother brought me from Paris. I look back,
and it seems a dream of some other child running about in the sunshine. It
is so hard to believe that joyous little being--who knew not the meaning of
heart-ache--was I."

"Why that sigh, sister? Surely none ever had less cause for heart-ache than
you?"

"Have I not cause? Not when my glass tells me youth is gone, and beauty
is waning? Not when there is no one in this wide world who cares a straw
whether I am handsome or hideous? I would as lief be dead as despised and
neglected."

"Sorella mia, questa donna ti ascolta," murmured Angela; "come and look at
the old gardens, sister, while Mrs. Lewin spreads out her wares. And pray
consider, madam," turning to the mantua-maker, "that those peacock purples
and gold embroideries have no temptations for me. I am marrying a country
gentleman, and am to lead a country life. My gowns must be such as will
not be spoilt by a walk in dusty lanes, or a visit to a farm-labourer's
cottage."

"Eh, gud, your ladyship, do not tell me that you would bury so much beauty
among sheep and cows, and odious ploughmen's wives and dairy-women. A month
or so of rustic life in summer between Epsom and Tunbridge Wells may be
well enough, to rest your beauty--without patches or a French head--out of
sight of your admirers. But to live in the country! Only a jealous husband
could ever propose more than an annual six weeks of rustic seclusion to a
wife under sixty. Lord Chesterfield was considered as cruel for taking his
Countess to the rocks and ravines of Derbyshire as Sir John Denham for
poisoning his poor lady."

"Chut! tu vas un peu trop loin, Lewin!" remonstrated Lady Fareham.

"But, in truly, your ladyship, when I hear Mrs. Kirkland talk of a husband
who would have her waste her beauty upon clod-polls and dairy-maids, and
never wear a mantua worth looking at----"

"I doubt my husband will be guided by his own likings rather than by Mrs.
Lewin's tastes and opinions," said Angela, with a stately curtsy, which was
designed to put the forward tradeswoman in her place, and which took that
personage's breath away.

"There never was anything like the insolence of a handsome young woman
before she has been educated by a lover," she said to her ladyship's
Frenchwoman, with a vindictive smile and scornful shrug of bloated
shoulders, when the sisters had left the parlour. "But wait till her first
intrigue, and then it is 'My dearest Lewin, wilt thou make me everlastingly
beholden to thee by taking this letter--thou knowest to whom?' Or, in a
flood of tears, 'Lewin, you are my only friend--and if you cannot find me
some good and serviceable woman who would give me a home where I can hide
from the cruel eye of the world, I must take poison.' No insolence then,
mark you, Madame Hortense!"

"This demoiselle is none of your sort," Hortense said. "You must not judge
English ladies by your maids of honour. Celles là sont des drôlesses, sans
foi ni loi."

"Well, if she thinks I am going to make up linsey woolsey, or Norwich
drugget, she will find her mistake. I never courted the custom of little
gentlemen's wives, with a hundred a year for pin-money. If I am to do
anything for this stuck-up peacock, Lady Fareham must give me the order. I
am no servant of Madame Kirkland."

       *       *       *       *       *

Alone in the garden, the sisters embraced again, Lady Fareham with a
fretful tearfulness, as of one whose over strung nerves were on the verge
of hysteria.

"There is something that preys upon your spirits, dearest," Angela said
interrogatively.

"Something! A hundred things. I am at cross purposes with life. But I
should have been worse had you been obstinate and still refused this
gentleman."

"Why should that affect you, Hyacinth?" asked her sister, with a sudden
coldness.

"Chi lo sa? One has fancies! But my dearest sister has been wise in good
time, and you will be the happiest wife in England; for I believe your
Puritan is a saintly person, the very opposite of our Court sparks, who are
the most incorrigible villains. Ah, sweet, if you heard the stories Lewin
tells me--even of that young Rochester--scarce out of his teens. And the
Duke--not a jot better than the King--and with so much less grace in his
iniquity. Well, you will be married at the Chapel Royal, and spend your
wedding night at Fareham House. We will have a great supper. His Majesty
will come, of course. He owes us that much civility."

"Hyacinth, if you would make me happy, let me be married in our dear
mother's oratory, by your chaplain. Sure, dearest, you know I have never
taken kindly to Court splendours."

"Have you not? Why, you shone and sparkled like a star, that last night you
were ever at Whitehall, Henri sitting close beside you. 'Twas the night
he took ill of a fever. Was it a fever? I have wondered sometimes whether
there was not a mystery of attempted murder behind that long sickness."

"Murder!"

"A deadly duel with a man who hated him. Is not that an attempt at murder
on the part of him who deliberately provokes the quarrel? Well, it is past,
and he is gone. For all the colour of the world I live in, there might
never have been any such person as Henri de Malfort."

Her airy laugh ended in a sob, which she tried to stifle, but could not.

"Hyacinth, Hyacinth, why will you persist in being miserable when you have
so little cause for sadness?"

"Have I not cause? Am I not growing old, and robbed of the only friend who
brought gaiety into my life; who understood my thoughts and valued me? A
traitor, I know--like the rest of them. They are all traitors. But he would
have been true had I been kinder, and trusted him."

"Hyacinth, you are mad! Would you have had him more your friend? He was
too near as it was. Every thought you gave him was an offence against your
husband. Would you have sunk as low as those shameless women the King
admires?"

"Sunk--low? Why, those women are on a pinnacle of
fame--courted--flattered--poetised--painted. They will be famous for
centuries after you and I are forgotten. There is no such thing as shame
nowadays, except that it is shameful to have done nothing to be ashamed of.
I have wasted my life, Angela. There was not a woman at the Louvre who had
my complexion, nor one who could walk a coranto with more grace. Yet I have
consented to be a nobody at two Courts. And now I am growing old, and my
poor painted face shocks me when I chance on my reflection by daylight; and
there is nothing left for me--nothing."

"Your husband, sister!"

"Sister, do not mock me! You know how much Fareham is to me. We were chosen
for each other, and fancied we were in love for the first few years, while
he was so often called away from me, that his coming back made a festival,
and renewed affection. He came crimson from battles and sieges; and I was
proud of him, and called him my hero. But after the treaty of the Pyrenees
our passion cooled, and he grew too much the school-master. And when he
recovered of the contagion, he had recovered of any love-sickness he ever
had for me!"

"Ah, sister, you say these things without thinking them. His lordship needs
but some sign of affection on your part to be as fond a husband as ever he
was."

"You can answer for him, I'll warrant"

"And there are other claims upon your love--your children."

"Henriette, who is nearly as tall as I am, and thinks herself handsomer and
cleverer than ever I was. George, who is a lump of selfishness, and cares
more for his ponies and peregrines than for father and mother. I tell you
there is nothing left for me, except fine houses and carriages; and to show
my fading beauty dressed in the latest mode at twilight in the Ring, and to
startle people from the observation of my wrinkles by the boldness of my
patches. I was the first to wear a coach and horses across my forehead--in
London, at least. They had these follies in Paris three years ago."

"Indeed, dearest?"

"And thou wilt let me arrange thy wedding after my own fancy, wilt thou
not, ma très chère?"

"You forget Denzil's hatred of finery."

"But the wedding is the bride's festival. The bridegroom hardly counts.
Nay, love, you need fear no immodest fooling when you bid good night to the
company; nor shall there be any scuffling for garters at the door of your
chamber. There was none of that antique nonsense when Lady Sandwich married
her daughter. All vulgar fashions of coarse old Oliver's day have gone to
the ragbag of worn-out English customs. We were so coarse a nation, till we
learnt manners in exile. Let me have my own way, dearest. It will amuse me,
and wean me from melancholic fancies."

"Then, indeed, love, thou shalt have thy way in all particulars."

After this Lady Fareham was in haste to return to the house in order to
choose the wedding gown; and here in the panelled parlour they found the
two gentlemen, with the dust of the road and the warmth of the noonday sun
upon them, newly returned from Aylesbury, where they had ridden in the
freshness of the early morning to choose a team of plough-horses at
the fair; and who were more disconcerted than gratified at finding the
dinner-parlour usurped by Mrs. Lewin, Madame Hortense, and an array of
finery that made the room look like a stall in the Exchange.

It was on the stroke of one, yet there were no signs of dinner. Sir John
and Sir Denzil were both sharp set after their ride, and were looking by no
means kindly on Mrs. Lewin and her wares when Hyacinth and Angela appeared
upon the scene.

"Nothing could happen luckier," said Lady Fareham, when she had saluted
Denzil, and embraced her father with "Pish, sir! how you smell of clover
and new-mown grass! I vow you have smothered my mantua with dust."

Father and sweetheart were called upon to assist in choosing the wedding
gown--a somewhat empty compliment on the part of Lady Fareham, since she
would not hear of the simple canary brocade which Denzil selected, and
which Mrs. Lewin protested was only good enough to make his lady
a bed-gown; or of the pale grey atlas which her father considered
suitable--since, indeed, she would have nothing but a white satin, powdered
with silver fleurs de luces, which she remarked, _en passant_, would
have become the Grande Mademoiselle, had she but obtained her cousin's
permission to cast herself away on Lauzun.

"Dear sister, can you consider a fabric fit for a Bourbon Princess a
becoming gown for me?" remonstrated Angela.

"Yes, child; white and silver will better become thee than poor Louise, who
has no more complexion left than I have. She was in her heyday when she
held the Bastille, and when she and Beaufort were two of the most popular
people in Paris. She has made herself a laughing-stock since then. That is
settled, Lewin"--with a nod to the milliner--"the silver fleurs de luces
for the wedding mantua. And now be quick with your samples."

All Angela's remonstrances were as vain to-day as they had been on the
occasion of her first acquaintance with Mrs. Lewin. The excitement of
discussing and selecting the finery she loved affected Lady Fareham's
spirits like a draught of saumur. She was generous by nature, extravagant
by long habit.

"Sure it would be a hard thing if I could not give you your wedding
clothes, when you are marrying the man I chose for you," she protested.
"The cherry-coloured farradine, by all means, Lewin; 'tis the very shade
for my sister's fair skin. Indeed, Denzil"--nodding at him, as he stood
watching them, with that hopelessly bewildered air of a man in a milliner's
shop--"I have been your best friend from the beginning, and, but for me,
you might never have won your sweetheart to listen to you. Mazarine hoods
are as ancient as the pyramids, Lewin. Pr'ythee show us something newer."

It was late in the evening when the two coaches left the Manor gate.
Hyacinth had been in no haste to return to the Abbey. There was nobody
there who wanted her, she protested, and there would be a moon after nine
o'clock, and she had servants enough to take care of her on the road; so
Mrs. Lewin and her ladyship's woman were entertained in the steward's
room, where Reuben held forth upon the splendour that had prevailed in his
master's house before the troubles--and where the mantua-maker ate and
drank all she could get, and dozed and yawned through the old man's
reminiscences.

The afternoon was spent more pleasantly by the quality, who sat about in
the sunny garden, or sauntered by the fish pond and fed the carp--and took
a dish of the Indian drink which the sisters loved, in the pergola at the
end of the grass walk.

Hyacinth now affected a passion for the country, and quoted the late Mr.
Cowley in praise of rusticity.

"Oh, how delicious is this woodland valley," she cried.

    "'Here let me, careless and unthoughtful lying,
    Hear the soft winds, above me plying,
    With all their wanton boughs dispute.'

Poor Cowley, he might well love the country, for he was shamefully treated
in town--a devoted servant to bankrupt royalty for all the best years of
his life, and fobbed off with a compliment when the King came into power.
Ah me, 'tis an ill world we live in, and London is the most hateful spot in
it," she concluded, with a sigh.

"And yet you will have me married nowhere else, sister?"

"Oh, for a wedding or a christening one must have a crowd of fine people.
It would go about that Lady Fareham was quite out of fashion if I were
content to see only ploughmen and dairy-maids, and a petty gentleman or two
with their ill-dressed wives, at my sister's marriage. London is the only
decent place--after Paris--to live in; but the country is a peacefuller
place in which to die."

A heart-breaking sigh emphasised the sentence, and Angela scrutinised her
sister's face with increased concern.

"Dear love, I fear you are hiding something from me; and that you are
seriously indisposed," she said earnestly.

"If I am I do not know it. But when one is weary of living there is only
one sensible thing left to do--if Providence will but be kind and help one
to do it. I am not for dagger or poison, or for a plunge in deep water. But
to fade away in a gentle disease--a quiet ebbing of the vital stream--is
the luckiest thing that can befall one who is tired of life."

Alarmed at hearing her sister talk in this melancholy strain, and still
more alarmed by the change in her looks, sunken cheeks, hectic flush,
fever-bright eyes, Angela entreated Lady Fareham to stay at the Manor, and
be nursed and cared for.

"Oh, I know your skill in nursing, and your power over a sick person,"
Hyacinth interjected scornfully, and then in the next moment apologised for
the little spurt of retrospective jealousy.

"Stay with us, love, and let us make you happier than you are at Chilton,"
pleaded Angela; but Hyacinth, who had been protesting that nobody wanted
her, now declared that she could not leave home, and recited a list of
duties, social and domestic.

"I shall not have half an hour to spare until I go to London next week to
prepare for the wedding," she said. The date had been fixed while they sat
at dinner; Sir John and his elder daughter settling the day, while Denzil
assented with radiant smiles, and Angela sat by in pale silence, submissive
to the will of others. They were to be married on a Thursday, July 19, and
it was now the end of June--little more than a fortnight's interval in
which to meditate upon the beginning of a new life.

Mrs. Lewin promised the white and silver mantua, and as many of the new
clothes as a supernatural address, industry, and obligingness, could
produce within the time. Hyacinth grew more lively after supper, and parted
from her father and sister in excellent spirits; but her haggard face
haunted Angela in troubled dreams all that night, and she thought of her
with anxiety during the next few days, and most of all upon one long sultry
day, the 4th of July, which was the third day she had spent in unbroken
solitude since her father and Denzil had ridden away in the dim early
morning, while the pastures were veiled in summer haze, on the first stage
of a journey to London, hoping, with a long rest between noon and evening,
to ride thirty-seven miles before night.

They were to consult with a learned London lawyer, and to execute the
marriage settlement, Sir John vastly anxious about this business, in his
ignorance of law and distrust of lawyers. They were to stay in London only
long enough to transact their business, and would then return post-haste to
the Manor; but as they were to ride their own horses all the way, and as
lawyers are notoriously slow, Angela had been told not to expect them till
the fourth evening after their departure. In her lonely rambles that long
summer day, with her spaniel Ganymede, and her father's favourite pointer,
for her only companions, Angela's thoughts dwelt ever on the past. Of the
future--even that so near future of her marriage--she thought hardly at
all. That future had been disposed of by others. Her fate had been settled
for her; and she was told that by her submission she would make those she
loved happy. Her father would have the son he longed for, and would be
sure of her faithful devotion till the end of his days--or of hers, should
untimely death intervene. Hyacinth's foolish jealousy would be dispelled by
the act which gave her sister's honour into a husband's custody. And for
him, that presumptuous lover who had taken so little pains to hide his
wicked passion, if in any audacious hour he had dared to believe her guilty
of reciprocating his love, that insolent suspicion would be answered at
once and for ever by her marriage with Denzil--Denzil who was Fareham's
junior by fifteen years, his superior in every advantage of person, as
she told herself with a bitter smile; for even while she thought of that
superiority--the statuesque regularity of feature, the clear colouring of
a complexion warmed with the glow of health, the deep blue of large
well-opened eyes, the light free carriage of one who had led an active
country life--even while she thought of Denzil, another face and figure
flashed upon her memory--rugged and dark, the forehead deeper lined than
years justified, the proud eye made sombre by the shadow of the projecting
brow, the cheek sunken, the shoulders bent as if under the burden of
melancholy thoughts.

O God! this was the face she loved. The only face that had ever touched the
springs of joy and pain. It was nearly half a year since she had seen him.
Their meetings in the future need be of the rarest. She knew that Denzil
regarded him with a distrust which made friendship out of the question; and
it would be her duty to keep as far aloof from that old time as possible.
Family meetings there must be, considering the short distance between
Chilton and the Manor, feastings and junketings in company once or twice in
the summer, lest it should be thought Sir John and his lordship were ill
friends. But Angela knew that in any such social gathering, sitting at the
overloaded board, amid the steam of rich viands, and the noise of many
voices, she and Fareham would be as far apart as if the Indian Ocean rolled
between them.

Once, and very soon, they must meet face to face; and he would take her
hand in greeting, and would kiss her on the lips as she stood before him in
her wedding finery, that splendour of white and silver which would provoke
him to scornful wonder at her trivial pleasure in sumptuous clothes. Thus
once they must meet. Her heart thrilled at the thought. He had so often
shunned her, taking such obvious trouble to keep his distance; but he could
hardly absent himself from her wedding. The scandal would be too great.

Well, she had accepted her fate, and this dull aching misery must be lived
through somehow; and neither her father nor Denzil must ever have occasion
to suspect her unhappiness.

"Oh, gracious Mary, Mother of God, help and sustain me in my sorrow! Guard
and deliver me from sinful thoughts. What are my fanciful griefs to thy
great sorrows, which thou didst endure with holy patience? Subdue and bend
me to obedience and humility. Let me be an affectionate daughter, a dutiful
wife, a friend and comforter to my poor neighbours."

So, and with many such prayers she struggled against the dominion of evil,
kneeling meekly in the leafy stillness of that deep beechwood, where no
human eye beheld her devotions. So in the long solitude of the summer day
she held commune with heaven, and fought against that ever-recurring memory
of past happiness, that looking back to the joys and emotions of those
placid hours at Chilton Abbey, before the faintest apprehension of evil had
shadowed her friendship with Fareham. Not to look back; not to remember
and regret. That was the struggle in which the intense abstraction of
the believer, lifting the mind to heaven, alone could help her. Long and
fervent were her prayers in that woodland sanctuary where she made her
pious retreat; nor was her sister forgotten in those prayers, which
included much earnest supplication for the welfare here and hereafter
of that lighter soul for whom she had ever felt a protecting and almost
maternal love. Years counted for very little in the relations between these
sisters.

The day wore to its close--the most solemn day in Angela's life since that
which she had spent in the Reverend Mother's death-chamber, kneeling in the
faint yellow glow of the tall wax-candles, in a room from which daylight
was excluded. She remembered the detachment of her mind from all earthly
interests as she knelt beside that death-bed, and how easily her thoughts
had mounted heavenward; while now her love clung to this sinful earth. How
had she changed for the worse, how was she sunk from the holy aspirations
of that time!




CHAPTER XXV.

HIGH STAKES.


Angela had eaten her lonely supper, and was sitting at her embroidery frame
between nine and ten, while the sounds of bolts and bars in the hall and
corridors, and old Reuben's voice hectoring the maids, told her that the
servants were closing the house before going to bed. Reuben would be coming
to her presently, no doubt, to remind her of the lateness of the hour,
wanting to carry her candle to her chamber, and as it were to see her
safely disposed of before he went to his garret. She meant, on this
occasion, to resist his friendly tyranny, having so little inclination for
sleep, and hoping to find peace of mind and distraction in this elaborate
embroidery of gold thread and many-coloured silks, which was destined to
adorn her father's person, on the facings of a new-fashioned doublet.

Suddenly, as she bent over the candle to scrutinize the shading of her
silks, the hollow sound of hoofs broke upon the silence, and in a minute
afterwards a bell rang loudly.

Who could it be at such an hour? Her father, no doubt; no one else. He had
hurried his business through, and returned a day earlier than he had hoped.
Or could it be that he had fallen sick in London, and Denzil had come to
tell her ill news? Or was it a messenger from her sister? She had time to
contemplate several evil contingencies while she stood in the hall watching
Reuben withdraw various bolts and bars.

The door swung back at last, and she saw a man in high-riding boots and
slouched hat standing on the threshold, while in the moonlight behind him
she could distinguish a mounted groom holding the bridle of a led horse, as
well as the horse from which the visitor had just dismounted.

The face that looked at her from the doorway was the face which had haunted
her with cruel persistency through that long day, chaining her thoughts to
earth.

Fareham stood looking at her for a few moments, deadly pale, while she
was collecting her senses, trying to understand this most unlooked-for
presence. Why was he here? Ah, no doubt, a messenger of evil.

"Oh, sir, my sister is ill!" she cried; "I read sorrow in your
face--seriously ill--dangerously? Speak, my lord, for pity's sake!"

"Yes, she is ill."

"Not dead?"

"No, no."

"But very ill? Oh, I feared, I feared when I saw her that there was
something amiss. Has she sent you to fetch me?"

"Yes; you are wanted."

"Reuben, I must set out this instant. Order the coach to be got ready. And
Betty must go with me."

"You will need no coach, Angela. Nor is there time to spare for any such
creeping conveyance. I have brought Zephyr. You remember how you loved him.
He is swift, and gentle as the wind after which we named him; sure of foot,
easy to ride. The roads are good after yesterday's rain, and the moon will
last us most of our way. We shall be at Chilton in two hours. Put on your
coat and hat. Indeed, there is no time to be lost."

"Do you mean that she may die before I can reach her?"

"I know not," stamping his foot impatiently. "Fate holds the keys. But you
had best waste no time on questions."

His manner was one of command, and he seemed to apprehend no possibility
of hesitation on her part. Reuben ran to his pantry, and came back with a
tankard of wine, which he offered to the visitor with tremulous respect,
almost ready to kneel.

"Our best Burgundy, my lord. Your lordship must be dry after your long
ride; and if your lordship would care to sup, there is good picking on last
Monday's chine, and a capon from madam's supper scarce touched with the
carving-knife."

"Nothing, I thank you, friend. There is no time for gluttony."

Reuben, pressing the tankard upon him, he drank some wine with an automatic
air, and still stood with his eyes fixed on Angela's pallid countenance,
waiting her decision.

"Are you coming?" he asked.

"Does she want me? Has she asked for me? Oh, for God's sake, my lord, tell
me more! Is she dangerously ill? Have the doctors given her over?"

"No. But she is in a bad way. And you--you--you--are wanted. Will you come?
Ay or no?"

"Yes. It is my duty to go to her. But when my father and Denzil come back
to-morrow, Reuben must be able to tell them why I went; and the nature
of my sister's illness. Were it not so serious that there is no time for
hesitation, it would ill become me to leave this house in my father's
absence."

He gave his head a curious jerk at Denzil's name, as if he had been stung.

"Yes, I will explain; I can make all clear to this gentleman here while you
put on your cloak. Bring the black to the door," he called to his man.

"Will not your lordship bait your horses before you start?" Reuben asked
deferentially.

"No time, fellow. There is no time. How often must I tell you so?" retorted
Fareham.

Reuben's village breeding had given him an exaggerated respect for
aristocracy. He had grown up in the midst of small country gentlemen,
rural squires, among whom the man with three thousand a year in land was a
magnate, and there had never been more than one nobleman resident within a
day's ride of the Manor Moat. To Reuben, therefore, a peer was like a god;
and he would have no more questioned Lord Fareham's will than a disciple of
Hobbes would have imputed injustice to Kings.

Angela returned in a few minutes, having changed her silken gown for a neat
cloth riding-skirt and close-fitting hood. She carried nothing with her,
being assured that her sister's wardrobe would be at her disposal, and
having no mind to spend a minute more in preparation than was absolutely
necessary. Brief as her toilet was, she had time to consider Lord Fareham's
countenance and manner, the cold distance of his address, and to scorn
herself for having thought of him in her reveries that day as loving her
always and till death. It was far better so. The abyss that parted them
could not yawn too wide. She put a stern restraint upon herself, so that
there should be nothing hysterical in her manner, lest her fears about her
sister's health should be mistaken for agitation at his presence. She stood
beside the horse, straight and firm, with her hand on the pommel, and
sprang lightly into the saddle as Fareham's strong arm lifted her. Yet
she could but notice that his hand shook as he gave her the bridle, and
arranged the cloth petticoat over her foot.

Not a word was spoken on either side as they rode out at the gate and
through the village of St. Nicholas, beautiful in the moonlight. Such low
crumbling walls and deeply sloping roofs of cottages squatting in a tangle
of garden and orchard; such curious outlines of old brick gables in the
better class houses of miller, butcher, and general dealer; orchards and
gardens and farm buildings, with every variety of thatch and eaves, huddled
together in picturesque confusion; large spaces everywhere--pond, and
village green, and common, and copse beyond; a peaceful, prosperous
settlement, which had passed unharmed through the ordeal of the civil war,
safe in its rural seclusion. Not a word was spoken even when the village
was left behind, and they were riding on a lonely road, in so brilliant
a moonlight that Angela could see every line in her companion's brooding
face.

Why was he so gloomy and so unkind, in an hour when his sympathy should
naturally have been given to her? Was he consumed with sorrow for his
wife's indisposition, and did anxiety make him silent; or was he angry with
himself for not being as deeply distressed as a husband ought to be at
a wife's peril? She knew too well how he and Hyacinth had been growing
further apart day by day, till the only link between husband and wife
seemed to be a decent courtesy and subservience to the world's opinion.

She recalled that other occasion when they two had made a solitary journey
together, and in as gloomy a silence--that night of the great fire, when he
had flung off his doublet and taken the sculls out of her hands, and rowed
steadily and fast, with his eyes downcast, leaving her to steer the boat as
she would, or trusting to the lateness of the hour for a clear course. He
had seemed to hate her that night just as he seemed to hate her now, as
they rode mile after mile side by side, the groom following near, now at a
fast trot, now galloping along a stretch of waste grass that bordered the
highway, now breathing their horses in a walk.


In one of those intervals he asked her if she were tired.

"No, no. I have no power to feel anything but anxiety. If you would only
be kinder and tell me more about my sister! I fear you consider her in
danger."

"Yes, she is in danger. There is no doubt of that."

"O God! she looked so ill when I saw her last, and she talked so wildly. I
feared she was in a bad way. How soon shall we be at Chilton, my lord?"

"My lord! Why do you 'my lord' me?"

"I can find no other name. We seem to be strangers to-night; but, indeed,
names and ceremonies matter nothing when the mind is in trouble. How soon
shall we reach the Abbey, Fareham?"

"In an hour, at latest, Angela."

His voice trembled as he spoke her name, and all of force and passion that
could be breathed into a single word was in his utterance. She flushed at
the sound, and looked at him with a sudden fear; but his countenance might
have been wrought-iron, so cold and passionless and cruelly resolute looked
that rough-hewn face in the moonlight.

"I have a fresh horse waiting for you at Thame," he said. "I will not have
you wearied by riding a tired horse. We are within five minutes of the inn.
Will you rest there for half an hour, and take some refreshment?"

"Rest, when my sister may be dying! Not a moment more than is needed to
change horses."

"I have brought Queen Bess, another of your favourites. 'Twas she who
taught you to ride. She will know your voice, and your light hand upon her
bridle."

They found the Inn wrapped in slumber, like every house or cottage they had
passed; but a lantern shone within an open door in the quadrangle round
which house and stables were built. One of the Fareham grooms was there,
with an ostler to wait upon him, and three horses were brought out of their
stable, ready saddled, as the travellers rode under the archway into the
yard.

The mare was excited at finding herself on the road in the clear cool
night, with the moonlight in her eyes, and was gayer than Fareham liked to
see her under so precious a load; but Angela was no longer the novice by
whose side he had ridden nearly two years before. She handled Queen Bess
firmly, and soon settled her into a sharp trot, and kept her at it for
nearly three miles. The hour Fareham had spoken of was not exceeded by many
minutes when Chilton Abbey came in sight, the grey stone walls pale in the
moonlight. All things--the long park wall, the pillared gates, the open
spaces of the park, the depth of shadow where the old oaks and beeches
spread wide and dark, had a look of unreality which contrasted curiously
with the scene as she had last beheld it in all its daylight verdure and
homeliness.

She dropped lightly from her horse, so soon as they drew rein at an angle
of the long irregular house, where there was a door, half hidden under ivy,
by which Lord Fareham went in and out much oftener than by the principal
entrance. It opened into a passage that led straight to the library, where
there was a lamp burning to-night. Angela saw the light in the window as
they rode past.

He opened the door, which had been left on the latch, and nodded a
dismissal to the groom, who went off to the stables, leading their horses.
All was dark in the passage--dark and strangely silent; but this wing was
remote from the chief apartments and from the servants' offices.

"Will you take me to my sister at once?" Angela asked, stopping on the
threshold of the library, when Fareham had opened the door.

A lamp upon the tall mantelpiece feebly lighted the long low room, gloomy
with the darkness of old oak wainscot and a heavily timbered ceiling. There
were two flasks of wine upon a silver salver, and provisions for a supper,
and a fire was burning on the hearth.

"You had better warm yourself after your night ride, and eat and drink
something before you see her."

"No, no. What, after riding as fast as our horses could carry us! I must go
to her this moment. Can you find me a candle?"--looking about her hurriedly
as she spoke. "But, indeed, it is no matter; I know my way to her room in
the dark, and there will be light enough from the great window."

"Stop!" he cried, seizing her arm as she was leaving the room; "stop!"
dragging her back and shutting the door violently. "Your sister is not
there."

"Great God! what do you mean? You told me your wife was here--ill--dying
perhaps."

"I told you a lie, sweetheart; but desperate men will do desperate things."

"Where is my sister? Is she dead?"

"Not unless the Nemesis that waits on woman's folly has been swifter of
foot than common. I have no wife, Angela; and you have no sister that you
will ever care to own. My Lady Fareham has crossed the narrow sea with her
lover, Henri de Malfort--her paramour always--though I once thought him
yours, and tried to kill him for your sake."

"A runaway wife! Hyacinth! Great God!" She clasped her hands before her
face in an agony of shame and despair, falling upon her knees in sudden
self-abasement, her head drooping until her brow almost touched the ground.
And then, after but a few minutes of this deep humiliation, she started to
her feet with a cry of anger. "Liar! villain! despicable, devilish villain!
This is a lie, like the other--a wicked lie! Your wife--your wife a wanton?
My sister? My life upon it, she is in London--in your house, busy preparing
for my marriage. Unlock that door, my lord; let me go this instant--back to
my father. Oh, that I could be so mad as to leave his protection at your
bidding! Open the door, sir, I command you!"

She seemed to gain in height, and to be taller than he had thought her--he
who had so watched her, and whose memory held every line of that slender,
graceful figure. She stood straight as an arrow, looking at him with
set lips and flaming eyes, too angry to be afraid, trembling, but with
indignation, not fear of him.

"Nay, child," he said gravely, "I have got you, and I mean to keep you. But
you have trusted yourself to my hospitality, and you are safe in my house
as in a sanctuary. I may be a villain, but I am not a ruffian. If I have
brought you here by a trick, you are as much mistress of your life and fate
under this roof as you ever were in your father's house."

"I have but one thing to say, sir. Let me out of this hateful house."

"What then? Would you walk back to the Manor Moat, through the
night--alone?"

"I would crawl there on my hands and knees if I could not walk; anything to
get away from you. Oh, the baseness of it! To vilify my sister--for your
own base purposes. Intolerable villain!"

"Mistress, we will soon put an end to that charge. Lies there have been,
but that is none. 'Tis you are the slanderer there."

He took a letter from the pocket of his doublet, and handed it to her. Then
he took the lamp from the mantelshelf and held it while she read.

Alas, it was her sister's hand. She knew those hurried characters too well.
The letter was blotted with ink and smeared as with tears. Angela's tears
began to rain upon the page as she read:--

"I have tried to be a good woman and a true wife to you, tried hard for
these many years, knowing all the time that you had left off loving me,
and but for the shame of it would have cared little, though I had as many
lovers as a maid of honour. You made life harder for me in this year last
past by your passion for my sister, which mystery of yours, silent and
secret as you were, these eyes must have been blind not to discover.

"And while you were cold in manner and cruel of speech--slighting me
ever--there was one who loved and praised me, one whose value I knew not
till he left this country, and I found myself desolate without him.

"He has come back. He, too, has found that I was the other half of his
mind; and that he could taste no pleasure in life unshared by me. He has
come to claim one who ever loved him, and denied him only for virtue's
sake. Virtue! Poor fool that I was to count that a woman's noblest quality!
Why, of all attributes, it is that the world least values. Virtue! when the
starched Due de Montausier fawns upon Louise de la Vallière, when Barbara
Palmer is de facto Queen of England. Virtue!

"Farewell! Forget me, Fareham, as I shall try to forget you. I shall be
in Paris perhaps before you receive this letter. My house in the Rue de
Touraine is ready for me. I shall dishonour you by no open scandal. The man
I love will but rank as the friend I most value, and my other friends will
ask no questions so long as you are silent, and do not seek to disgrace me.
Indeed, it were an ill thing to pursue me with your anger; the more so as I
am weak and ailing, and may not live long to enjoy my happiness. You have
given me so little that you should in common justice spare me your hate.

"I leave you your children, whom you have affected to love better than I;
and who have shown so little consideration for me that I shall not miss
them."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What think you of that, Angela, for the letter of a she-cynic?"

"It is blotted with her tears. She wrote in sorrow, despairing of your
love."

"She managed to exist for a round dozen years without my love--or doubting
it--so long as she had her _cavalière servante_. It was only when he
deserted her that she found life a burden. And now she has crossed the
Rubicon. She belongs to her age--the age of Kings' mistresses and light
women. And she will be happy, I dare swear, as they are. It is not an age
of tears. And when the fair Louise ran away to her Convent the other day,
in a passion of penitence, be sure she only went on purpose to be brought
back again. But now, sweet, say have I lied to you about the lady who was
once my wife?" he asked, pointing to the letter in her hand.

"And who is my sister to the end of time; my sister in Eternity: in
Purgatory or in Paradise. I cannot cast her off, though you may. I will set
out for Paris to-morrow, and bring her home, if I can, to the Manor. She
need trouble you no more. My husband and I can shelter and pity her."

"Your husband!"

"He will be my husband a fortnight hence."

"Never! Never, while I live to fling my body between you at the altar.
His blood or mine should choke your marriage vows. Angela, Angela, be
reasonable. I have brought you out of that trap. I have cut the net in
which they had caught you. My love, you are free, and I am free, and you
belong to me. You never loved Denzil Warner, never would love him, were
you to live with him a quarter of a century. He is ice, and you are fire.
Dearest, you belong to me. He who made us both created us to be happy
together. There are strings in our hearts that harmonize as concords in
music do. We are miserable apart, both of us. We waste, and fade, and
torture ourselves in absence; but only to breathe the same air, to sit,
silent, in the same room, is to be happy."

"Let me go!" she cried, looking at him with wild eyes, leaning against the
locked door, her hands clutching at the latch, seeming neither to hear nor
heed his impassioned address, though every word had sunk deep enough to
remain in her memory for ever. "Let me go! You are a dishonourable villain!
I came to London alone to your deserted house. I was not afraid of death or
the plague then. I am not afraid of you now. Open this door, and let me go,
never to see your wicked face again!"

"Angela, canst thou so play fast and loose with happiness? Look at me,"
kneeling at her feet, trying to take her hands from their hold on the
latch. "Our fate is in our power to-night. The day is near dawning, and
at the stroke of five my coach will be at the door to take us to Bristol,
where the ship lies that shall carry us to New England--to a new world, and
liberty; and to the sweet simple life that will please my dear love better
than all the garish pleasures of a licentious court. Ah, dearest, I know
thy mind and heart as well as I know my own. I know I can make thee happy
in that fair new world, where we shall begin life again, free from all old
burdens; and where, if thou wilt, my motherless children can join us, and
make one loving household. My Henriette adores you; and it were Christian
charity to rescue her and her brother from Charles Stuart's England, and to
bring them up to an honest life in a country where men are free to worship
God as He moves them. Love, you cannot deny me. So sweet a life waits for
us; and you have but to lay that dear hand in mine and give consent."


"Oh, God!" she murmured. "I thought this man held me in honour and esteem."

"Do I not honour you? Ah, love, what can a man do more than offer his life
to her he loves----"

"And if he is another woman's husband?"

"That tie is broken."

"I deny it. But if it were, you have been my sister's husband, and you
could be nothing to me but my brother. You have made sisterly affection
impossible, and so, my lord, we must be strangers; and, as you are a
gentleman, I bid you open this door, and let me make my way to some more
peaceful shelter than your house."

"Angela!"

He tried to draw her to his breast; but she held him off with outstretched
arm, and even in the tumult of his passion the knowledge of her
helplessness and his natural shame at his own treachery kept him in check.

"Angela, call me villain if you will, but give me a fair hearing. Dearest,
the joy or sorrow of two lives lies in your choice to-night. If you will
trust me, and go with me, I swear I will make you happy. If you are
stubborn to refuse--well, sweetheart, you will but send a man to the devil
who is not wholly bad, and who, with you for his guardian angel, might find
the way to heaven."

"And begin the journey by a sin these lips dare not name. Oh, Fareham," she
said, growing suddenly calm and grave, and with something of that tender
maternal manner with which she had soothed and controlled him while he had
but half his wits, and when she feared he might be lying on his death-bed,
"I would rather believe you a madman than a villain; and, indeed, all that
you have done to-night is the work of a madman, who follows his own wild
fancy without power to reason on what he does. Surely, sir, you know me too
well to believe that I would let love--were it the blindest, most absorbing
passion woman ever felt--lead me into sin so base as that you would urge.
The vilest wanton at Whitehall would shrink from stealing a sister's
husband."

"There would be no theft. Your sister flings me to you as a dog drops the
bone he has picked dry. She had me when I was young, and a soldier--with
some reflected glory about me from the hero I followed--and rich and happy.
She leaves me old and haggard, without aim or hope, save to win her I
worship. Shall I tell you when I began to love you, my angel?"

"No, no; I will listen to no more raving. Thank God, there is the
daylight!" as the cold wan dawn flickered across the room. "Will you let me
beat my hands against this door till they bleed?"

"Thou shalt not harm the loveliest hands on earth," seizing them both in
his own. "Ah, sweet, I began to love thee before ever I rose from that bed
of horror where I had been left to perish. I loved thee in my unreason, and
my love strengthened with each hour of returning sense. Our journey, I so
weak, and sick, and helpless--was a ride through Paradise. I would have had
it last a year; would have suffered sickness and pain, aching limbs and
parched lips, only to feel the light touch of this dear hand upon my brow
'twixt sleep and waking; only to look up as I awoke, and see those sweet
eyes looking down at me. Ah, dearest, my heart arose from among the dead,
and came out of the tomb of all human affections to greet thee. Till I knew
you I knew not the meaning of love. And if you are stubborn, and will not
come with me to that new world, where we may be so happy, why, then I must
go down to my grave a despairing wretch that never knew a woman's love."

"My sister--your wife?"

"Never loved me. Her heart--that which she calls heart--was ever Malfort's
and not mine. She gave me to know as much by a hundred signs and tokens
which read plain enough now, looking back, but which I scarce heeded at the
time. I believed her chaste, and she was civil, and I was satisfied. I tell
you, Angela, this heart never beat for woman till I knew you. Ah, love, be
not stone! Make not our affinity an obstacle. The Roman Church will ever
grant dispensation for a union of affinities where there is cause for
indulgence. The Church would have had Philip married to his wife's sister
Elizabeth."

"The Church holds the bond of marriage indissoluble," Angela answered. "You
are married to my sister; and while she lives you can have no other wife."

Her brow was stern, her courage unfaltering; but physical force was failing
her. She leant against the door for support, and she no longer struggled
to withdraw her hands from that strong grasp which held them. She fought
against the faintness that was stealing over her senses; but her heavy
eyelids were beginning to droop, and there was a sound like rushing water
in her ears.

"Angela--Angela," pleaded the tender voice, "do you forget that afternoon
at the play, and how you wept over Bellario's fidelity--the fond girl-page
who followed him she loved; risked name and virtue; counted not the
cost, in that large simplicity of love which gives all it has to give,
unquestioning? Remember Bellario."

"Bellario had no thought that was not virtue's," she answered faintly; and
he took that fainter tone for a yielding will.

"She would not have left Philaster if he had been alone in the wilderness,
miserable for want of her love."

Her white lips moved dumbly, her eyelids sank, and her head fell back
upon his shoulder, as he started up from his knees to support her sinking
figure. She was in his arms, unconscious--the image of death.

He kissed her on the brow.

"My soul, I will owe nothing to thy helplessness," he whispered. "Thy free
will shall decide whether I live or die."

Another sound had mingled with the rushing waters as her senses left
her--the sound of knocking at a distant door. It grew louder and louder
momently, indicating a passionate impatience in those who knocked. The
sound came from the principal door, and there was a long corridor between
that door and Fareham's room.

He stood listening, undecided; and then he laid the unconscious form gently
on the thick Persian carpet--knowing that for recovery the fainting girl
could not lie too low. He cast one agitated glance at the white face
looking up at the ceiling, and then went quickly to the hall.

As he came near, the knocking began again, with greater vehemence, and a
voice, which he knew for Sir John's, called--

"Open the door, in the King's name, or we will break it open!"

There was a pause; those without evidently waiting for the result of that
last and loudest summons.

Fareham heard the hoofs of restless horses trampling the gravel drive, the
jingle of bit and chain, and the click of steel scabbards.

Sir John had not come alone.

"So soon; so devilish soon!" muttered Fareham. And then, as the knocking
was renewed, he turned and left the hall without a word of answer to those
outside, and hastened back to the room where he had left Angela. His brow
was fixed in a resolute frown, every nerve was braced. He had made up his
mind what to do. He had the house to himself, and was thus master of the
situation, so long as he could keep his pursuers on the outside. The upper
servants--half a dozen coach-loads--had been packed off to London, under
convoy of Manningtree and Mrs. Hubbock. The under servants--rank and
file--from housemaids to turnspits, slept in a huge barrack adjoining the
stables, built in Elizabeth's reign to accommodate the lower grade of a
nobleman's household. These would not come into the house to light fires
and sweep rooms till six o'clock at the earliest; and it was not yet four.
Lord Fareham, therefore, had to fear no interruption from his own people.

There was broad daylight in the house now; yet he looked about for a
candle; found one on a side-table, in a tall silver candlestick, and
stopped to light it, before he raised the lifeless figure from the floor
and lifted it into the easiest position for carrying, the head lying on his
shoulder. Then, holding the slender waist firmly, circled by his left arm,
he took the candlestick in his right hand, and went out of the room with
his burden, along a passage leading to a seldom-used staircase, which he
ascended, carrying that tall, slim form as if it had been a feather-weight,
up flight after flight, to the muniment room in the roof. From that point
his journey, and the management of that unconscious form, and to dispose
safely of the lighted candle, became more difficult, and occupied a
considerable time; during which interval the impatience of an enraged
father and a betrothed husband, outside the hall door, increased with every
minute of delay, and one of their mounted followers, of whom they had
several, was despatched to ride at a hand-gallop to the village of
Chilton, and rouse the Constable, while another was sent to Oxford for a
Magistrate's warrant to arrest Lord Fareham on the charge of abduction. And
meanwhile the battering upon thick oaken panels with stout riding-whips,
and heavy sword-hilts, and the calling upon those within, were repeated
with unabated vehemence, while a couple of horsemen rode round the house to
examine other inlets, and do picket duty.

The Constable and his underling were on the ground before that stubborn
citadel answered the reiterated summons; but at last there came the sound
of bolts withdrawn. An iron bar dropped from its socket with a clang that
echoed long and loud in the empty hall, the door opened, and Fareham
appeared on the threshold, corpse-like in the cold raw daylight, facing his
besiegers with a determined insolence.

"Thou most infernal villain!" cried Sir John, rushing into the hall,
followed closely by Denzil and one of the men, "what have you done with my
daughter?"

"Which daughter does your honour seek? If it be she whom you gave me for a
wife, she has broken the bond, and is across the sea with her paramour?"

"You lie--reprobate! Your wife had doubtless business relating to her
French estate, which called her to Paris. My daughters are honest women,
unless by your villainy, one, who should have been sacred, as your sister
by affinity, should bear a blighted name. Give me back my daughter,
villain--the girl you lured from her home by the foulest deceit!"

"You cannot see the lady to-day, gentlemen; even though you threaten me
with your weapons," pointing with a sardonic smile to their drawn swords,
"and out-number me with your followers. The lady is gone. I am alone in the
house to submit to any affront your superior force may put upon me."

"Our superiority can at least search your house," said Denzil. "Sir John,
you had best take one way and I another. I doubt I know every room and
passage in the Abbey."

"And your yeoman's manners offer a handsome return for the hospitality
which made you acquainted with my house," said Fareham, with a contemptuous
laugh.

He followed Denzil, leaving Sir John to grope alone. The house had been
deserted but for a few days, yet the corridors and rooms had the heavy
atmosphere of places long shut from sunshine and summer breezes; while
the chilling hour, the grey ghostly light, added something phantasmal and
unnatural to the scene.

Denzil entered room after room--below stairs and above--explored the
picture-gallery, the bed-chambers, the long low ball-room in the roof,
built in Elizabeth's reign, when a wing had been added to the Abbey, and of
late used only for lumber. Fareham followed him close, stalking behind him
in sullen silence, with an unalterable gloom upon his face which betrayed
no sudden apprehensions, no triumph or defeat. He followed like doom, stood
quietly on one side as Denzil opened a door; waited on the threshold
while the searcher made his inspection, always with the same iron visage,
offering no opposition to the entrance of this or that chamber; only
following and watching, silent, intent, sphinx-like; till at last, fairly
worn out by blank disappointment, Denzil turned upon him in a sudden fury.

"What have you done with her?" he cried, desperately. "I will stake my life
she has not left this house, and by Him who made us you shall not leave it
living unless I find her."

He glanced downward at the naked sword he had carried throughout his
search. Fareham's was in the scabbard, and he answered that glance with an
insulting smile.

"You think I have murdered her, perhaps," he said. "Well, I would rather
see her dead than yours. So far I am in capacity a murderer."

They met Sir John in Lady Fareham's drawing-room, when Denzil had gone over
the whole house, trusting nothing to the father's scrutiny.

"He has stabbed her and dropped her murdered body down a well," cried the
Knight, half distraught. "He cannot have spirited her away otherwise. Look
at him, Denzil; look at that haggard wretch I have called my son. He has
the assassin's aspect."


Something--it might be the room in which they were standing--brought back
to Angela's betrothed the memory of that Christmas night when aunt and
niece had been missing, and when he, Denzil, had burst into this room,
where Fareham was seated at chess; who, at the first mention of Angela's
name, started up, white with horror, to join in the search. It was he who
found her then; it was he who had hidden her now; and in the same remote
and secret spot.

"Fool that I was not to remember sooner!" cried Denzil. "I know where to
find her. Follow me, Sir John. Andrew"--calling to the servant who waited
in the hall--"follow us close."

He rushed along a passage, ran upstairs faster than old age, were it ever
so eager, could follow. But Fareham was nearly as fast--nearly, but not
quite, able to overtake him; for he was older, heavier, and more broken by
the fever of that night's work than his colder-tempered rival.

Denzil was some paces in advance when he reached the muniment room. He
found the opening in the wainscot, and the steep stair built into the
chimney. Half way to the bottom there was a gap--an integral part of the
plan--and a drop of six feet; so that a stranger in hurried pursuit would
be likely to come to grief at this point, and make time for his quarry to
escape by the door that opened on the garden. Memory, or wits sharpened by
anxiety, enabled Denzil to avoid this trap; and he was at the door of the
Priest's Hole before Fareham began the descent.

Yes, she was there, kneeling in a corner, a candle burning dimly on a stone
shelf above her head. She was in the attitude of prayer, her head bent, her
face hidden, when the door opened, and she looked up and saw her betrothed
husband.

"Denzil! How did you find me here?"

"I should be a poor slave if I had not found you, remembering the past.
Great God, how pale you are! Come, love, you are safe. Your father is here.
Angela, thou that art so soon to be my wife--face to face--here--before we
leave this accursed pit--tell me that you did not go with that villain,
except for the sake of your sick sister--that you were the victim of a
heartless lie--not a party to a trick invented to blind your father and
me!"

"I doubt I have not all my senses yet," she said, putting her hand to her
head. "I was told my sister wanted me, and I came. Where is Lord Fareham?"

The terror in her countenance as she asked that question froze Denzil.
Ah, he had known it all along! That was the man she loved. Was she his
victim--and a willing victim? He felt as if a great gulf had opened between
him and his betrothed, and that all his hopes had withered.

Fareham was at his elbow in the next moment. "Well, you have found her,"
he said; "but you shall not have her, save by force of arms. She is in my
custody, and I will keep her; or die for her if I am outnumbered!"

"Execrable wretch! would you attempt to detain her by violence? Come,
madam," said Denzil, turning coldly to Angela, "there is a door on those
stairs which will let you out into the air.

"The door will not open at your bidding!" Fareham said fiercely.

He snatched Angela up in his arms before the other could prevent him, and
carried her triumphantly to the first landing-place, which was considerably
below that treacherous gap between stair and stair. He had the key of the
garden door in his pocket, unlocked it, and was in the open air with his
burden before Denzil could overtake him.

He found himself caught in a trap. He had his coach-and-six and armed
postillions waiting close by, and thought he had but to leap into it with
his prey and spirit her off towards Bristol; but between the coach and the
door one of Sir John's pickets was standing, who the moment the door opened
whistled his loudest, and brought Constable and man and another armed
servant running helter-skelter round an angle of the house, and so crossing
the very path to the coach.

"Fire upon him if he tries to pass you!" cried Denzil.

"What! And shoot the lady you have professed to love!" exclaimed Fareham,
drawing himself up, and standing firm as a rock, with Angela motionless in
his arms.

He dropped her to her feet, but held her against his left shoulder with an
iron hold, while he drew his sword and made a rush for the coach. Denzil
sprang into his path, sword in hand, and their blades crossed with a shrill
clash and rattle of steel. They fought like demons, Fareham holding Angela
behind him, sheltering her with his body, and swaying from side to side in
his sword-play with a demoniac swiftness and suppleness, his thick dark
brows knitted over eyes that flamed with a fiercer fire than flashed from
steel meeting steel. A shriek of horror from Angela marked the climax, as
Denzil fell with Fareham's sword between his ribs. There had been little of
dilettante science, or graceful play of wrist in this encounter. The men
had rushed at each other savagely, like beasts in a circus, and whatever
of science had guided Fareham's more practised hand had been employed
automatically. The spirit of the combatants was wild and fierce as the rage
that moves rival stags fighting for a mate, with bent heads and tramping
hoofs, and clash of locked antlers reverberating through the forest
stillness.

Fareham had no time to exult over his prostrate foe; Sir John and his
servants, Constable and underlings, surrounded him, and he was handcuffed
and hauled off to the coach that was to have carried him to a sinner's
paradise, before any one had looked to Denzil's wound, or discovered
whether that violent thrust below the right lung had been fatal. Angela
sank swooning in her father's arms.




CHAPTER XXVI.

IN THE COURT OF KING'S BENCH.


The summer and autumn had gone by--an eventful season, for with it had
vanished from the stage of politics one who had played so dignified and
serious a part there. Southampton was dead, Clarendon disgraced and in
exile. The Nestor and the Ulysses of the Stuart epic had melted from the
scene. Down those stairs by which he had descended on his way to so many a
splendid festival, himself a statelier figure than Kings or Princes, the
Chancellor had gone to banishment and oblivion. "The lady" had looked for
the last time, a laughing Jezebel, from a palace window, exultant at her
enemy's fall; and along the river that had carried such tragic destinies
eastward to be sealed in blood, Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon, had drifted
quietly out of the history he had helped to make. The ballast of that grave
intellect was flung overboard so that the ship of fools might drift the
faster.

But in Westminster Hall, upon this windy November morning, nobody thought
of Clarendon. The business of the day was interesting enough to obliterate
all considerations of yesterday. The young barristers, who were learning
their trade by listening to their betters, had been shivering on their
benches in the Common Pleas since nine o'clock, in that chilly corner
where every blast from the north or north-east swept over the low wooden
partition that enclosed the court, or cut through the chinks in the
panelling. The students and juniors were in their usual places, sitting at
the feet of their favourite Common-law Judge; but the idlers who came for
amusement, to saunter about the hall, haggle for books with the second-hand
dealers along the south wall, or flirt with the milliners who kept stalls
for bands and other legal finery on the opposite side, or to listen on
tiptoe, with an ear above the panelled enclosure, to the quips and cranks
or fierce rhetoric of a famous advocate--these to-day gravitated with one
accord towards the south-west corner of the Hall, where, in the Court of
King's Bench, Richard Revel, Baron Fareham, of Fareham, Hants, was to be
tried by a Buckinghamshire jury for abduction, with fraud, malice, and
violence, and for assault, with intent to murder.

The rank of the offender being high, and the indictment known to involve
tragic details of family history, there had been much talk of the cause
which was on the paper for to-day; and, as a natural consequence, besides
the habitual loungers and saunterers, gossips, and book-buyers, there was
a considerable sprinkling of persons of quality, who perfumed the not too
agreeable atmosphere with pulvilio and Florentine iris powder, and the
rustle of whose silks and brocades was audible all over the Hall. Not
often did such gowns sweep the dust brought in by plebeian feet, nor such
Venetian point collars rub shoulders with the frowsy Norwich drugget worn
by hireling perjurers or starveling clerks. The modish world had come down
upon the great Norman Hall like a flock of pigeons, sleek, iridescent,
all fuss and flutter; and among these unaccustomed visitors there was
prodigious impatience for the trial to begin, and a struggle for good
places that brought into full play the primitive brutality which underlies
the politeness of the civillest people.

Lady Sarah Tewkesbury had risen betimes, and, in her anxiety to secure a
good place, had come out in her last night's "head," which somewhat damaged
edifice of ginger-coloured ringlets and Roman pearls was now visible above
the wooden partition of the King's Bench to the eyes of the commonalty
in the hall below, her ladyship being accommodated with a seat among the
lawyers.

One of these was a young man in a shabby gown and rumpled wig, but with
a fair complexion and tolerable features--a stranger to that court, and
better known at Hicks's Hall, and among city litigators, with whom he had
already a certain repute for keen wits and a plausible tongue--about the
youngest advocate at the English Bar, and by some people said to be no
barrister at all, but to have put on wig and gown two years ago at Kingston
Assizes and called himself to the Bar, and stayed there by sheer audacity.
This young gentleman, Jeffreys by name, having deserted the city and
possible briefs in order to hear the Fareham trial, was inclined to resent
being ousted by an obsequious official to make room for Lady Sarah.

"Faith, one would suppose I was her ladyship's footman and had been keeping
her seat for her," he grumbled, as he reluctantly rose at the Usher's
whispered request, and edged himself sulkily off to a corner where he found
just standing-room.

It was a very hard seat which Mr. Jeffreys had vacated, and her ladyship,
after sitting there over two hours, nodding asleep a good part of the time,
began to feel internal sinkings and flutterings which presaged what she
called a "swound," and necessitated recourse to a crystal flask of strong
waters which she had prudently brought in her muff. Other of Lady Fareham's
particular friends were expected--Sir Ralph Masaroon, Lady Lucretia Topham,
and more of the same kidney; and even the volatile Rochester had deigned to
express an interest in the case.

"The man was mistaken in his métier," he had told Lady Sarah, when the
scandal was discussed in her drawing-room. "The _rôle_ of seducer was
not within his means. Any one could see he was in love with the pale
sister-in-law by the manner in which he scowled at her; but it is not every
woman who can be subjugated by gloom and sullenness, though some of 'em
like us tragical. My method has been to laugh away resistance, as my wife
will acknowledge, who was the cruellest she I ever tackled, and had baffled
all her other servants. Indeed she must have been in Butler's eye when he
wrote--

    'That old Pyg--what d'ye call him--malion
    That cut his mistress out of stone,
    Had not so hard a hearted one.'

Even Lady Rochester will admit I conquered without heroics," upon which her
ladyship, late mistress Mallett, a beauty and a fortune, smiled assent with
all the complacency of a six-months' bride. "To see a man tried for an
attempted abduction is a sight worth a year's income," pursued Rochester.
"I would travel a hundred miles to behold that rare monster who has failed
in his pursuit of one of your obliging sex!"

"Do you think us all so easily won?" asked Lady Sarah, piqued.

"Dear lady, I can but judge by experience. If obdurate to others you have
still been kind to me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lady Sarah had nearly emptied her flask of Muscadine before Masaroon
elbowed his way to a seat beside her, from which he audaciously dislodged
a coffee-house acquaintance, an elderly lawyer upon whom fortune had not
smiled, with a condescending civility that was more uncivil than absolute
rudeness.

"We'll share a bottle in Hell after the trial, mon ami," he said; and on
seeing Lady Sarah's look of horror, he hastened to explain that Heaven,
Hell, and Purgatory, were the cant names of three taverns which drove a
roaring trade in strong drinks under the very roof of the Hall.

"The King's Attorney-general is prosecuting," answered Sir Ralph, replying
to a question from Lady Sarah, whose inquiries betrayed that dense
ignorance of legal technicalities common even to accomplished women. "It
is thought the lady's father would have been glad for the matter to be
quashed, his fugitive daughter being restored to his custody--albeit with a
damaged character--and her elder sister having run away from her husband."

"I will not hear you slander my dearest friend," protested Lady Sarah.
"Lady Fareham left her husband, and with good cause, as his after-conduct
showed. She did not run away from him."

"Nay, she had doubtless the assistance of a carriage-and-six. She would
scarce foot it from London to Dover. And now she is leading grand train in
Paris, and has taken almost as commanding a place as her friend Madame de
Longueville, penitent and retired from service."

"Hyacinth, under all her appearance of silliness, is a remarkably clever
woman," said Lady Sarah, sententiously; "but, pray, Sir Ralph, if Mistress
Angela's father has good reason for not prosecuting his daughter's
lover--indeed I ever thought her an underhand hussy--why does not Sir
Denzil Warner--who I hear has been at death's door--pursue him for assault
and battery?"

"Nay, is so still, madam. I question if he be yet out of danger. The
gentleman is a kind of puritanical Quixote, and has persistently refused to
swear an information against Fareham, whereby I doubt the case will fall
through, or his lordship get off with a fine of a thousand or two. We have
no longer the blessing of a Star Chamber, to supply state needs out of
sinners' pockets, and mitigate general taxation; but his Majesty's Judges
have a capacious stomach for fines, and his Majesty has no objection to see
his subjects' misdemeanours transmuted into coin."

And now the business of the day began, the panelled enclosure being by
this time crowded almost to suffocation; and Lord Fareham was brought into
court.

He was plainly dressed in a dark grey suit, and looked ten years older
than when Lady Sarah had last seen him on his wife's visiting day, an
uninterested member of that modish assembly. His eyes were deeper sunken
under the strongly marked brows. The threads of iron-grey in his thick
black hair were more conspicuous. He carried his head higher than he had
been accustomed to carry it, and the broad shoulders were no longer bent in
the Stafford stoop. The spectators could see that he had braced himself for
the ordeal, and would go through the day's work like a man of iron.

Proclamation was made for silence, and for information, if any person could
give any, concerning the misdemeanour and offence whereof the defendant
stood impeached; and the defendant was bid to look to his challenges, and
the Jury, being gentlemen of the county of Bucks, were called, challenged,
and sworn.

The demand for silence was so far obeyed that there followed a hush within
the enclosure of the court; but there was no cessation of the buzz of
voices and the tramp of footsteps in the hall, which mingled sounds seemed
like the rise and fall of a human ocean, as heard within that panelled
sanctuary.

The lawyers took snuff, shuffled on their seats, nudged each other and
whispered now and then, during the reading of the indictment; but among
Lady Fareham's friends, and the quality in general, there was a breathless
silence and expectancy; and Lady Sarah would gladly have run her hat-pin
into a snuffy old Serjeant close beside her, who must needs talk behind his
hand to his pert junior.

To her ladyship's unaccustomed ears that indictment, translated literally
from the Latin original, sounded terrible as an impeachment in the
subterranean halls of the Vehm Gericht, or in the most select and secret
council in the Venetian Doge's Palace.

The indictment set forth "that the defendant, Richard Revel, Baron Fareham,
on the 4th day of July, in the 18th year of our sovereign lord the King
that now is, at the parish of St. Nicholas in the Vale, in the county of
Bucks, falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, and wickedly, by unlawful and impure
ways and means, contriving, practising, and intending the final ruin and
destruction of Mrs. Angela Kirkland, unmarried, and one of the daughters
of Sir John Kirkland, Knight--the said lady then and there being under
the custody, government, and education of the said Sir John Kirkland, her
father--he, the said Richard Revel, Baron Fareham, then and there falsely,
unlawfully, devilishly, to fulfil, perfect, and bring to effect, his most
wicked, impious, and devilish intentions aforesaid--the said Richard Revel,
Lord Fareham (then and long before, and yet, being the husband of Mrs.
Hyacinth, another daughter of the said Sir John Kirkland, Knight, and
sister of the said Mrs. Angela), against all laws as well divine as human,
impiously, wickedly, impurely, and scandalously, did tempt, invite, and
solicit, and by false and lying pretences, oaths, and affirmations,
unlawfully, unjustly, and without the leave, and against the will of the
aforesaid Sir John Kirkland, Knight, in prosecution of his most wicked
intent aforesaid, did carry off the aforesaid Mrs. Angela, she consenting
in ignorance of his real purpose, about the hour of twelve in the
night-time of the said 4th day of July, in the year aforesaid, and at the
aforesaid, parish of St. Nicholas in the Vale, in the county of Bucks
aforesaid, out of the dwelling-house of the said Sir John Kirkland, Knight,
did take and convey to his own house in the county of Oxford, and did then
and there detain her by fraud, and did there keep her hidden in a secret
chamber known as the Priest's Hole in his own house aforesaid, at the
hazard of her life, and did oppose her rescue by force of arms, and with
his sword, unlawfully, murderously, and devilishly, and in the prosecution
of his wicked purpose did stab and wound Sir Denzil Warner, Baronet, the
lady's betrothed husband, from which murderous assault the said Sir Denzil
Warner, Baronet, still lies in great sickness and danger of death, to the
great displeasure of Almighty God, to the ruin and destruction of the said
Mrs. Angela Kirkland, to the grief and sorrow of all her friends, and
to the evil and most pernicious example of all others in the like case
offending; and against the peace of our said sovereign lord the King, his
crown and dignity."

The defendant having pleaded "Not guilty," the Jury were charged in the
usual manner and with all solemnity.

"If you find him 'guilty' you are to say so; if you find him 'not guilty'
you are to say so, and no more, and hear your evidence."

The Attorney-General confined himself to a brief out-line of the tragic
story, leaving all details to be developed by the witnesses, who were
allowed to give their evidence with colloquial freedom and expansiveness.

The first witness was old Reuben, the steward from the Manor Moat, who had
not yet emerged from that mental maze in which he had found himself upon
beholding the change that had come to pass in the great city, since the
well-remembered winter of the King's execution, and the long frost, when
he, Reuben, was last in London. His evidence was confused and confusing;
and he drew upon himself much good-natured ridicule from the junior who
opened the case. Out of various muddle-headed answers and contradictory
statements the facts of Lord Fareham's unexpected appearance at the Manor
Moat, his account of his lady's illness, and his hurried departure,
carrying the young madam with him on horseback, were elicited, and the
story of the ruse by which Mrs. Angela Kirkland had been beguiled from her
home was made clear to the comprehension of a superior but rustic jury,
more skilled in discriminating the points of a horse, the qualities of an
ox, or the capacity of a hound, than in differentiating truth and falsehood
in a story of wrong-doing.

Sir John Kirkland was the next witness, and the aspect of the man, the
noble grey head, fine features, and soldierly carriage, the old-fashioned
habit, the fashion of an age not long past, but almost forgotten, enlisted
the regard and compassion of Jury and audience.

"Let me perish if it is not a ghost from the civil wars!" whispered Sir
Ralph to Lady Sarah. "Mrs. Angela might well be romanesque and unlike the
rest of us, with such a father."

A spasm of pain convulsed Fareham's face for a moment, as the old Cavalier
stood up in the witness-box, towering above the Court in that elevated
position, and, after being sworn, took one swift survey of the Bench and
Jury, and then fixed his angry gaze upon the defendant, and scarcely
shifted it in the whole course of his examination.

"Now, Gentlemen of the Jury," said the Attorney-General, "we shall tell you
what happened at Chilton Abbey, to which place the defendant, under such
fraudulent and lying pretences as you have heard of from the last witness,
conveyed the young lady. Sir John, I will ask you to acquaint the Jury
as fully and straightforwardly as you can with the circumstances of your
pursuit, and the defendant's reception of you and your intended son-in-law,
Sir Denzil Warner, whose deposition we have failed to obtain, but who could
relate no facts which are not equally within your own knowledge."

"My words shall be straight and plain, sir, to denounce that unchristian
wretch whom, until this miserable business, I trusted as if he had been my
son. I came to my house, accompanied by my daughter's plighted husband,
within an hour after that villain conveyed her away; and on hearing my old
servant's story was quick to suspect treachery. Nor was Sir Denzil backward
in his fears, which were more instantaneous than mine; and we waited only
for the saddling of fresh horses, and rousing a couple of grooms from
their beds, fellows that I could trust for prudence and courage, before we
mounted again, following in that wretch's track. We heard of him and his
victim at the Inn where they changed horses, she going consentingly,
believing she was being taken in this haste to attend a dying sister."

"And on arriving at the defendant's house what was your reception?"

"He opposed our entrance, until he saw that we should batter down his door
if he shut us out longer. We were not admitted until after I had sent one
of my servants for the nearest Constable; and before we had gained an
entrance into his house he had contrived to put away my daughter in a
wretched hiding-place, planned for the concealment of Romish Priests or
other recusants and malefactors, and would have kept her there, I believe,
till she had perished in that foul cavern, rather than restore her to her
father and natural guardian."

"That is false, and you know it!" cried Fareham. "My life is of less
account to me than a hair of her head. I hid her from you, to save her from
your tyranny, and the hateful marriage to which you would have compelled
her."

"Liar! Impudent, barbarous liar!" roared the old Knight, with his right arm
raised, and his body half out of the box, as if he would have assaulted
the defendant. "Sir John," said the Judge, "I would be very loath to deal
otherwise than becomes me with a person of your quality; but, indeed, this
is not so handsome, and we must desire you to be calm."

"When I remember his infamy, and that vile assumption of my daughter's
passion for him, which he showed in every word and act of that miserable
scene."

He went on to relate the searching of the house, and Warner's happy
inspiration, by which Angela's hiding-place was discovered, and she rescued
in a fainting condition. He described the defendant's audacious attempt
to convey her to the coach which stood ready for her abduction, and his
violence in opposing her rescue, and the fight which had well-nigh resulted
in Warner's death.

When Sir John's story was finished the defendant's advocate, who had
declined to question the old butler, rose to cross-examine this more
important witness.

"In your tracing of the defendant's journey between your house and Chilton
you heard of no outcries of resistance upon your daughter's side?"

"No, sir. She went willingly, under a delusion."

"And do you think now, sir, as a man of the world, and with some knowledge
of women, that your daughter was so easily hoodwinked; she having seen her
sister, Lady Fareham, so shortly before, in good health and spirits?"

"Lady Fareham did not appear in good health when she was last at the Manor,
and her sister was already uneasy about her."

"But not so uneasy as to believe her dying, and that it was needful to ride
to her helter-skelter in the night-time. Do you not think, sir, that the
young lady, who was so quick to comply with his lordship's summons, and
bustled up and was in the saddle ten minutes after he entered the house,
and was willing to got without her own woman, or any preparation for
travel, had a strong inclination for the journey, and a great kindness for
the gentleman who solicited her company?"

"Has that barbarous wretch set you on to slander the lady whose ruin he
sought, sir?" asked the Knight, pallid with the white heat of indignation.

"Nay, Sir John, I am no slanderer; but I want the Jury to understand the
sentiments and passions which are the springs of action here, and to bear
in mind that the case they are hearing is a love story, and they can only
come at the truth by remembering their own experience as lovers--"

The deep and angry tones of his client interrupted the silvery-tongued
Counsellor.

"If you think to help me, sir, by traducing the lady, I repudiate your
advocacy."

"My lord, you are not allowed to give evidence or to interrupt the Court.
You have pleaded not guilty, and it is my duty to demonstrate your
innocence. Come, Sir John, do you not know that his lordship's unhappy
passion for his sister-in-law was shared by the subject of it; and that she
for a long time opposed all your efforts to bring about a proper alliance
for her, solely guided and influenced by this secret passion?"

"I know no such thing."

"Do I understand, then, that from the time of your first proposals she was
willing to marry Sir Denzil Warner?"

"She was not willing."

"I would have wagered as much. Did you fathom her reason for declining so
proper an alliance?"

"I did not trouble myself about her reasons. I knew that time would wear
them away."

"And I doubt you trusted to a father's authority?"

"No, sir. I promised my daughter that I would not force her inclinations."

"But you used all methods of persuasion. How long was it before July the
4th that Mrs. Angela consented to marry Sir Denzil?"

"I cannot be over precise upon that point. I have no record of the date."

"But you have the faculty of memory, sir; and this is a point which a
father would not easily forget."

"It may have been a fortnight before."

"And until that time the lady was unwilling?"

"Yes."

"She refused positively to accept the match you urged upon her?"

"She refused."

"And finally consented, I will wager, with marked reluctance?"

"No, sir, there was no reluctance. She came to me of her own accord, and
surprised me by her submission."

"That will do, Sir John. You can stand down. I shall now proceed to call a
witness who will convince the Jury of my client's innocence upon the first
and chief count in the indictment, abduction with fraud and violence. I
shall tell you by the lips of my witness, that if he took the lady away
from her home, she being of full age, she went freely consenting, and with
knowledge of his purpose."

"Lies--foul lies!" cried the old Cavalier, almost strangled with passion.

He plucked at the knot of his cravat, trying to loosen it, feeling himself
threatened with apoplexy.

"Call Mistress Angela Kirkland," said the Serjeant, in strong steady tones
that contrasted with the indignant father's hoarse and gasping utterance.

"S'life! the business becomes every moment more interesting," whispered
Lady Sarah. "Will he make that sly slut own her misconduct in open court?"

"If she blush at her slip from virtue, it will be a new sensation in a
London law-court to see the colour of shame," replied Sir Ralph, behind his
perfumed glove; "but I warrant she'll carry matters with a high hand, and
feel herself every inch a heroine."

Angela came into the court attended by her waiting-woman, who remained near
the entrance, amid the close-packed crowd of lawyers and onlookers, while
her mistress quietly followed the official who conducted her to the
witness-box.

She was dressed in black, and her countenance under her neat black hood
looked scarcely less white than her lawn neckerchief; but she stood erect
and unfaltering in that conspicuous station, and met the eyes of her
interrogator with an untroubled gaze. When her lips had touched the dirty
little book, greasy with the kisses of innumerable perjurers, the Serjeant
began to question her in a tone of odious familiarity.

"Now, my dear young lady, here is a gentleman's liberty, and perhaps his
life, hanging on the breath of those pretty lips; so I want you to answer
a few plain questions with as plain speech as you can command, remembering
that you are to tell us the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth. Come, now, dear miss, when you left your father's house on the night
of July 4, in this present year, in Lord Fareham's company, did you go with
him of your own free will, and with a knowledge of his purpose?"

"I knew that he loved me."

A heart-breaking groan from Sir John Kirkland was hushed down by an usher
of the court.

"You knew that he loved you, and that he designed to carry you beyond
seas?"

"Yes."

"And you were willing to leave your father's custody and go with the
defendant as his paramour?"

There was a pause, and the white cheek crimsoned, and the heavy eyelids
fell over agonised eyes.

"I went willingly--because I loved him;" and then with a sudden burst of
passion, "I would have died for him, or lived for him. It mattered not
which."

"And she has lied for him--has sworn to a lie--and that to her own
dishonour!" cried Sir John, beside himself; whereupon he was sternly bidden
to keep silence.

There was no intention that this little Buckinghamshire gentleman should
be indulged, to the injury of a person of Lord Fareham's wealth and
consequence. The favour of the Bench obviously leant towards the defendant.

Fareham's deep tones startled the audience.

"In truth, your Honour, the young lady has belied herself in order to help
me," he said. "I cannot accept acquittal at the cost of her good name."

"Your lordship has pleaded not guilty."

"And his lordship's chivalry would revoke that plea," cried the Counsel;
"this is most irregular. I must beg that the Bench do order the defendant
to keep silence. The witness can stand down."

Angela descended from the witness-box falteringly, and would perhaps have
fallen but for her father's strong grasp, which clutched her arm as she
reached the last step.

He dragged her out of the close-packed court, and into the open Hall.

"Wanton!" he hissed in her ear, "shameless wanton!"

She answered nothing; but stood where he held her, with wild eyes looking
out of a white, rigid countenance. She had done what she had come there
to do. Persuaded by Fareham's attorney, who had waited upon her at her
lodgings when Sir John was out of the way, she had made her ill-considered
attempt to save the man she loved, ignorant of the extent of his danger,
exaggerating the potential severity of his punishment, in the illimitable
fear of a woman for the safety of the being she loves. And now she cared
nothing what became of her, cared little even for her father's anger or
distress. There was always the Convent, last refuge of sin or sorrow, which
meant the annihilation of the individual, and where the world's praise or
blame had no influence.

Her woman fussed about her with a bottle of strong essence, and Sir John
dragged rather than led her along the Hall, to the great door where the
coach that had carried her from his London lodgings was in waiting. He saw
her seated, with her woman beside her, supporting her, gave the coachman
his orders, and then went hastily back to the Court of King's Bench.

The Court was rising; the Jury, without leaving their seats, had pronounced
the defendant guilty of a misdemeanour, not in conveying Sir John
Kirkland's daughter away from her home, to which act she had avowed herself
a consenting party; but in detaining her in his house with violence, and
in opposition to her father and proper guardian. The Lord Chief Justice
expressed his satisfaction at this verdict, and after expatiating with
pious horror upon the evil consequences of an ungovernable passion, a
guilty, soul-destroying love, a direct inspiration of Satan, sentenced the
defendant to pay a fine of ten thousand pounds, upon the payment of which
sum he would be set at liberty.

The old Cavalier heard the brief sermon and the sentence, which seemed to
him of all punishments the most futile. He had hoped to see his son-in-law
sent to the Plantations for life; had been angry at the thought that he
would escape the gallows; and for sole penalty the seducer was sentenced to
forfeit less than a year's income. How corrupt and venal was a bench
that made the law of the land a nullity when a great personage was the
law-breaker!

He flung himself in the defendant's way as he left the court, and struck
him across the breast with the flat of his sword.

"An unarmed man, Sir John! Is that your old-world chivalry?" Fareham asked,
quietly.

A crowd was round them and swords were drawn before the officer could
interfere. There were friends of Fareham's in the court, and two of his
gentlemen; and Sir John, who was alone, might have been seriously hurt
before the authorities could put down the tumult, had not his son-in-law
protected him.

"Sheath your swords, if you love me!" he exclaimed, flinging himself in
front of Sir John. "I would not have the slightest violence offered to this
gentleman."

"And I would kill you if I had the chance!" cried Sir John; "that is the
difference between us. I keep no measures with the man who ruined my
daughter."

"Your daughter is as spotless a saint as the day she left her Convent, and
you are a blatant old fool to traduce her," said Fareham, exasperated, as
the Usher led him away.

His detention was no more than a formality; and as he had been previously
allowed his liberty upon bail, he was now permitted to return to his
own house, where by an order upon his banker he paid the fine, and was
henceforward a free man.

The first use he made of his freedom was to rush to Sir John's lodgings,
only to hear that the Cavalier, with his daughter and two servants, had
left half an hour earlier in a coach-and-four for Buckinghamshire. The
people at the lodgings did not know which road they had taken, or at what
Inn they were to lie on the way.

"Well, there will be a better chance of seeing her at the Manor than in
London," Fareham thought; "he cannot keep so close a watch upon her there
as in the narrow space of town lodgings."




CHAPTER XXVII.

BRINGERS OF SUNSHINE.


It was December, and the fields and pastures were white in the tardy dawn
with the frosty mists of early winter, and Sir John Kirkland was busy
making his preparations for leaving Buckinghamshire and England with his
daughter. He had come from Spain at the beginning of the year, hoping to
spend the remnant of his days in the home of his forefathers, and to lay
his old bones in the family vault; but the place was poisoned to him for
evermore, he told Angela. He could not stay where he and his had been held
in highest honour, to have his daughter pointed at by every grinning lout
in hob-nailed shoes, and scorned by the neighbouring quality. He only
waited till Denzil Warner should be pronounced out of danger and on the
high-road to recovery, before he crossed the Channel.

"There is no occasion you should leave Buckinghamshire, sir," Angela
argued. "It is the dearest wish of my heart to return to the Convent at
Louvain, and finish my life there, sheltered from the world's contempt."

"What, having failed to get your fancy, you would dedicate yourself to
God?" he cried. "No, madam. I am still your father, though you have
disgraced me; and I require a daughter's duty from you. Oh, child, I so
loved you, was so proud of you! It is a bitter physic you have given me to
drink."

She knelt at his feet, and kissed his sunburnt hands shrunken with age.

"I will do whatever you desire, sir. I wish no higher privilege than to
wait upon you; but when you weary of me there is ever the Convent."

"Leave that for your libertine sister. Be sure she will finish a loose life
by a conspicuous piety. She will turn saint like Madame de Longueville.
Sinners are the stuff of which modern saints are made. And women love
extremes--to pass from silk and luxury to four-o'clock matins, and the
Carmelite's woollen habit. No, Angela, there must be no Convent for you,
while I live. Your penance must be to suffer the company of a petulant,
disappointed old man."

"No penance, sir, but peace and contentment; so I am but forgiven."

"Oh, you are forgiven. There is that about you with which one cannot long
be angry--a creature so gentle and submissive, a reed that bends under a
blow. Let us not think of the past. You were a fool--but not a wanton. No,
I will never believe that! A generous, headstrong fool, ready with thine
own perjured lips to blacken thy character in order to save the villain who
did his best to ruin thee. But thou art pure," looking down at her with a
severe scrutiny. "There is no memory of guilt in those eyes. We will go
away together, and live peacefully together, and you shall still be the
staff of my failing steps, the light of my fading eyes, the comfort of
my ebbing life. Were I but easy in my mind about those poor forsaken
grandchildren, I could leave England cheerfully enough; but to know them
motherless--with such a father!"

"Indeed, sir, I believe, however greatly Lord Fareham may have erred, he
will not prove a neglectful father," Angela said, her voice growing low and
tremulous as she pronounced that fatal name.


"You will vouch for him, no doubt. A licentious villain, but an admirable
father! No, child, Nature does not deal in such anomalies. The children are
alone at Chilton with their English gouvernante, and the prim Frenchwoman,
who takes infinite pains to perfect Henriette's unlikeness to a human
child. They are alone, and their father is hanging about the Court."

"At Court! Lord Fareham! Indeed, sir, I think you must be mistaken."

"Indeed, madam, I have the fact on good authority."

"Oh, sir, if you have reason to think those dear children neglected, is it
not your duty to protect and care for them? Their poor, mistaken mother has
abandoned them."

"Yes, to play the great lady in Paris, where, when I went in quest of
her last July--while thou wert lying sick here--hoping to bring back a
penitent, I was received with a triumphant insolence, finding her the
centre of a circle of flatterers, a Princess in little, with all the airs
and graces and ceremonies and hauteur of the French Blood-royal. When I
charged her with being Malfort's mistress, and bade her pack her traps and
come home with me, she deafened me with her angry volubility. I to slander
her--I, her father, when there was no one in Paris, from the Place Royale
to the Louvre, more looked up to! But when I questioned my old friends they
answered with enigmatical smiles, and assured me that they knew nothing
against my daughter's character worse than all the world was saying about
some of the highest ladies in France--Madame, to wit; and with this cold
comfort I must needs be content, and leave her in her splendid infamy."

"Father, be sure she will come back to us. She has been led into
wrong-doing by the artfullest of villains. She will discover the emptiness
of her life, and come back to seek the solace of her children's love. Let
us care for them meanwhile. They have no other kindred. Think of our sweet
Henriette--so rich, so beautiful, so over-intelligent--growing from child
to woman in the care of servants, who may spoil and pervert her even by
their very fondness."

"It is a bad case, I grant; but I can stir no finger where that man is
concerned. I can hold no communication with that scoundrel."

"But your lawyer could claim custody of the children for you, perhaps."

"I think not, Angela, unless there was a criminal neglect of their bodies.
The law takes no account of souls."

Angela's greatest anxiety--now that Denzil's recovery was assured--was for
the welfare of these children whom she fondly loved, and for whom she would
have gladly played a mother's part. She wrote in secret to her sister,
entreating her to return to England for her children's sake, and to devote
herself to them in retirement at Chilton, leaving the scandal of her
elopement to be forgotten in the course of blameless years; so that by the
time Henriette was old enough to enter the world her mother would have
recovered the esteem of worthy people, as well as the respect of the mob.

Lady Fareham's tardy answer was not encouraging. She had no design of
returning to a house in which she had never been properly valued, and
she admired that her sister should talk of scandal, considering that the
scandal of her own intrigue with her brother-in-law had set all England
talking, and had been openly mentioned in the London and Oxford Gazettes.
Silence about other people's affairs would best become a young miss who had
made herself so notorious.

As for the children, Lady Fareham had no doubt that their father, who had
ever lavished more affection upon them than he bestowed upon his wife,
might be trusted with the care of them, however abominable his conduct
might be in other matters. But in any case her ladyship would not exchange
Paris for London, where she had been slighted and neglected at Court as
well as at home.

The letter was a tissue of injustice and egotism; and Angela gave up all
hope of influencing her sister for good; but not the hope of being useful
to her sister's children.

Now, as the short winter days went by, and the preparations for departure
were making, she grew more and more urgent with her father to obtain the
custody of his grandchildren, and carry them to France with him, where they
might be reared and educated under his own eye. Montpelier was the place of
exile he had chosen, a place renowned alike for its admirable climate and
educational establishments; and where Sir John had spent the previous
winter, and had made friends.

It was to Montpelier the great Chancellor had retired from the splendours
of a princely mansion but just completed--far exceeding his own original
intentions in splendour, as the palaces of new-made men are apt to do--and
from a power and authority second only to that of kings. There the
grandfather of future queens was now residing in modest state, devoting the
evening of his life to the composition of an authentic record of the late
rebellion, and of those few years during which he had been at the head of
affairs in England. Sir John Kirkland, who had never forgotten his own
disappointments in the beginning of his master's restored fortunes, had a
fellow-feeling for "Ned Hyde" in his fall.

"As a statesman he was next in capacity to Wentworth," said Sir John, "and
yet a painted favourite and a rabble of shallow wits were strong enough to
undermine him."

The old Knight confessed that he had ridden out of his way on several
occasions when he was visiting Warner's sick-bed, in the hope of meeting
Henrietta and George on their ponies, and had more than once been so lucky
as to see them.

"The girl grows handsomer, and is as insolent as ever; but she has a
sorrowful look which assures me she misses her mother; though it was indeed
of that wretch, her father, she talked most. She said he had told her he
was likely to go on a foreign embassy. If it is to France he goes, there is
an end of Montpelier. The same country shall not hold him and my daughter
while I live to protect you."

Angela began to understand that it was his fear, or his hatred of Fareham,
which was taking him out of his native country. No word had been said of
her betrothal since that fatal night. It seemed tacitly understood that all
was at an end between her and Denzil Warner. She herself had been prostrate
with a low, nervous fever during a considerable part of that long period of
apprehension and distress in which Denzil lay almost at the point of death,
nursed by his grief-stricken mother, to whom the very name of his so lately
betrothed wife was hateful. Verily the papistical bride had brought a
greater trouble to that house than even Lady Warner's prejudiced mind had
anticipated. Kneeling by her son's bed, exhausted with the passion of long
prayers for his recovery, the mother's thoughts went back to the day when
Angela crossed the threshold of that house for the first time, so fair, so
modest, with a countenance so innocent in its pensive beauty.

"And yet she was guilty at heart even then," Lady Warner told herself, in
the long night-watches, after the trial at Westminster Hall, when Angela's
public confession of an unlawful love had been reported to her by her
favourite Nonconformist Divine, who had been in court throughout the trial,
with Lady Warner's lawyer, watching the proceedings in the interest of Sit
Denzil. Lady Warner received the news of the verdict and sentence with
unspeakable indignation.

"And my murdered son!" she gasped, "for I know not yet that God will
hear my prayers and raise him up to me again. Is his blood to count for
nothing--or his sufferings--his patient sufferings on that bed? A fine--a
paltry fine--a trifle for a rich man. I would pay thrice as much, though
it beggared me, to see him sent to the Plantations. O Judge and Avenger of
Israel! Thou hast scourged us with pestilence, and punished us with fire;
but Thou hast not convinced us of sin. The world is so sunk in wickedness
that murder scarce counts for crime."

The day of terror was past. Denzil's convalescence was proceeding slowly,
but without retrograde stages. His youth and temperate habits had helped
his recovery from a wound which in the earlier stages looked fatal. He was
now able to sit up in an armchair, and talk to his visitor, when Sir John
rode twenty miles to see him; but only once did his lips shape the name
that had been so dear, and that occasion was at the end of a visit which
Sir John announced as the last.

"Our goods are packed and ready for shipping," he said. "My daughter and I
will begin our journey to Montpelier early next week."

It was the first time Sir John had spoken of his daughter in that
sick-room.

"If she should ever talk of me, in the time to come," Denzil said--speaking
very slowly, in a low voice, as if the effort, mental and physical, were
almost beyond his strength, and holding the hand which Sir John had given
him in saying good-bye--"tell her that I shall ever remember her with
a compassionate affection--ever hold her the dearest and loveliest of
women--yes, even if I should marry, and see the children of some fair and
chaste wife growing up around me. She will ever be the first. And tell
her that I know she forswore herself in the court; and that she was the
innocent dupe of that villain--never his consenting companion. And tell her
that I pity her even for that so misplaced affection which tempted her to
swear to a lie. I knew, sir, always, that she loved him and not me. Yes,
from the first. Indeed, sir, it was but too easy to read that unconscious
beginning of unholy love, which grew and strengthened like some fatal
disease. I knew, but nursed the fond hope that I could win her heart--in
spite of him. I fancied that right must prevail over wrong; but it does
not, you see, sir, not always--not----" A faintness came over him;
whereupon his mother, re-entering the room at this moment, ran to him and
restored him with the strong essence that stood handy among the medicine
bottles on the table by his chair.

"You have suffered him to talk too much," she said, glancing angrily at Sir
John. "And I'll warrant he has been talking of your daughter--whose name
must be poison to him. God knows 'tis worse than poison to me!"

"Madam, I did not come to this house to hear my daughter abused----"

"It would have better become you, Sir John Kirkland, to keep away from this
house."

"Mother, silence! You distress me worse than my illness----"

"This, madam, is my farewell visit. You will not be plagued any more with
me," said Sir John, lifting his hat, and bowing low to Lady Warner.

He was gone before she could reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

The baggage was ready--clothes, books, guns, plate, and linen--all
necessaries for an exile that might last for years, had been packed for the
sea voyage; but the trunks and bales had not yet been placed in the waggon
that was to convey them to the Tower Wharf, where they were to be shipped
in one of the orange-boats that came at this season from Valencia, laden
with that choice and costly fruit, and returned with a heterogeneous cargo.
At Valencia the goods would be put on board a Mediterranean coasting
vessel, and landed at Cette.

Sir John began to waver about his destination after having heard from
Henriette of her father's possible embassy. Certainly if Fareham were to be
employed in foreign diplomacy, Paris seemed a likely post for a man who was
so well known there, and had spent so much of his life in France. And if
Fareham were to be at Paris, Sir John considered Montpelier, remote as it
was from the capital, too near his enemy.

"He has proved himself an indomitable villain," thought the Knight. "And I
could not always keep as close a watch upon my daughter as I have done
in the last six weeks. No. If Fareham be for France, I am for some other
country. I might take her to Florence, and put the Apennines between her
and that daring wretch."

It may be, too, that Sir John had another reason for lingering, after all
was ready for the journey. He may have been much influenced by Angela's
concern about his grandchildren, and may have hesitated at leaving them
alone in England with only salaried guardians.

"Their father concerns himself very little about them, you see," he told
Angela, "since he can entertain the project of a foreign embassy, while
those little wretches are pining in a lonely barrack in Oxfordshire."

"Indeed, sir, he is a fond father. I would wager my life that he is deeply
concerned about them."

"Oh, he is an angel, on your showing! You would blacken your sister's
character to make him a saint."

The next day was fine and sunny, a temperature as of April, after the
morning frost had melted. There was a late rose or two still lingering in
the sheltered Buckinghamshire valley, though it wanted but a fortnight of
Christmas. Angela and her father were sitting in a parlour that faced the
iron gates. Since their return from London Sir John had seemed uneasy when
his daughter was out of his sight; and she, perceiving his watchfulness and
trouble, had been content to abandon her favourite walks in the lanes and
woods and to the "fair hill of Brill," whence the view was so lovely and
so vast, on one side reaching to the Welsh mountains, and on another
commanding the nearer prospect of "the great fat common of Ottmoor," as
Aubrey calls it, "which in some winters is like a sea of waters." For her
father's comfort, noting the sad wistful eyes that watched her coming in
and going out, she had resigned herself to spend long melancholy
hours within doors, reading aloud till Sir John fell asleep, playing
backgammon--a game she detested worse even than shove-halfpenny, which
latter primitive game they played sometimes on the shovel-board in the
hall. Life could scarcely be sadder than Angela's life in those grey winter
days; and had it not been for an occasional ride across country with her
father, health and spirits must alike have succumbed to this monotony of
sadness.

This morning, as on many mornings of late, the subject of the boy and girl
at Chilton had been discussed with the Knight's tankard of home-brewed and
his daughter's chocolate.

"Indeed, sir, it would be a cruel thing for us to abandon them. At
Montpelier we shall be a fortnight's journey from England; and if either
of those dear creatures should fall ill, dangerously ill, perhaps, their
father beyond the seas, and we, too, absent--oh, sir, figure to yourself
Henriette or George dying among strangers! A cold or a fever might carry
them off in a few days; and we should know nothing till all was over."

Sir John groaned and paced the room, agitated by the funereal image.

"Why, what a raven thou art, ever to croak dismal prophecies. The children
are strong and well, and have careful custodians. I can have no dealings
with their father. Must I tell you that a hundred times, Angela? He is a
consummate villain: and were it not that I fear to make a bigger scandal,
he or I should not have survived many hours after that iniquitous
sentence."

A happy solution of this difficulty, which distressed the Knight much more
than his stubbornness allowed him to admit, was close at hand that morning,
while Angela bent over her embroidery frame, and her father spelt through
the last _London Gazette_ that the post had brought him.

The clatter of hoofs and roll of wheels announced a visit; and while they
were looking at the gate, full of wonder, since their visitors were of so
small a number, a footman in the Fareham livery pulled the iron ring that
hung by a chain from the stone pillar, and the bell rang loud and long in
the frosty air. The Fareham livery! Twice before the Fareham coaches and
liveries had taken that quiet household by surprise; but to-day terror
rather than surprise was in Angela's mind as she stood in front of the
window looking at the gate.

Could Fareham be so rash as to face her father, so daring as to seek a
farewell interview on the eve of departure? No, she told herself; such
folly was impossible. The visitor could be but one person--Henriette. Even
assured of this in her own mind, she did not rush to welcome her niece, but
stood as if turned to stone, waiting for the opening of the gate.

Old Reuben, having seen the footman, went himself to admit the visitors,
with his grandson and slave in attendance.

"It must be her little ladyship," he said, taking his young mistress's view
of the case. "Lord Fareham would never dare to show his deceiving face
here."

A shrill voice greeted him from the coach window before he reached the
gate.

"You are the slowest old wretch I ever saw!" cried the voice. "Don't you
know that when visitors of importance come to a house they expect to be let
in? I vow a convent gate would be opened quicker."

"Indeed, your ladyship, when your legs are as old as mine----"

"Which I hope they never will be," muttered Henriette, as she descended
with a languid slowness from the coach, assisted on either side by a
footman; while George, who could not wait for her airs and graces, let
himself out at the door on the off side just as Reuben succeeded in turning
the key.

"So you are old Reuben!" he said, patting the butler on the shoulder with
the gold hilt of his riding-whip. "And you were here, like a vegetable, all
through the Civil Wars and the Commonwealth?"

"Yes, your lordship, from the raising of Hampden's regiment."

"Ah, you shall tell me all about it over a pipe and a bottle. You must be
vastly good company. I am come to live here."

"To live here, your honour?"

"Yes; sister and I are to live here while my father represents his Majesty
beyond seas. I hope you have good stabling and plenty of room. My ponies
and Mistress Henriette's Arab horse will be here to-morrow. I doubt I shall
have to build a place for my hawks; but I suppose Sir John will find me a
cottage for my Dutch falconer."

"Lord, how the young master do talk!" exclaimed Reuben, with an admiring
grin.

The boy was so rapid in his speech, had such vivacity and courage in his
face, such a spring in every movement, as if he had quicksilver in his
veins, Reuben thought; but it was only the quicksilver of youth, that
Divine ichor which lasts for so brief a season.

"It made me feel twenty years younger only to hear him prattle," Reuben
said afterwards.

Sir John and his daughter had come to meet the children by this time,
and there were fond embracings, in the midst of which Henriette withdrew
herself from her grandfather's arms, and retired a couple of paces, in
order to drop him the Jennings curtsy, sinking almost to the ground, and
then rising from billows of silk, like Venus from the sea, and handing
him a letter, with a circular sweep of her arm, learnt in London from her
Parisian dancing mistress, an apprentice of St. André's, not from the
shabby little French cut-caper from Oxford.

"My father sends you this letter, sir."

"Is your father at Chilton?"

"No, sir. He was with us the day before yesterday, to bid us good-bye
before he started upon his foreign embassy," replied Henriette, struggling
with her tears, lest she should seem a child, and not the woman of fashion
she aspired to be. "He left us early in the afternoon to ride back to
London, and he takes barge this afternoon to Gravesend, to embark for
Archangel, on his way to Moscow. I doubt you know he is to be his Majesty's
Ambassador at Muscovy?"

"I know nothing but what you told me t'other day, Henriette," the Knight
answered, as they went to the house, where George began to run about on an
exploration of corridors, and then escaped to the stables, while Henriette
stood in front of the great wood fire, and warmed her hands in a stately
manner.

Angela had found no words of welcome for her niece yet. She only hugged
and kissed her, and now occupied herself unfastening the child's hood and
cloak. "How your hands shake, auntie. You must be colder than I am; though
that leathern coach lets in the wind like a sieve. I suppose my people will
know where to dispose themselves?" she added, resuming her grand air.

"Reuben will take care of them, dearest."

"Why, your voice shakes like your hands; and oh, how white you are. But you
are glad to see us, I hope?"

"Gladder than I can say, Henriette."

"I am glad you don't call me Papillon. I have left off that ridiculous
name, which I ought never to have permitted."

"I doubt, mistress, you who know so much know what is in this letter," said
Sir John, staring at Fareham's superscription as if he had come suddenly
upon an adder.

"Nay, sir, I only know that my father was shut in his library for a long
time writing, and was as white as my aunt is now when he brought it to me.
'You and George, and your gouvernante and servants, are to go to the Manor
Moat the day after to-morrow,' he said, 'and you are to give this letter
into your grandfather's hand.' I have done my duty, and await your Honour's
pleasure. Our gouvernante is not the Frenchwoman. Father dismissed her for
neglecting my education, and walking out after dark with Daniel Lettsome.
'Tis only Priscilla, who is something between a servant and a friend, and
who does everything I tell her."

"A pretty gouvernante!"

"Nay, sir, she is as plain as a pikestaff; that is one of her merits.
Mademoiselle thought herself pretty, and angled for a rich husband. Please
be so good as to read your letter, grandfather, for I believe it is about
us."

Sir John broke the seal, and began to read the letter with a frowning brow,
which lightened as he read. Angela stood with her niece clasped in her
arms, and watched her father's countenance across the silky brown head that
nestled against her bosom.

"SIR,--Were it not in the interests of others, who must needs hold a place
in your affection second only to that they have in my heart, I should
scarce presume to address you; but it is to the grandfather of my children
I write, rather than to the gentleman whom I have so deeply offended. I
look back, sir, and repent the violence of that unhappy night; but know no
change in the melancholy passion that impelled me to crime. It would have
been better for me had I been the worst rake-hell at Whitehall, than to
have held myself aloof from the modish vices of my day, only to concentrate
all my desires and affections there, where it was most sinful to place
them.

"Enough, sir. Did I stand alone I should have found an easy solution of all
difficulties, and you, and the lady my madness has so insulted, would have
been rid for ever of the despicable wretch who now addresses you.

"I had to remember the dear innocents who bring you this letter, and it was
of them I thought when I humbled myself to turn courtier in order to obtain
the post of Ambassador to Muscovy--in which savage place I shall be so
remote from all who ever knew me in this country, that I shall be as good
as dead; and you would have as much compunction in withholding your love
and protection from my boy and girl as if they were de facto orphans. I
send them to you, sir, unheralded. I fling them into the bosom of your
love. They are rich, and the allowance that will be paid you for them will
cover, I apprehend, all outlays on their behalf, or can be increased at
your pleasure. My lawyers, whom you know, will be at your service for all
communications; and they will spare you the pain of correspondence with me.

"I leave the nurture, education, and happiness of these, my only son and
daughter, solely in your care and authority. They have been reared in
over-much luxury, and have been spoiled by injudicious indulgence. But
their faults are trivial faults, and are all on the surface. They are
truthful, and have warm and generous hearts. I shall deem it a further
favour if you will allow their nurse, or nurse-gouvernante, Mrs. Priscilla
Baker, to remain with them, as your servant, and subject to your authority.
Their horses, ponies, hawks, and hounds, carriages, etc., must be
accommodated, or not, at your pleasure. My girl is greatly taken up with
the Arab horse I gave her on her last birthday, and I should be glad if
your stable could shelter him. I subscribe myself, perhaps for the last
time, sir,

"Your obedient servant, and a penitent sinner,

"FAREHAM."


When he had come to the end of the letter, reading slowly and thoughtfully,
Sir John handed it to his daughter, in a dead silence.

She tried to read; but at sight of the beloved writing a rush of tears
blinded her, and she gave the letter back to her father.

"I cannot read it, sir," she sobbed; "tell me only, are we to keep the
children?"

"Yes. Henceforward they are our children; and it will be the business of
our lives to make them happy."

"If you cry, tante, I shall think you are vexed that we have come to plague
you," said Henriette, with a pretty, womanly air. "I am very sorry for
his poor lordship, for he also cried when he kissed us; but he will have
skating and sledging in Muscovy, and he will shoot bears; so he will be
very happy."




CHAPTER XXVIII.

IN A DEAD CALM.


The great bales and chests, and leather trunks, on the filling whereof
Sir John's household had bestowed a week's labour, were all unpacked and
cleared out of the hall, to make room for a waggon load of packages from
Chilton Abbey, which preliminary waggon was followed day after day by other
conveyances laden with other possessions of the Honourable Henriette,
or the Honourable George. The young lady's virginals, her guitar, her
embroidery frames, her books, her "babies," which the maids had packed,
although it was long since she had played with them; the young gentleman's
guns and whips, tennis rackets, bows and arrows, and a mass of
heterogeneous goods; there seemed no end to the two children's personal
property, and it was well that the old house was sufficiently spacious to
afford a wing for their occupation. They brought their gouvernante, and a
valet and maid, the falconer, and three grooms, for whom lodgings had to
be found out-of-doors. The valet and waiting-woman spent some days in
distributing and arranging all that mass of belongings; but at the end of
their labour the children's rooms looked more cheerful than their luxurious
quarters at Chilton, and the children themselves were delighted with their
new home.

"We are lodged ever so much better here than at the Abbey," George told
his grandfather. "We were ever so far away from father and mother, and
the house was under a curse, being stolen from the Church in King Henry's
reign. Once, when I had a fever, an old grey monk came and sat at the
foot of the bed, between the curtains, and wouldn't go away. He sat there
always, till I began to get well again. Father said there was nothing
there, and it was only the fever made me see him; but I know it was the
ghost of one of the monks who were flung out to starve when the Abbey was
seized by Cromwell's men. Not Oliver Cromwell, grandfather; but another bad
man of the name, who had his head cut off afterwards; though I doubt he
deserved the axe less than the Brewer did."

There was no more talk of Montpelier or exile. A new life began in the old
house in the valley, with new pleasures, new motives, new duties--a life in
which the children were paramount. These two eager young minds ruled at the
Manor Moat. For them the fish-pond teemed with carp and tench, for them
hawks flew, and hounds ran, and horses and ponies were moving from morning
till twilight; for them Sir John grew young again, and hunted fox and hare,
and rode with the hawks with all the pertinacity of youth, for whom there
is no such word as enough. For them the happy grandfather lived in his
boots from October to March, and the adoring aunt spent industrious hours
in the fabrication of flies for trout, after the recipes in Mr. Walton's
agreeable book. The whole establishment was ordered for their comfort and
pleasure; but their education and improvement were also considered in
everything. A Roman Catholic gentleman, from St. Omer, was engaged as
George's tutor, and to teach Angela and Henriette Latin and Italian,
studies in which the niece was stimulated to industry by her desire to
surpass her aunt, an ambition which her volatile spirits never allowed her
to realise. For all other learning and accomplishments Angela was her only
teacher, and as the girl grew to womanhood aunt and niece read and studied
together, like sisters, rather than like pupil and mistress; and Angela
taught Henriette to love those books which Fareham had given her, and so in
a manner the intellect of the banished father influenced the growing mind
of the child. Together, and of one opinion in all things, aunt and niece
visited and ministered to the neighbouring poor, or entertained their
genteel neighbours in a style at once friendly and elegant. No existence
could have been calmer or happier, to one who was content to renounce all
passionate hopes and desires, all the romantic aspirations of youth; and
Angela had resigned herself to such renunciation when she rose from her
sick-bed, after the tragedy at Chilton. Here was the calm of the Convent
without its restrictions and limitations, the peace which is not of this
world, and yet liberty to enjoy all that is fairest and noblest in this
world; for had not Sir John pledged himself to take his daughter and niece
and nephew for the grand tour through France and Italy, soon after George's
seventeenth birthday? Father Andrea, who was of Florentine birth, would go
with them; and with such a cicisbeo, they would see and understand all the
treasures of the past and the present, antique and modern art.

Lord Fareham was still in the north of Europe; but, after three years in
Russia, had been transferred from Moscow to Copenhagen, where he was in
high favour with the King of Denmark.

Denzil Warner had lately married a young lady of fortune, the only child
and heiress of a Wiltshire gentleman, who had made a considerable figure in
Parliament under the Protector, but was now retired from public affairs.

And all that remained to Angela of her story of impassioned love, sole
evidence of the homage that had been offered to her beauty or her youth,
was a letter, now long grown dim with tears, which Henriette had given to
her on the first night the children spent under their grandfather's roof.

"I was to hand you this when no one was by," the girl said simply, and left
her aunt standing mute and pale with a sealed letter in her hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How shall I thank or praise you for the sacrifice your love made for one
so unworthy--a sacrifice that cut me to the heart? Alas, my beloved, it
would have been better for both of us hadst thou given me thyself rather
than so empty a gift as thy good name. I hoped to tell you, lip to lip, in
one last meeting, all my gratitude and all my hopeless love; but though I
have watched and hung about your gardens and meadows day after day, you
have been too jealously guarded, or have kept too close, and only with my
pen can I bid you an eternal farewell.

"I go out of your life for ever, since I am leaving for a distant country
with the fixed intention never to return to England. I bequeath you my
children, as if I left you a rag of my own lacerated heart.

"If you ever think of me, I pray you to consider the story of my life
as that of an invincible passion, wicked and desperate if you will, but
constant as life and death. You were, and are, and will be to my latest
breath, my only love.

"Perhaps you will think sometimes, as I shall think always, that we might
have lived innocently and happily in New England, forgetting and forgotten
by the rabble we left behind us, having shaken off the slough of an unhappy
life, beginning the world again, under new names, in a new climate and
country. It was a guilty dream to entertain, perhaps; but I shall dream
it often enough in a strange land, among strange faces and strange
manners--shall dream of you on my death-bed, and open dying eyes to see you
standing by my bedside, looking down at me with that sweetly sorrowful
look I remember best of all the varying expressions in the face I
worship.--Farewell for ever.

"F."

While her son and daughter were growing up at the Manor Moat, Lady Fareham
sparkled at the French Court, one of the most brilliant figures in that
brilliant world, a frequent guest at the Louvre and Palais Royal, and the
brand-new palace of Versailles, where the largest Court that had ever
collected round a throne was accommodated in a building of Palladian
richness in ornament and detail, a Palace whose offices were spacious
enough for two thousand servants. No foreigner at the great King's court
was more admired than the lovely Lady Fareham, whose separation from her
black-browed husband occasioned no scandal in a society where the husbands
of beautiful women were for the most part gentlemen who pursued their own
vulgar amours abroad, and allowed a wide liberty to the Venus at home; nor
was Henri de Malfort's constant attendance upon her ladyship a cause of
evil-speaking, since there was scarce a woman of consequence who had not
her _cavalière servante_.

Madame de Sévigné, in one of those budgets of Parisian scandal with which
she cheered a kinsman's banishment, assured Bussy de Rabutin that Lady
Fareham had paid her friend's debts more than once since her return to
France; but constancy such as De Malfort's could hardly be expected
were not the golden fetters of love riveted by the harder metal of
self-interest. Their alliance was looked on with favour by all that
brilliant world, and even tolerated by that severe moralist, the Due
du Montausier, who had been lately rewarded for his wife's civility to
Mademoiselle de la Vallière, now Duchess and reigning favourite, by being
made guardian of the infant Dauphin.

Every one approved, every one admired; and Hyacinth's life in the land
she loved was like a long summer day. But darkness came upon that day as
suddenly as the night of the tropics. She rose one morning, light-hearted
and happy, to pursue the careless round of pleasure. She lay down in a
darkened chamber, never again to mix in that splendid crowd.

Betwixt noon and twilight Henri de Malfort had fallen in a combat of eight,
a combat so savage as to recall that fatal fight of five against five
during the Fronde, in which Nemours had fallen, shot through the heart by
Beaufort.

The light words of a fool in a tavern, backed by three other fools, had led
to this encounter, in which De Malfort had been the challenger. He and
one of his friends died on the ground, while three on the other side
were mortally wounded. It would henceforth be fully understood that Lady
Fareham's name was not for ribald jesters; but the man Lady Fareham loved
was dead, and her life of pleasure had ended with a pistol-ball from an
unerring hand. To her it seemed the hand of Fate. She scarcely thought of
the man who had killed him.

As her life had been brilliant and conspicuous, so her retirement from the
world was not without _éclat_. Royalty witnessed the solemn office of the
Church which transformed Hyacinth, Lady Fareham, into Mère Agnes, of the
Seven Wounds; while, seated in the royal tribune, a King's mistress,
beautiful and adored, thought of a day when she, too, might bring to yonder
altar the sacrifice of a broken spirit and a life that had outlived earthly
happiness.

THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of London Pride, by M. E. Braddon





Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, Eric Casteleijn
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





LYING PROPHETS

_A NOVEL_

BY EDEN PHILLPOTTS

_Author of "Down Dartmoor Way," "Some Everyday Folks" "The End of a
Life," etc.

"'Tis like this: your man did take plain Nature for God, an' he did talk
fulishness 'bout finding Him in the scent o' flowers, the hum o' bees an'
sichlike. Mayhap Nature's a gude working God for a selfish man but she ed'n
wan for a maid, as you knaws by now. Then your faither--his God do sit
everlastingly alongside hell-mouth, an' do laugh an' girn to see all the
world a walkin' in, same as the beasts walked in the Ark. Theer's another
picksher of a God for 'e; but mark this, gal, they be lying prophets--lying
prophets both!"--Book II., Chapter XI._






BOOK ONE

_ART_




CHAPTER ONE

NEWLYN


Away beyond the village stands a white cottage with the sea lapping at low
cliffs beneath it. Plum and apple orchards slope upward behind this
building, and already, upon the former trees, there trembles a snowy gauze
where blossom buds are breaking. Higher yet, dark plowed fields, with
hedges whereon grow straight elms, cover the undulations of a great hill
even to its windy crest, and below, at the water line, lies Newlyn--a
village of gray stone and blue, with slate roofs now shining silver-bright
under morning sunlight and easterly wind. Smoke softens every outline;
red-brick walls and tanned sails bring warmth and color through the blue
vapor of many chimneys; a sun-flash glitters at this point and that,
denoting here a conservatory, there a studio. Enter this hive and you shall
find a network of narrow stone streets; a flutter of flannel underwear, or
blue stockings, and tawny garments drying upon lines; little windows, some
with rows of oranges and ginger-beer bottles in them; little shops; little
doors, at which cluster little children and many cats, the latter mostly
tortoise-shell and white. Infants watch their elders playing marbles in the
roadway, and the cats stretch lazy bodies on the mats, made of old
fishing-net, which lie at every cottage door. Newlyn stands on slight
elevations above the sea level, and at one point the road bends downward,
breaks and fringes the tide, leading among broken iron, rusty anchors, and
dismantled fishing-boats, past an ancient buoy whose sides now serve the
purposes of advertisement and tell of prayer-meetings, cheap tea, and so
forth. Hard by, the mighty blocks of the old breakwater stand, their fabric
dating from the reign of James I., and taking the place of one still older.
But the old breakwater is no more than a rialto for ancient gossips now;
and far beyond it new piers stretch encircling arms of granite round a new
harbor, southward of which the lighthouse stands and winks his sleepless
golden eye from dusk to dawn. Within this harbor, when the fishing fleet is
at home, lie jungles of stout masts, row upon row, with here and there a
sail, carrying on the color of the plowed fields above the village, and
elsewhere, scraps of flaming bunting flashing like flowers in a reed bed.
Behind the masts, along the barbican, the cottages stand close and thick,
then clamber and straggle up the acclivities behind, decreasing in their
numbers as they ascend. Smoke trails inland on the wind--black as a thin
crepe veil, from the funnel of a coal "tramp" about to leave the harbor,
blue from the dry wood burning on a hundred cottage hearths. A smell of
fish--where great split pollocks hang drying in the sun--of tar and tan and
twine--where nets and cordage lie spread upon low walls and open
spaces--gives to Newlyn an odor all its own; but aloft, above the village
air, spring is dancing, sweet-scented, light-footed in the hedgerows,
through the woods and on the wild moors which stretch inland away. There
the gold of the gorse flames in many a sudden sheet and splash over the
wastes whereon last year's ling-bloom, all sere and gray, makes a
sad-colored world. But the season's change is coming fast. Celandines
twinkle everywhere, and primroses, more tardy and more coy, already open
wondering eyes. The sea lies smooth with a surface just wind-kissed and
strewed with a glory of sun-stars. Away to the east, at a point from which
brown hills, dotted with white dwellings, tend in long undulations to the
cliffs of the Lizard, under fair clouds all banked and sunny white against
the blue, rises St. Michael's Mount, with a man's little castle capping
Nature's gaunt escarpments and rugged walls. Between Marazion and Newlyn
stretches Mount's Bay; while a mile or two of flat sea-front, over which,
like a string of pearls, roll steam clouds, from a train, bring us to
Penzance. Then--noting centers of industry where freezing works rise and
smelting of ore occupies many men (for Newlyn labors at the two extremes of
fire and ice)--we are back in the fishing village again and upon the
winding road which leads therefrom, first to Penlee Point and the
blue-stone quarry, anon to the little hamlet of Mousehole beyond.

Beside this road lay our white cottage, with the sunshine lighting up a
piece of new golden thatch let into the old gray, and the plum-trees behind
it bursting into new-born foam of flowers. Just outside it, above the low
cliff, stood two men looking down into the water, seen dark green below
through a tangle of brier and blackthorn and emerald foliage of budding
elder. The sea served base uses here, for the dust and dirt of many a
cottage was daily cast into the lap of the great scavenger who carried all
away. The low cliffs were indeed spattered with filth, and the coltsfoot,
already opening yellow blossoms below, found itself rudely saluted with
cinders and potato-peelings, fishes' entrails, and suchlike unlovely
matter.

The men were watching a white fleet of bird boats paddling on the sea,
hurrying this way and that, struggling--with many a plunge and flutter and
plaintive cry--for the food a retreating tide was bearing from the shore.

"'White spirits and gray,' I call them," said the younger of the two
spectators. "The gulls fascinate me always. They are beautiful to see and
hear and paint. Swimming there, and wheeling between the seas in rough
weather, or hanging almost motionless in midair with their heads turning
first this way, then that, and their breasts pressed against the wind--
why, they are perfect always, the little winged gods of the sea."

"Gods kissing carrion," sneered the other. "Beautiful enough, no doubt, but
their music holds no charm for me. Nothing is quite beautiful which has for
its cause something ugly. Those echoing cries down there are the expression
of a greedy struggle, no more. I hate your Newlyn gulls. They are ruined,
like a thousand other wild things, by civilization. I see them scouring the
fields and hopping after the plowman like upland crows. A Cornish seabird
should fight its battle with the sea and find its home in the heart of the
dizzy cliffs, sharing them with the samphire. But your 'white spirits and
gray' behave like gutter-fed ducks."

The first speaker laughed and both strolled upon their way. They were
artists, but while Edmund Murdoch dwelt at Newlyn and lived by his
profession, the older man, John Barron, was merely on a visit to the place.
He had come down for change and with no particular intention to work.
Barron was wealthy and wasted rare talents. He did not paint much, and the
few who knew his pictures deplored the fact that no temporal inducement
called upon him to handle his brush oftener. A few excused him on the plea
of his health, which was at all times indifferent, but he never excused
himself. It needed something far from the beaten track to inspire him, and
inspiration was rare. But let a subject once grip him and the artist's life
centered and fastened upon it until his work was done. He sacrificed
everything at such a time; he slaved; labor was to him as a debauch to the
drunkard, and he wearied body and mind and counted his health nothing while
the frenzy held him. Then, his picture finished, at the cost of the man's
whole store of nervous energy and skill, he would probably paint no more
for many months. His subject was always some transcript from nature,
wrought out with almost brutal vigor and disregard of everything but truth.
His looks belied his work curiously. A small, slight man he was, with
sloping shoulders and the consumptive build. But the breadth of his head
above the ears showed brain, and his gray eyes spoke a strength of purpose
upon which a hard, finely-modeled mouth set the seal. Once he had painted
in the West Indies: a picture of two negresses bathing at Tobago. Behind
them hung low tangles of cactus, melo-cactus and white-blossomed orchid;
while on the tawny rocks glimmered snowy cotton splashed with a crimson
turban; but the marvel of the work lay in the figures and the refraction of
their brown limbs seen through crystal-clear water. The picture brought
reputation to a man who cared nothing for it; and Barron's "Bathing
Negresses" are only quoted here because they illustrate his method of work.
He had painted from the sea in a boat moored fore and aft; he had kept the
two women shivering and whining in the water for two hours at a time. They
could not indeed refuse the gold he offered for their services, but one
never lived to enjoy the money, for her prolonged ablutions in the cause of
art killed her a week after her work was done.

John Barren was a lonely sybarite with a real love for Nature and
absolutely primitive instincts with regard to his fellow-creatures. The
Land's End had disappointed him; he had found Nature neither grand nor
terrific there, but sleepy and tame as a cat after a full meal. Nor did he
derive any pleasure from the society of his craft at Newlyn. He hated the
clatter of art jargon, he flouted all schools, and pointed out what nobody
doubts now: that the artists of the Cornish village in reality represented
nothing but a community of fellow-workers, all actuated indeed by love of
art, but each developing his own bent without thought for his neighbor's
theory. Barron indeed made some enemies before he had been in the place a
week, and the greater lights liked him none the better for vehemently
disclaiming the honor when they told him he was one of themselves. "The
shape of a brush does not make men paint alike," he said, "else we were all
equal and should only differ in color. Some of you can no more paint with a
square brush than you can with a knife. Some of you could not paint though
your palettes were set with Nature's own sunset colors. And others of you,
if you had a rabbit's scut at the end of a hop-pole and the gray mud from a
rain puddle, would produce work worth considering. You are a community of
painters--some clever, some hopeless--but you are not a school, and you may
thank God for it."

John Barron was rough tonic, but the fearless little man generally found an
audience at the end of the day in this studio or that. The truth of much
that he said appealed to the lofty-minded and serious; his dry cynicism,
savage dislike of civilization, and frank affection for Nature, attracted
others. He hit hard, but he never resented rough knocks in return, and no
man had seen him out of temper with anything but mysticism and the art bred
therefrom. Upon the whole, however, his materialism annoyed more than his
wit amused.

Upon the evening which followed his insult to the Newlyn gulls, Barron,
with Edmund Murdoch and some other men, was talking in the studio of one
Brady, known to fame as the "Wrecker," from his love for the artistic
representation of maritime disaster. Barron liked this man, for he was
outspoken and held vigorous views, but the two quarreled freely.

"Fate was a fool when she chucked her presents into the lap of a lazy
beggar like you," said Brady, addressing the visitor. "And thrice a fool,"
he added, "to assort her gifts so ill."

"Fate is a knave, a mad thing playing at cat's cradle with the threads of
our wretched little lives," answered John Barron, "she is a coward--a
bully. She hits the hungry below the belt; she heaps gold into the lap of
the old man, but not till he has already dug his own grave to come at it;
she gives health to those who must needs waste all their splendid strength
on work; and wealth to worthless beings like myself who are always ailing
and who never spend a pound with wisdom. Make no dark cryptic mystery of
Fate when you paint her. She looks to me like a mischievous monkey poking
sticks into an ant-hill."

"She's a woman," said Murdoch.

"She's three," corrected Brady; "what can you expect from three women
rolled into one?"

"Away with her! Waste no incense at her shrine. She'll cut the thread no
sooner because you turn your back on her." Fling overboard your
mythologies, dead and alive, and kneel to Nature. A budding spike of wild
hyacinth is worth all the gods put together. Go hand in hand with Nature, I
say. Ask nothing from her; walk humbly; be well content if she lets you but
turn the corner of one page none else have read. That's how I live. My life
is not a prayer exactly--"

"I should say not," interrupted Brady.

"But a hymn of praise--a purely impersonal existence, lived all alone, like
a man at a prison window. This carcass, with its shaky machinery and
defective breathing apparatus, is the prison. I look out of the window till
the walls crumble away--"

"And then?" asked one Paul Tarrant, a painter who prided himself on being a
Christian as well.

"Then, the spark which I call myself, goes back to Nature, as the cloud
gives the raindrop back to the sea from whence the sun drew it."

"A lie, man!" answered the other hotly.

"Perhaps. It matters nothing. God--if there be a God--will not blame me for
making a mistake. Meantime I live like the rook and the thrush. They never
pray, they praise, they sing 'grace before meat' and after it, as Nature
taught them."

"A simple child of Nature--beautiful spectacle," said Brady. "But I'm sorry
all the same," he continued, "that you've found nothing in Cornwall to keep
you here and make you do some work. You talk an awful deal of rot, but we
want to see you paint. Isn't there anything or anybody worthy of you here?"

"As a matter of face, I've found a girl," said Barron.

There was a clamor of excitement at this news, above which Brady's bull
voice roared approval.

"Proud girl, proud parents, proud Newlyn!" he bellowed.

"The mood ripens too," continued Barren quietly. "'Sacrifice all the world
to mood' is my motto. So I shall stop and paint."

A moment later derisive laughter greeted Barron's decision, for Murdoch, in
answer to a hail of questions, announced the subject of his friend's
inspiration.

"We strolled round this morning and saw Joan Tregenza in an iron hoop with
a pail of water slung at either hand."

"So your picture begins and ends where it is, Barron, my friend; in your
imagination. Did it strike you when you first saw that vision of loveliness
in dirty drab that she was hardly the girl to have gone unpainted till
now?" asked Brady.

"The possibility of previous pictures is hardly likely to weigh with me.
Why, I would paint a drowned sailor if the subject attracted me, and that
though you have done it," answered the other, nodding toward a big canvas
in the corner, where Brady's picture for the year approached completion.

"My dear chap, we all worship Joan--at a distance. She is not to be
painted. Tears and prayers are useless. She has a flinty father--a
fisherman, who looks upon painting as a snare of the devil and sees every
artist already wriggling on the trident in his mind's eye. Joan has also a
lover, who would rather behold her dead than on canvas."

"In fact these Methodist folk take us to be what you really are," said
Brady bluntly. "Old Tregenza tars us every one with the same brush. We are
lost sinners all."

"Well, why trouble him? A fisherman would have his business on the sea.
Candidly, I must paint her. The wish grows upon me."

"Even money you don't get as much as a, sketch," said Murdoch.

"Have any of you tried approaching her directly, instead of her relations?"

"She's as shy as a hawk, man."

"That makes me the more hopeful. You fellows, with your Tam o' Shanters and
aggressive neckties and knickerbockers and calves, would frighten the
devil. I'm shy myself. If she's natural, then we shall possibly understand
each other."

"I'll bet you ten to one in pounds you won't have your wish," said Brady.

"No, shan't bet. You're all so certain. Probably I shall find myself beaten
like the rest of you. But it's worth trying. She's a pretty thing."

"How will you paint her if you get the chance?"

"Don't know yet. I should like to paint her in a wolf-skin with a thread of
wolf's teeth round her neck and a celt-headed spear in her hand."

"Art will be a loser by the pending repulse," declared Brady. "And now, as
my whisky-bottle's empty and my lamp going out, you chaps can follow its
example whenever you please."

So the men scattered into a starry night, and went, each his way, through
the streets of the sleeping village.




CHAPTER TWO

IN A HALO OF GOLD


Edmund Murdoch's studio stood high on Newlyn hill, and Barron had taken
comfortable rooms in a little lodging-house close beside it. The men often
enjoyed breakfast in each other's company, but on the following morning,
when Murdoch strolled over to see his friend, he found that his rooms were
empty.

Barron, in fact, was already nearly a mile from Newlyn, and, at the moment
when the younger artist sought him, he stood upon a footpath which ran
through plowed fields to the village of Paul. In the bottom of his mind ran
a current of thought occupied with the problem of Joan Tregenza, but,
superficially, he was concerned with the spring world in which he walked.
He stood where Nature, like Artemis, appeared as a mother of many breasts.
Brown and solemn in their undulations, they rose about and around him to
the sky-line, where the land cut sharply against a pale blue heaven from
which tinkled the music of larks. He watched a bird wind upward in a spiral
to its song throne; he noted the young wheat brushing the earth with a veil
of green; he dawdled where elms stood, their high tops thick with blossom;
and he delayed for full fifteen minutes to see the felling of one giant
tree. A wedge-shaped cut had been made upon the side where the great elm
was to fall, and, upon the other side, two men were sawing through the
trunk. There was no sound but the steady hiss of steel teeth gnawing inch
by inch to the wine-red heart of the tree. Sunshine glimmered on its leafy
crown, and as yet distant branch and bough knew nothing of the midgets and
Death below.

Barron took pleasure in seeing the great god Change at work, but he mourned
in that a masterpiece, on which Nature had bestowed half a century and more
of love, must now vanish.

"A pity," he said, while the executioners rested a few moments from their
labors, "a pity to cut down such a noble tree."

One woodman laughed, and the other--an old rustic, brown and bent--made
answer:

"I sez 'dang the tree!' Us doan't take no joy in thrawin' en, mister. I be
bedoled wi' pain, an' this 'ere sawin's just food for rheumatiz. My back's
that bad. But Squire must 'ave money, an' theer's five hundred pounds'
value o' ellum comin' down 'fore us done wi' it."

The saw won its way; and between each spell of labor, the ancient man held
his back and grumbled.

"Er's Billy Jago," confided the second laborer to Barron, when his
companion had turned aside to get some steel wedges and a sledge-hammer.
"Er's well-knawn in these paarts--a reg'lar cure. Er used tu work up Drift
wi' Mister Chirgwin."

Billy added two wedges to those already hammered into the saw-cut, then,
with the sledge, he drove them home and finished his task. The sorrowful
strokes rang hollow and mournful over the land, sadder to Barron's ear than
fall of earth-clod on coffin-lid. And, upon the sound, a responsive shiver
and uneasy tremor ran through trunk and bough to topmost twig of the elm--a
sudden sense, as it seemed, of awful evil and ruin undreamed of, but now
imminent. Then the monster staggered and the midget struck his last blow
and removed himself and his rheumatism. Whereupon began that magnificent
descent. Slowly, with infinitely solemn sweep, the elm's vast height swung
away from its place, described a wide aerial arc, and so, with the jolting
crash and rattle of close thunder, roared headlong to the earth, casting up
a cloud of dust, plowing the grass with splintered limbs, then lying very
still. From glorious tree to battered log it sank. No man ever saw more
instant wreck and ruin fall lightning-like on a fair thing. The mass was
crushed flat and shapeless by its own vast weight, and the larger boughs,
which did not touch the earth, were snapped short off by the concussion of
their fall.

Billy Jago held his back and whined while Barron spoke, as much to himself
as the woodman.

"Dear God!" he said, "to think that this glory of the hedge-row--this
kingdom of song birds--should come to the making of pauper coffins and
lodging-house furniture!"

"Squire must have money; an' folks must have coffins," said Billy. "You can
sleep your last sleep so sound in ellum as you can in oak, for that
matter."

Feeling the truth of the assertion, Barron admitted it, then turned his
back on the fallen king and pursued his way with thoughts reverting to the
proposed picture. There was nothing to alarm Joan Tregenza about him; which
seemed well, as he meant to approach the girl herself at the first
opportunity, and not her parents. Barron did not carry "artist" stamped
upon him. He was plainly attired in a thick tweed suit and wore a cap of
the same material. The man appeared insignificantly small. He was
clean-shaved and looked younger than his five-and-thirty years seen a short
distance off, but older when you stood beside him. He strolled now onward
toward the sea, and his cheeks took some color from the fine air. He walked
with a stick and carried a pair of field-glasses in a case slung over his
shoulder. The field-glasses had become a habit with him, but he rarely used
them, for his small slate-colored eyes were keen.

Once and again John Barron turned to look at St. Michael's Mount, seen afar
across the bay. The magic of morning made it beautiful and the great pile
towered grandly through a sunny haze. No detail disturbed the eye under
this effect of light, and the mount stood vast, dim, golden, magnified and
glorified into a fairy palace of romance built by immortal things in a
night. Seen thus, it even challenged the beholder's admiration, of which he
was at all times sparing. Until that hour, he had found nothing but
laughter for this same mount, likening the spectacle of it, with its castle
and cottages, now to a senile monarch with moth-eaten ermine about his toes
and a lop-sided crown on his head, now to a monstrous sea-snail creeping
shoreward.

Barron, having walked down the hill to Mouse-hole, breasted slowly the
steep acclivity which leads therefrom toward the west. Presently he turned,
where a plateau of grass sloped above the cliffs into a little theater of
banks ablaze with gorse. And here his thoughts and the image they were
concerned with perished before reality. Framed in a halo of golden furze,
her hands making a little penthouse above her brow, and in her blue eyes
the mingled hue of sea and sky, stood a girl looking out at the horizon.
The bud of a wondrous fair woman she was, and Barron saw her slim yet
vigorous figure accentuated under its drab-brown draperies by a kindly
breeze. He noted the sweet, childish freshness of her face, her plump arms
filling the sleeves of rusty black, and her feet in shoes too big for them.
Her hair was hidden under a linen sun-bonnet, but one lock had escaped, and
he noted that it was the color of wheat ripe for the reaping. He regretted
it had not been darker, but observed that it chimed well enough with the
flaming flowers behind it. And then he frankly praised Nature in his heart
for sending her servant such a splendid harmony in gold and brown. There
stood his picture in front of him. He gazed a brief second only, and then
his quick mind worked to find what human interest had brought Joan Tregenza
to this place and turned her eyes to the sea. It might be that herein
existed the possibility of the introduction he desired. He felt that
victory probably depended on the events of the next two or three minutes.
He owed a supreme effort of skill and tact to Fate, which had thus
befriended him, and he rose to the occasion.

The girl looked up as he came suddenly upon her, but his eyes were already
away and fixed upon the horizon before she turned. Observing that he was
not regarding her, she put up her hands again and continued to scan the
remote sea-line where a thin trail of dark smoke told of a steamer, itself
apparently invisible. Barron took his glasses from their case, and seeing
that the girl made no movement of departure, acted deliberately, and
presently began to watch a fleet of brown sails and black hulls putting
forth from the little harbor below. Then, without looking at her or taking
his eyes from the glasses, he spoke.

"Would you kindly tell me what those small vessels are below there just
setting out to sea?" he asked.

The girl started, looked round, and, realizing that he had addressed her,
made answer:

"They'm Mouzle [Footnote: _Mouzle_--Mousehole.] luggers, sir."

"Luggers, are they? Thank you. And where are they sailing to? Do you know?"

"Away down-long, south'ard o' the Scillies mostly, arter mackerl. Theer's a
power o' mackerl bein' catched just now--thousands an' thousands--but some
o' they booats be laskin'--that's just fishin' off shore."

"Ah, a busy time for the fishermen."

"Iss, 'tis."

"Thank you. Good-morning."

"Good-marnin', sir."

He started as though to continue his walk along the cliffs beyond the
plateau and the gorse; then he stopped suddenly, actuated, as it seemed, by
a chance thought, and turned back to the girl. She was looking out to sea
again.

"By the way," he said, unconcernedly, and with no suggestion that anything
in particular was responsible for his politeness. "I see you are on the
lookout there for something. You may have my glass a moment, if you like,
before I go on. They bring the ships very close."

The girl flushed with shy pleasure and seemed a little uncertain what to
answer. Barron, meanwhile, showed no trace of a smile, but looked bored if
anything, and, with a serious face, handed her the glass, then walked a
little way off. He was grave and courteous, but made no attempt at
friendship. He had noticed when Joan smiled that her teeth were fine, and
that her full face, though sweet enough, was a shade too plump.

"Thank 'e kindly, sir," she said, taking the glass. "You see theer's a gert
ship passin' down Channel, an'--an' my Joe's aboard 'er, an' they'm bound
for furrin' paarts, an' I promised as I'd come to this here horny-winky
[Footnote: _Horny-winky_--Lonely. Fit place for horny-winks.] plaace to get
a last sight o' the vessel if I could." He made no answer, and, after a
pause, she spoke again.

"I caan't see naught, but that's my fault, p'raps, not bein' used to sich
things."

"Let me try and find the ship," he said, taking the glass, which he had put
out of focus purposely. Then, while scanning the horizon where he had noted
the smoke-trail, he spoke, his head turned from her.

"Who's Joe, if I may ask? Your brother, I daresay?"

"No, sir; Joe'm my sweetheart."

"There's a big three-masted ship being taken down the Channel by a small
steamer."

"Ah! then I reckon that's the 'Anna,' 'cause Joe said 'twas tolerable
certain they'd be in tow of a tug."

"You can see the smoke on the edge of the sea. Look below it."

He handed the glasses to her again and heard a little laugh of delight
break from her lips. The surprise of the suddenly-magnified spectacle,
visible only as a shadow to the naked eye, brought laughter; and Barron,
now that the girl's attention was occupied, had leisure to look at her. She
was more than a pretty cottage maid, and possessed some distinction and
charm. There was a delicacy about her too--a sweet turn of lip, a purity of
skin, a set of limb--which gave the lie to her rough speech. She was all
Saxon to look at, with nothing of the Celt about her excepting her name and
the old Cornish words upon her lips. Those he rejoiced in, for they showed
that she still remained a free thing, primitive, innocent of School Boards,
or like frost-biting influences.

Barron took mental notes. Joan Tregenza was a careless young woman, it
seemed. Her dress had a button or two missing in front, and a safety-pin
had taken their place. Her drab skirt was frayed a little and patched in
one corner with a square of another material. But the colors were well
enough, from the artist's point of view. He noted also that the girl's
stockings were darned and badly needed further attention, for above her
right shoe-heel a white scrap of Joan was visible. Her hands were a little
large, but well shaped; her pose was free and fine, though the
field-glasses spoiled the picture and the sun-bonnet hid the contour of her
head.

"So you walked out from Mouzle to see the last of Joe's ship?" he asked,
quite seriously and with no light note in his voice.

"From Newlyn. I ed'n a Mouzle maid," she answered.

"Is the 'Anna' coming home again soon?"

"No, sir. Her's bound for the Gulf of Californy, round t'other side the
world, Joe sez. He reckons to be back agin' come winter."

"That's a long time."

"Iss, 'tis."

But there was no sentiment about the answer. Joan gazed without a shadow of
emotion at the vanishing ship, and alluded to the duration of her
sweetheart's absence in a voice that never trembled. Then she gave the
glass back to Barron with many thanks, and evidently wanted to be gone, but
stopped awkwardly, not quite knowing how to depart.

Meanwhile, showing no further cognizance of her, Barron took the glasses
himself and looked at the distant ship.

"A splendid vessel," he said. "I expect you have a picture of her, haven't
you?"

"No," she answered, "but I've got a lil ship Joe cut out o' wood an'
painted butivul. Awnly that's another vessel what Joe sailed in afore."

"I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "because you were good enough to
explain all about the fishing-boats. I'll make a tiny picture of the 'Anna'
and paint it and give it to you."

But the girl took fright instantly.

"You'm a artist, then?" she said, with alarm in her face and voice.

He shook his head.

"No, no. Do I look like an artist? I'm only a stranger down here for a day
or two. I paint things sometimes for my own amusement, that's all."

"Pickshers?"

"They are not worth calling pictures. Just scraps of the sea and trees and
cliffs and sky, to while away the time and remind me of beautiful things
after I have left them."

"You ban't a artist ezacally, then?"

"Certainly not. Don't you like artists?"

"Faither don't. He'm a fisherman an' caan't abear many things as happens in
the world. An' not artists. Genlemen have arsked him to let 'em take my
picksher, 'cause they've painted a good few maidens to Newlyn; an' some of
'em wanted to paint faither as well; but he up an' sez 'No!' short.
Paintin's vanity 'cordin' to faither, same as they flags an' cannels an'
moosic to Newlyn church is vanity. Most purty things is vanity, faither
reckons."

"I'm sure he's a wise man. And I think he's right, especially about the
candles and flags in church. And now I must go on my walk. Let me see,
shall I bring you the little picture of Joe's ship here? I often walk out
this way."

He assumed she would take the picture, and now she feared to object.
Moreover, such a sketch would be precious in her eyes.

"Maybe 'tis troublin' of 'e, sir?"

"I've promised you. I always keep my word. I shall be here to-morrow about
mid-afternoon, because it is lonely and quiet and beautiful. I'm going to
try and paint the gorse, all blazing so brightly against the sky."

"Them prickly fuzz-bushes?"

"Yes; because they are very beautiful."

"But they'm everywheres. You might so well paint the bannel [Footnote:
_Bannel_--Broom.] or the yether on the moors, mightn't 'e?"

"They are beautiful, too. Remember, I shall have Joe's ship for you
to-morrow."

He nodded without smiling, and turned away until a point of the gorse had
hidden her from sight. Then he sat down, loaded his pipe, and reflected.

"'Joe's ship,'" he said to himself, "a happy title enough."

And meantime the girl had looked after him with wonder and some amusement
in her eyes, had rubbed her chin reflectively--a habit caught from her
father--and had then scampered off smiling to herself.

"What a funny gent," she thought, "never laughs nor nothin'. An' I judged
he was a artist! But wonnerful kind, an' wonnerful queer, wi' it, sure
'nough."




CHAPTER THREE

THE TREGENZAS


Joan Tregenza lived in a white cottage already mentioned: that standing
just beyond Newlyn upon a road above the sea. The cot was larger than it
appeared from the road and extended backward into an orchard of plum and
apple-trees. The kitchen which opened into this garden was stone-paved,
cool, comfortable, sweet at all times with the scent of wood smoke, and
frequently not innocent of varied fishy odors. But Newlyn folk suck in a
smell of fish with their mothers' milk. 'Tis part of the atmosphere of
home.

When Joan returned from her visit to Gorse Point, she found a hard-faced
woman, thin of figure, with untidy hair, wrinkled brow and sharp features,
engaged about a pile of washing in the garden at the kitchen-door. Mrs.
Tregenza heard the girl arrive, and spoke without lifting her little gray
eyes from the clothes. Her voice was hard and high and discontented, like
that of one who has long bawled into a deaf man's ear and is weary of it.

"Drabbit you! Wheer you bin? Allus trapsing out when you'm wanted; allus
caddlin' round doin' nothin' when you ban't. I s'pose you think breakfus'
can be kep' on the table till dinner, washing-day or no?"

"I don't want no breakfus', then. I tuke some bread an' drippin' long with
me. Wheer's Tom to?"

"Gone to schule this half-hour. 'Tis nine o'clock an' past. Wheer you bin,
I sez? 'Tain't much in your way to rise afore me of a marnin'."

"Out through Mouzle to Gorse P'int to see Joe's ship pass by; an' I seen en
butivul."

"Thank the Lard he's gone. Now, I s'pose, theer'll be a bit peace in the
house, an' you'll bide home an' work. My fingers is to the bone day an'
night."

"He'll be gone a year purty nigh."

"Well, the harder you works, the quicker the time'll pass by. Theer's
nuthin' to grizzle at. Sea-farin' fellers must be away most times. But he'm
a good, straight man, an' you'm tokened to en, an' that's enough. Bide
cheerful an' get the water for washin'. If they things of faither's bant
dry come to-morrer, he'll knaw the reason why."

Joan accepted Mrs. Tregenza's comfort philosophically, though her
sweetheart's departure had not really caused her any emotion. She visited
the larder, drank a cup of milk, and then, fetching an iron hoop and
buckets, went to a sunken barrel outside the cottage door, into which, from
a pipe through the road-bank, tumbled a silver thread of spring water.

Of the Tregenza household a word must needs be spoken. Joan's own mother
had died twelve years ago, and the anxious-natured woman who took her place
proved herself a good step-parent enough. Despite a disposition prone to
worry and to dwell upon the small tribulations of life, Thomasin Tregenza
was not unhappy, for her husband enjoyed prosperity and a reputation for
godliness unequaled in Newlyn. A great, weather-worn, gray, hairy man was
he, with a big head and a furrowed cliff of a forehead that looked as
though it had been carved by its Creator from Cornish granite. Tregenza
indeed might have stood for a typical Cornish fisher--or a Breton. Like
enough, indeed, he had old Armorican blood in his veins, for many hundreds
of Britons betook themselves to ancient Brittany when the Saxon invasion
swept the West, and many afterward returned, with foreign wives, to the
homes of their fathers. Michael Tregenza had found religion, of a sort
fiery and unlovely enough, but his convictions were definite, with
iron-hard limitations, and he looked coldly and without pity on a damned
world, himself saved. Gray Michael had no sympathy with sin and less with
sinners. He found the devil in most unexpected quarters and was always
dragging him out of surprising hiding-places and exhibiting him
triumphantly, as a boy might show a bird's egg or butterfly. His devil
dwelt at penny readings, at fairs and festivals, in the brushes of the
artists, in a walk on a Sunday afternoon undertaken without a definite
object, sometimes in a primrose given by a boy to a girl. Of all these
bitter, self-righteous, censorious little sects which raise each its own
ladder to the Throne of Grace at Newlyn, the Luke Gospelers was the most
bitter, most self-righteous, most censorious. And of all those burning
lights which reflected the primitive savagery of the Pentateuch from that
fold, Gray Michael's beacon flamed the fiercest and most bloody red. There
was not a Gospeler, including the pastor of the flock, but feared the
austere fisherman while admiring him.

Concerning his creed, at the risk of wearying you, it must be permitted to
speak here; for only by grasping its leading features and its vast
unlikeness to the parent tree can a just estimate of Michael Tregenza be
arrived at. Luke Gospeldom had mighty little to do with the Gospel of Luke.
The sect numbered one hundred and thirty-four just persons, at war with
principalities and powers. They were saturated with the spirit of Israel in
the Wilderness, of Esau, when every man's hand was against him. At their
chapel one heard much of Jehovah, the jealous God, of the burning lakes and
the damnation reserved for mankind, as a whole. Every Luke Gospeler was a
Jehovah in his own right. They walked hand in hand with God; they realized
the dismay and indignation Newlyn must occasion in His breast; they
sympathized heartily with the Everlasting and would have called down fire
from Heaven themselves if they could. Many openly wondered that He delayed
so long, for, from a Luke Gospeler's point of view, the place with its
dozen other chapels--each held in error by the rest, and all at deadly war
among themselves--its most vile ritualistic church of St. Peter, its
public-houses, scandals, and strifes, was riper for destruction than Sodom.
However, the hundred and thirty-four served to stave off celestial
brimstone, as it seemed.

It is pitiable, in the face of the majestic work of John Wesley in
Cornwall, to see the shattered ruins of it which remain. When the Wesleys
achieved their notable revival and swept off the dust of a dead Anglicanism
which covered religious Cornwall like a pall in the days of the Georges,
the old Celtic spirit, though these heroes found it hard enough to
rekindle, burst from its banked-up furnaces at last and blazed abroad once
more. That spirit had been bred by the saint bishops of Brito-Celtic days,
and Wesley's ultimate success was a grand repetition of history, as extant
records of the ancient use of the Church in Cornwall prove. Its principle
was that he who filled a bishop's office should, before all things, conduct
and develop missionary enterprise; and the moral and physical courage of
the Brito-Celtic bishops, having long slumbered, awoke again in John
Wesley. He built on the old foundations, he gave to the laymen a power at
that time blindly denied them by the Church--the power which Irish and
Welsh and Breton missionary saints of old had vested in them.
Wesley--himself a giant--made wise use of the strong where he found them,
and if a man--tinker or tinner, fisher or jowster--could preach and grip an
audience, that man might do so. Thus had the founders of the new creed
developed it; thus does the Church to-day; but when John Wesley filled his
empty belly with blackberries at St. Hilary, in 1743; when he thundered
what he deemed eternal truth through Cornwall, year after year for half a
century; when he faced a thousand perils by sea and land and spent his
arduous days "in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fasting often,
in cold and nakedness"; when, in fine, this stupendous man achieved the
foundations of Methodism, the harvest was overripe, at any rate, in
Cornwall. No Nonconformist was he, though few enough of his followers
to-day remember that, if they ever knew it. He worked for his church; he
was a link between it and his party; his last prayer was for church and
king--a fact which might have greatly shocked the Luke Gospelers had such
come to their ears. For John Wesley was their only saint, and they honestly
believed that they alone of all Methodist communities were following in his
footsteps. Poor souls! they lived as far from what Wesley taught as it is
easily possible to conceive. As for Gray Michael, he was under the
impression that he and his sect worthily held aloft the true light which
Wesley brought in person to Newlyn, and he talked with authority upon the
subject of his master and his master's doings. But he knew little about the
founder of Methodism in reality, and still less about the history of the
Methodist movement. Had he learned that John Wesley himself was once
accused of Popish practices; had he known that not until some years after
the great preacher's death did his party, in conference assembled, separate
itself from the Church of England, he had doubtless been much amazed.
Though saturated with religious feeling, the man was wholly ignorant of
religious history in so far as it affected his own country. To him all
saints not mentioned in Scripture were an abomination and invention of
Rome. Had he been informed that the venerable missionary saints of his
mother land were in no case Romish, another vast surprise must have awaited
him.

Let it not for an instant be supposed that the Luke Gospelers represented
right Methodism. But they fairly exemplified a sorry side of it; those
little offshoots of which dozens have separated from the parent tree; and
they exhibited most abundantly in themselves that canker-worm of Pharisaism
which gnaws at the root of all Nonconformity. This offense, combined with
such intolerance and profound ignorance as was to be found amid the Luke
Gospelers, produced a community merely sad or comic to consider according
to the point of view.

An instance of Michael Tregenza's attitude to the Church will illustrate
better than analysis the lines of thought on which he served his Creator.

Once, when she was thirteen, Joan had gone to an evening service at St.
Peter's, because a friend had dared her to do so. Her father was at sea and
she believed the delinquency could by no possibility reach his ears. But a
Luke Gospeler heard the dread tidings and Michael Tregenza was quickly
informed of his daughter's lapse. He accused Joan quietly enough, and she
confessed.

"Then you'm a damned maiden," he said, "'cause you sinned open-eyed."

He thought the matter over for a week, and finally an idea occurred to him.

"'Tis wi'in the power o' God to reach even you back," he declared to Joan,
"an' He's put in my mind that chastenin' might do it. A sore body's saved
many sowls 'fore now."

Whereupon he took his daughter into the little parlor, shut the door, and
then flogged her as he would have flogged a boy--only using his hard hand
instead of a stick. "Get thee behind her, Satan! Get thee behind her,
Satan! Get thee behind her, Satan!" he groaned with every blow, while Joan
grit her teeth and bore it as long as she could, then screamed and fainted.
That was how the truth about heaven and hell came to her. She had never
felt physical pain before, and eternal torment was merely an idea. From
that day, however, she was frightened and listened to her father gladly and
wept tears of thankfulness when, a month after her flogging, he explained
that he had wrestled with the Lord for her soul and how it had been borne
in upon him that she was saved alive. She had reached the age of seventeen
now, and felt quite confident upon the subject of eternity as became a
right Luke Gospeler. Unlike other women of the sect, however, and despite
extreme ignorance on all subjects, the girl had a seed of humor in her
nature only waiting circumstances to ripen. She felt pity, too, for the
great damned world, and though religion turned life sad-colored, her own
simple, healthy, animal nature and high spirits brought ample share of
sunshine and delight. She was, in fact, her mother's child rather than her
father's. His ancestors before him had fought the devil and lived honest
lives under a cloud of fear; Michael's own brother had gone religious mad,
when still a young man, and died in a lunatic asylum; indeed the awful
difficulty of saving his soul had been in the blood of every true Tregenza
for generations. But Joan's mother came of different stock. The Chirgwins
were upland people. They dwelt at Drift and elsewhere, went to the nearest
church, held simple views, and were content with orthodox religion. Mr.
Tregenza said of them that they always wanted and expected God to do more
than His share. But he married Joan Chirgwin, nevertheless; and now he saw
her again, fair, trustful, light-hearted, in his daughter. The girl indeed
had more of her mother in her than Gray Michael liked. She was
superstitious, not after the manner of the Tregenzas, but in a direction
that must have brought her father's loudest thunders upon her head if the
matter had come to his ears. She loved the old stories of the saints and
spirits, she gloried secretly in the splendid wealth of folklore and
tradition her mother's people and those like them possessed at command. Her
dead parent had whispered and sung these matters into Joan's baby ears
until her father stopped it. She remembered how black he looked when she
lisped about the piskeys; and though to-day she half believed in demon and
fairy, goblin and giant, and quite believed in the saints and their
miracles, she kept this side of her intelligence close locked when at home,
and only nodded very gravely when her father roared against the blighting
credulity of men's minds and the follies for which fishers and miners, and
indeed the bulk of the human family in Cornwall, must some day burn.

People outside the fold said that the Luke Gospelers killed Tregenza's
first wife. She, of course, accepted her husband's convictions, but it had
never been in her tender heart to catch the true Luke Gospel spirit. She
was too full of the milk of human kindness, too prone to forgive and
forget, too tolerant and ready to see good in all men. The fiery sustenance
of the new tenets withered her away like a scorched flower, and she died
five years after her child was born. For a space of two years the widower
remained one; then he married again, being at that time a hale man of
forty, the owner of his own fishing-boat, and at once the strongest
personality and handsomest person in Newlyn. Thomasin Strick, his second
wife, was already a Luke Gospeler and needed no conversion. People laughed
in secret at their wooing, and likened it to the rubbing of granite rocks
or a miner's pick striking fire from tin ore. A boy presently came to them;
and now he was ten and his mother forty. She passed rightly for a careful,
money-loving soul, and a good wife, with the wit to be also a good Luke
Gospeler. But her tongue was harder than her heart. Father and mother alike
thought the wide world of their boy, though the child was brought up under
an iron rod. Joan, too, loved her half-brother, Tom, very dearly, and took
a pride only second to her stepmother's in the lad's progress and
achievements. More than once, though only Joan and he knew it, she had
saved his skin from punishment, and she worshiped him with a frank
admiration which was bound to win Mrs. Tregenza's regard. Joan quite
understood the careful and troubled matron, never attached undue importance
to her sharp words, and was usually at her elbow with an ear for all
grievances and even a sympathetic word if the same seemed called for. Mrs.
Tregenza had to grumble to live, and Joan was the safety-valve, for when
her husband came off the sea he would have none of it.

Life moved uniformly for these people, being varied only by the seasons of
the year and the different harvests from the sea which each brought with
it. Pollock, mackerel, pilchards, herrings--all had their appointed time,
and the years rolled on, marked by events connected with the secular
business of life on one hand and that greater matter of eternity upon the
other. Thus mighty catches of fish held the memory with mighty catches of
men. One year the take of mackerel had been beyond all previous
recollection; on another occasion three entire families had joined the Luke
Gospelers, and so promised to increase the scanty numbers of the chosen.
There were black memories, too, and black years, casting gloomy shadows.
Widows and orphans knew what it was to watch for brown sails that came into
the harbor's sheltering arms no more; and spiritual death had overtaken
more than one Luke Gospeler. Such turned their backs upon the light and
exchanged Truth for the benighted parody of religion displayed by Bible
Christians, by Plymouth Brethren or by the Church of England.

Six months before the day on which she saw his ship through Barron's
glasses, Joan had been formally affianced to Joe Noy, with her father's
permission and approval. The circumstances of the event demand a word, for
Joe had already been engaged once before: to Mary Chirgwin, a young woman
who was first cousin to Joan and a good deal older. She was an orphan and
dwelt at Drift with Thomas Chirgwin, her uncle. The sailor had thereby
brightened an unutterably lonely life and brought earthly joy to one who
had never known it. Then Gray Michael got hold of the lad, who was
naturally of a solid and religious temperament, and up to that time of the
order of the Rechabites. As a result, Joe Noy joined the Luke Gospelers and
called upon his sweetheart to do likewise. But she recollected her aunt,
Joan's mother, and being made of stern stuff, stuck to the Church of
England as she knew it, counting salvation a greater thing than even a home
of her own. The struggle was sharp between them; neither would give way;
their engagement was therefore broken, and the girl's solitary golden
glimpse of happiness in this world shattered. She found it hard to forgive
the Tregenzas, and when, six months afterward, the sleepy farm life at
Drift was startled by news of Joan's love affair, Mary, in the first flush
of her reawakened agony, spoke bitterly enough; and even that most
mild-mannered of men, her uncle, said that Michael Tregenza had done an
ugly act.

But the fisherman was at no time concerned with Mary or with Joan. The
opportunity to get a soul into the fold had offered and been accepted. Any
matter of earthly love-making counted little beside this. When Joe broke
with Mary, his mentor declared the action inevitable, as the girl would not
alter her opinions, and when, presently, young Noy fell in love with Joan,
her father saw no objection, for the sailor was honest, already a stanch
Luke Gospeler and a clean liver.

Perhaps at that moment there was hardly another eligible youth in Newlyn
from Tregenza's point of view. He held Joan a girl to be put under stern
marital rule as soon as possible, and Joe promised to make a godly husband
with a strong will, while his convictions and view of life were altogether
satisfactory, being modeled on Michael's own. The arrangement suited Joan.
She believed she loved Joe very dearly, and she looked forward with
satisfaction to marrying him in about a year's time, when he should have
won a ship-master's certificate. But she viewed his departure without
suffering and would not have willingly foregone her remaining year of
freedom. She respected Joe very much and knew he would make a good partner
and give her a position above the everyday wives of Newlyn; moreover, he
was a fine figure of a man. But he lacked mental breadth, and that fact
sometimes tickled her dormant sense of humor. He copied her father so
exactly, and she, who lived with the real thunder, never could show
sufficient gravity or conviction in the presence of the youthful and
narrow-minded Noy's second-hand echoes. Mary Chirgwin was naturally a
thousand times more religious-minded than Joan, and sometimes Joe wished
the sober mind of his first love could be transported to the beautiful body
of his second; but he kept this notion to himself, studied to please his
future father-in-law, which he succeeded in doing handsomely, and contented
himself, in so far as his lady was concerned, by reflecting that the
necessary control over her somewhat light mind would be his in due season.

To return from this tedious but necessary glimpse at the position and
belief of these people to Joan and the washing, it is to be noted that she
quickly made up for lost time, and, without further mentioning the
incidents of her morning's excursion, began to work. She pulled up her
sleeves, dragged her dress about her waist, then started to cleanse the
thick flannels her father wore at sea, his long-tailed shirts and woolen
stockings. The Tregenzas were well-to-do folk, and did not need to use the
open spaces of the village for drying of clothes. Joan presently set up a
line among the plum-trees, and dawdled over the hanging out of wet
garments, for it was now noon, sunny, mild, and fresh, with a cool salt
breeze off the sea. The winter repose of the bee-butts had been broken at
last, and the insects were busy with the plum-blossom and among the little
green flowerets on the gooseberry bushes. Beyond, sun-streaked and bright,
extended apple-trees with whitewashed stems and a twinkle of crimson on
their boughs, where buds grew ripe for the blowing.

Joan yawned and blinked up at the sun to see if it was dinner time. Then
she watched a kitten hunting the bees in the gooseberry bushes. Presently
the little creature knocked one to the ground and began to pat it and
pounce upon it. Then the bee, using Nature's weapon to preserve precious
life, stung the kitten; and the kitten hopped into the air much amazed. It
shook its paw, licked it, shook it again. Joan laughed, and two pigs at the
bottom of the garden heard her and grunted and squealed as they thrust
expectant noses through the palings of their sty. They connected the laugh
with their dinner, but Joan's thoughts were all upon her own.

A few minutes later Thomasin Tregenza called her, and, as they sat down,
Tom arrived from school. He was a brown-faced, dark-eyed, black-haired
youngster, good-looking enough, but not at that moment.

"Aw! Jimmery! fightin' agin," said his mother, viewing two swollen lips, a
bulged ear, and an eye half closed.

"I've downed Matthew Bent, Joan! Ten fair rounds, then he gived up."

"Fight, fight, fight--'tis all you think of," said his parent, while Joan
poured congratulations on the conqueror.

"'Tweer bound to come arter the football, when he played foul, an' I tawld
en so. Now, we'm friends."

"Be he bruised same as you?"

"A sight worse; he's a braave picksher, I tell 'e! I doubt he won't come to
schule this arternoon. That'll shaw. I be gwaine, if I got to crawl theer."

"An' him a year older than what you be!" said Joan.

"Iss, Mat's 'leben year old. I'll have some vinegar an' brown paper to this
here eye, mother."

"Ait your mayte, ait your mayte fust," she answered. "Plague 'pon your
fightin'!"

"But that Bent bwoy's bin at en for months; an' a year older too," said
Joan.

"Iss, the bwoy's got no more'n what 'e desarved. For that matter, they
Bents be all puffed up, though they'm so poor as rats, an' wi'out 'nough
religion to save the sawl of a new-born babe 'mongst the lot of 'em."

Tom, with his mouth full of fish and potato pie, told the story of his
victory, and the women made a big, hearty meal and listened.

"He cockled up to me, an' us beginned fightin' right away, an' in the third
round I scat en on the mouth an' knocked wan 'is teeth out. An' in the
fifth round he dropped me a whister-cuff 'pon the eye as made me blink
proper."

"Us doan't want to knaw no more 'bout it," declared his mother after dinner
was over. "You've laced en an' that's enough. You knaw what faither'll say.
You did ought to fight no battle but the Lard's. Now clap this here over
your eye for a bit, then be off with 'e."

Tom marched away to school earlier than usual that afternoon, while the
women went to the door and watched him trudge off, both mightily proud of
his performance and his battered brown face.

"He be a reg'lar lil apty-cock, [Footnote: _Apty-cock_--Brave, plucky
youngster.] sure 'nough!" said Joan.

Mrs. Tregenza answered with a nod and looked along the road after her son.
There was a softer expression in her eyes as she watched him. Besides, she
had eaten well and was comfortable. Now she picked her teeth with a pin,
and snuffed the sea air, and gave a passing neighbor "good-afternoon" with
greater warmth of manner than usual. Presently her mood changed; she
noisily rated herself and her stepdaughter for standing idling; then both
went back to their work.



 CHAPTER FOUR

BARRON BEGINS TO LEARN THE GORSE


Between four and five o'clock in the morning of the following day the
master of the white cottage came home. His wife expected him and was
getting breakfast when Michael tramped in--a very tall, square-built man,
clad to the eye in tanned oilskin overalls, sou'wester, and jackboots. The
fisherman returned to his family in high good temper; for the sea had
yielded silvery thousands to his drift-nets, and the catch had already been
sold in the harbor for a handsome figure. The brown sails of Tregenza's
lugger flapped in the bay among a crowd of others, and every man was in a
hurry to be off again at the earliest opportunity. Already the first boats
home were putting to sea once more, making a wide tack across the mouth of
the bay until nearly abreast of St. Michael's Mount, then tearing away like
race horses with foam flying as they sailed before the eastern wind for the
Scilly Islands and the mackerel.

Michael kissed his wife and Joan also, as she came to the kitchen
sleepy-eyed in the soft light to welcome him. Then, while Mrs. Tregenza was
busied with breakfast and the girl cleaned some fish, he went to his own
small room off the kitchen and changed his clothes--all silvery,
scale-spotted and blood-smeared--for the clean garments which were spread
and waiting. First the man indulged in luxuries. He poured out a large tub
of fresh water and washed himself; he even cleaned his nails and
teeth--hyberbolic refinements that made the baser sort laugh at him behind
his back.

At the meal which followed his toilet Tregenza talked to his wife and
daughter upon various subjects. He spoke slowly and from the lungs with the
deep echoing voice of one used to vocal exercise in the open air.

"I seed the 'Anna' yesterday, Joan," he said, "a proud ship, full-rigged
wi' butivul lines. Her passed wi'in three mile of us or less off the
islands."

Joan did not hint at her visit to Gorse Point of the previous day, but her
stepmother mentioned it, and her father felt called upon to reprimand his
daughter, though not very seriously.

"'Twas a empty, vain thing to do," he said.

"I promised Joe, faither."

"Why, then you was right to go, though a fulish thing to promise en.
Wheer's Tom to?"

Tom came down a minute later. The swelling of his lips was lessened, but
his ear had not returned to a normal size and his eye was black.

"Fighting again?" Michael began, looking up from his saucer and fixing his
eyes on his son.

"Please, faither, I--"

"Doan't say naught. You'm so fond of it that I judges you'd best begin
fightin' the battle o' life right on end. 'Tain't no use keepin' you to
schule no more. 'Tis time you comed aboard."

Tom crowed with satisfaction, and Mrs. Tregenza sighed and stopped eating.
This event had been hanging over her head for many a long day now; but she
had put the thing away, and secretly hoped that after all Tregenza would
change his mind and apprentice the boy to a shore trade. However, Tom had
made his choice, and his father meant him to abide by it. No other life
appealed to the boy; heredity marked him for the sea, and he longed for the
hard business to begin.

"I'll larn you something besides fisticuffs, my beauty. 'Tis all
well-a-fine, this batterin' an' bruisin', but it awnly breeds the savage in
'e, same as raw meat do in a dog. No more fightin' 'cept wi' dirty weather
an' high seas an' contrary winds, an' the world, the flaish an' the devil.
I went to sea as a lugger-bwoy when I was eight year old, an' ain't bin off
the water more'n a month to wance ever since. This day two week you come
along wi' me. That'll give mother full time to see 'bout your kit."

Joan wept, Thomasin Tregenza whined, and Tom danced a break-down and rolled
away to see some fisher-boy friends in the harbor before school began. Then
Michael, calling his daughter to him, walked with her among his plum-trees,
talked of God with some quotations, and looked at his pigs. Presently he
busied himself and made ready for sea in a little outhouse where paint and
ship's chandlery were stored; and finally, the hour then being half past
seven, he returned to his labors. Joan walked with him to the harbor and
listened while he talked of the goodness of God to the Luke Gospelers at
sea; how the mackerel had been delivered to them in thousands, and how the
Bible Christians and Primitive Methodists had fared by no means so happily.
The tide was high, and Gray Michael's skiff waited for him at the pierhead
beside the lighthouse. He soon climbed down into it, and the little boat,
rowed by two strong pairs of hands, danced away to the fleet. Already the
luggers were stretching off in a long line across the bay; and among them
appeared a number of visitors: Lowestoft yawls come down to the West after
the early mackerel. They were big, stout vessels, and many had steam-power
aboard. Joan watched her father's lugger start and saw it overhaul not a
few smaller ships before she turned from the busy harbor homeward. That
morning she designed to work with a will, for the afternoon was to be spent
on Gorse Point if all went well, and she already looked forward somewhat
curiously to her next meeting with the singular man who had lent her his
field-glass.

Mrs. Tregenza was in sorry, snappy case all day. The blow had fallen, and
within a fort-night Tom would go to sea. This dismal fact depressed her not
a little, and she snuffled over her ironing, and her voice grated worse
than usual upon the ear.

"He's such a hot-headed twoad of a bwoy. I knaw he'll never get on 'pon the
water. I doubt us'll hear he's bin knocked overboard or some sich thing
some day; an' them two brothers, they Pritchards, as allus sails 'long wi'
Tregenza, they'm that comical-tempered every one knaws. Oh, my God, why
couldn' he let the bwoy larn a land trade--carpenterin' or sich like?"

"But, you see, faither's a rich man, an' some time Tom'll fill his shoes.
Faither do awn his bwoat an' the nets tu, which is more'n most Newlyn men
does."

"Iss, I should think 'twas," said Mrs. Tregenza, forgetting her present
sorrow in the memory of such splendid circumstances. "Theer ban't wan
feller as awns all like what faither do. The Lard helps His chosen, not but
what Tregenza allus helped hisself an' set the example to Newlyn from his
boyhood."

Mrs. Tregenza always licked her lips when she talked about money or
religion, and she did so now.

Among Cornish drifters Gray Michael's position was undoubtedly unique, for
under the rules of the Cornish fishery he enjoyed exceptional advantages
owing to his personal possession both of boat and nets. The owner of a
drift-boat takes one-eighth part of the gross proceeds of a catch, and the
remaining seven-eighths are divided into two equal parts of which one part
is subdivided among the crew of the boat, while the other goes to the owner
or owners of the nets used on board. The number of nets to a boat is about
fifty as a rule, and a man to possess his own boat and outfit must be
unusually well-to-do.

But it was partly for this reason that Mrs. Tregenza refused to be
comforted. She grudged every farthing spent on anything, and much disliked
the notion of tramping to Penzance to expend the greater part of a
five-pound note on Tom's sea outfit. In a better cause she would not have
thought it ill to expend money upon him. His position pointed to something
higher than a fisherman's life. He might have aspired to a shop in the
future together with a measure of worldly prosperity and importance not to
be expected for any mere seafarer. But Tom had settled the matter by
deciding for himself, and his father had approved the ambition, so there
the matter ended, save for grumbling and sighing. Joan, too, felt sore
enough at heart when she heard that the long-dreaded event lay but a
fortnight in the future. But she knew her father, and felt sure that the
certainty of Tom's going to sea at the appointed time would now only be
defeated by death or the Judgment Day. So she did not worry or fret.
Nothing served to soothe her stepmother, however, and the girl was glad to
slip off after dinner, leaving Thomasin with her troubles.

Joan made brisk way through Mousehole and in less than an hour stood out
among the furzes in the little lonely theater above the cliffs. For a
moment she saw nothing of John Barron, then she found him sitting on a
camp-stool before a light easel which looked all legs with a mere little
square patch of a picture perched upon them. Joan walked to within a few
yards of the artist and waited for him to speak. But eye, hand, brain were
all working together on the sketch before him, and if he saw the visitor at
all, which was doubtful, he took no notice of her. Joan came a little
closer, and still John Barron ignored her presence. Then she grew
uncomfortable, and, feeling she must break the silence, spoke.

"I be come, sir, 'cordin' to what you said."

He added a touch and looked up with no recognition in his eyes. His
forehead frowned with doubt apparently, then he seemed to remember. "Ah,
the young woman who told me about the luggers." Suddenly he smiled at her,
the first time she had seen him do so.

"You never mentioned your name, I think?"

"Joan Tregenza, sir."

"I promised you a little picture of that big ship, didn't I?"

"You was that kind, sir."

"Well, I haven't forgotten it. I finished the picture this morning and I
think you may like it, but I had to leave it until to-morrow, because the
paints take so long to dry."

"I'm sure I thank you kindly, sir."

"No need. To-morrow it will be quite ready for you, with a frame and all
complete. You see I've begun to try and paint the gorse." He invited her by
a gesture to view his work. She came closer, and as she bent he glanced up
at her with his face for a moment close to hers. Then she drew back
quickly, blushing.

"'Tis butivul--just like them fuzzes."

He had been working for two hours before she came, painting a small patch
of the gorse. Old gnarled stems wound upward crookedly, and beneath them
lay a dead carpet of gorse needles with a blade or two of grass shooting
through. From the roots and bases of the main stems sprouted many a shoot
of young gorse, their prickles tender as the claws of a new-born kitten,
their shape, color, and foliage of thorns quite different to the mature
plant above. There, in the main masses of the shrub, mossy brown buds in
clumps foretold future splendor. But already much gold had burst the sheath
and was ablaze, scenting the pure air, murmured over by many bees.

"You could a'most pick thicky theer flowers," declared Joan of the picture.

"Perhaps presently, when they are painted as I hope to paint them. This is
only a rough bit of work to occupy my hand and eye while I am learning the
gorse. Men who paint seriously have to learn trees and blossoms just as
they have to learn faces. And we are never satisfied. When I have painted
this gorse, with its thorns and buds, I shall sigh for more truth. I cannot
paint the soul of each little yellow flower that opens to the sun; I cannot
paint the sunny smell that is sweet in our nostrils now. God's gorse scents
the air; mine will only smell of fat oil. What shall I do?"

"I dunnaw."

"No more does anybody. It can't be helped. But I must try my best and make
it real--each spike, as I see it--the dead gray ones on the ground and the
live green ones on the tree, and the baby ones and the old gray-pointed
ones, which have seen their best days and will presently die and fall--I
must paint them all, Joan."

She laughed.

"Don't laugh," he said, very seriously. "Only an artist would laugh at me,
not you who love Nature. There lives a great painter, Joan, who paints
pictures that nobody else in the wide world can paint. He is growing old,
but he is not too old to take trouble still. Once, when he was a young man,
he drew a lemon-tree far away in Italy. It was only a little lemon-tree,
but the artist rose morning after morning and drew it leaf by leaf, twig by
twig, until every leaf and bud and lemon and bough had appeared. It was not
labored and false; it was grand because it was true: a joy forever; work
Old Masters had loved; full of distinction and power and patience almost
Oriental. A thing, Joan Tregenza, worth a wilderness of 'harmonies' and
'impressions,' 'nocturnes' and 'notes,' smudges and audacities. But I
suppose that is all gibberish to you?"

"Iss, so it be," she admitted.

"Learn to love everything that is beautiful, my good child. But I think you
do, unconsciously perhaps."

"I don't take much 'count of things."
 "Yes, unconsciously. You have a cowslip there stuck in your frock, though
where you got it from I can't imagine. The flower is a month too early."

"Iss, 'tis, I found en in a lew, sunshiny plaace. Us have got a frame for
growin' things under glass, an' it had bin put down 'pon top this cowslip
an' drawed 'en up."

"Will you give it to me?"

She did so, and he smelled it.

"D'you know that the green of the cowslip is the most beautiful green in
all Nature, Joan? Here, I have a flower, too; we will exchange if you
like."

He took a scrap of blackthorn bloom from his coat and held it out to her,
but she shrank backward and he learned something.

"Please not that--truly 'tis the dreadfulest wicked flower. Doan't 'e arsk
I to take en."

"Unlucky?"

"Iss fay! Him or her as first brings blackthorn in the house dies afore it
blows again. Truth--solemn--us all knaws it down in these paarts. 'Tis a
bewitched thing--a wicked plant, an' you can see it grawin' all
humpetty-backed an' bent an' crooked. Wance, when a man killed hisself,
they did use to bury en wheer roads met an' put a blackthorn stake through
en; an' it all us grawed arter; an' that's the worstest sort o' all."

"Dear, dear, I'm glad you told me, Joan; I will not wear it, nor shall
you," he said, and flung it down and stamped on it very seriously.

The girl was gratified.

"I judge you'm a furriner, else you'd knawn 'bout the wickedness o'
blackthorn."

"I am. Thank you very much. But for you I should have gone home wearing it.
That puts me in your debt, Joan."

"'Tain't nothin', awnly there's a many coorious Carnish things like that.
An' coorious customs what some doan't hold with an' some does."

She sat down near the cliff edge with her back to him, and he smiled to
himself to find how quickly his mild manners and reserve had put the girl
at her ease. She looked perfect that afternoon and he yearned to begin
painting her; but his scheme of action demanded time for its perfect
fulfillment and ultimate success. He let the little timorous chatterbox
talk. Her voice was soft and musical as the cooing of a wood-dove, and the
sweet full notes chimed in striking contrast to her uncouth speech. But
Joan's diction gave pleasure to the listener. It had freedom and wildness,
and was almost wholly innocent of any petrifying educational influences.

Joan, for her part, felt at ease. The man was so polite and so humble. He
thanked her for her information so gratefully. Moreover, he evidently cared
so little about her or her looks. She felt perfectly safe, for it was easy
to see that he thought more of the gorse than anything.

"My faither's agin such things an' sayin's," she babbled on, "but I dunnaw.
They seems truth to me, an' to many as is wiser than what I be. My mother
b'lieved in 'em, an' Joe did, till faither turned en away from 'em. But
when us plighted troth, I made en jine hands wi' me under a livin' spring
o' water, though he said 'twas heathenish. Awnly, somehow, I knawed 'twas a
proper thing to do."

"I should like to hear more about these old customs some day," he said, as
though Joan and he were to meet often in the future, "and I should be
obliged to you for telling me about them, because I always delight in such
matters."

She was quicker of mind than he thought, and rose, taking his last remark
as a hint that he wished to be alone.

"Don't go, Joan, unless you must. I'm a very lonely man, and it is a great
pleasure to me to hear you talk. Look here."

She approached him, and he showed her a pencil sketch now perched on the
easel--a drawing considerably larger than that upon which he had been
working when she arrived.

"This is a rough idea of my picture. It is going to be much larger though,
and I have sent all the way to London for a canvas on which to paint it."

'"Twill be a gert big picksher then?"

"So big that I think I must try and get something into it besides the
gorse. I want something or other in the middle, just for a change. What
could I paint there?"

"I dunnaw."

"No more do I. I wonder how that little white pony tethered yonder would
do?"

Joan laughed.

"You'd never get the likes o' him to bide still for 'e."

"No, I'm afraid not; and I doubt if I'm clever enough to paint him either.
You see, I'm only a beginner--not like these clever artists who can draw
anything. Well, I must think: to-morrow is Sunday. I shall begin my big
picture on Monday if the weather keeps kind. I shall paint here, in the
open air. And I will bring your ship, too, if you care to take the trouble
to come for it."

"Yes, an' thank 'e, sir."

"Not at all. I owe you thanks. Just think if I had gone home with that
horrid blackthorn."

He turned to his work as though she were no longer present and the girl
prepared to depart.

"I'll bid you good-arternoon now, sir," she said timidly.

He looked up with surprise.

"Haven't you gone, Joan? I thought you had started. Good-by until Monday.
Remember, if it is cold or rainy I shall not be here."

The girl trotted off; and when she had gone Barren drew her from memory in
the center of his sketch. The golden glories of the gorse were destined to
be no more than a frame for something fairer.




CHAPTER FIVE

COLD COMFORT


John Barron made other preparations for his picture besides those detailed
to Joan Tregenza. He designed a large canvas and proposed to paint it in
the open air according to his custom. His health had improved, and the
sustained splendor of the spring weather flattered hopes that, his model
once won, the work he proposed would grow into an accomplished fact. There
was no cottage where he might house his picture and materials within half a
mile of Gorse Point, but a granite cow-byre rose considerably nearer, at a
corner of an upland field. Wind-worn and lichen-stained it stood, situated
not more than two hundred yards from the spot on which Barron's picture was
to be painted. A pathway to outlying farms cut the fields hard by the byre,
and about it lay implements of husbandry--a chain harrow and a rusty plow.
Black, tar-pitched double doors gave entrance to the shed, and light
entered from a solitary window now roughly nailed up from the outside with
boards. A padlock fastened the door, but, by wrenching down the covering of
the window, Barron got sight of the interior. A smell of vermin and decay
rose from the inner darkness; then, as his eyes focused the gloom, he noted
a dry, spacious chamber likely enough to answer his purpose. Brown litter
of last year's fern filled one corner, and in it was marked a lair as of
some medium-sized beast; elsewhere a few sacks with spades and picks and a
small pile of potatoes appeared: the roots were all sprouting feebly from
white eyes, as though they knew spring held the world, though neither
sunshine warmed them nor soft earth aided their struggle for life. Here the
man might well keep his canvas and other matters. Assuming that temporary
possession of the shed was possible, his property would certainly be safe
enough there; for artists are respected in and about Newlyn, and their
needs considered when possible. A farm, known as Middle Hemyll, showed gray
chimneys above the fields, half a mile distant, and, after finding the
shed, Barron proceeded thither to learn its ownership. The master of Middle
Hemyll speedily enlightened him, and the visitor learned that not only did
he speak to the possessor of the cow-byre, but that Farmer Ford was a keen
supporter of art, and would be happy to rent his outhouse for a moderate
consideration.

"The land ban't under pasture now, an' the plaace ed'n much used just this
minute, so you'm welcome if you mind to. My auld goat did live theer wance,
but er's dead this long time. Maybe you seed the carcass of en, outside?
I'll have the byre cleared come to-morrer; an' if so be you wants winders
in the roof, same as other paintin' gents, you'll have to put 'em theer wi'
your awn money."

Barron explained that he only needed the shed as a storehouse for his
picture and tools.

"Just so, just so. Then you'll find a bwoy wi' the key theer to-morrer, an'
all vitty; an' you can pay in advancement or arter, as you please to. Us'll
say half-a-crown a week, if that'll soot 'e."

The listener produced half-a-sovereign, much to Farmer Ford's
gratification, and asked that a lad or man might be found to return with
him there and then to the shed.

"I am anxious to see the place and have it in order before I go back to
Newlyn," he explained. "I will pay you extra for the necessary labor, and
it should not take above an hour."

"No more 'twill, an' I'll come 'long with 'e myself this minute," answered
the other.

Getting a key to the padlock, and a big birch broom, he returned with
Barron, and soon had the doors of the disused byre thrown open to the air.

"I shut en up when the auld goat went dead. Theer a used to lie in the
corner, but now he'm outside, an' I doubt the piskeys, what they talks
'bout, be mighty savage wi' me for not buryin' the beast, 'cause all
fairies is 'dicted to goats, they do say, an' mighty fond o' the milk of
'em."

Farmer Ford soon cleared the place of potatoes, sacks, and tools. Then,
taking his broom, he made a clean sweep of dust and dirt.

"Theer's a many more rats here than I knawed seemin'ly," he said, as he
examined a sink in the stones of the floor, used for draining the stalls;
"they come up here for sartain, an' runs out 'long the heydge to the
mangel-wurzel mound, I lay."

Without, evidences of the vermin were clear enough. Long hardened tracks,
patted down by many paws, ran this way and that; and the main rat
thoroughfare extended, as the farmer foretold, to a great mound where,
stowed snugly in straw under earth, lay packed the remains of a
mangel-wurzel crop. At one end the store had been opened and drawn upon for
winter use; but a goodly pile of the great tawny globes still remained,
small lemon-colored leaves sprouting from them. Farmer Ford, however,
viewed the treasure without satisfaction.

"Us killed a power o' sheep wi' they blarsted roots last winter," he said.
"You'd never think now as the frost could touch 'em, but it did though,
awin' to the wicked long winter. It got to 'em, sure 'nough, an' theer was
frost in 'em when us gived 'em to the sheep, an' it rotted theer innards,
poor twoads, an' they died, more'n a score."

Barron listened thoughtfully to these details, then pointed to an ugly
sight beyond the wurzel mound.

"I should like that removed," he said.

It was the dead goat, withered to a mummy almost, with horns and hide
intact, and a rat-way bored through the body of the beast under a tunnel of
its ribs.

"Jimmery! to see what them varmints have done to 'en! But I'll bury what's
left right on en; an' I'll stop the sink in the house, then you'll be free
of 'em."

These things the farmer did, and presently departed, promising to revisit
the spot ere long with some dogs and a ferret or two. So Barron was left
master of the place. He found it dry, weather-proof and well suited to his
requirements in every respect. The concerns which he had ordered from
London would be with him by Saturday night if all went well, and he decided
that they should be conveyed to the byre at an early hour on Monday
morning.

The next day was Sunday, and half a dozen men, with Barron and Murdoch
among them, strolled into Brady's great whitewashed studio to see and
criticise his academy picture which was finished. Everybody declared that
the artist had excelled himself in "The End of the Voyage." It represented
a sweep of the rocky coast by the Lizard, a wide gray sand, left naked by
the tide, with the fringe of a heavy sea churning on it, and sea-fowl
strutting here and there. In the foreground, half buried under tangles of
brown weed torn from the rocks by past storms, lay a dead sailor, and a big
herring-gull, with its head on one side and a world of inquiry in its
yellow eyes, was looking at him. Tremendous vigor marked the work, and only
a Brady could have come safely through the difficulties which had been
surmounted in its creation. Everybody sang praises, and Barron nodded warm
approval, but said nothing until challenged.

"Now, find the faults, then tell me what's good," said the gigantic
painter. He stood there, burly, hearty, physically splendid--the man of all
others in that throng who might have been pointed to as the creator of the
solemn gray picture before them.

"Leave fault-finding to Fleet Street," said Barron; "let the press people
tell you where you are wrong. I am no critic and I know what a mountain of
hard work went to this."

"That's all right, old man; never mind the work--or me. Be impartial."

"Why should I? To be impartial, as this world wags, is to be friendless."

"Good Lord! d'you think I mind mauling? There's something wrong or you
wouldn't be so deucedly evasive. Out with it!"

"Well, your sailor's not dead."

Brady roared with laughter.

"Man! the poor devil's been in the water a week!"

"Not he. 'Tis a mistake in nine painted corpses out of ten. If you want to
paint a drowned man, wait till you've seen one close. That sailor in the
seaweed's asleep. Sleep is graceful, remember; death by drowning is
generally ugly--stiff, stark, hideous, eyeless, fish-gnawed a week after
the event. But what does it matter? You've painted a great picture. That
sea, with the circular swirl, as each wave goes back into the belly of the
next, is well done; and those lumps of spume fluttering above
watermark--that was finely noted. Easy to write down in print, but
difficult as the fiend to paint. And the picture is full of wind too. Your
troubles are amply repaid and I congratulate you. A man who could paint
that will go as far as he likes."

The simple Brady forgot the powder in swallowing the jam. Barron had
touched those things in his work which were precious to him. His impulsive
nature took fire, and there was almost a quiver of emotion in his big voice
as he answered:

"Damn it, you're a brick! I'd sooner hear you praise those lumps of
sea-spume, racing over the sand there, than see my picture on the line."

But sentiment was strange to John Barron's impersonal nature, and he froze.

"Another fault exists which probably nobody will tell you but me. Your
seaweed's great, and you knew it by heart before you painted it--that I'll
swear to, but your sleeper there would never lie in the line of it as you
have him. Reflect: the sea must float the light weed after it could move
him no more. He should be stogged in the sand nearer the sea."

Brady, however, contested this criticism, and so the talk wore on until the
men separated. But the Irishman called on Barron after midday dinner and
together they strolled through Newlyn toward the neighboring village.
Chance brought them face to face with two persons more vital to the
narrative than themselves, and, pausing to chronicle the event of the
meeting, we may leave the artists and follow those whom they encountered.

Gray Michael kept ashore on Sundays, and today, having come off the sea at
dawn, was not again putting forth until next morning. He had attended
meeting with his wife, his daughter and his son; he had dined also, and was
now walking over to Mousehole that he might bring some religious comfort to
a sorely stricken Luke Gospeler--a young sheep but lately won to the fold
and who now lay at the point of death. Joan accompanied him, and upon the
way they met John Barron and his companion. The girl blushed hotly and then
chilled with a great disappointment, for Barron's eyes were on the sea; he
was talking as he passed by, and he apparently saw neither her nor her
Sunday gown; which circumstance was a sorrow to Joan. But in reality Barron
missed nothing. He had shivered at her green dress and poor finery long
before she reached him. Her garb ruffled his senses and left him wounded.

"There goes your beauty," laughed Brady; "how would you like to paint her
in that frock with those sinful blue flowers in her hat?"

"Nature must weep to see the bizarre carnival these people enjoy on the
Seventh Day," answered the other. "Their duns and drabs, their russets and
tawny tones of red and orange, are of their environment, the proper skins
for their bodies; but to think of that girl brightening the eyes of a
hundred louts by virtue of those fine feathers! Dream of her in the Stone
Age, clad in a petticoat torn from a wolf, with her straw-colored hair to
her waist and a necklace of shells or wild beasts' teeth between her
breasts! And the man--her father, I suppose--what a picture his cursed
broadcloth and soft black hat make of him--like the head of a patriarch
stuck on a tailor's dummy."

Meanwhile, ignorant of these startling criticisms, Mr. Tregenza and his
daughter pursued their road, and presently stopped before a cottage in one
of the cobble-paved alley-ways of Mousehole. A worn old woman opened the
door and courtesied to Gray Michael. He wished her good-afternoon, then
entered the cottage, first bidding Joan return in an hour. She had friends
near at hand, and hurried off, glad to escape the sight of sickness and the
prayers she knew that her father would presently deliver.

"How be en?" inquired the fisherman, and the widowed mother of the patient
answered:

"Better, I do pray. Er was in the doldrums issterday an' bad by night also,
a dwaling an' moaning gashly, but, the Lard be praised, he'm better in mind
by now, an' I do think 'tis more along of Bible-readin' than all the
doctor's traade [Footnote: _Traade_--Physic.] he've took. I read to en
'bout that theer bwoy, the awnly son o' his mother, an' her a
widder-wumman, an' how as the Lard brought en round arter he'd gone dead."

Gray Michael sniffed and made no comment.

"I'll see en an' put up a prayer or so," he said.

"An' the Lard'll reward it, Mr. Tregenza."

Young Albert Vallack greeted the visitor with even greater reverence than
his mother had done. He and the old woman were Falmouth folks and had
drifted Westerly upon the father's death, until chance anchored them in
Newlyn. Now the lad--a dissolute youth enough, until sudden illness had
frightened him to religion--was dying of consumption, and dying fast,
though as yet he knew it not.

"'Tis handsome in you, a comin' to see the likes o' me," said the patient,
flushing with satisfaction. "You'm like the stickler at a wras'lin' match,
Mister Tregenza, sir; you sees fair play betwixt God an' man."

"So you'm better, Albert, your mother sez."

"Iss, a bit. Theer's more kick an' sprawl [Footnote: _Kick an'
sprawl_--Strength, vitality.] in me than theer 'ave bin; an' I feels
more hopeful like 'bout the future."

Self-righteousness in a new-fledged Luke Gospeler, who had been of the fold
but three months and whose previous record was extremely unsatisfactory,
irritated Gray Michael not a little.

"Bwoy!" he said loudly, "doan't 'e be deceived that way. 'Gird 'e wi'
sackcloth, lament and howl; for the fierce anger o' the Lard is _not_
turned back from us.' Three months o' righteousness is a purty bad set off
'gainst twenty years o' sin, an' it doan't become 'e to feel hopeful, I
'sure ye."

The sick man's color paled, and a certain note as of triumph in his voice
died out of it. His mother had left them, feeling that her presence might
hinder conversation and lessen the comfort which Mr. Tregenza had brought.

"I did ought to be chap-fall'n, I s'pose."

"Iss, you did, my son, nobody more'n you. Maybe you'll live; maybe you'll
die; but keep humble. I doan't wish to deceive 'e. Us ain't had time to
make no certainty 'bout things. You'm in the Lard's hand, an' it becomes 'e
to sing small, an' remember what your life's bin."

The other grew uneasy and his voice faltered while he still fought for a
happy eternity.

"I'd felt like 'twas all right arter what mother read."

"Not so. God's a just God 'fore everything. Theer ed'n no favorin' wi' Him.
I hopes you'll live this many a day, Vallack; an' then, when your hour
comes, you'll have piled up a tidy record an' can go wi' a certainty
faacin' you. Seems you'm better, an' us at chapel's prayed hot an' strong
to the Throne that you might be left to work out your salvation now your
foot's 'pon the right road."

"But if I dies, mister?"

"'The prayer of the righteous man availeth much,'" answered Gray Michael
evasively. "I be come," he added, "to read the Scriptures to 'e."

"You all prayed for me, sir?"

"Iss, every man, but theer was no mincin' matters, Albert. Us was arskin'
for a miserable sinner, a lost sheep awnly just strayed back, an' we put it
plain as that was so."

"'Tweer mighty kind o' the Luke Gosp'lers, sir."

"'Twas their dooty. Now I be gwaine to read the Book."

"I feels that uneasy now," whined the sufferer, in a voice where fear spoke
instead of hope, "but I s'pose 'tis a sign o' graace I should be?"

"Iss, 'tis. I've comed to tell 'e the truth, for 'tis ill as a man should
be blind to facts on what may be his last bed 'bove the airth. Listen to
this, my son, an' if theer's anything you doan't onderstand, arsk me an'
I'll thraw light 'pon it."

He read, with loud, slow voice, the fifty-fifth chapter of Isaiah, and that
glorious clarion of great promise gave Michael the lie and drowned his own
religious opinions as thunder drowns the croaking of marsh frogs; but he
knew it not. The brighter burned his own shining light, the blacker the
shadows it threw upon the future of all sinners.

As Tregenza finished and put down his Bible, the other spoke and quoted
eagerly:

"'Incline your ear an' come unto Me; fear, an' your sawl shall live!' Theer
do seem a hope in that if it ed'n awver-bold me thinkin' so?" he asked.

"That's like them Church o' Englanders, a tearin' wan text away from
t'others an' readin' it accordin' as they pleases. I'll expound it all to
wance, as a God-fearin' man did ought to treat the Scriptures."

Gray Michael's exposition illustrated nothing beyond his own narrow
intellectual limitations. His cold cloud of words obscured the prophet's
sunshine, and the light went out of the dying man's eyes, leaving only
alarm. He trembled on the brink of the horrid truth; he heard it thinly
veiled in the other's stern utterance, saw it looking from his hard blue
eyes. After the sermon, silence followed, broken by Vallack, who coughed
once and again, then raised himself and braced his heart to the tremendous
question that demanded answering.

"I wants your awn feelin' like, mister. I must have it. I caan't sleep no
more wi'out knawin' the best or worst. You be the justest man ever I seed
or heard tell on out the Scriptures. An' I wants 'e to gimme your opinion
like. S'pose you was the Judge an' I comed afore 'e an' the Books was theer
and you'd read 'em an' had to conclude 'pon 'em--?"

The fisherman reflected. Vallack's proposition did not strike him as
particularly grotesque. He felt it was a natural question, and he only
regretted that it had been put, because, though he had driven more than one
young man to righteousness along the path of terror, in this present case
the truth came too late save to add another horror to death. He believed in
all sincerity that as surely as the young man before him presently died, so
surely would he be damned, but he saw no particular object in stating the
fact. Such intelligence might tell upon Vallack's physical condition--a
thing of all others to be avoided, for Gray Michael held that the
sufferer's only chance of a happy eternity was increased and lengthened
opportunity in time.

"It ed'n for me to sit in the Judgment Seat, Albert. 'Vengeance is mine,
sayeth the Lard.' You must allus hold in mind that theer's mighty few saved
alive, best o' times. Many be called, but few chosen. Men go down to the
graave every second o' the day an' night, but if you could see the sawls a
streamin' away, thicker'n a cloud of starlings, you'd find a mass, black as
a storm, went down long, an' awnly just a summer cloud like o' the blessed
riz up. Hell's bigger'n Heaven; an' er's need to be, for Heaven's like to
be a lonely plaace, when all's said. I won't speak no more 'bout that
subjec'. 'Tis good fashion weather for 'e just now, an us'll hope as you
ban't gwaine to die for many a day."

"Say it out, mister, say it out. I knaws what you means. You reckons if I
gaws I'm lost."

"My poor sawl, justice is justice; an' the Lard's all for justice an' no
less. Theer's no favorin' wi' Him, Albert."

"But mightn't He favor the whole bilin' of us--good'n bad--cause He made
us?"

"Surely not. Wheer's the justice o' that? If He done that, how'd the godly
get their fair dues--eh? Be the righteous man to share God's Heaven wi'
publicans an' sinners? That ed'n justice anyhow. Don't fret, lad; tears
won't mend bad years. Bide quiet an' listen to me whiles I pray for 'e."

The man in the bed had grown very white, his eyes burned wildly out of a
shrunken face, and he gripped the sheets and shivered in pure physical
terror.

"I caan't die, I caan't die, not yet," he groaned, "pray to the Lard to
keep me from dyin' yet a while, mister. Arsk en to give me just a lil time,
'cause I'm that sorry for my scarlet sins."

Thereupon Michael knelt, clasped his hands so close that the bent
finger-joints grew white, raised his massive head upward and prayed with
his eyes closed. The intercession for life ended, he rose up, shook Vallack
by the hand, and so departed.

"Allus, when you've got the chance, bear the balm o' Gilead to a sinner's
couch," he said to his daughter as they walked home. "'Tis the duty of man
an' maid to spread the truth an' bring peace to the troubled, an' strength
to the weak-hearted, an' rise up them that fall."

A week later Mr. Tregenza heard how Albert Vallack had burst a blood-vessel
and died, fighting horribly with awful invisible terrors.

"Another sawl gone down into the Pit," he said. "I reckon fewer an' fewer
be chosen every year as the world do grow older an' riper for the last
fires."




CHAPTER SIX

FAIRY STORIES


Joan found her sketch waiting for her the next day when she reached Gorse
Point about eleven o'clock; and she also discovered John Barron with a
large canvas before him. He had constructed his picture and already made
many drawings for it. Now he knew exactly what he wanted, and he designed
to paint Joan standing looking out at a distant sea which would be far
behind the spectator of the picture. When she arrived, on a fine morning
and mild, Barron rose from his camp-stool, lifted up a little canvas which
stood framed at his side and presented it to her. The sketch in oils of the
"Anna" was cleverer than Joan could possibly know, but she took no small
delight in it and in the setting of rough deal brightly gilded.

"Sure 'tis truly good of 'e, sir!"

"You are more than welcome. Only let me say one word, Joan. Keep your
picture hidden away until Joe comes back from sea and marries you. From
what you tell me, your father might not like you to have this trifle, and I
should be very sorry to annoy him."

"I waddun' gwaine to show en," she confessed. "I shall store the picksher
away as you sez."

"You are wise. Now look here, doesn't this promise to be a big affair? The
gorse will be nearly as large as life, and I've been wondering ever so long
what I shall put in the middle; and whatever do you think I've thought of?"

"I dunnaw. That white pony us saw, p'raps?"

"No; something much prettier. How would it do, d'you think, if _you_
stood here in front of the gorse, just to fill up the middle piece of the
picture?"

"Oh, no, no! My faither--"

"You misunderstand, Joan. I don't want a picture of _you_, you know;
I'm going to paint the gorse. But if you just stood here, you'd make a sort
of contrast with your brown frock. Not a portrait at all, only just a
figure to help the color. Besides, you mustn't think I'm an artist, I
shouldn't go selling the picture or hanging it up for everybody to stare at
it. I'm certain your father wouldn't mind, and I'll tell him all about it
afterward, if you like."

She hesitated and reflected with trouble in her eyes, while Barron quietly
took the picture he had brought her and wrapped it up in a piece of paper.
His object was to remind her without appearing to do so of her obligation
to him, and Joan was clever enough to take the hint, though not clever
enough to see that it was an intentional one.

"Would it be a long job, sir?" she asked at length.

"Yes, it would; because I'm a slow painter and rather stupid. But I should
think it very, very kind of you. I'm not strong, you know, and I daresay
this is the last picture I shall ever paint."

"You ed'n strong, sir?"

"Not at all."

She was silent, and a great sympathy rose in her girl's heart, for frail
health always made her sad.

"You don't judge 'tis wrong then for a maiden to be painted in a picksher?"

"Certainly not, Joan. I should never suggest such a thing to you if I
thought it was in the least wrong. I _know_ it isn't wrong."

"I seed you issterday," she said, changing the subject suddenly, "but you
dedn see me, did 'e?"

"Yes, I did, and your father. He is a grand-looking man. By the way, Joan,
I think I never told you my name. I'm called John; that's short and simple,
isn't it?"

"Mister Jan," she said.

"No, not 'mister'--just 'Jan,'" he answered, adopting her pronunciation. "I
don't call you 'Miss' Joan."

She looked at once uncomfortable and pleased.

"We must be friends," the man continued calmly, "now you have promised to
let me put you here among the gorse bushes."

"Sure, I dunnaw 'bout the picksher, Mister Jan."

"Well, you would be doing me a great service. I want to paint you very much
and I think you will be kind."

He looked into her eyes with a steady, inquiring glance, and Joan
experienced a new emotion. Joe had never looked like that; nor yet her
father. She felt a will stronger than her own was busy with her
inclinations. Volition remained free, and yet she doubted whether under any
circumstances could she refuse his petition. As it happened, however, she
already liked the man. He was so respectful and polite. Moreover, she felt
sad to hear that he suffered in health. He would not ask her to do wrong
and she felt certain that she might trust him. A trembling wish and a
longing to comply with his request already mastered her mind.

"You'm sure--gospel truth--theer ed'n no harm in it?"

"Trust me."

In five minutes he had posed her as he wished and was drawing, while every
word he spoke put Joan more at her ease. The spice of adventure and secrecy
fired her and she felt the spirit of romance in her blood, though she knew
no name for it. Here was a secret delight knocking at the gray threshold of
every-day life--an adventure which might last for many days.

Barron, to touch the woman in her if he could, harped upon her gown and the
color of it, on her shoes and sun-bonnet--on everything but herself.
Presently he reaped his reward.

"Ban't you gwaine to paint my faace as well, Mister Jan."

"Yes, if I can. But your eyes are blue, and blue eyes are hard to paint
well. Yours are so very blue, Joan. Didn't Joe ever tell you that?"

"No--that's all fulishness."

"Nothing that's true is foolish. Now I'm going to make some little sketches
of you, so as to get each fold and shadow in your dress right."

Barron drew rapidly, and Joan--ever ready to talk to a willing listener
when her confidence was won--prattled on, turning the conversation as usual
to the matters she loved. Upon her favorite subjects she dared not open her
mouth at home, and even her lover refused to listen to the legends of the
land, but they were part of the girl's life notwithstanding, drawn into her
blood from her mother, a thousand times more real and precious than even
the promised heaven of Luke Gospeldom, not to be wholly smothered at any
time. Occasionally, indeed, uneasy fears that discussion of such concerns
was absolutely sinful kept her dumb for a week, then the religious wave
swept on, and Cornish folk-lore, with its splendor and romance, again
filled her heart and bubbled from her lips. Her little stories pleased
Barron mightily. Excitement heightened Joan's beauty. Her absolute
innocence at the age of seventeen struck him as remarkable. It seemed
curious that a child born in a cottage, where realities and facts are apt
to roughly front boy and girl alike, should know so little. She was a
beautiful, primitive creature, with strange store of fairy fable in her
mind; a treasury which brought color and joy into life. So she prattled,
and the man painted.

Pure artistic interest filled Barron's brain at this season; not a shadow
of passion made his pencil shaky or his eye dim; he began to learn the girl
with as little emotion as he had learned the gorse. He asked her to
unfasten the top button of her dress that he might see the lines of her
plump throat, and she complied without hesitation or ceasing from her
chatter. He noted where the tan on her neck faded to white under her dress,
and occupied himself with all the artistic problems she unconsciously
spread before him; while she merely talked, garnered in his questions and
comments on all she said, and found delight in the apparent interest and
entertainment her conversation afforded him.

"I seed a maggotty-pie [Footnote: _Maggotty-pie_--Magpie.] comin'
along this marnin'," she said. "Wan's bad an' a sign o' sorrer; but if you
spits twice over your left shoulder it doan't matter so much. But I be
better off than many maidens, 'cause I be saint-protected like."

"That's interesting, Joan."

"Faither'd be mad if I let on 'bout it to him, so I doesn't. He doan't
b'lieve much in dead saints, though Carnwall's full of 'em. Have 'e heard
tell 'bout Saint Madern?"

"Ah, the saint of the well?"

"Iss, an' the brook as runs by the Madern chapel."

"I sketched the little ruin of the baptistery some time ago."

"'Twas tho't a deal of wance, an' the holy water theer was reckoned better
for childern than any doctor's traade as ever was. My mother weer a Madern
cheel; an' 'er ordained I should be as well, an' when faither was to sea,
as fell out just 'pon the right day, mother took me up theer. That was my
awn mother as is dead. More folks b'lieved in the spring then than what do
now, 'cause that was sebenteen year agone. An' from bein' a puny cheel I
grawed a bonny wan arter dipping. But some liked the crick-stone better for
lil baabies than even the Madern brook."

"Mên-an-tol that stone is called?"

"So 'tis, awnly us knaws it as the crick-stone. Theer's a big hole in en,
an' if a cheel was passed through nine times runnin', gwaine 'gainst the
way of the sun every time, it made en as strong as a lion. An' 'tis good
for grawn people tu, awnly folks is afeared to try now 'cause t'others
laugh at en. But I reckon the Madern brook's holy water still. An' theer's
wonnerful things said 'bout the crick-stones an' long stones tu. A many of
'em stands round 'bout these paarts."

"D'you know Mên Scryfa--the stone with the writing on it? That's a famous
long stone, up beyond Lanyon Farmhouse."

"I've seed en, 'pon the heath. 'Tis butivul an' solemn an' still, all aloan
out theer in a croft to itself. I trapsed up-long wan day an' got beside of
en an' ate a pasty wi' Joe. But Joe chid me, an' said 'tweer a heathenish
thing sticked theer by the Phoenicians, as comed for tin in Solomon's
times."

"Don't you believe that, Joan. Mên Scryfa marks the memory of a good
Briton--one who knew King Arthur, very likely. I love the old stones too.
You are right to love them. They are landmarks in time, books from which we
may read something of a far, fascinating past."

"Iss, but I ded'n tell 'e all 'bout the Madern waters. The best day for 'em
be the fust Sunday in May; an' come that, the mothers did use to gaw up to
the chapel--dozens of 'em--wi' poor lil baabies. They dipped 'em naked in
the brook, an' 'twas just a miracle for rashes and braggety legs and sich
like. An', arterward, the mothers made offerin's to the saint. 'Twas awnly
the thot like, but folks reckoned the saint 'ud take the will for the act,
'cause poor people couldn' give a saint nothin' worth namin'."

Barren had heard of the votive offerings left by the faithful in past days
at St. Madron's shrine, but felt somewhat surprised to find the practice
dated back to a time so recent as Joan's infancy. He let her talk on, for
the subject was evidently dear to the girl.

"And what did the mothers give the saint?"

"Why, rags mostly. Just a rag tored off a petticoat, or some sich thing.
They hanged 'em up around about on the thorn bushes to shaw as they'd a
done more for the good saint if they'd had the power. An' theer's another
marvelous thing as washin' in thicky waters done: it kep' the fairies
off--the bad fairies, I mean. 'Cause theer'm gude an' bad piskeys, same as
gude an' bad men folks."

"You believe in fairies, Joan?"

She looked at him shyly, but he had apparently asked for information and
was not in the least amused.

"I dunnaw. P'raps. Iss, I do, then! Many wiser'n me do b'lieve in 'em. You
arsk the tinners--them as works deep. They knaws; they've 'eard the
knackers an' gathorns many a time, an' some's seen 'em. But the mine
fairies be mostly wicked lil humpetty-backed twoads as'll do harm if they
can; an' the buccas is onkind to fishermen most times; an' 'tis said they
used to bide in the shape of a cat by day. But theer be land fairies as is
mighty good-hearted if a body behaves seemly."

"I believe in the fairies too," said Barren gravely, "but I've never seen
one."

"Do 'e now, Mister Jan! Then I'm sure theer is sich things. I ne'er seed
wan neither; but I'd love to. Some maids has vanished away an' dwelt 'mong
'em for many days an' then comed home. Theer's Robin o' the Carn as had a
maiden to work for en. You may have heard the tale?"

"No, never."

"'Tis a fine tale; an' the gal had a braave time 'mongst the lil people
till she disobeyed 'em an' found herself back 'mongst men folk agin. But in
coorse some of them--the piskeys, I mean--works for men folk themselves. My
gran'mother Chirgwin, when she was very auld, seed 'em a threshin' corn in
a barn up Drift. They was tiny fellers wi' beards an' red faaces, an' they
handled the flails cruel clever. Then, arter a bit, they done the threshin'
an' was kickin' the short straw out the grain, which riz a gert dust; an'
the piskeys all beginned sneezin'. An' my gran'mother, as was peepin'
through the door unbeknown to 'em, forgot you must never speak to a piskey,
an' sez, 'God bless 'e, hi men!' 'cause that's what us allus sez if a body
sneezes. Then they all took fright an' vanished away in the twinkle of a
eye. Which must be true, 'cause my awn gran'mother tawld it. But they ded'n
leave the farm, though nobody seed 'em again, for arter that 'tis said as
the cows gived a wonnerful shower o' milk, better'n ever was knawn before.
An' I 'sure 'e I'd dearly like to be maiden to good piskeys if they'd let
me work for 'em."

"Ah, I'm certain you would suit them well, Joan; and they would be lucky to
get you, I think; but I hope they won't go and carry you off until I've
done with you, at any rate."

She laughed, and he bid her put down her hand from her eyes and rest. He
had brought some oranges for her, but judged the friendship had gone far
enough, and first decided not to produce them. Half an hour later, however,
when the sitting was ended, he changed his mind.

"Can you come to-morrow, Joan? I am entirely in your hands, remember, and
must consider your convenience always. In fact, I am your servant and shall
wait your pleasure at all times."

Joan felt proud and rather important.

"I'll come at 'leben o'clock to-morrow, but I doubt I caan't be here next
day, Mister Jan."

"Thank you very much. To-morrow at eleven will do splendidly. By the way, I
have an orange here--two, in fact. I thought we might be thirsty. Will you
take one to eat going home?"

He held out the fruit and she took it.

"My! What a butivul orange!"

"Good-by until to-morrow, Joan; and thank you for your great kindness to a
very friendless man. You'll never be sorry for it, I'm sure."

He bowed gravely and took off his cap, then turned to his easel; and she
blushed with a lively pleasure. She had seen gentlemen take off their hats
to ladies, but no man had ever paid her that respect until then, and it
seemed good to her. She marched off with her picture and her orange, but
did not eat the fruit until out of sight of Gorse Point.

The man painting there already began to fill a space in Joan's thoughts. He
knew so much and yet was glad to learn from her. He never laughed or talked
lightly. He put her in mind of her father for that reason, but then his
heart was soft, and he loved Nature and beautiful things, and believed in
fairies and spoke no ill of anybody. Joan speculated as to how these
meetings could be kept a secret and came to the conclusion it would not be
difficult to hide them. Then, reaching home, she hid her picture behind the
pig-sty until opportunity offered for taking it indoors to her own bedroom
unobserved.

As for John Barren, he felt kindly enough toward his model. He could hold
himself with an iron hand when he pleased, and proposed that the growing
friendship should ripen into a fine work of art and no more. But what might
go to the making of the picture could not be foretold. He would certainly
allow nothing to check inspiration or stand between him and the very best
he had power to achieve. No sacrifice could be too great for Art, and
Barron, who was now awake and alive for an achievement, would, according to
his rule, count nothing hard, nothing impossible that might add a grain of
value to the work. His own skill and Joan's beauty were brought in contact
and he meant to do everything a man might do to make the result immortal.
But the human instruments necessary to such work counted for nothing, and
their personal prosperity and welfare would weigh no more with him than the
future of the brushes which he might use, after he had done with them.




CHAPTER SEVEN

UNCLE CHIRGWIN


Joan's first announcement upon the following morning was a regret that the
sitting must be short.

"We'm mighty busy, come wan thing an' another," she said. "Mother's gwaine
to Penzance wi' my brother to buy his seafarin' kit; and Uncle Chirgwin, as
keeps a farm up Drift, be comin' to dinner, which he ain't done this long
time; an' faither may by chance be home tu, so like as not, for the first
bwoats be tackin' back from the islands a'ready."

"You shall stop just as short a time as you choose, Joan. It was very good
of you to come at all under these circumstances," declared the artist.

"Us be fine an' busy when uncle comes down-long, an' partickler this time,
'cause theer've bin a differ'nce of 'pinion 'bout--'bout a matter betwixt
him and faither, but now he's wrote through the post to say as he'm comin',
so 'tis all right, I s'pose, an' us'll have to give en a good dinner
anyways."

"Of course you must," admitted Barren, working steadily the while.

"He'm a dear sawl, an' I likes en better'n anybody in the world, I think,
'cept faither. But he's easier to please than faither, an' so humble as a
beggar-man. An' I wants to make some cakes for en against tea-time, 'cause
when he comes, he bides till candle-lighting or later."

Presently the artist bid her rest for a short while, and her thoughts
reverted to him and the picture.

"I hope as you'm feelin' strong an' no worser, Mister Jan," she said
timidly.

He was puzzled for a moment, then recollected that he had mentioned his
health to her.

"Thank you very much for asking, Joan. It was good and thoughtful. I am no
worse--rather better if anything, now I come to think about it. Your
Cornish air is kind to me, and when the sun shines I am happy."

"How be the picksher farin'?"

"I get on well, I think."

"'Tis cruel clever of 'e, Mister Jan. An' you'll paint me wi' the fuzz all
around?"

"That is what I hope to do; a harmony in brown and gold."

"You'll get my likeness tu, I s'pose, same as the photograph man done it
last winter to Penzance? Me an' Joe was took side by side, an' folks
reckoned 'twas the moral of us, specially when the gen'leman painted Joe's
hair black an' mine yeller for another shillin' cost."

"It must have been very excellent."

"Iss, 'twas for sartain."

"What did Mr. Tregenza say of it?"

"Well, faither, he'm contrary to sich things, as I tawld 'e, Mister Jan.
Faither said Joe'd better by a deal keep his money in his purse; but he let
me have the picksher, an' 'tis nailed up in a lil frame, what Joe made, at
home in the parlor."

She stopped a moment and sighed, then spoke again.

"Faither's a wonnerful God-fearin' man, sure 'nough."

"Is he a God-loving man too, Joan?"

"I dunnaw. That ed'n 'sackly the same, I s'pose?"

"As different as fear and love. I'm not an atom frightened of God
myself--no more than I am of you."

"Lard! Mister Jan."

"Why should I be? You are not frightened of the air you breathe--yet that
is part of God; you are not frightened of the gold gorse or the blue
sky--yet they are part of God too. God made you--you are part of God--a
deliberate manifestation of Him. What's the use of being frightened? You
and I can only know God by the shapes He takes--by the bluebells and the
ferns and the larks in the sky, and the rabbits and wild things."

His effort to inspire the girl with Nature-worship, though crudely cast in
a fashion most likely to attract her, yet failed just then, and failed
ludicrously. Her mind comprehended barely enough to accept his idea in a
sense suggested by her acquaintance with fable, and when he instanced a
rabbit as an earthly manifestation of the Everlasting, she felt she could
cap the example from her own store of knowledge.

"I reckon I sees what you'm meanin', Mister Jan. Theer's things us calls
witch-hares in these paarts up-long. The higher-quarter people have seed
'em 'fore now; nothin' but siller bullets will kill 'em. They goes
loppettin' about down lawnly lanes on moonlight nights, an' they draws
folks arter 'em. But if you could kill wan of 'em 'tis said as they'd turn
into witches theer an' then. So you means that God A'-mighty' takes shaapes
sometimes same as they witches do, doan't 'e?"

"Not quite that, Joan. What I want you to know is that the great Being you
call God is nearer to you here, on Gorse Point, than in the Luke Gospelers'
meeting-house, and He takes greater delight in a bird's song than in all
your father's prayers and sermons put together. That is because the great
Being taught the bird to sing Himself, but He never taught your father to
pray."

"I dunnaw 'sackly what you means, Mister Jan, but I judges you ban't so
religious like as what faither is."

"Religion came from God to man, Joan, because man wanted it and couldn't
get on comfortably without it; but theology--if you know what that
means--man invented for himself. Religion is the light; theology is the
candlestick. Never quarrel with any man's candlestick as long as you can
see his light burning bravely. Mr. Tregenza thinks all men are mistaken but
the Luke Gospelers--so you told me. But if that is the case, what becomes
of all your good Cornish saints? They were not Luke Gospelers--at least I
don't think they were."

Joan frowned over this tremendous problem, then dismissed it for the
pleasanter and simpler theme John Barron's last remark suggested.

"Them saints was righteous men anyhow, an' they worked miracles tu, so it
ban't no gude sayin' they wasn't godly in their ways, the whole boilin' of
'em. Theer's St. Piran, St. Michael, St. Austell, St. Blazey, St. Buryan,
St. Ives, St. Sennen, St. Levan, an' a many more, I could call home if I
was to think. Did 'e ever hear tell 'bout St. Neot, Mister Jan?"

"'No, Joan; I'm afraid I don't know much about him."

"Not 'bout they feesh?"

"Tell me, while you rest a minute or two."

"'Tis a holy story, an' true as any Bible tale, I should guess. St. Neot
had a well, an' wan day he seed three feesh a swimmin' in it an' he was
'mazed to knaw how they comed theer. So a angel flew down an' tawld en
that they was put theer for his eatin', but he must never draw out more'n
wan at a time. Then he'd all us find three when he comed again. An' so he
did; but wance he failed sick an' his servant had to look arter his vittles
meantime. He was a man by the name of Barius, an' he judged as maybe a
change of eatin' might do the saint good. So he goes an' takes two o' them
feesh 'stead o' wan as the angel said. An' he b'iled wan feesh, an' fried
t'other, an' took 'em to St. Neot; an' when he seed what his man been
'bout, he was flustered, I tell 'e. Then the saint up and done a marvelous
straange thing, for he flinged them feesh back in the well, just as they
was, and began praayin' to the Lard to forgive his man. An' the feesh
comed alive ag'in and swimmed around, though Barius had cleaned 'em, I
s'pose, an' took the guts out of 'em an' everything. Then the chap just
catched wan feesh proper, an' St. Neot ate en, an' grawed well by sundown.
So he was a saint anyways."

"You can't have a miracle without a saint, of course, Joan?"

"Or else the Lard. But I'll hold in mind what you sez 'bout Him bein' hid
in flowers an' birds an' sich like, 'cause that's a butivul thing to knaw."

"And in the stars and the sun and the moon, Joan; and in the winds and
clouds. See how I've got on to-day. I don't think I ever did so much work
in an hour before."

She looked and blushed to note her brown frock and shoes.

"You've done a deal more to them fuzzes than what you have to me,
seemin'ly," she said.

"That's because the gorse is always here and you are not. I work at the
gorse morning after morning, when the sun is up, until my fingers ache.
You'll see great changes in the picture of yourself soon though."

But she was not satisfied, of course misunderstanding the unfinished work.

"You mustn't say anything yet, you know, Joan," added the artist, seeing
her pouting lips.

"But--but you've drawed me as flat as a cheeld, an' I be round as a wummon,
ban't I?" she said, holding out her hands that he might see her slight
figure. Her blue eyes were clouded, for she deemed that he had put an
insult upon her budding womanhood. Barren showed no sign of his enjoyment,
but explained as clearly as possible that she was looking at a thing wholly
unfinished, indeed scarce begun.

"You might as well grumble with me for not painting your fingers or your
face, Joan. I told you I was a slow artist; only be patient; I'm going to
do all fitting honor to every scrap of you, if only you will let me."

"Warmer words had come to his lips, but he did not suffer them to pass.
Then the girl's beautiful face broke into a smile again.

"I be nigher eighteen than sebenteen, you knaw, Mister Jan. But, coorse, I
hadn't no bizness to talk like that to 'e, 'cause what do I knaw 'bout sich
things?"

"You shan't see the picture again till it is finished, Joan. It was my
fault for showing it to you like that, and you had every right to protest.
Now you must go, for it's long past twelve o'clock."

"I'm afeared I caan't come to-morrer."

"As you please. I shall be here every day, ready and only too glad to see
you."

"An'--an' you ban't cross wi' me for speakin' so rude, Mister Jan?"

"Cross, Joan? No, I'm never cross with anybody but myself. I couldn't be
cross with my kind little friend if I tried to be."

He shook hands; it was the first occasion that he had done so, and she
blushed. His hand was cold and thin, and she heard one of the bones in it
give a little crack as he held her palm within his own for the briefest
space of time. Then, as usual, the moment after he had said "good-by," he
appeared to become absolutely unconscious of her presence, and returned to
his picture.

Joan's mind dwelt much upon the artist after she had departed, and every
train of reflection came back to the last words Barron spoke that morning.
He had called her his kind little friend. It was very wonderful, Joan
thought, and a statement not to be explained at all. Her stepmother's voice
cut these pleasant memories sharply, and she returned home to find that
Uncle Chirgwin had already arrived--a fact his old gray horse, tethered in
the orchard, and his two-wheeled market cart, drawn up in the side-lane,
testified to before Mrs. Tregenza announced it.

"Out again, of coorse, just because you knawed I was to be drove off my
blessed legs to-day. I'll tell your faither of 'e, so I will. Gals like you
did ought to be chained 'longside theer work till 'tis done."

Uncle Chirgwin sat by the fireside with a placid if bored expression on his
round face. His hands were folded on his stomach; his short legs were stuck
out before him; his head was quite bald, his color high, his gray eyes
weak, though they had some laughter hidden in them. His double chin was
shaved, but a very white bristle of stubbly whisker surrounded it and
ascended to where all that remained of his hair stuck, like two patches of
cotton wool, above his ears. The old man wore a suit of gray tweed and
blinked benignly through a pair of spectacles. He had already heard enough
of Mrs. Tregenza's troubles to last some time, and turned with pleasure to
Joan as she entered. So hearty indeed was the greeting and a kiss which
accompanied it that his niece felt the displeasure which her uncle had
recorded by post upon the occasion of her engagement to Mary Chirgwin's
former sweetheart existed no more.

"My ivers! a braave, bowerly maid you'm grawin', sure 'nough! Joan'll be a
wummon 'fore us can look round, mother."

"Iss--an' a fine an' lazy wummon tu. I wish you could make her work like
what Mary does up Drift."

"Well, I dunnaw. You see there's all sorts of girls, same as plants an'
'osses an' cetera. Some's for work, some's for shaw. You 'specks a flower
to be purty, but you doan't blame a 'tater plant 'cause 'e ed'n particular
butivul. Same wi' 'osses, an' wi' gals. Joan's like that chinee plate 'pon
the bracket, wi' the pickshers o' Saltash Burdge 'pon en, an' gold writin'
under; an' Mary's like that pie-dish, what you put in the ubben a while
back. Wan's for shaw, t'other's for use--eh?"

"Gwan! you'm jokin', Uncle Thomas!" said Joan.

"An' a poor joke tu, so 'tis. You'd turn any gal's 'ead wi' your stuff,
Chirgwin. Wheer's the gude of a fuzz-pole o' yeller hair an' a pair o' blue
eyes stuck 'pon top of a idle, good-for-nothin' body? Maidens caan't live
by looks in these paarts, an' they'll find theerselves in trouble mighty
quick if they tries to."

Uncle Chirgwin instantly admitted that Mrs. Tregenza had the better of the
argument. He was a simple man with a soft heart and no brains worth naming.
Most people laughed at him and loved him. As sure as he went to Penzance on
market-day, he was cordially greeted and made much of, and robbed. People
suspected that his shrewd, black-eyed niece stood between him and absolute
misfortune. She never let him go to market without her if she could help
it; for, on those infrequent occasions when he jogged to town with his gray
horse and cart alone, he always went with a great trust of the world in his
heart and endeavored to conduct the sale of farm produce in the spirit of
Christianity, which was magnificent but not business. Mr. Chirgwin's simple
theories had kept him a poor man; yet the discovery, often repeated, that
his knowledge of human nature was bad, never imbittered him, and he mildly
persisted in his pernicious system of trusting everybody until he found he
could not; unlike his neighbors who trusted nobody until they found that
they could. The farmer had blazed with indignation when Joe Noy flung over
Mary Chirgwin because she would not become a Luke Gospeler. But the matter
was now blown over, for the jilted girl, though the secret bitterness of
her sorrow still bred much gall in her bosom, never paraded it or showed a
shadow of it in her dark face. Uncle Thomas greatly admired Mary and even
feared her; but he loved Joan, for she was like her dead mother outwardly
and like himself in character: a right Chirgwin, loving sunshine and
happiness, herself sunshiny and happy.

"'Pears I've comed the wrong day, Joan," he said presently, when Mrs.
Tregenza's back was turned, "but now I be here, you must do with me as you
can."

"Mother's gwaine to town wi' Tom bimebye; then me an' you'll have a talk,
uncle, wi'out nothin' to let us. You'm lookin' braave, me auld dear."

He liked a compliment, and anticipated pleasure from a quiet afternoon with
his niece. She bustled about, as usual, to make up for lost time; and
presently, when the cloth was laid, walked to the cottage door to see if
her father's lugger was at its moorings or in sight. Meantime Mrs.
Tregenza, having brought forth dinner from the oven, called at the back
door to her son in a voice harsh and shrill beyond customary measure, as
became her exceptional tribulations.

"Come in, will 'e, an' ait your food, bwoy. Theer ed'n no call to kick out
they boots agin' the pig's 'ouse because I be gwaine to buy new wans for 'e
presently."

Fired by a word which she had heard from John Barron, that flowers became
the house as well as the garden, Joan plucked an early sprig of pink ribe
and the first buds of wall-flower before returning to the kitchen. These
she put in a jug of water and planted boldly upon the dinner-table as Mrs.
Tregenza brought out a pie.

"Butivul, sure 'nough," said Mr. Chirgwin, drawing in his chair. His eye
was on the pie-dish, but Joan thought he referred to her bouquet.

"Lard! what'll 'e do next? Take they things off the table to wance, Joan."

"But Uncle Thomas sez they'm butivul," she pleaded.

"They be pleasant," admitted Mr. Chirgwin, "but bloody-warriors [Footnote:
_Bloody-warrior_--Wall-flower.] be out o' plaace 'pon the
dinner-table. I was 'ludin' to this here. You do brown a 'tater to rights,
mother."

Mrs. Tregenza's shepherd's pies had a reputation, and anybody eating of one
without favorable comment was judged to have made a hole in his manners.
Now she helped the steaming delicacy and sighed as she sat down before her
own ample share.

"Lard knaws how I done it to-day. 'Tis just a enstance how some things
comes nachrul to some people. You wants a light hand wi' herbs an' to knaw
your ubben. Get the brandy, Joan. Uncle allus likes the edge off drinkin'
water."

The Tregenzas were teetotalers, but a bottle of brandy for medicinal
purposes occupied the corner of a certain cupboard.

"You puts it right, mother. 'Tis just the sharpness I takes off. I can't
drink no beer nowadays, though fond o' it, 'cause 'tis belly-vengeance
stuff arter you gets past a certain time o' life. But I'd as soon have
tea."

"That's bad to drink 'long wi' vlaish," said Mrs. Tregenza. "Tea turns
mayte leather-hard an' plagues the stomach cruel, as I knaws to my cost."

They ate in silence a while, then, having expressed and twice repeated a
wish that Mary could be taught to make shepherd's pies after the rare
fashion of his hostess, Mr. Chirgwin turned to Tom.

"So you'm off for a sailor bwoy, my lad?"

"Iss, uncle, an' mother gwaine to spend fi' puns o' money on my kit."

"By Golles! be she now? I lay you'll be smart an' vitty!"

"That he will!" said Joan, but Mrs. Tregenza shook her head.

"I did sadly want en to be a landsman an' 'prenticed to some good body in
bizness. It's runnin' 'gainst dreams as I had 'fore the bwoy was born, an'
the voice I heard speakin' by night arter I were churched by the Luke
Gosp'lers. But you knaw Michael. What's dreams to him, nor yet voices?"

"The worst paart 'bout 'em, if I may say it, is that they'm so uncommon
well acquainted like wi' theer awn virtues. I mean the Gosp'lers an' all
chapel-members likewise. It blunts my pleasure in a good man to find he
knaws how good he is. Same as wan doan't like to see a purty gal tossin'
her head tu high."

"You caan't say no sich thing o' Michael, I'm sure," remonstrated Mrs.
Tregenza instantly; "he'm that modest wi' his righteousness as can be. I've
knawn en say open in prayer, 'fore the whole chapel, as he's no better'n a
crawlin' worm. An' if he's a worm, what's common folks like you an' me?
Awnly Michael doan't seem to take 'count in voices an' dreams, but I knaws
they'm sent a purpose an' not for nort."

Mr. Chirgwin admitted his own ridiculous religious insignificance as
contrasted with Gray Michael. Indeed the comparison, so little in his
favor, amused him extremely. He sipped his brandy and water and enjoyed a
treacle-pudding which followed the pie. Then, when Joan was clearing up and
Mrs. Tregenza had departed to prepare for her visit to Penzance, Uncle
Thomas began to puff out his cheeks, and blow, and frown, and look uneasily
to the right and left--actions invariably performed when he contemplated
certain monetary achievements of which he was only too fond. The sight of
Mary's eyes upon him had often killed such indiscretions in the bud, but
she was not present just then, so, with further furtive glances, he brought
out his purse, opened it, and found a half-sovereign which reposed alone in
the splendor of a separate compartment. Uncle Chirgwin then beckoned to
Tom, who had gone into the garden till his mother should be ready to start.

"Good speed to 'e, bwoy," he said, "an' may the Lard watch over 'e by land
an' sea. Take you this lil piece o' money to buy what you've a mind to; an'
knaw you've got a auld man's blessin' 'long wi' it."

"Mother," said Tom, a minute later, "uncle have gived me a bit o' gawld!"

She took the coin from him and her eyes rested on it lovingly while the
outlines of her face grew softer and she moistened her lips.

"First gawld's ever I had," commented Tom.

"You'm 'mazin' generous wi' your moneys, uncle, an' I thank 'e hearty for
the bwoy. Mighty good of 'e--so much money to wance," said Thomasin,
showing more gratification than she knew.

"I wants en to be thrifty," answered the old man, very wisely. "You knaws
how hard it is to teach young people the worth o' money."

"Ay, an' some auld wans! Blest if I doan't think you'd give your head away
if 'e could. But I'll take this here half-suvrin' for Tom. 'Tis a nest-egg
as he shall add to as he may."

Tom did not foresee this arrangement, and had something to say as he
tramped off with his mother to town; but though he could do more with her
and get more out of her than anybody else in the world, money was a subject
concerning which Mrs. Tregenza always had her way. She understood it and
loved it and allowed no interference from anybody, Michael alone excepted.
But he cared not much for money and was well content to let his wife hold
the purse; yet when he did occasionally demand an account, it was always
forthcoming to the uttermost farthing, and he fully believed what other
people told him that Thomasin could make a sixpenny-piece go further than
any other woman in Newlyn.

Mother and son presently departed; while Mr. Chirgwin took off his coat,
lighted his pipe, and walked with Joan round about the orchard. He foretold
great things for the plums, now in full flower; he poked the pigs with his
stick and spoke encouragingly of their future also. Then he discussed
Joan's prospects and gladdened her heart by telling her the past must be
let alone and need never be reverted to again.

"Mary's gettin' over it tu," he said, "least-ways I think she is. Her knaws
wheer to look for comfort, bless her. Us must all keep friendly for life's
not long enough to do 'nough good in, I allus says, let alone the doin' o'
bad."

Then he discussed Joe Noy, and Joan was startled to find, when she came to
think seriously upon the subject, that though but a week and three days had
passed since she bid her lover "good-by," yet the picture of him in her
mind already grew a trifle dim, and the prospect of his absence for a year
held not the least sorrow in it for her.

Presently, after looking to his horse, Uncle Thomas hinted at forty winks,
if the same would be quite convenient, and Joan, settling him with some
approach to comfort upon n little horsehair sofa in the parlor, turned her
attention to the making of saffron cakes for tea.




CHAPTER EIGHT

THE MAKING OF PROGRESS


John Barron held strong theories about the importance of the mental
condition when work was in hand. Once fairly engaged upon a picture, he
painted very fast, labored without cessation, and separated himself as far
as might be from every outside influence. No new interests were suffered to
intrude upon his mind; no distractions of any sort, intellectual or
otherwise, were permitted to occupy even those leisure intervals which of
necessity lay between the periods of his work. On the present occasion he
merely fed and slept and dwelt solitary, shunning society of every sort and
spending as little time in Newlyn as possible. Fortunately for his
achievement the weather continued wonderfully fine and each successive day
brought like conditions of sunshine and color, light and air. This
circumstance enabled him to proceed rapidly, and another fact also
contributed to progress; the temperature kept high and the cow-byre,
wherein Barren stored his implements and growing picture, proved so
well-built and so snug withal that on more than one occasion he spent the
entire night there. Sweet brown bracken filled a manger, and of this he
pulled down sufficient quantities to make, with railway rugs, an ample bed.
The outdoor life appeared to suit his health well; some color had come to
his pale cheeks; he felt considerably stronger in body and mentally
invigorated by the strain of work now upon him.

But though he turned his back on his fellow-men they sought him out, and
rumors at length grew to a certainty that Barron was busy painting
somewhere on the cliffs beyond Mousehole. Everybody supposed he had
abandoned his ambition to get a portrait of Joan Tregenza; but one man was
in his confidence: Edmund Murdoch. The young artist had been useful to
Barron. On many occasions he tramped out from Newlyn with additions to the
scanty larder kept at the cow-byre. He would bring hard-boiled eggs,
sandwiches, bottles of soda-water and whisky; and once he arrived at six
o'clock in the morning with a pony cart in which was a little oil stove.
Barron had confided in Murdoch, but begged he would let it be known that he
courted no society for the present. As the work grew he spent more and more
time upon it. He explained to his friend quite seriously that he was
painting the gorse, but that Joan Tregenza had consented to fill a part of
the picture--a statement which amused the younger artist not a little.

"But the gorse is extraordinary, I'll admit. You must have worked without
ceasing. She will be exquisite. Where shall you get the blue for her eyes?"

"Out of the sky and the sea."

"Does the girl inspire you herself, John? I swear something has. This is
going to be great."

"It's going to be true, that's all. No, Joan is a dear child, but her
body's no more than a perfect casket to a commonplace little soul. She
talks a great deal and I like nothing better than to listen; for although
what she says is naught, yet her manner of saying it does not lack charm.
Her voice is wonderfully sweet--it comes from her throat like a
wood-pigeon's, and education has not ruined her diction."

"She's as shy as any wood-pigeon, too--we all know that; and you've done a
clever thing to tame her."

"God forbid that I should tame her. We met and grew friendly as wild things
both. She is a child of Nature, her mind is as pure as the sea. Moreover,
Joan walks saint-guided. Folklore and local twaddle does not appeal
overmuch to me, as you know, yet the stories drop prettily from her lips
and I find pleasure in listening."

Murdoch whistled.

"By Jove! I never heard you so enthusiastic, so positive, so personally
alive and awake and interested. Don't fall in love with the girl before you
know it."

To this warning Barron made a curious reply.

"Everything depends on my picture. You know my rule of life; to sacrifice
all things to mood. I shall do so here. The best I can do must be done
whatever the cost."

A shadow almost sinister lay behind the utterance, yet young Murdoch could
not fathom it. Barren spoke in his usual slow, unaffected tones, and
painted all the time; for the conversation took place on Gorse Point.

"Not sure if I quite understand you, old man," said Murdoch.

"It doesn't matter in the least if you don't, my dear fellow."

His words were hardly civil, but the tone in which Barren spoke robbed the
utterance of any offense.

"All you need do," he continued, "is to keep silent in the interests of art
and of Joan. I don't want her precious visits to me to get back to her
father's ears or they will cease, and I don't wish to do her a bad turn in
her home, for I owe her a great debt of gratitude. If men ask what I'm
doing, lie to them and beg them not to disturb me, for the sake of Art.
What a glint the east wind gives to color! Yet this is hardly to be called
an east wind, so soft and balmy does it keep."

"Well, you seem to be the better for your work, at any rate. You're getting
absolutely fat. If Newlyn brings you health as well as fame, I hope you'll
retract some of the many hard things you have said about it."

"It has brought me an interest, and for that at any rate I am grateful.
Good-by. I shall probably come down to-night, despite the fact that you
have replenished my stores so handsomely."

Murdoch started homeward and met Joan Tregenza upon the way. She had given
Barron one further sitting after Uncle Chirgwin's call at Newlyn, but since
the last occasion, and for a period of two days, chance prevented the girl
from paying him another visit. Now she arrived, however, as early as
half-past ten, and Murdoch, while he passed her on the hill from Mousehole,
envied his friend the morning's work before him.

Joan was very hot and very apologetic upon her arrival.

"I began to fear you had forgotten me," the artist said, but she was loud
in protestations to the contrary.

"No, no, Mister Jan. I've fretted 'bout not comin' up like anything; ay,
an' I've cried of a night 'cause I thot you'd be reckoning I waddun comin'
no more. But 'tweern't my doin' no ways."

"You hadn't forgotten me?"

"Indeed an' I hadn't. An' I'd be sorrerful if I thot you thot so."

She walked to the old position before the gorse and fell naturally into it,
speaking the while.

"Tis this way: mother's been bad wi' faace ache arter my brother Tom went
to sea wi' faither. An' mother grizzled an' worrited herself reg'lar ill
an' stopped in bed two days an' kep on whinin' 'bout what I was to do if
she died; cause she s'posed she was gwained to. But so soon as Tom comed
off his first trip, mother cheered wonnerful, an' riz up to see to en, an'
hear tell 'bout how he fared on the water."

"Your head a wee bit higher, Joan. Well, I'm thankful to see you again. I
was getting very, very lonely, I promise you. And the more I thought about
the picture the more unhappy I became. There's such a lot to do and only
such a clumsy hand to do it. The better I know you, Joan, the harder become
the problems you set me. How am I going to get your soul looking out of
your eyes, d'you think? How am I to make those who may see my picture some
day--years after you and I are both dead and gone, Joan--fall in love with
you?"

"La! I dunnaw, Mister Jan."

"Nor do I. How shall I make the picture so true that generations unborn
will delight in the portrait and deem it great and fine?"

"I dunnaw."

"And yet you deserve it, Joan, for I don't think God ever made anything
prettier."

She blushed and looked softly at him, but took no alarm; for though such a
compliment had never before been paid her, yet, as Barron spoke the words,
slowly, critically, without enthusiasm or any expression of pleasure on his
face, they had little power to alarm. He merely stated what he seemed to
regard as a fact. There was almost a suggestion of irritation in his
utterance, as though his model's rare beauty only increased his own
artistic difficulties; and, perhaps fearing from her smile that she found
undue pleasure in his statement, he added to it:

"I don't say that to natter you, Joan. I hate compliments and never pay
them. I told you, remember, that your wrists were a thought too big."

"You needn't be sayin' it over an' over, Mister Jan," she answered, her
smile changing to a pout.

"But you wouldn't like me any more if I stopped telling you the truth. We
have agreed to love what is true and to worship Mother Nature because she
always speaks the truth."

The girl made no answer, and he went on working for a few moments, then
spoke again.

"I'm selfish, Joan, and think more of my picture than I do of my little
model. Put down your arm and take a good rest. I tried holding my hand over
my eyes yesterday to see how long I could do so without wearying myself. I
found that three minutes was quite enough, but I have often kept you posed
for five."

"It hurted my arm 'tween the shoulder an' elbow a lil bit at first, but
I've grawed used to it now."

"How ever shall I repay you, kind Joan, for all your trouble and your long
walks and pretty stories?"

"I doan't need no pay. If 'twas a matter o' payin', 'twould be a wrong
thing to do, I reckon. Theer's auld Bascombe up Paul--him wi' curls o' long
hair an' gawld rings in's ears. Gents pays en to take his likeness; an'
theer's gals make money so, more'n wan; but faither says 'tis a heathenish
way of livin' an' not honest. An'--an' I'd never let nobody paint me else
but you, Mister Jan, 'cause you'm different."

"Well, you make me a proud man, Joan. I'm afraid I must be a poor
substitute for Joe."

He noticed she had never mentioned her sweetheart since their early
interviews, and wanted to ascertain of what nature was Joan's affection for
the sailor. He did not yet dream how faint a thing poor Joe had shrunk to
be in Joan's mind, or how the present episode in her life was dwarfing and
dominating all others, present and past.

Nor did the girl's answer to his remark enlighten him.

"In coorse you an' Joe's differ'nt as can be. You knaws everything
seemin'ly an' be a gen'le-man; Joe's only a seafarin' man, an' 'e doan't
knaw much 'cept what he's larned from faither. But Joe used to say a sight
more'n what you do, for all that."

"I like to hear you talk, Joan; perhaps Joe liked to hear himself talk.
Most men do. But, you see, the things you have told me are pleasant to me
and they were not to Joe, because he didn't believe in them. Don't look at
me, Joan; look right away to the edge of the sea."

"You'm surprised like as I talks to ye, Mister Jan. Doan't ladies talk so
free as what I do?"

"Other women talk, but they are very seldom in earnest like you are, Joan.
They don't believe half they say, they pretend and make believe; they've
got to do so, poor things, because the world they live in is all built up
on ancient foundations of great festering lies. The lies are carefully
coated over and disinfected as much as possible and quite hidden out of
sight, but everybody knows they are there--everybody knows the quaking
foundations they tread upon. Civilization means universal civility, I
suppose, Joan; and to be civil to everybody argues a great power of telling
lies. People call it tact. But I don't like polite society myself, because
my nose is sensitive and I smell the stinking basis through all the pretty
paint. You and I, Joan, belong to Nature. She is not always civil, but you
can trust her; she is seldom polite, but she never says what is not true."

"You talk as though 'e ded'n much like ladies an' gen'lemen, same as you
be."

"I don't, and I'm not what you understand by 'a gentleman,' Joan. Gentlemen
and ladies let me go among them and mix with them, because I happen to have
a great deal of money--thousands and thousands of pounds. That opens the
door to their drawing-rooms, if I wanted to open it, but I don't. I've seen
them and gone about among them, and I'm sick of them. If a man wishes to
know what polite society is let him go into it as a very wealthy bachelor.
I'm not 'a gentleman,' you know, Joan, fortunately."

"Surely, Mister Jan!"

"No more than you're a lady. But I can try to be gentle and manly, which is
better. You and I come from the same class, Joan; from the people. The only
difference is that my father happened to make a huge fortune in London.
Guess what he sold?"

"I dunnaw."

"Fish--just plaice and flounders and herrings and so forth. He sold them by
tens of thousands. Your father sells them too. But what d'you think was the
difference? Why, your father is an honest man; mine wasn't. The fishermen
sold their fish, after they had had the trouble and danger of catching
them, to my father; and then my father sold them again to the public; and
the fishermen got too little and the public paid too much, and so--I'm a
very rich man to-day--the son of a thief."

"Mister Jan!"

"Nobody ever called him a thief but me. He was a great star in this same
polite society I speak of. He fed hundreds of fat people on the money that
ought to have gone into the fishermen's pockets; and he died after eating
too much salmon and cucumber at his own table. Poetic justice, you know.
There are stained glass windows up to his memory in two churches and tons
of good white marble were wasted when they made his grave. But he was a
thief, just as surely as your father is an honest man; so you have the
advantage of me, Joan. I really doubt if I'm respectable enough for you to
know and trust."

"I'd trust 'e with anything, Mister Jan, 'cause you'm plain-spoken an'
true."

"Don't be too sure--the son of a thief may have wrong ideas and lax
principles. Many things not to be bought can easily be stolen."

Again he struck a sinister note, but this time on an ear wholly unable to
appreciate or suspect it. Joan was occupied with Barron's startling scraps
of biography, and, as usual, when he began talking in a way she could not
understand, turned to her own thoughts. This sudden alteration of his
position she took literally. It struck her in a happy light.

"If you'm not a gen'leman then you wouldn' look down 'pon me, would 'e?"

"God forbid! I look up to you, Joan."

She was silent, trying to master this remarkable assertion. The artist
stood no longer upon that lofty pedestal where she had placed him; but the
change of attitude seemed to bring him a little closer, and Joan forgot the
fall in contemplating the nearer approach.

"That's why I asked you not to call me 'Mister Jan,"' Barron added after a
pause. "We are, you see, only different because I'm a man and you're a
woman. Money merely makes a difference to outside things, like houses and
clothes. But you've got possessions which no money can bring to me: a happy
home and a lover coming back to you from the sea. Think what it must be to
have nobody in the world to care whether you live or die. Why, I haven't a
relation near enough to be even interested in all my money--there's
loneliness for you!"

Joan felt full of a great pity, but could not tell how to express it. Even
her dull brains were not slow enough to credit his frank assertion that he
and she were equals; but she accepted the statement in some degree, and
now, with her mind wandering in his lonely existence, wondered if she might
presume to express sympathy for him and proclaim herself his friend. She
hesitated, for such friendship as hers, though it came hot from her little
heart, seemed a ludicrous thing to offer this man. Every day of intercourse
with him filled her more with wonder and with admiration; every day he
occupied a wider place in her thoughts; and at that moment his utterances
and his declaration of a want in life made him more human than ever to her,
more easily to be comprehended, more within the reach of her understanding.
And that was not a circumstance calculated to lessen her regard for him by
any means. Until that day he had appeared a being far apart, whose
interests and main threads of life belonged to another sphere; now he had
deliberately come into her world and declared it his own.

The silence became painful to Joan, but she could not pluck up courage
enough to tell the artist that she at least was a friend. Finally she
spoke, feeling that he waited for her to do so, and her words led to the
point, for she found, in his answer to them, that he took her goodwill for
granted.

"Ain't you got no uncles nor nothin' o' that even, Mister Jan?"

He laughed and shook his head.

"Not one, Joan--not anybody in all the world to think twice about me but
you."

Her heart beat hard and her breath quickened, but she did not speak. Then
Barron, putting down his brushes and beginning to load a pipe, that his
next remark might not seem too serious, proceeded:

"I call you 'friend,' Joan, because I know you are one. And I want you to
think of me sometimes when I am gone, will you?"

He went on filling his pipe, and then, looking suddenly into her eyes, saw
there a light that was strange--a light that he would have given his soul
to put into paint--a light that Joe's name never had kindled and never
could. Joan wiped her hand across her mouth uneasily; then she twisted her
hands behind her back, like a schoolgirl standing in class, and made answer
with her eyes on the ground.

"Iss, I will, then, Mister Jan; an' maybe I couldn't help it if I would."

He lighted his pipe carefully before answering.

"Then I shall be happy, Joan."

But while she grew rose-red at the boldness of her sudden announcement, he
took care neither to look at her nor to let her know that he had realized
the earnestness with which she spoke. And when, ten minutes later, she had
departed, he mused speculatively on the course of their conversation,
asking himself what whim had led him to pretend to so much human feeling
and to lament his loneliness. This condition of his life he loved above all
others. No man, woman or child had the right to interfere with his selfish,
impersonal existence, and he gloried in the fact. But to the scraps of his
life's history, which he had spread before Joan in their absolute truth, he
had added this fiction of friendless loneliness, and it had worked a
wonder. He saw that he was growing to be much to her, and the problem lying
in his path rose again, as it had for a moment when Murdoch warned him in
jest against falling in love with Joan Tregenza. Dim suspicions crossed his
mind with greater frequency, and being now a mere remorseless savage,
hunting to its completion a fine picture, he made no effort to shut their
shadows from his calculation. Everything which bore even indirectly upon
his work received its share of attention; to mood must all sacrifices be
made; and now a new mood began to dawn in him. He knew it, he accepted it.
He had not sought it, but the thing was there, and Nature had sent it to
him. To shun it and fly from it meant a lie to his art; to open his arms to
it promised the destruction of a human unit. Barron was not the man to
hesitate between two such courses. If any action could heighten his
inspiration, add a glimmer of glory to his picture, or get a shadow more
soul into the painted blue eyes of the subject, he held such action
justified. For the present his mind was chaos on the subject, and he left
the future to work itself out as chance might determine.

His painting was all he concerned himself with, and should Nature
ultimately indicate that greater perfection might be achieved through
worship and even sacrifice at her shrine, neither worship nor sacrifice
would be withheld.




CHAPTER NINE
 A WEDDING


Joan Tregenza went home in a dream that day. She did not know where to
begin thinking. "Mister Jan" had told her so many astounding things; and
her own heart, too, had made bold utterances--concerning matters which she
had crushed out of sight with some shame and many secret blushes until now.
But, seen in the light of John Barron's revelations, this emotion which she
had thrust so resolutely to the back of her mind could remain there no
more. It arose strong, rampant and ridiculous; only from her point of view
no humor distinguished it. This man, then, was like herself, made of the
same flesh and blood, sprung from the people. That fact, though possessing
absolutely no significance whatever in reality, struck Joan with great
force. Her highly primitive instincts stretched a wide gulf between the
thing called "gentleman" and other men; which was the result of training
from parents of the old-fashioned sort, whose world lay outside and behind
the modern spirit; who had reached the highest development of their
intelligence and formed their opinions before the passing of the Education
Act. Gray Michael naturally held the great ones of the earth as objects of
pity from an eternal standpoint, but birth weighed with him, and, in
temporal concerns, he treated his superiors with all respect and civility
when rare chance brought him into contact with them. He viewed uneasily the
last outcome of progress and the vastly increased facilities for
instruction of the juvenile population. The age was sufficiently godless,
in his judgment; and he had found that a Board School education was the
first nail in the coffin of every young man's faith.

Joan, therefore, allowing nothing for the value of riches, of education, of
intellect, was content to accept Barron's own cynical statement in a spirit
widely different from the speaker's. He had sneered at himself, just as he
had sneered at his own dead father. But Joan missed all the bitterness of
his speech. To her he was simply a wondrously honest man who loved truth
for itself, who could never utter anything not true, who held it no offense
to speak truth even of the dead. Gentle or simple, he seemed infinitely
superior to all men whom she had met with. And yet this beautiful nature
walked through the world quite alone. He had asked her to remember him when
he was gone; he had said that she was his friend. And he cared little for
women--there was perhaps no other woman in the world he had called a
friend. Then the girl's heart fluttered at the presumption of her silly,
soaring thoughts, and she glanced nervously to the right and to the left of
the lonely road, as though fearful that some hidden eavesdropper might peep
into her open mind. The magic spell was upon her. This little, pale, clever
man, so quiet, so strange, so unlike anything else within her seventeen
years of experience, had wrought Nature's vital miracle, and Joan, who,
until then, believed herself in love with her sailor sweetheart, now stood
aghast before the truth, stood bewildered between the tame and bloodless
fantasy of her affection for Joe Noy and this wild, live reality. She
looked far back into a past already dim and remembered that she had told
Joe many times how she loved him with all her heart. But the words were
spoken before she knew that she possessed a heart at all. Yet Joe then
formed no inconsiderable figure in life. She had looked forward to marriage
with him as a comfortable and sufficient background for present existence;
she had viewed Joe as a handsome, solid figure--a man well thought of, one
who would give her a home with bigger rooms and better furniture in it than
most fishermen's daughters might reasonably hope for. But this new blinding
light was more than the memory of Joe could face uninjured. He shriveled
and shrank in it. Like St. Michael's Mount, seen afar, through curtains of
rain, Joe had once bulked large, towering, even grand, but under noonday
sun the great mass dwindles as a whole though every detail becomes more
apparent; and so with poor Joe Noy. Removed to a distance of a thousand
miles though he was, Joan had never known him better, never realized the
height, breadth, depth of him so acutely as now she did. The former
ignorance in such a case had been bliss indeed, for whereunto her present
acquired wisdom might point even she dared not consider. Any other girl
must have remained sufficiently alive to the enormous disparity every way
between herself and the artist; and Joan grasped the difference, but from
the wrong point of view. The man's delicacy of discernment, his wisdom, his
love of the things which she loved, his fine feeling, his humility--all
combined in Joan's judgment to place him far above herself, though she had
not words to name the qualities; but whereas another lowly woman, reaching
this point, must, if she possessed any mother-wit or knowledge of the
world, have awakened to the danger and grown guarded, Joan, claiming little
wit to speak of, and being an empty vessel so far as knowledge of the world
was concerned, saw no danger and allowed her thoughts to run away with her
in a wholly insane direction. This she did for two reasons: because she
felt absolutely safe, and because she suspected that Nature, who was
"Mister Jan's" God, had now come to be her God also. The man was very wise,
and he hated everything which lacked truth: therefore he would always do
what was right, and he would not be less true to her than he was to the
world. Truth was his guiding star, and he had always found Nature true.
Therefore, why should not Joan find it true? Nature was talking to her now
and teaching her rapidly. She must be content to wait and learn. The two
men, Noy and Barren, fairly represented the opposite views of life each
entertained, and Joan felt the new music wake a thousand sleeping echoes in
her heart while the old grew more harsh and unlovely as she considered it.
Joe had so many opinions and so little information; "Mister Jan" knew
everything and asserted nothing save what Nature had taught him. Joe was so
self-righteous and overbearing, so like her father, so convinced that Luke
Gospeldom was the only gate to glory; "Mister Jan" had said there was more
of the Everlasting God in a bluebell than in the whole of the Old
Testament; he had declared that the smell of the gorse and the sunshine on
the deep sea were better things than the incense and banners at St.
Peter's; he had asserted that the purring of kittens was sweeter to the
Father of all than the thunder of a mighty organ played in the noblest
cathedral ever made with hands. All these foolish and inconsequent
comparisons, uttered thoughtlessly by Barron's lips while his mind was on
his picture, seemed very fine to Joan; and the finer because she did not
understand them. Again, Joe rarely listened to her; this man always did,
and he liked to hear her talk: he had declared as much.

Her brains almost hurt Joan on her way back to the white cottage that
morning. They seemed so loaded; they lifted her up high above the
working-day world and made her feel many years older. Such reflections and
ideas came to grown women doubtless, she thought. A great unrest arose from
the shadows of these varied speculations--a great unrest and disquiet--a
feeling of coming change, like the note in the air when the swallows meet
together in autumn, like the whisper of the leaves on the high tops of the
forest before rain. Her heart was very full. She walked more slowly as the
thoughts weighed heavier; she went back to her home round-eyed and solemn,
wondering at many things, at the extension of the horizon of life, at the
mental picture of Joe standing clearly out of the mists, viewed from a
woman's standpoint.

That day much serving awaited her; but, at every turn and pause in the
small affairs of her duty, Joan's mind swooped back like a hawk to the
easel on Gorse Point; and when it did, her cheeks flushed and she turned to
bend over sink or pig's trough to hide the new fire that burned in her
heart and lighted her eyes.

Mrs. Tregenza, who had suffered from neuralgia and profound depression of
spirit upon Tom's departure to the sea, but who comforted herself even in
her darkest hour by reflection that no lugger boy ever joined the fishing
fleet with such an equipment of new clothes as her son, was somewhat better
and more cheerful now that the lad had made his first trip and survived it.
Moreover, Tom would be home again that night in all probability, and, since
Michael was last ashore, the butcher from Paul had called and offered three
shillings and sixpence more for the next pig to be killed than ever a
Tregenza pig had fetched until that day. Life therefore held some
prosperity in it, even for Thomasin.

After their dinner both women, the elder with a shawl muffled about her
face, went down the road to Newlyn to see a sight. They stopped at George
Trevennick's little house. It had a garden in front of it with a short
flagstaff erected thereon, and all looked neat, trim and ship-shape as
became the home of a retired Royal Navy man. A wedding was afoot, and Mr.
Trevennick, who never lost an opportunity to display his rare store of
bunting, had plentifully shaken out bright reds and yellows, blues and
greens. The little flags fluttered in four streamers from the head of the
flagstaff, and their colors looked harsh and crude until associated with
the human interests they marked.

Already many children gazed with awe from the road, while a favored few,
including the Tregenzas, stood in Mr. Trevennick's garden, which was raised
above the causeway. Great good-humor prevailed, together with some
questionable jesting, and Joan heard the merriment with a sense of
discomfort. They would talk like this when Joe came back to marry her; but
the great day of a maid's life had lost its greatness for her now. The
rough, good-natured fun grated on her nerves as it had never grated before;
because, though she only guessed at the sly jokes of her elders, something
told her that "Mister Jan" would have found no pleasure in such merriment.
Mrs. Tregenza talked, Mr. Trevennick smoked, and Sally Trevennick, the old
sailor's daughter, entertained the party and had a word for all. She was
not young, and not well-favored, and unduly plump, but a sweet-hearted
woman nevertheless, with a great love for the little children. This indeed
presently appeared, for while the party waited there happened a tragedy in
the street which brought extreme sorrow to a pair of very small people.
They had a big crabshell full of dirt off the road which they drew after
them by a string, and in which they took no small pride and pleasure; but a
young sailor, coming hastily round a corner, trampled upon the shell,
smashed it, and passed laughing on. The infants, overwhelmed by this sudden
disaster to their most cherished earthly possession, crushed to the earth
by this blotting out of the sunshine of the day, lifted up their voices and
wept before the shattered ruins. One, the biggest, dropped the useless
string and put his face against the wall, that his extreme grief might be
hidden; but the smaller hesitated not to make his sorrows widely known. He
bawled, then took a deep breath and bawled again. As the full extent of his
loss was borne in upon him, he absolutely danced with access of frenzied
grief; and everybody laughed but fat Sally Trevennick. Her black eyes grew
clouded, and she went down into the road to bring comfort to the sufferers.

"Never mind, then; never mind, you bwoys; us'll get 'e another braave
shell, so us will. Theer, theer, give over an' come 'long wi' me an' see
the flags. Theer's many bigger auld crabshells wheer that comed from, I
lay. Your faither'll get 'e another."

She took a hand of each babe and brought them into the garden, from which
they could look down upon their fellows. Such exaltation naturally soothed
their sufferings, and amid many gasps and gurgles they found a return to
peace in the close contemplation of Mr. Trevennick's flagstaff and the
discussion of a big saffron pasty.

Presently the bridegroom and his young brother passed on the way to church.
Both looked the reverse of happy; both wore their Sunday broadcloth, and
both swung along as fast as their legs would carry them. They were red hot
and going five miles an hour; but, though Mousehole men, everybody in
Newlyn knew them, and they were forced to run the gauntlet of much chaff.

"Time was when they did use to thrash a new-married couple to bed," said
Mr. Trevennick. "'Twas an amoosin' carcumstance an' I've 'elped at many,
but them good auld doin's is dyin' out fast."

Mrs. Tregenza was discussing the bridegroom's family.

"He be a poor Billy-be-damned sort o' feller, I've allus heard, an' awnly a
common tinner, though his faither were a grass cap'n at Levant Mine."

"But he's a steady chap," said Sally; "an' them in his awn station sez he's
reg'lar at church-goin' an' well thot 'pon by everybody. 'Tedn' all young
pairs as parson'll ax out, I can tell 'e. He wants to knaw a bit 'fore
'e'll marry bwoys an' gals; but theer weren't no trouble 'bout Mark
Taskes."

"Sure I'm glad to hear it, Sally, 'cause if he caan't do everything,
everything won't be done. They Penns be a pauper lot--him a fish-jouster as
ain't so much as his awn donkey an' cart, an' lame tu. Not that 'twas his
awn fault, I s'pose, but they do say a lame chap's never caught in a good
trick notwithstandin'."

"Here comes the weddeners!" said Joan, "but 'tedn' a very braave shaw," she
added. "They'm all a-foot, I do b'lieve."

"Aw, my dear sawl! look at that now!" cried Mrs. Tregenza. "Walkin',
ackshally walkin'. Well--well!"

The little bride advanced between her father and mother, while relations
and friends marched two and two behind. A vision it was of age and youth,
of bright spring flowers, of spotless cotton and black broadcloth. A matron
or two marched in flaming colors; a few fishermen wore their blue jerseys
under their reefer jackets; the smaller children were led by hand; and the
whole party numbered twelve all told. Mr. Penn looked up at the flags as he
limped along, and a great delight broke out upon his face; the bride's
mother beamed with satisfaction at a compliment not by any means expected,
for the Penns were a humble folk; and the bride blushed and stole a nervous
peep at the display. Mr. Penn touched his hat to the party in the garden,
and Mr. Trevennick, feeling the eye of the multitude upon him, loudly
wished the wedding party well as it passed by.

"Good speed to 'e an' to the maid, Bill Penn. May she live 'appy an' be a
credit to all parties consarned."

"Thank 'e, thank 'e, kindly, Mr. Trevennick. An' us takes it mighty
favorable to see your butivul flags a hangin' out--mighty favorable, I
'sure 'e."

So the party tramped on and ugly Sally looked after them with dim eyes; but
Mrs. Tregenza's thin voice dried them.

"A bad come-along o't for a gal to walk 'pon sich a day. They did ought to
a got her a lift to her weddin', come what might."

"Maybe 'tis all wan to them poor dears. A coach an' four 'orses wouldn'
make that cheel no better pleased. God bless her, did 'e look 'ow she
flickered up when she seed faither's flags a flyin'?"

"Theer's a right way an' a wrong o' doin' weddin's, Sarah, an' 'tedn' a
question whether a gal's better pleased or no. It's all wan to a dead
corpse whether 'tis took to the yard in a black hearse wi' plumes, same as
what us shall be, or whether 'tis borne 'pon wan o' them four 'anded
stretchers used for carryin' fishin' nets, same as poor Albert Vallack was
a while back--but wan way's proper an' t'other 'edn'."

"They'm savin' the money for the feed. Theer's gwaine to be a deal o' clome
liftin' at Perm's cottage bimebye," said another of the party.

"No honeymoon neither, so I hear tell," added Mrs. Tregenza.

"But Taskes have bought flam-new furniture for his parlor, they sez,"
declared the former speaker.

"Of coorse. Still no honeymoon 'tall! Who ever heard tell of sich a thing
nowadays? I wonder they ban't 'shamed."

"Less shame, Mrs. Tregenza, than trapsing off to Truro or somewheers an'
wastin' their time an' spendin' money they'll be wanting back agin 'fore
Christmas," retorted Sally, with some warmth.

But Mrs. Tregenza only shook her head and sighed.

"You speaks as a onmarried wummon, Sarah; but if you comed to be a bride
you'd sing dif-fer'nt. No honeymoon's wrong, an' your faither'll tell the
same."

Mr. Trevennick admitted that no honeymoon was bad. He went further and
declared the omission of such an institution to be unprincipled. He even
said that had he known of this serious defect in the ceremonies he should
certainly have abstained from lending the brightness of his bunting to
them. Then he went to eye the flags from different points of view, while
Sally, in a minority of one, turned to Joan.

"And what do you say?" she asked. "You'm 'mazin' quiet an' tongue-tied for
you. I s'pose you'm thinkin' of the time when Joe Noy comes home. I lay
you'll have a honeymoon anyways."

"Iss, that you may depend 'pon," said Mrs. Tregenza.

And Joan, who had in truth been thinking of her sweetheart's return, grew
red, whereat they all laughed. But she felt secretly superior to every one
of them, for the shrinking process began to extend beyond Joe now. A
fortnight before, she had been much gratified by allusions to the future
and felt herself an important individual enough. Then, she must have shared
her stepmother's pity at the poverty of the pageant which had just passed
by. But now the world had changed. Matrimony with Joe Noy was not a subject
which brought present delight to her, but the little bride who had just
gone to her wedding filled Joan's thoughts. What was in that girl's heart,
she greatly wondered. Did Milly Penn feel for long-legged Mark Taskes what
Joan felt for "Mister Jan"? Was it possible that any other woman had ever
experienced similar mysterious splendors of mind? She could not tell, but
it seemed unlikely to her; it appeared improbable that an ordinary man had
power to inspire another heart with such golden magic as glorified her own.

Presently she departed with her stepmother, whereupon Sally Trevennick
relieved her pent-up feelings.

"Thank the Lard that chitter-faaced wummon edn' gwaine to the weddin' any
ways! Us knaws she's a dear good sawl 'nough; but what wi' her sour voice,
an' her sour way o' talkin', an' her sour 'pinions, she'm enough to set a
rat-trap's teeth on edge."




CHAPTER TEN

MOONLIGHT


That evening Thomasin had another spasm of face-ache and went to bed soon
after drinking tea. Michael was due at home about ten o'clock or earlier,
and Joan--having set out supper, made all ready, and ascertained that her
stepmother had gone to sleep--walked out to the pierhead, there to wait for
Mr. Tregenza and Tom. Under moonlight, the returning luggers crept
homeward, like inky silhouettes on a background of dull silver. Every
moment added to the forest of masts anchored at the moorings outside the
harbor; every minute another rowing-boat shot between the granite piers,
slid silently into the darkness under shore, leaving moonlit rings widening
out behind at each dip of the oars. Joan sat down under the lighthouse and
waited in the stillness for her father's boat. Yellow flashes, like
fireflies, twinkled along through Newlyn, and above them the moon brought
out square patches of silver-bright roof seen through a blue night. Now and
then a bell rang in the harbor, and lights leaped here and there, mingling
red snakes and streamers of fire with the white moonbeams where they lay on
still water. Then Joan knew the fish were being sold by auction, and she
grew anxious for her father's return, fearing prices might have fallen
before he arrived. Great periods of silence lay between the ringings of the
bell, and at such times only faint laughter floated out from shore, or
blocks chipped and rattled as a sail came down or a concertina squeaked
fitfully where it was played on a Norwegian iceboat at the harbor quay. The
tide ran high, and Joan watched the lights reflected in the harbor and
wondered why the gold of them contrasted so ill with the silver from the
moon.

Presently two men came along to the pierhead. They smoked, looked at the
sea, and did not notice her where she sat in shadow. One, the larger, wore
knickerbockers, talked loudly, and looked a giant in the vague light; the
other was muffled up in a big ulster, and Joan would not have recognized
Barron had he not spoken. But he answered his friend, and then the girl's
heart leaped to hear that quiet, unimpassioned voice. He spoke of matters
which she did not understand, of pictures and light and all manner of
puzzles set by Nature for the solution of art; but though for the most part
his remarks conveyed no meaning to her, yet he closed a sentence with words
that made her happy, and warmed her heart and left a precious memory behind
them.

"Moonlight is a problem only less difficult than sunshine," he said to his
friend. "Where are you going to get that?" and he pointed to the sea.

"It's been jolly well done all the same."

"Never. It is not to be done. You can suggest by a trick, but God defend us
from tricks and sleight-of-hand in connection with the solemn business of
painting pictures. Let us be true or nothing."

They walked away together, and Joan pondered over the last words. Truth
seemed an eternal, abiding passion with John Barron, and the contemplation
of this idea gave her considerable pleasure. She did not know that a man
may be at once true to his art and a liar to his fellows.

Presently her father returned with Tom, and the three walked home together.
Gray Michael appeared quietly satisfied that his son was shaping well and
showing courage and nerve. But he silenced the lad quickly enough when Tom
began to talk with some gasconade concerning greet deeds done westward of
the Scilly Islands.

"'Let another man praise thee an' not thine awn mouth,' my bwoy," said Mr.
Tregenza. "It ban't the wave as makes most splash what gaws highest up the
beach, mind. You get Joan to teach 'e how to peel 'taties, 'cause 'tis a
job you made a tidy bawk of, not to mention no other. Keep your weather-eye
liftin' an' your tongue still. Then you'll do. An' mind--the bwoat's clean
as a smelt by five o'clock to-morrow marnin', an' no later."

Tom, dashed by these base details, answered seaman fashion:

"Ay, ay, faither."

Then they all tramped home, and the boy enjoyed the glories of a late
supper, though he was half asleep before he had finished it.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

THE KISS


By half-past five o'clock, Mr. Tregenza's black lugger was off again in a
gray dawn all tangled with gold on the eastern horizon.

His mother had given Tom an early breakfast at half-past four, and the
youngster, agape and dim-eyed at first, speedily brightened up, for he had
a willing listener, in the candle-light and poured a tale of moving
incidents into Thomasin's proud but uneasy mind.

"Them Pritchards sez as they'll make a busker [Footnote: _Busker_--A
rare good fisherman.] of me, 'cause it blawed a bit issterday marnin', but
'twas all wan to me; an' you abbun no call to fret yourself, nohow, mother,
'cause faither's 'lowed to be the best sailor in the fleet an' theer ban't
a better foul-weather boat sails from Newlyn than ourn."

He chattered on, larding his discourse with new words picked up aboard, and
presently rolled off to get things shipshape just as his father came down
to breakfast.

When the men had gone, little remained to be done that day, and, by
half-past seven, about which hour Mrs. Tregenza went into the village that
she might whine with a widow who had two boys in the fleet, Joan found
herself free until the afternoon. She determined therefore to reach Gorse
Point before the artist should arrive there, and set off accordingly.

Early though she was, she had but a short time to wait, for Barron appeared
with his big canvas by nine o'clock. She thought he showed more pleasure
than usual at the sight of her. Certainly he shook hands and congratulated
her upon such early hours.

"This is an unexpected pleasure, Joan. You must have been up betimes
indeed."

"Iss fay, us took breakfus' by five, an' faither sailed 'fore half-past.
'Tis busy times for fishin' folk when the mackerl begins shoalin'."

"I'm glad I came back to my den in the fields yonder and didn't stop in
Newlyn last night. You must see my little cow-byre some day or other, Joan.
I've made it wonderfully snug. Farmer Ford is good enough to let me take
possession of it for the present; and I've got food and drink stowed away,
and a beautiful bed of sweet, withered bracken. I sleep well there, and the
dawn comes in and wakens me."

"You ban't feared o' piskeys nor nothin' in a lawnsome plaace like thicky
byre?"

"No, no--the rats are rather intrusive, though."

"But they'm piskeys or spriggans so like's not! You see, the lil people
takes all manner o' shaapes, Mister Jan; an' they chaanges 'em tu, but
every time they chaanges they've got to alter into somethin' smaller than
what they was before. An' so, in coorse of time, they do say they comes
down into muryans an' such like insects."

"Piskeys or no piskeys, I've caught several in a trap and killed them."

"They'm gashly things, rats, an' I shouldn't think as no good piskeys would
turn into varmints like them."

"More should I. But something better than rats came to see me last night,
Joan. Guess who it was."

"I dunnaw."

"Why, you came!"

"Me, Mister Jan! You must a bin dreamin'!"

"Yes, of course I was; but such a lovely dream, Joan! You see, men who
paint pictures and love what is beautiful and dream about beautiful things
and beautiful people see all sorts of visions sometimes. I have pictures in
my head a thousand times more splendid than any I shall ever put upon
canvas, because mere paint-brushes cannot do much, even when they are in
the cleverest hands; but a man's brain is not bound down by material,
mechanical matters. My brain made a picture of you last night--a picture
that came and looked at me on my fern bed--a picture so real, so alive that
I could see it move and hear it laugh. You think that wonderful. It isn't
really, because my brain has done nothing but think of you now for nearly
six weeks. My eye studies you and stamps you upon my brain; then, when
night comes, and no man works, and the world is dark and silent, my brain
sets off on its own account and raises up a magic vision just to show me
what you really are--how different to this poor daub here."

"Lard, Mister Jan! I never heard tell of sich a coorious thing as that."

"And the pretty dream-Joan can talk almost as well as you can! Why, last
night, while I was half awake and half asleep, she put her hand upon my
shoulder and said kind things, but I dared not move or kiss her hand at
first for fear she would vanish if I did."

Joan laughed.

"That is a funny story, sure 'nough," she said. "I 'specs 'twas awnly
another fairy body, arter all."

"No, it wasn't. She had your voice and your spirit in her; and that picture
which my brain painted for me was so much better than the thing my hand has
painted that, in the morning, I was almost tempted to destroy this
altogether. But I didn't."

"An' what did this here misty sort o' maid say to 'e?"

"Strange things, strange things. Things I would give a great deal to hear
you say. It seemed that you had come, Joan, it seemed that you had
purposely come from your little cottage on the cliff through the darkness
before dawn. Why? To share my loneliness, to brighten my poor shadowy life.
Dreams are funny things, are they not? What d'you think you said?"

"Sure I dunnaw."

"Why, you said that you were not going to leave me any more; that you
believed in me and that you had come to me because it was bad for a man to
live all alone in the world. You said that you felt alone too--without me.
And it made me feel happy to hear you say that, though I knew, all the
time, that it was not the real beautiful Joan who spoke to me."

Thereupon the girl asked a question which seemed to argue some sharpening
of intelligence within her.

"An' when I spoke that, what did you say, Mister Jan?"

"I didn't say anything at all. I just took that sweet Joan-of-dreams into
my arms and kissed her."

He was looking listlessly out over the sea as he spoke, and Joan felt
thankful his eyes were turned away from her, for this wonderful dream
incident made her grow hot all over. He seemed to divine by her silence
that his answer to her question had not added to her happiness.

"I shouldn't have told you that, Joan, only you asked me. You see, in
dreams, we are real in some senses, though unreal in others. In dreams the
savage part of us comes to the top and Nature can whisper to us. She
chooses night to do so and often speaks to men in visions, because by day
the voice of the world is in their ears and they have no attention for any
other. It was strange, too, that I should fancy such a thing--should
imagine I was kissing you--because I never kissed a woman in my life."

But from her point of view this falsehood was not so alluring as he meant
to make it sound.

"'Twould be wrong to kiss any maiden, I reckon, onless you was tokened to
her or she were your awn sister."

"But, as we look at life, we're all brothers and sisters, Joan--with Nature
for our mother. We agreed about that long ago."

He turned to his easel, and she went and stood where her feet had already
made a brown mark on the grass.

"I seen you last night, but you dedn' see me," she said, changing the
conversation with abruptness.

"Yes, I did," he answered, "sitting under the shadow of the lighthouse,
waiting for Mr. Tregenza, I expect."

"An' you never took no note o' me!"

He flung down his brushes, turned away from the picture before he had
touched it, and went and lay near the edge of the cliff.

"Come here, Joan, and I will tell you why I didn't notice you, though I
longed to do so. Come and sit down by me and I'll explain why I seemed so
rude."

She came slowly and sat down some distance from him, putting her elbows on
her knees and looking away to sea.

"'Tweern't kind," she said, "but when you'm with other folks, I s'pose
you'm ashamed o' me 'spite what you tawld me 'bout yourself."

"You mustn't say that, Joan, or you'll make me unhappy. Ashamed of you! Is
it likely I'm ashamed of the only friend I've got in the world? No, I'm
frightened of losing you; I'm selfish; I couldn't make you known to any
other man because I should be afraid you'd like him better than me, and
then I should have no friend at all. So I wouldn't speak and reveal my
treasure to anybody else. I'm very fond of my friend, and very proud of
her, and as greedy as a miser over his gold."

Joan took a long breath before this tremendous assertion. He had told her
in so many words that he was fond of her; and he had mentioned it most
casually as a point long since decided. Here was the question which she had
asked herself so often answered once for all. Her heart leaped at tidings
of great joy, and as she looked up into his face the man saw infinite
wonder and delight in her own. Mind was adding beauty to flesh, and he,
fast losing the artist's instinct before another, thought she had never
looked so lovely as then.

"Oh, Mister Jan, you'm fond o' me!"

"Why, didn't you know it, Joan? Did it want my words to tell you so? Hadn't
you guessed it?"

He rose slowly and approached his picture.

"Oh, how I wish this was a little more like my dream and like reality! I
need inspiration, Joan; I have reached a point beyond which I cannot go. My
colors are dead; my soul is dead. Something must happen to me or I shall
never finish this."

"Ban't you so well as you was?"

"No, Joan, I'm not. A thing has come between me and my happiness, between
me and my picture. I know not what to call it. Nature has sent it."

"Then 'tis right an' proper, I s'pose?"

"I suppose so, but it stops work. It makes my hand shake and my heart throb
fast and my brains grow hot."

"Can't 'e take no physic for't?"

"Why, yes, but I hesitate."

He turned to her and went close to her.

"Let me look at you, Joan--close--very close--so close that I can feel your
breath. It was so easy to learn the furze; it is so hard to learn you."

"Sure I've comed out butivul in the picksher."

"Not yet, not yet."

He put his hands on her shoulders and looked into her eyes until she grew
nervous and brushed her hand across her cheek. Then, without a second's
warning, he bent down and kissed her on the mouth.

"Mister Jan! How could 'e! 'Tis wrong--wrong of 'e! I'd never a thot--"

She started from him, wild, alarmed, blushing hotly; and he shook his head
at her dismay and answered very calmly, very seriously:

"It was not wrong, Joan, or I should not have done it. You heard me ask to
whom I should pray for inspiration, and Nature told me I must seek it from
you. And I have."

"You shouldn't never a done it. I trusted 'e so!"

"But I had to do it. Nature said 'Kiss her, and you will find what you
want.' Do you understand that? I have touched you and I am awake and alive
again; I have touched you, Joan, and I am not hopeless and sad, but happy.
Nature thought of me, Joan, when she made you and brought you into the
world; and she thought of sweet Joan when she fashioned Jan. Believe
it--you must believe it."

"You did ought to a arsked me."

"Listen. Nature let you live quiet in the country--for me, Joan. She let me
live all lonely in the world--for you. Only for you. Can't you understand?"

"You did ought to a arsked me. Kissing be wrong 'tween us. You knaws it,
Mr. Jan."

"It is right and proper and fair and beautiful," he said quietly. "My heart
sang when I kissed you, Joan, and so did yours. D'you know why? Because we
are two halves of a whole. Because the sunshine of your life would go out
without me; because my life, which never had any sunshine in it until now,
has been full of sunshine since I knew Joan."

"I dunnaw. 'Twadden a proper thing to do, seein' how I trusted 'e."

"We are children of Nature, Joan. I always do what she tells me. I can't
help it. I have obeyed her all my life. She tells me to love you, Joan, and
I do. I'm very sorry. I thought she had told you to love me, but I suppose
I was wrong. Never mind this once. Forgive me, Joan. I'll even fight Nature
rather than make you angry with me. Let me finish my picture and go away.
Come. I've no business to waste your precious time, though you have been so
kind and generous with it. Only I was tired and hopeless and you came like
a drink of wine to me, Joan; and I drank too much, I suppose."

He picked up his brushes, spoke in a sad minor key, and seemed crushed and
weary. The flash died from his face and he looked older again. Joan, the
mistress of the situation, found it wholly bitter. She was bewildered, for
affairs had proceeded with such rapidity. He had declared frankly that he
loved her, and yet had stopped there. To her ideas it was impossible that a
man should say as much as that to a woman and no more. Love invariably
meant ultimate union for life, Joan thought. She could not understand any
other end to it. The man talked about Nature as a little child talks of its
mother. He had deemed himself entirely in the right; yet something--not
Nature, she supposed--had told her that he was wrong. But who was she to
judge him? Who was she to say where his conduct erred? He loved truth. It
was not a lie to kiss a girl. He promised nothing. How could he promise
anything or propose anything? Was she not another man's sweetheart? That
doubtless had been the reason why he had said no more than that he loved
her. To love her could be no sin. Nature had told him to; and God knew how
she loved him now.

But she could not make it up with him. A cold curtain seemed to have fallen
between them. The old reserve which had only melted after many meetings,
was upon him again. He stood, as it seemed, on the former pedestal. A
strange, surging sensation filled her head--a sense of helpless fighting
against a flood of unhappy affairs. All the new glory of life was suddenly
tarnished through her own act, and she felt that things could never be the
same again.

She thought and thought. Then John Barron saw Joan's blue eyes begin to
wink ominously, the corners of her bonny mouth drag down and something
bright twinkle over her cheek. He took no notice, and when he looked up
again, she had moved away and was sitting on the grass crying bitterly with
her hands over her face. The sun was bright, a lark sang overhead; from
adjacent inland fields came the jolt and clank of a plow with a man's voice
calling to his horses at the turns. The artist put down his palette and
walked over to Joan.

"My dear, my dear," he said, "d'you know what's making you so unhappy?"

She sobbed on and did not answer.

"I can tell you, I think. You don't quite know whether to believe me or
not, Joan. That is very natural. Why should you believe me? And yet if you
knew--"

She sat up, swallowed some of her tears, and smudged her face with her
knuckles. He took a clean handkerchief from his pocket and handed it to
her. It was cool and pleasant, and she went on crying a while, but tears
which were comforting and different to the first stinging drops bred from a
sudden, forlorn survey of life. He talked on, and his voice soothed her. He
kept his distance, and presently, as her ruffled spirit grew calmer, his
remarks assumed a brighter note.

"Has my poor little Lady of the Gorse forgiven me at last? She won't punish
me any more, I know, and it is a very terrible punishment to see tears in
her eyes."

Then she found her tongue again and words to answer him, together with
fluttering sighs that told the tears were ended.

"I dunnaw why for I cried, Mr. Jan, but I seemed 'mazed like. I'm a stupid
fule of a maid, I reckon, an' I s'pose 'tis auld-fashioned notions as I've
got 'bout what be right an' wrong. But, coorse, you knaws better'n what I
can; an' you'd do me no hurt 'cause you loves me--you've said it;
an'--an'--I love 'e tu, Mister Jan, I 'sure 'e--better'n anything in all
the world."

"Why, that's good, sweet news, Joan; and Nature told me the truth after
all! We're bound to love one another. She made us for that very reason!"

He knew that her mind was full of the tangles of life and that she wanted
him to solve some of the riddles just then uppermost in her own existence.
He felt that Joe was in her thoughts, and he easily divined her unuttered
question as to why Nature had sent Joe before she had sent him. But, though
answers and explanations of her troubles were not likely to be difficult,
he had no wish to make them or to pursue the subject just then. Indeed, he
bid Joan depart an hour before she need have done so. Her face was spoiled
for that sitting, and matters had progressed up to the threshold of the
barrier. Before that could be broken down, she must be made to feel that
she was necessary to the happiness of his life; as he already felt that she
was necessary to the completion of his picture. She loved him very dearly,
and he, though love was not possible to his nature, could feel the
substitute. He had fairly stepped out of his impersonal shell into reality.
Presently he would return to his shell again. For a moment a model had
grown more to him than a picture; and he told himself that he must obey
Nature in order adequately to serve Art.

He picked up the handkerchief he had lent Joan, looked at the dampness of
the tear-stains, and then spread it in the sun to dry.




CHAPTER TWELVE

JOAN WALKS HOME


While John Barren determined that a space of time extending over some days
should now separate him from Joan, she, for her part, had scarce left Gorse
Point after the conversation just chronicled when there came a great
longing in her heart to return thither. As she walked home she viewed
wearily the hours which lay between her and the following morning when she
might go back to him and see his face again. Time promised to drag for the
next day and night. Already she framed in her mind the things her mouth
should say to-morrow; and that almost before she was beyond sight of the
man's easel. Her fears had vanished with her tears. The future was entirely
in his hand now, for she had accepted his teaching, endeavored to look at
life with his eyes, made his God her own, so far as she had wit to gather
what his God was. She accepted the situation with trust, and felt
responsibility shifted on to "Mister Jan's" shoulders with infinite relief.
He was very wise and knew everything and loved the truth. It is desirable
to harp and harp upon this ever-recurring thought: the artist's grand love
for truth; because all channels of Joan's mind flowed into this lake. His
sincerity begat absolute trust. And, as John Barren and his words and
thoughts filled the foreground of life for her, so, correspondingly, did
the affairs of her home, with all the circumstances of existence in the old
environment, peak and dwindle toward shadowy insignificance. Her father
lost his majestic proportions; the Luke Gospelers became mere objects for
compassion; the petty, temporal interests and concerns of the passing hour
appeared mere worthless affairs for the occupation and waste of time.
"Mister Jan" loved her, and she loved him, and what else mattered? Past
hours of unrest and wakefulness were forgotten; her tears washed the dead
anxieties clean away; and the kiss which had caused them, though it
scorched her lip when it fell there, was now set as a seal and a crowning
glory to her life. He never kissed any other woman. That pledge of this
rare man's affection had been won by the magic of love, and Joan welcomed
Nature gladly and called it God with a warm heart and thankful soul; for
Nature had brought about this miracle. Her former religion worked no
wonders; it had only conveyed terror to her and a comprehensive knowledge
of hell. "Mister Jan" smiled at hell and she could laugh at her old fears.
How was it possible to hesitate between two such creeds? She did not do so,
and, with final acceptation of the new, and secret rejection of the old,
came a great peace to Joan's heart with the whisper of many voices telling
her that she had done rightly.

So the storm gave place to periods of delicious calm and content only
clouded by a longing to be back with the artist again. He loved her; the
voice of his love was the song of the spring weather, and the thrush echoed
it and the early flowers wrote it on the hedgerows. God was everywhere to
her open eyes. Everything that was beautiful, everything that was good,
seemed to have been created for her delight during that homeward walk. She
was mightily lifted up. Nature seemed so strong, so kind, such a guardian
angel for a maiden. And the birds sang out that "Mister Jan" was Nature's
priest and could do no wrong; and that to obey Nature was the highest good.

From which reflection rose a hazy happiness--dim, beautiful and indefinable
as the twinkling gold upon the sea under the throne of the sun. Joan dwelt
on the memory of the day which was now over for her, and on the thought of
morning hours which to-morrow would bring. But she looked no further; and
backward she did not gaze at all. No thought of Joe Noy dimmed her mental
delight; no shadowy cloud darkened the horizon then. All was bright, all
perfect. Her mind seemed to be breaking its little case, as the butterfly
bursts the chrysalis. Her life till then had been mere grub existence; now
she could fly and had seen the sun drawing the scent from flowers. Great
ideas filled her soul; new emotions awoke; she was like a baby trying to
utter the thing he has no word for; her vocabulary broke down under the
strain, and as she walked she gave thanks to Nature in a mere wordless
song, like the lark, because she could not put her acknowledgment into
language. But the great Mother, to whom Life is all in all, the living
individual nothing, looked on at a world wakening from sleep and viewed the
loves of the flowers and the loves of the birds and beasts and fishes with
concern as keen as the love in the blue eyes of Joan upon her homeward way.

Busy indeed at this vernal season was the mysterious Nurse of God's little
world. Her hands rested not from her labors. She worked strange wonders on
the waste, by magic of a million breaking buds, by burying of the dead, by
wafting of subtle pollen-life from blossom to blossom. And in cliffs above
the green waters the nests of her wild-fowl were already lined with wool
and feather; neither were her samphires forgotten in their dizzy
habitations; and salt spray sprinkled her uncurling sea ferns in caves and
crannies where they grew. She laughed at the porpoises rolling their fat
sides into sunshine; she brought the sea-otter where it should find fish
for its young; she led giant congers to drowned men; she patted the sleek
head of the sad-eyed seal. Elsewhere she showed the father-hawk a leveret
crouching in his form; she took young rabbits to the new spring grass; the
fox to the fowl, the fly to the spider, the blight to the bud. Her weakly
nestlings fell from tree and cliff to die, but she beheld unmoved; her
weasel sucked the gray-bird's egg, yet no hand was raised against the
thief, no voice comforted the screaming agony of the mother. With the van
of her legions she moved, and the suffering stragglers cried in vain, for
her concerns were not with them. She did no right, she worked no evil; she
was not cruel, neither shall we call her kind. The servant of God was she,
then as always, heedful of His utterances, obedient to His laws. Which
laws, when man better divines, he shall learn thy secret too, Nurse of the
world, but not sooner.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN
 LONELY DAYS


Having already learned from experience that hard work quickens the flight
of time, Joan, returning in happy mood to her home and with no trace of the
past tears upon her cheeks, surprised Mrs. Tregenza by a display of most
unusual energy and activity. She helped the butcher to get the pig into a
low cart built expressly for the conveyance of such unwieldy animals; she
looked mournfully at her departing companion, knowing that the morrow had
nothing for him but a knife, that he had eaten his last meal. And while
Joan listened to the farewell grunts of the fattest pig which had ever
adorned her father's sty, Mrs. Tregenza counted the money and bit a piece
here and there, and wondered if she could get the next young pig from Uncle
Chirgwin for even a lower figure than the last.

The day which had wrought such wonders for Joan's inner life, and brought
to her eyes a sort of tears unshed till then, ended at last, and for her a
sleepless night followed upon it. Not until long past one o'clock in the
morning did she lose consciousness, and then the thoughts of the day broke
loose again in visions, taking upon themselves fantastic shapes and moving
amid dream scenery of strange splendor. Now it was her turn to conjure
brain pictures out of fevered thoughts, and she woke at last with a start
in the dawn, to see a faint light painting the square of her bedroom
window. Looking out, she found the world dimly visible, a darker shadow
through the gloom where the fishing-boats were gathering in the bay, the
lighthouse lamp still shining, stars twinkling overhead, absolute silence
everywhere, and a cold bite about the air. The girl went back to bed again,
but slept no more and anon arose, dressed, set about morning duties, and,
much to Mrs. Tregenza's astonishment, had the fire burning and breakfast
ready by the time her stepmother appeared.

"Aw jimmery!" Thomasin exclaimed, as Joan came in from the outhouse to find
her warming cold hands at the fire, "I couldn't b'lieve my eyes at first
an' thot the piskey men had come to do us a turn spite o' what faither sez.
You've turned over a leaf seemin'ly. Workin' out o' core be a new game for
you."

"I couldn' sleep for thinkin' 'bout--'bout the pig an' wan thing an'
'nother."

"He's pork now, or nearly. You heard butcher promise me some nattlins,
dedn' 'e? You'd best walk up to Paul bimebye an' fetch, 'em. 'Tis easier to
call to mind other folk's promises than our awn. He said the same last
pig-killin' an' it comed to nort."

Joan escaped soon after breakfast and set off eagerly enough. She took a
basket with her and designed to call at Paul on the way home again.
Moreover, she chose a longer route to Gorse Point than that through
Mousehole, for her very regular habits of late had caused some comment in
that village, and more than one acquaintance had asked her, half in jest,
half in earnest, who it was she went to see up Mousehole hill. This had
frightened Joan twice already, and to-day, for the first time, she took the
longer route above Paul Church-town. It brought her over fields near the
cow-byre where Barren spent much of his time and kept his picture; and when
she saw her footpath must pass the door of the little house, a flutter
quickened her pulses and she branched away over the field and proceeded to
the cliffs through a gap in the hedge some distance from the byre.

But as Joan came out upon the sward through the furzes her heart sank in
sight of loneliness. She was not early to-day, but she had come earlier
than "Mister Jan." The gray figure was invisible. There were the marks on
the turf where his easel and camp-stool stood; there was the spot his feet
were wont to press, and her own standing-point against the glimmering
gorse; but that was all. She knew of no reason for his delay. The weather
was splendid, the day was warm, and he had never been so late before within
her recollection. Joan, much wondering, sat down to wait with her eyes upon
the sea, her ears alert for the first footstep, and her mind listening
also. Time passed, and indefinite uneasiness grew into a fear; then that
expanded and multiplied as her mind approached the problem of "Mister
Jan's" non-appearance from a dozen different standpoints. Hope declared
some private concern had kept him and he would not be long in coming; fear
inquired what unforeseen incident was likely to have risen since
yesterday--asked the question and answered it a dozen ways. The girl
waited, walked here and there, scanned the footpath and the road, returned,
sat down in patience, ate a cake she had brought, and so whiled the long
minutes away. The fears grew as hour and half-hour passed--fears for him,
not herself. The crowning despair did not touch her mind till later, and
her first sorrow was a simple terror that harm had fallen upon the man. He
had told her that he valued life but little, that at best no great length
of days awaited him; and now she thought that wandering about the cliffs by
night he might have met the death he did not fear. Then she remembered he
was but a sick man always, with frail breathing parts; and her thoughts
turned to the shed, and she pictured him lying ill there, unable to
communicate with friends, perhaps waiting and praying long hours for her
footfall as she had been waiting and praying for his. Upon this most
plausible possibility striking Joan, her heart beat at her breast and her
cheeks grew white. She rose from her seat upon the cliff, turned her face
to the cow-byre and made a few quick steps in that direction. Then a vague
flutter of sense, as of warning where no danger is visible, slowed her
speed for a moment; but her heart was strung to action, and the strange new
voice did not sound like Nature's, so she put it aside and let it drown
into silence before the clamor of fear for "Mister Jan's" well-being.
Indeed, that dim premonitory whisper excited a moment's anger in the girl
that any distrust could shadow her love for such a one at such a time. She
hated herself, held the thought a sin of her own commission, and sped
onward until she stood upon the northern side of the byre in a shadow cast
from it by the sun. The place was padlocked, and at that sight Joan's
spirits, though they rose in one direction, yet fell in another. One fear
vanished, a second loomed the larger; for the padlock, while it indicated
that the artist had left his lonely habitation for the time, did not
explain his absence now or dispel the possibilities of an accident or
disaster. The tar-pitched double door of the shed was fast and offered no
peep-hole; but Joan went round to the south side, where an aperture
appeared and where a little glass window had taken the place of the wooden
shutters. Sunshine lighted the shed inside; she could see every detail of
the chamber, and she photographed it on her mind with a quick glance. A big
easel with the life-size picture of herself upon it stood in the middle of
the shed, and a smaller easel appeared hard by. The artist's palettes,
brushes and colors littered a bench, and bottles and tumblers were
scattered among them. Two pipes which she had seen in his mouth lay
together upon a box on the floor, and beside them stood a tin of tobacco
wrapped in yellow paper. A white umbrella and some sticks stood in one
corner, and another she saw was filled by some railway rugs spread over
dried bracken. Two coats hung on nails in the wall, and above one was
suspended a Panama hat which Barren often wore when painting. Something
moved suddenly, and, looking upon the stone floor, she saw a rat-trap with
a live rat in it. The beast was running as far as it could this way and
that, poking its nose up and trying the roof of its prison. She noticed its
snout was raw from thrusting between the wire, and she wished she could get
in to kill it. She did not know that it was a mother rat with young ones
outside squeaking faintly in the stack of mangel-wurzels; she did not know,
as it hopped round and round, that its beady eyes were glittering with a
great agony, and that the Mother of all was powerless to break down a mere
wire or two and save it.

Presently, worn and weary, Joan trudged home again, with no very happy
mind. She found food for comfort in one reflection alone: the artist had
made no special appointment for that day, and it might be that business or
an engagement at Newlyn, Penzance or elsewhere was occupying his time. She
felt it must be so, and tried hard to convince herself that he would surely
be at the usual spot upon the morrow.

So she walked home unhappy; and time, which had dragged yesterday, to-day
stood still. Before night she had lived an age; the hours of darkness were
endless, but her father's return furnished excuse for another morning of
early rising; and when Gray Michael and Tom had eaten, donned clean raiment
and returned to the sea, Joan, having seen them to the pierhead, did not go
home, but hastened straight away for Gorse Point, and arrived there earlier
than ever she had done before. There was something soothing to her troubled
mind in being upon the spot sacred to him. Though he was not present, she
seemed closer far to him on Gorse Point than anywhere else. His foot had
marked the turf there; his eye had mirrored the furzes a hundred times; she
knew just where his shadow had fallen as be stood painting, and the spot
upon which he was wont to sit by the cliff-edge when came the time for
rest. Beside this holy place she now seated herself and waited with hope
higher in the splendor of morning; for sorrows, fears and ills are always
blackest when the sun has set, and every man or woman can better face
trouble on opening their eyes in a sunny dawn than after midnight has
struck, a sad day left them weakened, and nothing wakes in the world but
Care and themselves.

The morning wore away, and the old fears returned with greater force to
chill her soul. The sun was burnishing the sea, and she watched Mousehole
luggers putting out and dancing away through the gold. Under the cliffs the
gulls wheeled with sad cries and the long-necked cormorants hastened
backward and forward, now flying fast and low over the water, now fishing
here and there in couples. She saw them rear in the water as they dived,
then go down head first, leaving a rippling circle which widened out and
vanished long before the fishers bobbed up again twenty yards further on.
Time after time she watched them, speculating vaguely after each
disappearance as to how long the bird would remain out of sight. Then she
turned her face to the land, weary of waiting, weary of the bright sea and
sky, and the music of the gulls, and of life. She sat down again presently,
and put her hand over her face and struggled with her thoughts. Manifold
fears compassed her mind about, but one, not felt till then, rose now, a
giant above the rest. Yesterday she had been all alarm for "Mister Jan";
to-day there came terror for herself. Something said "He has gone, he has
left you." Her brain, without any warning, framed the words and spoke them
to her. It was as though a stranger had brought the news, and she rose up
white and stricken at this fatal explanation of the artist's continued
absence. She put the thought from her as she had put another, but it
returned with pertinacity, and each time larger than before, until the fear
filled all her mind and made her wild and desperate, under the conviction
of a sudden, awful life-quake launched against her existence to shatter all
her new joy and dash the brimming cup of love from her lips.

Hours passed, and she grew somewhat faint and hollow every way--in head and
heart and stomach. Her eyes ached, her brains were worn out with thinking;
she felt old, and her body was heavy and energy dead. The world changed,
too. The gorse looked strange as the sun went round, the lark sang no more,
the wind blew coldly, and the sea's gold was darkened by a rack of flying
clouds whose shadows fell purple and gray upon the waters. He had gone; he
had left her; perhaps she would never see him or hear of him again. Then
the place grew hateful to her and terrible as a grave. She dragged herself
away, dizzy, weary, wretched; and not until half way home again did she
find power to steady her mind and control thought. Then the old alarm
returned--that first fear which had pictured him dead, perhaps even now
rolling over and over under the precipices, or hid forever in the cranny of
some dark cavern at the root of the cliffs, where high tides spouted and
thundered and battered the flesh off his bones against granite. She
suffered terribly in mind upon that homeward journey. Her own light and
darkness mattered nothing now, and her personal and selfish fears had
vanished before she reached Newlyn. She was thinking how she should raise
an alarm, how she should tell his friends, who possibly imagined "Mister
Jan" safe and comfortable in his cow-byre. But who were his friends and how
should she approach them without such a step becoming known and getting
talked about? Her misery was stamped on her face when she at last returned
to the white cottage at three o'clock in the afternoon of that day, and
Mrs. Tregenza saw it there.

"God save us! wheer you bin to, an' what you bin 'bout? You'm so pasty an'
round-eyed as if you'd bin piskey-led somewheers. An' me worn to death wi'
work. An' wheer'm the nattlins an' the basket?"

Joan had quite forgotten her commission and left the basket on Gorse Point.

"I'll gaw back bimebye," she said. "I bin walkin' 'long the cliffs in the
sun an' forgot the time. Gimme somethin' t'ate, mother; I be hungry an'
fainty like wi' gwaine tu far. I could hardly fetch home."

"You'm a queer twoad," said Thomasin, "an' I doan't knaw what's come over
'e of late days. 'Pears to me you'm hidin' summat; an' if I thot that, I'd
mighty quick get faither to find out what 'twas, I can tell 'e."

Then she went off, and brought some cold potatoes and dripping, with bread
and salt, and a cup of milk.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

LESSONS LEARNED


The lesson which he had set for Joan Tregenza's learning taught John Barron
something also. Eight-and-forty hours he stayed in Newlyn, and was
astounded to find during that period what grip this girl had got upon his
mind, how she had dragged him out of himself. His first thought was to
escape all physical excitement and emotion by abandoning his picture almost
upon the moment of its completion and abandoning his model too; but various
considerations cried out against such a course. To go was to escape no
difficulty, but to fly from the spoils of victory. The fruit only wanted
plucking, and, through pleasure, he believed that he would proceed to
speedy, easy and triumphant completion of his picture. No lasting
compunction colored the tenor of his thoughts. Once, indeed, upon the day
when he returned to Gorse Point and saw Joan again, some shadow of regret
for her swept through his brain; but that and the issue of it will be
detailed in their place.

Time went heavily for him away from Joan. He roamed listlessly here and
there and watched the weather-glass uneasily; for this abstention from work
was a deliberate challenge to Providence to change sunshine for rain and
high temperature for low. Upon the third day therefore he returned at early
morning to his picture in the shed. The greater part was finished, and the
masses of gorse stood out strong, solid and complete with the slender brown
figure before them. The face of it was very sweet, but to Barron it seemed
as the face of a ghost, with no hot blood in its veins, no live interests
in its eyes.

"'Tis the countenance of a nun," he said sneeringly to himself. "No fire,
no love, no story--a sweet virgin page of life, innocent of history or of
interest as a new-blown lily." The problem was difficult, and he had now
quite convinced himself that solution depended on one course alone. "And
why not?" he asked himself. "Why, when pleasures are offered, shall I
refuse them? God knows Nature is chary enough with her delights. She has
sowed death in me, here in my lungs. I shall bleed away my life some day or
die strangled, unless I anticipate the climax and choose another exit. Why
not take what she throws to me in the meantime?"

He walked down to the Point, set up his easel and waited, feeling that Joan
had certainly made two pilgrimages since his last visit and little doubting
that she would come a third time. Presently indeed she did, scarcely daring
to raise her eyes, but flushing with great waves of joy when she saw him,
and crying "Mister Jan!" in a triumphant ripple of music from a full heart.
Then the artist rose very boldly and put his arms round her and looked into
her face, while she nestled close to him and shut her eyes with a sigh of
sheer content and thankfulness. She had learned her lesson thoroughly
enough; she felt she could not live without him now, and when he kissed her
she did not start from the caress, but opened her eyes and looked into his
face with great yearning love.

"Oh, thank the good God you'm comed back agin to me! To think it be awnly
two lil days! An' the time have seemed a hunderd years. I thot 'e was lost
or dead or killed, an' I seed 'e, when I slept, a tossin' over down in the
zawns [Footnote: _Zawns_--Sea caves.] where the sea roars an' makes the
world shake. Oh, Mister Jan, an' I woke screamin', an' mother comed up, an'
I near spoke your name, but not quite."

"You need not have feared for me, Joan, though I have been very miserable
too, my little sweetheart; I have indeed. I was overworked and worried and
wretched, so I stopped in Newlyn, but being away from you had only taught
me I cannot exist away from you. The time was long and dreary, and it would
have been still worse had I known that you were unhappy."

"'Tweer wisht days for me, Mister Jan. I be such a poor lass in brains, an'
I could awnly think of trouble 'cause I loved 'e so true. 'Tedn' like the
same plaace when you'm away. Then I thot you'd gone right back to Lunnon,
an' I judged my heart 'ud break for 'e, I did."

"Poor little blue-eyed woman! Could you really think I was such a brute?"

"'Twas awnly wan thot among many. I never thot so much afore in my life.
An' I looked 'bout tu; an' I went up to the lil byre, where your things
was, an' peeped in en. But I seed naught of 'e, awnly a gashly auld rat in
a trap. But 'e won't gaw aways like that ag'in, will 'e?"

"No, no. It was too bad."

"Coorse I knawed that if all was well with 'e, you'd a done the right
thing, but it 'peared as if the right thing couldn' be to leave me, Mister
Jan--not now, now you be my world like; 'cause theer edn' nothin' or nobody
else in the world but you for me. 'Tis wicked, but t'others be all faded
away; an' faither's nort, an' Joe's nort, alongside o' you."

He did not answer, and began to paint. Joan's face was far short of looking
its best; there were dark shadows under her eyes and less color than usual
brightened her cheeks. He tried to work, but circumstances and his own
feelings were alike against him. He was restless and lacked patience, nor
could his eye see color aright. In half an hour he had spoiled not a little
of what was already done. Then he took a palette-knife, made a clean sweep
of much previous labor and began again. But the music of her happy voice
was in his blood. The child had come out of the valley of sorrow and she
was boisterously happy and her laughter made him wild. Mists gathered in
his eyes and his breath caught now and again. Passion fairly gripped him by
the throat till even the sound of his own voice was strange to him and he
felt his knees shake. He put down his brushes, turned from the picture, and
went to the cliff-edge, there flinging himself down upon the grass.

"I cannot paint to-day, Joan; I'm too over-joyed at getting you back to me.
My hand is not steady, and my Joan of paint and canvas seems worse and
feebler than ever beside your flesh and blood. You don't know--you cannot
guess how I have missed you."

"Iss fay, but I can, Mister Jan, if you felt same as what I done. 'Tweer
cruel, cruel. But then you've got a many things an' folks to fill up your
time along with; I abbun got nothin' now but you."

"I expect Joe often thinks about you."

"I dunnaw. 'Tis awful wicked, but Joe he gone clean out my mind now. I thot
I loved en, but I was a cheel then an' I didn't 'sackly knaw what love was;
now I do. 'Twadden what I felt for Joe Noy 'tall; 'tis what I feels for
you, Mister Jan."

"Ah, I like to hear you say that. Nature has brought you to me, Joan, my
little jewel; and she has brought Jan to you. You could not understand that
last time I told you; now you can and you do. We belong to each other--you
and I--and to nobody else."

"I'd be well content to belong to 'e, Mister Jan. You'm my good fairy, I
reckon. If I could work for 'e allus an' see 'e an' 'ear 'e every day, I
shouldn' want nothin' better'n that."

Then it was that the shade of a compunction and the shadow of a regret
touched John Barron; and it cooled his hot blood for a brief moment, and he
swore to himself he would try to paint her again as she was. He would fight
Nature for once and try if pure intellect was strong enough to get the face
he wanted on to the canvas without the gratification of his flesh and
blood. In which determination glimmered something almost approaching to
self-sacrifice in such a man. He did not answer Joan's last remark, but
rose and went to his picture, and she, thinking herself snubbed by his
silence after her avowal, grew hot and uncomfortable.

"The weather is going to change, sweetheart," he said, allowing himself the
luxury of affectionate words in the moment of his half-hearted struggle;
"the weather-glass creeps back slowly. We must not waste time. Come, Joan;
we are the children of Nature, but the slaves of Art. Let me try again."

But she, who had spoken in all innocence and with a child's love, was
pained that he should have taken no note of her speech. She was almost
angry that he had power to conjure such words to her lips; and yet the
anger vanished from her mind quickly enough and her thoughts were all happy
as she resumed her pose for him.

The past few days had vastly deepened and widened her mental horizon; and
now Barron for the first time saw something of what he wanted in her eyes
as she gazed away over the sea and did not look at him as usual. There,
sure enough, was the soul that he knew slept somewhere, but had never seen
until then. And the sight of it came as a shock and swept away his
sophistries and ugly-woven ideas. Inclination had told him that Nature,
through one channel only, would bring the mystery of hidden thought to
Joan's blue eyes, and he had felt well satisfied to believe it was so; but
now even the plea of Art could not excuse the thing which had grown within
him of late, for experiences other than those he dreamed of had glorified
the frank blue eyes and brought mind into them. Now it only remained for
him to paint them if he could. Not wholly untroubled, but never much more
beautiful than that morning, Joan gazed out upon the remote sea. Then the
thoughtful mood passed, and she laughed and babbled again, and the new-born
beauty departed from her eyes for a season, and the warm blood raced
through her veins, and she was all happiness. Meanwhile nothing came of his
painting and he was not sorry when she ended the ordeal.

"The bwoats be comin' back home along, Mister Jan. I doan't mark faither's
yet, but when 'tis wance in sight he'll be to Newlyn sooner'n me. So I'd
best be gwaine, though it edn' more than noon, I s'pose. An' my heart's a
tidy sight lighter now than 'tweer issterday indeed."

"I'm almost afraid to let you go, Joan."

She looked at him curiously, waiting for his bidding, but he seemed moody,
and said no more.

"When be you comin' next?"

"To-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow, my pearl above price. It is so
hard, so very hard," he answered. "Fine or wet I shall be here to-morrow,
for I am not going back to Newlyn again till my work is done. Three more
sittings, Joan, if you have enough patience--"

"In coorse, Mister Jan."

She did not explain to him what difficulties daily grew in the way of her
coming, how rumor was alive, and how her stepmother had threatened more
than once to tell Gray Michael that his wayward daughter was growing a
gadabout. Joan had explained away her roaming with a variety of more or
less ingenious lies, and she always found her brain startlingly fertile
where the artist and his picture were concerned. She felt little doubt that
three more visits to Gorse Point might be achieved--ay, and thirty more if
necessary. But afterward? What would follow the painting of the picture?
She asked herself the question as he kissed her, with a kiss that was
almost rough, while he bid her go quickly; and the former reply to every
doubt made answer. Her fears fled as usual before the invigorating
spectacle of this sterling, truth-loving man. With him all the future
remained and with him only. Hers was the pleasant, passive task of
obedience to one utterly trusted and passionately loved. Her fate lay
hidden in his heart, as the fate of the clay lies hid in the brain of the
potter.

And so home she went, walking in a sunshine of her own thoughts. The clouds
were gone; they massed gloomily on the horizon of the past; but looking
forward, she saw no more of them. All time to come was at the disposition
of the wisest man she had ever met. She did not know or guess at the battle
which this same wise man had fought and lost under her eyes; she gathered
nothing of the truth from his gloom, his silence, his changed voice, his
sudden farewell. She did not know passion when she saw it; and the ugly
visible signs thereof told no tale to her.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

STORM


That night the change came and the wind veered first to the south, then to
the southwest. By morning, gray clouds hid the sky and hourly grew darker
and lower. As yet no rain fell, but the world had altered, and every
light-value, from an artist's standpoint, was modified.

John Barren sat by his stove in the byre, made himself a cup of black
coffee, and presently, wrapped in a big mackintosh, walked out to Gorse
Point. His picture he left, of course, at the shed, for painting was out of
the question.

Nature, who had been smiling so pleasantly in sunshine these many days, now
awoke in a grim gray mood. The sea ran high, its white foam-caps and ridges
fretting the rolling volume of it; the luggers fought their way out with
buried noses and laboring hulls; rain still held off, but it was coming
quickly, and the furze and the young grasses panted for it on Gorse Point.
Below the cliffs a wild spirit inhabited the sea fowl, and they screamed
and wheeled in many an aerial circle, now sliding with motionless
outstretched wing upon the gathering gale, now beating back against it, now
dancing in a fleet and making music far away in the foam. Upon the beach
the dry sand whipped round in little whirls and eddies where wind-gusts
caught it; the naked rocks poked shining weed-covered heads out of a low
tide, and the wet white light of them glimmered raw through the gray tones
of the atmosphere. Now and then a little cloud of dust would puff out from
the cliff-face where the wind dislodged a dry particle of stone or mould;
elsewhere Barren saw the sure-rooted samphire and tufts of sea-pink,
innocent of flowers as yet; and sometimes little squeaking dabs of down
might also be observed below where infant gulls huddled together in the
ledges outside their nests and gazed upon a condition of things as yet
beyond their experience.

Joan came presently to find the artist looking out at the sea.

"You ban't gwaine to paint, I s'pose, 'cause o' this ugly fashion weather?"
she said.

"No, sweetheart! All the gold has gone out of the world, and there is
nothing left but lead and dross. See how sharp the green is under the gray,
and note the clearness of the air. Everything is keen and hard upon the eye
to-day; the sky is full of rain and the sea is a wild harmony in gray and
silver."

"Iss, the cleeves be callin' this marnin'. 'Tis a sort o' whisper as comes
to a body's ear, an' it means that the high hills knaws the rain is nigh.
An' they tell it wan to t'other, and moans it mournful over the valleys
'pon the wind. 'The storm be comin', the storm be comin',' they sez."

The south and west regions of distance blackened as they sat there on the
cliff, and upon the sea separate heavy gusts of wind roughened up the
hollows of the waves. Which effect seen from afar flickered weirdly like a
sort of submarine lightning shivering white through dark water. Presently a
cloud broke, showing a bank of paler gray behind, and misty silver arrows
fell in broad bands of light upon the sea. They sped round, each upon the
last, like the spokes of a gigantic wheel trundling over the world; then
the clouds huddled together again and the gleam of brightness died.

"You'm wisht this marnin', Mister Jan. You abbun so much as two words for
me. 'Tis 'cause you caan't paint your picksher, I reckon."

He sighed and took her hand in his.

"Don't think that, my Joan. Once I cared nothing for you, everything for my
picture; now I care nothing for my picture, everything for you. And the
better I love you, the worse I paint you. That's funny, isn't it?"

"Iss, 'tis coorious. But I'm sure you do draw me a mighty sight finer than
I be. 'Tis wonnerful clever, an' theer edn' no call to be sad, for no man
else could a done better, I lay."

He did not answer, and still held her hand. Then there came a harder breath
of wind with a sob of sound in it, while already over the distant sea swept
separate gray curtains of rain.

"It's coming, Joan; the storm. It's everywhere, in earth and air and water;
and in my blood. I am savage to-day, Joan, savage and thirsty. What will be
the end of it?"

He spoke wildly, like the weather. She did not understand, but she felt his
hand clinch tightly over hers, and, looking at the white thin fingers
crooked round her wrist, they brought to her mind the twisted claws of a
dead sea-gull she remembered to have found upon the beach.

"What will be the end of it, Joan? Can't you answer me?"

"Doan't 'e, Mister Jan; you'm hurtin' my hand. I s'pose as a sou'westerly
gale be comin'. Us knaws 'em well enough in these paarts. Faither reckoned
theer was dirty weather blawin' up 'fore he sailed. He was away by
daylight. The gales do bring trouble to somebody most times."

"What will be the end of us, I mean, not of the weather? The rain will come
and the clouds will melt, and we know, as sure as God's in heaven, that we
shall see sunshine and blue sky again. But what about our storm, Joan; the
storm of love that's burst in my heart for you--what follows that?"

His question frightened her. She had asked herself the same and been well
content to leave an answer to him. Here he was faced with a like problem
and now invited her to solve it.

"I dunnaw. I thot such love never comed to no end, Mister Jan. I thot
'tweer good to wear; but--but how do I knaw if you doan't?"

"You trust me, Joan?"

"Why, who should I trust, if 'tweern't you? I never knawed any person else
as set such store 'pon the truth. I doan't s'pose the cherrybims in heaven
loves it more'n what you do."

"Here's the rain on the back of the wind," he said.

A few heavy drops fell, cold as ice upon his burning face, and Joan laughed
as she held out her hand, on which a great splash as big as a shilling had
spread.

"That be wan of Tregagle's tears," she said, "an' 'tis the voice of en as
you can hear howlin' in the wind. He's allus a bawlin' an' squealin', poor
sawl, but you can awnly hear en now an' again 'fore a storm when the gale
blaws his hollerin' this way."

"Who was Tregagle?"

"He was a lawyer man wance, an' killed a many wives, an' did a many
shameful deeds 'fore he went dead. Then, to Bodmin Court, theer comes a law
case, an' they wanted Tregagle, an' a man said Tregagle was the awnly
witness, and another said he wadden. The second man up an' swore 'If
Tregagle saw it done, then I wish to God he may rise from's graave and come
this minute.' Then, sure enough, the ghost of Tregagle 'peared in the
court-house an' shawed the man was a liar. But they couldn' lay the ghost
no more arter; an' it was a devil-ghost, which is the worstest kind; an' it
stuck close to thicky lyin' man an' wouldn' leave en nohow. But at last a
white witch bound the spirit an' condemned it to empty out Dosmery Pool wi'
a crogan wi' a hole in it. A crogan's a limpet shell, which you mightn't
knaw, Mister Jan. Tregagle, he done that party quick, an' then he was at
the man again; but a passon got the bettermost of en an' tamed en wi'
Scripture till Tregagle was as gentle as a cheel. Then they set en to work
agin an' bid en make a truss o' sand down in Gwenvor Cove, an' carry it
'pon his shoulder up to Carn Olva. Tregagle weer a braave time doin' that,
I can 'sure 'e, but theer comed a gert frost wan winter, an' he got water
from the brook an' poured it 'pon the truss o' sand, so it froze hard. Then
he carried it up Carn Olva; an' then, bein' a free spirit agin, he flew off
quicker'n lightning to that lyin' man to tear en to pieces this time. But
by good chance, when Tregagle comed to en, the man weer carryin' a lil
baaby in's arms--a lil cheel as had never done a single wicked act, bein'
tu young; so Tregagle couldn' do no hurt. An' they caught en again, an'
passon set en 'pon another job: to make a truss o' sand in Whitsand Bay
wi'out usin' any fresh water. But Tregagle caan't never do that; so he
cries bitter sometimes, an' howls; an' when 'e howls you knaw the storm's a
comin' to scatter the truss o' sand he's builded up."

Barron followed the legend with interest. Tregagle and his victim and the
charm of the pure child that saved one from the other filled his thought
and the event to which Fate was now relentlessly dragging him. He argued
with himself a little; then the rain came down and the wind leaped like a
lion over the edge of the land, and the man's blood boiled as he breathed
ocean air.

"Us'll be wetted proper. I'll run for it, Mister Jan, an' you'd best to go
up-long to your lil lew house. Wet's bad for 'e, I reckon."

"No," he said, "I can't let you go, Joan. Look over there. Another flood is
going to burst, I think. Follow me quickly, quickly."

The rain came slanting over the gorse in earnest, but Joan hesitated and
hung back. Louder than the wind, louder than the cry of the birds, than the
howling of Tregagle, than the calling of the cleeves, spoke something. And
it said "Turn, on the wing of the storm; fly before it, alone. Let this man
walk in the teeth of the gale if he will; but you, Joan Tregenza, follow
the wind and set your face to the east, where the sole brightness now left
in the sky is shining."

Sheets of gray swept over them; the world was wet in an instant; a little
mist of water splashed up two inches high off the ground; the gorse tossed
and swayed its tough arms; the sea and the struggling craft upon it
vanished like a dream; from the heart of the storm cried gulls, themselves
invisible.

"Come, Joan, we shall be drowned."

He had wrapped her in a part of the mackintosh, and laughed as he fastened
them both into it and hugged her close to himself. But she broke away,
greatly fearing, yet knowing not what she feared.

"I reckon I'd best run down fast. Indeed an' I want to go."

"Go? Where? Where should you go? Come to me, Joan; you shall; you must. We
two, sweetheart--we two against the rain and the wind and the world. Come!
It will kill me to stand here, and you don't want that."

"But--"

"Come, I say. Quicker and quicker! We two--only we two. Don't make me
command you, my priceless treasure of a Joan. Come with me. You are mine
now and always. Quicker and quicker, I say. God! what rain!"

Still she hesitated and he grew angry.

"This is folly, madness. Where is your trust and belief? You don't trust,
nor love, nor--"

"Doan't 'e say that! Never say that! It edn' true. You'm all to me, an' you
knaws it right well, an' I'll gaw to the world's end with 'e, I will--ay,
an' trust 'e wi' my life!"

He moved away and she followed, hastening as he hastened. Unutterable
desolation marked the spot. Life had vanished save only where sheep
clustered under a bank with their tails to the weather, and long-legged
lambs blinked their yellow eyes and bleated as the couple passed. Despite
their haste the man and the girl were very wet before reaching the shelter
of the byre. Rain-water dribbled off his cap on to his hot face and his
feet were soaking. Joan was breathless with haste; her draggled skirts
clung to her; and the struggle against the storm made her giddy.

So they reached the place of shelter; and the gale burst over it with a
great, crowning yell of wind and hurtle of rain. Then John Barren opened
the byre door and Joan Tregenza passed in before him; whereupon he followed
and shut the door.

A loose slate clattered upon the roof, and from inside the byre it sounded
like a hand tapping high above the artist's bed of brown fern--tapping some
message which neither the man nor the girl could read--tapping, tapping,
tapping tirelessly upon ears wholly deaf to it.






BOOK TWO

NATURE




CHAPTER ONE

AN INTERVAL


For a week the rain came down and it blew hard from the west. Then the
weather moderated, and there were intervals of brightness and mild, damp
warmth that brought a green veil trembling over the world like magic. The
elms broke into a million buds, the pear trees in sunny corners put forth
snowy flowers; the crimson knobs of the apple-blossom prepared to unfold.
In the market gardens around and about Newlyn the plums were already
setting, the wallflowers, which make a carpet of golden-brown beneath the
fruit-trees in many orchards, were velvety with bloom; the raspberry canes,
bent hoop-like in long rows, beautifully brightened the dark earth with
young green; and verdure likewise twinkled even to the heart of the
forests, to the stony nipples of the moor's vast, lonely bosom. So spring
came, heralded by the thrush; borne upon the wings of the western wind. And
then followed a brief change with more heavy rains and lower temperature.

The furzes on Gorse Point were a scented glory now--a nimbus of gold for
the skull of the lofty cliff. Here John Barren and Joan Tregenza had met
but twice since the beginning of the unsettled weather. For her this period
was in a measure mysterious and strange. Centuries of experience seemed to
separate her from the past, and, looking backward, infinite spaces of time
already stretched between what had been and what was. Now overmuch sorrow
mingled with her reflections, though a leaven of it ran through all--a
sense of loss, of sacrifice, of change, which flits, like the shadow of a
summer cloud, even through the soul of the most deeply loving woman who
ever opened her eyes to smile upon the first day-dawn of married life. But
Joan's sorrow was no greater than that, and little unquiet or uneasiness
went with it. She had his promises; from him they could but be absolute;
and not a hundred attested ceremonies had left her heart more at ease. In
fact she believed that John Barren was presently going to marry her, and
that when he vanished from Newlyn, she, as the better-loved part of
himself, would vanish too. It was the old, stale falsehood which men have
told a hundred thousand times; which men will go on telling and women
believing, because it is the only lie which meets all requirements of the
case and answers its exact purpose effectively. Age cannot wither it, for
experience is no part of the armor of the deceived, and Love and Trust have
never stopped to think since the world began.

As for the artist, each day now saw him slipping more deeply, more
comfortably back into the convolutions of his old impersonal shell. He had
been dragged out, not unwilling, by a giant passion, and he had sacrificed
to it, sent it to sleep again, and so returned. He felt infinitely kind to
Joan. A week after her visit to the linhay he, while sitting alone there,
had turned her picture about on the easel, withdrawn its face from the wall
and studied his work. And looking, with restored critical faculty and cold
blood, he loved the paint for itself and deemed it very good. The storm was
over, the transitory lightnings drowned lesser lights no more, and that
steady beacon-flame of his life, which had been merged, not lost, in the
fleeting blaze, now shone out again, steadfast and clear. Such a revulsion
of feeling argued well for the completion of his picture, ill for the model
of it.

They sat one day, as the weather grew more settled, beside a granite
bowlder, which studded the short turf at the extremity of Gorse Point,
where it jutted above the sea. Joan, with her chin upon her hands, looked
out upon the water; Barron, lying on a railway-rug, leaned back and smoked
his pipe and studied her face with the old, keen, passionless eagerness of
their earliest meetings.

"When'll 'e tell me, Jan love? When'll 'e tell me what 'e be gwaine to do?
Us be wan now--you an' me--but the lines be all the lovin'est wife can
p'int to in proof she _be_ a wife. Couldn't us be axed out in church
purty soon?"

He did not make immediate answer, but only longed for his easel. There, in
her face, was the wistful, far-away expression he had sighed for; a measure
of thought had come to the little animal--her brains were awake and her
blue eyes had never looked liked this before. Joan asked the question
again, and Barren answered.

"The same matter was in my own mind, sweetheart. I am in a mighty hurry
too, believe it. You are safe with your husband, Joan. You belong to me
now, and you must trust the future with me. All that law demands to make us
man and wife it shall have; and all religion clamors for as well, if that
is a great matter to you. But not here--in this Newlyn. I think of you when
I say that, Joan, for it matters nothing to me."

"Iss. I dunnaw what awful sayin's might go abroad. Things is all contrary
to home as 'tis. Mother's guessed part an' she tawld faither I weer gwaine
daft or else in love wi' some pusson else than Joe. An' faither was short
an' sharp, an' took me out walkin', an' bid me bide at home an' give over
trapsin' 'bout. An' 'e said as 'ow I was tokened to Joe Noy an' bound by
God A'mighty to wait for en if 'twas a score years. But if faither had
knawed I weer never for Noy, he'd a' said more'n that. I ban't 'feared o'
faither now I knaws you, Jan, but I be cruel 'feared o' bein' cussed,
'cause theer's times when cusses doan't fall to the ground but sticks.
'Twouldn' be well for the likes o' you to have a ill-wished, awver-luked
body for wife. An' if faither knawed 'bout you, then I lay he'd do more'n
speak. So like's not he'd strike me dead for't, bein' that religious. But
you must take me away, Jan, dear heart. I'm yourn now an' you must go on
lovin' me allus, 'cause theer'll never be nobody else to not now. I've
chose you an' gived 'e myself an' I caan't do no more."

He listened to her delicious voice, and shut out the crude words as much as
might be while he marked the music. He was thinking that if Joan had
possessed a reasonable measure of intellect, a foundation for an education,
he would have been satisfied to keep her about him during that probably
limited number of years which must span his existence. But the gulf between
them was too wide; and, as for the present position, he considered that no
harm had been done which time would not remedy. Joan was not sufficiently
intelligent to suffer long or much. She would forget quickly. She was very
young. Her sailor must return before the end of the year. Then he began to
think of money, and then sneered at himself. But, after all, it was natural
that he should follow step by step upon the beaten track of similar events.
"Better not attempt originality," he thought, "for the thing I have done is
scarce capable of original treatment. I suppose the curtain always rings
down on a check--either taken or spurned."

"So you think you can give them all up for poor me, Joan? Your home, your
father, brother, mother--all?"

"I've gived up a sight more'n them, Jan. I've gived 'e what's all to a
maiden. But my folks weern't hard to give up. 'Tis long since they was
ought to me now. I gaws an' comes from the cottage an' sez, all the time,
'this ban't home no more. Mister Jan's home be mine,' I sez to myself. An'
each time as I breaks bread, an' sleeps, an' wakes, an' looks arter
faither's clothes I feels 'tis wan time nigher the last. They'll look back
an' think what a snake 'twas they had 'bout the house, I s'pose. Mother'll
whine an' say, 'Ah! 'er was a bitter weed for sartain,' an' faither'll
thunder till the crocks rattle an' bid none dare foul the air wi' my name
no more. But I be wearyin' of 'e wi' my clackin', Jan, dear heart?"

"Not so, Joan--never think that. I could listen to you till Doomsday. Only
we must act now and talk presently. I know you're tired of the picture, and
you were cross last time we met because I could speak of it; but I must for
a moment more. It cries out to be finished. A few hours' good work and
all's done. The weather steadies now and the glass is rising, so our
sittings may begin in a day or two. Let me make one last, grand struggle.
Then, if I fail, I shall fling the picture over this cliff, and my palette
and brushes after it. So we will keep our secret a little longer. Then,
when the picture is made or marred, away we'll go, and by the time they
miss you from your old home you will be half way to your new one."

But she did not heed the latter part of his remarks, for her thoughts were
occupied with what had gone before.

"'Pears, when all's said, you'd sooner have the picksher Joan than the real
wan. 'Tis all the picksher an' the picksher an' the picksher."

This was not less than the truth, but of course he blamed her for so
speaking, and said her words hurt him.

"'Tis this way," she said, "I've larned so much since I knawed 'e, an' I be
like as if I was woke from a sleep. Things is all differ'nt now; but 'tis
awnly my gert love for 'e as makes me 'feared sometimes 'cause life's too
butivul to last. An' the picksher frights me more'n fancy, 'cause,
seemin'ly, theer's two Joans, an' the picksher Joan's purtier than me.
'Er's me, but better'n me. 'Er's allus bright an' bonny; 'er's never
crossed an' wisht; 'er 'olds 'er tongue an' doan't talk countrified same as
me. Theer'll never be no tears nor trouble in her eyes; she'll bring 'e a
name, an' bide purty an'--an' I hates the picksher now, so I do."

Barron listened with considerable interest to these remarks. There was
passion in Joan's voice as she concluded, and her emotion presently found
relief in tears. She only uttered thoughts long in her mind, without for an
instant guessing the grim truth or suspecting what his work was to the man;
yet, things being as they were, she felt some real passing pain to find him
devote so much thought to it. Before the storm his painting had sunk to
insignificance, since then it began to grow into a great matter again; and
Joan was honestly jealous of the attention the artist bestowed upon it now.
If she had dared, she would have asked him to destroy it; but something
told her he would refuse. No fear for the future was mingled with this
emotion. Only his mighty interest in the work annoyed her. It was a natural
petty jealousy; and when John Barron laughed at her and kissed her tears
away, she laughed too and felt a little ashamed, though none the less glad
that she had spoken.

But while he flung jests at her anger, Barron felt secretly surprised to
note the strides his Awdrey's mind was making. Much worth consideration
appeared in her sudden attack upon the picture. She had evidently been
really reflecting, with coherence and lucidity. That astonished him. But
still he answered with a laugh.

"Jealous, Joan! Jealous of yourself--of the poor painted thing which has
risen from the contents of small tubes smeared over a bit of canvas! My
funny little dear delight! Will you always amuse me, I wonder? I hope you
will. Nobody else can. Why, the gorse there will grumble next and think I
love my poor, daubed burlesque of its gold better than the thing itself. If
I find pleasure in the picture, how much the more must I love the soul of
it? You see, I'm ambitious. You are quite the hardest thing I ever found to
paint, and so I go on trying and trying. Hard to win and hard to paint,
Joan."

She stretched out her hands to him and shook her head.

"Not hard to win, Jan. Easy enough to win to you. I ne'er seed the likes o'
you in my small world. Not hard to win I wasn't."

"You won't refuse me a few more sittings, then, because you have become my
precious wife?"

"In coorse not. An' I'm so sorry I was cranky. I 'dedn' mean what I said
ezacally."

To-day, coming fresh to his ear after a week's interval, after several days
spent with cultured friends and acquaintances in Newlyn, Joan's rustic
speech grated more painfully than usual. Once he had found pleasure in it;
but he was not a Cornishman to love the sound of those venerable words
which sprinkled Joan's utterances and which have long since vanished from
all vocabularies save those of the common people; and now her language
began to get upon his nerves and jar them. He was tired of it. Often, while
he painted, she had prattled and he, occupied with his work, had heard
nothing; but to-day he recognized the debt he owed and listened patiently
for a considerable time. Her deep expectancy irritated him too. He had
anticipated that, however, and was aware that her trust and confidence in
him were alike profound. Perhaps a shadow of fear, distrust or uneasiness
had pleased him better. He was snugly back in his tub of impersonality from
which he liked to view the fools' show drift pass. His last experiment in
the actively objective had ruined a girl and promised to produce a fine
picture. And that was the end of it. No fellow-creature could ever share
this cynic's barrel with him.

Presently Joan departed upon her long tramp home. She had gone to convey a
message to one of Thomasin Tregenza's friends at Paul. And when the girl
left him, with a promise to come at all costs upon the next sunny morning,
Barron began to think about money again. He found that the larger the
imaginary figures, the smaller shadow of discomfort clouded his thoughts.
So he decided upon an act of princely generosity, as the result of which
resolve peace returned and an unruffled mind. For the musty conventionality
of his conclusion, it merely served as a peg upon which to hang thoughts
not necessary to set down here.




CHAPTER TWO

THE PARTING


Joan had only told her lover a part of what happened in her home when
Thomasin broke her suspicions to Gray Michael. He had taken the matter very
seriously indeed, delivered a stern homily and commanded his daughter to
read the Book of Ecclesiasticus through thrice.

"'The gad-about is a vain thing and a mighty cause for stumblin'.' You mind
that, an' take better care hencefarrard to set a right example to other
maids an' not lead 'em wrong. Theer shan't be no froward liver under this
roof, Joan Tregenza, an' you, as be my awn darter's the last I'd count to
find wanderin'."

She lied as to particulars. She had no fear of her father now as a man, but
hard words always hurt her, and superstition, though she was fast breaking
from many forms of it under Barron's tuition, still chained her soul in
some directions. Did her father know even a shadow of the truth, some dire
and blasting prediction would probably result from it, and though
personally he was little to her now, as a mouthpiece of supernatural powers
he might bring blighting words upon her; for he walked with God. But
Michael's God was Joan's no more. She had fled from that awful divinity to
the more beautiful Creator of John Barron. He was kind and gentle, and she
loved to hear His voice in the hum of the bees upon the gorse and see His
face everywhere in the fair on-coming of spring. Nature, as she understood
it now, chimed with the things her mother had taught Joan. She found room
for all the old, pretty stories in this new creed. The dear saints fitted
in with it, and their wonders and mysteries, and the comprehensive if vague
knowledge that "God is Love." She believed she understood the truth about
religion at last; and Nature smiled very sweetly at her and shared in the
delight of the time. So she walked dreaming on toward the invisible door of
her fool's paradise, and never guessed how near it was or what Nature would
look like from the other side.

She still dwelt at the little home on the cliff, so unreal and shadowy now;
she built cloud castles ablaze with happiness; she found falsehood not
difficult, for her former absolute truthfulness deadened her stepmother's
suspicion. Certain lies told at home enabled her to keep faith with the
artist; and the weather also befriending him, three more sittings in speedy
succession brought John Barron to the end of his labors. After Joan's
exhibition of jealousy he was careful to say little about his work and
affect no further interest in it. He let her chatter concerning the future,
told her of his big house in London, and presently took care to drop hints
from time to time that the habitation was by no means as yet ready to
receive his bride. She always spoke on the assumption that when the picture
was done he would leave for London and take her with him. She already
imagined herself creeping off to join him at the station, sitting beside
him in the train, and then rolling away, past Marazion, into the great
unfamiliar world which lay beyond. And he knew that no such thing would
happen. He intended that Joan should become a pleasant memory, with the
veil of distance and time over it to beautify what was already beautiful.
He wanted to remember the music of her throbbing voice, and forget the
words it used to utter. The living girl's part was played and ended. Their
lives had crossed at right angles and would never meet again. "Nature makes
a glorious present to Art, and I am privileged to execute the deed of
gift," thought Barron; "that is the position in an epigram." He felt very
grateful to Joan. He knew her arm must have ached often enough, but whether
her heart would presently do so he hardly felt qualified to judge. The
incidents of that stormy day might have been buried in time ten years, so
faint was his recollection of them now. He remembered the matter with no
greater concern than the image of the shivering negresses in the blue water
at Tobago.

And so the picture, called "Joe's Ship," was finished, and while it fell
far short of what Barron had hoped, yet he knew his work was great and the
best thing he had done. A packing case for the canvas was already ordered
and he expected it upon the identical day that saw his farewell to Joan.

Bit by bit he had broken to her that it was not his intention to take her
with him, but that he must go to his house alone and order things in
readiness. Then he would come back and fetch her. And she had accepted the
position and felt wondrous sad at the first meeting with Barren after the
completion of the picture. It seemed as though a great link was broken
between them, and she realized now what folly her dislike of his work had
been.

"I wish I could take you right away with me, Joan, my little love; but a
bachelor's house is a comfortless concern from a woman's point of view. You
will hear from me in a day or two. You must call at the post-office in
Penzance for letters, because I shall not send them here."

"You'll print out what you writes big, so's I doan't miss nort, won't 'e?"

"I'll make the meaning as clear as possible, Joan."

"'Tis wisht to think as theer'll be hunderds o' miles 'twixt us. I doan't
know how I be gwaine to live the days out."

"Only a fortnight, remember."

"Fourteen whole days an' nights."

"Yes, indeed. It seems a terribly long time. You must comfort me,
sweetheart, and tell me that they will be very quickly done with."

Joan laughed at this turning of the tables.

"I reckon a man's allus got a plenty things to make time pass for en. But
'tis different wi' a gal."

She trusted him as she trusted God to lift the sun out of the eastern sea
next morning and swing it in its solemn course over heaven. And as there
was no fear of danger and no shadow of distrust upon her, Joan made a
braver parting than her lover expected.

"Some men are coming to see my picture presently," he said, very gently. "I
expect my sweet Joan would like to be gone before they arrive."

She took the hint, braced her heart for the ordeal, and rose from where
they had been sitting on Gorse Point. She looked dreamily a moment at the
furzes and the place whereon she had stood so often, then turned to the man
and came close and held up four little spring lilies which she had brought
with her. Her voice grew unsteady, but she mastered it again and smiled at
him.

"I brot these for 'e, dear Jan. Us calls 'em butter-an'-eggs, 'cause o' the
colors, I s'pose. They'm awnly four lil flowers. Will 'e keep 'em? An'--an'
give me summat as I can knaw's just bin in your hand, will 'e? 'Tis
fulishness, dear heart, but I'm thinkin' 'twould make the days a dinky bit
shorter."

He took the gift, thought a moment, and gave her a little silver ring off
his finger. Then he kissed her, pressed her close to him and said
"good-by," asking God to bless her, and so forth.

With but a few tears rebelling against her determination, Joan prayed good
upon his head, repaid the caress, begged him for his love to come quickly
back again, then tore herself away, turned and hastened off with her head
held bravely up. But the green fields swam and the sea danced for her a
moment later. The world was all splashed and blotched and misty. "I'll be
braave like him," she thought, smothering the great sobs and rubbing her
knuckles into her eyes till she hurt them. But she could not stem the
sorrow in a moment, and, climbing through a gap in the hedge, she sat down,
where only ewes and lambs might see, and cried bitterly a while. And so
weeping, a sensation, strange, vague, tremendous, came into her being; and
she knew not what it meant; but the mystery of it filled her with great
awe. "'Tis God," she said to herself, "'tis God's hand upon me. He've
touched me, He've sealed me to dear, dear Jan. 'Tis a feelin' to bring
happiness along with it, nor sorrer." She battled with herself to read the
wonder aright, and yet at the bottom of her heart was fear. Then physical
sensations distracted her; she found her head was aching and her body
feeling sick. Truly the girl had been through an ordeal that day, and so
she explained her discomfort. "I be wivvery an' wisht along o' leavin' en,"
she said; "oh! kind, good God A'mighty, as hears all, send en back to me,
send en back to me very soon, for I caan't live wi'out en no more."

As for the man, he sighed when Joan disappeared; and the expiration of
breath was short and sharp as the sound of a key in a lock. He had in truth
turned the key upon a diary to be opened no more; for the sweetness of the
closed chapter was embalmed in memory, blazoned on canvas. Yet there was
bitterness, too, of a sort in his sigh, and the result of this sunken
twinge at his heart appeared when Brady, Tarrant and one or two other
artists presently joined him. They saw their companion was perturbed, and
found him plunged into a black, cynic fit more deeply than usual. He spared
no subject, no individual, least of all himself.

Paul Tarrant--a Christian painter, already mentioned--was the first to
find fault with Barron's picture. The rest had little but praise for it,
and Brady, who grew madly enthusiastic, swore that "Joe's Ship" was the
finest bit of work that ever went out of Cornwall. But Tarrant cherished a
private grievance, and, as his view of art and ethics made it possible for
him, from his standpoint, to criticise the picture unfavorably in some
respects, he did so. It happened that he had recently finished a curious
work for the Academy: a painting called "The Good Shepherd." It represented
a young laboring man with a face of rare beauty but little power, plodding
homeward under setting sunlight. Upon his arm he bore a lamb, and behind
his head the sinking sun made a glorious nimbus. Barron had seen this work,
admired some of the painting, but bluntly sneered at the false sentiment
and vulgar parade of religious conviction which, as he conceived, animated
the whole. And now, the other man, in whose heart those contemptuous words
still rankled, found his turn had come. He had bitterly resented Barron's
sarcastic reference to those holy things which guided his life; there was
something of feminine nature in him too; so he did not much regret the
present opportunity.

"And you, Tarrant? This gives you scant pleasure--eh?" asked Barron.

"It is very wonderful painting, but there's nothing under the paint that I
can see."

"Nothing but the canvas--in so far at least as the spectator is concerned.
Every work of art must have a secret history only known to its creator."

"What the divil d'you mean, Paul?" asked Brady.

"You know what I mean well enough," answered the first speaker coldly. "My
views are not unfamiliar to any of you. Here is a thing without a soul--to
me."

"God! you say that! You can look at those eyes and say that?"

"I admire the painting, but _cui bono_? Who is the better, the wiser?
There is nothing under the paint."

"You are one of those who turn shadows into crosses, clouds into angels. Is
it not so?" asked Barron smiling; and the other fired at this allusion to
his best known picture.

"I am one of those who know that Art is the handmaid of God," he answered
hotly. "I happen to believe in Jesus Christ, and I conceive that no picture
is worthy to be called great or worthy of any Christian's painting unless
it possess some qualities calculated to ennoble the mind of those who see.
Art is the noblest labor man can employ time upon. The thing comes from
God; it is a talent only to be employed in the highest sense when devoted
to His glory."

"Then what of heathen art? You let your religion distort your view of
Nature. You sacrifice truth to a dogma. Nature has no ethics. You profess
to paint facts and paint them wrong. You are not a mystic; that we could
understand and criticise accordingly. You try to run with the hare and hunt
with the hounds. You talk about truth and paint things not true."

"From your standpoint possibly. Yours is the truth of naturalism; mine is
the truth of Faith."

"If you are going to entrench yourself behind Faith, I have done, of
course. Only, don't go about saying, as you did just now, that Art is the
noblest labor man can employ time upon. That's bosh, pure and simple. There
are some occupations not so noble, that is all. Art is a heathen and always
will be, and you missionary-men, with a paint-brush in one hand and a Bible
in the other, are even worse than certain objectionable literary
celebrities, whose novels reek of the 'new journalism' and the Sermon on
the Mount--the ridiculous and sublime in tasteless combination. You
missionaries, I say, sap the primitive strength of Art; you demoralize her.
To dare to make Art pander to a passing creed is vile--worse than the
spectacle of the Salvation Army trying to convert Buddhists. That I saw in
India, and laughed. But we won't quarrel. You paint Faith's jewelry; I'll
amuse myself with Truth's drabs and duns. The point of view is all. I
depict pretty Joan Tregenza looking over the sea to catch a glimpse of her
sweetheart's outward-bound ship. I paint her just as I saw her. There was
no occasion to leave out or put in. I reveled in a mere brutal transcript
of Nature. You would have set her down by one of the old Cornish crosses
praying to Christ to guard her man. And round her you would have wrought a
world of idle significance. You would have twisted dogma into the flowers
and grass-blades. The fact that the girl happened to be practically
brainless and a Luke Gospeler would not have weighed with you a moment."

"I'm weary of the old cant about Nature," said Tarrant. "You're a
naturalist and a materialist. That ends it. There is no possibility of
argument between us."

"Would the man who painted that gorse cant?" burst out Brady. "Damn it all,
Tarrant, if a chap can teach us to paint, perhaps he can teach us something
else as well. Look at that gorse, I tell you. That's the truth, won with
many a wrestle and heartache, I'll swear. You know as well as I do what
went to get that, and yet you say there's nothing behind the paint. That's
cant, if you like. And as to your religious spirit, what's the good of
preaching sermons in paint if the paint's false? We're on it now and I'll
say what I believe, which is that your 'Good Shepherd' is all wrong, apart
from any question of sentiment at all. Your own party will probably say
it's blasphemous, and I say it's ridiculous. You've painted a grand sky and
then ruined it with the subject. Did you ever see a man's head bang between
you and a clear setting sun? Any way, that figure of yours was never
painted with a sunset behind him, I'll swear."

"You can't paint truth as you find it and preach truth as you believe it on
the same canvas if you belong to any creed but mine," said Barron calmly.
"You build on the foundations of Art a series of temples to your religious
convictions. You blaze Christianity on every canvas. I suppose that is
natural in a man of your opinions, but to me it is as painful as the
spectacle of advertisements of quack nostrums planted, as you shall see
them, beside railway lines--here in a golden field of buttercups, there
rising above young barley. Of course, I don't presume to assert that your
faith is a quack nostrum; only real Art and Religion won't run in double
harness for you or anybody. They did once, but the world has passed beyond
that point."

"Never," answered Tarrant. "We have proof of it. Souls have been saved by
pictures. That is as certain as that God made the earth and everything on
it."

"There again! Every word you speak only shows how difficult it is for us to
exchange ideas. Why is it so positively certain that God made the earth and
everything on it? To attribute man's origin direct to God is always, in my
mind, the supreme proposition of human conceit. Did it need a God to
manufacture you or me or Brady? I don't think so. Consider creation. I
suppose if an ant could gauge the ingenuity of a steam engine, he would
attribute it without hesitation to God, but it happens that the steam
engine is the work of a creature--a being standing somewhere between God
and the ant, but much nearer the latter than the former. You follow me?
Even Tarrant will admit, for it is an article of his creed, that there
exist many beings nearer to God than man. They have wings, he would tell
us, and are eternal, immortal, everlasting."

"I see," said Brady, "you're going to say next that faulty concerns like
this particular world are the work of minor intelligences. What rot you can
talk at times, old man!"

"Yet is it an honor to God Almighty that we attribute the contents of this
poor pill of a planet to Him? I think it would be an insult if you ask me.
Out of respect to the Everlasting, I would rather suppose that the earth,
being by chance a concern too small for His present purposes, He tosses it,
as we toss a dog a bone, to some ingenious archangel with a theory. Then
you enjoy the spectacle of that seraph about as busy over this notable
world as a child with a mud pie. The winged one sets to work with a will. A
little pinch of life; develops under his skillful manipulation; evolution
takes its remorseless course through the wastes of Time until--behold! the
apotheosis of the ape at last. Picture that well-meaning but muddle-headed
archangel's dismay at such a conclusion! All his theories and conceits--his
splendid scheme of evolution and the rest--end in a mean but obstinate
creature with conscious intelligence and an absolute contempt and disregard
for Nature. This poor Frankenstein of a cherub watches the worm he has
produced defy him and refuse absolutely to obey his most fundamental
postulates or accept his axioms. The fittest survive no more; these
gregarious, new-born things presently form themselves into a pestilential
society, they breed rubbish, they--"

"By God! stop it, John," said Murdoch. "Now you're going too far. Look at
Tarrant. He'd burn you over a slow fire for this if he could. Speak for
yourself at any rate, not for us."

"I do," answered the other bitterly. "I speak for myself. I know what a
poor, rotten cur I am physically and mentally--not worth the bread I eat to
keep me alive. And shall I dare say that God made me?"

"But what's the end of this philosophy of despair, old chap?" asked Brady;
"what becomes of your worst of all possible planets?"

"The end? Dust and ashes. My unfortunate workman, having blundered on for
certain millions of years tinkering and patching and improving his dismal
colony, will give the thing up; and God will laugh and show him the
mistakes and then blot the essay out, as a master runs his pen through the
errors in a pupil's exercise. The earth grows cold at last, and the herds
of humanity die, and the countless ages of agony and misery are over. Yes,
the poor vermin perish to the last one; then their black tomb goes whirling
on until it shall be allowed to meet another like itself, when a new sun
shines in heaven and space is the richer by one more star."

"May God forgive you for your profanity, John Barren," said Tarrant. "That
He places in your hand such power and suffers your brain to breed the
devil's dung that fills it, is to me a mystery. May you live to learn your
errors and regret them."

He turned away and two men followed him. Conversation among those who
remained reverted to the picture; and presently all were gone, excepting
only Barren, who had to wait and see his work packed.

Remorse will take strange shapes. His bitter tirade against his environment
and himself was the direct result of this man's recent experiences. He knew
himself for a mean knave in his dealings with an innocent girl and the
thought turned the aspect of all things into gall.

Solitude brought back a measure of peace. The picture was packed and
started to Penzance railway-station, while Barron's tools also went, by
pony-cart, back to his rooms in Newlyn. He was to leave upon the following
morning with Murdoch and others who were taking their work to the
Exhibitions.

Now he looked round the cow-byre before locking it for the last time and
returning the key to Farmer Ford's boy, who waited outside to receive it.
"The chapter is ended," he said to himself. "The chapter which contains the
best thing that ever I did, and, I suppose, the worst, as morals have it.
Yet Art happily rises above those misty abstractions which we call right
and wrong. She resembles Nature herself there. Both demand their
sacrifices. 'The white martyrdom of self-denial, the red martyrdom of
blood--each is a thousand times recorded in the history of painting and
will be a thousand times again."




CHAPTER THREE

THE ACT OF FAITH


So John Barren set forth, well content to believe that he would never again
visit Cornwall, and Joan called at the Penzance post-office on the morning
which followed his departure. Her geographical knowledge was scanty. Truro
and Plymouth, in her belief, lay somewhere upon the edge of the world; and
she scarcely imagined that London could be much more remote.
 But no letter awaited her, and life grew to be terribly empty. For a week
she struggled with herself to keep from the post-office, and then, nothing
doubting that her patience would now be well rewarded, Joan marched off
with confidence for the treasure. But only a greater disappointment than
the last resulted; and she went home very sorrowful, building up
explanations of the silence, finding excuses for "Mister Jan." The prefix
to his name, which had dropped during their latter intimacy, returned to
her mind now the man was gone: as "Mister Jan" it was that she thought
about him and prayed for him.

The days passed quickly, and when a fortnight stood between herself and the
last glimpse of her lover, Joan began to grow very anxious. She wept
through long nights now, and her father, finding the girl changed, guessed
she had a secret and told his wife to find it out. But it was some time
before Thomasin made any discovery, for Joan lied stoutly by day and prayed
to God to pardon by night. She strove hard to follow the teaching of the
artist, to find joy in flowers and leaves, in the spring music of birds, in
the color of the sea. But now she dimly guessed that it was love of him
which went so far to make all things beautiful, that it was the magic and
wisdom of his words which had gilded the world with gold and thrown new
light upon the old familiar objects of life. Nature's organ was dumb now
that the hands which played upon it so skillfully had passed far away. But
she was loyal to her teacher; she remembered many things which he had said
and tried hard to feel as he felt, to put her hand in beautiful Mother
Nature's and walk with her and be at peace. Mister Jan would soon return;
the fortnight was already past; each day as she rose she felt he might come
to claim her before the evening.

And, meanwhile, other concerns occupied her thoughts. The voice which spoke
to her after she bid John Barren "good-by," had since then similarly
sounded on the ear of her heart. Alike at high noon and in the silence of
the night watches it addressed her; and the mystery of it, taken with her
other sorrows, began to affect her physically. For the first time in her
life the girl felt ill in body. Her appetite failed, dawn found her sick
and weary; her glass told her of a white, unhappy face, of eyes that were
lighted from within and shone with strange thoughts. She was always
listening now--listening for the new voice, that she might hear the word it
uttered. Her physical illness she hid with some cunning and put a bright
face upon life as far as she could do so before those of her home; but the
task grew daily more difficult. Then, with a period of greatly increased
discomfort, Joan grew alarmed and turned to the kind God of "Mister Jan,"
and made great, tearful praying for a return of strength. Her petition was
apparently granted, for the girl enjoyed some improvement of health and
spirit. Whereupon she became fired with a notable thought, and determined
to seek her patron saint where still she suspected his power held sway: at
the little brook which tinkles along beside the ruins of St. Madron's
chapel in a fair coomb below the Cornish moorlands. The precious water, as
Joan remembered, had brought strength and health to her when a baby; and
now the girl longed to try its virtues again, and a great conviction grew
upon her that the ancient saint never forgot his own little ones.
Opportunity presently offered, and through the first misty gray of a
morning in early April, she set out upon her long tramp from Newlyn through
Madron to the ruined baptistery.

St. Madron, or Padern, lived in the sixth century, somewhat earlier than
Augustine. A Breton by birth, he labored chiefly in Wales, established a
monastery on Brito-Celtic lines in Cardiganshire, and became its bishop
when a see was established in that district. He traveled far, visited
Mount's Bay and established the church of Madron, still sacred to his name,
while doubtless the brook and chapel hard by were associated with him from
the same period. In Scawen's time folk were wont to take their hurts
thither on Corpus Christi evening, drink of the water, deposit an offering,
and repose upon the chapel floor till dawn. Then, drinking again, they
departed whole, if faith sufficiently mighty had supported them. Norden
remarks of the water that "its fame was great for the supposed vertue of
healinge, which St. Maderne had thereunto infused; and maine votaries made
anuale pilgrimages unto it...." In connection with the custom of immersion
here indicated, we find there obtained the equally venerable practice of
hanging votive rags upon the thorn bushes round about the chapel. This
conceit is ancient as Japan, and one not only in usage to this day among
the Shintoists of that land, but likewise common throughout Northern Asia
and, nearer home, in the Orkneys, in Scotland, in Ireland. Older far than
Christianity are these customs; the megalithic monuments of the pagan
witness similar practices in remote corners of the earth; rag-trees,
burdened with the tattered offerings of the devout, yet stud the desert of
Suez, and those who seek shall surely find some holy well or grave hard at
hand in every case. To mark and examine the junction of these venerable
fancies with Christian superstition is no part of our present purpose, but
that ideas, pagan in their birth, have lent themselves with sufficient
readiness to successive creeds and been knit into the dogmas of each in
turn, is certain enough. Thus, through Cornwall, the imaginings of wizard
and wonder-worker in hoary time come, centuries later, to be the glory and
special power of a saint. Such fantastic lore was definitely interdicted in
King Edgar's reign, when "stone worshipings, divinations, well worshipings
and necromances" were proclaimed things heathen, and unhallowed; but with
the advent of the Saint-Bishops from Wales, from Ireland, from Brittany,
primitive superstitions were patched upon the new creed, and, to suit
private purposes, the old giants of the Christian faith sanctified holy
well and holy stone, posing by right divine as sure dispensers of the
hidden virtue in stream and granite. But the roots of these fables burrow
back to paganism. Hundreds of weakly infants were passed through
Mên-an-tol--the stone with a hole or the "crick-stone"--in the names of
saints; and hundreds had already been handed through it centuries before
under like appeal to pagan deities.

Of Madron baptistery, now a picturesque ruin, it seems clear that until the
Reformation regular worship and the service of baptism were therein
celebrated. The place has mercifully escaped all restoration or renovation
and stands at this moment open to the sky in the slow hand of Time. A brook
runs babbling outside, but the holy well or colymbethra is now dry, though
it might easily be filled again. This interesting portion of the chapel
remains intact, and the entrance to it lies upon the level of the floor
according to ancient custom, being so ordered that the adult to undergo
baptism might step down into the water, and that not without dignity.

Hither came Joan. Her patchwork of faith and Nature-worship was a live
thing to her now, and she found no difficulty in reconciling the sweet
saint-stories heard in childhood from her dead mother's lips, with the
beautiful and fair exposition of truth which "Mister Jan" found written
large upon the world by Nature in spring-time.

It was half-past four o'clock when she trudged through Madron to see the
gray church and the little gray houses all sleeping under the gray sky. She
plodded on up the hill past the gaunt workhouse which stands at the top of
it; and what had seemed soft, sweet repose among the cottage homes, felt
like cold death beneath these ashy walls. To Joan, the workhouse was a word
of shame unutterable. Those among whom she lived would hurl the word
against enemies as a prophecy of the utmost degradation. She shivered as
she passed, and was sad, knowing that a whole world of poverty, failure,
sorrow, regret, was hidden away in that cold, still pile. But the hand of
sleep lay softly there; only a sick soul or two stirred, the paupers were
the equal of princes till a hoarse bell brought them back out of blessed
unconsciousness.

Bars of light streaked the east, and Joan, only stopping at the hill crest
to see dawn open silver eyes on the sea, hastened inland through silent,
dewy fields. Presently a fence and wall cut civilization from the wild land
of the coomb, and the girl proceeded where grass-grown cart-ruts wound
among furze and heather and the silver coils of new-born bracken just
beginning to peep up above the dead fern of last year. This hollow ran
between undulations of fallow and meadow; no harrow clinked as yet; only
the cows stood here and there above the dry patches on the dewy fields
where their bodies had lain in sleep. She saw their soft eyes and smelled
the savor of them. Presently the cart-ruts disappeared in fine grass all
bediamonded, knobbed with heather, sprouting rusty-red, and sprinkled with
tussocks of coarser grass, whereon green blades sprang up above the dead
ones, where they struggled, matted and bleached and sere. Rabbits flashed
here and there, the white under-side of their little scuts twinkling
through the gorse; and then the birds woke up; a thrush sang low, sleepy
notes from the heart of a whitethorn; yellowhammers piped their mournful
calls from the furze. On Joan's left hand there now rose a clump of
wind-worn beech-trees, their brown spikes breaking to green, even where
dead red leaves still clung to the parent branches. Beneath them ran a
hedge of earth above a deep pool or two, very clear and fringed with young
rushes, upright and triumphant above the old dead ones. Everywhere Joan saw
Life trampling and leaping, growing and laughing over the ruins of things
that had lived and died. It saddened her a little. Did Nature forget so
soon? Then she told herself that kind Nature had loved them and gloried in
them too; and now she would presently bury all her dead children in
beautiful graves of new green. The mosses and marsh were lovely and the
clear pools full of living creatures. But these things were not
saint-blessed and eternal. No spring fed these silent wells, no holy man of
old had ever smiled upon them.

A stepping-stone by a wall lay before her now; this she crossed, heard the
stream murmuring peace, and hastened, and presently stood beside it. Here
were holy ground and water; here were peace and a place to pray in. Blue
forget-me-nots looked wondering up, seeing eyes as blue as their own, and
she smiled at them and drank of the ripples that ran at their roots. Gray
through the growing haze of green, a ruined wall showed close to the girl.
The blackthorns' blooms were faded around her, the hawthorn was not yet
powdered with white. She cast one look to right and left before entering
the chapel. A distant view of the moorland rose to the sky, and the ragged
edge of the hills was marked by a gaunt engine-stack noting past
enterprise, triumphs long gone by, ruined hopes but recently dead. Snug
fox-covers of rhododendron swept up toward the head of the coomb; and
below, distant half a mile or more, cottages already showed a glimmer of
gold on their thatches where the increasing splendor of day brightened
them, and morning mists were raising jeweled arms. Then Joan passed into
the ruin through that narrow opening which marks the door of it. The
granite walls now stand about the height of a man's shoulder and the
chamber itself is small. Stone seats still run round two sides of it; ivy
and stone-worts and grasses have picked the mortar from the walls and
clothed them, even as emerald moss and gray lichens and black and gold
glorify each piece of granite; a may-bush, tangled about a great shiny
ivy-tod, surmounts the western walls above the dried well; furzes and
heather and tall grasses soften the jagged outlines of the ruin, and above
a stone altar, at the east end of it, rises another white-thorn. At this
season of the year the subsequent floral glories of the little chapel were
only indicated: young briers already thrust their soft points over the
stone of the altar and the first leaves of foxgloves were unfolding, with
dandelions and docks, biting-stone-crop and ferns, ragged-robins and wild
geraniums. These infant things softened no outline yet. The flat paving of
the floor, where it yet remained, was bedded in grass; a little square
incision upon the stone of the altar glimmered full of water and reflected
the light from fleecy clouds which now climbed into heaven, bearing sunrise
fires upward over a pale blue sky.

Here, under the circumambient, sparkling clearness, coolness and silence,
Joan stood with strange medley of thoughts upon her soul. The saints and
the fairies mingled there with visions of Nature, always smiling, with a
vague shadow of one great God above the blue, but dim and very far away;
and a nearer picture which quickened her heart-beat: the picture of "Mister
Jan." Here she felt herself at one with the world spread round her. The
mother eyes of a blackbird, sitting upon her eggs in the ivy-tod, kept
their bright gold on Joan, but showed no fear; the young rabbits frisked at
hand; a mole poked his snout and little paddle-paws out of the grass; all
was peace and happiness, it seemed, with the voice of good St. Madron
murmuring love in his brooklet at hand.

Joan knelt down by the old altar and bowed her head there and prayed to
Nature and to God. At first merely wordless prayers full of passionate
entreaty rose to the Throne; then utterance came in a wild simple throng of
petitions; and all her various knowledge, won from her mother and John
Barren, found a place. Pan and Christ might each have heard and listened,
for she called on the gods of earth and heaven from a heart that was full.

"Kind Mother o' the flowers, doan't 'e forget a poor maiden what loves 'e
so dear. I be sad an' sore-hearted 'cause things is bad wi' me now Mister
Jan's gone; an' I knaws as I've lied an' bin wicked 'bout Joe, but, kind
Mother, I awnly done what Mister Jan, as was wise an' loved me, bid. Oh,
God A'mighty, doan't 'E let en forget me, 'cause I've gived up all--all the
lil I had for en, an' Nature made me as I be. Oh, kind God, make me happy
an' light-hearted an' strong agin, same as the lil birds an' sich like is
happy an' strong; an' forgive me for all my sins an' make me well for
Mister Jan, an' clever for Mister Jan, so's I'll be a fine an' good wife to
en. An' forgive me for lyin', 'cause what I done was Nature, 'cordin' to
Mister Jan; an' Nature's kind to young things, 'cordin' to Mister Jan; an'
I be young yet. An' make me a better lass, for I caan't abear to feel as I
do; an' make me think o' the next world arter this wan. But, oh, dear God,
make me well an' braave agin, for 'tis awful wisht for me wi'out Mister
Jan; an' make Mister Jan strong too. I be all in a miz-maze and doan't knaw
wheer to turn 'cept to Nature, dear Lard. Oh, kind God A'mighty, lemme have
my angel watchin' over me close, same as what mother used to say he did
allus. An' bring Mister Jan back long very quick, 'cause I'm nothin' but
sadness wi'out en. An', dear St. Madern, I ax 'e to bless me same as you
done when--when I was a lil baaby, 'cause I be gwaine to bathe in your
brook, bein' a St. Madern cheel. Oh, dear, good God o' all things, please
to help me an' look to me, 'cause I be very sad, an' I never done no harm
to none, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen."

Then she said the Lord's Prayer, because her mother had taught her that no
human petition was ever heard unless accompanied by it. And it seemed as
though the lark, winding upward with wide spiral to his song-throne in the
sky and tinkling thin music on the morning wind, was her messenger: which
thought was beautiful to Joan and made her heart glad.

Never had she looked fairer. Her blue eyes were misty, but the magic of
prayer, the glory of speaking straight to the Father of all, call Him what
she might, had nobly fortified her sinking spirit. Peace brooded in her
soul then, and faith warmed her blood. She was sure her prayer would be
answered; she was certain that her health and her loved one would both come
back to her. And she stood by the altar and smiled at the golden morning,
herself the fairest thing the sun shone upon.

Having peeped shyly about her, Joan took off her clothes, placed them on
the altar-stones, shook down her hair, and glided softly to the stream. At
one point its waters caught the sunshine and babbled over white sand
between many budding spikes of wild parsley and young fronds of fern. Naked
and beautiful the girl stood, her bright hair glinting to her waist, all
rippled with the first red gold of the morning, her body very white save
where the sun and western wind had browned both arms and neck; her form
innocent as yet of the mystery hid for her in Time. Joan's fair limbs spoke
of blood not Cornish, of days far past when a race of giants swept up from
behind the North Sea to tread a new earth and take wives of the little dark
women of the land, abating the still prevalent nigrescence of the Celt with
Saxon eyes and hair, adding their stature and their strength to races
unborn. A sweet embodiment of all that was lovely and pure and fresh, she
looked--a human incarnation of youth and springtime.

There was a pool deeper than the general shallowness of the stream which
served for Joan's bath, and she entered there, where soft white sand made
pleasant footing for her toes, where more forget-me-nots twinkled their
turquoise about the margin, where shining gorse towered like a sentinel
above.

She suffered the holy water to flow over every inch of her body, and then,
rubbing her white self red and glowing with the dead brake fern of last
year and squeezing the water out of her hair, Joan quickly dressed again
and prepared to depart. She was about to leave a fragment torn from her
skirt hanging by the chapel, but changed her mind, and getting a splinter
of granite, rough-edged, she began to chip away a tress of her own bright
hair, sawing it off upon the stone table as best she could. Like a fallen
star it presently glimmered in the thorn bush above St. Madron's altar
where she wound the little lock, presently to bring gold to the nests and
joy to the heart of small feathered folk.

Joan walked home with the warm blood racing in her veins, roses on her
cheeks and the glory of hope in her eyes. Already she felt her prayers were
being heard; already she was thanking God for heeding her cry, and St
Madron for the life-giving waters of his holy stream. Thee, where finches
chattered and fluttered forward, breakfasting together in pleasant company,
a shadow and a swift, strong wing flashed across Joan's sight--and a hawk
struck. The little people shrieked, a few gray feathers puffed here and
there, and one spark of life was blown out that other sparks might shine
the brighter. For presently Joan's kind "Mother o' the flowers" watched the
beaks of fledgeling hawks grow red, and the parent bird of prey's cold eyes
brightened with satisfaction; as will every parent eye brighten at the
spectacle of baby things eating wholesome food with hearty appetite.

The death of the small fowl clouded the pilgrim's thoughts, but only for a
moment. Sentiment and emotion had passed; now she was eager with delicious
physical hunger and longing for her breakfast. The girl had not felt so
well or so happy for a considerable time. Half her prayer, she told
herself, was answered already; and the other half, relating to "Mister
Jan," would doubtless meet with similar merciful response ere many hours
had flown.

So joyfully homeward out of dreamland into a world of facts Joan hastened.




CHAPTER FOUR

A THOUSAND POUNDS


A glad heart shortens the longest road, and Joan, whose return journey from
the holy well was for the most part downhill, soon found herself back again
in Penzance. The fire of devotion still actuated her movements, and she
walked fearlessly, doubting nothing, to the post-office. There would be a
letter to-day; she knew it; she felt it in her consciousness, as a
certainty. And when she asked for it and mentioned her name, she put her
hand out and waited until the sleepy-eyed clerk rummaged through a little
pile of letters standing together and tied with a separate string. She
watched him slowly untie them and scan the addresses, grumbling as he did
so. Then he came to the last of all and read out:

"'Miss Joan Tregenza, Post-Office, Penzance. To be left until called for.'"

"Mine, mine, sir! I knawed 'e'd have it! I knawed as the kind, good--"

Then she stopped and grew red, while the clerk looked at her curiously and
then yawned. "What's a draggle-tailed chit like her got to do with such a
thing?" he wondered, and then spoke to Joan:

"Here you are; and you must sign this paper--it's a registered letter."

Joan, her hand shaking with excitement, printed her name where he directed,
thanked the man with a smile that softened him, and then hastened away.

The girl was faint with hunger and happiness before she reached home. She
did not dare to open the letter just then, but took it from her pocket a
dozen times before she reached Newlyn and feasted her eyes on her own name,
very beautifully and legibly printed. He had written it! His precious hand
had held the pen and formed each letter.

Deep, wordless thanks welled up in Joan's heart, for God was not very far
away, after all. He had heard her prayer already, and answered it within an
hour. No doubt it was easy for Him to grant such a little prayer. It could
be nothing much to God that one small creature should enjoy such happiness;
but what seemed wonderful was that He should have any time to listen at
all, that He should have been able to turn from the mighty business of the
great awakening world and give a thought to her.

"Sure 'twas the lil lark as the good Lard heard, an' my asking as went
up-long wi' en," said Joan to herself.

She found her father at home and the family just about to take breakfast.
Gray Michael had returned somewhat unexpectedly, with a fine catch, and did
not intend sailing again before the evening tide. A somewhat ominous
silence greeted the girl, a silence which her father was the first to
break.

"Ayte your food, my lass, an' then come in the garden 'long with me," he
said. "I do want a word with 'e, an' things must be said which I've put off
the sayin' of tu long. So be quick's you can."

But this sauce did not spoil the girl's enjoyment of her porridge and
treacle. She ate heartily, and her happy humor seemed catching, at least so
far as Tom was concerned. A bright color warmed Joan's cheek; the cloud
that had dimmed her eyes was there no longer; and more than once Mr.
Tregenza looked at his wife inquiringly, for the tale she had been telling
of Joan's recent moods and disorder was at variance with her present
spirits and appetite. After breakfast she went to her room while her father
waited; and then it was that Joan snatched a moment to open John Barron's
letter. There would be no time to read it then, she knew: that delicious
task must take many hours of loving labor; but she wanted to count the
pages and see "Mister Jan's" name at the end. She knew that crosses meant
kisses, too. There might be crosses somewhere. So she opened the envelope
in a fever of joyous excitement, being careful, however, not to tear a
letter of the superscription. And from it there came a fat, folded pile of
tissue paper. Joan knew it was money, and flung it on her bed and fumbled
with sinking heart for something better. But there was nothing else--only
ten pieces of tissue-paper. She remembered seeing her father with similar
pieces; and her mother saying there was nothing like Bank of England notes.
But they had been crumpled and dirty, these were snowy white. Each had a
hundred pounds marked upon it; and Joan was aware that ten times a hundred
is a thousand. But a thousand pounds possessed no more real meaning for her
than a million of money does for the average man. She could not estimate
its significance in the least or gauge its possibilities. Only she knew
that she would far rather have had a few words from "Mister Jan" than all
the money in the world.

Mr. Tregenza's voice below broke in upon the girl's disappointment, and,
hastily hiding the money under some linen in a little chest of drawers,
where the picture of Joe's ship was also concealed, she hurried to join her
father. But the empty envelope, with her name printed on it, she put into
her pocket that it might be near her.

Joan did not for an instant gather what meaning lay under this great gift
of money, and to her the absence of a letter was no more than a passing
sorrow. She read nothing between the lines of this silence; she only saw
that he had not forgotten, and only thought that he perhaps imagined such
vast sums of money would give her pleasure and make the waiting easier.
What were banknotes to Joan? What was life to her away from him? She
sighed, and fell back upon the thought of his wisdom and knowledge. He must
be in the right to delay, because he was always in the right. A letter
would presently come to explain why he had sent the money and to treat of
his return. The girl felt that she had much to thank God for, after all. He
had sent her the letter; He had answered her prayer in His own way. It ill
became her, she thought, to question more deeply. She must wait and be
patient, however hard the waiting.

So thinking, she joined her father. Tom was away up the village, Mrs.
Tregenza found plenty to occupy her mind and body indoors; Joan and Mr.
Tregenza had the garden to themselves. He was silent until they reached the
wicket, then, going through it, he led the way slowly up a hill which wound
above the neighboring stone quarry; and as he walked he addressed Joan.
She, weary enough already, prayed that her parent intended going no further
than the summit of the hill; but when he spoke she forgot physical fatigue,
for his manner was short and stern.

"Theer's things bein' hid 'twixt you an' me, darter, an' 'tis time you
spoke up. Every parent's got some responsibility in the matter of his
cheel's sawl, an', if theer's aught to knaw, 'tis I must hear it. 'The
faither waketh for the darter when no man knaweth,' sez the Preacher, an'
he never wrote nothin' truer. I've waked for you, Joan. 'Keep a sure watch
over a shameless darter,' sez the Preacher agin; but God forbid you'm that.
Awnly you'm allus wool-gatherin', an' roamin', an' wastin' time. An' time
wance squandered do never come agin. I hear tell this has been gwaine
forrard since Joe went to sea. What's the matter with 'e? Say it out plain
an' straight an' now this minute."

Joan had particularly prayed by the Madron altar that the Everlasting would
keep her from lying. She remembered the fact as her father put his
question; and she also recollected that John Barron had told her to say
nothing about their union until he returned to her. So she lied again, and
that the more readily because Gray Michael's manner of asking his question
put a reasonable answer into her head.

"I s'pose as it might be I'm wisht 'cause o' Joe Noy, faither."

"Then look 'e to it an' let it cease. Joe's in the hand o' the Lard same as
we be. He's got to work out his salvation in fear an' tremblin' same as us.
Some do the Lard's work ashore, some afloat, some--sich as me--do it by
land an' sea both. You doan't work Joe no good trapsing 'bout inland, here,
theer, an' everywheers; an' you do yourself harm, 'cause it makes 'e oneasy
an' restless. Mendin' holes an' washin' clothes an' prayin' to the Lard to
'a' mercy on your sinful sawl's what you got to do. Also learnin' to cook
'gainst the time you'm a wife an' the mother o' childern, if God so wills.
But this ban't no right way o' life for any wan, gentle or simple, so mend
it. A gad-about, lazy female's hell-meat in any station. Theer's enough of
'em as 'tis, wi'in the edge o' Carnwall tu. What was you doin' this
marnin'? Mother sez 'er heard you stirrin' 'fore the birds."

"I went out a long walk to think, faither."

"What 'e want to think 'bout? Your plaace is to du, not to think. God'll
think for 'e if 'e ax; an' the sooner you mind that an' call 'pon the
A'mighty the better; 'cause the Devil's ready an' willin' to think for 'e
tu. Read the Book more an' look about 'e less. Man's eyes, an' likewise
maid's, is best 'pon the ground most time. Theer's no evil writ theer. The
brain of man an' woman imagineth ill nearly allus, for why? 'Cause they
looks about an' sees it. Evil comes in through the eyes of 'em; evil's
pasted large 'pon every dead wall in Newlyn. Read the Book--'tis all summed
up in that. You've gotten a power o' your mother in 'e yet. Not but you've
bin a good darter thus far, save for back-slidin' in the past; but I saved
your sawl then, thanks be to the voice o' God in me, an' I saved your
mother's sawl, though theer was tidy wraslin' for her; an' I'll save yourn
yet if you'll do your paart."

Here Gray Michael paused and turned homeward, while Joan congratulated
herself upon the fact that a conversation which promised to be difficult
had ended so speedily and without misfortune. Then her father asked her
another question.

"An' what's this I hear tell 'bout you bein' poorly? You do look so well as
ever I knawed 'e, but mother sez you'm that cranky with vittles as you
never was afore, an' wrong inside likewise."

"Ban't nothin', faither. 'Tis awver an' done. I ate tu much or some sich
thing an' I be bonny well agin now."

"Doan't be thinkin' then. 'Tis all brain-sickness, I'll lay. I doan't want
no doctor's traade in my 'ouse if us can keep it outside. The Lard's my
doctor. Keep your sawl clean, an' the Lard'll watch your body. 'E's said as
much. 'E knaws we'm poor trashy worms an' even a breath o' foul air'll take
our lives onless 'E be by to filter it. Faith's the awnly medicine worth
usin'."

Joan remembered her morning bath and felt comforted by this last
reflection. Had she not already found the magic result? For a moment she
thought of telling her father what she had done, but she changed her mind.
Such faith as that would have brought nothing but wrath upon her.

While Mr. Tregenza improved the hour and uttered various precepts for his
daughter's help and guidance, Thomasin was occupied at home with grave
thoughts respecting Joan. She more than suspected the truth from signs of
indisposition full of meaning to a mother; but while duly mentioning the
girl's illness, Mrs. Tregenza did not dare to breathe the color of her own
explanation. She prayed to God in all honesty to prove her wrong, but her
lynx eyes waited to read the truth she feared. If things were really so
with Joan, then they could not be hid from her eyes much longer; and in the
event of her suspicions proving correct, Mrs. Tregenza told herself, as a
right Luke Gospeler, she must proclaim her horrid discovery and let the
perdition of her husband's daughter be generally made manifest. She knew so
many were called, so few chosen. No girl had ever been more surely called
than Joan: her father's trumpet tongue had thundered the ways of
righteousness into her ears from her birth; but, after all, it began to
look as though she was not chosen. The circumstance, of course, if proved,
would rob her of every Luke Gospeler's regard. No weak pandering with
sentiment and sin was permitted in that fold. And Mrs. Tregenza had little
pity herself for unfortunate or mistaken women. Let a girl lose her
character and Thomasin usually refused to hear any plea of mercy from any
source. Only once did she find extenuating circumstances: in a case where a
ruined farmer's daughter brought an action for breach of promise and won
it, with heavy damages. But money acted in a peculiar way with this woman.
It put her conscience and her judgment out of focus, softened the outlines
of events, furnished excuses for unusual practices, gilded with a bright
lining even the blackest cloud of wrongdoing. Where Mrs. Tregenza could see
money she could see light. Money made her charitable, broad-minded, even
tolerant. She knew she loved it, and was careful to keep the fact out of
Gray Michael's sight as far as possible. She held the purse, and he felt
that it was in good hands, but cautioned her from time to time against the
awful danger of letting a lust for this world's wealth come between the
soul and God.

And now a course long indicated in Thomasin's mind was being by her
pursued. Having convinced herself that under the present circumstances any
step to found or dispel her fears concerning Joan would be just and proper,
she took the exceptional one of searching the girl's little room while her
stepdaughter was out with Michael. Even as Mr. Tregenza turned to go
homeward again, his wife stood in the midst of Joan's small sanctuary, and
cast keen, inquiring eyes about her. She rarely visited the apartment, and
had not been in it for six months. Now she came to set doubt at rest if
possible, or confirm it. Her own secret opinion was that Joan had come to
serious trouble with her superiors. In that case letters, presents or
tokens had probably passed into her hands; and, if such existed, in this
room they would be.

"God send as I'm makin' a mistake an' shaan't find nothin' 'tall," said
Mrs. Tregenza to herself. And then she began her scrutiny.




CHAPTER FIVE
 THE TRUTH


Thomasin saw that all things about Joan's room were neat, spotless, and in
order. For one brief moment a sense of disquiet at the action before her
touched the woman's heart and head; but duty alike to her husband and her
stepdaughter demanded the search in her opinion. Should there be nothing to
find, so much the better; if, on the other hand, matters affecting Joan's
temporal and eternal welfare were here hidden, then they could not be
uncovered too quickly. She looked first through the girl's little wooden
trunk, the key of which was in the lock, but nothing save a childish
treasure or two rewarded Mrs. Tregenza here. In a broken desk, which had
belonged to her mother, Joan kept a few Christmas cards, and two
silhouettes: one of Uncle Thomas, of Drift, one of Mary Chirgwin. Here were
also some cooking recipes copied in her mother's writing, an agate marble
which Joan had found on Penzance beach, lavender tied up in a bag, and an
odd toy that softened Thomasin's heart not a little as she picked it up and
looked at it. The thing brought back to her memory a time four years
earlier. It was a small, grotesque figure on wires, built up of chestnuts
and acorns with a hazel-nut for its head and black pins stuck in for the
eyes. She remembered Tom making it and giving it to Joan on her birthday.
Then the memory of Joan's love for Tom from the time he was born came like
a glow of sunshine into the mother's heart, and for a moment she was minded
to relinquish her unpleasant task upon the spot; but she changed her
intention again and proceeded. The box held little else save a parcel of
old clothes tied up with rosemary in brown paper. These the woman surveyed
curiously, and knew, without being told, that they had belonged to Joan's
mother. For some reason the spectacle killed sentiment and changed her
mood. She shut down the box, and then, going to the chest of drawers,
pulled out each compartment in turn. Nothing but Joan's apparel and her few
brooches and trinkets appeared here. The history of each and all was
familiar to Mrs. Tregenza. But on reaching the bottom drawer of the chest,
she found it locked and the key absent. To continue her search, however,
was not difficult. Nothing separated the drawers, and by removing that
above the last, the contents of the lowest lay at her mercy, It was full of
linen for the most part, but hidden at the bottom, Thomasin made a
discovery, and found certain matters which at once spoke of tremendous
mystery, and, to her mind, indicated the nature of it. First she came upon
the little picture of Joe's ship in its rough gilded frame. This might be
an innocent gift from some of the young men who had asked in the past to be
allowed to paint Joan and received a curt negative from Gray Michael. But
the other discovery meant more. Pushing her hand about the drawer she found
a pile of paper, felt the crackle of it, and pulled it eagerly to the
light. Then, and before she learned the grandeur of the sum, she was seized
with a sudden palpitation and sat down on Joan's bed. Her mouth grew full
as a hungry man's before a feast, her lips were wet, her hand shook as she
opened and spread the notes. Then she counted them and sat gasping like a
landed fish. Thomasin had never seen so much money before in her life. A
thousand pounds! Unlike Joan, to whom the sum conveyed no significance,
Mrs. Tregenza could estimate it. Her mind reached that far, and the
bank-notes, for her, lay just within the estimation of avarice. Every snowy
fragment meant a hundred pounds--a hundred sovereigns--two hundred
ten-shilling pieces. The first shock overpast, and long before she grew
sufficiently calm to associate the treasure with its possessor, Mrs.
Tregenza began spending in her mind's eye. The points in house and garden,
outhouse and sty, whereon money might be advantageously expended, rose up
one after the other. Then she put aside eight hundred and fifty out of the
grand total and pictured herself taking it to the bank. She thought of a
nest-egg that would "goody" against the time Tom should grow into a man;
she saw herself among the neighbors, pointed at, whispered of as a woman
with hundreds and hundreds of pounds put by; she saw the rows of men
sitting basking about in Newlyn, as their custom is when off the sea; and
she heard them drop words of admiration at the sight of her. Presently,
however, this gilded vision vanished, and she began to connect the money
with Joan. She solved the mystery then with a brutal directness which hit
the mark in one direction; as to the source of the money, but went wide of
it in some measure upon the subject of the girl. Thomasin held briefly that
her stepdaughter had fallen, and now, knowing her condition, had informed
some man of it, with the result that from him came this unutterable gift.
That the money made an enormous difference to Mrs. Tregenza's mental
attitude must be confessed. She found herself fashioning absolute excuses
for Joan. Girls so often came to ill through no fault of their own. The man
must at least have been a gentleman to pay for his pleasure in four
figures. Four figures! Here she stopped thinking in order to picture the
vision of a unit followed by three ciphers. Then she marveled as to what
manner of man he was who could send a girl like Joan a thousand pounds. She
never heard of such a price for the value received. Her respect for Joan
began to increase when she realized that the money was hers. Probably there
was even more where that came from. "Anyway," she reflected, "it ban't no
use cryin' ower spilt milk. What's done's done. An' a thousand pounds'll go
long ways to softenin' the road. She might travel up-long to Truro to my
cousin an' bide quiet theer till arter, an' no harm done, poor lass. When
all's said, us knaws the Lard Hissel weer mighty easy wi' the like o' she,
an' worser wenches tu. But Michael--God A'mighty knaws he won't be easy.
She'm a damned wummon, I s'pose, but she's got to live through 'er life
here--damned or saved; an' she's got a thousand pound to do't with. A
terrible braave dollop o' money, sure 'nough. To think 'ow 'ard a man's got
to work 'fore he earns five of 'em!" But her imagination centered upon Gray
Michael now, and she almost forgot the banknotes for a moment. She thought
of his agony and trembled for the result. He might strike Joan down and
kill her. The man's anger against evil-doers was always a terrific thing;
and he had no idea of the value of money. She hazarded guesses at the
course he would pursue, and each idea was blacker than the last. Then
Thomasin fell to wondering what Michael would be likely to do with the
money. She sighed at this thought, and then she grew pale at the imaginary
spectacle of her husband tearing the devil-sent notes to pieces and
scattering them over the cliff to the sea. This horrible possibility stung
her to another train of ideas. Might it be within her power to win Joan's
secret, share it, and keep it from the father? Her pluck, however, gave way
when she looked a little deeper into the future. She would have done most
things in her power for a thousand pounds, but she would not have dared any
treachery to Michael. The woman put the notes together and stroked them and
listened to the rustle of them and rubbed her hard cheek with them. Then,
looking from the little window of Joan's garret, she saw the girl herself
approaching with Mr. Tregenza. They were nearly home again, so Thomasin
returned the money and the picture to their places in the chest of drawers,
smoothed the bed, where she had been sitting for half an hour, and went
downstairs still undetermined as to a course of action.

Before dinner was eaten, however, she had decided that her husband must
know the truth. Even her desire toward the money cooled before the prospect
of treachery to him. Fear had something to do with this decision, but the
woman's own principles were strong. It is unlikely that in any case they
would have broken down. She sent Joan on an errand to the village after the
meal was ended; and upon her departure addressed her husband hurriedly.

"You said I was 'mazed to dinner, an' so I was. I've gotten bad news for
'e, Michael, touchin' Joan."

"No more o' that, mother," he answered, "I've talked wi' she an' said a
word in season. She'm well in body an' be gwaine to turn a new leaf, so
theer's an end o' the matter."

"'Tedn' so," she declared, "I've bin in the gal's room an' I've found--but
you bide here an' I'll bring 'em to 'e. Hold yourself back, Michael, for us
caan't say nothin' sure till us knaws the truth from Joan."

"She've tawld me the truth out a walkin' an' I've shawed her the narrer
path. What should you find?"

"Money--no lil come-by-chance neither; more money than ever you or me seed
in our born days afore or shall agin."

"You'm dreamin', wummon!" he said.

"God knaws I wishes it weer so," she answered, and went once more to Joan's
room.

Gray Michael was walking up and down the kitchen when she returned, and
Thomasin said nothing, but put money and picture upon the table. Her
husband fought with himself a moment, as it appeared, then seemed to pray a
while, standing still with his hand pressed over his eyes, and finally sat
himself down beside the things which Thomasin had brought.

"I'd no choice but to tell 'e," she said.

Gray Michael's eyes were on the picture and utter astonishment appeared in
them.

"Why! 'tis Joe Noy's ship. Us seed her off the islands, outward bound! He
might 'a' gived it her hisself surely?"

"But t'other thing; the money. Count them notes. Noy never gived Joan
them."

He spread the parcel, counted the money, and sat back thunderstruck.

"God in heaven! A thousan' pound, an' notes as never went through no dirty
hands neither! What do it mean?"

"How should I tell what it means? I found the whole fortune hid beneath her
smickets. Lard knaws how she comed by it. What have the likes o' she to
give for money?"

"What do 'e mean by that?" he blazed out, rising to his feet and clinching
his fists.

"Ax your darter. Do 'e think I'd dare to say a word onless I was sartain
sure? You'd smash me, your own wife, if I weer wrong, like enough. I ban't
wrong. Joan's wi' cheel or I never was. Maybe that thraws light on the
money, maybe it doan't. I did pray as it might 'a' comed out to be her man
at sea. But you'll find it weern't. God help 'e, Michael, my heart do bleed
for 'e. Can 'e find it in 'e to be merciful same as the Lard in like case,
or--?"

He raised his hand to stop her. He was sitting back in his chair with a
face that had grown gray even to the skin, with eyes that looked out at
nothing. There was a moment's silence save for the tall clock in the
corner; then Tregenza brushed beads of water off his forehead and dried his
hand on his trousers. He raised his eyes to the roof and gripped his hands
together on his chest and slowly spoke a text which his wife had heard upon
his lips before, but only at times of deep concern or emotion.

"'The Lard is king, be the people never so impatient; He sitteth between
the cherubims, be the airth never so unquiet.'"

Few saw any particular meaning in this quotation applied in moments of
stress, as Michael usually employed it; but to the man it was a supreme
utterance, the last word to be spoken in the face of all the evil and
wickedness of the world. Come what might, God still reigned in heaven.

He spoke aloud thus far, and afterward, by the movement of his beard and
lip, Thomasin could see he was still talking or praying.

"Let the Lard lead 'e, husband, in this hard pass," she said. "'Vengeance
is Mine,' the Book sez."

He turned his eyes upon her. His brows were dragged down upon them; he had
brushed his gray hair like bristles upright on his head; across the mighty
wall of his forehead jagged cross-lines were stamped, like the broken
strata over a cliff-face.

"Ay, you say it. Vengeance be God's awn, an' mercy be God's awn. 'Tedn' for
no man to meddle wi' them. Us caan't be aught but just. She'll have justice
from me--no more'n that. 'Tis all wan now. Wanton or no wanton, she've
flummoxed me this day. The giglot lied an' said the thing that was not.
She'm not o' the Kingdom--the fust Tregenza as ever lied--the fust."

"God send it edn' as bad as it do look, master. 'Er caracter belike ban't
gone. S'pose as she'm married?"

"Hould your clack, wummon. I be thinkin'."

He was thinking, indeed. In the face of this discovery, the ghost of an
idea, which had haunted Gray Michael's mind more than once during the
upbringing of Joan, returned a greater and more pronounced shadow than ever
before. The conviction carried truth stamped upon it from the standpoint of
his present horrid knowledge. To an outsider his thought had appeared
absolutely devilish, to the man himself it was as a buoy thrown to one
drowning. The belief flooded his mind, swept him away, convinced him. Its
nature presently appeared as he answered Thomasin. She was still thinking
of the thousand pounds.

"Theer's no word in the Book agin mercy, Michael. Joan's your awn
darter--froward or not froward."

"You'm wrong theer," he said. He was now cool and quiet. "I did think so
wance; I did tell her so when us walked not two hour agone. Now I sees
differ'nt. She'm none o' mine. She'm no Tregenza. Be Nature, as made us
God-fearin' to a man, to a wummon, to a cheel, gwaine to lie after
generations 'pon generations? Look back at them as bred me, an' them as
bred them--back, an' back, an' back. All Tregenzas was o' the Lard's
harvest; an' should I, as feared God more'n any o' 'em, an' fought for the
Lard of Hosts 'fore I was higher'n this table--should I--Michael Tregenza,
breed a damned sawl? The thot's comed black an' terrible 'pon my mind 'fore
to-day; an' I've put en away from me, judgin' 'twas the devil. Now I knaw
'twas God spoke; now I knaw that her's none o' my gettin'. 'Who honoreth
his faither shall 'a' joy o' his awn childern.' Shall I, as weer a pattern
son, be cussed wi' a strumpet for a darter?"

"You'm speakin' a hard thing o' dead bones, then. The Chirgwins is upland
folks o' long standin', knawn so far as the Land's End, an' up Drift an'
down Lizard likewise."

"She've lied to me," was his answer; "she've lied oftentimes; she'm false
to whatever I did teach her; she've sawld herself--she've--no more on
it--no more on it but awnly this: I call 'pon God A'mighty to bear witness
she'm no Tregenza--never--never."

"'Tweer her mother in the gal; but doan't 'e say more 'bout that, Michael.
Poor dear sawl, she'm dead an' gone, an' she loved 'e wi' all her 'eart, as
I, what knawed her, can testify to."

"No more o' that," he said, "the gal's comin'. Thank God she ban't no cheel
o' mine--thank God, as 'ave tawld me 'tedn' so. He whispered it, an' I put
it away an' away. Now I knaws. You bide here, Thomasin Tregenza, and I'll
speak what's fittin'."

Thus in one moment this hideous conviction was stamped upon the man's soul
for life. He judged the dead mother by the daughter and visited the child's
sin upon the parent's memory. Any conclusion more monstrous, more directly
opposed to every natural instinct, can hardly be conceived, but the man had
been strangling natural instincts for fifty years. Only pride of family
remained. There were but few Tregenzas left and soon there would be none
unless Tom carried on the name. Michael was the quintessence of the
Tregenza spirit, the fruit of generations, the high-water mark. He stood on
that giddy pinnacle which has religious mania for its precipice. To damn a
dead woman was easier than to accept a wanton daughter. Better an
unfaithful wife than that any soul born of Tregenza blood should be lost.
So he washed his hands of both, thanking God, who had launched the truth
into his mind at last; and then he rose to his feet as Joan entered the
room.

She stood for a moment in the doorway with her blue eyes fixed in amazement
upon the kitchen table. Then she grew very red to the roots of her hair and
came forward. There was almost a joy in her mind that the long story of
falsehood must end at last. She did not fear her father now and looked up
into his face quite calmly as she approached the table.

"These be mine," she said. "Was it you, faither, as took 'em from wheer
they was?"

"'Twas me, Joan," answered Mrs. Tregenza; "an' I judge the Lard led me."

The girl stood erect and scornful.

"I'm glad you found them; now I can tell the truth."

"Truth!" thundered Michael. "Truth--what do you knaw 'bout Truth, darter o'
Baal? Your life's a lie, your tongue's rotten in your mouth wi' lyin'.
Never look in no honest faace agin!"

"You'd do best to bide still while I tell 'e what this here means," said
Joan quietly. The man's anger alarmed her no more than the squeak of a
caged rat. "I ban't no darter o' Baal, an' the money's come by honest. I've
lied afore, but never shall again. An' I've let Joe go 'is ways thinkin' I
loved en, which I doan't. I be tokened to a furriner from London, an' he's
took me for his awn, an' he be gwaine to come down-long mighty soon an'
take me away. But I couldn't tell 'e nothin' of that 'cause he bid me keep
my mouth shut. So theer."

"'Took 'e for 'is awn'! Wheer is he, then? Why be you here?"

"He'm comin', I tell 'e. He'm a true man, an' he shawed me what 'tis to
love."

"Bought you, you damned harlot!"

She knew the word was vile, but a shred of John Barron's philosophy
supported her.

"My awnly sin is I've lied to you, faither; an' you've no right to call me
evil names."

"Never call me faither no more, lewd slut! I be no faither o' thine, nor
never was. God A'mighty! a Tregenza a wanton! I'd rather cut my hand off
than b'lieve it so. It's this--this--blood-money--the price o' a damned
sawl! No more lyin'. I knaw--I knaw--an' the picksher--the ship of a true
man. It did ought to break your heart to see it, if you had wan. A
devil-spawned painting feller, in coorse. An' his black heart happy an'
content 'cause he've sent this filth. You stare, wi' your mother's
eyes--you stare, an' stare. Hell's yawning for 'e, wretched wummon, an' for
him as brot 'e to it!"

"He doan't believe in hell, no more doan't I," said Joan calmly; "an' it
ban't a faither's plaace to damn's awn flaish an' blood no way."

"Never name me thy faither no more! I ban't your faither, I tell 'e, an' I
do never mean to see thy faace agin. Go wheer you'm minded; but get 'e gone
from here. Tramp the broad road with the crowd--the narrer path's closed
agin 'e. And this--this--let it burn same as him what sent it will."

He picked up the note nearest to him, crumpled it into a ball and flung it
upon the fire.

"Michael, Michael!" cried his wife, rushing forward, "for God's love, what
be doin' of? The money ban't damned; the money's honest!"

But Joan did more than speak. As the gift flamed quickly up, then sunk to
gray ash, a tempest of passion carried her out of herself. She trembled in
her limbs, grew deadly pale, and flew at her father like a tigress. No evil
word had ever crossed her lips till then, though they had echoed in her
ears often enough. But now they jumped to her tongue, and she cursed Gray
Michael and tore the rest of the money out of his hand so quickly that his
intention of burning it was frustrated.

"It's mine, it's mine, blast you!" she screamed like a fury, "what right
have you to steal it? It's mine--gived me by wan whose shoe you ban't
worthy to latch! He's shawed me what you be, an' the likes o' you, wi' your
hell-fire an' prayin' an' sour looks. I ban't afeared 'o you no more--none
o' you. I be sick o' the smeech o' your God. 'Er's a poor thing alongside
o' mine an' Mister Jan's. I'll gaw, I'll gaw so far away as ever I can; an'
I'll never call 'e my faither agin, s'elp me God!"

Mrs. Tregenza had thanked Providence under her breath when Joan rescued the
notes, but now, almost for the first time, she realized that her own
interest in this pile of money was as nothing. Every penny belonged to her
stepdaughter, and her stepdaughter evidently meant to keep it. This
discovery hit her hard, and now the bitterness came forth in a flood of
words that tumbled each over the other and stung like hornets as they
settled.

Gray Michael's broadside had roared harmlessly over Joan's erect head;
Thomasin's small shot did not miss the mark. She was furious; her husband
stood dumb; her virago tongue hissed the truth; and Joan, listening, knew
that it was the truth.

No matter what the elder woman said. She missed no vile word of them all.
She called Joan every name that chills the ear of the fallen; and she
explained the meaning of her expressions; she bid the girl take herself and
the love-child within her from out the sight of honest folks; she told her
the man had turned his back forever, that only the ashy road of the ruined
remained for her to tread. And that was how the great news that Nature had
looked upon her for a mother came to Joan Tregenza. Here was the riddle of
the mysterious voice unraveled; here was the secret of her physical sorrows
made clear. She looked wildly from one to the other--from the man to the
woman; then she tottered a step away, clutching her money and her little
picture to her breast; and then she rolled over, a huddled, senseless heap,
upon the floor.




CHAPTER SIX

DRIFT


When Joan recovered consciousness she found her head and neck wet where her
stepmother had flung cold water over her. Thomasin was at that moment
burning a feather under her nose, but she stopped and withdrew it as the
girl's eyes opened.

"Theer, now you'll be well by night. He've gone aboard. Best to change your
gownd, for 'tis wetted. Then I'll tell 'e what 'er said. Can 'e get
upstairs?"

Joan rose slowly and went with swimming brain to her room. She still held
her picture and her money. She took off her wet clothes, then sat down upon
her bed to think; and as her mind grew clear, there crept through the
gloomy shadows of the past tragedy a joy. It lightened her heart a moment,
then vanished again, like the moon blotted suddenly from the sky by a rack
of storm-cloud. Joan was full of the stupendous news. The shock of hearing
her most unsuspected condition had indeed stricken her insensible, but it
was the surprise of it more than the dismay. Now she viewed the
circumstance with uncertainty, not knowing the attitude "Mister Jan" would
adopt toward it. She argued with herself long hours, and peace brooded over
her at the end; for, as his cherished utterances passed in review before
her memory, the sense and sum of them seemed to promise well. He would be
very glad to share in the little life that was upon the way to earth. He
always spoke kindly of children; he had called them the flower-buds in
Nature's lap. Yes, he must be glad; and Nature would smile too. Nature knew
what it was to be a mother, Joan told herself. She was in Nature's hand
henceforth. But her blue eyes grew cold when she thought of the morning. So
much for St. Madron and his holy water; so much for the good angels who her
dead parent had told her were forever stretching loving, invisible hands to
guard and shield. "Mister Jan's be the awnly God," she thought, "an' He'm
tu far aways to mind the likes o' we; so us must trust to the gert Mother
o' the flowers." She accepted the position with an open heart, then turned
her thoughts to her loved one. Having now firmly convinced herself that her
condition would bring him gratification and draw them still nearer each to
the other, Joan yearned unutterably for his presence. She puzzled her
brains to know how she might communicate with him, how hasten his return.
She remembered that he had once told her his surname, but she could not
recollect it now. He had always been "Mister Jan" to her.

She went down to her supper in the course of the evening, and the great
matter in her mind was for a while put aside before a present necessity.
Action, she found, would be immediately required of her. Her father, before
going from the kitchen after she had fainted, directed Thomasin to bid her
never see his face again. She must depart, according to his direction, on
the following day; for the thatched cottage upon the cliff could be her
home no more.

"Theer weern't no time for talkin'; but I lay 'er'll sing differ'nt when
next ashore. You bide quiet here till 'er's home agin. 'Tain't nachur to
bid's awn flaish an' blood go its ways like that. An', 'pears to me, as
'tedn' the law neither. But you bide till he'm back. I be sorry as I spawk
so sharp, but you was that bowldacious that my dander brawk loose. Aw
Jimmery! to think as you dedn' knaw you was cheeldin'!"

"'Twas hearin' so suddint like as made me come over fainty."

"Ate hearty then. An' mind henceforrard you'm feedin' an' drinkin' for two.
Best get to bed so soon's you can. Us'll talk 'bout this coil in the
marnin'."

"Us'll talk now. I be off by light. I 'edn' gwaine to stop no more. Faither
sez I ban't no cheel o' his an' he doan't want to see my faace agen. Then
he shaan't. I'll gaw to them as won't be 'shamed o' me: my mother's
people."

"Doan't 'e be in no tearin' hurry, Joan," said Mrs. Tregenza, thinking of
the money. "Let him, the chap, knaw fust what's come along o' his
carneying, an' maybe he'll marry 'e, as you sez, right away. Bide wi' me
till you tells en. Let en do what's right an' seemly. That's the shortest
road."

"Iss fay; he'm a true man. But I ban't gwaine to wait for en in this 'ouse.
To-morrow I'll send my box up Drift by the fust omblibus as belongs to
Staaft, an' walk myself, an' tell Uncle Thomas all's there is to tell.
He've got a heart in his breast, an' I'll bide 'long wi' him till Mister
Jan do come back."

"Wheer's he to now?"

"To Lunnon. He've gone to make his house vitty for me."

"Well, best to get Uncle Chirgwin to write to en, onless you'd like me to
do it for 'e."

"No. He'll do what's right--a proper, braave man."

"An 'mazin' rich seemin'ly. For the Lard's love, if you'm gwaine up Drift,
take care o' all that blessed money. Doan't say no word 'bout it till you'm
in the farm, for theer's them--the tinners out o' work an' sich--as 'ud
knock 'e on the head for half of it. To think as Michael burned a hunderd
pound! Just a flicker o' purpley fire an' a hunderd pound gone! 'Tis 'nough
to make a body rave."

The girl flushed, and something of her father's stern look seemed reflected
in her face.

"He stawl my money. No, I judge his word be truth: he'm no faither o' mine
if the blood in the veins do count for anything."

Joan went to bed abruptly on this remark, and lay awake thinking and
wondering through a long night--thinking what she should say to Uncle
Chirgwin, wondering when "Mister Jan" was coming back to her, and picturing
his excitement at her intelligence. In the morning she packed her box, ate
her breakfast, and then went into the village to find somebody who would
carry her scanty luggage as far as Penzance. From there, an omnibus ran
through Drift, past Mr. Chirgwin's farmhouse door. Joan herself designed to
walk, the distance by road from Newlyn being but trifling. It chanced that
the girl met Billy Jago, he who in early spring had cut down an elm tree
while John Barron watched. Him Joan knew, for he had worked on her uncle's
farm for many years. Mr. Jago, who could be relied upon to do simple
offices, undertook the task readily enough and presently arrived with a
wheelbarrow. He whined, as ever, about his physical sufferings, but drank a
cup of tea with evident enjoyment, then fetched Joan's box from her room
and set off with it to meet the public vehicle. Her goods were to be left
at Drift, and Joan herself started at an early hour, wishing to be at the
farm before her property. She walked in the garden for the last time,
marked the magic progress of spring, then took an unemotional leave of her
stepmother.

"There 'edn' no call to leave no message as I can see," said Joan, while
she stood at the door. "He ban't my faither, he sez, so I'll take it for
truth. But I'll ask you to kiss Tom for me. Us was allus good brother an'
sister, whether or no; an' I loves en dearly."

"Iss, I knaw. He'll grizzle an' fret proper when he finds you'm gone.
Good-by to 'e. May the Lard forgive 'e, an' send your man 'long smart; an'
for heaven's sake doan't lose them notes."

"They be safe stawed next to my skin. Uncle Chirgwin'll look to them; an'
you needn't be axin' God A'mighty to forgive me, 'cause I abbun done
nothin' to want it. I be Nature's cheel now; an' I be in kindly hands. You
caan't understand that, but I knaws what I knaws through bein' taught.
Good-by to 'e. Maybe us'll see each other bimebye."

Joan held out her hand and Mrs. Tregenza shook it. Then she stood and
watched her stepdaughter walk away into Newlyn. The day was cold and
unpleasant, with high winds and driving mists. The village looked grayer
than usual; the boats were nearly all away; the gulls fluttered in the
harbor making their eternal music. Seaward, white horses flecked the leaden
water; a steamer hooted hoarsely, looming large under the low, sullen sky,
as it came between the pierheads. Presently a scat of heavy rain on a
squall of wind shut out the harbor for a time. Mrs. Tregenza waited until
Joan had disappeared, then went back to her kitchen, closed the door, sat
in Gray Michael's great chair by the hearth, put her apron over her head
and wept. But the exact reason for her tears she could not have explained,
for she did not know it. Mingled emotions possessed her. Disappointment had
something to do with this present grief; sorrow for Joan was also
responsible for it in a measure. That the girl should have asked her to
kiss Tom was good, Thomasin thought, and the reflection moved her to
further tears; while that Joan was going to put her money into the keeping
of a simple old fool like Uncle Chirgwin seemed a highly pathetic
circumstance to Mrs. Tregenza. Indeed, the more she speculated upon it the
sadder it appeared.

Meanwhile Joan, leaving Newlyn and turning inland along the little lane
which has St. Peter's church and the Newlyn brook upon its right, escaped
the wind and found herself walking through an emerald woodland world all
wrapped in haze and rain. Past the smelting works, where purple smoke made
wonderful color in rising against the young green, over the brook and under
the avenue of great elms went Joan. Her heart ached this morning, and she
thought of yesterday. It seemed as though a hundred years of experience had
passed over her since she knelt by St. Madron's stone altar. She told
herself bitterly how much wiser she was to-day, and, so thinking strange
thoughts, tramped forward over Buryas Bridge, and faced the winding hill
beyond. Then came doubts. Perhaps after all St. Madron had answered her
prayer. Else why the underlying joy that now fringed her sorrows with
happiness?

Drift is a place well named, when seen, as then, gray through sad-colored
curtains of rain on the bare hilltop. But the orchard lands of the coomb
below were fair, and many primroses twinkled in the soaking green of the
tall hedge-banks. Joan splashed along through the mud, and presently a lump
rose in her throat, born of thoughts. It had seemed nothing to leave the
nest on the cliff, and she held her head high and thanked God for a great
deliverance. That was less than an hour ago; yet here, on the last hill to
Drift and within sight of the stone houses clustering at the summit, her
head sank lower and lower, and it was not the rain which dimmed her eyes.
She much doubted the value of further prayers now, yet every frantic hope
and aspiration found its vent in a petition to her new God, as Joan mounted
the hill. She prayed, because she could think of no other way to soothe her
heart; but her mind was very weary and sad--not at the spectacle of the
future, for that she knew was going to be fair enough--but at the vision of
the past, at the years ended forever, at the early pages of life closed and
locked, to be opened again no more. A childhood, mostly quite happy, was
over; she would probably visit the house wherein she was born never again.
But even in her sorrow, the girl wondered why she should be sad.

Mr. Chirgwin's farm fronted the highway, and its gray stone face was
separated therefrom by a small and neat patch of garden. Below the house a
gate opened into the farmyard, and Uncle Chirgwin's land chiefly sloped
away into the coomb behind, though certain fields upon the opposite side of
the highroad also pertained to him. The farmhouse was time-stained, and the
stone had taken some wealth of color where black and golden lichens fretted
it. The slates of the roof shone with wet and reflected a streak of white
light that now broke the clouds near the hidden sun. The drippings from the
eaves had made a neat row of little regular holes among the crocuses in the
garden. Tall jonquils also bent their heads there, heavy with water, and
the white violets which stood in patches upon either side of the front door
had each a raindrop glimmering within its cup. A japonica splashed one gray
wall with crimson blossoms and young green leaves; but, for the rest, this
house-front was quite bare. Joan saw Mary Chirgwin's neat hand in the snowy
short blinds which crossed the upper windows; and she knew that the
geraniums behind the diamond panes of the parlor were her uncle's care.
They dwelt indoors, winter and summer, and their lanky, straggling limbs
shut out much light.

The visitor did not go to the front door, whither a narrow path, flanked
with handsome masses of "Cornish diamonds," or quartz crystals, directly
led from the wicket, but entered at a larger gate which led into the
farmyard. Here cattle-byres and shippons ranged snugly on three sides of an
open space, their venerable slates yellow with lichens, their thatches
green with moss. In the center of the yard a great manure heap made
comfortable lying for pigs and poultry; while the farmhouse stretched back
upon the fourth side. Another gate opened beyond it, and led to the land
upon the sloping hill and in the valley below. Joan passed a row of cream
pans, shining like frosted silver in the mist, then turned from the bleak
and dripping world. The kitchen door was open, and revealed a large, low
chamber whose rafters were studded with orange-colored hams, whose
fireplace was vast and black save for a small wood fire filling but a
quarter of the hearth. Grocer's almanacs brought brave color to the walls,
sharing the same with a big dresser where the china made a play of
reflected light from the windows. Above the lofty mantel-piece there hung
an old fowling-piece, and a row of faded Daguerreotypes, into most of which
damp had eaten dull yellow patches. The mantel-shelf carried some rough
stoneware ornaments, an eight-day clock, a tobacco jar, and divers small
utensils of polished tin. A big table covered with American cloth filled
the center of the kitchen, a low settle crossed the alcove of the window,
and a leather screen, of four folds and five feet high, surrounded Uncle
Chirgwin's own roomy armchair in the chimney-corner. Strips of cocoanut
fiber lay upon the ground, but between them appeared the bare floor. It was
paved with blue stone for the most part, though here and there a square of
white broke the color; and the white patches had worn lower than the rest
under many generations of hobnailed boots. A faint odor of hams was in the
air, and the slight, stuffy smell of feathers.

A woman sat in the window as Joan entered. She had her back to the door,
and not hearing the footfall, went on with her work, which was the plucking
of a fowl. A cloth lay spread over the floor at her feet, and each moment
the pile of feathers upon it increased as the plucker worked with rhythmic
regularity and sang to herself the while.

Mary Chirgwin was a dark, good-looking girl, with a face in which strong
character appeared too prominently shadowed to leave room for absolute
beauty. But her features were regular if swarthy; her eyes were splendid,
and her brow, from which black hair was smoothly and plainly parted away,
rose broad and low. There was nothing to mark kinship between the cousins
save that both held their heads finely and possessed something of the same
distinction of carriage. Mary was eight-and-twenty, and, whatever might be
thought about her face, there could be but one opinion upon her feminine
splendor of figure. Her broad chest produced a strange speaking and singing
voice--mellow as Joan's, but far deeper in the notes. Mary gloried in
congregational melodies, and those who had not before heard her efforts at
church on Sundays would often mistake her voice for a man's. She was
dressed in print with a big apron overall; and her sleeves, turned up to
her elbows, showed a pair of fine arms, perfect as to shape, but brown of
color as the woman's face.

Joan stood motionless, then her cousin looked round suddenly and started
almost out of her chair at a sight so unexpected. But she composed herself
again instantly, put down the semi-naked fowl and came forward. They had
not seen each other since the time when Joe Noy flung over Mary for Joan;
and the latter, remembering this circumstance very well, had hoped she
might escape from meeting her cousin until after some talk with Uncle
Thomas. But Mary hid her emotion from Joan's sight, and they shook hands
and looked into one another's faces, each noting marked changes there since
the last occasion of their meeting. The elder spoke first, and went
straight to the past. It was her nature to have every connection and
concern of life upon a definite and clear understanding. She hated mystery,
she disliked things hidden, she never allowed the relations between herself
and any living being to stand otherwise than absolutely defined.

"You'm come, Joan, at last, though 'twas a soft day to choose. Listen
to me, will 'e? Then us can let the past lie, same as us lets sleepin'
dogs. I called 'pon God to blight your life, Joan Tregenza, when--you
knaw. I thot I weer gwaine to die, an' I read the cussin' psalm
[Footnote: _The Cursing Psalm--Psalm CIX_. If read by a wronged person
before death, it was, and is sometimes yet, supposed to bring
punishment upon the evil-doer.] agin you. 'Feared to me as you'd
stawl the awnly thing as ever brot a bit o' brightness to my life. But
that's all over. Love weern't for me; I awnly dreamed it weer. An' I
larned better an' didn't die; an' prayed to God a many times to
forgive that first prayer agin you. The likes o' you doan't know nort
'bout the grim side o' life or what it is to lose the glory o'
lovin'. But I doan't harbor no ill agin you no more."

"You'm good to hear, Polly, an' kind words is better'n food to me now. I'll
tell 'e 'bout myself bimebye. But I must speak to uncle fust. Things has
happened."

"Nothin' wrong wi' your folks?"

"I ain't got no folks no more. But I'll tell 'e so soon's I've tawld Uncle
Thomas."

"He'm in the croft somewheers. Better bide till dinner. Uncle'll be back by
then."

"I caan't, Mary--not till I've spoke wi' en. I'll gaw long down Green Lane,
then I shall meet en for sure. An' if a box o' mine comes by the omblibus,
'tis right."

"A box! Whatever is there in it, Joan?"

"All's I've gotten in the world--leastways nearly. Doan't ax me nothin'
now. You'll knaw as soon as need be."

Without waiting for more words Joan departed, hastened through the gate on
the inner wall of the farmyard and walked along the steep hillside by a
lane which wound muddily downward to the grasslands, under high hazel
hedges. The new leaves dripped showers at every gust of the wind, then a
gleam of wan sunlight brightened distant vistas of the way, while Joan
heard the patter of a hundred hoofs in the mud, the bleat of lambs, the
deeper answer of ewes, the barking of a shepherd's dog. Soon the cavalcade
came into view--a flock of sheep first, a black and white dog with a black
and white pup, which was learning his business, next, and Uncle Chirgwin
himself bringing up the rear. The first sunshine of the day seemed to have
found him out. It shone over his round red face and twinkled in the dew on
his white whiskers. He stumped along upon short, gaitered legs, but went
not fast, and stayed at the steep shoulder of the hill that his lambs might
have rest and time to suck.

Mary Chirgwin meantime speculated on this sudden mystery of her cousin's
arrival. She spread the cloth for dinner, bid her maid lay another place
for Joan and wondered much what manner of news she brought. There were
changes in Joan's face since she saw it last--not changes which might have
been attributed to the possession of Joe Noy, but an alteration of
expression betokening thought, a look of increased age, of experiences not
wholly happy in their nature.

And Joan had also marked the changes in Mary. These indications were clear
enough and filled her with sorrow. A river of tears will leave its bed
marked upon a woman's face; and Joan, who had never thought overmuch of her
cousin's sorrows until then, began to feel her heart fill and run over with
sudden sympathy. She asked herself what life would look like for her if
"Mister Jan"; changed his mind now and never came back again. That was how
Mary felt doubtless when Joe Noy left her. Already Joan grew zealous in
thought for Mary. She would teach her something of that sweet wisdom which
was to support her own burden in the future; she would tell her about
Nature--the "All-Mother" as "Mister Jan" called her once. And, concerning
Joe Noy--might it be within the bounds of possibility, within the power of
time to bring these two together again? The thought was good to Joan, and
wholly occupied her mind until the sight of Uncle Chirgwin with his sheep
brought her back to the present moment and her own affairs.




CHAPTER SEVEN

A PROBLEM


When Mr. Chirgwin caught sight of Joan his astonishment knew no bounds, and
his first thought was that something must certainly be amiss. He stood in
the roadway, a picture of surprise, and, for a moment, forgot both his
sheep and lambs.

"My stars, Joan! Be it you really? Whatever do 'e make at Drift, 'pon such
a day as this? No evil news, I hope?"

"Uncle," she answered, "go slow a bit an' listen to what I've got to say.
You be a kind, good sawl as judges nobody, ban't you? And you love me
'cause your sister was my mother?"

"Surely, surely, Joan; an' I love you for yourself tu--nobody better in
this world."

"You wouldn' go for to send me to hell-fire, would 'e?"

"God forbid, lass! Why, whatever be talkin' 'bout?"

"Uncle Thomas, faither's not my faither no more now. He've turned me out
his house an' denied me. I ban't no darter of his henceforrard; an' he'm no
faither o' mine. He don't mean never to look 'pon my faace agin, nor me
'pon his. The cottage edn' no home for me no more."

"Joan, gal alive! what talk be this?"

"'Tis gospel. I'm a damned wummon, 'cordin' to my faither as was."

"God A'mighty! You--paart a Chirgwin--as comed, o' wan side, from her as
loved the Lard so dear, an', 'pon t'other, from him as feared un so much.
Never, Joan!"

"Uncle Thomas, I be in the fam'ly way; an' faither's damned me, an'
likewise the man as loves me, an' the cheel I be gwaine to bring in the
world. I've comed to hear you speak. Will you say the same? If you will,
I'll pack off this instant moment."

The old man stood perfectly still and his jaw went down while he breathed
heavily; a world of amazement and piteous sorrow sat upon his face; his
voice shook and whistled in the sound as he answered.

"Joan! My poor Joan! My awn gal, this be black news--black news. Thank God
she'm not here to knaw--your mother."

"I've done no wrong, uncle; I ban't 'shamed of it. He'm a true, good man,
and he'm comin' to marry me quick."

"Joe Noy?"

"No, no, not him. I thot I loved en well till Mister Jan comed, an' opened
my blind eyes, an' shawed me what love was. Mister Jan's a gen'leman--a
furriner. He caan't live wi'out me no more; he's said as he caan't. An' I'm
droopin' an' longin' for the sight o' en. An' I caan't bide in the streets,
so I axes you to keep me till Mister Jan do come to fetch me. I find words
hard to use to 'splain things, but his God's differ'nt to what the Luke
Gosp'lers' is, an' I lay 'tis differ'nt to yourn. But his God's mine
anyways, an' I'm not afeared o' what I done, nor 'shamed to look folks in
the faace. That's how 'tis, Uncle Thomas. 'Tis Nature, you mind, an' I be
Nature's cheel no--wi' no faither nor mother but her."

The old man was snuffling, and a tear or two rolled down his red face,
gathered the damp already there and fell. He groaned to himself, then
brought forth a big, red pocket-handkerchief, and wept outright, while Joan
stood silently regarding him.

"I'd rather a met death than this; I'd rather a knawn you was coffined."

"Oh, if I could awnly 'splain!" she cried, frantically; "if I awnly could
find his words 'pon my tongue, but I caan't. They be hid down deep in me,
an' by them I lives from day to day; but how can I make others see same as
I see? I awnly brings sorrer 'pon sorrer now. Theer's nothin' left but him.
If you could a heard Mister Jan! You would understand, wi' your warm heart,
but I caan't make 'e; I've no terrible, braave, butivul words. I'll gaw my
ways then. If any sawl had tawld me as I'd ever bring tears down your faace
I'd never b'lieved 'em--never; but so I have, an' that's bitterness to me."

He took her by the hand and pressed it, then put his arm round her and
kissed her. His white bristles hurt, but Joan rejoiced exceedingly, and now
it was her turn to shed tears.

"He'll come back--he'm a true man," she sobbed; "theer ban't the likes o'
Mister Jan in Carnwall, an'--an' if you knawed en, you'd say no less. You'm
the fust as have got to my heart since he went; an' he'd bless 'e if he
knawed."

"Come along with me, Joan," answered Uncle Chirgwin, straightening himself
and applying his big handkerchief to her face. "God send the man'll be
'longside 'e right soon, as you sez. Till he do come, you shaan't leave me
no more. Drift's home for you while you'm pleased to bide theer. An' I'll
see your faither presently, though I wish 'twas any other man."

"I knawed you was all us the same; I knawed you'd take me in. An' Mister
Jan shall knaw. An' he'll love you for't when he do."

"Come an' see me put the ewes an' lambs in the croft; then us'll gaw to
dinner, an' I'll hear you tell me all 'bout en."

He tried hard to put a hopeful face upon the position and, himself as
simple as a child, presently found Joan's story not hopeless at all. He
seemed indeed to catch some of her spirit as she proceeded and painted the
manifold glories of "Mister Jan" in the best language at her command. To
love Nature was no sin; Mr. Chirgwin himself did so; and as for the money,
instead of reading the truth of it, he told himself very wisely that the
giver of a sum so tremendous must at least be in earnest. The amount
astounded him. Fired by Joan's words, for as he played the ready listener
her eloquence increased, he fell to thinking as she thought, and even
speaking hopefully. The old farmer's reflections merely echoed his own
simple trust in men and had best not been uttered, for they raised Joan's
spirits to a futile height. But he caught the contagion from her and spoke
with sanguine words of the future, and even prayed Joan that, if wealth and
a noble position awaited her, she would endeavor to brighten the lives of
the poor as became a good Cornish woman. This she solemnly promised, and
they built castles in the air: two children together. His sheep driven to
their new pasture, Uncle Chirgwin led the way home and listened as he
walked to Joan's story. She quite convinced him before he reached his
kitchen door--partly because he was very well content to be convinced,
partly because he could honestly imagine no man base enough to betray this
particular blue-eyed child.

Mr. Chirgwin's extremely unworldly review of the position was balm to Joan.
Her heart grew warm again, and the old man's philosophy brightened her
face, as the sun, now making a great clearness after rain, brightened the
face of the land. But the recollection of Mary Chirgwin sobered her uncle
not a little. How she would take this tremendous intelligence he failed to
guess remotely. Opportunity to impart it occurred sooner than he expected,
for Joan's box had just arrived. During dinner the old man explained that
his niece was to be a visitor at Drift for a term of uncertain duration;
and after the meal, when Joan disappeared to unpack her box and make tidy a
little apple-room, which was now empty and at her service, Uncle Chirgwin
had speech with Mary. He braced himself to the trying task, waited until
the kitchen was empty of those among his servants who ate at his table, and
then replied to the question which his niece promptly put.

"What do this mean, Uncle Thomas? What's come o' Joan that she do drop in
'pon us like this here wi' never a word to say she was comin'?"

"Polly," he answered, "your cousin Joan have seen sore trouble, in a manner
o' speakin', an' you'd best to knaw fust as last. Us must be large-minded
'bout a thing like this She'm tokened to a gen'leman from Lunnon."

"What! An' him--Joe Noy?"

"To he plain wi' you, Polly, she've thrawed en over. Listen 'fore you
speaks. 'Twas a match o' Michael Tregenza's makin', I reckon, an', so
like's not, Joe weern't any more heart-struck than Joan. I finds it hard to
feel as I ought to Gray Michael, more shame to me. But Joan's failed in
love wi' a gen'leman, an' he with her, an' he'm comin' any mornin' to fetch
'er--an'--an'--you must be tawld--'tis time as he did come. An' he've sent
Joan a thousand pound o' paper money to shaw as 'e means the right thing."

But the woman's mind had not followed these last facts. Her face was white
to the lips; her hands were shaking. She put her head down upon them as she
sat by the fire, and a groan which no power could strangle broke from her
deep bosom. She spoke, and regretted her words a moment later. "Oh, my God!
an' he brawk off wi' me for the likes o' she!"

"Theer, theer, lass Mary, doan't 'e, doan't 'e. You've hid your tears that
cunnin', but my old eyes has seen the marks this many day an' sorrered for
'e. 'Tis a hard matter viewed from the point what you looks 'pon it; but I
knaws you, my awn good gal; I knaws your Saviour's done a 'mazin' deal to
hold you up. An' 'twont be for long, 'cause the man'll come for her mighty
soon seemin'ly. Can 'e faace it, the Lard helpin'? Poor Joan's bin kicked
out the house by her faither. I do _not_ like en--never did. What do
'e say? She doan't count it no sin, mind you, an' doan't look for no
reprovin', 'cause the gen'leman have taught her terrible coorious ideas;
but 'tis just this: we'm all sinners, eh, Polly? An' us caan't say 'sactly
what size a sin do look to God A'mighty's eye. An' us have got the Lard's
way o' handlin' sich like troubles writ out clear--eh? Eh, Polly? He dedn'
preach no sermon at the time neither."

The old man prattled on, setting out the position in the most favorable
light to Joan that seemed possible to him. But his listener was one no
longer. She had forgotten her cousin and the present circumstances, for her
thoughts were with a sailor at sea. One tremendous moment of savage joy
gripped her heart, but the primitive passion perished in its birth-pang and
left her cold and faint and ashamed. She wondered from what unknown,
unsecured corner of her soul the vile thing came. It died on the instant,
but the corpse fouled her thoughts and tainted them and made her feel faint
again. The irony of chance burst like a storm on the woman, and mazes of
tangled thoughts made her brain whirl in a chaos of bewilderment. She sat
motionless, her face dark, and much mystery in her wonderful eyes, while
Mr. Chirgwin, with shaking head and scriptural quotation and tears, babbled
on, pleading for Joan with all his strength. Mary heard little of what he
said. She was occupied with facts and asking herself her duty. From the
storm in her mind arose a clear question at last, and she could not answer
it. The point had appeared unimportant to anybody but Mary Chirgwin, but no
question of conduct ever looked trivial to her. At least the doubt was
definite and afforded mental occupation. She wondered now whether it was
well or possible that she and Joan could live together under the same roof.
Why such a problem had arisen she knew not; but it stood in the path, a
fact to be dealt with. Her heart told her that Joan and her uncle alike
erred in the supposition that the girl's seducer would ever return. She
read the great gift of money as Thomasin had read it--rightly; and the
thought of living with Joan was at first horrible to her.

Mr. Chirgwin talked and Mary reflected. Then she rose to leave the room.

"'Tis tu gert a thing for me to say--no wummon was ever plaaced like what I
be now. I do mean to see passon at Sancreed, uncle. He'll knaw what's right
for me. If he bids me stay, I'll stay. 'Tis the thot o' Joe Noy maddens me.
My head'll burst if I think any more. I'll go to passon."

"Whether you'll stay, Polly! Why shouldn't 'e stay? Surely it do--"

"Doan't 'e talk no more 'tall, uncle. You caan't knaw what this is to me,
you doan't understan' a wummon faaced wi' a coil like this here. Joe--Joe
as loved 'er, I s'pose, differ'nt to what 'e did me. An' she, when his back
weer turned--an'--an'--me--God help me!--as never could do less than love
en through all!"

She was gone before he had time to answer, but he realized her mighty agony
of mind and stood dumb and frightened before it. Then a thought came
concerning Joan and he felt that, at all costs, he must speak to Mary again
before she went out. Mr. Chirgwin waited quietly at the stair-foot until
she came down. The turmoil was in her eyes still, but she spoke calmly and
listened to him when he replied.

"Doan't 'e say nuthin' to Joan, Uncle Thomas. I be gwaine to larn my duty,
as is hidden from me. An' my duty I will do."

"An' so you alias have, Polly, since you was a grawed gal; an' God knaws
it. But--do'e think as you could--in a manner o' speakin'--hide names from
passon? Ban't no call to tell what's fallen out to other folks. Joan--eh,
Polly? Might 'e speak in a parable like--same as Scripture--wi'out namin'
no names. For Joan's sake, Mary--eh?"

She was silent a full minute, then answered slowly.

"I see what you mean, uncle. I hadn' thot o' she just then. Iss fay, you'm
right theer. Ban't no work o' mine to tell 'bout her."

She hesitated, and the old man spoke again.

"I s'pose that a bit o' prayer wouldn' shaw light on it--eh, Polly? Wi'out
gwaine to Sancreed. The Lard knaws your fix better'n what any words 'ud put
it clear to passon. An' theer's yourself tu. 'Pears to me, axin' your
pardon, for you'm clever'n what I am, that 'tedn' a tale what you can put
out 'fore any other body 'sactly--even a holy man like him."

She saw at once that it was not. Her custom had been to get the
kind-hearted old clergyman of her parish church to soothe the doubts and
perplexities which not seldom rose within her strenuous mind. And before
this great, crushing problem, with the pretext of the one difficulty which
had tumbled uppermost from the chaos and so been grasped as a reality, she
had naturally turned to her guide and friend. But, as her uncle spoke, she
saw that in truth this matter could not be laid naked before any man.
Another's hidden life was involved; another's secret must come out if all
was told, and Mary's sense of justice warned her that this could not be.
She had taken her own mighty grief to the little parsonage at Sancreed, and
a kindly counselor, who knew sorrow at first hand, helped her upon the road
that henceforth looked so lonely and so long; but this present trial,
though it tore the old wounds open, must be borne alone. She saw as much,
and turned and went upstairs again to her chamber.

"Think of her kindly," said Uncle Chirgwin as Mary left him without more
words. "She'm so young an' ignorant o' the gert world, Polly. An' if the
worst falls, which God forbid, 'tis her as'll suffer most, not we."

"Us have all got to suffer an' suffer this side our graaves," she said,
mounting wearily.

"So young an' purty as she be--the moral o' her mother. I doan't knaw--'tis
sich a wonnerful world--but them blue eyes--them round blue eyes couldn't
do a thing as was wrong afore God as wan might fancy," he said aloud, not
knowing she was out of earshot. Then he heaved a sigh, returned to the
kitchen, and presently departed to the fields.




CHAPTER EIGHT

WAITING FOR "MISTER JAN"


With searching of heart, Mary Chirgwin spent time during that afternoon. In
one room Joan, happier than she had been for many days, set out her few
possessions, boldly hung the picture of Joe Noy's ship upon the wall and
gazed at it with affection, for it spoke of the painter, not the sailor, to
her; while, in a chamber hard by, Mary solved the problem of the day,
coming at her conclusion with great struggle of mind and clashing of
arguments. She resolved at last to abide at Drift with her uncle and with
Joan. The reason for those events now crowding upon her life was hidden
from her; and why Providence saw fit to awaken or mightily intensify the
sorrows which time was lulling to sleep, she could not divine. She accepted
her position, none the less, doubted nothing but that the secret hidden in
these matters would some day be explained, and, according to her custom
before the approach of all mundane events and circumstances affecting
herself, viewed the present trial as heaven-sent to purify and strengthen.
So your religious egotists are ever wont to read into the great waves of
chance, as here and there a ripple from them sets their own little vessels
shaking, as here and there some splash of foam, a puff of wind, strikes the
nutshell which floats their lives, a personal, deliberate intervention, an
event designed by the Everlasting to test their powers, ripen their
characters, equip their souls for an eternity of satisfaction.

At tea time the cousins met again, and Uncle Chirgwin, returning from his
affairs, was rejoiced to learn Mary's decision. No outward sign marked her
struggle. She was calm, even stately, with a natural distinction which
physically appeared in her bearing and carriage. She chilled Joan a little,
but not with intention. Yet Joan was bold for her love and spoke no less
than the truth when she asserted that she viewed her position without shame
and without remorse. She spoke of it openly, fearlessly, and kept Uncle
Chirgwin on thorns between the cold silence of his elder niece and the
garrulous chatter of the younger. The saint was so stern, the sinner so
happy and so perfectly impressed with her own innocence, which latter fact
Mary too saw clearly; and it instantly solved half the problem in her mind.
Joan had obviously been sent to Drift that the truth might reach her heart.
She came a heathen from the outer darkness of sin, with vain babbling on
her lips and a mind empty. She called herself "Nature's child" and the
theatric thunders of Luke Gospeldom had never taught her that she was
God's. Here, then, was one to be brought into the fold with all possible
dispatch, and Mary, who loved religious battle, braced herself to the task
while silently listening to Joan, that she might the better learn what
manner of spiritual attack would best meet this sorry case.

Uncle Chirgwin took charge of his niece's bank-notes, and, after some
persuasion, consented to accept the weekly sum of three shillings and
sixpence from Joan. He made many objections to any such arrangement, but
the girl overruled them, declaring absolutely that she would not stop at
Drift, even until her future husband's return, unless the payment of money
was accepted from her. It bred a secret joy in Joan to feel that "Mister
Jan's" wealth now enabled her to enjoy an independence which even Mary
could not share. She much desired to give more money, but Uncle Chirgwin
reduced the sum to three shillings and sixpence weekly and would take no
more. This wealth was viewed with very considerable loathing by Mary
Chirgwin, and she criticised her uncle's decision unfavorably; but he
accepted the owner's view, arguing that it was only justice to all parties
so to do, until facts proved whether Joan was mistaken. The notes did not
cause him uneasiness--at any rate during this stage of affairs--and he took
them to Penzance upon the occasion of his next visit. Mr. Chirgwin's lawyer
saw to the safe bestowal of the money; and when she heard that her nine
hundred pounds would produce about five-and-twenty every year and yet not
decrease the while, Joan was much astonished.

Meantime John Barren neither came to fetch her, nor sent any writing to
tell of the causes for his delay. The girl was fruitful of new reasons for
his silence, and then grew a black fear which answered all doubts and, by
its reasonableness, terrified her. Perhaps "Mister Jan" was ill--too ill
even to write. He had but little strength--that she knew, and few
friends--of that Joan was also aware, for he had told her so. Yet, surely,
there were those, if only his servants, who might have written to bid her
hasten. A line--a single word--and she would get into the train and stop in
it until she saw "London" written on a board at a station. Then she would
leap out and find him and get to his heart and warm it and kiss life back
to his body, light to his loved gray eyes. So thinking, time dragged, and
as the novelty of the new life abated, and wore thin, Joan's spirits
wavered until long and longer intervals of gloomy sadness marked the
duration of each day for her. But she was young, and hope yet held revels
in her heart when the mood favored, when the wind was soft, the sun bright,
and Mother Nature seemed close and kind, as often happened. Joan worked
too, helping Mary and the maids, but after a wayward manner of her own.
There was no counting upon her and she loved better to be with her uncle,
abroad upon the land, or by herself, hidden in the orchard, in the fruit
garden, or in the secret places of the coomb.

She had her favorite spots, for as yet that great, overwhelming regard for
the old stone crosses, which came to her afterward, had not grown into a
live passion. Her present pilgrimages were short, her shrines those of
Nature's building. Much she loved the arm of an ancient apple-tree hid in
the very heart of the orchard. A great gnarled limb bent abruptly out, grew
long and low, and was propped at a distance of three yards from the parent
tree. Midway between the stem and support, a crooked elbow of the bough
made a pleasant seat for Joan; and here, when life at the farm looked more
gray than common, she came and sometimes sat long hours. Her perch raised
her above a velvet scented sea of wall-flowers which ran in regular waves
beneath the apple-trees, under murmuring of many bees. The blossom above
Joan's head was all a lacework of sunny rose and cream; and the sun painted
glorious russet harmonies below, glinted magically in the green and white
above, turned the gray lichens, which clustered on the weather side of the
trunks and boughs, to silver. The glory of life here always heartened Joan.
She felt the immortality of Nature, who, from naked earth and barren
boughs, thus at the sun's smile splendidly awakened, and teemed and
overflowed with bewildering, inexhaustible luxuriance. Nor seldom this
aspect of her Mother's infinite wealth touched her blood, and a strange
sensation as of very lust of life made her wild. At such times she would
pick the green things and tear them and watch the colorless life ooze from
their wounds; she would gather blossoms and scatter them against the wind,
break buds open and pluck their hearts out, fill her mouth with sorrel and
young grass-shoots, and feel the cool saps of them upon her palate. And
sometimes her Mother frightened her, for the dim clouds hid beneath the
horizon of maternity were moving now and their color was dark. Nature had
as many moods as Joan and often looked distant and terrible. Poor little
blue-eyed "sister of the sun and moon!" She likened herself so bravely to
the other children of her Mother--to the stars, to the fair birch-trees,
where emerald showers now twinkled down over the silver stems, to the
uncurling fronds of the fern, to the little trout in the coomb-stream; and
yet she was not content as they were.

"Her's good, so good, but oh! if her was a bit nigher--if I could sit in
her lap an' feel her arms around me an' thread the daisies into chains like
when I was a lil maid! But I be a grawed wummon now--an' yet caan't feel it
so--not yet. Her'll hold my hand, maybe, an' lead me 'pon the road past
pain an' sorrow. I can trust her, 'cause Mister Jan did say as Nature never
lies--never."

So the child's thoughts wandered on a day when she sat upon the bough and
brought a shower of pale petals down with every movement. But as yet only
the shadows of shadows clouded her thoughts when she thought about herself.
It was the loneliness brought real care--the loneliness and the waiting.

She spent time, too, in Uncle Chirgwin's old walled garden. This place and
its products went for little in the traffic of the farm, though every year
its owner was wont to count upon certain few baskets of choice fruit as an
addition to his income, and every year his hopes were blighted. For the
walls whereon his peaches and nectarines grew had stood through
generations, their red brick work was much fretted by time, and the
interstices between the bricks made snug homes for a variety of insects.
Joan once listened to her uncle upon this subject, and henceforth chose to
make his scanty fruit her special care.

"'Tis like this," he explained, "an' specially wi' the necter'ns. The
moment they graws a shade, an' long afore they stone, them dratted lil auld
sow-pigs [Footnote: _Sow-pigs_--Woodlice.] falls 'pon 'em cruel. Then
they waits theer time till the ripenin', an', blame me, but the varmints do
allus knaw just a day 'fore I does, when things be ready, an' they eats the
peaches an' necter'ns by night, gouging 'em shameful, same as if you'd done
it wi' your nails. 'Tis a terrible coorious wall for sow-pigs, likewise for
snails; an' I be allus a gwaine to have en repaired an' pinted, but yet
somehow 'tedn' done. But your sharp eyes'll be a sight o' use wi' creepin'
things. 'Tis a reg'lar Noah's Ark o' a wall, to be sure; not but what I lay
theer's five pound worth o' stone fruit 'pon it most years if 'twas let
bide."

Joan enjoyed watching the peaches grow. First they peeped like pearls from
the dried frills of their blossoms; then they expanded and cast off the
encumbrance of dead petals and nestled against the red bricks that sucked
up sunshine and held it for them when the sun had gone. She found the
garden wall was a whole busy world, and, taught by her vanished master, she
took interest in all that dwelt thereon. But the snails and woodlice she
slew ruthlessly that her uncle might presently come by his five pounds'
value of fruit.

Mary Chirgwin speedily discovered the task of reforming her cousin was like
to be lengthy and arduous. There appeared no foundations upon which to
work, and while the certainty of Barron's return still remained with Joan
as a vital guide to conduct, no other gospel than that which he had taught
found her a listener. She refused to go to church, to Mary's chagrin and
Uncle Chirgwin's sorrow; but he explained the matter correctly and indeed
found a clew to most of Joan's actions at this season. Mary saw the old
man's growing love for the new arrival, and a smaller mind might have sunk
to jealousy quickly enough under such circumstances, but she, deeply
concerned with Joan's eternal welfare, rose above temporary details, At the
same time her uncle's mild and tolerant attitude caused her pain.

"As to church-gwaine," he said, on a Sunday morning when he and his elder
niece had driven off to Sancreed as usual, leaving Joan in the orchard;
"she've larned to look 'pon it from a Luke Gosp'ler's pint o' view. Doan't
you fret, Polly. Let her bide. 'Twill come o' itself bimebye wan o' these
Sundays. Poor tiby lamb! Christ's a watchin' of her, Polly. An' if this
here gen'leman, by the name o' Mister Jan, doan't come--"

"You make me daft!" she interrupted, with impatience. "D'you mean as you
ever thot he would?"

"I hopes. Theer's sich a 'mazin' deal o' good in human nature. Mayhap he'm
wraslin' wi' his sawl to this hour. An' the Lard do allus fight 'pon the
side o' conscience. Iss fay! Some 'ow I do think as he'll come."

Mary said no more. She was quite positive that her cousin and her uncle
were alike mistaken; but she saw that, until the hard truth forced itself
upon Joan, the girl would go her present way. It was not that Joan lacked
goodness and sweetness, but, in Mary's opinion, she took an obstinate and
wrong-headed course upon the one vital subject of her own salvation. Mary
fought with herself to love Joan, and the battle now was only hard when Joe
Noy came within the scope of her thoughts. She banished him as much as she
could, but it never grew easy, and the complex problems bred of reflections
on this theme maddened her. For she had always loved him, and that
affection, thrust away as deadly-sin, when he left her for another, could
not be wholly strangled now.

Time hung heavily and more heavily with Joan at Drift. A fortnight passed;
but the hope of the ignorant and trustful dies very hard and the faith
which is bred of absolute love has a hundred lives. The girl walked into
Penzance every second day, and hope blazed brightly on the road to the
post-office, then sank a little deeper into the hidden places of her heart
as she plodded empty-handed back to Drift.

Slowly, and so gradually that she herself knew it not, her thoughts grew
something less occupied with John Barren, something more concerned about
herself. For the world was full of happy mothers now. One "Brindle"--a
knot-cow of repute--dropped a fine bull-calf in a croft hard by the
orchard, and Joan looked into "Brindle's" solemn eyes after the event, and
learned. She marveled to see the little brown calf stand on his shaking
legs within an hour of his birth; then his mother licked him lovingly,
while Uncle Chirgwin himself drew off her "buzzy milk." There was another
mother in a disused pigsty. There Joan found a red and white tortoise-shell
cat with four blind, squeaking atoms beside her, and as the cat rolled over
and the atoms sucked life, Joan saw her shining eyes, afore-time so bright
and hard, full of a new strange light, like the cloud that glimmers over
the fires of an opal. The cat's green orbs were full of mystery: of pain
past, of joy present. So again Joan learned. But a black tragedy blotted
out that little happy family in the pigsty, and Death, in the shape of Amos
Bartlett, Mr. Chirgwin's head man, fell upon them. Then the farmer learned
that his niece could be angry. One morning Joan found the mother cat
running wildly here and there, with a world of misery in its cry; while a
moment afterward she came upon the kittens in a duck pond. Mr. Bartlett was
present and explained.

"Them chets had to gaw, missy. 'Tis a auld word an' it ban't wise to take
no count of sayings like that. 'May chets bad luck begets.' You've heard
tell o' that? Never let live no kittens born in May. They theer dead chets
comed May Day."

"You'm a cruel devil!" she said hotly; "how'd you like for your two lil
children to be thrawed in the water, May or no May? Look at thicky cat,
breakin' her heart, poor twoad!"

Mr. Bartlett was justly angry that Joan could dare to thus class his
priceless red-headed twins with a litter of dead kittens, and he said more
than was wise, ramming home a truth, and that coarsely.

"Theer's plenty more wheer them comed from, I lay. Nachur's so free, you
see--tu free like sometimes. Ban't no dearth o' chets or childern as I've
heard on. They comes unaxed, an' unwanted tu. You might a heard tell o'
some sich p'raps?"

She blushed and shook with passion at this sudden new aspect of affairs.
Here was a standpoint from which nobody had viewed her before. Worse--far
worse than her father's rage or Uncle Chirgwin's tears was this. Amos
Bartlett represented the world's attitude. The world would not be angry
with her, or cry for her; it would merely laugh and pass on, like Mr.
Bartlett. So Joan learned yet again; and the new knowledge cowed her for
full eight-and-forty hours. But the eyes of the mothers had taught Joan
something of the secret of pain, and a thread of gravity ran henceforth
through all thoughts concerning the future. She much marveled that "Mister
Jan" had never touched upon this leaf in the book. Beauty was what he
invariably talked about, and he found beauty hidden in many a strange
matter too; but not in pain. That was because he suffered himself
sometimes, Joan suspected. And yet, to her, pain, though she had never felt
it, seemed not wholly hideous. She surprised herself mightily by the depth
of her own thoughts now. She seemed to stand upon the brink of deep matters
guessing dimly at things hidden. Then her moods would break again from the
clouds to brightness. Hot sunshine on her cheek always raised her young
spirits, and her health, now excellent, threw joy into life despite the
ever-present anxiety. Then came a meeting which roused interest and brought
very genuine delight with it.

It happened upon a fine Sunday afternoon, when Joan was walking through the
fields on the farm--those which extended southward--that she reached a
stile where granite blocks lay lengthwise, like the rungs of a ladder,
between two uprights. Here she stopped a while, and sat her down, and
looked out over the promise of fine hay. The undulating green expanse was
studded with the black knobs of ribwort plantain and gemmed with
buttercups, which here were dotted like sparks of fire, here massed in
broad bunches and splashes of color. The wind swept over the field, and its
course was marked by sudden flecks and ripples of transient sheeny light,
paler and brighter than the mass of the herbage. Then a figure appeared
afar off, following the course of the footpath where it wound through the
gold of the flowers and the silver of the bending grasses. It approached,
resolved itself into a fisher-boy and presently proved to be Tom Tregenza.
Joan ran forward to meet him as soon as the short figure, with its
exaggerated nautical roll, became known to her. She kissed her half-brother
warmly, and he hugged her and showed great delight at the meeting, for he
loved Joan well.

"I've stealed away, 'cause I was just burstin' to get sight of 'e again,
Joan. Faither's home an' I comed off for a walk, creepin' round here an'
hopin' as we'd meet. 'Tis mighty wisht to home now you'm gone, I can tell
'e. I've got a sore head yet along o' you."

"G'wan, bwoy! Why should 'e?"

"Iss so. 'Twas like this. When us comed back from sea wan mornin' a week
arter you'd gone I ups an' sez, ''Tis 'bout as lively as bad feesh ashore
now Joan ban't here.' I dedn' knaw faither was in the doorway when I said
it, 'cause he'd give out you was never to be named no more. But mother seed
en an' sez to me, 'Shut your mouth.' An', not knawin' faither was be'ind
me, I ups agin an' sez, 'Why caan't I, as be her awn brother, see Joan
anyway an' hear tell what 'tis she've done? I lay as it ban't no mighty
harm neither, 'cause Joan's true Tregenza!'"

"Good Lard! An' faither heard 'e?"

"Iss, an' next minute I knawed it. He blazed an' roared, an' comed over an'
bummed my head 'pon the earhole--a buster as might 'a' killed some lads. My
ivers! I seed stars 'nough to fill a new sky, Joan, an' I went down tail
over nose. I doubt theer's nobody in Newlyn what can hit like faither. But
I got up agin an' sot mighty still, an' faither sez, 'She as was here ban't
no Tregenza, nor my darter, nor nothin' to none under my hellings
[Footnote: _Hellings_--Roof.] no more--never more, mark that.' Then
mother thrawed her apern over her faace an' hollered, 'cause I'd got such a
welt, an' faither walked out in the garden. I was for axin' mother then,
but reckoned not for fear as he might be listenin' agin. But I knawed you
was up Drift, 'cause I heard mother say that much; an' now I've sot eyes on
you agin; an' I knaw you'll tell me what's wrong wi' you; an' if I can do
anything for 'e I will, sink or swim."

"Faither's a cruel beast, an' he'll come to a bad end, Tom, 'spite of they
Gosp'lers. He'm all wrong an' doan't knaw nothin' 'tall 'bout God. I do
knaw what I knaw. Theer's more o' God in that gert shine o' buttercups 'pon
the grass than in all them whey-faced chapel folks put together."

"My stars, Joan!"
 "'Tis truth, an' you'll find 'tis some day, same as what I have."

"I doan't see how any lad be gwaine to make heaven myself," said Tom
gloomily. "Us had a mining cap'n from Camborne preach this marnin', an', by
Gollies! 'tweer like sittin' tu near a gert red'ot fire. Her rubbed it in,
I tell 'e, same as you rubs salt into a hake. Faither said 'twas braave
talk. But you, Joan, what's wrong with 'e, what have you done?"

"I ain't done no wrong, Tom, an' you can take my word for't."

"Do 'e reckon you'm damned, like what faither sez?"

"Never! I doan't care a grain o' wheat what faither sez. What I done
weern't no sin, 'cause him, as be wiser an' cleverer an' better every way
than any man in Carnwall, said 'tweern't; an' he knawed. I've heard wise
things said, an' I've minded some an' forgot others. None can damn folks
but God, when all's done, an' He's the last as would; for God do love even
the creeping, gashly worms under a turned stone tu well to damn 'em. Much
more humans. I be a Nature's cheel an' doan't b'lieve in no devil an' no
hell-fire 'tall."

"I wish I was a Nachur's cheel then."

Joan flung down a little bouquet of starry stitchworts she had gathered
upon the way and turned very earnestly to Tom.

"You _be_, you _be_ a Nature's cheel. Us all be, but awnly a few
knaws it."

Tom laughed at this idea mightily.

"Well, I'll slip back long, Joan; an' if I be a Nachur's cheel, I be; but I
guess I'll keep it a secret. If I tawld faither as I dedn' b'lieve in no
auld devil, I guess he'd hurry me into next world so's I might see for
myself theer was wan."

They walked a little way together. Then Tom grew frightened and stopped his
companion. "Guess you'd best to be turnin'. Folks is 'bout everywheer in
the fields, bein' Sunday, an' if it got back to faither as I'd seed you,
he'd make me hop."

"D'you like the sea still, Tom?"

"Doan't I just! Better'n better; an' I be grawin' smart, 'cause I heard
faither tell mother so when I was in the wash'ouse an' they thot I wasn't.
Faither said as I'd got a hawk's eye for moorin's or what not. An' I licked
the bwoy on Pratt's bwoat a fortnight agone. A lot o' men seed me do't. I
hopes I'll hit so hard as faither hisself wan day, when I'm grawed.
Good-by, sister Joan. I'll see 'e agin when I can, an' bring up a feesh
maybe. Doan't say nothin' 'bout me to them at the farm, else it may get
back."

So Tom marched off, speculating as to what particular lie would best meet
the case if cross-questioning awaited him on his return, and Joan watched
the thickset little figure very lovingly until it was out of sight.




CHAPTER NINE

MEADOWSWEETS


June came. The wall-flowers were long plucked or dead, the last snows of
apple-blossom had vanished away, and the fruit was setting well. The
woodlice were already ruining the young nectarines. "They spiles 'em in
the growth an' scores 'em wi' their wicked lil teeth, then, come August
an' they ripens, they'll begin again. But the peaches they won't touch
now, 'cause of the fur 'pon 'em. Awnly they'll make up for't when the
things is ready for eatin'." So Uncle Thomas explained the position to
Joan. He, good man, had fulfilled his promise to see Michael Tregenza.
It happened that a load of oar-weed was wanted on the farm, and Mr.
Chirgwin, instead of sending one of the hands with horse and cart to
Newlyn according to his custom when seaweed was needed, went himself.
His elder niece expostulated with him and explained that such a trip
would be interpreted to mean straitened circumstances on the farm; but
her uncle was not proud, and when he explained that his real object was
an opportunity to speak with Joan's father Mary said no more.

Screwing courage to the sticking-point, therefore, the old man went down to
Newlyn on a morning when Joan was not by to question his movements. Fortune
favored him. Michael had landed at daylight and was not sailing again till
dusk. The fisherman listened patiently, but Mr. Chirgwin's inconsequent and
sentimental conversation sounded as tinkling brass upon his ear. Both
argued the question upon religious grounds, but from an entirely different
standpoint. Michael was not at the trouble to talk much, for his visitor
seemed scarce worthy of powder and shot. He explained that he deemed it
damnation to hold unnecessary converse with sinners; that, by her act, Joan
had raised eternal barriers between herself and those of her own home, and,
indeed, all chosen people; that he had walked in the light from the dawn of
his days until the present time, and could not imperil the souls of his
wife, his son and himself by any further communion with one, in his
judgment, lost beyond faintest possibility of redemption. Uncle Chirgwin
listened with open mouth to these sentiments. He longed to relate how Joan
had repented of her offense, how she had thrown herself upon the Lord, and
found peace and forgiveness. No such thing could be recorded, however, and
he felt himself at a disadvantage. He prayed for mercy on her behalf, but
mercy was a luxury Gray Michael deemed beyond the reach of man. He showed
absolutely no emotion upon the subject, and his chill unconcern quenched
the farmer's ardor. Mr. Chirgwin mourned mightily that he held not a
stronger case. Joan had tied his hands, at any rate, for the present. If
she would only come round, accept the truth and abandon her present
attitude--then he knew that he would fight like a giant for her, and that,
with right upon his side, he would surely prevail. His last words upon the
subject shadowed this conviction.

"Please God time may soften 'e, Tregenza; an', maybe, soften Joan tu. Her
heart's warm yet, an' the truth will find its plaace theer in the Lard's
awn time; but you--I doubt 'tedn' in you to change."

"Never, till wrong be right."

"You makes me sorry for 'e, Tregenza."

"Weep for yourself, Thomas Chirgwin. You'm that contented, an' the
contented sawl be allus farthest from God if you awnly knawed it. Wheer's
your fear an' tremblin' too? I've never seed 'e afeared or shaken 'fore the
thrawn o' the Most High in your life. But I 'sure 'e, thee'll come to it."

"An' you say that!' You'm 'mazin' blind, Tregenza, for all you walk in the
Light. The Light's dazed 'e, I'm thinkin', same as birds a breakin' theer
wings 'gainst lighthouse glasses. You sez you be a worm twenty times a day,
an' yet you'm proud enough for Satan hisself purty nigh. If you'm a worm,
why doan't 'e act like a worm an' be humble-minded? 'Tis the lil childern
gets into heaven. You'm stiff-necked, Michael Tregenza. I sez it respectful
an' in sorrer; but 'tis true."

"I hope the Lard won't lay thy sin to thy charge, my poor sawl," answered
the fisherman with perfect indifference. "You--you dares to speak agin me!
I wish I could give 'e a hand an' drag 'e a lil higher up the ladder o'
righteousness, Chirgwin; but you'm o' them as caan't dance or else won't,
not if God A'mighty's Self piped to 'e. Go your ways, an' knaw you'm in the
prayers of a man whose prayers be heard."

"Then pray for Joan. If you'm so cocksure you gets a hearin' 'fore us
church folks, 'tis your fust duty to plead for her."

"It was," he said. "Now it is too late, I've sweated for her, an' wrastled
wi' principalities an' powers for her, an' filled the night watches by sea
an' shore wi' gert agonies o' prayer for her. But 'tweern't to be. Her
name's writ in the big Book o' Death, not the small Book o' Life. David
prayed hard till that cheel, got wrong side the blanket, died. Then he
washed his face an' ate his meat. 'Twas like that wi' me. Joan's dead now.
Let the dead bury theer dead."

"'Tis awful to hear 'e, Tregenza."

"The truth's a awful thing, Chirgwin, but a lie is awfuler still. 'Tis the
common fate to be lost. You an' sich as you caan't grasp the truth 'bout
that. Heaven's no need to be a big plaace--theer 'edn' gwaine to be no
crowdin' theer. 'Tis hell as'll fill space wi' its roominess."

"I be gwaine," answered Mr. Chirgwin. "Us have talked three hour by the
clock, an' us ain't gotten wan thot in common. I trusts in Christ; you
trusts in yourself. Time'll shaw which was right. You damn the world; I
wouldn't damn a dew-snail. [Footnote: _Dew-snail_--A slug.] I awnly
sez again, 'May you live to see all the pints you'm wrong.' An' if you do,
'twill be a tidy big prospect."

They exchanged some further remarks in a similar strain. Then Tom informed
Uncle Chirgwin that his cart with a full load of oar-weed was waiting at
the door. Whereupon the old man got his hat, loaded his pipe, wished
Thomasin good-by, and drove sorrowfully away. Mrs. Tregenza had secretly
inquired after Joan's health and wealth. That the first was excellent, the
second carefully put away in the lawyer's hands, caused her satisfaction.
She told Mr. Chirgwin to make Joan write out a will.

"You never knaws," she said. "God keep the gal, but they do die now an'
agin. 'Tweer better she wrote about the money 'cordin' to a lawyer's way.
And, say, for the Lard's love, not to leave it to Michael. So well light a
fire wi' it as that. He bawled out as the money had lit a fire a'ready,
when I touched 'pon it to en--a fire as was gwaine to burn through
eternity; but Michael's not like a human. His ideas 'pon affairs is all
pure Bible. You an' me caan't grasp hold o' all he says. An' the money's
done no wrong. So you'll drop in Joan's ear as it might be worldly-wise to
save trouble by sayin' what should be done if anything ill failed 'pon
her--eh?"

Uncle Chirgwin promised that he would do so, and Mrs. Tregenza felt a
weight off her mind which had distressed it for some while. She was
thinking of Tom, of course. She knew that Joan loved him, and though the
prospect of his ever coming by a penny of the money appeared slender, yet
to think that he might be in a will, named for hundreds of pounds, was a
shadowy sort of joy to her.

That night Joan's uncle told the girl of his afternoon's work, and she
expressed some sorrow that he should have thus exerted himself on her
behalf.

"Faither's dirt beside the likes of you," she said. "'Twas wastin' good
time to talk to en, an' I wouldn't go back to Newlyn, you mind, if he was
to ax me 'pon his knees. I'm a poor fool of a gal, but I knaws enough to
laugh at the ignorance o' faither an' that fiddle-faaced crowd to the Luke
Gospel Chapel."

"Doan't 'e be bitter, Joan. Us all makes mistakes an' bad's the best o'
human creatures. Your faither will chaange, sure as I'm a livin' man, some
day. God ban't gwaine to let en gaw down to's graave wi' sich a 'mazin'
number o' wrong opinions. Else think o' the wakin' t'other side! Iss, it
caan't be. Why, as 'tis, if he went dead sudden, he'd gaw marchin' into
heaven as bold as brass, an' bang up to the right hand o' the thrawne!
Theer's a situation for a body! An' the awk'ardness o' havin' to step
forrard an' tell en! No, no, the man'll be humbled sure 'fore his journey's
end. Theer's Everlasting eyes 'pon en, think as you may."

"I never think at all about him," declared Joan, "an' I ban't gwaine to. He
won't chaange, an' I never wants en to. I've got you to love me, an' to
love; an' I'm--I'm waitin' for wan as be gawld to faither's dross."

She sighed as she spoke.

"Waitin' for en still?"

"Ay, for Mister Jan. It caan't be no gert length o' time now. I s'pose days
go quicker up Lunnon town than wi' us."

"Joan, my dovey, 'tis idle. Even I sees it now. I did think wi' you fust as
he was a true man. I caan't no more. I wish I could."

A month before Joan would have flashed into anger at such a speech as this,
but now she did not answer. Young love is fertile in imagination. She had
found a thousand glories in John Barren, and, when he left her, had woven a
thousand explanations for his delayed return. Now invention grew dull;
enthusiasm waned; her confidence was shaken, though she denied the fact
even to herself as a sort of treachery. But there is no standing still in
time. The remorseless fact of his non-return extended over weeks and
months.

Mr. Chirgwin saw her silence, noted the little quiver of her mouth as he
declared his own loss of faith, stroked the hand she thrust dumbly into his
and felt her silence hurt his heart.

Presently Joan spoke.

"I've got none to b'lieve in en no more then--not wan now, not even you.
Whiles you stuck up for en I felt braave 'bout his comin'; now--now Mister
Jan have awnly got me to say a word for en. An' you doan't think he'm a
true man no more then, uncle?"

"Lassie, I wish to God as I did. Time's time. Why ban't he here?"

"I doan't dare think this is the end. I'm feared to look forrard now. If
it do wance come 'pon me as he've gone 'twill drive me mad, I knaws."

"No, never, not if you'd awnly turn your faace the right way. Theer's
oceans o' comfort an' love waitin' for 'e, gal. You did belong to a hard
world, as I knaws who have just comed from speech wi' your faither; but
'twas a world o' clean eatin' an' dressin' an' livin'--a God-fearin' world
leadin' up'ards on a narrer, ugly road, but a safe road, I s'pose. An' you
left it. You'll say I be harsh, but my heart do bleed for 'e, Joan. If
you'd awnly drop this talk 'bout Nature, as none of us understands, an'
turn to the livin' Christ, as all can understand. That's wheer rest lies
for 'e, nowheers else. You'm like Eve in the garden. She was kindiddled an'
did eat an' lost eternal life an' had to quit Eden. An' 'tis forbidden
fruit as you've ate, not knawin' 'twas sich. Nature doan't label her
pisins, worse luck."

"Eve? No, I ban't no Eve. She had Adam."

There was a world of sorrow in the words and the hopeless ring in them
startled Uncle Chirgwin, for it denoted greater changes in the girl's mind
than he thought existed. She seemed nearer to the truth. It cut his heart
to see her suffering, but he thanked Heaven that the inevitable knowledge
was coming, and prayed it might be the first step toward peace. He was
silent with his thoughts, and Joan spoke again, repeating her last words.

"Iss, Eve had Adam to put his arm around her an' kiss her wet eyes. He were
more to her than what the garden was, I'll lay, or God either. That's the
bitter black God o' my faither. What for did He let the snake in the garden
'tall if He really loved them fust poor fools? Why dedn' He put they
flamin' angels theer sooner. 'Twas the snake they should have watched an'
kep' out."

Uncle Chirgwin looked at her with round terrified eyes. She had never
echoed Barron's sentiments to such a horrified listener.

"Doan't, for pity's sake, Joan! The wickedness of it! Him as taught you to
think such frightful thoughts tried to ruin your sawl so well as your body.
Oh, if you'd awnly up an' say, 'That man was wrong an' I'll forget en an'
turn to the Saviour.'"

"You caan't understan'. I do put ugly bits o' thot afore 'e, but if you'd
heard him as opened my eyes, you'd knaw 'tedn' ugly taken altogether. I
knaws so much, but caan't speak it out. Us done no sin, an' I ban't shamed
to look the sun in the faace, nor you. An' he will come--he will--if
theer's a kind God in heaven he'll come back to me. If 'e doan't, then I'll
say that faither's God's the right wan."

"Doan't 'e put on a bold front, Joan gal. Theer's things tu deep for the
likes o' us. You ban't prayin' right, I reckon. Theer's a voice hid in you.
Listen to that. Nature's spawk to 'e an' now er's dumb. Listen to t'other,
lassie. Nature do guide beasts an' birds an' the poor herbs o' the field;
but you--you listen to t'other. You'll never be happy no more till you awns
'twas a sad mistake an' do ax in the right plaace for pardon."

"I want no pardon," she said. "I have done no wrong, I tell 'e. Wheer's
justice to? 'Cause the man do bide away, I be wicked; if he comed back
to-morrer an' married me--what then? I be sinless in the matter of it, an'
Nature do knaw it, an' God do knaw it."

But her breast heaved and her eyes were wet with unshed tears. Uncle
Chirgwin, her solitary trust and stand-by, had drifted away too. His hope
was dead and she could not revive it. He had never spoken so strongly
before, but now he was taking up Mary's line of action and had ranged
himself against her. It almost seemed to Joan that he reflected in a meek,
diluted fashion, as the moon turns the sun's golden fire to silver,
something of what he must have heard that afternoon from her father. This
defection acted definitely on the girl's temperament. She fought fear,
hardened her heart against doubt, cast suspicion far away as treason to
"Mister Jan" and gave to hope a new lease of life. She would be patient for
his sake, she would trust in him still.

There was something grand in the loneliness, she told herself. He would
know perhaps one day of her great patient faith and love. And the trial
would make her brain and heart bigger and better fit her for the position
of wife to him. The struggle was fought by her with that courage which lies
beyond man's comprehension. She looked at the world with bright eyes when
there was necessity for facing it; she exhausted her ingenuity in schemes
for communicating with John Barron. If he only knew! She felt that even had
change darkened his affection for her, yet, most surely, the thought of the
baby must tempt him back again. Thus, with sustained bravery and ignorance,
she left her hand in Nature's, and her faith, rising gloriously above the
doubt of the time, trusted that majestic heathen goddess as a little child
trusts its mother.

Fate played another prank upon her not long afterward and thrust into her
hands a possible means of access to John Barron. A favorite resort of
Joan's was the brook which ran down the valley beneath Drift and Sancreed.
The little stream wound through a fair coomb between orchards, meadows,
wastes of fern and heather. At this season of the year the valley was very
lonely, and a certain spot beside the stream often tempted Joan by reason
of its comfort and its peace. From here, sitting on a granite bowlder
clothed in soft green mosses and having a shape into which human limbs
might fit easily, the girl could see much that was fair. The meadows were
all sprinkled with the silver-mauve of cuckoo-flowers--Shakespeare's
"lady's smock"; the hills sloped upward under oaken saplings as yet too
young for the stripping; the valley stretched winding landward beneath
Sancreed. Above and far away stretched the Cornish moors dotted with man's
mining enterprises, chiefly deserted. Ding-Dong raised its gaunt engine
stack and, distant though it was, Joan's sharp eyes could see the rusty arm
of iron stretching forth from the brickwork, motionless, not worth the
removing. Close at hand, where the stream wandered babbling at her feet,
the whole glory of spring shone on blossoms and grasses where the world of
the stream-side sent forth a warm, living smell. The wildness of the upland
moors stretched down into the valley below them. There glimmered blue-green
patches of bracken, speckled with the red and white hides of calves which
fed and scampered dew-lap deep; and the fern was all sheened with light
where the sunshine brightened its polished leaves. The stream wound through
the midst, bedecked and adorned with purple bugle flowers, bridged with
dog-roses and honeysuckles, in festoons, in bunches and in sprays, crowned
with scented gorse, fringed with yellow irises which splashed flaming
reflections where the brook widened and slowed into shallow little
backwaters. Flags and cresses framed the margins; meadowsweets made the air
fragrant above, and granite bowlders fretted the waters silver, their
foundations hidden in dark water-weed. Sunshine danced on every tiny
cascade and threw stars and twinkling flashes of light upward from the
brown pools upon the banks. Everything was upon a miniature scale, even to
the trout which lived in the stream, flashed their dim shadows under its
waters, leaped into the air after the flies, set little clouds of sand
shimmering as they darted up and down or, when surprised, wriggled away
into favorite holes and hiding places beneath the banks and trailing weeds.
Ling and wortleberry too were moorland visitors in the valley, and the bog
heather already budded.

Here was one of the many favorite resting-places of Joan, and hither she
came on a rare morning in mid June at the wish of another person.

Uncle Chirgwin had set his niece a task, and the object of her present
visit was no mere dawdling and thinking while perched upon the granite
throne above the meadowsweets. This fact a basket and a three-pronged fork
indicated. Her uncle deemed himself an authority on simples and possessed
much information, mostly erroneous, concerning the properties of wild herbs
and flowers. A decoction of hemp agrimony he at all times considered a most
valuable bitter tonic; and of this plant the curious flesh-colored flowers
on their long green stems grew pretty freely by the stream-side in the
valley. The time of flowering was not yet come, but Joan knew the dull leaf
of the herb well enough and, that found, she could easily dig up the root,
wherein its virtue dwelt. But before starting on her search, the girl
rested a while where the serrated foliage and creamy blossom of the
meadowsweets laced and fringed the granite of her couch; and, as she sat
there, her eye taking in the happy valley, her brain reading into the
luxuriant life of nature, some strange new thoughts hidden until lately,
she became suddenly conscious of a phenomenon beyond her power to
immediately explain or understand It drove the hemp agrimony quite out of
her head, and, when the mystery came to be explained, filled Joan's mind
with the memory of her own sad affairs. First and repeatedly there
glimmered a gossamer over the stream, falling into the water and as often
rising again; then above the film of light flashed another, rising abruptly
golden into the sunshine. Not for a moment or two did she discover the
flashing thing was a fly-rod, but presently the man who held it appeared
below her at a bend of the streamlet. He was clad much like the artists,
and it made the blood flush hot to her cheek as she thought he might be
one. Young men sometimes fished the brook for the fingerling trout it
contained. They were small but sweet, and the catching them with a fly was
difficult work in a stream so overhung with tangles of vine and brier, so
densely planted in the wider reaches with water hemlock and lesser weeds.
This fisherman, at any rate, found successful sport beyond his power to
achieve. He flogged away, but hung his fly clear of the stream at every
second cast and deceived not the smallest troutlet of them all. The young
man, after the manner of those anglers classified as "chuck and chance it,"
worked his clumsy way toward Joan's chair on the granite bowlder.
Motionless she sat, and her drab attire and faded sun-bonnet harmonized so
well with the tones around it--the gray of the stones, the lights of the
river, the masses of the meadowsweet--that while noting a broad and
sparkling stickle winding away beneath her, the angler missed the girl
herself. This stickle spread, with an oily tremor and white undercurrent
full of air pearls, from a waterfall where the foot of Joan's throne
fretted the stream. Below it the waters slowed and ran smoothly into dark
brown shadows, being here marked by the wrinkled lines of their currents
and splashed with the sky's reflected blue. An ideal spot for a trout it
doubtless was, and the approaching sportsman exercised unusual care in his
approach, crouching along the bank and finally creeping bent double within
casting distance. Then, as he freed his fly, he saw Joan, like a queen of
the pool reigning motionless and silent. She moved and no fish was likely
to rise after within the visual radius of her sudden action. Thereupon the
angler in the man cursed; the artist in him drew a short, sharp breath. He
scrambled to his feet and looked again upon a beautiful picture. The plump,
baby freshness of Joan's face had vanished indeed, and there was that in
the slightly anxious expression and questioning look of her blue eyes that
had told any medical man he stood before a future mother; but, in her
seated position, no tangible suggestion of a hidden life was thrust upon
the spectator's view. He only saw a wondrously pretty woman in a charming
attitude, amid objects which enhanced her beauty by their own. She seemed a
trifle pale for a cottage girl, but her mouth was scarlet and dewy as ripe
wood-strawberries, her eyes were just of that color where the blue sky
above was reflected and changed to a darker shade by the pools of the
brook. She sat with her hands folded in her lap and looked straight at the
sportsman with a frank interest which surprised him. He was a modest lad,
but the sudden presentment of an object so lovely woke his pluck and he
fished ostentatiously to Joan's very feet, suspecting that the absurdity of
the action would not be apparent to her. She watched the morsel of feather
and fur dragged across the water after the fantastic fashion of the "chuck
and chancer," and he, when her eyes were on the water, kept his own fast
upon her face. Both man and woman were profoundly anxious each to hear the
other's voice, but neither felt brave enough to speak first. Then the
artist's ingenuity found a means, and Joan presently saw his fly stick fast
upon the side of the stream where she sat. The thing was caught at the
seed-head of a rush within reach of Joan's hand, and while this incident
appeared absolutely accidental, yet it was not so, for the artist had long
been endeavoring to get fast somewhere hard by Joan. Now, finding his
maneuver accomplished, he made but the feeblest efforts to loosen the fly,
then raised his hat and accosted Joan.

"Might I trouble you to set my line clear? Ashamed to ask such a thing, but
it would be awfully kind. Oh, thank you, thank you. Take care of your
fingers! The hook is very sharp."

Joan got the fly free in a moment, and then, to Harry Murdoch's
gratification, addressed him. The young fellow was Edmund Murdoch's cousin,
and at present dwelt in Newlyn with the elder artist already mentioned as
John Barron's friend.

"May I make so bold as to ax if you do knaw a paintin' gen'leman by name
o'--o' Mister Jan? Leastways, that's wan on's names, but I never can call
home the other, though he tawld me wance. He was here last early
spring-time, an' painted a gert picture of me up 'pon top the hill they
calls Gorse Point."

"Lucky devil," thought the artist; but though he knew something of Barron
and his work and had heard that Barron painted when at Newlyn, he did not
associate these facts with the girl before him.

"He'm in Lunnon, so far's I knaw," she continued.

Harry Murdoch had to look hard at Joan before answering, and he delayed a
while with an expression of deep thought upon his face. At length he spoke.

"No, I cannot say that I have heard of him or the picture. But perhaps some
of the men in Newlyn will know. He was lucky to get you to paint. I wish
you would let me try."

She shook her head impatiently.

"No, no. He done it 'cause--'cause he just wanted a livin' thing to fill up
a bit o' his canvas. 'Tweern't for shaw or for folks to see. He done it for
pleasure. An' I wants to knaw wheer he lives 'cause he might think I be in
Newlyn still, but I ban't. I'm livin' up Drift along wi' Mr. Chirgwin. An'
I wish he could knaw it."

"He was called 'Mister John'? Well, I'll see what I can do to find out
anything about him. And your name?"

"Joan Tregenza. If you'll be so good as to put a question round 'mongst the
painting gen'lemen, I'd thank 'e kindly."

"Then I certainly will. And on Saturday next I'll come here again to tell
you if I have heard anything. Will you come?"

"Iss fay, an' thank you, sir."

So he passed slowly forward, and she sat a full hour after he had left her
building new castles on the old crumbling foundations. It was even in her
mind to pray, to pray with her whole heart and soul; but chaos had settled
like a storm upon her beliefs. She did not know where to pray to now; yet
to-day Hope once more glimmered like a lighthouse lamp through the dreary
darkness. So she turned her eyes to that radiance and waited for next
Saturday to come.

Then she set about grubbing up roots of hemp agrimony where they grew. She
was almost happy and whistled gently to herself as she filled her little
basket.

That night Edmund Murdoch heard his cousin's story and explained that
"Mister Jan" was doubtless John Barron.

"I'm owing the beggar a letter; I'll write tomorrow."

"Was it a good picture?"

"I should say that few better ever came out of Newlyn. Perhaps none so
good. Is the model as pretty as ever?"

Young Harry raved of the vision that Joan had presented among the
meadowsweets.

"Well, I suppose he wouldn't mind her knowing where he lives; but he's such
a queer devil that I'll write and ask him first. We shall hear in a couple
of days; I can tell him her address, at any rate; then he may write direct
to her, if he cares to."




CHAPTER TEN

TWO LETTERS


Four days elapsed, and then Edmund Murdoch received an answer to his
letter. He had written at length upon various affairs and his friend did no
less.

"No. 6 Melbury Gardens, S.W.

"June 8, 189--.

"Dear Murdoch--Your long screed gave me some pleasure and killed an hour.
You relate the even course of your days since my departure from Cornwall,
and I envy the good health and happy contentment of mind which your note
indicates. I gained no slight benefit from my visit to the West Country,
and it had doubtless carried me bravely through this summer but for an
unfortunate event. A sharp cold, which settled on my chest, has laid me low
for some length of time, though I am now as well again as I shall ever be.
So much for facing the night air in evening dress. Nature has no patience
with our idiotic conventions, and hates alike man's shirt-front and woman's
bare bosom when displayed, as is our imbecile custom, at the most dangerous
hours in the twenty-four. My doctors are for sending me away, and I shall
probably follow their advice presently. But the end is not very far off.

"I rejoice that you have sucked in something of my spirit and are trying to
get at the heart of rocks and sea before you paint them. Men waste so much
time poking about in art galleries, like the blind moles they mostly are,
and forget that Nature's art gallery is open every day at sunrise. Dwell
much in the air, glean the secrets of dawns, listen when the white rain
whispers over woodland, translate the tinkle of summer seas where they kiss
your rocky shores; get behind the sunset; think not of what colors you will
mix when you try to paint it, but let the pageant sink into your soul like
a song. Do not drag your art everywhere. Forget it sometimes and develop
your individuality. You have learned to draw tolerably; now learn to think.
Believe me, the painting people do not think enough.

"Truly I am content to die in the face of the folly I read and see around
me. Know you what certain obscure writers are now about in magazines? They
are vindicating the cosmic forces, whitewashing Mother Nature after
Huxley's Romanes lecture! He told the truth, and Nature loved him for it;
but now come hysterical religious ciphers who squeak boldly forth in print
that Nature is the mother of altruism, that self-sacrifice is her first
law! One genius observes that 'tis their cruelty and selfishness have
arrested the progress of the tiger and the ape! Poor Nature! Never a word
of shotguns in all this drivel, of course. Cruelty and selfishness!
Qualities purely and solely human--qualities resulting from conscious
intelligence alone. You and I are selfish, not the ape; you and I are
cruel, not the tiger. He at least learns Nature's lessons and obeys her
dictates; we never do and never shall. A plague upon these fools with their
theologic rubbish heaps. They would prostitute the very fonts of reason and
make Nature's eternal circle fit the little squares of their own faiths.
Man! I tell you that the root of human misery might be pulled out and
destroyed to-morrow like the fang of a decayed tooth if only reason could
kill these weeds of falsehood which choke civilization and strangle
religion. But the world's 'doers' have all got 'faith' (or pretend to it);
the world's thinkers are mere shadows moving about in the background of
active affairs. They only write and talk. Action is the sole way of
chaining a nation's mind.

"Your churchman is active enough, hence the spread of that poison which
keeps human reason stunted, impotent, anaemic. Take Liberty--the cursed
ignis fatuus our dear poets have shrieked for, our preachers have prayed
for, our patriots have perished for through all time. In pursuit of this
rainbow-gold more blood and brains have been wasted than would have
sufficed to make a nation. And yet a breath from Reason blows the thing to
tatters, as an uprising wind annihilates a fog. Freedom is an attribute of
the Eternal, and creation cannot share it with him, any more than it can
share his throne with him. 'The liberty of the subject'! A contradiction in
terms. Banish this unutterable folly of freedom, and control the breeding
of human flesh as we control the output of beef and of mutton. Then the
face of the world will alter. Millions of money is annually spent in order
that mindless humanity, congenital lunatics and madmen, may be fed and
housed and kept alive. Their existences are to themselves less pleasurable
than that of the beasts, they are a source of agony to those who have borne
them; but they live to old age and devour tons of good food, while
wholesome intellects starve in the gutters of every big city. Banish this
cant of freedom then, I tell you. The lightning in heaven is not free; the
stars are not free; Nature herself is the created slave of the Great
Will--and _we_ prattle about liberty. Let the State look to it and
practice these lessons Nature has taught and still preaches patiently to
deaf ears. Let it be as penal to bring life into the world without
permission from authority as it is to put life out of the world. Let the
begetting of paupers be a crime; let the health and happiness of the
community rise higher than the satisfaction of individuals; let the
self-denial practiced by the reasonable few be made a legal necessity to
the unreasonable many. Let the blighted, the malformed, the brainless go
back to the earth from which they came. Let the world of humanity be
cleansed and sweetened and purified as Nature cleanses and sweetens and
purifies her own kingdom. She removes her failures; we put ours under glass
and treat them like hothouse flowers. That is called humanity; it is the
mad leading the mad.... But why waste your time? Nature will have the last
word; Reason must win in the end; a genius, at once thinker and doer, will
come along some day and put the world right, at a happy moment when the din
of theologists is out of its ears. We want a new practical religion; for
Christianity, distorted and twisted through the centuries into its present
outworn, effete, ignoble shape, is a mere political force or a money-making
machine, according to the genius of the country which professes it. The
golden key of the founder, which is lost, may be found again, but I think
it never will be."

[Here the man elaborated his opinions. They were like himself: a medley--a
farrago--wherein ascerbity, acuteness, and a mind naturally philosophic
were stranded in the arid deserts of a pessimism bred partly from his own
decaying physical circumstances and partly from recognition of his own
wasted time.]

"I do not suppose that I shall paint any more. I had my Cornish picture
brought from its packing-case and framed, and supported on a great easel at
the foot of my bed while I was stricken down last month. Mistress Joan eyed
me curiously from under her hand, and through the night-watches, while my
man snored in the next chamber and I tossed with great unrest, the girl
seemed to live and move and smile at me under the flicker of the night
lamp. Everybody is pleased to say that 'Joe's Ship' seems good to them. I
have it now in the studio, and contrasted it yesterday with my bathing
negresses from Tobago. I think I like it better. It is difficult to read
the soul in black faces, especially when the models are freezing to death
as mine were. But there is something near to soul in this painted
Joan--more I doubt than the living reality would be found to possess
to-day. She was a good girl all the same, and I am gratified to hear she
did not quite forget me. I have written to her at the address you mention.
They pester me to send the picture somewhere, and to stop their
importunities--especially the women--I have promised to let the thing go to
the Institute in the autumn. I shall doubtless change my mind before the
time comes.

"My life slowly but surely dwindles to that mere battle with Death which
your consumptive wages at the finish. I fancy Biskra will see my bones
later in the year. The R.A. took not less than six months off my waning
days this spring. Thank God they hung Brady as he deserved. Twenty good
works I saw--'the rest is silence.'

"Yours, while I remain,

"JOHN BARRON."

It was true that the artist had written another letter addressed to Joan
Tregenza at Drift. He had written it first--written it hurriedly, wildly,
on the spur of the moment. But, after the completion of his communication
to Murdoch, the mood of the man changed. He had coldly read again the
former epistle, and altered his mind concerning it. Barron wanted Joan back
again sometimes, if life dragged more than usual; but pens and paper
generally modified his desire when he got that far toward calling her to
him. Her memory tickled him pleasantly and whiled away time. He framed the
various sketches he had made of her and suffered thought to occupy itself
with her as with no other woman who had entered his life. But the day on
which he wrote to Murdoch was a good one with him. He felt stronger and
better able to suck pleasure out of living than he had for a month.

"When I whistle she will come," he thought to himself. "Perhaps there would
be some pleasure in taking her to Biskra presently. I will wait, at any
rate, until nearer the last scene. She would be pretty to look at when I'm
dying. Yes, she shall close my eyes some day, if she likes. That's a
pleasant thought--for me."

So the letter to Murdoch was sent forth, but the letter to Joan, containing
some poetic thoughts on Nature, a pathetic description of Barron's
enfeebled state, and an appeal to her to join him that they might part no
more on this side the grave, was torn up. He laughed at the trouble he had
taken to print it all, and pondered pleasantly on the picture which Murdoch
had drawn of Joan ruling the kingdom of the meadowsweets, of her eager
question concerning "Mister Jan."

"Strange," he reflected, "that her mediocre intelligence should have clung
to a man so outwardly mean as myself. If I thought that she had remembered
half I said when I was with her, or had made a single attempt to practice
the gospel I preached so finely--damned if I wouldn't have her back again
to-morrow and be proud of her too. But it can't be. She was such an
absolute fool. No, I much fear she only desires to find out what has become
of the goose who laid the big golden egg. Or if she doesn't, perhaps her
God-fearing father and mother do."

Which opinion is not uninteresting, for it illustrates the usual failure of
materialism to discover or gauge those mental possibilities which lie
hidden within the humblest and worst equipped intelligences. John Barron
was an able man in some respects, but his knowledge of Joan Tregenza had
taught him nothing concerning her character and its latent powers of
development.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

DISENCHANTMENT


With summer, Nature, proceeding on her busy way, approached again the
annual phenomena of seed-time and harvest. To Joan, as spring had brought
with it a world of mothers, so the subsequent season filled Nature with
babies; and, in the light of all this newborn life, the mothers suffered a
change. Now, sorrow-guided, did Joan begin to read under the face of
things, "to get behind the sunset," as Barren had said in his letter to
Murdoch, to realize a little of the mystery hidden in green leaves and
swelling fruits and ripening grain, to observe at least the presence of
mystery though she could not translate more than an occasional
manifestation thereof. She found much matter for wonder and for fear.
Visible Nature had grown to be a smiling curtain behind which raged eternal
struggles for life. Every leaf sheltered a tragedy, every bough was a
battlefield. The awful frailty of all existence began to dawn upon Joan
Tregenza, and the discovery left her helpless, lonely, longing for new
gods. She knew not where to turn. Any brightness from any source had been
welcome then.

Disenchantment came with the second visit of the artist to the stream.
There; young Murdoch had met her and told her that "Mister Jan" was going
to write her a letter. Upon which she had sung glad songs in a sunlit world
and amazed Mary and Uncle Chirgwin alike by the exhibition of a sudden and
profound happiness. But that longed-for letter never came; weeks passed by;
the truth rolled up over her life at last; and, as a world seen in a blaze
of sunshine only dazzles us and conceals its facts under too much light,
but reveals the same clear cut and distinct at dawn or early twilight, so
now Joan's eyes, obscured no more by the blinding promise of great joy,
began to see her world as it was, her future as it would be.

Strange thoughts came to her on an evening when she stood by the door of
the kitchen at Drift, waiting for the cart to return from market. It was a
cool, gray gloaming, wreathed in diaphanous mists born of past ram. These
rendered every outline of tree and building vague and immense. Where Joan
stood, the peace of the time was broken only by a gentle dripping from the
leaves of a great laurel by the gate which led from the farmyard to the
fields. Below it, moist ground was stamped with the trident impress of many
fowls' feet; and, now and then, a feather sidled down from the heart of the
evergreen, where poultry, black and white and spangled, were settling to
roost. A subdued clucking and fluttering marked their hidden perches; then
came showers of rain-drops from the shining leaves as a bird mounted to a
higher branch; after which silence fell again.

And Joan found all hope fairly dead at last. There and then, in the misty
eveningtide, the fact fell on the ear of her heart as though one had spoken
it; and henceforth she dated disenchantment from that hour. The whole
pageant of her romance, with the knightly figure of the painter that filled
its foreground, shriveled to a scroll no bigger than a curled, dead
leaf--sere, wasted, ghostly, and light enough to be washed away on a tear,
borne away upon a sigh.

Then there followed for her prodigious transformations in the panorama of
Nature. Seen from the standpoint of his great, overwhelming lie to her, the
philosophy which this man had professed changed in its appearance, and that
mightily. He had used his cleverness like a net to trap her, and now,
though she could not prove his words untrue save in one particular, yet
that crowning act of faithlessness much tended to vitiate all the beauties
of imagination which had gone before it. They were lilies grown from a
dung-heap. Looking back in the new cold sidelight, her life came out
clearly with all the color gone from it and the remorseless details
distinct. And in this survey Nature dwindled to a minor Deity, a goddess
with moods as many and whims as wild as a woman's. She was unstable, it
seemed to Joan then; the immemorial solidity and splendor of her had
departed; her eyes were not fixed on Heaven any more, nor did peace any
longer rest within them; they were frightened, terrified, and their wild
and furtive glances followed one Shadow, reflected one Shape. It stood
waiting at the end of all her avenues; It peered from the heart of her
forests; it wandered on her heaths and moors; it lay under the stones in
her rivers; it stalked her sea-shores, floated on her waves, rode upon her
lightning, hid in her four winds; and the Shadow's name was Death. Joan
stood face to face with it at last and gazed round-eyed at a revelation.
She was saddened to find her own story told by Nature in many allegories,
painted upon the garden, set forth in waste places, fashioned by humble
weeds, reflected in the small, brief lives of unconsidered creatures. Now
she imagined herself an ill-shaped apple in the orchard which the mother of
all had neglected. It was crumpled up on one side, twisted out of its fair
full beauty, ruined by some wicked influence--a failure. Now she was a fly
caught by the gold spider who set his web shaking to deceive. Now she was a
little bird singing one moment, the next crawling dazed and shaking under
the paw of a cat. Why should Nature make the strong her favorites and be so
cruel to the weak? That seemed an ungodly thing to Joan. She had only
reached this point. She had no inkling of the great cleansing process which
removes the dross, the eternal competition from which only the cleanest and
sweetest and best come forth first. She saw the battle indeed, but did not
understand the meaning of it any more than the rest of the world which, in
the words of the weakling Barren, beneath the emblems of a false humanity,
keeps its weeds under hot-house glasses and, out of mercy to futile
individuals, does terribly wrong its communities. Our cleansing processes
are only valuable so far as they go hand in hand with Nature, and where the
folly of many fools rejects the wisdom of the wise, there Nature has her
certain revenge sooner or later. The sins of the State are visited on the
children of the State, and those who repeal laws which Science, walking
hand in hand with Nature, has proposed, those who refuse laws which
Science, Nature-taught, urges upon Power, do not indeed suffer themselves,
but commit thousands of others to suffering. So their false sentiment in
effect poisons the blood-springs of a nation. Religion leads to these
disasters, and any religion answerable for gigantic human follies is either
false or most falsely comprehended.

Her uncle still tarried, and Joan, weary of waiting, betook herself and her
sorrows to the old garden, there to view a spectacle which she never tired
of. She watched the evening primroses, saw their green bud-cases spring
open and the soft yellow leaves tremble out like butterflies new come from
the chrysalis. She loved these little lemon-colored lamps that twinkled
anew at every sundown in the green twilight of the garden. She knew their
eyes would watch through the night and that their reward would be death.
Many shriveled fragments marked the old blossoms on the long stems, but the
crowns of each still put out new buds, and every dusk saw the wakening of
fresh blossoms heedless of their dead sisters below. "They was killed
'cause they looked at the sun," thought Joan. "I suppose the moon be theer
mistress and they should not chaange their god. Yet it do seem hard like to
be scorched to death for lookin' upward."

What she saw now typified in a dead flower was her own case under a new
symbol; but the girl wasted no anger on the man who had played with her to
make a holiday pleasant, on that mock sun whose light now turned to
darkness. Her mind was occupied entirely with pity for herself. And that
fact probably promised to be a sure first step to peace. The lonely void of
her life must be filled, else Joan was like to go mad; and the filling,
left to Faith, might yet be happily accomplished. For Faith, if no more
than a "worm with diamond eyes" yet has eyes of diamonds, and rainbows are
the arches of her shape. Faith is fair and a very heart-companion to those
who know her and love her courts; and Joan, of all others, was best endowed
by disposition and instinct for the possession of her. Faith had slept in
the girl's heart since her mother died; but, sleeping, had grown, and now
waited in all strength to be called to a great task. The void was at its
deepest just now; the lowest note of Joan's soul had sounded; the facts of
her ruin and desertion were fully accepted at last; and such knowledge
served even to turn the growing mother in her sour for a time. Maternal
instinct stood still just a little while at this point in the girl's inner
life; then, when all things whirled away to chaos; on this night, when
nothing remained sure for her but death; in her hour of ultimate,
unutterable weakness and at the dawn of a blank despair, came one last plea
from Uncle Chirgwin. Mary had given up talking, fairly wearied out and
convinced that to waste more words on Joan would be a culpable disposal of
time; but Mr. Chirgwin blundered doggedly on with the humility of a worm
and the obstinacy of a friendly dog. He hammered at the portals of Joan's
spiritual being with admirable pertinacity; and at length he had his
reward. Faith in something being an absolute and vital essential to the
welfare of every woman, Joan Tregenza was no exception to the rule.

It fell out on the night of her uncle's weekly visit to market, that Joan
had just returned from the garden, when she heard the clatter of the
spring-cart. It drew up at the kitchen door and Mary alighted with Mr.
Chirgwin. The baskets that had started laden with eggs, butter and other
produce came back empty save for a few brown paper parcels. Exceptional
prices had ruled in the market-place that day, so Mr. Chirgwin and his
niece returned home in excellent temper.

They all met at supper, together with those farm-servants who took their
meals at the farmer's table. Then the laborers and the women workers
withdrew; Mary sat down to a little sewing before bedtime; and Mr. Chirgwin
smoked his pipe and looked at Joan. He noticed that the weather reflected
much upon her moods. She was more than usually silent tonight despite the
bright news from market.

Presently Mary put on the kettle and brought out a bottle of rum. Her uncle
had taken his nightcap of spirit and water from her hand for nearly ten
years, and the little duty of preparing it was dear to her. She also made
cups of tea for Joan and herself. Mary often blamed herself for this luxury
and only allowed it on the night that ended those arduous duties proper to
market-day. "While thus employed, both she and Uncle Thomas tried to draw
Joan out of her gloomy silence.

"Theer's to be a braave sight o' singin' down to Penzance come next week,
Joan. Lunnon folks, they tell me, wi' names a foot tall stuck 'pon the
hoardings. Us thot 'twould be a pleasin' kind o' junketin' to go an'
listen. Not but entertainments o' singin' by night be mighty exciting to
the blood. Awnly just for wance, Polly reckoned it might do us all good.
An' Polly knaws what's singin' an' what edn' so well as any lass. The
riders [Footnote: _The riders_--A circus.] be comin' likewise, though
maybe that's tu wild an' savage amoosment for quiet folks."

"You an' Polly go to the singin' then. 'Tedn' for the likes o' me."

Then Joan turned to her cousin, who was pouring tea out of a little pot
which held two cups and no more.

"Let me have the last nine drops, Polly; they'm good for the heartache, an'
mine's more'n common sore to-night."

Mary sighed, opened her mouth to preach a sermon, but shut it without a
word. She drained the teapot into Joan's cup, and then, from a bright mood
for her, relapsed into cold silence. Uncle Chirgwin, however, prattled on
about the concert until his elder niece finished her tea and went to bed.
Then he put down his pipe, took a long pull at his drink, and began to talk
hurriedly to Joan.

"I bin an' got a wonnerful fine notion this day, drivin' home-long, Joan;
an' it's comed back an' back that importuneous that I lay it's truth, an'
sent for me to remember. D'you knaw that since you comed to Drift us have
prospered uncommon? Iss, us have. The winter dedn' give no mighty promise,
nor yet the spring, till you comed. Then the Lard smiled 'pon Drift. Look
at the hay what's gwaine to be cut, God willin', next week. I never seed
nothin' more butivul thick underneath in all my days. A rare aftermath tu,
I'll warrant. 'Tis so all round. The wheat's kernin' somethin' cruel
fine--I awnly wish theer was more of it--an' the sheep an' cattle's in
braave kelter likewise. Then the orchard do promise no worse. I never seed
such a shaw of russets an' of quarantines 'pon they old trees afore."

"'Tis a fine, fair season."

"Why, so I say--a 'mazin' summer thus far--but what's the reason o't?
That's the poser as an answer comed to in the cart a drivin' home. You'm
the reason! You mind when good Saint Levan walked through the fields that
the grass grawed the greener for his tread, an' many days arter, when he'd
gone dead years an' years, the corn allus comed richest 'long the path what
he trod. An' 'tis the same here, 'cause God's eye be on you, Joan Tregenza,
an' His eye caan't be fixed 'pon no spot wi'out brightening all around. You
mind me, that's solemn truth. The Lard's watchin' over you--watchin' double
tides, as the sailors say--and so this bit o' airth's smilin' from the herb
o' the field to the biggest tree as graws. He'm watchin' over Drift for
your sake, my girl, an' the farm prospers along o' the gert goodness o' the
watchin' Lard. Iss fay, He fills all things livin' with plenshousness, an'
fats the root an' swells the corn 'cause He'm breathin' sweet over the
land--'cause He'm wakin' an' watchin' for you, Joan."

"He'm watchin' all of us, I s'pose--just to catch the trippin' footstep,
like what faither sez. He abbun no call to worry no more 'bout me, I
reckon. I be Nature's cheel, I be; an' my mother's turnin' hard too--like a
cat, as purrs to 'e wan moment an' sclows 'e the next. My day's done. I've
chose wrong an' must abide by it. But 'tis along o' bein' sich a lil fool.
Nature pushes the weak to the wall. I've seed that much 'o late days. I was
born to have my heart broke, I s'pose. 'Tedn' nothin' very straange."

"I judge your angel do cry gert tears when you lets on like that, my Joan.
Oh, gal, why won't 'e give ear to me, as have lived fifty an' more winters
in the world than what you have? Why caan't 'e taste an' try what the Lard
is? Drabbit this nonsense 'bout Nature! As if you was a fitcher, or an
'awk, or an owl! Caan't 'e see what a draggle tail, low-minded pass all
this be bringin' 'e to? Yet you'm a thinkin' creature an' abbun done no
worse than scores o' folks who be tanklin' 'pon harps afore the throne o'
God this blessed minute. You chose wrong; you said so, an' I was glad to
hear 'e, for you never 'lowed even that much till this night. What then?
Everybody chooses wrong wan time or another. Some allus goes for it, like
the bud-pickers to the red-currant bushes, some slips here an' theer, an'
do straightway right 'emselves--right 'emselves again an' again. The best
life be just a slippin' up an' rightin' over an' over, till a man dies.
You've slipped young an' maybe theer's half a cent'ry o' years waitin' for
'e to get 'pon the right road; yet you sez you must abide by what you've
done. Think how it stands. You've forgived him as wronged 'e, an' caan't
the Lard forgive as easy as you can? He forgived you 'fore you was born. I
lay the Luke Gosp'lers never told 'e that braave fact, 'cause they doan't
knaw it theerselves. 'Tis like this: your man did take plain Nature for
God, an' he did talk fulishness 'bout finding Him in the scent o' flowers,
the hum o' bees an' sichlike. Mayhap Nature's a gude working God for a
selfish man, but she edn' wan for a maid, as you knaws by now. Then your
faither--his God do sit everlastingly alongside hell-mouth, an' laugh an'
girn to see all the world a walkin' in, same as the beasts walked in the
Ark. Theer's another picksher of a God for 'e; but mark this, gal, they be
lying prophets--lying prophets both! You've tried the wan, an' found it
left your heart hollow like, an' you've tried t'other an' found that left
it no better filled; now try Christ, will 'e--? Just try. Doan't keep Him,
as is allus busy, a waitin' your whims no more. Try Christ, Joan dearie,
an' you'll feel what you've never felt yet. I knaw, as put my 'and in His
when 'twas plump an' young as yourn. An' He holds it yet, now 'tis
shriveled an' crooked wi' rheumatics. He holds it. Iss, He do."

The old man put out his hand to Joan as he spoke and she took it between
her own and kissed it.

"You'm very good," she said, "an' you'm wise 'cause you'm auld an' have
seen many years. I prayed to Saint Madern to hear me not long since, an' I
bathed in his waters, an' went home happy. But awnly the birds an' the
rabbits heard me. An' next day faither turned me out o' his house an'
counted me numbered for hell."

"Saints be very well, but 'tedn' in 'cordance with what we'm tawld nowadays
to pray to any but the Lard direct."

He pleaded long and patiently, humbly praying for the religion which had
lightened his own road. The thought of his vast experience and the
spectacle of his own blameless and simple life, as she reviewed it, made
Joan relent at last. The great loneliness of her heart yearned for
something to fill it. Man had failed her, saints had failed her; Nature had
turned cold; and Uncle Chirgwin held out a great promise.

"Ban't no sort o' use, I'm thinkin'," she said at last, "but if you'm that
set 'pon it I'll do your wish. I owe you that an' more'n that. Iss, I'll
come along wi' you an' Mary to Sancreed church next Sunday. 'Tis lil enough
to do for wan as have done so much for me."

"Thank God!" he said earnestly. "That's good news, to be sure, bless your
purty eyes! An' doan't 'e go a tremblin' an' fearin', you mind, like to
meetin'. 'Tedn' no ways like that. Just love o' the Lard an' moosic an'
holy thots from passon, an' not more hell-fire than keeps a body
healthy-minded an' awake. My ivers! I could a'most sing an' dance myself
now, an' arter my day's work tu, to think as you'll sit alongside o' me in
church come Sunday!"

Joan smiled at his enthusiasm on her behalf, then kissed him and went to
bed; while he, mixing up his prayers, his last pipe, and his final glass of
spirits according to his custom, sat the fire out while he drank deeper and
prayed harder than usual in the light of his triumph.

"Polly couldn' do it, not for all her brains an' godliness," he murmured to
himself, "yet 'twas given to an auld simple sawl like me! An' I have. I've
led her slap-bang into the hand o' the Lard, an' the rest be His business.
No man's done a better day's work inside Cornwall to-day than what I
have--that's sure!"




CHAPTER TWELVE

FROM JOE


Since her visit to the church at Newlyn, Joan had been in no place of
worship save the chapel of the Luke Gospelers. What might be the nature of
the service before her she did not know, nor did she care. But the girl
kept her promise and drove in the market-cart to Sancreed with her uncle
and cousin when Sunday came. The little church lay bowered in its grove of
sycamores, and, around it, a golden-green concourse of quivering shadows
cooled those who had walked or driven from Drift--an outlying portion of
the parish--approached through lanes innocent of all shade. Mr. Chirgwin
put up the horse and presently joined his nieces in church. Then Joan saw
him under interesting and novel conditions. He wore glasses with gold rims;
he covered his bald head with a little velvet cap; at the appointed time he
took a wooden plate and carried it round for money. Mary found the old
man's places for him and sang in a way that fairly astounded Joan. The
enormous satisfaction brought to herself by these vocal efforts was
apparent. Her soul appeared mightily lifted up. She amused chance visitors
to the church, but the regular congregation liked to hear Mary; and Joan,
seeing the comfort her cousin sucked from singing, wished she had heart to
join. That, however, she wholly lacked. Moreover, the words were strange to
her.

The quiet service, brightened by music, dragged its slow length murmuringly
along. The sermon, delivered by a visitor, was not of a sort to hold Joan,
and, indeed, could hardly be expected to attract many in such a
congregation. The preacher had lately been reading old Cornish history,
and, overcome by the startling fact that the far west of England--Cornwall
and Devon--were Christian long before Augustine saw Kent, dwelt upon the
matter after a very instructive fashion in ears unlikely to benefit from
such knowledge. That the Cornu-British bishops preached Christ while yet
Sussex, Wessex, Hampshire, Berks and other districts worshiped Woden,
Freya, the Queen of Heaven, the Thunder God, and other deities whose altars
were set up after the Conquest, did not interest Joan for one or Mr.
Chirgwin for another. But the girl woke up at the mention of Irish and
Welsh and Breton saints. Pleasant to hear was the utterance of names which
she had loved once but of late almost forgotten. They came back now, and,
the service having turned her heart to softness, she welcomed them gladly
as friends returned from afar. For the rest, the Litany it was which roused
Joan to deepest interest and opened her mind to new impressions. Here was a
prayer, gigantic in length, universal, all-embracing, catholic beyond the
compass of anything her thoughts had heretofore conceived. From the Queen
upon her throne to Joan herself, from the bishops, the princes and the
Lords of the Council to Uncle Chirgwin and his fruits of the earth, that
astounding petition ranged with equal vigor and earnestness. Nothing was
too high, nothing was too low for it; all the world was named, and the
people cried for a hearing or for mercy between each supplication and each
prayer. The overwhelming majesty of such praying impressed Joan much; as,
indeed, it impresses all who come adult thereto and do not associate it
with their childhood, with weary hours dragging interminably out, with
sleepy buzz of voices, with sore knees or a breaking back, with yearnings
stifled, with devices for passing time, with the longed-for sunshine
stealing inch by inch eastward on the church walls.

"A power o' larnin' in a small headpiece," commented Uncle Chirgwin as he
drove home with the girls sitting side by side on his left. "A braave
ch'ice o' words an' a easy knowledge o' the saints as weern't picked up in
a day. Tis well to hear a furriner now an' again. They do widen the grasp
of a man's mind, looking 'pon things from a changed point o' view. Not as
us could be 'spected to be Latiners, yet I seem 'tis very well to listen to
it as chance offers. 'Tis something to knaw 'twas Latin, an' that did I,
though I doubt some o' the good neighbors couldn' tell it for what 'twas,
by no means."

Joan said little about the service, but she praised the Litany from her own
peculiar attitude toward it.

"That be fine prayin'," she said, "with nobody forgot, an' all in black
print so's wance said 'tedn' lost."

After dinner, when Mary had gone to see a friend and the farm people were
dawdling abroad till evening milking-time, Joan made her uncle read the
service through again. This he did comfortably between the whiffs of his
pipe, and Joan answered the responses, cooing them in her sweet voice as
softly as the red and blue pigeons crooned on the roof outside. Drift was
asleep under a hot blaze of afternoon sunshine. Sometimes a child's keen
voice in the road cut the drowsy silence and came to Joan's ears where she
sat, in the best parlor with Uncle Thomas; sometimes slow wheels rumbled up
the hill toward Buryan. Other sounds there were none. The old people slept
within their cottages after the extra baked meats of Sunday's dinner; many
of the young paired and walked where pathways ran over meadows and through
yellowing wheat; while others, more gregarious and unattached, had tramped
away to Penzance to join the parade by the sea and meet their friends from
the shops.

Anon nailed boots stamped up the little pathway to Drift farmhouse, and Tom
Tregenza appeared. To-day he entered fearlessly, for he came upon an errand
from his father. He kissed Joan and shook hands with Uncle Thomas. Then he
said:

"'Tis a letter as I've brought for Joan--a furriner."

The girl's heart beat hard, and the blood rushing from her cheeks left them
white. But the letter only came from Joe Noy, and it is certain that Mr.
Tregenza would have forwarded no other. Excitement died, and was painfully
renewed, in a fresh direction, when Joan realized from whom the missive
came and thought about its writer. He had long been a stranger to her mind,
and now he seemed suddenly to re-enter it--like a stranger.

"I can stay for a bit of tea so long as I be back by chapel-time,"
explained Tom.

"An' so you shall, my son. Run 'e out o' doors an' amoose yourself where
you mind to; awnly don't ope the lil linhay in the Brook Croft, 'cause auld
bull's fastened up theer an' his temper's gettin' more'n more out o' hand."

So Tom departed, and Uncle Chirgwin read Joan's letter aloud to her. It
came from Santa Rosalia, and contained not much news but plenty of love and
some religious sentiments bred from the writer's foreign environment. Joe
Noy would be back in England again before the end of the year.

Joan was reduced to tears by this communication. She refused to be
comforted, and, indeed, the position was beyond Uncle Chirgwin's power to
brighten. The letter had come at a bad moment, and that calm and repose
which almost appeared to be softening Joan's sorrows now spread speedy
wings and departed, leaving her wholly forlorn. Curtains were falling
behind her, but curtains were also rising in front. She had looked forward
vaguely, and now the position was suddenly defined by the arrival of Joe's
letter, with all its future phases clear-cut, cold and terrible.

"My baaby's comin' just then. An' that's what'll fall 'pon his ear fust
thing. Oh, if us could awnly tell en afore he comes so he might knaw 'tis
all chaanged! 'Twould be easier for en, lovin' me that keen. He'd grawed to
be a shadder of a man in my mind; but now I sees en real flaish'n blood;
an' maybe--maybe he'll seek me out an' kill me for what's done."

"I do creem to hear 'e, gal! No, no, Joe Noy's a God fearin' sawl."

"If he'd forgive me fust, I'd so soon he killed me as not. Sam Martin
killed Widow Garth's gal 'cause she were ontrue to en; an' a many said
'twas wrong to hang en to Bodmin. Death's my deserts, same as Ann Garth;
an' she got it; an' I doan't care how soon I do. None wants me no more, nor
what I'm breedin' neither. I'd die now, an' smilin', if 'tweern't for
arterwards."

"Cuss the letter!" said Uncle Chirgwin, getting red in the face. "Cuss it,
I says, for gwaine an' turnin' up just this day! A fortnight later you
could 'a' looked on it wi' quiet mind an' knawed wheer to turn; to-day's
it's just bin an' undone what was done. Not but what 'tis as butivul a
letter as ever comed off the sea; but if theer'd awnly been time to
'stablish 'e 'fore it comed! Now you've turned your back 'pon the Household
o' Faith just as arms was being stretched out that lovin'."

"Faith won't undo what I've done, nor yet make my wickedness fall lighter
for Joe. Yes, 'twas wicked, wicked, wicked. I knaw it now."

Mary and Tom came in from different directions about this time. The latter
had regaled himself with a peep at "auld bull," heard the terrific snorting
of his nostrils and observed how he bellowed mightily at durance on such an
afternoon. Tea being finished, the boy started homeward with a basket of
fresh eggs and butter, a pound of cream and some early apples of a sort
used for cider, but yet equal to the making of a pie.

"As for the butter, 'tis Joan's churnin'," said Mary, "but you'd best not
to tell your faither that, else, so like's not, he'll pitch it into the
sea. If us could send en a pound o' charity, I doubt he'd be better for't."

"Faither's a holy man, whatever else he be," said Tom stoutly. "He doan't
want for no good qualities like, 'cause what he doan't knaw 'bout God edn'
worth knawin'."

Mary laughed. It was a feat she seldom performed, and the sound of her
amusement lacked joy.

"Well, us won't argue 'bout en. You'm right to say that. Be the basket too
heavy for 'e?"

"No! not likely. Have 'e ever seed my forearm, Polly?"

"Never. I will another time. Best be gwaine, else you'll be late for
chapel."

So Tom marched off, and Mary, returning to the house, heard of Joan's
letter.

The old gusts of misery, sorrow, indignation, rose in her heart again then,
but faintly, like the dying flutter of winds that have blown themselves
out. She tried to find a way of bringing comfort to her cousin, but failed.
Joan had retired and refused consolation.

The glory of splendid summer hours passed away; the long twilight sank to
darkness; the opal lights in the west at last died under the silver of the
moon. And then, like a child weary with crying, Joan slept, while Mary,
creeping a third time to see and speak with her, departed silently. But she
did not sleep; and her wakefulness was fortunate, for long after eleven
o'clock came a noisy summons at the outer door. Looking from her room which
faced the front of the house, the woman saw Tom with his full basket
standing clearly defined below. The world of the weald and woods shimmered
silvery in dew and moonlight. Infinite silence reigned. Then the boy's
small, indignant voice broke it.

"You'll have to let me in, I reckon. Blamed if I doan't think you was right
'bout faither arter all."

The reason for Tom's return may be briefly told. He had taken his basket
home and got it safely under cover to his mother. Then, after chapel, Gray
Michael went into the village, and Thomasin had an opportunity to ask some
of those questions she was burning to put.

"An' how be Joan?" she began.

"Wisht an' drawed thin 'bout the faace seemin'ly. An' Joe's letter just
made her cry fit to bust her eyes, 'stead o' cheerin' of her like."

"Poor lass. I dedn' expect nothin' differ'nt. I've most a mind to go up
Drift an' see her--for a reason I've thot upon. Did Joan say anythin' 'bout
a last will an' testament to 'e?"

"No, nothin' 'bout anything worth namin'. But Polly had a deal to say. Her
wished her could send faither a pound o' charity 'stead o' butter."

"She dared!"

At that moment Mr. Tregenza returned to supper, and soon afterward his son
went to bed. The lad had not been asleep half an hour before Gray Michael
came across the basket from Drift. Two minutes later Tom heard the thunder
of his father's voice.

"Tom! you come down here an' be sharp about it!"

The boy tumbled out of bed instantly, and went down to the kitchen in his
nightshirt and trousers. Michael Tregenza was standing by the table. Upon
it appeared the basket from Drift, stored with cream, butter, eggs and
apples. Thomasin sat in the low chair by the fire with her apron over her
face, and that was always a bad sign, as Tom knew.

"What day be this, bwoy?" began Michael.

"The Lard's, faither."

"Ay: the Lard's awn day, though you've forgot it seemin'ly."

"No I abbun, faither."

"Doan't 'e answer me 'cept I tells you to. Where did these things come
from?"

"Drift, faither. Uncle Chirgwin bid me bring 'em with his respects."

"Did you tell en 'twas breakin' the commandments?"

"No, faither."

"Why didn't 'e? You knawed it yourself."

"Iss, faither; but uncle's a ancient man, an' I guessed he knawed so well
as me, an' I reckoned 'twould be sauce for such as me to say anything to a
auld, gray body like him."

"Sinners is all colors an' ages. Another time doan't you do what's wrong,
whether 'tis auld or young as tempts 'e to't. You'm a Luke Gosp'ler, an' it
edn' being a shinin' light 'tall to go wrong just because wan as did ought
to knaw wiser an' doan't, tells 'e to. Now you can lace on your boots, as
soon as you'm minded to, an' traapse up Drift with that theer basket an'
all in it. 'Twon't harm godless folks to wake 'em an' faace 'em with their
wrongdoing. An' I lay you'll remember another time."

Tom, knowing that words would be utterly wasted, went back to his attic,
dressed, and started. He had the satisfaction of eating apples in the
moonlight and of posing as a bitterly wronged boy at Drift when Mary came
down, lighted a candle, and let him into the house.

Uncle Chirgwin also appeared, and said some hard things in a sleepy voice,
while Tom drank cider and ate a big slice of bread and bacon.

"A terrible Old Testament man, your faither, sure 'nough," said Uncle
Chirgwin. "Be you gwaine to stop the night 'long o' us or no?"

"Not me! I got to be in the bwoat 'fore half-past five to-morrer marnin'."

"This marnin' 'tis," said Mary, "or will be in a few minutes. An' you can
tell your faither what I said 'bout charity, if you like. I sez it again,
an' it won't hurt en to knaw."

"But it might hurt me to tell. The less said soonest mended wi' faither."

Tom departed, the lighter for his basket. He flung a stone at a hare,
listened to the jarring of a night-hawk, and finally returned home about
one o'clock. Both his parents were awaiting him, and the boy saw that his
mother had been enduring some trouble on his behalf.

"Mind, my son, hencefarrard that the Sabbath is the Lard thy God's. You may
have done others a good turn besides yourself this night."

"What did they say, Tom?" asked his mother.

"They wasn't best pleased. They said a hard sayin' I'd better not to say
agin," answered the boy, heavy with sleep.

"Let it be. Us doan't want to hear it. Get you to bed. An', mind, the bwoat
at the steps by half-past five to-morrer."

"Ay, ay, faither."

Then Tom vanished, his parents went to their rest, and the cottage on the
cliff slept within the music of the sea, its thatch all silver-bright under
a summer moon.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

A BARGAIN FOR MRS. TREGENZA


To the superficial eye dead hopes leave ugly traces; viewed more
inquiringly the cryptic significance of them appears; and that is often
beautiful. Joan's soul looked out of her blue eyes now. Seen thoughtfully
her beauty was refined and exalted to an exquisite perfection; but the
unintelligent observer had simply pronounced her pale and thin. The event
which first promised to destroy the new-spun gossamers of a religious faith
and break them even on the day of their creation, in reality acted
otherwise. For Joan, Joe's letter was like a window opening upon a hopeless
dawn; and her helplessness before this spectacle of the future threw the
girl upon religion--not as a sure rock in the storm of her life, but as a
straw to the hand of the drowning. The world had nothing else left in it
for her. She, to whom sunshine and happiness were the breath of life, she
who had envied butterflies their joyous being, now stood before a future
all uphill and gray, lonely and loveless. As yet but the dawn of affection
for the unborn child lightened her mind. Thought upon that subject went
hand in hand with fear of pain. And now, in her dark hours, Joan happily
did not turn to feed upon her own heart, but fled from it. For distraction
she read the four Gospels feverishly day by day, and she prayed long to the
Lord of them by night.

Mary helped her in an earnest, cheerless fashion, and before her cousin's
solicitude, Joan's eyes opened to another thought: the old friendship
between Mary and Joe Noy. It had wakened once, on her first arrival at
Drift, then slept again till now. She was troubled to see the other woman's
indifference, and she formed plans to bring these two together again. The
act of getting away from herself and thinking for others brought some
comfort to her heart and seemed to rise indirectly out of her reading.

The Christianity of Drift was old-fashioned, and reflected the Founder. No
distractions rose between Joan and the story. She took it at first hand,
escaping thus from those petty follies and fooleries which blight and fog
the real issues today. She sucked her new faith pure. A noble rule of
conduct lay before her; she dimly discerned something of its force; and
unselfishness appeared in her, proving that she had read aright. As for the
dogma, she opened her arms to that very readily because it was beautiful
and promised so much. Faith's votaries never turn critical eyes upon the
foundations of her gorgeous fabric; their sight is fixed aloft on the
rainbow towers and pinnacles, upon the golden fanes. And yet this man-born
structure of theology, with aisles and pillars fretting and crumbling under
the hand of reason, needs such eternal propping, restoring and repairing,
that priestly tinkers, masons, hod-carriers are solely occupied with it.
They grapple and fight for the poor shadows of dogma by which they live,
and, so engaged, the spirit and substance of religion is by them altogether
lost. None of the Christian churches will ever be overcrowded with men who
possess brain-power worthy the name. Mediocrity and ignorance may starve,
but talent and any new nostrum to strangle reason and keep the rot from the
fabric will always open their coffers.

Joan truly found the dogma more grateful and comforting than anything else
within her experience, and the apparition of a flesh and blood God, who had
saved her with His own life's blood before she was born, appeared too
beautiful and sufficing to be less than true. Her eyes, shut so long,
seemed opening at last. With errors that really signify nothing, she drew
to herself great truths that matter much and are vital to all elevated
conduct. She thought of other people and looked at them as one wakened from
sleep. And, similarly, she looked at Nature. Even her vanished lover had
not taught her all. There were truths below the formulae of his worship;
there were secrets deeper than his intellectual plummet had ever sounded.
Without understanding it, Joan yet knew that a change had come to pass in
material things. Sunshine on the deep sea hid more matters for wonder than
John Barron had taught or known. Once only as yet had she caught a glimpse
of Nature's beating heart; and that was upon the occasion of her visit to
St. Madron's chapel. She was lifted up then for a magic hour; but the lurid
end of that day looked clearer afterward than ever the dewy dawn of it.
Nature had smiled mutely and dumbly at her sufferings for long months since
then. But now added knowledge certainly grew, and from a matrix mightier
than the love of Nature or of man, was Joan's new life born. It embraced a
new sight, new senses, ambitions, fears and hopes.

Joan went to church at every opportunity. Faith seemed so easy, and soon so
necessary. Secret prayer became a real thing to be approached with joy. To
own to sins was as satisfactory as casting down a heavy burden at a
journey's end; to confess them to God was to know that they were forgiven.
There were not many clouds in her religious sky. As Mary's religion was
bounded by her own capabilities and set forth against a background of
gloom, which never absolutely vanished save in moments of rare exaltation,
so Joan's newfound faith took upon itself an aspect of sunshine. Her clouds
were made beautiful by the new light; they did not darken it. Mary's gray
Cornish mind kept sentiment out of sight. She lived with clear eyes always
focusing reality as it appeared to her. Heaven was indeed a pleasanter
eternal fact than hell; yet the place of torment existed on Bible
authority; and it was idle to suppose it existed for nothing. Grasping
eternity as a truth, she occupied herself in strenuous preparation; which
preparation took the form of good works and personal self-denial. Joan
belonged to an order of emotional creatures widely different. She loved the
beautiful for its own sake, kept her face to the sun when it shone,
shivered and shut up like a scarlet pimpernel if bad weather was abroad.
And now a chastened sunshine, daily growing stronger, shot through the
present clouds, painted beauty on their fringes, and lighted the darkness
of their recesses so that even the secrets of suffering were fitfully
revealed. Joan grasped at new thoughts, the outcome of her new road.

Nature presently seemed of a nobler face, and certain immemorial
achievements of man also flashed out in the side-light of the new
convictions; as objects, themselves inconsiderable, will suddenly develop
unsuspected splendors from change of standpoint in the beholder. The magic
of that Christianity, which Joan now received directly from her Bible,
wrought and embroidered a new significance into many things. And it worked
upon none as upon the old crosses, some perfect still, some ruined as to
arm or shaft, some quite worn out and gnawed by time from their original
semblance. These dotted her native land. Them she had always loved, but now
they appeared marvelously transfigured, and the soul hid in their granite
beamed through it. Supposing the true menhirs to be but ruined crosses
also, Joan shed on them no scantier affection than upon the less venerable
Brito-Celtic records of Christianity. Bid so to do, and prompted also by
her inclination, the girl was wont to take walks of some length for her
health's sake; and these had an object now. As her dead mother's legends
came back to her memory and knit Nature to her new Saviour, so the
weather-beaten stones brought Him likewise nearer, marked the goal of
precious daily pilgrimages, and filled a sad young life with friends.

Returning from a visit to Tremathick cross, where it stands upon a little
mound on the St. Just road, Joan heard a thin and well-known voice before
she saw the speaker. It was Mrs. Tregenza, who had walked over to drink tea
and satisfy herself on sundry points respecting her stepdaughter.

"Oh, my Guy Faux, Polly!" she said upon arriving, "I'm in a reg'lar take to
be here, though I knaws Michael's t'other side the islands an' won't fetch
home 'fore marnin'. I've comed 'cause I couldn't keep from it no more.
How's her doin', poor tibby lamb, wi' all them piles o' money tu. Not that
money did ought to make a differ'nce, but it do, an' that's the truth, an'
it edn' no good makin' as though it doan't. What a world, to be sure! An'
that letter from Noy? I knaw you was fond of en likewise in your time. The
sadness of it! Just think o' that mariner comin' home 'pon top o' this
mishap."

Mary winced and answered coldly that the world was full of mishaps and of
sadness.

"The man must face sorrer same as what us all have got to, Mrs. Tregenza.
Some gets more, some gets less, as the sparks fly up'ard. Joe Noy's got
religion tu."

Mary spoke the last words with some bitterness, which she noted too late
and set against herself for a sin.

"Oh, my dear sawl," said Mrs. Tregenza, looking round nervously, as though
she feared the shadow of her husband might be listening. "Luke Gosp'ling's
a mighty uncomfortable business, though I lay Tregenza'd most kill me if he
heard the word. 'Tedn' stomachable to all, an' I doubts whether 'twill be a
chain strong enough to hold Joe Noy, when he comes back to find this coil.
'Tis a kicklish business an' I wish 'twas awver. Joe's a fiery feller when
he reckons he's wronged; an' there ban't no balm to this hurt in Gosp'ling,
take it as you will. I tell you, in your ear awnly, that Luke Gosp'lers
graw ferocious like along o' the wickedness o' the airth. Take Michael, as
walks wi' the Lard, same as Moses done; an' the more he do, the ferociouser
he do get. Religion! He stinks o' religion worse than ever Newlyn stinks o'
feesh; he goes in fear o' God to his marrow; an' yet 'tis uncomfortable,
now an' then, to live wi' such a righteous member. Theer's a sourness along
of it. Luke Gosp'ling doan't soften the heart of en."

"It should," said Mary.

"An's so it should, but he says the world's no plaace for softness. He'm a
terror to the evildoer; an' he'm a terror to the righteous-doer; an' to
hisself no less, I reckon; an' to God A'mighty tu, so like's not. The
friends of en be as feared of en as his foes be. An' that's awful wisht,
'cause he goes an' comes purty nigh alone. The Gosp'lers be like fry flyin'
this way an' that 'fore a school o' mackerl when Michael's among 'em. Even
minister, he do shrivel a inch or two 'longside o' Michael. I've seen en
wras'lin' wi' the Word same as Jacob wras'led wi' the angel. An' yet, why?
Theer's a man chosen for glory this five-an'-forty years, an' he knaws it
so well as I do, or any wan."

"He knaws nothin' o' the sort. The best abbun no right to say it," declared
Mary.

Then Mrs. Tregenza fired up, for she resented any criticism on this subject
other than her own.

"An' why not, Polly Chirgwin? Who's a right to doubt it? Not you, I reckon,
Ban't your plaace to judge a man as walks wi' God, like Moses done. If
Michael edn' saved, then theer's no sawl saved 'pon land or sea. You
talk--a young maiden! His sawl was bleedin' an' his hands raw a batterin'
the gate o' heaven 'fore you was born, Polly--ay, an' he'd got the
bettermost o' the devil wance for all 'fore you was conceived in the womb;
you mind that."

"Us caan't get the bettermost o' the devil wance for all," said Mary,
changing the issue, "no--not no more'n us can wash our skin clean wance for
all. But you an' me thinks differ'nt an' allus shall, Mrs. Tregenza."

"Iss, though I s'pose 'tis the same devil as takes backslidin' church or
chapel folks. Let that bide now. Wheer's Joan to? I've got to thank 'e
kindly for lookin' arter Tom t'other Sunday night. Tis things like that
makes religion uncomfortable. But you gived the bwoy some tidy belly-timber
in the small hours o' day, an' he comed home dog-tired, but none the worse.
An' thank 'e for they apples an' cream an' eggs, which I'm sorry they had
sich poor speed. A butivul basket as hurt me to the heart to paart with.
But I wasn't asked. No offense, I hope, 'bout it? Maybe uncle forgot 'twas
the Lard's day?"

"He'm the last ever to do that."

Joan entered at this point in the conversation and betrayed some slight
emotion as her stepmother kissed her. It was nearly five months since they
had met, and Mary now departed, leaving them to discuss Joan's physical
condition.

"I be doin' clever," said Joan, "never felt righter in body."

Mrs. Tregenza poured forth good advice, and after a lengthy conversation
came to a secret ambition and broached it with caution.

"I called to mind some baaby's things--shoes, clouts, frocks an' sich-like
as I've got snug in lavender to home. They was all flam-new for Tom, an' I
judged I'd have further use for 'em, but never did. Theer they be, even to
a furry-cloth, as none doan't ever use nowadays, though my mother did, and
thot well on't. So I did tu. 'Tis just a bit o' crimson red tailor's cloth
to cover the soft plaace 'pon a lil baaby's head 'fore the bones of en graw
together. An' I reckon 'tis better to have it then not. I seem you'd do
wise to take the whole kit; an' you'm that well-to-do that 'twouldn' be
worth thinkin' 'bout. 'Twould be cheaper'n a shop; an' theer's everything a
royal duke's cheel could want; an' a butivul robe wi' lacework cut 'pon it,
an' lil bits o' ribbon to tie in the armholes Sundays. They'm vitty
clothes."

Joan's eyes softened to a misty dreaminess before this aspect of the time
to come. She had thought so little about the baby and all matters
pertaining thereto, that every day now brought with it mental novelty
and a fresh view of that experience stored for her in the future.

"Iss, I do mind they things when Tom was in 'em. What be the value in
money?"

Mrs. Tregenza answered shyly and almost respectfully.

"Well, 'tis so difficult to say, not bein' a reg'lar seller o' things. They
cost wi'out the robe, as was a gift from Mrs. Blight, more'n five pound."

"Take ten pound, then. I'll tell uncle."

Thomasin's red tongue-tip crept along her lips and her bright eyes blinked,
but conscience was too strong.

"No, no--a sight too much--too much by half. I'll let 'e have the lot for a
fi'-pun' note. An' I'd like it to be a new wan, if 'tis the same to you."

Joan agreed to this, and ten minutes afterward Uncle Chirgwin was opening
his cash-box and handing Thomasin the snowy, crackling fragment she
desired.

"'Tis the fust bit o' money ever I kept unbeknawnst to Michael," she said,
"an', 'pon me life, Chirgwin, I be a'most 'feared on't."

"You'll soon get awver that," declared Uncle Thomas. "I'll send the trap
home with 'e, an' you can look out the frippery; an' you might send a nice
split bake back-along with it, if you've got the likes of sich a thing
gwaine beggin' to be ate."

Presently Mrs. Tregenza drove away and Joan went to her room to think.
Magic effects had risen from the spectacle of the well-remembered face,
from the sound of the sharp, high voice. A new sensation grew out of them
for Joan. Home rose like a vision, with the sighing of the sea, the crying
of the gulls, the musical rattle of blocks in the bay, the clink, clink of
picks in the quarry, the occasional thunder of a blast. Many odors were
with her: the smell of tar and twine and stores, the scent of drying fish.
She saw the low cliffs all gemmed at this season with moon-flowers--the
great white convolvulus which twinkled there. A red and purple fuchsia in
the garden, had blossomed also. She could see the bees climbing into its
drooping bells. She remembered their music, as it murmured drowsily from
dead and gone summers, and sounded sweeter than the song of the bees at
Drift. She heard the tinkle of a stream outside the cottage, where it ran
under the hedge through a shute and emptied itself into a great
half-barrel; and then, turning her thoughts to the house, her own attic,
with the view of St. Michael's Mount and the bay, rose in thought, with
every detail distinct, even to the glass scent-bottle on the mantel-piece,
and the colored print of John Wesley being rescued in his childhood from a
burning house. These and kindred memories made a live picture to Joan's
eyes. For the first time since she had left her home the girl found in her
heart a desire to return to it. She awoke next morning with the old
recollections increased and multiplied; and the sensation bred from
continued contemplation was the sensation of a loss.






BOOK THREE

CHANCE




CHAPTER ONE

OF THE CROSSES


The significance of the ancient crosses in Joan Tregenza's latest phase of
mental growth becomes much finer after learning somewhat more concerning
them than she could ever know. The ephemeral life of one unhappy woman
viewed from these granite records of Brito-Celtic pagan and Christian
faith, examined in its relation to these hoary splinters of stone, grows an
object of some pathetic interest. Such memorials of the past as are here
indicated, vary mightily in age. The Christian monuments are not older than
the fifth century, but many have been proved palimpsests and rise on pagan
foundations dating from a time far more ancient than their own. The relics
are divided into two classes by antiquarians: Pillar Stones and Sculptured
Crosses. The former occur throughout the Celtic divisions of Great Britain,
and are sometimes marked with the Chi Rho monogram, or early rude cross
form. In most cases these earlier erections indicated a grave, while the
sculptured crosses either denoted boundaries of sanctuary, or were raised
promiscuously where men and women passed or congregated, their object being
to encourage devotion and lead human thoughts heavenward. The designs on
these monuments are usually a bad imitation of Irish key patterns and
spirals; but many, in addition, show crucifixes in their midst, with
pre-Norman figures depicting the Christ in a loose tunic or shirt, his head
erect and his body alive, after the Byzantine fashion. The mediaeval mode
of carving a corpse on the cross is of much later date and may not be
observed before the twelfth century.

More than three hundred of these sculptured crosses have been discovered
within the confines of Cornwall. In churchyards and churchyard walls they
stand; they have even been discovered wrought into the fabric of the
churches themselves; the brown moor likewise knows them, for they stud its
wildernesses and rise at the crossways of many lonely roads; while
elsewhere, villages hold them in their hearts, and the emblem rises daily
before the sight of generation upon generation. In hedges they are also to
be seen, and in fields; many have been rescued from base uses; and all have
stood through the centuries as the sign and testimony of primitive Cornish
faith, even as St. Piran's white cross on a black ground, the first banner
of Cornwall, bore aloft the same symbol in days when the present emblem,
with its fifteen bezants and its motto, "One and All," was not dimly
dreamed of.

These ancient crosses now rose like gray sentinels on the gray life of Joan
Tregenza. At Drift she was happily placed among them, and many, not
necessary to separately name, lay within the limit of her daily wanderings,
and her superstitious nature, working with the new-born faith, wove
precious mystery into them. Much she loved the more remote and lonely
stones, for beside them, hidden from the world's eye, she could pray. Those
others about which circled human lives attracted her less frequently. To
her the crosses were sentient creatures above the fret of Time, eternally
watching human affairs. The dawn of art as shown in early religious
sculpture generally amuses an ignorant mind, but, to Joan, the little
shirted figures of her new Saviour, which opened blind eyes on the stones
she loved, were matter for sorrow rather than amusement. They did by no
means repel her, despite the superficial hideousness of them; indeed, with
a sort of intuition, Joan told herself that human hands had fashioned them
somewhere in the dawn of the world when yet her Lord's blood was newly
shed, at a time before men had learned skill to make beautiful things.

Once, beside the foot of the cross which stood in Sancreed [Footnote: This
fine sculptured cross has since these events been placed within the said
churchyard, at the desire of Mr. A. G. Langdon, the greatest living
authority on the subject of Cornish remains.] churchyard wall, between two
tree-trunks under a dome of leaves, the girl found growing a spotted
persicaria, and the force of the discovery at such a spot was great to her.
Familiar with the legend of the purple mark on every leaf of the plant,
nothing doubting that it had aforetime grown at the foot of the true cross
and there been splashed with the blood of her Master, Joan accepted the old
story that henceforth the weed was granted this proud livery and badge of
blood. And now, finding it here, the fable revived with added truth and
conviction, the legend of the persicaria was as true to her as that other
of the Lord's resurrection from death. Thus her views of Nature suffered
some approach to debasement in a new direction, but this degradation, so to
call it, brought mighty comfort to her soul, daily rounded the ragged edges
of life, woke merciful trust and belief in a promised life of bliss beyond
the grave, and embroidered thereupon a patchwork, not unbeautiful, built of
fairy folk-lore, saintly legend and venerable myth. Her credulous nature
accepted right and left; anything that harbored a promise or was lovely or
wonderful in itself found acceptance; and Joan read into the very pulses of
the summer world the truth as she now understood it. Cornwall suddenly
became a new Holy Land to the girl. Here the circumstances of life chimed
with those recorded in the New Testament, and it was an easy mental
achievement to transplant her Saviour from a historical environment into
her own. She pictured Him as walking amid Uncle Chirgwin's ripening corn;
she saw Him place His hands on the heads of the little children at cottage
doors; she imagined Him standing upon one of the stranded luggers in Newlyn
harbor with the gulls floating round His head and the fishermen listening
to his utterance.

The growing mother instincts in Joan also developed about this season. They
leaped from comparative quiescence into activity; they may indeed be
recorded as having arisen within her after a manner not less sudden than
had the new faith itself, which was exhibited to you as blossoming with an
abruptness almost violent, because it thus occurred. Now most channels of
thought led Joan to her unborn infant, and there came at length an occasion
upon which she prayed for the first time that her child might be justified
in its existence.

The petition was raised where, in the past, she had uttered one widely
different: at the altar-stone in the ruined baptistery of Saint Madron.
Thither on a day in early August, Joan traveled by short cuts over fields
which brought the chapel within reach of Drift. The scene had changed from
that of her former visit, and summer was keeping the promises of spring.
Yellow stars of biting stone-crop covered the walls of the ruin; the fruit
of the blackthorn was growing purple, of the hawthorn, red; the lesser
dodder crept, like pink lacework, over furze and heather; bright-eyed
euphrasy and sweet wild thyme were murmured over by many bees; at the
altar's foot grew brake fern and towering foxgloves; while upon the sacred
stone itself brambles laid their fruit, a few ripe blackberries shining
from clusters of red and green. Seeding grasses and docks likewise
nourished within the little chapel, and ragged robins and dandelions
brought the best beauty they had. Among which matters, hid in loneliness,
to the sound of that hymn of life which rises in a whisper from all earth
at summer noon, Joan prayed for her baby that it might not be born in vain.




CHAPTER TWO

HOME


Among the varied ambitions now manifested by Joan was one already hinted
at--one which increased to the displacement of smaller interests: she much
desired to see again her home, if but for the space of an hour. The days
and weeks of an unusually smiling summer brought autumn, and with it the
cutting of golden grain; but the bustle and custom of harvest failed to
draw Joan among her kind. Human life faded somewhat, even to the verge of
unreality with her. Silence fell upon her, and a gravity of demeanor which
was new to the beholders. Uncle Chirgwin and Mary were alike puzzled at
this sign, and, misunderstanding the nature of the change, feared that the
girl's spiritual development must be meeting unseen opposition. Whims and
moods were proper to her condition, so the farmer maintained; but the fancy
of eternally sequestering herself, the conceit of regarding as friends
those ancient stones of the moor and crossroads, was beyond his power to
appreciate. To Mary such conduct presented even greater elements of
mystery. Yet the fact faced them, and the crosses came in time to be one of
the few subjects which Joan cared to talk upon. Even then it was to her
uncle alone she opened her heart concerning them: Mary never unlocked the
inner nature of her cousin.

"I got names o' my awn for each of 'em," Joan confessed, "an' I seem they
do knaw my comin' an' my secrets an' my troubles. They teach me the force
o' keepin' my mouth shut; an' much mixin' wi' other folks arter the silence
o' the stones 'mazes me--men an' wummen do chatter so."

"An' so did you, lassie, an' weern't none the worse. Us doan't hear your
purty voice enough now."

"'Tis better thinkin' than talkin', Uncle Thomas. I abbun nort to talk
'bout, you see, but a power o' things to think of. The auld stones speaks
to me solemn, though they can't talk. They'm wise, voiceless things an'
brings God closer. An' me, an' all the world o' grass an' flowers, an' the
lil chirruping griggans [Footnote: Grasshoppers.] do seem so young beside
'em; but they'm big an' kind. They warm my heart somethin' braave; an' they
let the gray mosses cling to 'em an' the dinky blue butterflies open an'
shut their wings 'pon 'em, an' the bramble climb around theer arms. They've
tawld me a many good things; an' fust as I must be humbler in my bearin'.
Wance I said I'd forgive faither, an' I thot 'twas a fair thing to say; now
I awnly wants en to forgive me an' let me come to my time wi' no man's
anger hot agin me. If I could win just a peep o' home. I may never see it
no more arter, 'cause things might fall out bad wi' me."

"'Tis nachrul as you harp on it; an', blame me, if I sees why you shouldn'
go down-long. Us might ride in the cart an' no harm done."

"Ay, do 'e come, theer's a dear sawl. Just to look upon the plaace--"

"As for that, if us goes, us must see the matter through an' give your
faither the chance to do what's right by 'e."

"He'll not change; but still I'd have en hear me tell I'm in sorrer for the
ill I brot 'pon his name."

"Ay, facks! 'Tis a wise word an' a right. Us'll go this very arternoon. You
get a odd pound or so o' scald cream, an' I'll see to a basket o' fruit wi'
some o' they scoured necterns, as ban't no good for sellin', but eats so
well as t'others. Iss, we'll go so soon as dinner be swallowed. Wishes
doan't run in a body's head for nothin'."

Uncle Chirgwin's old market-cart, with the gray horse and the squeaking
wheel, rattled off to Newlyn some two hours later, and the ordeal, longed
for at a distance, towered tremendous and less beautiful at nearer
approach. When they started, Joan had hoped that her father might be at
home; as they neared Newlyn she felt a growing relief in the reflection
that his presence ashore was exceedingly improbable. Her anxieties were
forgotten for a few moments at sight of the well-known outlines of the
hills above the village. Now arrish-mows--little thatched stacks some eight
feet high--glimmered in the pale gilded stubbles of the fields; the
orchards gleamed with promise; the foliage of the elms was at its darkest
before the golden dawn of autumn. Well-remembered sights rose on Joan's
misty eyes with the music proper to them; then came the smell of the sea
and the jolting of the cart, going slowly over rough stones. Narrow, steep
streets and sharp corners had to be traversed not only with caution but at
a speed which easily placed Joan within the focus of many glances. Troubles
and humiliation of a sort wholly unexpected burst suddenly upon her,
bringing the girl's mind rudely back from dreams born of the familiar
scene. Newlyn women bobbed about their cottage doors with hum and stir, and
every gossip's mouth was full of news at this entry. Doors and windows
filled with curious heads and bright eyes; there was some laughter in the
air; fishermen got up with sidelong looks from the old masts or low walls
whereon, during hours of leisure, they sat in rows and smoked. Joan, all
aflame, prayed Uncle Chirgwin to hasten, which he did to the best of his
power; but their progress was of necessity slow, and local curiosity
enjoyed full scope and play. Tears came to the girl's eyes long before the
village was traversed; then, through a mist of them, she saw a hand
stretched to meet her own and heard a voice which rang kindly on her ears.
It was Sally Trevennick, who faced the spiteful laughter without flinching
and said a few loud, friendly words, though indeed her well-meant support
brought scant comfort with it for the victim.

"Lard sakes! Joan, doan't 'e take on so at them buzzin' fools! 'Tedn' the
trouble, 'tis the money make 'em clatter! Bah! Wheer's the wan of them
black-browed gals as 'alf the money wouldn' buy? You keep a bold faace, an'
doan't let 'em see as their sniggerin's aught more to 'e than dog-barking."

"Us'll be theer in a minute," added Mr. Chirgwin, "an' I'll drive back agin
by Mouzle; then you'll 'scape they she-cats. I never thot as you'd a got to
stand that dressin' down in a plaace what's knawed you an' yours these many
years."

Joan asked Sally Trevennick whether she could say if Gray Michael was on
the water, and she felt very genuine thankfulness on learning that Sally
believed so. Two minutes later the spring-cart reached level ground above
the sea, then, whipping up his horse, Uncle Chirgwin increased the pace,
and very quickly Joan found herself at the door of home.

Thomasin was within, and, hearing the sound of wheels cease before the
cottage, came forth to learn who had arrived. Her surprise was only equaled
by her alarm at sight of Joan and Mr. Chirgwin. So frightened indeed did
she appear that both the newcomers supposed Mr. Tregenza must be within.
Such, however, was not the case, and Joan's stepmother explained the nature
of her fears.

"He'm to sea, but the whole world do knaw you be come, I'll lay; an' he'll
knaw tu. Sure's death some long-tongued female will babble it to en 'fore
he's off the quay. Then what?"

"'Tedn' your fault anyways," declared Uncle Thomas. "Joan's wisht an' sad
to see home agin, as was right an' proper; an' in her present way she've
got to be humored. So I've brot her, an' what blame comes o't my shoulders
is more'n broad enough to carry. I wish, for my paart, as Michael was home,
so's I might faace en when Joan says what her've comed to say. I be gwaine
to Penzance now, 'pon a matter o' business, an' I'll come back here in an
hour or so an' drink a dish o' tea along with you 'fore we staarts."

He drove away immediately, and for a while Joan was left with Mrs.
Tregenza. The latter's curiosity presently soothed her fears, and almost
the first thing she began to talk about was that "will and testament" which
she had long since urged upon her stepdaughter. But the girl, moving about
in the well-known orchard, had no attention for anything but the sights,
sounds and scents around her. Silently and not unhappily she basked in old
sensations renewed; and they filled her heart. Meanwhile Thomasin kept up a
buzz of conversation concerning Joan's money and Joan's future.

"Touchin' that bit o' writin'! Do 'e see to it, soas; 'tis awnly wisdom.
Theer's allus a fear wi' the fust, specially in the case o' a pin-tail
built lass like you be. An' if you was took, which God forbid, theer'd be
that mort o' money to come to Michael, him bein' your faither--that is,
s'pose the cheel was took tu, which God forbid likewise. An' he'd burn
it--every note--I mean Michael. Now if you was to name Tom--just in case o'
accidents--? He'm of your awn blood by's faither."

"But my baaby must be fust."

"In coorse er must. 'Tis lawful an' right. Love childern do come as sweet
an' innercent on to the airth as them born o' wedlock--purty sawls. 'Tis
the fashion to apprentice 'em to theer faithers mostly, an' they be a sort
o' poor cousins o' the rightful fam'ly; but your lil wan--well--theer edn'
gwaine to be any 'poor cousin' talk 'bout en--if en do live. But I was
talkin' o' the will."

"I've writ it out all fair in ink 'cordin' as Uncle Chirgwin advised," said
Joan. "Fust comes my cheel, then Tom. Uncle sez theer ban't no call to name
others. I wanted hisself to take a half on it, but he said theer weren't no
need an' he wouldn't nohow."

"Quite right," declared Thomasin. "Iss fay! He be a plain dealer an' a good
righteous man."

Joan's thoughts meanwhile were mainly concerned with her surroundings, and
when she had walked thrice about the garden, visited the pigs, peeped into
the tool-house to smell the paint and twine, noted the ripening plums and a
promising little crop of beets coming on in the field beyond, she went
indoors. There a pair of Michael's tall sea-boots stood in the chimney
corner, with a small pair of Tom's beside them; the old, well-remembered
crockery shone from the dresser; geraniums and begonias filled the window;
on a basket at the right of the fireside stood a small blue plate with gold
lettering upon it and a picture of Saltash Bridge in the middle. The legend
ran--_A present for a good girl_. It was a gift from her father to
Joan, on her tenth birthday. She picked it up, polished it, and asked for a
piece of paper to wrap it in, designing to carry the trifle away with her.

Every old nook and corner had been visited by the time that Uncle Chirgwin
returned. Then all sat down to eat and drink, and the taste of the tea went
still further to quicken Joan's memory.

Mrs. Tregenza gave them such information as suggested itself to her during
the progress of the meal. She was chiefly concerned about her son.

"Cruel 'ard worked he be, sure 'nough," she murmured. "'Tis contrary to
reason a boy can graw when he's made to sweat same as Tom be. An' short for
his age as 'tis. But butivul broad, an' 'mazin' strong, an' a fine sight to
see en ate his food. Then the Gosp'lers--well, they'm cold friends to the
young. A bwoy like him caan't feel religion in his blood same as grawed
folks."

"Small blame to en," said Joan promptly. "Let en go to church an' hear
proper holy ministers in black an' white gownds, an' proper words set down
in print, same as what I do now."

"I'd as soon not have my flaish creep down the spine 'pon Sundays as not,"
confessed Thomasin, "but Michael's Michael, an' so all's said."

Uncle Chirgwin went to smoke a pipe and water his horse at this juncture;
but he returned within less than ten minutes.

"It's blowin'," he said, "an' the fust skew o' gray rain's breakin' over
the sea. I knawed 'twas comin' by my corns. The bwoats is sailin' back
tu--a frothin' in proper ower the lumpy water."

"Then you'd best be movin'," said Mrs. Tregenza. "I judged bad-fashioned
weather was comin' tu when I touched the string o' seaweed as hangs by the
winder. 'Tis clammy to the hand. God save us!" she continued, turning from
the door, "theer's ourn at the moorin's! They've been driv' back 'fore us
counted 'pon seein' 'em by the promise of storm. Get you gone, for the love
o' the Lard; an' go Mouzle way, else you'll run on top o' Michael for
sure."

"Ban't no odds if us do. Joan had a mind to see en," answered the farmer;
but Joan spoke for herself. She explained that she now wished to depart
without seeing her father if possible.

It was, however, too late to escape the meeting. Even as the twain bade
Mrs. Tregenza a hasty farewell, heavy feet sounded on the cobbles at the
cottage door and a moment later Tregenza entered. His oilskins were wet and
shiny; half a dozen herrings, threaded through the gills on a string, hung
from his right hand.




CHAPTER THREE

"THE LORD IS KING"


Michael Tregenza instantly observed Joan where she sat by the window, and,
seeing her, stood still. The fish fell from his hand and dropped slithering
in a heap on the stone floor. There was a silence so great that all could
hear a patter of drops from the fisherman's oilskins as the water rolled to
the ground. At the same moment gusts of rising wind shook the casement and
bleared the glass in it with rain. Joan, as she rose and stood near Mr.
Chirgwin, heard her heart thump and felt the blood leap. Then she nerved
herself, came a little forward, and spoke before her father had time to do
so. He had now turned his gaze from her and was looking at the farmer.

"Faither," she said very gently, "faither dearie, forgive me. I begs it so
hard; 'tis the thing I wants most. I feared to see 'e, but you was sent off
the waters that I might. I comed in tremblin' an' sorrer to see wheer I've
lived most all my short days. I'm that differ'nt now to what I was. Uncle
Thomas'll tell 'e. I know I'm a sinful, wicked wummon, an' I'm heart-broke
day an' night for the shame I've brot 'pon my folks. I'll trouble 'e no
more if 'e will awnly say the word. Please, please, faither, forgive."

She stood without moving, as did he. Uncle Chirgwin watched silently. Mrs.
Tregenza made some stir at the fire to conceal her anxiety. No relenting
glimmer softened either the steel of Gray Michael's eyes or one line in his
great face. The furrows knotted between his eyebrows and at the corners of
his eyes. His sou'wester still covered his head. At his mouth was a
down-drawing, as of disgust before some offensive sight or smell, and the
hand which had held the fish was clinched. He swallowed and found speech
hard. Then Joan spoke again.

"Uncle's forgived me, an' Mary, an' Tom, an' mother here. Caan't 'e, caan't
'e, faither? My road's that hard."

Then he answered, his words bursting out of his lips sharply, painfully at
first, rolling as usual in his mighty chest voice afterward. The man
twisted Scripture to his narrow purposes according to Luke Gospel usage.

"'Forgive'? Who can forgive but the Lard, an' what is man that he should
forgive them as the A'mighty's damned? 'Tis the sinners' bleat an' whine
for forgiveness what's crackin' the ear o' God whensoever 'tis bent 'pon
airth. Ain't your religion taught you that--you, Thomas Chirgwin? If not,
'tis a brawken reed, man. Get you gone, you fagot, you an' this here
white-haired sawl, as is foolin' you an' holdin' converse wi' the outcast
o' heaven. I ban't no faither o' yourn, thank God, as shawed me I
weern't--never, never. Gaw! Gaw both of 'e. My God! the sight of 'e do
sicken me as I stand in the same air. You--an auld man--touchin' her an'
her devil-sent, filthy moneys. 'Twas a evil day, Thomas Chirgwin, when I
fust seed them o' your blood--an ill hour, an' you drives it red-hot into
my brain with your actions. Bad, bad you be--bad as that lyin', false, lost
sinner theer--a-draggin' out your cant o' forgiveness an' foolin' a damned
sawl wi' falsehoods. _You_ knaws wheer she'm gwaine; an' your
squeakin', time-servin' passon knaws; an' you both tells her differ'nt!"

"Out on 'e, you stone-hearted wretch o' a man!" began Uncle Chirgwin in a
small voice, shaking with anger; but the fisherman had not said his last
word, and roared the other down. Gray Michael's self-control was less than
usual; his face had grown very red and surcharged veins showed black on the
unwrinkled sides of his forehead.

"No more, not a word. Get you gone an' never agin set foot 'pon this here
draxel. [Footnote: _Draxel_--Threshold.] Never--never none o' Chirgwin
breed. Gaw! or auld as you be, I'll force 'e! God's on the side o' right!"

Hereupon Joan, not judging correctly of the black storm signs on her
father's face or the force of the voice, now grating into a shriek as
passion tumbled to flood, prayed yet again for that pardon which her parent
was powerless to grant. The boon denied grew precious in her eyes. She wept
and importuned, falling on her knees to him.

"God can do it, God can do it, faither. Please--please, for the sake o' the
God as leads you, forgive. Oh, God in heaven, make en forgive me--'tis all
I wants."

But a religious delirium gripped Tregenza and poisoned the blood in him.
His breast rose, his fists clinched, his mouth was dragged sidewise and his
underlip shook. A damned soul, looking up with wild eyes into his, was all
he saw--the very off scouring and filth of human nature--hell tinder, to
touch which in kindness was to risk his own salvation.

"Gaw, gaw! Else the Lard'll make me His weapon. He's whisperin'--He's
whisperin'!"

There was something horribly akin to genuine madness in the frenzy of this
utterance. Mrs. Tregenza screamed; Joan struggled to her feet in some
terror and her head swam. She turned to get her hat from the dresser-ledge,
and, as she did so, the little blue plate, tied up in paper beside it, fell
and broke, like the last link of a snapping chain. Gray Michael was making
a snorting in his nostrils and his head seemed to grow lower on his
shoulders. Then Mr. Chirgwin found his opportunity and spoke.

"I've heard you, an' it ban't human nachur to knuckle down dumb, so I be
gwaine to speak, an' you can mind or not as you please."

He flung his old hat upon the ground and walked without fear close beside
the fisherman who towered above him.

"God be with 'e, I sez, for you need En fine an' bad for sartain--worse'n
that poor 'mazed lamb shakin' theer. _You_ talk o' the ways o' God to
men an' knaw no more 'bout 'em than the feesh what you draw from the sea!
You'm choustin' yourself cruel wi' your self-righteousness--take it from
me. _You'm_ saved, be you? _You_ be gwaine to heaven, are 'e? Who
tawld 'e so, Michael Tregenza? Did God A'mighty send a flyin' angel to tell
'e a purpose? Look in your heart, man, an' see how much o' Christ be in it.
Christ, I tell 'e, Christ--Christ--Jesus Christ. It's _Him_ as'll
smuggle us all into heaven, not your psalm-smitin', knock-me-down,
ten-commandment, cussin' God. I'm grawin' very auld an' I knaw what I knaw.
Your God's a _devil_, fisherman--a graspin', cruel devil; an' them the
devil saves is damned. 'Tis Christ as you've turned your stiff back
'pon--Christ as'll let this poor lass into heaven afore ever you gets
theer! You ban't in sight o' the gates o' pearl, not you, for all your cold
prayers. You'm young in well-doin'; an' 'tis a 'ard road you'll fetch home
by, I'll swear; an' 'tis more'n granite the Lard'll use to make your heart
bleed. He'll break you, Tregenza--you, so bold, as looks dry-eyed 'pon the
sun an' reckons your throne'll wan day be as bright. He'll break you, an'
bring you to your knees, an' that 'fore your gray hairs be turned, as mine,
to white. Oh, Christ Jesus, look you at this blind sawl an' give en
somethin' better to lay hold 'pon than his poor bally-muck o' religion
what's nort but a gert livin' lie!"

Thomas Chirgwin seemed mightily transfigured as he spoke. The words came
without an effort, but he uttered them with pauses and in a loud voice not
lacking solemnity. His head shook, yet he stood firm and motionless upon
his feet; and he made his points with a gesture, often repeated, of his
open right hand.

As for Tregenza, the man listened through all, though he heard but little.
His head was full of blood; there was a weight on his tongue striking it
silent and forcing his mouth open at the same moment. The world looked red
as he saw it; his limbs were not bearing him stiffly. Thomasin had her eye
upon him, for she was quite prepared to throw over her previous statements
and support her husband against an attack so astounding and unexpected. And
the more so that he had not himself hurled an immediate and crushing
answer.

Meantime the old farmer's sudden fires died within him; he shrank to his
true self, and the voice in which he now spoke seemed that of another man.

"Give heed to what I've said to 'e, Michael, an' be humble afore the Lard
same as your darter be. Go in fear, as you be forever biddin' all flaish to
go. Never say no sawl's lost while you give all power to the Maker o'
sawls. Go in fear, I sez, else theer'll come a whirlwind o' God-sent sorrer
to strike wheer your heart's desire be rooted. 'Tis allus so--allus--"

Tom entered upon these words, and Uncle Chirgwin's eyes dropping upon him
as he spoke, his utterance sounded like a prophecy. So the boy's mother
read it, and with a half sob, half shriek, she turned in all the frenzy of
sudden maternal wrath. Her sharp tongue dropped mere vituperation, but did
so with boundless vigor, and the woman's torrent of unbridled curses and
threats swept that scene of storm to its close. Joan went first from the
door, while Mr. Chirgwin, picking up his hat and buttoning his coat,
retreated after her before the volume of Thomasin's virago attack. Tom
stood open-mouthed and silent, dumfounded at the tremendous spectacle of
his mother's rage and his father's stricken silence. Then, as Mrs. Tregenza
slammed the door and wept, her husband sunk slowly down with something
strangely like terror in his eyes. The man in truth had just passed through
a physical crisis of alarming nature. He sat in his easy-chair now, removed
his hat, and wiped the perspiration from his forehead with hands that
shook. It was not what he had heard or beheld that woke alarm in a spirit
which had never known it till then, but what he had felt: a horror which
crowded down upon every sense, gripped his volition with unseen hands,
blinded him, stopped his ears, held his limbs, stirred his brains into a
whirling waste. He knew now that in his moment of passion he had stood upon
the very brink of some terrific, shattering evil, possibly of death itself.
Body or brain or both had passed through a great, unknown danger; and now,
dazed and for the time much aged, he looked about him with slow
eyes--mastered the situation, and realized the incident was ended.

"The Lard--'the Lard is King,'" he said, and stopped a moment. Then he
slowly rose to his feet and with the old voice, though it shook and slurred
somewhat upon his tongue, spoke that text which served him in all occasions
of unusual stress and significance.

"'The Lard is King, be the people never so impatient; He sitteth between
the cherubims, be the airth never so unquiet'!"

Then he sat again and long remained motionless with his face buried in his
hands.

Meantime the old horse dragged Uncle Chirgwin and his niece away along the
level road to Mousehole. Joan was wrapped in a tarpaulin and they proceeded
silently a while under cold rains, which swept up from a leaden south over
the sea. The wind blew strong, tore green leaves from the hedges, and
chimed with the thoughts of the man and his niece.

"How did you come to speak so big an' braave, Uncle Thomas? I couldn' say
no more to en, for the lights rose up in my throat an' choked me; but you
swelled out somethin' grand to see, an' spawk as no man ever yet spawk to
faither afore."

"'Twas put in me to say; I doan't knaw how ever I done it, but my tongue
weern't my awn for the time. Pull that thing tighter about 'e. This rain
would go through a barn door."

At the steep hill rising from Mousehole to Paul, Uncle Chirgwin got out and
walked, while the horse, with his shoulders to the collar, plodded forward.
Then, down the road came the laboring man, Billy Jago, mentioned aforetime
as one who had worked for Mr. Chirgwin in the past. He touched his hat to
his old master and greeted him with respect and regard. For a moment the
farmer also stopped. No false sentiment tied Billy's tongue and he spoke of
matters personal to those before him, having first mournfully described his
own state of health.

"But theer, us gaws down to the tomb to make way for the new born. I do
say, an' swear tu, that the butivulest things in all wild nachur be a ship
in full sail an' a wummon in the fam'ly way. Ban't nothin' to beat 'em. An'
I'll say it here, 'pon this spot, though the rain's bitin' into my bones
like teeth. So long to 'e, maaster, an' good cheeldin' to 'e, miss!"

The man rolled with loutish gait down the hill; the darkness gathered; the
wind whistled through high hedges on the left; farmer Chirgwin made sounds
of encouragement to his horse, which moved onward; and Joan thought with
curious interest of those things that Billy Jago had said.

"'Tis straange us met that poor, croony antic at sich a moment," mused
Uncle Thomas; "the words of en jag sore 'pon a body's mind, comin' arter
what's in our thots like."

"Maybe 'tis paart o' the queerness o' things as us should fall 'pon en
now," answered Joan.

Then, through a stormy gloaming, they returned in sadness to the high lands
of Drift.




CHAPTER FOUR

A GLEN-ADER


"A new broom sweeps clean, but 'tis the auld wan as is good for corners,"
said Uncle Chirgwin, when with his nieces he sat beside the kitchen fire
that night and discussed the events of the day.

"By which I means," he added, "that these new-fangled ways of approaching
the A'mighty may go to branch and trunk an' make a clean sweep o' evil, but
they leaves the root o' pride stickin' in a man's sawl. 'Tis the auld broom
as Christ brought in the world as routs into the dark corners like nothin'
else."

"I be glad you spawk to en," said Mary. "Seed sawed do bring forth fruit in
a 'mazin'' way."

"I reckoned he'd a smote me, but he dedn'. He just turned rosy red an'
stood glazin' at me as if I was a ghost."

"I never see en look like that afore," declared Joan; "he 'peared to be
afeared. But the door's shut 'gainst me now. I caan't do no more'n I have
done. He'll never forgive."

"As to that, Joan, I won't say. You bide quiet till the seed sprouts. I lay
now as you'll hear tell about your faither an' maybe get a message from en
'fore the year's a month older."

With which hopeful prediction Uncle Chirgwin ended the discussion.

That night the circular storm, which had died away at dark, turned upon
itself and the wind moaned at window latches and down chimneys, prophesying
autumn. Dawn broke on a drenched, gray world, but the storm had clean
passed, and at noon the gray brightened to silver and burned to gold when
the sun came out. The wind wore to the west, and on to northwest; the
weather settled down and days of a rare late summer pursued their even way.

A fortnight passed, and the farmer's belief that Gray Michael would
communicate with his daughter began to waver.

"Pharaoh's a soft-'earted twoad to this wan," he declared gloomily. "It do
beat me to picksher sich a man. I've piped to en hot an' strong, as Joan
knaws, but he ban't gwaine to dance 'tall seemin'ly. Poor sawl! When the
hand o' the Lard do fall, God send 'twon't crush en all in all.
'Saved'--_him_--dear, dear!"

"The likes of Tregenza be saved 'pon St. Tibbs Eve, [Footnote: _St. Tibbs
Eve_--Equivalent to the "Greek Calends."] I reckon, an' no sooner,"
answered Mary scornfully. Then she modified her fiery statement according
to her custom, for the woman's zeal always had first call upon her tongue,
and her judgment usually took off the edge of every harsh statement
immediately upon its utterance.

"Leastways 'tis hard to see how sich bowldashious standin' up in the eye o'
God should prosper. But us can be saved even from our awnselves, I s'pose.
So Tregenza have got his chance along o' the best."

Joan never resented the outspoken criticisms on her parent. She listened,
but rarely joined the discussion. The whole matter speedily sank to a
position of insignificance. Her own mind was clear, and the deadlock only
cut off one more outer interest and reduced Life's existing influences to a
smaller field. She drew more and more into herself, slipped more and more
from out the routine life of Drift. She became self-centered, and when her
body was not absent, as happened upon most fine days, her mind abstracted
itself to extreme limits. She grew shy of fellow-creatures, found no day
happy of which a part had not been spent beside a cross, showed a gradual
indifference to the services of the church which not long since had
attracted her so strongly and braced the foundations of her soul. There
came at last a black Sunday when Joan refused to accompany Mary and the
farmer to morning worship at Sancreed. She made no excuse, but designed a
pilgrimage of more than usual length, and, having driven as far as the
church with her uncle and cousin, left them there and walked on her way.
Even the fascinations of a harvest festival failed to charm her; and the
spectacle of fat roots, mighty marrows, yellow corn and red apples on the
window-ledges, of grapes and tomatoes, flowers and loaves upon the altar,
pulpit and font, did not appeal overmuch to Joana--a fact perhaps
surprising.

With a plump pasty of meat and flour in her pocket and one of Uncle
Chirgwin's walking-sticks to help her footsteps, Joan went on her way,
passed the Wesleyan Chapel of Sancreed, and then maintained a reasonably
direct line to her destination by short cuts and field paths. She intended
to visit Mên Scryfa, that famous "long stone" which stands away in a moor
croft beyond Lanyon. She knew that it was no right cross, but she
remembered it well, having visited the monument frequently in the past. It
was holy with infinite age, and the writing upon it fascinated her as a
mystery fascinates most of us.

The words, "_Rialobrani Cunovali Fili_," which probably mark the fact
that Rialobran, son of Cunoval, some Brito-Celtic chieftain of eld, lies
buried not far distant, meant nothing to Joan, but the old gray-headed
stone, perhaps the loneliest in all Cornwall, was pleasant to her thoughts,
and she trudged forward gladly with her eyes open for all the beauties of
a smiling world.

Summer clouds, sunny-hearted and towering against the blue, dropped immense
shadows on the glimmering gold of much stubble and on the wastes of the
moor rising above them. In the cornfields, visible now that the crops were
cut and gathered into mows, stood little gray-green islands--a mark
distinctive of Cornish husbandry. Here grew cow-cabbages in rank
luxuriance, on mounds of manure which would be presently scattered over the
exhausted land. The little oases in the deserts of the fields were too
familiar to arrest Joan's eye. She merely glanced at the garnered wheat and
thought what a brief time the arrish geese, stuffing themselves in the
stubble, had yet to live. A solemn, splendid peace held the country-side,
and hardly a soul was abroad where the road led upward to wild moor and
waste. Sometimes a group of calves crowding under the shady side of hedges
regarded Joan with youthful interest; sometimes, in a distant coomb-bottom,
where blackberries grew, little sunbonnets bobbed above the fern and a
child's shrill voice came clear to her upon the wind. But the loneliness
grew, and, anon, turning from her way a while, the traveler sat on the gray
crown of Trengwainton Carn to rest and look at the wide world.

From the little tor, over undulations of broad light and blue shadow, Joan
could see afar to Buryan's lofty tower, to Paul above the sea, to
Sancreed's sycamores and to Drift beyond them. Wild sweeps of fell and
field faded on the sight to those dim and remote hues of distance only
visible upon days of exceeding aerial brilliancy. Immediately beneath the
eminence subtended ragged expanses of rainbow-colored heath and fern and
furze spotted with small fir trees which showed blue against the tones of
the moor. The heather's pink clearly contrasted with the paler shades of
the ling, and an additional silvery twinkle of light inhabited the latter
plant, its cause last year's dead white branches and twigs still scattered
through the living foliage and flower. Out of a myriad bells that wild
world spoke, and the murmur of the heath came as the murmur of a wise voice
to the ear on which it fell. There was a soul in the day; it lived, and
Joan looked into the eyes of a glorious, conscious entity, herself a little
part of the space-filling whole.

Presently, refreshed by brief rest, the pilgrim journeyed on over a road
which climbs the moor above deep fox-covers of rhododendron, already
mentioned as visible from Madron chapel. The way dipped presently, crossed
a rivulet and mounted again past the famous cromlech of Lanyon. But Joan
passed the quoit unheeding, and kept upon flint roads through Lanyon farm,
where its irregular buildings stretch across the hill-crest. She saw the
stacks roped strangely in nets with heavy stones to secure them against
winter gales; she observed the various familiar objects of Drift repeated
on a greater scale; then, going down hill yet again, Joan struck up the
course of another stream and passed steadily over broad, granite-dotted
tangles of whin, heather and rank grasses to her destination. Here the
heath was blasted and scarred with summer fires. Great patches of the waste
had been eaten naked by past flames, and Mên-an-tol--the
"crick-stone"--past which she progressed, stood with its lesser granite
pillars in a dark bed of scorched earth and blackened furze-stems stripped
bare by the fire. She stood in a wide, desolate cup of the Cornish moor. To
the south Ding-Dong Mine reared its shattered chimney-stack, toward the
northwest Carn Galvas--that rock-piled fastness of dead giants--reared a
gray head against the blue. A curlew piped; a lizard rustled into a tussock
of grass where pink bog-heather and seeding cotton grasses splashed the
sodden ground; a dragon-fly from the marsh stayed a moment upon Mên-an-tol,
and the jewel of his eyes was a little world holding all the colors of the
larger.

Joan, keeping her way to where Carn Galvas rose over the next ridge, walked
another few hundred yards, crossed a disused road, climbed a stony bank,
and then stood in the little croft sacred to Mên Scryfa. At the center,
above a land almost barren save for stunted heath and wind-beaten fern it
rose--a tall stone of rough and irregular shape. The bare black earth, in
which shone quartz crystals, stretched at hand in squares. From these raw
spaces, peat had been cut, to be subsequently burned for manure; and it
stood hard by stacked in a row of beat-burrows or little piles of
overlapping pieces, the cut side out. Near the famous old stone itself,
surmounting a barrow-like tumulus, grew stunted bracken; and here Joan
presently sat down full of happiness in that her pilgrimage had been
achieved. The granite pillar of Mên Scryfa was crested with that fine
yellow-gray lichen which finds life on exposed stones; upon the windward
side clung a few atoms of golden growth; and its rude carved inscription
straggled down the northern face. The monument rose sheer above black
corpses of crooked furze, for fire had swept this region also, adding not a
little to the prevailing sobriety of it, and only the elemental splendor of
weather and the canopy of blue and gold beneath which spread this
desolation rendered it less than mournful. Even under these circumstances
imagination, as though rebelling against the conditions of sunshine and
summer then maintaining, leaped to picture Mên Scryfa under the black
screaming of winter storm or rising darkly upon deep snows; casting a
transitory shadow over a waste ghastly blue under flashes of lightning, or
throbbing to its deep roots when thunder roared over the moor and the levin
brand hissed unseen into quag and fen.

The double crown of Carn Galvas fronted Joan as she presently sat with her
back resting against the stone; and a medley of the old thoughts rose not
unwelcome in her mind. Giant mythology seemed a true thing in sight of
these vast regular piles of granite; and the thought of the kind simple
monsters who had raised that earn led to musings on the "little people."
Her mind brooded over the fairies and their strange ways with young human
mothers. She remembered the stories of changelings, and vowed to herself
that her own babe should never be out of sight. These reflections found no
adverse criticism in faith. The Bible was full of giants; and if no fairies
were mentioned therein, she had read nothing aimed against them. Presently
she prayed for the coming child. Her soul went with the words; and they
were addressed with vagueness as became her vague thoughts, half to Mên
Scryfa, half to God, all in the name of Christ.

Going home again, after noon, Joan found a glen-ader, [Footnote:
_Glen-ader_--The cast skin of an adder. Once accounted a powerful
amulet, and still sometimes secretly preserved by the ignorant, as sailors
treasure a caul.] which circumstance is here mentioned to illustrate the
conflicting nature of those many forces still active in her mind. That they
should have coexisted and not destroyed each other is the point of most
peculiarity. But it seemed for a moment as though the girl had
intellectually passed at least that form of superstition embraced by
coveted possession of a glen-ader; for, upon finding the thing lying
extended like a snake's ghost, she hesitated before picking it up. The old
tradition, however, sucked in from a credulous parent with much similar
folly at a time when the mind accepts impressions most readily, was too
strong for Joan. Qualms she had, and some whisper at the bottom of her mind
was heard with a clearness sufficient to make her uncomfortable, but reason
held a feeble citadel at best in Joan's mind. The whisper died, memory
spoke of the notable value which wise men through long past years had
placed upon this charm, and in the face of the future it seemed wicked to
reject a thing of such proven efficacy. So she picked up the adder's
slough, designing to sew it upon a piece of flannel and henceforth wear it
against her skin until her baby should be born. But she determined to tell
neither Mary nor her uncle, though she did not stop to ask why secrecy thus
commended itself to her.

That evening Mary came primed from church-going with grave admonition, Mr.
Chirgwin was tearful, and hinted at his own sorrow arising from Joan's
backsliding, but Mary did not mince language and spoke what she thought.

"You'm wrong, an' you knaw you'm wrong," she said. "The crosses be very
well, an' coorious, butivul things to see 'pon the land tu, but they'm poor
food to a body's sawl. They caan't shaw wheer you'm out; they caan't lead
'e right."

"Iss they can, then, an' they do," declared Joan. "The more I bide along
wi' 'em the better I feel an' the nearer to God A'mighty, so theer! They'm
allus the same, an' they puts thots in my head that's good to think; an' I
must go my ways, Polly, same as you go yours."

When night came Joan slept within the mystic circumference of the
glen-ader; and that she derived a growing measure of mental satisfaction
from its embrace is unquestionable.




CHAPTER FIVE

"COME TO ME!"


A space of time six weeks in duration may be hastily dismissed as producing
no alteration in Joan's method of thought and life. It swept her swiftly
through shortening days and the last of the summer weather to the climax of
her fortunes. As the season waned she kept nearer home, going not much
further than Tremathick Cross on the St. Just road or to that relic already
mentioned as lying outside Sancreed churchyard. These, in time, she
associated as much with her child as with herself. The baby had now taken
its natural place in her mind, and she prayed every day that it might
presently forgive her for bringing it into the world at all. Misty-eyed,
not unhappy, with her beauty still a startling fact, Joan mused away long
hours at the feet of her granite friends through the waning splendors of
many an autumn noon. Then, within the brief space of two weeks, a period of
weather almost unexampled in the memory of the oldest agriculturists drew
to its close.

That mighty rains must surely come all knew, but none foretold their
tremendous volume or foresaw the havoc, ruin and destruction to follow upon
their outpouring. Meantime, with late September, the leaves began to hustle
early to earth under great winds. Rain fell at times, but not heavily at
first, and a thirsty world drank open-mouthed through deep sun-cracks in
field and moor and dried-up marsh. But bedraggled autumn's robes were soon
washed colorless; the heath turned pallid before it faded to sere brown;
rotten banks of decaying leaves rose high under the hedges. There was no
dry, crisp whirl of gold on the wind, but a sodden condition gradually
overspread the land. The earth grew drunken with the later rains and could
hold no more. October saw the last of the purple and crimson, the tawny
browns and royal yellows. Only beeches, their wet leaves by many shades a
darker auburn than is customary, still retained lower foliage. The trees
put on their winter shapes unduly early. The world was dark and sweated
fungus. Uncouth children of the earth, whose hour is that which sees the
leaf fall, sprang into short-lived being. Black goblins and gray, white
goblins and brown, spread weird life abroad. With fleshy gills, squat and
lean, fat and thin, bursting through the grass in companies and circles,
lurking livid, gigantic and alone on the trunks of forest trees, gemming
the rotten bough with crimson, twinkling like topaz on the crooked stems of
the furze, battening upon death, rising into transitory vigor from the rack
and rot of a festering earth, they flourished. Heavy mists now stretched
their draperies over the high lands; and exhalations from the corpse of the
summer hung bluish under the rain in the valleys. One night a full moon
shone clearly, and through the ambient light ominous sheets and splashes of
silver glimmered in the low fields. Here they had slowly and silently
spread into existence, their birth hidden under the mists, their
significance marked by none but anxious farmers. All men hoped that the
full moon would bring cessation of this rainfall; but another gray dawn
faced them on the morrow and a thousand busy rills murmured and babbled
down the lanes round Drift. Here and there unsuspected springs burst their
hidden chambers and swept by steep courses over the green grass to join
these main waters which now raced through the valley. The light of day was
heavy and pressed upon the sight. It acted like a telescope in the
intervals of no rain and brought distant objects into strange distinctness.
The weather was much too warm even for "Western Cornwall. A few leaves
still hung on the crown of the apple trees, and such scanty peach and
nectarine foliage as yet remained was green. The red currants flaunted a
gold leaf or two and the remaining leaves of the black currant were purple
after his fashion. Joan marveled to see sundry of her favorites thrusting
forth tokens of spring almost before autumn was ended. Lilac buds swelled
to bursting; a peony pushed many pink points upward through the brown ruins
of the past; bulbs were growing rapidly; Nature had forgotten winter for
once, thought Joan. Thus the sodden, sunless, steaming days followed each
on the last until farming folk began to grow grave before a steady increase
of water on the land. Much hay stood in danger and some ricks had been
already ruined. Many theories were rife, Uncle Chirgwin's being, upon the
whole, the most fatuous.

"Tis a thunder-planet," he told his nieces, "an' till us get a rousin'
storm o' crooked forks an' heavy thunder this rain'll go on fallin'. But
not so much as a flap o' the collybran [Footnote: _Collybran_--Sheet
lightning.] do us get for all the heat o' the air. I should knaw, if any,
for I be out turnin' night into day an' markin' the water in the valley
every evenin' long after dark now. I'm fearin' graave for the big stack;
an' theer's three paarts o' last year's hay beside, an' two tidy lil mows
of the aftermath. So sure's the waters do rise another foot and a half,
'tis 'good-by' to the whole boilin'. Not but 'twill be a miracle for the
stream to get much higher. The moor's burstin' wi' rain, but the coffins
[Footnote: _Coffins_--Ancient mining excavations.] do hold it up, I s'pose,
an' keep it aloft. A penn'orth o' frost now would save a pound of
produce from wan end o' Carnwall to t'other."

Joan spent many long days in the house at this time and practiced an
unskillful needle, while her thoughts wandered far and near through the
sullen weather to this old cross and that. Then came a night of rainless
darkness through which past augmentations of water still thundered. Nature
rested for some hours before her final, shattering deluge, but the brief
peace was more tremendous than rain or wind, for a mighty foreboding
permeated it, and all men felt the end was not yet, though none could say
why they feared the silence more than storm.

It happened upon this black night that Joan was alone in the kitchen.
Supper had been but a scrambling meal and her uncle with Amos Bartlett and
all the men on the farm were now somewhere in the valley under the darkness
fighting for the hay with rising water. Where Mary was just then, Joan did
not know. Her thoughts were occupied with her own affairs, and in the
oppressive silence she sat watching some little moving threadlike concerns
which hung in a row through a crack below the mantelpiece above the open
fire. They were the tails of mice which often here congregated nigh the
warmth and sat in a row, themselves invisible. The tails moved, and Joan
noted some shorter tails beside long ones, telling of infant vermin at
their mothers' sides. In the silence she could hear the squeaking of them,
and now and then she talked to them very softly.

"Thank God, you lil mice, as you abbun got no brains in your heads an' no
call to look far in the future. I lay you'm happier than us, wi' nort to
fear 'bout 'cept crumbs an' a lew snug spot to live in."

Thus she stumbled on the lowest note of pessimism: that conscious
intelligence is a supreme mistake. But the significance of her idea she
knew not.

Then Joan rose up, shivered with a sudden sense of chill, stamped her feet,
and caused the row of tails below the mantel to vanish.

"Goose-flaish down the spine do mean as theer's feet walkin' 'pon my
graave, I s'pose," she thought, as a heavy knock at the front door
interrupted her reflections. Hastening to open it, Joan found the
postman--a rare visitor at Drift. He handed her a letter and prepared to
depart immediately.

"I'm grievous afeared o' Buryas Bridge tonight," he said; "when I comed
over, two hour back, the water was above the arches, an', so like's not, I
won't get 'cross 'tall if it's riz higher. An' somethin' cruel's comin',
I'll lay my life, 'fore marnin'. This pitch-black silence be worse than the
noise o' the rain."

He vanished down the hill, and, returning to the kitchen, Joan lighted a
candle and examined the letter. A fit of trembling shook the girl to the
hidden seat of her soul as she did so, for her own name greeted her, in
neat printed letters akin to those on the superscription of another letter
she had received in the past. From John Barron it was that this
communication came, and the reception of it begot a wild chaos of mind
which now carried Joan headlong backward. Images swept through her brain
with the bewildering rapidity and brilliance of lightning flashes; she was
whirled and tossed on a flood of thoughts; a single sad-eyed figure
retained permanency and rose clear and separated itself from the
phantasmagorial procession of personages and events wending through her
mind, dissolving each into the other, stretching the circumstances of eight
short months into an eternity, crowding the solemn aisles of time past with
shadows of those emotions which had reigned over the dead spring time of
the year and were themselves long dead. Thus she stood for a space of vast
apparent duration, but in reality most brief. That trifling standpoint in
time needed for a dream or for the brain-picture of his past which
dominates the mind of the drowning was all that had sped with Joan. Then,
shaking herself clear of thought, she found her candle, which burned dim
when first lighted, was only now melting the wax and rising to its full
flame. A mist of damp had long hung on the inner walls of the kitchen at
Drift, begotten not of faulty building but by the peculiar condition of the
atmosphere; and as the candle flickered up in a chamber dark save for its
light and the subdued glow of a low fire, Joan noticed how the gathering
moisture on the walls had coalesced, run into drops and fallen, streaking
the misty gray with bright bars and networks, silvery' as the slime of
snails.

With shaking hand, she set the candle upon a table, dropped into a chair
beside it and opened her letter. For a moment the page with its large
printed characters danced before her eyes, then they steadied and she was
able to read. Like a message from one long dead came the words; and in
truth, though the writer lived, he wrote upon the threshold of the grave.
John Barren had put into force his project, which was, as may be
remembered, to write to Joan when the end of his journey came in sight. The
words were carefully chosen, for he remembered her sympathy with suffering
and her extensive ignorance. He wrote in simple language, therefore, and
dwelt on his own helpless condition, exaggerating it to some extent.

"No. 6 Melbury Gardens, London.

"My own dear love--What can I say to make you know what has kept me away
from you? There is but one word and that is my poor sick and suffering
body. I wrote to you and tore up what I wrote, for I loved you too much to
ask you to come and share my sad life. It was very, very awful to be away
and know you were waiting and waiting for Jan; yet I could not come,
because Mother Nature was so hard. Then I went far away and hoped you had
forgotten me. Doctors made me go to a place over the sea where tall palm
trees grew up out of a dry yellow desert; but my poor lungs were too sick
to get well again and I came home to die. Yes, sweetheart, you will forgive
me for all when you know poor lonely Jan will soon be gone. He cannot live
much longer, and he is so weak now that he has no more power to fight
against the love of Joan.

"For your own good, dear one, I made myself keep away and hid myself from
you. Now the little life left to me cries out by night and by day for you.
Joan, my own true love, I cannot die until I have seen you again. Come to
me, Joan, love, if you do not hate me. Come to me; come; and close my eyes
and let poor Jan have the one face that he loves quite near him at the end.
Even your picture has gone, for they came when I was away and took it and
put it in a place with many others for people to see. And all men and women
say it is the best picture. I shall be dead before they send it back to me.
So now I have nothing but the thoughts of my Joan. Oh, come to me, my love,
if you can. It will not be for long, and when Jan lies under the ground all
that he has is yours. I have fought so hard to keep from you and from
praying you to come to me, but I can fight no more. My home is named at the
top of this letter. You have but to enter the train for London and stop in
it until it gets to the end of its journey. My servant shall wait each day
for your coming. I can write no more, I can only pray to the God we both
love to bring you to me. And if you come or do not I shall have the same
great true love for you. I will die alone rather than trouble you to come
if you have forgotten me and not forgiven me for keeping silence. God bless
you, my only love. JAN."

This feeble stuff rang like a clarion on the ear of the reader, for he who
had written it knew how best to strike, how best to appeal with
overwhelming force to Joan Tregenza. Her mind plunged straight into the
struggle and the billows of the storm, sweeping aside lesser obstructions,
were soon beating against the new-built ramparts of faith. The rush of
thought which had coursed through her brains before reading the letter now
made the task of deciding upon it easier. Indeed it can hardly be said that
any real doubt from first to last assailed Joan's decision. Faith did not
crumble, but, at a second glance, appeared to her wholly compatible with
obedience to this demand. There was an electric force in every word of the
letter. It proved Mister Jan's wondrous nobility of character, his
unselfishness, his love. He had suffered, too, had longed eternally for
her, had denied himself out of consideration for her future happiness, had
struggled with his love, and only broken down and given way to it in the
shadow of death. Grief shook Joan upon this thought, but joy was uppermost.
The long months of weary suffering faded from her recollection as nocturnal
mists vanish at the touch of the sun's first fire. She had no power to
analyze the position or reflect upon the various courses of action the man
might have taken to spare her so much agony. She accepted his bald
utterance word for word, as he knew she would. Every inclination and desire
swept her toward him now. His cry of suffering, his love, his loneliness,
her duty, as it stood blazoned upon her mind ten minutes after reading his
letter; the child to be born within two months--all these considerations
united to establish Joan's mind at this juncture. "Come to me!" Those were
the words echoing within her heart, and her soul cried upon Christ to
shorten time that she might reach him the sooner. Before the world was next
awake, she would be upon her way; before another night fell, Mister Jan's
arms would be round her. The long, dreary nightmare had ended for her at
last. Then came tears of bitter remorse, for she saw how his love had
never left her, how he had been true as steel, while she, misled by
appearances, had lost faith and lapsed into forgetfulness. A wild,
unreasoning yearning superior to time and space and the service of railways
got hold upon her. "Come to me," "Come to me," sounded in Joan's ears in
the live voice she had loved and lost and found again. An hour's delay, a
minute's, a moment's seemed a crime. Yet delay there must be, but the
tension and terrific excitement of her whole being at this period demanded
some immediate outlet in action. She wanted to talk to Uncle Chirgwin, and
she desired instant information upon the subject of her journey. First she
thought of seeking the farmer in the valley; then it struck her, the hour
being not later than eight o'clock, that by going into Penzance she might
learn at what time the morning train departed to London.

Out of doors it was inky black, very silent, very oppressive. Joan called
Mary twice before departing, but received no answer. Indeed the house was
empty, though she did not know it. Finally, thrusting the letter into her
bosom, taking her hat and cloak from a nail in the kitchen and putting on a
pair of walking shoes, the girl went abroad. Her present medley of thoughts
begot a state of exceeding nervous excitation. For the letter touched the
two poles of extreme happiness and utmost possible sorrow. "Mister Jan" was
calling her to him indeed, but only calling her that she might see him die.
Careless of her steps, soothed unconsciously by rapid motion, she walked
from the farm, her mind full of joy and grief; and the night, silent no
longer for her, was full of a voice crying "Come to me, Joan, love, come!"




CHAPTER SIX

THE FLOOD


In the coomb beneath Drift, flashing as though red-hot from a theater of
Cimmerian blackness, certain figures, flame-lighted, flickered hurriedly
this way and that about a dark and monstrous pile which rose in their
midst. From the adjacent hill, superstitious watchers might have supposed
that they beheld some demoniac throng newly burst oat of the bowels of
earth and to be presently re-engulfed; but seen nearer, the toiling
creatures, fighting with all their hearts and souls to save a haystack from
flood, had merely excited human interest and commiseration. Farmer Chirgwin
and his men were girt as to the legs in old-fashioned hay-bands; some held
torches while others toiled with ropes to anchor the giant rick against the
gathering waters. There was no immediate fear, for the pile still stood a
clear foot above the stream on a gentle undulation distant nearly two yards
from the present boundary of the swollen river. But, on the landward side,
another danger threatened, because in that quarter the meadow sank in a
slight hollow which had now changed to a lake fed by a brisk rivulet from
the main river. The great rick thus stood almost insulated, and much
further uprising of the flood would place it in a position not to be
approached by man without danger. Above the stack, distant about
five-and-twenty yards, stood a couple of stout pollarded willows, and by
these Uncle Chirgwin had decided to moor his hay, trusting that they might
hold the great mass of it secure even though the threatened flood swept
away its foundations. Nine figures worked amain, and to them approached a
tenth, appearing from the darkness, skirting the lake and splashing through
the streamlet which fed it. Mary Chirgwin it was who now arrived--a
grotesque figure with her gown and petticoats fastened high and wearing on
her legs a pair of her uncle's leather gaiters. Mary had been up to the
farm for more rope, but the clothesline was all that she could find, and
this she now returned with. Already three ropes had been passed round the
rick and made fast to the willows, but none among them was of great
stoutness, nor had they been tied at an elevation best calculated to resist
a possible strain. Amos Bartlett took the line from Mary and set to work
with many assistants; while the farmer himself, waving a torch and stumping
hither and thither, now directed Bartlett, now encouraged two men who
worked with all their might at the cutting of a trench from the lake in
order that this dangerous body of water might be drained back to the main
stream. The flame-light danced in many a flash and splash over the smooth
surface of the face of the inland pond. Indeed it reflected like a glass at
present, for no wind fretted it, neither did a drop of rain fall. Intense,
watchful silence held that hour. The squash of men's feet in the mud, the
soft swirl of the water, the cry of voices alone disturbed the night.

"God be praised! I do think 'tis 'bating," cried the farmer presently. He
ran every few minutes to the water and examined a stake hammered into it a
foot from the edge. It seemed, as far as might be judged by such fitful
light and rough measurement, that the river had sunk an inch or two, but it
was running in undulations, and what its muddy mass had lost in volume was
gained in speed. The water chattered and hissed; and Amos Bartlett, who
next made a survey, declared that the flood had by no means waned, but
rather risen. Then, the last ropes being disposed to the best advantage,
all joined the laborers who were digging. Twenty minutes later, however,
and before the trench was more than three parts finished, there came a
tremendous change. Turning hastily to the river, Bartlett uttered a shout
of alarm and called for light. He had approached the telltale stake, and
suddenly, before he reached it, found his feet in the water. The river was
rising with fierce rapidity at last, and five minutes later began to lick
at the edge of the hay-rick, and churn along with a strange hidden force
and devil in it. The pace increased with the volume, and told of some
prodigious outburst on the moor. The uncanny silence of the swelling water
as it slipped downward was a curious feature of it in this phase. Chirgwin
and his men huddled together at the side of the rick; then Bartlett held up
his hand and spoke.

"Hark 'e all! 'Tis comin' now, by God!"

They kept silence and listened with straining ears and frightened eyes,
fire-rimmed by the flickering torchlight. A sound came from afar--a sound
not unmelodious but singular beyond power of language to express--a whisper
of sinister significance to him who knew its meaning, of sheer mystery to
all others. A murmur filled the air, a murmur of undefined noises still far
distant. They might have been human, they might have arisen from the flight
and terror of beasts, from the movement of vast bodies, from the
reverberations of remote music; Earth or Heaven might have bred them, or
the upper chambers of the air midway between. They spoke of terrific
energies, of outpourings of force, of elemental chaos come again, of a
crown of unimagined horror set upon the night.

All listened fearfully while the solemn cadences crept on their ears,
fascinated them like a siren song, wakened wild dread of tribulations and
terrors unknown till now. It was indeed a sound but seldom heard and wholly
unfamiliar to those beside the stack save one.

"'Tis the callin' o' the cleeves," said Uncle Chirgwin.

"Nay, man, 'tis a live, ragin' storm comed off the sea an' tearin' ower the
airth like a legion out o' hell! 'Tis the floodgates o' God opened you'm
hearin'! Ay, an' the four winds at each other's throats, an' a outburst o'
all the springs 'pon the hills! 'Tis death and ruin for the whole
country-side as be yelling up-long now. An' 'tis comin' faster'n thot."

As Bartlett spoke, the voice of the tempest grew rapidly nearer, all
mystery faded out of it and its murmuring changed to a hoarse rattle.
Thunder growled a bass to the shriek of coming winds and a flash of distant
lightning bridged the head of the coomb with a crooked snake of fire.

"Us'd best to get 'pon high land out o' this," shouted Bartlett. "All as
men can do us have done. The hay's in the hand o' Providence, but I
wouldn't be perched on top o' that stack not for diamonds all the same."

A cry cut him short. Mary had turned and found the way to higher ground
already cut off. The lake was rising under their eyes, and that in spite of
the fact that the waters had already reached the trench cut for them, and
now tumbled in a torrent back to the parent stream. Escape in this
direction was clearly impossible. It only remained to wade through the head
of the lake, and that without a moment's delay. Mary herself, holding a
torch, went first through water above her knees and the men hastily
followed, Uncle Chirgwin coming last and being nearly carried off his short
legs as he turned to view the rick. Once through the water, all were in
safety, for the meadow sloped steeply upward. An increasing play of
lightning made the torches useless, and they were dropped, while the party
pressed close beneath an overhanging hedge which ran along the upper
boundary of the meadow. From this vantage-ground they beheld a spectacle
unexampled in the memory of any among them.

Screaming like some incarnate and mad manifestation of all the elements
massed in one, the hurricane launched itself upon that valley. As a wall
the wind heralded the water, while forked lightnings, flaming above both,
tore the black darkness into jagged rags and lighted a chaos of yellow
foaming torrent which battled with livid front straight down the heart of
the coomb. The swollen river was lost in the torrent of it; and the hiss of
the rain was drowned by its sound.

So Nature's full, hollowed hand ran over lightning-lighted to the organ
music of the thunder; but for these horror-stricken watchers the majestic
phenomena sweeping before them held no splendor and prompted no admiration.
They only saw ruin tearing at the roots of the land; they only imagined
drowned beasts floating before them belly upward, scattered hay hurried to
the sea, wasted crops, a million tons of precious soil torn off the fields,
orchards desolated, bridges and roads destroyed. For them misery stared out
of the lightning and starvation rode upon the flood. The roar of water
answering the thunder above it was to their ears Earth groaning against the
rod, and right well they knew that the pale torrent was drowning those
summer labors which represented money and food for the on-coming of the
long winter months. They stared, silent and dumb, under the ram; they knew
that the kernel of near a year's toil was riding away upon the livid
torrent; that the higher meadows, held absolutely safe, were half under
water now; that the flood tumbling under the blue fire most surely held
sheep and cattle in its depths; that tons of upland hay swam upon it; that,
like enough, dead men also turned and twisted there in a last mad journey
to the sea.

A passing belief that their labors might save the stack sprung up in the
breast of one alone. Uncle Chirgwin trusted Providence and his hempen ropes
and clothesline; but it was a childish hope, and, gazing open-mouthed upon
that swelling, hurtling cataract of roaring water, none shared it. An
almost continuous mist of livid light crossed and recrossed, festooned and
cut by its own crinkled sources, revealed the progress of the flood, and,
heedless of themselves, Uncle Chirgwin and his men watched the fate of the
stack, now rising very pale of hue above the water, seen through shining
curtains of rain. First the torrent tumbled and rose about it, and then a
sudden tremor and turning of the mass told that the rick floated. As it
twisted the weak ropes, receiving the strain in turn, snapped one after
another; then the great stack moved solemnly forward, stuck fast, moved
again, lost its center of gravity and foundered like a ship. Under the
lightning they saw it heave upward upon one side, plunge forward against
the torrent which had swept its base from beneath it, and vanish. The
farmer heaved a bitter groan.

"Dear God, that sich things can be in a Christian land," he cried. "All
gone, this year, an' last, an' the aftermath; an' Lard He knaws what be
doin' in the valley bottom. I wish the light may strike me dead wheer I
stand, for I be a blot afore Him, else I'd never be made to suffer like
this here. Awnly if any man among 'e will up an' tell me what I've done
I'll thank en."

"'Tis the land as have sinned, not you," said Mary. "This reaches more'n us
o' Drift. Come your ways an' get out o' these clothes, else you'll catch
your death. Come to the house, all of 'e," she cried to the rest. "Theer
ban't no more for us to do till marnin' light."

"If ever it do come," groaned the man Bartlett. "So like's not the end o'
the world be here; an' I'd be fust to hollo it, awnly theer's more water
than fire here when all's said, an' the airth's to be burned, not drowned."

"Let a come when a will now," gasped an aged man as the drenched party
moved slowly away upward to the farm; "our ears be tuned to the trump o'
God, for nort--no, not the screech o' horns blawed by all the angels in
heaven--could sound awfuler than the tantarra o' this gert tempest. I,
Gaffer Polglaze, be the auldest piece up Drift, but I never heard tell o'
no sich noise, let alone havin' my awn ears flattened wi' it."

They climbed the steep lane to the farm, and the wind began to drown the
more distant roar of the water. Rain fell more heavily than before, and the
full heart of the storm crashed and flamed over their heads as Drift was
reached.

Dawn trembled out upon a tremendous chapter of disasters, still fresh in
the memory of many who witnessed it. A gray, sullen morning, with
sky-glimpses of blue, hastily shown and greedily hidden, broke over Western
Cornwall and uncovered the handiwork of a flood more savage in its fury and
far-reaching in its effects than man's memory could parallel--a flood which
already shrunk fast backward from its own havoc. To describe a single one
of those valleys through which small rivers usually ran to the sea is to
describe them all. Thus the torrent which raved down the coomb beneath
Drift, and carried Uncle Chirgwin's massive hayrick with it like a child's
toy-boat, had also uprooted acres of gooseberry bushes and raspberry canes,
torn apple trees from the ground, laid waste extensive tracts of ripe
produce and carried ripening roots by thousands into the sea. Beneath the
orchards, as the flood subsided, there appeared great tracts of nakedness
where banks of stone had been torn out of the land and scattered upon it;
dead beasts stuck jammed in the low forks of trees; swine, sheep and calves
appeared, cast up in fantastic places, strangled by the water; sandy
wastes, stripped of every living leaf and blade, ran like banks where no
banks formerly existed, and here and there from their midst stuck out naked
boughs of upturned trees, fragments of man's contrivances, or the legs of
dead beasts. Looking up the coomb, desolation was writ large and the utmost
margins of the flood clearly recorded on branch and bough, where rubbish
which had floated to the fringe of the flood was caught and hung aloft.
Below, as the waters gained volume and force, Buryas Bridge, an ancient
structure of three arches beneath which the trout-stream peacefully babbled
under ordinary conditions, was swept headlong away and the houses hard by
flooded; while the greatest desolation had fallen on those orchards lying
lowest in the valley. Indeed the nearer the flood approached Newlyn the
more tremendous had been the ravage wrought by it. The orchards of Talcarne
valley were ruined as though artillery had swept them, and of the lesser
crops scarce any at all remained. Then, bursting down Street-an-nowan, as
that lane is called, the waters running high where their courses narrowed,
swamped sundry cottages and leaped like a wolf on the low-lying portion of
Newlyn. Here it burst through the alleys and narrow passages, drowned the
basements of many tenements, isolated cottages, stores and granaries,
threatened nearly a hundred lives startled from sleep by its sudden
assault. Then, under the raging weather and in that babel of angry waters,
brave deeds were done by the fisher folk, who chanced to be ashore. Grave
personal risks were hazarded by many a man in that turbid flood, and not a
few women and children were rescued with utmost danger to their saviors'
lives. Yet the petty rivalry of split and riven creeds actuated not a few
even at that time of peril, and while life was allowed sacred and no man
turned a deaf ear to the cry of woman or child, with property the case was
altered and sects lifted not a finger each to help the other in the saving
of furniture and effects.

Newlyn furnished but one theater of a desolation which covered wide
regions. At Penzance, the Laregan River flooded all the lowlands as it
swept with prodigious cataracts to the sea; mighty lakes stretched between
Penzance and Gulval; the brooklets of Ponsandine and Coombe, swollen to
torrents, bore crushing destruction upon the valleys through which they
fell. Bleu Bridge with its ancient inscribed "long stone" was swept into
the bed of the Ponsandine, and here, as in other low-lying lands, many tons
of hay were torn from their foundations and set adrift. At Churchtown the
rainfall precipitated off the slopes of Castle-an-dinas begot vast torrents
which, upon their roaring way, tore the very heart out of steep and stony
lanes, flooded farmyards, plowed up miles of hillside, leaped the wall of
the cemetery below and spread twining yellow fingers among the graves.

Three hundred tons of rain fell to the acre in the immediate tract of that
terrific storm, and the world of misery, loss and suffering poured forth on
the humble dwellers of the land only came to be estimated in its bitter
magnitude during the course of the winter which followed.

Ashore it was not immediately known whether any loss of human life had
added crowning horror to the catastrophe, but evil news came quickly off
the sea. Mourning fell upon Mousehole for the crews of two among its fisher
fleet who were lost that night upon the way toward Plymouth waters to join
the herring fishery; and Newlyn heard the wail of a robbed mother.

At Drift the farmhouse was found to hold a mystery soon after the day had
broken. Joan Tregenza, whose condition rendered it impossible for her to
actively assist at the struggle in the coomb, did not retire early on the
previous night, as her family supposed, and Mary, entering her room at
breakfast-time, found it empty. There was no sign of the girl and no
indication of anything which could explain her absence.




CHAPTER SEVEN

OUT OF THE DEEP


At the dawn of the day which followed upon the great storm, while yet the
sea ran high and the gale died hard, many tumbling luggers, some maimed,
began to dot the wind-torn waters of Mounts Bay. The tide was out, but
within the shelter of the shore which rose between Newlyn and the course of
the wind, the returning boats found safety at their accustomed anchorage;
and as one by one they made the little roads, as boat after boat came
ashore from the fleet, tears, hysteric screams and deep-voiced thanks to
the Almighty arose from the crowd of men and women massed at the extremity
of Newlyn pier beneat