ul as our parting was sorrowful! I
can only repeat what I have so often told you, that if I felt myself
without you, my dearest friend, in the world, I could enjoy none of
its pleasures without an alloy of sadness; that if you love me, you
will above all things watch over your health, and amuse yourself as
much as you can by varied occupation.' There are protestations of this
kind in nearly every letter, for the prince's pen was always tipped
with fine sentiment and vows of eternal devotion came more easily to
him than the ordinary civilities of everyday life to the average man.

A visit to Goethe at Weimar, on the traveller's leisurely journey
towards England, furnished his notebook with some interesting
specimens of the old poet's conversation. 'He received me,' writes the
prince, 'in a dimly-lighted room, whose _clair obscure_ was
arranged with some _coquetterie_; and truly the aspect of the
beautiful old man, with his Jovelike countenance, was most stately....
In the course of conversation we came to Walter Scott. Goethe was not
very enthusiastic about the Great Unknown. He said he doubted not that
he wrote his novels in the same sort of partnership as existed between
the old painters and their pupils; that he furnished the plot, the
leading thoughts, the skeleton of the scenes, that he then let his
pupils fill them up, and retouched them at the last. It seemed almost
to be his opinion that it was not worth the while of a man of Scott's
eminence to give himself up to such a number of minute and tedious
details. "Had I," he said, "been able to lend myself to the idea of
mere gain, I could formerly have sent such things anonymously into the
world, with the aid of Lenz and others--nay, I could still, as would
astonish people not a little, and make them puzzle their brains to
find out the author; but after all, they would be but manufactured
wares...."

'He afterwards spoke of Lord Byron with great affection, almost as a
father would of a son, which was extremely grateful to my enthusiastic
feelings for this great poet. He contradicted the silly assertion
that _Manfred_ was only an echo of his _Faust_. He extremely
regretted that he had never become personally acquainted with Lord
Byron, and severely and justly reproached the English nation for
having judged their illustrious countryman so pettily, and understood
him so ill.' The conversation next turned on politics, and Goethe
reverted to his favourite theory that if every man laboured
faithfully, honestly, and lovingly in this sphere, were it great or
small, universal well-being and happiness would not long be wanting,
whatever the form of government. The prince urged in reply that a
constitutional government was first necessary to call such a principle
into life, and adduced the example of England in support of his
argument. 'Goethe immediately replied that the choice of the example
was not happy, for that in no country was selfishness more omnipotent;
that no people were perhaps essentially less humane in their political
or their private relations; that salvation came, not from without, by
means of forms of government, but from within, by the wise moderation
and humble activity of each man in his own circle; and that this must
ever be the chief source of human felicity, while it was the easiest
and the simplest to attain.'

The prince seems always to have played the part of Jonah on board
ship, and on the occasion of his journey to England, he had a terrible
passage of forty hours, from Rotterdam to the London Docks. As soon as
he could get his carriage, horses, and luggage clear of the customs,
he hastened to the Clarendon Hotel, where he had stayed during his
first visit to London. Unlike the American, N. P. Willis, he had come
armed with many prejudices against England and the English, few of
which he succeeded in losing during the two years of his sojourn among
us. In his first letter from London, dated October 5, 1826, he writes:
'London is now so utterly dead to elegance and fashion that one hardly
meets a single equipage, and nothing remains of the _beau monde_
but a few ambassadors. The huge city is at the same time full of fog
and dirt, and the macadamised streets are like well-worn roads. The
old pavement has been torn up, and replaced by small pieces of
granite, the interstices between which are filled up with gravel; this
renders the riding more easy, and diminishes the noise, but on the
other hand changes the town into a sort of quagmire.' The prince
comments favourably on the improvements that had recently been carried
out by Nash the architect, more especially as regards Regent Street
and Portland Place, and declares that the laying out of the Regent's
Park is 'faultless,' particularly in the disposition of the water.

The comfort and luxury of English hotels, as well as of private
houses, is a subject on which the traveller frequently enlarges, and
in this first letter he assures his Lucie that she would be delighted
with the extreme cleanliness of the interiors, the great convenience
of the furniture, and the good manners of the serving-people, though
he admits that, for all that pertains to luxury, the tourist pays
about six times as much as in Germany. 'The comfort of the inns,' he
continues, 'is unknown on the Continent; on your washing-table you
find, not one miserable water-bottle with a single earthenware jug and
basin, and a long strip of towel, but positive tubs of porcelain in
which you may plunge half your body; taps which instantly supply you
with streams of water at pleasure; half-a-dozen wide towels, a large
standing mirror, foot-baths and other conveniences of the toilet, all
of equal elegance.'

The prince took advantage of the dead season to explore the city and
other unfashionable quarters of the town. He was delighted with the
excellent side-pavements, the splendid shops, the brilliant gas-lamps,
and above all (like Miss Edgeworth's Rosamund) with 'the great glass
globes in the chemists' windows, filled with liquid of a deep red,
blue or green, the light of which is visible for miles(!)' Visits to
the Exchange, the Bank, and the Guildhall were followed by a call on
Rothschild, 'the Grand Ally of the Grand Alliance,' at his house of
business. 'On my presenting my card,' says our hero, 'he remarked
ironically that we were lucky people who could afford to travel about,
and take our pleasure, while he, poor man, had such a heavy burden to
bear. He then broke out into bitter complaints that every poor devil
who came to England had something to ask of him.... After this the
conversation took a political turn, and we of course agreed that
Europe could not subsist without him; he modestly declined our
compliments, and said, smiling, 'Oh no, you are only jesting; I am but
a servant, with whom people are pleased because he manages their
affairs well, and to whom they allow some crumbs to fall as an
acknowledgment.'

On October 19 the prince went to Newmarket for the races. During his
stay he was introduced to a rich merchant of the neighbourhood, who
invited him to spend a couple of days at his country-house. He gives
Lucie a minute account of the manners and customs of an English
_menage_, but these are only interesting to the modern reader in
so far as they have become obsolete. For example: 'When you enter the
dining-room, you find the whole of the first course on the table, as
in France. After the soup is removed, and the covers are taken off,
every man helps the dish before him, and offers some to his neighbour;
if he wishes for anything else, he must ask across the table, or send
a servant for it, a very troublesome custom.... It is not usual to
take wine without drinking to another person. If the company is small,
and a man has drunk with everybody, but happens to wish for more wine,
he must wait for the dessert, if he does not find in himself courage
to brave custom.'

On his return to town the prince, who had been elected a member of the
Travellers' Club, gives a long dissertation on English club life, not
forgetting to dwell on the luxury of all the arrangements, the
excellent service, and the methodical fashion in which the
gaming-tables were conducted. 'In no other country,' he declares, 'are
what are here emphatically called "business habits" carried so
extensively into social and domestic life; the value of time, of
order, of despatch, of routine, are nowhere so well understood. This
is the great key to the most striking, national characteristics. The
quantity of material objects produced and accomplished--_the work
done_--in England exceeds all that man ever effected. The causes
that have produced these results have as certainly given birth to the
dulness, the contracted views, the inveterate prejudices, the
unbounded desire for, and deference to wealth which characterise the
great mass of Englishmen.'

During this first winter in London the prince was a regular attendant
at the theatres, and many were the dramatic criticisms that he sent to
his 'friend' at Muskau. He saw Liston in the hundred and second
representation of Paul Pry, and at Drury Lane found, to his amazement
that Braham, whom he remembered as an elderly man in 1814, was still
first favourite. 'He is the genuine representative of the English
style of singing,' writes our critic, 'and in popular songs is the
adored idol of the public. One cannot deny him great power of voice
and rapidity of execution, but a more abominable style it is difficult
to conceive.... The most striking feature to a foreigner in English
theatres is the natural coarseness and brutality of the audiences. The
consequence is that the higher and more civilised classes go only to
the Italian Opera, and very rarely visit their national theatre.
English freedom has degenerated into the rudest licence, and it is not
uncommon in the midst of the most affecting part of a tragedy, or the
most charming cadenza of a singer, to hear some coarse expression
shouted from the gallery in a stentor voice. This is followed, either
by loud laughter and applause, or by the castigation and expulsion of
the offender.'

The poor prince saw Mozart's _Figaro_ announced for performance
at Drury Lane, and looked forward to hearing once more the sweet
harmonies of his Vaterland. 'What, then, was my astonishment,' he
exclaims, in justifiable indignation, 'at the unheard-of treatment
which the masterpiece of the immortal composer has received at English
hands! You will hardly believe me when I tell you that neither the
count, the countess, nor Figaro sang; these parts were given to mere
actors, and their principal airs were sung by other singers. To add to
this the gardener roared out some interpolated English popular songs,
which suited Mozart's music just as a pitch-plaster would suit the
face of the Venus de' Medici. The whole opera was, moreover, arranged
by a certain Mr. Bishop; that is, adapted to English ears by means of
the most tasteless and shocking alterations. The English national
music, the coarse, heavy melodies of which can never be mistaken for
an instant, has to me, at least, something singularly offensive, an
expression of brutal feeling both in pain and pleasure that smacks of
"roast-beef, plum-pudding, and porter."'

Another entertainment attended by our hero about this time was the
opening of Parliament by George IV., who had not performed this
ceremony for several years. 'The king,' we are told, 'looked pale and
bloated, and was obliged to sit on the throne for a considerable time
before he could get breath enough to read his speech. During this time
he turned friendly glances and condescending bows towards some
favoured ladies. On his right stood Lord Liverpool, with the sword of
state and the speech in his hand, and the Duke of Wellington on his
left. All three looked so miserable, so ashy-grey and worn out, that
never did human greatness appear to me so little worth.... In spite of
his feebleness, George IV. read his _banale_ speech with great
dignity and a fine voice, but with that royal nonchalance which does
not concern itself with what his Majesty promises, or whether he is
sometimes unable to decipher a word. It was very evident that the
monarch was heartily glad when the _corvee_ was over.'

In one of his early letters the traveller gives his friend the
following account of the manner in which he passes his day: 'I rise
late, read three or four newspapers at breakfast, look in my
visiting-book to see what visits I have to pay, and either drive to
pay them in my cabriolet, or ride. In the course of these excursions,
I sometimes catch the enjoyment of the picturesque; the struggle of
the blood-red sun with the winter fogs often produces wild and
singular effects of light. After my visits I ride for several hours
about the beautiful environs of London, return when it grows dark,
dress for dinner, which is at seven or eight, and spend the evening
either at the theatre or some small party. The ludicrous routs--at
which one hardly finds standing-room on the staircase--have not yet
commenced. In England, however, except in a few diplomatic houses, you
can go nowhere in the evening without a special invitation.'

The prince seems to have been bored at most of the parties he
attended; partly, perhaps, out of pique at finding himself, so long
accustomed to be the principal personage in his little kingdom of
Muskau, eclipsed in influence and wealth by many a British commoner.
Few persons that he met in the London of that day amused him more than
the great Rothschild, with whom he dined more than once at the
banker's suburban villa. Of one of these entertainments he writes:
'Mr. Rothschild was in high good-humour, amusing and talkative. It was
diverting to hear him explain to us the pictures round his room (all
portraits of the sovereigns of Europe, presented through their
ambassadors), and talk of the originals as his very good friends, and
in a certain sense his equals. "Yes," said he, "the Prince of -----
once pressed me for a loan, and in the same week on which I received
his autograph letter, his father wrote to me also from Rome, to beg
me, for Heaven's sake, not to have any concern in it, for that I could
not have to do with a more dishonest man than his son...." He
concluded by modestly calling himself the dutiful and generously paid
agent and servant of these high potentates, all of whom he honoured
equally, let the state of politics be what it might; for, said he,
laughing, "I never like to quarrel with my bread and butter." It shows
great prudence in Mr. Rothschild to have accepted neither title nor
order, and thus to have preserved a far more respectable independence.
He doubtless owes much to the good advice of his extremely amiable and
judicious wife, who excels him in tact and knowledge of the world,
though not, perhaps, in acuteness and talents for business.'

Although the prince had not as yet entered the ranks of authors, he
was always interested in meeting literary people, such as Mr. Hope,
author of _Anastasius_, Mr. Morier of _Hadji Baba_ fame, and
Lady Charlotte Bury, who had exchanged the celebrity of a beauty for
that of a fashionable novelist. 'I called on Lady Charlotte,' he says,
'the morning after meeting her, and found everything in her house
brown, in every possible shade; furniture, curtains, carpets, her own
and her children's dresses, presented no other colour. The room was
without looking-glasses or pictures, and its only ornaments were casts
from the antique.... After I had been there some time, the celebrated
publisher, Constable, entered. This man has made a fortune by Walter
Scott's novels, though, as I was told, he refused his first and best,
_Waverley_, and at last gave but a small sum for it. I hope the
charming Lady Charlotte had better cause to be satisfied with him.'
Towards the end of December, his Highness's head-gardener, Rehde, a
very important functionary at Muskau, arrived in London to be
initiated into the mysteries of English landscape-gardening. Together
the two enthusiasts, master and man, made a tour of some of the
principal show-places of England, including Stanmore Priory, Woburn
Abbey, Cashiobury, Blenheim, Stowe, Eaton, Warwick, and Kenilworth,
besides many of lesser note. At the end of the excursion, which lasted
three weeks, the prince declared that even he was beginning to feel
satiated with the charms of English parks. On his return to London he
was invited to spend a few days with Lord Darnley at Cobham, and
writes thence some further impressions of English country-house life.
He was a little perturbed at being publicly reminded by his elderly
host that they had made each other's acquaintance thirty years before.

'Now, as I was in frocks at the time he spoke of,' observes the
prince, 'I was obliged to beg for a further explanation, though I
cannot say I was much delighted at having my age so fully discussed
before all the company, for you know I claim to look not more than
thirty. However, I could not but admire Lord Darnley's memory. He
recollected every circumstance of his visit to my parents with the
Duke of Portland, and recalled to me many a little forgotten
incident.'

The _vie de chateau_ the traveller considered the most agreeable
side of English life, by reason of its freedom, and the absence of
those wearisome ceremonies which in Germany oppressed both host and
guests. The English custom of being always _en evidence_,
however, occasioned him considerable surprise. 'Strangers,' he
observes, 'have generally only one room allotted to them, and
Englishmen seldom go into this room except to sleep, and to dress
twice a day, which, even without company, is always _de rigueur_;
for all meals are usually taken in public, and any one who wants to
write does it in the library. There, also, those who wish to converse,
give each other _rendezvous_, to avoid the rest of the society.
Here you have an opportunity of gossiping for hours with the young
ladies, who are always very literarily inclined. Many a marriage is
thus concocted or destroyed between the _corpus juris_ on the one
side, and Bouffler's works on the other, while fashionable novels, as
a sort of intermediate link, lie on the tables in the middle.

Early in February the prince paid a visit to Brighton, where he made
the acquaintance of Count D'Orsay, and was entertained by Mrs.
Fitzherbert. He gives a jaundiced account of two entertainments, a
public ball and a musical _soiree_, which he attended while at
Brighton, declaring--probably with some truth--that the latter is one
of the greatest trials to which a foreigner can be exposed in England.
'Every mother,' he explains, 'who has grown-up daughters, for whom she
has had to pay large sums to the music-master, chooses to enjoy the
satisfaction of having the youthful talent admired. There is nothing,
therefore, but quavering and strumming right and left, so that one is
really overpowered and unhappy; and even if an Englishwoman has a
natural capacity for singing, she seldom acquires either style or
science. The men are much more agreeable _dilettanti_, for they
at least give one the diversion of a comical farce. That a man should
advance to the piano with far greater confidence than a David, strike
with his forefinger the note which he thinks his song should begin
with, and then _entonner_ like a thunder-clap (generally a tone
or two lower than the pitch), and sing through a long aria without an
accompaniment of any kind, except the most wonderful distortions of
face, is a thing one must have seen to believe it possible, especially
in the presence of at least fifty people.'

By the middle of April the season had begun in town, and the prince
soon found himself up to the eyes in invitations for balls, dinners,
breakfasts, and _soirees_. We hear of him dining with the Duke of
Clarence, to meet the Duchess of Kent and her daughter; assisting at
the Lord Mayor's banquet, which lasted six hours, and at which the
chief magistrate made six-and-twenty speeches, long and short;
breakfasting with the Duke of Devonshire at Chiswick, being nearly
suffocated at the routs of Lady Cowper and Lady Jersey, and attending
his first ball at Almack's, in which famous assemblage his
expectations were woefully disappointed. 'A large, bare room,' so runs
his description, 'with a bad floor, and ropes round it, like the space
in an Arab camp parted off for horses; two or three badly-furnished
rooms at the side, in which the most wretched refreshments are served,
and a company into which, in spite of all the immense difficulty of
getting tickets, a great many nobodies had wriggled; in which the
dress was as tasteless as the _tournure_ was bad--this was all.
In a word, a sort of inn-entertainment--the music and lighting the
only good things. And yet Almack's is the culminating point of the
English world of fashion.'

Unfortunately for his readers, the prince was rather an observer than
an auditor; for he describes what he sees vividly enough, but seldom
takes the trouble to set down the conversation that he hears. Perhaps
he thought it hardly worth recording, for he complains that in England
politics had become the main ingredient in social intercourse, that
the lighter and more frivolous pleasures suffered by the change, and
that the art of conversation would soon be entirely lost. 'In this
country,' he unkindly adds, 'I should think it [the art of
conversation] never existed, unless, perhaps, in Charles II.'s time.
And, indeed, people here are too slavishly subject to established
usages, too systematic in all their enjoyments, too incredibly kneaded
up with prejudices; in a word, too little vivacious to attain to that
unfettered spring and freedom of spirit, which must ever be the sole
basis of agreeable society. I must confess that I know none more
monotonous, nor more persuaded of its own pre-eminence than the
highest society of this country. A stony, marble-cold spirit of caste
and fashion rules all classes, and makes the highest tedious, the
lowest ridiculous.'

In spite of his dislike to politics as a subject of conversation, his
Highness attended debates at the House of Lords and the House of
Commons, and was so keenly interested in what he heard that he
declared the hours passed like minutes. Canning had just been
intrusted by George IV. with the task of forming a government, but had
promptly been deserted by six members of the former Ministry,
including Wellington, Lord Eldon, and Peel, who were now accused of
having resigned in consequence of a cabal or conspiracy against the
constitutional prerogative of the king to change his ministers at his
own pleasure. In the House of Commons the prince heard Peel's attack
on Canning and the new government, which was parried by Brougham. 'In
a magnificent speech, which flowed on like a clear stream, Brougham,'
we are told, 'tried to disarm his opponent; now tortured him with
sarcasms; now wrought upon the sensibility, or convinced the reason,
of his hearers. The orator closed with the solemn declaration that he
was perfectly impartial; that he _could_ be impartial, because it
was his fixed determination never, and on no terms, to accept a place
in the administration of the kingdom.... [Footnote: In 1831 Brougham
accepted office as Lord Chancellor.] Canning, the hero of the day, now
rose. If his predecessor might be compared to a dexterous and elegant
boxer, Canning presented the image of a finished antique gladiator.
All was noble, simple, refined; then suddenly his eloquence burst
forth like lightning-grand and all-subduing. His speech was, from
every point of view, the most complete, as well as the most
irresistibly persuasive--the crown and glory of the debate.'

On the following day the prince heard some of the late ministers on
their defence in the House of Lords. 'Here,' he observes, 'I saw the
great Wellington in terrible straits. He is no orator, and was obliged
to enter upon his defence like an accused person. He was considerably
agitated; and this senate of his country, though composed of men whom
individually, perhaps, he did not care for, appeared more imposing to
him _en masse_ than Napoleon and his hundred thousands. He
stammered much, interrupted and involved himself, but at length he
brought the matter tolerably to this conclusion, that there was no
"conspiracy." He occasionally said strong things--probably stronger
than he meant, for he was evidently not master of his material. Among
other things, the following words pleased me extremely: "I am a
soldier and no orator. I am utterly deficient in the talents requisite
to play a part in this great assembly. I must be more than insane if I
ever entertained the thought, of which I am accused, of becoming Prime
Minister."... [Footnote: In January 1828 the duke became Prime
Minister.] When I question myself as to the total impression of this
day, I must confess that it was at once elevating and melancholy--the
former when I fancied myself an Englishman, the latter when I felt
myself a German. This twofold senate of the people of England, in
spite of all the defects and blemishes common to human institutions,
is yet grand in the highest degree; and in contemplating its power and
operation thus near at hand, one begins to understand why it is that
the English nation is, as yet, the first on the face of the earth.'

The traveller was by no means exclusively occupied in hearing and
seeing new things. With that strain of practicality which contrasted
so oddly with his sentimental and romantic temperament, he kept firmly
before his eyes the main object of his visit to England. He had
determined at the outset not to sell himself and his title for less
than L50,000, but he confesses that, as time passed on, his demands
became much more modest. His matrimonial ventures were all faithfully
detailed to the presumably sympathising Lucie, for whose sake, the
prince persuaded himself, he was far more anxious for success than for
his own. But he had not counted on the many obstacles with which he
found himself confronted, chief among them being his relations with
his former wife. It was known that the ex-princess was still living at
Muskau with all the rights and privileges of a _chatelaine_,
while the prince never disguised his attachment to her, and openly
kept her portrait on his table. English mothers who would have
welcomed him as a son-in-law were led to believe that the divorce was
only a blind, and that the prince's marriage would be actually, if not
legally, a bigamous union. The satirical papers represented him as a
fortune-hunter, a Bluebeard who had ill-treated his first wife, and
declared that he had proposed for the hand of the dusky Empress of
Hayti, then on a visit to Europe.

Still our hero obstinately pursued his quest, laying siege to the
heart of every presentable-looking heiress to whom he was introduced,
and if attention to the art of the toilet could have gained him a rich
bride, he would not long have been unsuccessful. In dress he took the
genuine interest and delight of the dandy of the period, and
marvellous are the descriptions of his costume that he sends to Lucie.
For morning visits, of which he sometimes paid fifty in one day, he
wore his hair dyed a beautiful black, a new hat, a green neckerchief
with gaily coloured stripes, a yellow cashmere waistcoat with metal
buttons, an olive-green frock-coat and iron-grey pantaloons. On other
occasions he is attired in a dark-brown coat, with a velvet collar, a
white neckerchief, in which a thin gold watch-chain is entwined, a
waistcoat with a collar of _cramoisie_ and gold stars, an
under-waistcoat of white satin, embroidered with gold flowers, full
black pantaloons, spun silk stockings, and short square shoes. Style
such as this could only be maintained at a vast outlay, from the
German point of view, the week's washing-bill alone amounting to an
important sum. According to the prince's calculation, a London
exquisite, during the season of 1827, required every week twenty
shirts, twenty-four pocket-handkerchiefs, nine or ten pairs of summer
trousers, thirty neckerchiefs, a dozen waistcoats and stockings _a
discertion_. 'I see your housewifely ears aghast, my good Lucie,'
he writes, 'but as a dandy cannot get on without dressing three or
four times a day, the affair is quite simple.'

However much the prince may have enjoyed the ceremony of the toilet,
he strongly objected to the process of hair-dyeing, and his letters
are full of complaints of his sufferings and humiliation while
undergoing the operation, which, he declares, is a form of slow
poison, and also an unpleasant reminder that he is really old, but
obliged to play the part of youth in order to attain an object that
may bring him more misery than happiness. As soon as he is safely
married to his heiress, he expresses his determination of looking his
full age, so that people might say 'What a well-preserved old man!'
instead of '_Voila, le ci-devant jeune homme_!' Still, with all
this care and thought, heiresses remained coy, or more probably their
parents were 'difficult.' The prince's highly-developed personal
vanity was wounded by many a refusal, and so weary did he become of
this woman-hunt, that in one letter to Lucie, dated March 5, 1827, he
exclaims, 'Ah, my dearest, if you only had 150,000 thalers, I would
marry you again to-morrow!'




PART II


The summer months were spent in visits to Windsor and other parks near
London, and in a tour through Yorkshire. In October his Highness was
back in town, and engaged in a new matrimonial venture. He writes to
Lucie that 'the fortune in question is immense, and if I obtain it, I
shall end gloriously.' In the correspondence published after the
prince's death is the draft of a letter to Mr. Bonham of Titness Park,
containing a formal proposal for the hand of his daughter, 'Miss
Harriet,' and detailing (with considerable reservations) the position
of his financial affairs. Muskau, he explains, is worth L4,000 a year,
an income which in Germany is equivalent to three times as much in
England. 'Everything belonging to me,' he continues, 'is in the best
possible order; a noble residence at Muskau, and two smaller chateaux,
surrounded with large parks and gardens, in fact, all that make enjoy
life (sic) in the country is amply provided for, and a numerous train
of officious (sic) of my household are always ready to receive their
young princess at her own seat, or if she should prefer town, the
court of Prussia will offer her every satisfaction.' Owing to the fact
that Muskau was mortgaged for L50,000, he was forced, he confesses, to
expect an adequate fortune with his wife, a circumstance to which, if
he had been otherwise situated, he should have paid little attention.

This missive was accompanied by a long letter, dated Nov. 1, 1827, to
'Miss Harriet,' in which the suitor explains the circumstances of his
former marriage, and of his divorce, the knowledge of which has
rendered her uneasy. 'It is rather singular,' he proceeds, 'that in
the very first days after my arrival, you, Miss Harriet, were named to
me, together with some other young ladies, as heiresses. Now I must
confess, at the risk of the fact being doubted in our industrious
times, that I myself had a prejudice against, and even some dread of
heiresses. I may say that I proved in some way these feelings to exist
by marrying a lady with a very small fortune, and afterwards in
England by never courting any heiresses further as common civility
required. My reasons for so doing are not without foundation. In the
first instance, I am a little proud; in the second, I don't want any
more than I possess, though I should not reject it, finding it in my
way, and besides all this, rich young maidens are not always very
amiable.' The prince continues that he had gone, out of principle,
into all kinds of society, and seen many charming and handsome girls,
but had not been able to discover his affinity. At last, after
renouncing the idea of marriage, he heard again of Miss Harriet
Bonham, not of her fortune this time, but of her many excellent
qualities, and the fact that she had refused several splendid offers.
His curiosity was now at last aroused; he sought an opportunity of
being introduced to her, and--'Dearest Miss Harriet, you know the
rest. I thought--and I protest it by all that is sacred--I thought
when I left you again, that here at last I had found united all and
everything I could wish in a future companion through life. An
exterior the most pleasing, a mind and person equally fit for the
representation of a court and the delight of a cottage, and above all,
that sensibility, that goodness of heart, and that perfect absence of
conceitedness which I value more than every other accomplishment.... I
beheld you, besides all your more essential qualities, so quick as
lively, so playful as whitty (_sic_), and nothing really seemed
more bewitching to me as when a hearty, joyful laugh changed your
thoughtful, noble features to the cheerful appearance of a happy
child! And still through every change your and your friends'
conversation and behaviour always remained distinguished by that
perfect breeding and fine tact which, indeed, is to private life what
a clear sky is to a landscape....'

There is a great deal mere to the same effect, and it is sad to think
that all this trouble, all this expenditure of ink and English
grammar, was thrown away. Papa Bonham could not pay down the fortune
demanded by the prince without injuring the other members of his
family; [Footnote: Mr. Bonham's eldest daughter was the second wife of
the first Lord Garvagh.] and although Miss Harriet deplores 'the cruel
end of all our hopes,' the negotiations fell through.

The prince consoled himself for his disappointment with a fresh round
of sight-seeing. He became deeply enamoured of a steam-engine, of
which newly-invented animal he sends the following picturesque
description to Lucie: 'We must now be living in the days of
the _Arabian Nights_, for I have seen a creature to-day far
surpassing all the fantastic beings of that time. Listen to the
monster's characteristics. In the first place, its food is the
cheapest possible, for it eats nothing but wood or coals, and when not
actually at work, it requires none. It never sleeps, nor is weary; it
is subject to no diseases, if well organised at first; and never
refuses its work till worn out by great length of service. It is
equally active in all climates, and undertakes all kinds of labour
without a murmur. Here it is a miner, there a sailor, a
cotton-spinner, a weaver, or a miller; and though a small creature, it
draws ninety tons of goods, or a whole regiment of soldiers, with a
swiftness exceeding that of the fleetest mail-coaches. At the same
time, it marks its own measured steps on a tablet fixed in front of
it. It regulates, too, the degree of warmth necessary to its
well-being; it has a strange power of oiling its inmost joints when
they are stiff, and of removing at pleasure all injurious air that
might find the way into its system; but should anything become
deranged in it, it warns its master by the loud ringing of a bell.
Lastly, it is so docile, in spite of its enormous strength (nearly
equal to that of six hundred horses), that a child of four years old
is able in a moment to arrest its mighty labours by the pressure of
his little finger. Did ever a witch burnt for sorcery produce its
equal?'

A few weeks later we hear of one manifestation of the new power, which
did not quite come up to the expectations of its admirers. On January
16, 1828, the prince writes: 'The new steam-carriage is completed, and
goes five miles in half an hour on trial in the Regent's Park. But
there was something to repair every moment. I was one of the first of
the curious who tried it; but found the smell of oiled iron, which
makes steamboats so unpleasant, far more insufferable here. Stranger
still is another vehicle to which I yesterday intrusted my person. It
is nothing less than a carriage drawn by a paper kite, very like those
the children fly. This is the invention of a schoolmaster, who is so
skilful in the guidance of his vehicle, that he can get on very fairly
with half a wind, but with a completely fair one, and good roads, he
goes a mile in three-quarters of a minute. The inventor proposes to
traverse the African deserts in this manner, and has contrived a place
behind, in which a pony stands like a footman, and in case of a calm,
can he harnessed to the carriage.'

In the early part of 1828 Henriette Sontag arrived in London, and the
prince at once fell a victim to her charms. The fascinating singer,
then barely three-and-twenty, was already the idol of the public, at
the very summit of her renown. Amazing prices were paid for seats when
she was announced to appear. Among his Highness's papers was found a
ticket for a box at the opera on 'Madame Sontag's night,' on which he
notes that he had sold a diamond clasp to pay the eighty guineas
demanded for the bit of cardboard. He was in love once again with all
the ardour of youth, and for the moment all thoughts of a marriage of
convenience were dismissed from his mind. He was now eager for a
love-match with the fair Henriette, whose attractions had rendered him
temporarily forgetful of those of Muskau. But Mademoiselle Sontag,
though carried away by the passionate wooing of the prince, actually
remembered that she had other ties, probably her engagement to Rossi,
to which it was her duty to remain true. She told her lover that he
must learn to forget her, and that when they parted at the conclusion
of the London season, they must never meet again. The prince was
heart-broken at the necessity for separation, and we are assured that
he never forgot Henriette Sontag (though she had many successors in
his affections), and that after his return to Germany he placed a
gilded bust of the singer in his park, in order that he might have her
image ever before his eyes.

In the hope of distracting his thoughts from his disappointment,
Prince Pueckler decided to make a lengthened tour through Wales and
Ireland, and with this object in view he set out in July 1828. Before
his departure, however, he had an interesting rencontre at a
dinner-party given by the Duchess of St. Albans-the _ci-devant_
Harriet Melton. 'I arrived late,' says the prince, in his account of
the incident, 'and was placed between my hostess and a tall, very
simple, but benevolent-looking man of middle age, who spoke broad
Scotch--a dialect anything but agreeable; and would probably have
struck me by nothing else, if I had not discovered that I was sitting
next to ----, the Great Unknown! It was not long ere many a sally of
dry, poignant wit fell from his lips, and many an anecdote told in the
most unpretending manner. His eye, too, glanced whenever he was
animated, with such a clear, good-natured lustre, and such an
expression of true-hearted kindness, that it was impossible not to
conceive a sort of affection for him. Towards the end of the dinner he
and Sir Francis Burdett told ghost-stories, half terrible, half
humorous, one against the other.... A little concert concluded the
evening, in which the very pretty daughter of the great bard--a
healthy-looking Highland beauty--took part, and Miss Stephens sang
nothing but Scottish ballads.'

Before entering upon a new field of observation, the prince summed up
his general impressions of London society with a candour that cannot
have been very agreeable to his English readers. The goddess of
Fashion, he observes, reigns in England alone with a despotic and
inexorable sway; while the spirit of caste here receives a power,
consistency, and completeness of development unexampled in any other
country. 'Every class of society in England, as well as every field,
is separated from every other by a hedge of thorns. Each has its own
manners and turns of expression, and, above all, a supreme and
absolute contempt for all below it.... Now although the aristocracy
does not stand _as such_ upon the pinnacle of this strange social
edifice, it yet exercises great influence over it. It is, indeed,
difficult to become fashionable without being of good descent; but it
by no means follows that a man is so in virtue of being
well-born--still less of being rich. Ludicrous as it may sound, it is
a fact that while the present king is a very fashionable man, his
father was not so in the smallest degree, and that none of his
brothers have any pretensions to fashion; which unquestionably is
highly to their honour.' The truth of this observation is borne out by
the story of Beau Brummell, who, when offended by some action of the
Regent's, exclaimed, 'If this sort of thing goes on, I shall cut
Wales, and bring old George into fashion!'

'A London exclusive of the present day,' continues our censor, 'is
nothing more than a bad, flat, dull imitation of a French _roue_
of the Regency, Both have in common selfishness, levity, boundless
vanity, and an utter want of heart. But what a contrast if we look
further! In France the absence of all morality and honesty was in some
degree atoned for by the most refined courtesy, the poverty of soul by
agreeableness and wit. What of all this has the English dandy to
offer? His highest triumph is to appear with the most wooden manners,
as little polished as will suffice to avoid castigation; nay, to
contrive even his civilities so that they are as near as may be to
affronts--this is the style of deportment that confers on him the
greatest celebrity. Instead of a noble, high-bred ease, to have the
courage to offend against every restraint of decorum; to invert the
relation in which his sex stands to women, so that they appear the
attacking, and he the passive or defensive party; to cut his best
friends if they cease to have the strength and authority of fashion;
to delight in the ineffably _fade_ jargon and affectations of his
set, and always to know what is "the thing"--these are the
accomplishments that distinguish a young "lion" of fashion. Whoever
reads the best of the recent English novels--those by the author of
_Pelham_--may be able to abstract from them a tolerably just idea
of English fashionable society, provided he does not forget to deduct
qualities which the national self-love has erroneously claimed
--namely, grace for its _roues_, seductive manners and witty
conversation for its dandies.'

The foregoing is a summary of the prince's lengthy indictment against
London society. 'I saw in the fashionable world,' he observes in
conclusion, 'only too frequently, and with few exceptions, a profound
vulgarity of thought; an immorality little veiled or adorned; the most
undisguised arrogance; and the coarsest neglect of all kindly feelings
and attentions haughtily assumed for the sake of shining in a false
and despicable refinement; even more inane and intolerable to a
healthy mind than the awkward stiffness of the declared Nobodies. It
has been said that vice and poverty form the most revolting
combination; since I have been in England, vice and boorish rudeness
seem to me to form a still more disgusting union.'

The prince's adventures in Wales and Ireland, with the recital of
which he has filled up the best part of two volumes, must here be
dismissed in as many paragraphs. On his tour through Wales, he left
his card on the Ladies of Llangollen, who promptly invited him to
lunch. Fortunately, he had previously been warned of his hostesses'
peculiarities of dress and appearance. 'Imagine,' he writes, 'two
ladies, the elder of whom, Lady Eleanor Butler, a short, robust woman,
begins to feel her years a little, being nearly eighty-three; the
other, a tall and imposing person, esteems herself still youthful,
being only seventy-four. Both wore their still abundant hair combed
straight back and powdered, a round man's hat, a man's cravat and
waistcoat, but in the place of "inexpressibles," a short petticoat and
boots: the whole covered by a coat of blue cloth, of quite a peculiar
cut. Over this Lady Eleanor wore, first the grand cordon of the order
of St. Louis across her shoulders; secondly, the same order round her
neck; thirdly, the small cross of the same in her buttonhole; and,
_pour comble de gloire_, a golden lily of nearly the natural size
as a star. So far the effect was somewhat ludicrous. But now you must
imagine both ladies with that agreeable _aisance_, that air of
the world of the _ancien regime_, courteous, entertaining,
without the slightest affectation, speaking French as well as any
Englishwoman of my acquaintance; and, above all, with that essentially
polite, unconstrained, simply cheerful manner of the good society of
that day, which in our hard-working, business age appears to be going
to utter decay.'

Thanks to his letters of introduction and the friendships that he
struck up on the road, the prince was able occasionally to step out of
the beaten tourist tracks, and to see something of the more intimate
side of Irish social life. He has given a lively and picturesque
account of his experiences, which included an introduction to Lady
Morgan, [Footnote: See page 142.] and to her charming nieces, the Miss
Clarkes (who made a profound impression on his susceptible heart), a
sentimental journey through Wicklow, a glance at the humours of
Donnybrook Fair, a visit to O'Connell at Derrinane Abbey, a peep into
the wilds of Connaught, an Emancipation dinner at Cashel, where he
made his _debut_ as an English orator, and an expedition to the
lakes of Killarney. All this, which was probably novel and interesting
to the German public, contains little that is not familiar to the
modern English reader. The sketch of O'Connell is sufficiently vivid
to bear quotation.

'Daniel O'Connell,' observes the prince, after his visit to Derrinane,
'is no common man--though the man of the commonalty. His power is so
great that at this moment it only depends on him to raise the standard
of rebellion from one end of the island to the other. He is, however,
too sharp-sighted, and much too sure of attaining his ends by safer
means, to wish to bring on any such violent crisis. He has certainly
shown great dexterity in availing himself of the temper of the country
at this moment, legally, openly, and in the face of Government, to
acquire a power scarcely inferior to that of the sovereign; indeed,
though without arms or armies, in some instances far surpassing it.
For how would it have been possible for his Majesty George IV. to
withhold 40,000 of his faithful Irishmen for three days from whisky
drinking? which O'Connell actually accomplished in the memorable Clare
election. The enthusiasm of the people rose to such a height that they
themselves decreed and inflicted a punishment for drunkenness. The
delinquent was thrown into the river, and held there for two hours,
during which time he was made to undergo frequent submersions.... On
the whole, O'Connell exceeded my expectations. His exterior is
attractive, and the expression of intelligent good-humour, united with
determination and prudence, which marks his countenance, is extremely
winning. He has perhaps more of persuasiveness than of large and lofty
eloquence; and one frequently perceives too much design and manner in
his words. Nevertheless, it is impossible not to follow his powerful
arguments with interest, to view the martial dignity of his carriage
without pleasure, or to refrain from laughing at his wit.... He has
received from Nature an invaluable gift for a party-leader, a
magnificent voice, united to good lungs and a strong constitution. His
understanding is sharp and quick, and his acquirements out of his
profession not inconsiderable. With all this his manners are, as I
have said, winning and popular, though somewhat of the actor is
noticeable in them; they do not conceal his very high opinion of
himself, and are occasionally tinged by what an Englishman would call
_vulgarity_. But where is there a picture without shade?'

The prince's matrimonial projects had been pursued only in
half-hearted fashion during this year, and on his return to England in
December, he seems to have thrown up the game in despair. On January
2, 1829, he turned his back on our perfidious shores, and made a short
tour in France before proceeding to Muskau. In one of his letters to
Lucie he admits that on his return journey he had plenty of material
for reflection. Two precious years had been wasted, absence from his
dearest friend had been endured, a large sum of money had been spent
in keeping up a dashing appearance--and all in vain. He consoles
himself with the amazing reflection that Parry had failed in three
attempts to reach the North Pole, and Bonaparte, after heaping victory
on victory for twenty years, had perished miserably in St. Helena!

But if the prince had not accomplished his design of carrying off a
British heiress, his sojourn in England brought him a prize of a
different kind--namely, the laurel crown of fame. His _Briefe eines
Verstorbenen_, the first volumes of which were published
anonymously in 1830, was greeted with an almost unanimous outburst of
admiration and applause. The critics vied with each other in praising
a work in which, according to their verdict, the grace and piquancy of
France were combined with the analytical methods and the profound
philosophy of Germany. In England, as was only to be expected, the
chorus of applause was not unmixed with hisses and catcalls. The
author had, however, been exceptionally fortunate in his translator,
Sarah Austin, whose version of the Letters, entitled _The Tour of a
German Prince_, was described by the _Westminster Review_ as
'the best modern translation of a prose work that has ever appeared,
and perhaps our only translation from the German. As an original work,
the ease and facility of the style would be admired; as a translation,
it is unrivalled.' Croker reviewed the book in the _Quarterly_ in
his accustomed strain of playful brutality, rejoiced savagely over the
numerous blunders, [Footnote: The most amusing of these is the
derivation of the Prince of Wales' motto 'Ich dien' from two Welsh
words, 'Eich deyn,' said to signify 'This is your man!'] and credited
the author with almost as many blasphemies as Lady Morgan herself. The
_Edinburgh_, in a more impartial notice, observed that a great
part of the work had no other merit than that of being an act of
individual treachery against the hospitalities of private life, and
commented on the fact that while the masterpieces of Goethe
and Schiller were still untranslated, the _Tour of Prince
Pueckler-Muskau_ had been bought up in a month.

The prince was far too vain of his unexpected literary success to
preserve his anonymity, and the ink-craving having laid hold upon him,
he lost no time in setting to work upon another book. The semblance of
a separation between himself and Lucie had now been thrown aside.
During the summer months they lived at Muskau, where they laboured
together over plans for the embellishment of the gardens, while in the
winter they kept up a splendid establishment in Berlin. The sight of a
divorced couple living together seems to have shocked the Berliners
far more than that of a married couple living apart, but to Pueckler,
as a chartered 'original,' much was forgiven. At this time he went a
good deal into literary society, and became intimate with several
women-writers, among them the Graefin Hahn-Hahn, Rahel, and that
amazing lady, Bettine von Arnim. With the last-named he struck up an
intellectual friendship which roused the jealousy of Lucie, and was
finally wrecked by Bettine's attempts to obtain a spiritual empire
over the lord of Muskau.

In 1832 the prince's debts amounted to 500,000 thalers, and he was
obliged once again to face the fact that he could only save himself
from ruin by a wealthy marriage, or by the sale of his estate. In a
long letter he laid the state of the case before his faithful
companion, pointing out that even at forty-seven, he, with his title
and his youthful appearance, might hope to secure a bride worth
300,000 thalers, but that as long as his ex-wife remained at Muskau he
was hardly likely to be successful in his matrimonial speculations.
Lucie again consented to sacrifice herself in the good cause; but the
prince, a man of innumerable _bonnes fortunes_ according to his
own account, was curiously unfortunate as a would-be Benedick. The
German heiresses were no more propitious to his suit than the English
ones had been; and though, as he plaintively observes, he would have
liked nothing better than to be a Turkish pasha with a hundred and
fifty sultanas, he was unable to obtain a single Christian wife.

In 1834 the prince published two books, _Tutti Frutti_, a
collection of stories and sketches, and _Observations on
Landscape-Gardening_. _Tutti Frutti_ was by no means so
popular as the _Briefe eines Verstorbenen_, but the
_Observations_ took rank as a standard work. The project of a
journey to America having been abandoned, the prince now determined to
spend the winter in Algiers, leaving Lucie in charge at Muskau. This
modest programme enlarged itself into a tour in the East, which lasted
for more than five years. The travellers adventures during this period
have been described in his _Semilasso in Africa, Aus Mehemet's
Reich, Die Rueckkehr_, and other works, which added to their
author's fame, and nearly sufficed to pay his expenses. We hear of him
breaking hearts at Tunis and Athens, shooting big game in the Soudan,
astonishing the Arabs by his horsemanship, and meddling in Egyptian
politics. It was not until 1838 that, moved by Lucie's complaints of
her loneliness, he reluctantly abandoned his plan of settling in the
East, and turned his face towards Europe. On the homeward journey he
made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and turned out of his course for the
visit to Lady Hester Stanhope that has already been described.

His Highness arrived at Vienna in the autumn of 1839, bringing in his
suite an Abyssinian slave-girl, Machbuba, whom he had bought a couple
of years before, and who had developed such wonderful qualities of
head and heart, that he could not bring himself to part from her. But
Lucie obstinately refused to receive Machbuba at Muskau, and declared
that the prince's reputation would be destroyed for ever, if he
brought a favourite slave under the same roof as his 'wife,' and thus
sinned against the laws of outward seemliness. So Machbuba and the
master who, like another Pygmalion, seems to have endowed this dusky
Galatea with a mind and soul, remained at Vienna, where the
Abyssinian, clad in a picturesque Mameluke's costume, accompanied the
prince to all the public spectacles, and became a nine days' wonder to
the novelty-loving Viennese. But the severity of a European winter
proved fatal to poor Machbuba, consumption laid its grip upon her, and
it was as a dying girl that at last she was taken to the Baths of
Muskau. Lucie received this once-dreaded rival kindly, but at once
carried off the prince for a visit to Berlin, and in the absence of
the master whom she worshipped with a spaniel-like devotion, Machbuba
breathed her last. The slave-girl was laid to rest amid all the pomp
and ceremony of a state funeral, the principal inhabitants of Muskau
and the neighbourhood followed her to her grave, and on the Sunday
following her death the chaplain delivered a eulogy on Machbuba's
virtues, and the fatherly benevolence of her master.

The prince was temporarily broken-hearted at the death of his
favourite, but his mercurial spirits soon reasserted themselves, and a
round of visits to the various German courts restored him to his
accustomed self-complacency. The idea of selling Muskau, and thus
ridding himself of the burden of his debts, once more occupied his
mind. A handsome offer for the estate had been refused a few years
before, in compliance with the wishes of Lucie, who loved Muskau even
better than its master, and had appealed to the king to prevent the
sale. But in 1845 came another offer from Count Hatzfeld of 1,700,000
thalers, which, in spite of Lucie's tears and entreaties, the prince
decided to accept. Although it cost him a sharp pang to give up to
another the spot of earth on which he had lavished so much time, so
much labour, and so much money, he fully appreciated the advantage of
an unembarrassed income and complete freedom of movement.

For a year or two after the sale, he led a wandering life, with Berlin
or Weimar for his headquarters. In 1846, shortly before his sixtieth
birthday, he met, so he confided to the long-suffering Lucie, the only
woman he had ever loved, or at least the only woman he had ever
desired to marry. Unfortunately, the lady, who was young, beautiful,
clever, of high rank, large fortune, and angelic disposition, had been
married for some years to a husband who is described as ugly,
ill-tempered, jealous, and incredibly selfish. The prince's letters at
this period are filled with raptures over the virtues of his new
_inamorata_, and lamentations that he had met her too late. For
though his passion was returned the lady was a strict Catholic, for
whom a divorce was out of the question, and for once this hardened
Lothario shrank from an elopement, with the resultant stain upon the
reputation of the woman he loved. In 1846 he parted from his affinity,
who survived the separation little more than a year, and retired with
a heavy heart to his paternal castle of Branitz, near Kottbus, where
he occupied himself in planting a park and laying out gardens. Branitz
was only about a tenth part the size of Muskau, and stood in the midst
of a sandy waste, but at more than sixty years of age the prince set
himself, with all the ardour of youth, to conjure a paradise out of
the wilderness. Forest trees were transplanted, lakes and canals dug,
hills appeared out of the level fields, and, in short, this
'earth-tamer,' as Rahel called him, created not only a park, but a
complete landscape.

The remainder of our hero's eventful career must be briefly
summarised. In 1851 he made a flight to England to see the Great
Exhibition. Here he renewed his acquaintance with many old friends,
among them the Duchess of Somerset, who told him that she had known
his father well twenty-five years before. The prince, who has been
described as a male Ninon de L'Enclos, was naturally delighted at
being mistaken for his own son. In 1852 the work at Branitz was so far
advanced that its lord invited Lucie to come and take up her abode at
the Schloss. But the poor lady's troubled life was nearing its close.
She had a paralytic stroke in the autumn of this year, and remained an
invalid until her death, which took place at Branitz in May, 1854.

In the loneliness that followed, the prince amused himself by keeping
up a lively correspondence with his feminine acquaintance, for whom,
even at seventy, he had not lost his fascinations. His celebrity as an
author and a traveller brought him many anonymous correspondents, and
he never wearied of reading and answering the sentimental effusions of
his unknown admirers. In 1863 he paid a visit incognito to Muskau, the
first since he had left it eighteen years before, though Branitz was
but a few leagues away. He was recognised at once, and great was the
joy in the little town over the return of its old ruler, who was
honoured with illuminations, the discharge of cannon, and torchlight
processions. The estate had passed into the hands of Prince Frederick
of the Netherlands, who had carried out all its former master's plans,
and added many improvements of his own. Pueckler generously admired the
splendour that he had had so large a share in creating, and then went
contentedly back to his _kleine Branitz_, his only regret being
that he could not live to see it, like Muskau, in the fulness of its
matured beauty. In 1866, when war broke out between Prussia and
Austria, this grand old man of eighty-one volunteered for active
service, and begged to be attached to the headquarters' staff. His
request was granted, and he went gallantly through the brief campaign,
but was bitterly disappointed because he was not able to be present at
the battle of Koniggraetz, owing to the indisposition of the king, upon
whom he was in attendance.

In 1870, when France declared war against Prussia, he again
volunteered, and was deeply mortified when the king declined his
services on account of his advanced age. For the first time he seems
to have realised that he was old, and it is probable that the
disappointment preyed upon his spirits, for his strength rapidly
declined, his memory failed, and on February 4,1871, after a brief
illness, he sank peacefully to rest. He was buried in a tomb that he
had built for himself many years before, a pyramid sixty feet high,
which stood upon an acre of ground in the centre of an artificial
lake. The two inscriptions that the prince chose for his sepulchre
illustrate, appropriately enough, the sharply contrasting qualities of
his strange individuality--his romantic sentimentality, and his
callous cynicism. The first inscription was a line from the Koran:

   'Graves are the mountain summits of a far-off, fairer world.'

The second, chosen presumably for the sake of the paradox, was the
French apothegm:

      'Allons
       Chez
   Pluto plutot plus tard.'




WILLIAM AND MARY HOWITT


PART I


[Illustration: Mary Howitt From a portrait by Margaret Gillies]

The names of William and Mary Howitt are inextricably associated with
the England of the early nineteenth century, with the re-discovery of
the beauty and interest of their native land, with the renaissance of
the national passion for country pleasures and country pursuits, and
with the slow, painful struggle for a wider freedom, a truer humanity,
a fuller, more gracious life. The Howitts had no genius, nor were they
pioneers, but, where the unfamiliar was concerned, they were
open-minded and receptive to a degree that is unfortunately rare in
persons of their perfect uprightness and strong natural piety. If they
flashed no new radiance upon the world, they were always among the
first to kindle their little torches at the new lamps; and they did
good service in handing back the light to those who, but for them,
would have had sat in the shadow, and flung stones at the
incomprehensible illuminations.

Of the two minds, Mary's was the finer and the more original. It was
one of those everyday miracles--the miracles that do happen--that in
spite of the severity, the narrowness, the repression of her early
training, she should have forced her way through the shell of rigid
sectarianism, repudiated her heritage of drab denials, and opened both
heart and mind to the new poetry, the new art, and the new knowledge.
In her husband she found a kindred spirit, and during the more than
fifty years of their pilgrimage together their eyes were ever turned
towards the same goal. Though not equally gifted, they were equally
disinterested, equally enlightened, and equally anxious for the
advancement of humanity. They took themselves and their vocation
seriously, and produced an immense quantity of careful, conscientious
work, the work of honest craftsmen rather than artists, with the
quality of a finished piece of cabinet-making, or a strip of fine
embroidery.

Mary Howitt was the daughter of Samuel Botham, a land-surveyor at
Uttoxeter. His father, the descendant of a long line of Staffordshire
yeomen, Quakers by persuasion, loved a roaming life, and having
married a maltster's widow with a talent for business management, was
left free to indulge his own propensities. He seems to have had a
talent for medical science of an empirical kind, for he dabbled in
magnetism and electricity, and wandered about the country collecting
herbs for headache--snuffs, and healing ointments. Samuel, as soon as
he had served his apprenticeship, found plenty of employment in the
neighbourhood, the country gentlemen, who had taken alarm at the
revolutionary ideas newly introduced from France, being anxious to
have their acres measured, and their boundaries accurately defined.
While at work upon Lord Talbot's Welsh estates in 1795, he became
attracted by a 'convinced' Friend, named Ann Wood. The interesting
discovery that both had a passion for nuts, together with the gentle
match-making of a Quaker patriarch, led to an engagement, and the
couple were married in December, 1796.

Ann Wood was the granddaughter of William Wood, whose contract for
supplying Ireland with copper coin (obtained by bribing the Duchess of
Kendal) was turned into a national grievance by Swift, and led to the
publication of the _Drapier Letters_. Although Wood's half-pence
were admitted to be excellent coin, and Ireland was short of copper,
the feeling against their circulation was so intense, that Ministers
were obliged to withdraw the patent, Wood being compensated for his
losses with a grant of L3000 a year for a term of years, and 'places'
for some of his fifteen children. Ann's father, Charles, when very
young, was appointed assay-master to Jamaica. After his return to
England in middle life he married a lively widow, went into business
as an iron-master near Merthyr Tydvil, and distinguished himself by
introducing platinum into Europe, having first met with the semi-metal
in Jamaica, whither it had been brought from Carthagena in New Spain.
After his death, Ann, the only serious member of a 'worldly' family,
found it impossible to remain in the frivolous atmosphere of her home,
and determined, in modern fashion, to 'live her own life.' After
spending some years as governess or companion in various families, she
became converted to Quaker doctrines, and was received into the
Society of Friends.

Samuel Botham took his bride to live in the paternal home at
Uttoxeter, where the preparation of the old quack doctor's herbal
medicines caused her a great deal of discomfort. In the course of the
next three years two daughters were born to the couple; Anna in 1797,
and Mary on March 12, 1799. At the time of Mary's birth her parents
were passing through a period of pecuniary distress, owing to a
disastrous speculation; but with the opening of the new century a
piece of great good fortune befell Samuel Botham. He was one of the
two surveyors chosen to enclose and divide the Chase of Needwood in
the county of Stafford. In the early years of the nineteenth century
there was, unfortunately for England, a mania for enclosing commons,
and felling ancient forests. Needwood, which extended for many miles,
contained great numbers of magnificent old oaks, limes, and hollies,
and no less than twenty thousand head of deer. In after years, Mary
Howitt often regretted that her family should have had a hand in the
destruction of so vast an extent of solitude and beauty, in a country
that was already thickly populated and trimly cultivated. Still, for
the nine years that the work of 'disafforesting' lasted, the two
little girls got a great deal of enjoyment out of the ruined Chase,
spending long summer days in its grassy glades, while their father
parcelled out the land and marked trees for the axe.

In her _Autobiography_ [Footnote: Edited by her daughter
Margaret, and published by Messrs. Isbister in 1889.] Mary declares
that it is impossible for her to give an adequate idea of the
stillness and isolation of her childish life. So intense was the
silence of the Quaker household, that, at four years old, Anna had to
be sent to a dame's school in order that she might learn to talk;
while even after both children had attained the use of speech, their
ignorance of the right names for the most ordinary feelings and
actions obliged them to coin words of their own. 'My childhood was
happy in many respects,' she writes. 'It was so, as far as physical
health, the enjoyment of a beautiful country, and the companionship of
a dearly loved sister could make it--but oh, there was such a cloud
over all from the extreme severity of a so-called religious education,
it almost made cowards and hypocrites of us, and made us feel that, if
this were religion, it was a thing to be feared and hated.' The family
reading consisted chiefly of the writings of Madame Guyon, Thomas a
Kempis, and St. Francis de Sales, while for light literature there
were Telemachus, Fox's _Book of Martyrs_, and a work on the
_Persecution of the Friends_. But it is impossible for even the
most pious of Quakers to guard against all the stratagems by which the
spirit of evil--or human nature--contrives to gain an entrance into a
godly household. In the case of the Botham children an early knowledge
of good and evil was learnt from an apparently respectable nurse, who
made her little charges acquainted with most of the scandals of the
neighbourhood, accustomed their infant ears to oaths, and--most
terrible of all--taught them to play whist, she herself taking dummy,
and transforming the nursery tea-tray into a card-table. In that
silent household it was easy to keep a secret, and though the little
girls often trembled at their nurse's language, they never betrayed
her confidence.

In 1806 another daughter, Emma, was born to the Bothams, and in 1808 a
son, Charles. In the midst of their joy and amazement at the news that
they had a brother, the little girls asked each other anxiously: 'Will
our parents like it?' Only a short time before a stranger had inquired
if they had any brothers, and they had replied in all seriousness: 'Oh
no, our parents do not approve of boys.' Now, much to their relief,
they found that their father and mother highly approved of their own
boy, who became the spoilt darling of the austere household. A new
nurse was engaged for the son and heir, a lady of many love-affairs,
who made Mary her confidante, and induced the child, then nine years
old, to write an imaginary love-letter. The unlucky letter was laid
between the pages of the worthy Madame Guyon, and there discovered by
Mr. Botham. Not much was said on the subject of the document, which
seems to have been considered too awful to bear discussion; but the
children were removed from the influence of the nurse, and allowed to
attend a day-school in the neighbourhood, though only on condition
that they sat apart from the other children in order to avoid
contamination with possible worldlings.

In 1809 the two elder sisters were sent to a Quaker school at Croydon,
where they found themselves the youngest, the most provincial, and the
worst dressed of the little community. Even in advanced old age, Mary
had a keen memory for the costumes of her childhood, and the
mortification that these had caused her. On their arrival at school
the little girls were attired in brown pelisses, cut plain and
straight, without plait or fold, and hooked down the front to obviate
the necessity for buttons, which, being in the nature of trimmings,
were regarded as an indulgence of the lust of the eye. On their heads
they wore little drab beaver bonnets, also destitute of trimmings, and
so plain in shape that even the Quaker hatter had to order special
blocks for their manufacture. The other girls were busy over various
kinds of fashionable fancy-work, but the little Bothams were expected,
in their leisure moments, to make half-a-dozen linen shirts for their
father, button-holes and all. They had never learnt to net, to weave
coloured paper into baskets, to plait split straw into patterns, nor
any of the other amateur handicrafts of the day. But they were clever
with their fingers, and could copy almost anything that they had seen
done. 'We could buckle flax or spin a rope,' writes Mary. 'We could
drive a nail, put in a screw or draw it out. We knew the use of a
glue-pot, and how to paper a room. We soon furnished ourselves with
coloured paper for plaiting, and straw to split and weave into net;
and I shall never forget my admiration of a pattern of diamonds woven
with strips of gold paper on a black ground. It was my first attempt
at artistic handiwork.'

After a few months at Croydon the girls were recalled to Uttoxeter on
account of their mother's illness; and as soon as she recovered they
were despatched to another Friends' school at Sheffield. In 1812, when
Mary was only thirteen and Anna fifteen, their education was supposed
to be completed, and they returned home for good. But Mr. Botham was
dissatisfied with his daughters' attainments, and engaged the master
of the boys' school to teach them Latin, mathematics, and the use of
the globes. The death of this instructor obliged them thenceforward to
rely on a system of self-education. 'We retained and perfected our
rudimentary knowledge,' Mary writes, 'by instructing others. Our
father fitted up a school-room for us in the stable-loft, where, twice
a week, we were allowed to teach poor children. In this room, also, we
instructed our dear little brother and sister. Our father, in his
beautiful handwriting, used to set them copies, texts of Scripture,
such as he no doubt had found of a consolatory nature. On one
occasion, however, I set the copies, and well remember the tribulation
I experienced in consequence. I always warred in my mind against the
enforced gloom of our home, and having for my private reading at that
time Young's _Night Thoughts_, came upon what seemed to me the
very spirit of true religion, a cheerful heart gathering up the
joyfulness of surrounding nature; on which the poet says: "'Tis
impious in a good man to be sad." How I rejoiced in this!--and
thinking it a great fact which ought to be noised abroad, wrote it
down in my best hand as a copy. It fell under our father's eye, and
sorely grieved he was at such a sentiment, and extremely angry with me
as its promulgator.'

The sisters can never have found the time hang heavy on their hands,
for in addition to their educational duties, their mother required
them to be expert in all household matters; while, in their scanty
hours of leisure, they attempted, in the face of every kind of
discouragement, to satisfy their strong natural craving for beauty and
knowledge. 'We studied poetry, botany, and flower-painting,' Mary
writes. 'These pursuits were almost out of the pale of permitted
Quaker pleasures, but we pursued them with a perfect passion, doing in
secret that which we dared not do openly, such as reading Shakespeare,
the elder novelists, and translations of the classics. We studied
French and chemistry, and enabled ourselves to read Latin, storing our
minds with a whole mass of heterogeneous knowledge. This was good as
far as it went, but I now deplore the secrecy, the subterfuge, and the
fear under which this ill-digested, ill-arranged knowledge was
obtained.'

The young Quakeresses picked up ideas and models for their artistic
handicraft from the most unlikely sources. A shop-window, full of
dusty plaster medallions for mantelpiece decorations, gave them their
first notions of classic design. The black Wedgwood ware was to be
seen in nearly every house in Uttoxeter, while a few of the more
prosperous inhabitants possessed vases and jugs in the pale blue ware,
ornamented with graceful figures. These precious specimens the Botham
sisters used to borrow, and contrived to reproduce the figures by
means of moulds made of paper pulp. They also etched flowers and
landscapes on panes of glass, and manufactured 'transparencies' out of
different thicknesses of cap-paper. 'I feel a sort of tender pity for
Anna and myself,' wrote Mary long afterwards, 'when I remember how we
were always seeking and struggling after the beautiful, and after
artistic production, though we knew nothing of art. I am thankful that
we made no alms-baskets, or hideous abortions of that kind. What we
did was from the innate yearnings of our souls for perfection in form
and colour; and our accomplished work, though crude and poor, was the
genuine outcome of our own individuality.'

It was one of the heaviest crosses of Mary's girlish days that she and
Anna were not permitted to exercise their clever fingers, and indulge
their taste for the beautiful, in their own dress. But they found a
faint vicarious pleasure in making pretty summer gowns, and
embroidering elaborate muslin collars for a girl-friend who was
allowed to wear fashionable clothes, and even to go to balls. Even
their ultra-plain costumes, however, could not disguise the fact that
Anna and Mary Botham were comely damsels, and they had several suitors
among the young men-Friends of Uttoxeter. But the sisters held a low
opinion of the mental endowments of the average Quaker, an opinion
that was only shaken by a report of the marvellous attainments of
young William Howitt of Heanor, who was said to be not only a scholar,
but a born genius. William's mother, Phoebe, herself a noted amateur
healer, was an old friend of Mary's grandfather, the herbal doctor,
but the young people had never met. However, in the autumn of 1818,
William paid a visit to some relations at Uttoxeter, and there made
the acquaintance of the Botham girls, who discovered that this young
man-Friend shared nearly all their interests, and was full of sympathy
with their studies and pursuits.

Before the end of the year Mary Botham was engaged to William Howitt,
he being then six-and-twenty and she nineteen. 'The tastes of my
future husband and my own were strongly similar,' she observes, 'so
also was our mental culture; but he was in every direction so far in
advance of me as to become my teacher and guide. Knowledge in the
broadest sense was the aim of our intellectual efforts; poetry and
nature were the paths that led to it. Of ballad poetry I was already
enamoured, William made me acquainted with the realistic life-pictures
of Crabbe; the bits of nature and poetry in the vignettes of Bewick;
with the earliest works of Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Shelley, and the
first marvellous prose productions of the author of _Waverley_.'

After an engagement lasting a little more than two years, William and
Mary were married on April 16, 1821, the bride wearing her first silk
gown--a pretty dove-colour--and a white silk shawl, finery which
filled her soul with rapture. The couple spent the honeymoon in the
bridegroom's native Derbyshire, visiting every spot of beauty or haunt
of old tradition in that country of the romantic and the picturesque.
Incorporated in his wife's _Autobiography _is William Howitt's
narrative of his parentage and youthful days, which is supplemented by
his _Boys' Country Book_, the true story of his early adventures
and experiences. The Howitts, he tells us, were descended from a
family named Hewitt, the younger branch of which obtained Wansley
Hall, near Nottingham, through marriage with an heiress, and changed
the spelling of their name. His ancestors had been, for generations, a
rollicking set, all wofully lacking in prudence and sobriety.
About the end of the seventeenth century, one Thomas Howitt,
great-great-grandfather of William, married Catherine, heiress of the
Charltons of Chilwell. But Thomas so disgusted his father-in-law by
his drunken habits that Mr. Charlton disinherited his daughter, who
loyally refused to leave her husband, and left his property to a
stranger who chanced to bear his name. After this misfortune the
Howitts descended somewhat in the social scale, and, having no more
substance to waste, reformed their ways and forsook all riotous
living. William's father, who held a post as manager of a Derbyshire
colliery, married a Quaker lady, Phoebe Tantum of the Fall, Heanor,
and was himself received into the Society of Friends in 1783.

William received a good plain education at a Quaker school at
Ackworth, and grew up a genuine country lad, scouring the lanes on his
famous grey pony, Peter Scroggins, the acknowledged leader of the
village lads in bird-nesting and rat-hunting expeditions, and taking
his full share of the work on his father's little farm. Long
afterwards he used to say that every scene in and about Heanor was
photographed with absolute distinctness on his brain, and he loved to
recall the long days that he had spent in following the plough,
chopping turnips for the cattle, tramping over the snow-covered fields
after red-wing and fieldfare, collecting acorns for the swine, or
hunting through the barns for eggs. The Howitt family was much less
strict than that of the Bothams, for in the winter evenings the boys
were allowed to play draughts and dominoes, while at Christmas there
were games of forfeits, blind-man's buff, and fishing for the ring in
the great posset-pot.

On leaving school at fifteen, William amused himself for a couple of
years on the farm, though, curiously enough, he never thought of
becoming a farmer in good earnest; indeed, at this time he seems to
have had no distinct bias towards any profession. Mr. Howitt had
somehow become imbued with Rousseau's doctrine that every boy,
whatever his position in life, should learn a mechanical handicraft,
in order that, if all else failed, he might be able to earn his own
living by the labour of his hands. Having decided that William should
learn carpentering, the boy was apprenticed for four years to a
carpenter and builder at Mansfield, on the outskirts of Sherwood
Forest. The four precious years were practically thrown away, except
for the enjoyment obtained from long solitary rambles amid the
picturesque associations of the Forest, and the knowledge of natural
history gained from close observation of the wild life of that
romantic district.

It was not until his twenty-first birthday that William's indentures
were out, and as he was still unable to make up his mind about a
profession--it must be remembered that the law, the church, the army
and navy were all closed to a Quaker--he spent the next seven years at
home, angling in the streams like his favourite hero, Isaac Walton,
and striving, by dint of hard study, to make up the many deficiencies
in his education. He taught himself Latin, French, and Italian,
besides working at botany, chemistry, and the dispensing of medicines.
It was during these seven years of uncertainty and experiment that
William read Washington Irving's _Sketches of Geoffrey Crayon_,
which produced a strong impression on his mind. With the inspiration
of this book hot upon him, he made a tour on foot through the Peak
country, and afterwards wrote an account of his adventures in what he
fondly believed to be the style of Geoffrey Crayon. The paper was
printed in a local journal under the title of _A Pedestrian
Pilgrimage through the Peak_, by Wilfrid Wendle. This was not
William Howitt's first literary essay, some stanzas of his on Spring,
written when he was only thirteen, having been printed in the
_Monthly Magazine_, with his name and age attached.

With the prospect of marriage it was thought desirable that William
should have some regular calling. Without, so far as appears, passing
any examinations or obtaining any certificates, he bought the business
of a chemist and druggist in Hanley, and thither, though with no
intention of settling permanently in the Potteries, he took his bride
as soon as the honeymoon was over. Only seven months were spent at
Hanley, and in December, 1821, the couple were preparing to move to
Nottingham, where William had bought the good-will of another
chemist's business. But before settling down in their new home, the
Howitts undertook a long pedestrian tour through Scotland and the
north of England, in the course of which they explored the Rob Roy
country, rambled through Fife, made acquaintance with the beauties of
Edinburgh, looked in upon Robert Owen's model factories at New Lanark,
got a glimpse of Walter Scott at Melrose, were mistaken for a runaway
couple at Gretna Green, gazed reverently on Rydal Mount, and tramped
in all no less than five hundred miles. An account of the tour was
contributed to a Staffordshire paper under the title of _A Scottish
Ramble in the Spring of 1822_, by Wilfrid and Wilfreda Wendle.

It was not until August, 1822, that the pair established themselves in
a little house at Nottingham. Of the chemist's business we hear
practically nothing in Mary's narrative, but a great deal about the
literary enterprises in which husband and wife collaborated. They
began by collecting the poems, of which each had a large number ready
written, and, in fear and trembling, prepared to submit them to the
verdict of critics and public. 'It seems strange to me,' wrote Mary,
when she informed her sister of this modest venture, 'and I cannot
reconcile myself to the thought of seeing my own name staring me in
the face in every bookseller's window, or being pointed at and peeped
after as a writer of verses.' In April, 1823, _The Forest Minstrel
and other Poems_, by William and Mary Howitt, made its appearance
in a not particularly appreciative world. The verses were chiefly
descriptive of country sights and sounds, and had been produced, as
stated in the Preface, 'not for the sake of writing, but for the
indulgence of our own overflowing feelings.' The little book created
no sensation, but it was kindly noticed, and seems to have attracted a
few quiet readers who, like the writers, were lovers of nature and
simplicity.

During these early years at Nottingham the Howitts kept up, as far as
their opportunities allowed, with the thought and literature of their
day, and never relaxed their anxious efforts after 'mental
improvement.' William's brother, Richard, himself a budding poet, was
at this time an inmate of the little household, which was increased in
1824 by the birth of a daughter, Anna Mary. Although the couple still
remained in the Quaker fold, they were gradually discarding the
peculiar dress and speech of the 'plain' Friends. They were evidently
regarded as terribly 'advanced' young people in their own circle, and
shocked many of their old acquaintances by the catholicity of their
views, by their admiration of Byron and Shelley, and by the liberal
tone of their own productions. Like most of the lesser writers of that
day, they found their way into the popular Keepsakes and Annuals,
which Mary accurately describes as 'a chaffy, frivolous, and
unsatisfactory style of publication, that only serves to keep a young
author in the mind of the public, and to bring in a little cash.' In
1826 Mrs. Howitt was preparing for the press a new volume of poems by
herself and her husband, _The Desolation of Eyam_, and in a
letter to her sister, now transformed into Mrs. Daniel Wilson, she
describes her sensations while awaiting the ordeal of critical
judgment, and expresses her not very flattering opinion of the
contemporary reviewer.

'Nobody that has not published,' she observes, 'can tell the almost
painful excitement which the first opinions occasion. Really, for some
days I was quite nervous. William boasted of possessing his mind in
wise passivity, and truly his imperturbable patience was quite an
annoyance; I therefore got Rogers's beautiful poem on Italy to read,
and so diverted my thoughts. Everything in the literary world is done
by favour and connections. It is a miracle to me how our former
volume, when we were quite unknown, got favourably noticed. In many
cases a book is reviewed which has never been read, or even seen
externally.'

By this time the young authors who, to use Mary's own phrase, hungered
and thirsted after acquaintances who were highly gifted in mind or
profound in knowledge, had acquired one or two literary friends and
correspondents, among them Mrs. Hemans, Bernard Barton, the Quaker
poet, and the Alaric Watts's of Keepsake fame. An occasional notice of
the Howitts and their little household may be found in contemporary
works by forgotten writers. For example, Sir Richard Phillips, in the
section devoted to Nottingham of his quaintly-worded _Personal Tour
through the United Kingdom _(1828), observes: 'Of Messrs. Howitt,
husband and wife, conjugal in love and poetry, it would be vain for me
to speak. Their tasteful productions belong to the nation as well as
to Nottingham. As a man of taste Mr. Howitt married a lady of taste;
and with rare amiability they have jointly cultivated the Muses, and
produced some volumes of poetry, consisting of pieces under their
separate names. The circumstance afforded a topic for ridicule to some
of those anonymous critics who abuse the press and disgrace
literature; but no one ventured to assail their productions.' Spencer
Hall, a fellow-townsman, became acquainted with the Howitts in 1829,
and in his _Reminiscences_ describes William as a bright, neat,
quick, dapper man of medium height, with a light complexion, blue
eyes, and brisk, cheery speech. Mary, he tells us; was always neatly
dressed, but with nothing prim or sectarian in her style. 'Her
expression was frank and free, yet very modest, and she was blessed
with an affectionate, sociable spirit.'

A presentation copy of _The Desolation of Eyam_ was sent to the
Howitts' favourite poet, Wordsworth, who, in acknowledging their
'elegant volume,' declared that, though he had only had time to turn
over the leaves, he had found several poems which had already afforded
him no small gratification. The harmless little book was denounced by
the _Eclectic Review_ as 'anti-Quakerish, atheistical, and
licentious in style and sentiment, 'but the authors were consoled by a
charming little notice of their contributions to the Annuals in the
_Noctes Ambrosianae_ for November, 1828. 'Who are these three
brothers and sisters, the Howitts, sir?' asks the Shepherd of
Christopher North, in the course of a discussion of the Christmas
gift-books, 'whose names I see in the adverteesements?'

_North_. I don't know, James. It runs in my head that they are
Quakers. Richard and William seem amiable and ingenious men, and
Sister Mary writes beautifully.

_Shepherd_. What do you mean by beautifully? That's vague.

_North_. Her language is chaste and simple, her feelings tender
and pure, and her observation of nature accurate and intense. Her
'Sketches from Natural History' in the _Christmas Box_ have much
of the moral--nay, rather the religious spirit--that permeates all
Wordsworth's smaller poems, however light and slight the subject, and
show that Mary Howitt is not only well-read in the book of Bewick, but
also in the book from which Bewick has borrowed all--glorious
plagiarist--and every other inspired zoologist--

_Shepherd_. The Book o' Natur'.'

The great event of 1829 for the Howitts was a visit to London, where
they were the guests of Alaric and Zillah Watts, with whom they had
long maintained a paper friendship. 'What wilt thou say, dear Anna,'
writes Mary in December, 'when I tell thee that William and I set out
for London the day after to-morrow. I half dread it. I shall wish
twenty times for our quiet fireside, where day by day we read and talk
by ourselves, and nobody looks in upon us. I keep reasoning with
myself that the people we shall see in London are but men and women,
and perhaps, after all, no better than ourselves. If we could but
divest our minds of _self_, as our dear father used to say we
should do, it would be better and more comfortable for us. Yet it is
one of the faults peculiar to us Bothams that, with all the desire
there was to make us regardless of self, we never had confidence and
proper self-respect instilled into us, and the want of this gives us a
depressing feeling, though I hope it is less seen by others than by
ourselves.... We do not intend to stay more than a week, and thou may
believe we shall have enough to do. We have to make special calls on
the Carter Halls, Dr. Bowring, and the Pringles, and are to be
introduced to their ramifications of acquaintance. Allan Cunningham,
L. E. L., and Thomas Roscoe we are sure to see.'

In Miss Landon's now forgotten novel, _Romance and Reality_,
there is a little sketch of Mary Howitt as she appeared at a literary
_soiree_, during her brief visit to London. The heroine, Miss
Arundel, is being initiated into the mysteries of the writing world by
her friend, Mrs. Sullivan, when her attention is arrested by the sight
of 'a female in a Quaker's dress--the quiet, dark silk dress--the hair
simply parted on the forehead--the small, close cap--the placid,
subdued expression of the face, were all in strong contrast to the
crimsons, yellows, and blues around. The general character of the
large, soft eyes seemed sweetness; but they were now lighted up with
an expression of intelligent observation--that clear, animated, and
comprehensive glance which shows it analyses what it observes. You
looked at her with something of the sensation with which, while
travelling along a dusty road, the eye fixes on some green field,
where the hour flings its sunshine and the tree its shadow, as if its
pure fresh beauty was a thing apart from the soil and tumult of the
highway. "You see," said Mrs. Sullivan, "one who, in a brief
interview, gave me more the idea of a poet than most of our modern
votaries of the lute.... She is as creative in her imaginary poems as
she is touching and true in her simpler ones."'

Though there were still giants upon the earth in those far-off days,
the general standard of literary taste was by no means exalted, a fact
which Mary Howitt could hardly be expected to realise. She seems to
have taken the praises lavished on her simple verses over-seriously,
and to have imagined herself in very truth a poet. She was more
clear-sighted where the work of her fellow-scribes was concerned, and
in a letter written about this time, she descants upon the dearth of
good literature in a somewhat disillusioned vein. After expressing her
desire that some mighty spirit would rise up and give an impulse to
poetry, she continues: 'I am tired of Sir Walter Scott and his
imitators, and I am sickened of Mrs. Hemans's luscious poetry, and all
her tribe of copyists. The libraries set in array one school against
another, and hurry out the trashy volumes before the ink of the
manuscript is fairly dry. Dost thou remember the days when Byron's
poems first came out, now one and then another, at sufficient
intervals to allow of digesting them? And dost thou remember our first
reading of _Lalla Rookh_? It was on a washing-day. We read and
clapped our clear-starching, read and clapped, and read again, and all
the time our souls were not on this earth.'

There was one book then in course of preparation which Mary thought
worthy to have been read, even in those literary clear-starching days.
'Thou hast no idea,' she assures her sister, 'how very interesting
William's work, now called _A Book of the Seasons_, has become.
It contains original sketches on every month, with every
characteristic of the season, and a garden department which will fill
thy heart brimful of all garden delights, greenness, and boweriness.
Mountain scenery and lake scenery, meadows and woods, hamlets, farms,
halls, storm and sunshine--all are in this most delicious book,
grouped into a most harmonious whole.' Unfortunately, publishers were
hard to convince of the merits of the new work, the first of William
Howitt's rural series, and it was declined by four houses in turn. The
author at last suggested that a stone should be tied to the unlucky
manuscript, and that it should be flung over London Bridge; but his
wife was not so easily disheartened. She was certain that the book was
a worthy book, and only needed to be made a little more 'personable'
to find favour in the eyes of a publisher. Accordingly, blotted sheets
were hastily re-copied, new articles introduced, and passages of
dubious interest omitted, husband and wife working together at this
remodelling until their fingers ached and their eyes were as dim as an
owl's in sunshine. Their labours were rewarded by the acceptance of
the work by Bentley and Colburn, and its triumphant success with both
critics and public, seven editions being called for in the first few
months of its career.

'Prig it and pocket it,' says Christopher North, alluding to the
_Book of the Seasons_ in the _Noctes_ for April, 1831. ''Tis
a jewel.'

'Is Nottingham far intil England, sir?' asks the simple Shepherd, to
whom the above advice is given. 'For I would really like to pay the
Hooits a visit this simmer. Thae Quakers are what we micht scarcely
opine frae first principles, a maist poetical Christian seck.... The
twa married Hooits I love just excessively, sir. What they write canna
fail o' being poetry, even the most middlin' o't, for it's aye wi'
them the ebullition o' their ain feeling and their ain fancy, and
whenever that's the case, a bonny word or twa will drap itself intil
ilka stanzy, and a sweet stanzy or twa intil ilka pome, and sae they
touch, and sae they win a body's heart.'

The year 1831 was rendered memorable to the Howitts, not only by their
first literary success, but also by an unexpected visit from their
poetical idol, Mr. Wordsworth. The poet, his wife and daughter, were
on their way home from London when Mrs. Wordsworth was suddenly taken
ill, and was unable to proceed farther than Nottingham. Her husband,
in great perplexity, came to ask advice of the Howitts, who insisted
that the invalid should be removed to their house, where she remained
for ten days before she was able to continue her journey. Wordsworth
himself was only able to stay one night, but in that short time he
made a very favourable impression upon his host and hostess.
'He is worthy of being the author of _The Excursion_, _Ruth_, and
those sweet poems so full of human sympathy,' writes Mary. 'He is a
kind man, full of strong feeling and sound judgment. My greatest
delight was that he seemed so pleased with William's conversation.
They seemed quite in their element, pouring out their eloquent
sentiments on the future prospects of society, and on all subjects
connected with poetry and the interests of man. Nor are we less
pleased with Mrs. Wordsworth and her lovely daughter, Dora. They are
the most grateful people; everything that we do for them is right, and
the very best it can be.'

During the next two or three years Mary produced a volume of dramatic
sketches, called _The Seven Temptations_, which she always
regarded as her best and most original work, but which was damned by
the critics and neglected by the public; a little book of natural
history for children; and a novel in three volumes, called _Wood
Leighton_, which seems to have had some success. _The Seven
Temptations_, it must be owned, is a rather lugubrious production,
probably inspired by Joanna Baillie's _Plays on the Passions_.
The scene of _Wood Leighton_ is laid at Uttoxeter, and the book
is not so much a connected tale as a series of sketches descriptive of
scenes and characters in and about the author's early home. It is
evident that Mrs. Botham and Sister Anna looked somewhat
disapprovingly upon so much literary work for the mistress of a
household, since we find Mary writing in eager defence of her chosen
calling.

'I want to make thee, and more particularly dear mother, see,' she
explains, 'that I am not out of my line of duty in devoting myself so
much to literary occupation. Just lately things were sadly against us.
Dear William could not sleep at night, and the days were dark and
gloomy. Altogether, I was at my wits' end. I turned over in my mind
what I could do next, for till William's _Rural Life_ was
finished we had nothing available. Then I bethought myself of all
those little verses and prose tales that for years I had written for
the juvenile Annuals. It seemed probable I might turn them to some
account. In about a week I had nearly all the poetry copied; and then
who should come to Nottingham but John Darton [a Quaker publisher]. He
fell into the idea immediately, took what I had copied up to London
with him, and I am to have a hundred and fifty guineas for them. Have
I not reason to feel that in thus writing I was fulfilling a duty?'

In 1833 William Hewitt's _History of Priestcraft_ appeared, a
work which was publicly denounced at the Friends' yearly meeting, all
good Quakers being cautioned not to read it. William hitherto had
lived in great retirement at Nottingham, but he was now claimed by the
Radical and Nonconformist members of the community as their spokesman
and champion. In January, 1834, he and Joseph Gilbert (husband of Ann
Gilbert of _Original Poems_ fame) were deputed to present to the
Prime Minister, Lord Grey, a petition from Nottingham for the
disestablishment of the Church of England. The Premier regretted that
he could not give his support to such a sweeping measure, which would
embarrass the Ministry, alarm both Houses of Parliament, and startle
the nation. He declared his intention of standing by the Church to the
best of his ability, believing it to be the sacred duty of Government
to maintain an establishment of religion. To which sturdy William
Howitt replied that to establish one sect in preference to another was
to establish a party and not a religion.

Civic duties, together with the excitements of local politics, proved
a sad hindrance to literary work, and in 1836 the Howitts, who had
long been yearning for a wider intellectual sphere, decided to give up
the chemist's business, and settle in the neighbourhood of London.
Their friends, the Alaric Watts's, who were living at Thames Ditton,
found them a pretty little house at Esher, where they would be able to
enjoy the woods and heaths of rural Surrey, and yet be within easy
reach of publishers and editors in town. Before settling down in their
new home, the Howitts made a three months' tour in the north, with a
view to gathering materials for William's book on _Rural
England_. They explored the Yorkshire dales, stayed with the
Wordsworths at Rydal, and made a pilgrimage to the haunts of their
favourite, Thomas Bewick, in Northumberland. Crossing the Border they
paid a delightful visit to Edinburgh, where they were made much of by
the three literary cliques of the city, the Blackwood and Wilson set,
the Tait set, and the Chambers set.

'Immediately after our arrival,' relates Mary, 'a public dinner was
given to Campbell the poet, at which the committee requested my
husband's attendance, and that he would take a share in the
proceedings of the evening by proposing as a toast, "Wordsworth,
Southey, and Moore." This was our first introduction to Professor
Wilson (Christopher North) and his family. I sat in the gallery with
Mrs. Wilson and her daughters, one of whom was engaged to Professor
Ferrier. We could not but remark the wonderful difference, not only in
the outer man, but in the whole character of mind and manner, between
Professor Wilson and Campbell--the one so hearty, outspoken, and
joyous, the other so petty and trivial.'

Robert Chambers constituted himself the Hewitts' cicerone in
Edinburgh, showing them every place of interest, and presenting them
to every person of note, including Mrs. Maclehose (the Clarinda of
Burns), and William Miller, the Quaker artist and engraver, as intense
a nature-worshipper as themselves. From Edinburgh they went to
Glasgow, where they took ship for the Western Isles. Their adventures
at Staffa and Iona, their voyage up the Caledonian Canal, and the
remainder of their experiences on this tour, were afterwards described
by William Howitt in his _Visits to Remarkable Places_.




PART II


In September, 1836, the Howitts took possession of their Surrey home,
West End Cottage, an old-fashioned dwelling, with a large garden, an
orchard, a meadow by the river Mole, and the right of boating and
fishing to the extent of seven miles. The new life opened with good
prospects of literary and journalistic employment, William Howitt's
political writings having already attracted attention from several
persons of power and influence in the newspaper world. On December 3
of this year, Mary wrote to inform her sister that, 'In consequence of
an article that William wrote on Dymond's _Christian Morality_,
Joseph Hume, the member for Middlesex, wrote to him, and has opened a
most promising connection for him with a new Radical newspaper, _The
Constitutional_. O'Connell seems determined to make him the editor
of the _Dublin Review_, and wrote him a most kind letter, which
has naturally promoted his interest with the party. I cannot but see
the hand of Providence in our leaving Nottingham. All has turned out
admirably.'

Unfortunately for these sanguine anticipations, the newspaper
connections on which the Howitts depended for a livelihood, now that
the despised chemist's business had been given up, proved but hollow
supports. O'Connell had overlooked the trifling fact that a Quaker
editor was hardly fitted to conduct a journal that was emphatically
and polemically Catholic; and though he considered that William Howitt
was admirably adapted to deal with literary and political topics, he
was obliged to withdraw his offer of the editorship. A more crushing
disappointment arose out of the engagement on _The Constitutional_.
Mr. Howitt, according to his wife, did more for the paper than any
other member of the staff. 'He worked and wrote like any slave,'
she tells her sister. 'In the end, after a series of the most
harassing and vexatious conduct on the part of the newspaper
company, he was swindled out of every farthing. Oh, it was a most
mortifying and humiliating thing to see men professing liberal and
honest principles act so badly. A month ago, when in the very depths
of discouragement and low spirits, I set about a little volume for
Darton, to be called _Birds and Flowers_, and have pretty nearly
finished it. William, in the mean time, has finished his _Rural
Life_, and sold the first edition to Longman's.'

The manager of the unlucky paper was Major Carmichael Smith, who, when
matters grew desperate, sent for his step-son, Thackeray, then acting
as Paris correspondent for a London daily. 'Just as I was going out of
the office one day,' writes William, 'I met on the stairs a tall, thin
young man, in a dark blue coat, and with a nose that seemed to have
had a blow that had flattened the bridge. I turned back, and had some
conversation with him, being anxious to know how he proposed to carry
on a paper which was without any funds, and already deeply in debt. He
did not seem to know any more than I did. I thought to myself that his
step-father had not done him much service in taking him from a
profitable post for the vain business of endeavouring to buoy up a
desperate speculation. How much longer _The Constitutional_
struggled on, I know not. That was the first time I ever saw or heard
of William Makepeace Thackeray.'

The Howitts were somewhat consoled for their journalistic losses by
the triumphant success of _Rural Life in England_. The reading
public which, during the previous century, had swallowed mock
pastorals, made in Fleet Street, with perfect serenity, was now,
thanks to the slowly-working influence of Wordsworth and the other
Lake poets, prepared for a renaissance of nature and simplicity in
prose. Miss Mitford's exquisite work had given them a distaste for the
'jewelled turf,' the 'silver streams,' and 'smiling valleys' which
constituted the rustic stock-in-trade of the average novelist; and
they eagerly welcomed a book that treated with accuracy and
observation of the real country. William Howitt's straightforward,
undistinguished style was acceptable enough in an age when even men of
genius seem to have written fine prose without knowing it, and tripped
up not infrequently over the subtleties of English grammar. His lack
of imagination and humour was more than atoned for, in the uncritical
eyes of the 'thirties,' by the easy loquacity of his rural gossip, and
the varied information with which he crammed his pages. The Nature of
those days was a simple, transparent creature, with but small
resemblance to the lady of moods, mystery, and passion who is so
overworked in our modern literature. No one dreamt of going into
hysterics over the veining of a leaf, or penning a rhapsody on the
outline of a rain-cloud; nor could it yet be said that, 'if everybody
must needs blab of the favours that have been done him by roadside,
and river-brink, and woodland walk, as if to kiss and tell were no
longer treachery, it will soon be a positive refreshment to meet a man
who is as superbly indifferent to Nature as she is to him.' [Footnote:
Lowell]

The Howitts took great delight in the pleasant Surrey country, so
different from the dreary scenery around Nottingham, and Mary's
letters contain many descriptions of the woods and commons and shady
lanes through which the family made long expeditions in a little
carriage drawn by Peg, their venerable pony. Driving one day to Hook,
they met Charles Dickens, then best known as 'Boz,' in one of his long
tramps, with Harrison Ainsworth as his companion. When Dickens's next
work, _Master Humphrey's Clock_, appeared, the Howitts were
amused to see that their stout and wilful Peg had not escaped the
novelist's keen eye, but had been pressed into service for Mr.
Garland's chaise.

On another occasion, in July 1841, William, while driving with a
friend, was attacked by two handsome, dark-eyed girls, dressed in
gipsy costume, who ran one on each side of the carriage, begging that
the kind gentleman would give them sixpence, as they were poor
strangers who had taken nothing all day. Mr. Howitt, who had made a
special study of the gipsy tribe, perceived in an instant that these
were only sham Romanys. He paid no attention to their pleading, but
observed that he hoped they would enjoy their frolic, and only wished
that he were as rich as they. Subsequently, he discovered that the
mock-gipsies, who had been unable to coax a sixpence out of him, were
none other than the beautiful Sheridan sisters, the Duchess of
Somerset, and Mrs. Blackwood (afterwards Lady Dufferin), whose husband
had lately taken Bookham Lodge.

During the four years spent at Esher, Mary seems to have been too much
occupied with the cares of a young family to use her pen to much
purpose. She produced little, except a volume of _Hymns and Fireside
Verses_, but she frequently assisted her husband in his work.
William, industrious as ever, published, besides a large number of
newspaper articles, his _Boys' Country Book_, the best work of
the kind ever written, according to the _Quarterly Review_; and
his _History of Colonisation and Christianity_, in which he took
a rapid survey of the behaviour of the Christian nations of Europe to
the inhabitants of the countries they conquered in all parts of the
world. It was the reading of this book that led Mr. Joseph Pease to
establish the British India Society, which issued, in a separate form,
the portion of the work that related to India. Mr. Howitt next set to
work upon another topographical volume, his _Visits to Remarkable
Places_, in which he turned to good account the materials collected
in his pedestrian rambles about the country.

In 1840 the question of education for the elder children became
urgent, and the Howitts, who had heard much of the advantages of a
residence in Germany from their friends, Mrs. Hemans, Mrs. Jameson,
and Henry Chorley, decided to give up their cottage at Esher, and
spend two or three years at Heidelberg. Letters of introduction from
Mrs. Jameson gave them the _entree_ into German society, which
they found more to their taste than that of their native land. 'For
the sake of our children,' writes Mary, 'we sought German
acquaintances, we read German, we followed German customs. The life
seemed to me easier, the customs simpler and less expensive than in
England. There was not the same feverish thirst after wealth as with
us; there was more calm appreciation of nature, of music, of social
enjoyment.' In their home on the Neckar, the Howitts, most adaptable
of couples, found new pleasures and new amusements with each season of
the year. In the spring and summer they explored the surrounding
country, wandered through the deep valleys and woods, where the grass
was purple with bilberries, visited quaint, half-timbered homesteads,
standing in the midst of ancient orchards, or followed the
swift-flowing streams, on whose banks the peasant girls in their
picturesque costumes were washing and drying linen. In the autumn the
whole family turned out on the first day of the vintage, and worked
like their neighbours. 'It was like something Arcadian,' wrote Mary
when recalling the scene. 'The tubs and baskets piled up with enormous
clusters, the men and women carrying them away on their heads to the
place where they were being crushed; the laughter, the merriment, the
feasting, the firing--for they make as much noise as they can--all was
delightful, to say nothing of the masquerading and dancing in the
evening, which we saw, though we did not take part in it.' In the
winter the strangers were introduced to the Christmas Tree, which had
not yet become a British institution: while with the first snow came
the joys of sleighing, when wheel-barrows, tubs, baskets, everything
that could be put on runners, were turned into sledges, and the boys
were in their glory.

During the three years that were spent at Heidelberg, William
Howitt wrote his _Student Life in Germany_, _German Experiences_,
and _Rural and Domestic Life in Germany_, works which contain a
great deal of more or less valuable information about the country and
the people, presented in a homely, unpretentious style. Mary was no
less industrious, having struck a new literary vein, the success of
which was far to surpass her modest anticipations. 'I have been very
busy,' she writes in 1842, 'translating the first volume of a charming
work by Frederica Bremer, a Swedish writer; and if any publisher will
give me encouragement to go on with it, I will soon complete the work.
It is one of a series of stories of everyday life in Sweden--a
beautiful book, full of the noblest moral lessons for every man and
woman.' In the summer of 1841 the Howitts, accompanied by their elder
daughter, Anna, made a long tour through Germany and Austria, in the
course of which they collected materials for fresh works, and visited
the celebrities, literary and artistic, of the various cities that lay
in their route. At Stuttgart they called on Gustav Schwab, the poet,
and visited Dannecker's studio; at Tuebingen they made the acquaintance
of Uhland, and at Munich that of Kaulbach, then at the height of his
fame. By way of Vienna and Prague they travelled to Dresden, where,
through the good offices of Mrs. Jameson, they were received by Moritz
Retzsch, whose _Outlines_ they had long admired. At Berlin they
made friends with Tieck, on whom the king had bestowed a pension and a
house at Potsdam; while at Weimar they were entertained by Frau von
Goethe, whose son, Wolfgang, had been one of their earliest
acquaintances at Heidelberg. This interesting tour is described at
length in the _Rural and Domestic Life of Germany_.

Another year was spent at Heidelberg, but the difficulties of
arranging the business details of their work at such a distance from
publishers and editors, brought the industrious couple back to London
in the spring of 1843. 'On our return to England,' writes Mary, 'I was
full of energy and hope. Glowing with aspiration, and in enjoyment of
great domestic happiness, I was anticipating a busy, perhaps
overburdened, but, nevertheless, congenial life. It was to be one of
darkness, perplexity, discouragement.' The Howitts had scarcely
entered into possession of a new house that they had taken at Clapton,
when news came from Heidelberg, where the elder children had been left
at school, that their second son, Claude, had developed alarming
symptoms of disease in the knee-joint. It was known that he had been
slightly injured in play a few weeks before, but no danger had been
anticipated. Mr. Howitt at once set out for Heidelberg, and returned
with the invalid, on whose case Liston was consulted. The great
surgeon counselled amputation, but to this the parents refused their
consent, except as a last resource. Various less heroic modes of
treatment were tried, but poor Claude faded away, and died in March,
1844, aged only ten years and a half. This was the heaviest trial that
the husband and wife had yet experienced, for Claude had been a boy of
brilliant promise, whom they regarded as the flower of their flock.
Only a few months before his accident his mother had written in the
pride of her heart: 'Claude is the naughtiest of all the children, and
yet the most gifted. He learns anything at a glance. Claude is born to
be fortunate; he is one that will make the family distinguished in the
next generation. He has an extraordinary faculty for telling stories,
either of his own invention or of what he reads.'

A lesser cause of trouble and anxiety arose out of the translation of
Miss Bremer's novels. 'When we first translated _The Neighbours_,'
writes Mary, 'there was not a house in London that would undertake
its publication. We published it and the other Bremer novels at our
own risk, but such became the rage for them that our translations
were seized by a publisher, altered, and reissued as new ones.'
The success of these books was said to be greater than that of
any series since the first appearance of the Waverley novels. Cheap
editions were multiplied in the United States, and even the boys who
hawked the books about the streets were to be seen deep in _The
Home_ or _The H. Family_. In a letter to her sister written
about this time, Mary expatiates on the annoyance and loss caused by
these piracies. 'It is very mortifying,' she observes, 'because no one
knew of these Swedish novels till we introduced them. It obliges us to
hurry in all we do, and we must work almost day and night to get ours
out in order that we may have some little chance.... We have embarked
a great deal of money in the publication, and the interference of the
upstart London publisher is most annoying. Mlle. Bremer, however, has
written a new novel, and sends it to us before publication. We began
its translation this week, and hope to be able to publish it about the
time it will appear in Sweden and Germany.'

In addition to her translating work, Mrs. Howitt was engaged at this
time upon a series of little books, called _Tales for the People and
their Children_, which had been commissioned by a cheap publisher.
These stories, each of which illustrated a domestic virtue, were
punctually paid for: and though they were never advertised, they
passed swiftly through innumerable editions, and have been popular
with a certain public down to quite recent times. Perhaps the most
attractive is the _Autobiography of a Child_, in which Mary told
the story of her own early days in her pretty, simple style, with the
many little quaint touches that gave all her juvenile stories an
atmosphere of truth and reality. Her quick sympathy with young people,
and her knowledge of what most appealed to the childish mind, was
probably due to her vivid remembrance of her own youthful days, and to
her affectionate study of the 'little ways' of her own children. Many
are the original traits and sayings that she reports to her sister,
more especially those of her youngest boy, Charlton, who had inherited
his parents' naturalistic tastes in a pronounced form, and preferred
the Quakers' meeting-house to any other church or chapel, because
there was a dog-kennel on the premises!

About a year after her return to England, Mrs. Howitt turned her
attention to Danish literature, finding that, with her knowledge of
Swedish and German, the language presented few difficulties. In 1845
she translated Hans Andersen's _Impromsatore_, greatly to the
satisfaction of the author, who begged that she would continue to
translate his works, till he was as well known and loved in England as
he was on the Continent. Appreciation, fame, and joy, declared the
complacent poet, followed his footsteps wherever he went, and his
whole life was full of sunshine, like a beautiful fairy-tale. Mary
translated his _Only a Fiddler_; _O. T., or Life in Denmark_;
_The True Story of My Life_; and several of the _Wonderful Stories
for Children_. The _Improvisatore_ was the only one that went
into a second edition, the other works scarcely paying the cost
of publication. Hans Andersen, however, being assured that Mrs.
Howitt was making a fortune of the translations, came to England
in 1847 to arrange for a share of the profits. Though disappointed
in his hope of gain, he begged Mrs. Howitt to translate the whole
of his fairy-tales, which had just been brought out in a
beautifully-illustrated German edition. Much to her after regret, she
was then too much engrossed by other work to be able to accede to his
proposal. The relations between Hans Andersen and his translator were
marred, we are told, by the extreme sensitiveness and egoism of the
Dane. Mrs. Howitt narrates, as an example of his childish vanity, the
following little incident which occurred during his visit to England
in the summer of 1847:--

'We had taken him, as a pleasant rural experience, to the annual
hay-making at Hillside, Highgate, thus introducing him to an English
home, full of poetry and art, sincerity, and affection. The ladies of
Hillside--Miss Mary and Margaret Gillies, the one an embodiment of
peace and an admirable writer, whose talent, like the violet, kept in
the shade; the other, the warm-hearted painter--made him welcome....
Immediately after our arrival, the assembled children, loving his
delightful fairy-tales, clustered round him in the hay-field, and
watched him make them a pretty device of flowers; then, feeling
somehow that the stiff, silent foreigner was not kindred to
themselves, stole off to an American, Henry Clarke Wright, whose
admirable little book, _A Kiss for a Blow_, some of them knew.
He, without any suggestion of condescension or difference of age,
entered heart and soul into their glee, laughed, shouted, and played
with them, thus unconsciously evincing the gift which had made him
earlier the exclusive pastor of six hundred children in Boston. Soon
poor Andersen, perceiving himself neglected, complained of headache,
and insisted on going indoors, whither Mary Gillies and I, both
anxious to efface any disagreeable impression, accompanied him; but he
remained irritable and out of sorts.'

It was in 1845 or 1846 that the Howitts made the acquaintance of
Tennyson, whose poetry they had long admired. 'The retiring and
meditative young poet, Alfred Tennyson, visited us,' relates Mary,
'and cheered our seclusion by the recitation of his exquisite poetry.
He spent a Sunday night at our house, when we sat talking together
till three in the morning. All the next day he remained with us in
constant converse. We seemed to have known him for years. So in fact
we had, for his poetry was himself. He hailed all attempts at
heralding a grander, more liberal state of public opinion, and
consequently sweeter, nobler modes of living. He wished that we
Englanders could dress up our affections in more poetical costume;
real warmth of heart would gain rather than lose by it. As it was, our
manners were as cold as the walls of our churches.' Another new friend
was gained through William Howitt's book, _Visits to Remarkable
Places_. When the work was announced as 'in preparation,' the
author received a letter, signed E. C. Gaskell, drawing his attention
to a beautiful old house, Clopton Hall, near Stratford-on-Avon. The
letter described in such admirable style the writer's visit to the
house as a schoolgirl, that William wrote to suggest that she ought to
use her pen for the public benefit. This timely encouragement led to
the production of _Mary Barton_, the first volume of which was
sent in manuscript for Mr. Howitt's verdict. A few months later Mrs.
Gaskell came as a guest to the little house at Clopton, bringing with
her the completed work.

In 1846 William Howitt took part in a new journalistic venture, his
wife, as usual, sharing his labours and anxieties. He became first
contributor, and afterwards editor and part-proprietor of the
_People's Journal_, a cheap weekly, through the medium of which
he hoped to improve the moral and intellectual condition of the
working classes. 'The bearing of its contents,' wrote Mary, in answer
to some adverse criticism of the new paper, 'is love to God and man.
There is no attempt to set the poor against the rich, but, on the
contrary, to induce them to be careful, prudent, sober and
independent; above all, to be satisfied to be workers, and to regard
labour as a privilege rather than as a penalty, which is quite our
view of the matter.' The combination of business and philanthropy
seldom answers, and the Howitts, despite the excellence of their
intentions, were unlucky in their newspaper speculations. At the end
of a few months it was discovered that the manager of the _People's
Journal_ kept no books, and that the affairs of the paper were in
hopeless confusion. William Howitt, finding himself responsible for
the losses on the venture, tried to cure the evil by a hair of the dog
that had bitten him. He withdrew from the _People's Journal_,
and, with Samuel Smiles as his assistant, started a rival paper on the
same lines, called _Howitts Journal_. But, as Ebenezer Elliott,
the shrewd old Quaker, remarked, apropos of the apathy of the
working-class public: 'Men engaged in a death struggle for bread will
pay for amusement when they will not for instruction. They woo
laughter to unscare them, that they may forget their perils, their
wrongs, and their oppressors. If you were able and willing to fill the
journal with fun, it would pay.' The failure of his paper spelt ruin
to its promoter; his copyrights, as well as those of his wife, were
sacrificed, and he was obliged to begin the world anew.

The Howitts seem to have kept up their spirits bravely under this
reverse, and never for a moment relaxed in their untiring industry.
They moved into a small house in Avenue Road, St. John's Wood, and
looked around them for new subjects upon which to exercise their
well-worn pens. Mary hoped to get employment from the Religious Tract
Society, which had invited her to send in a specimen story, but she
feared that her work would hardly be considered sufficiently orthodox,
though she had introduced one of the 'death-bed scenes,' which were
then in so much request. As she anticipated, the story was returned as
quite unsuitable, and thereupon she writes to her sister in some
depression: 'Times are so bad that publishers will not speculate in
books; and when I have finished the work I am now engaged on, I have
nothing else certain to go on with.' However, writers so popular with
the public as the Howitts were not likely to be left long without
employment. Mary seems to have been the greater favourite of the two,
and the vogue of her volume of collected _Poems and Ballads_,
which appeared in 1847, strikes the modern reader with amazement. Some
idea of the estimation in which she was then held is proved by Allan
Cunningham's dictum that 'Mary Howitt has shown herself mistress of
every string of the minstrel's lyre, save that which sounds of broil
and bloodshed. There is more of the old ballad simplicity in her
composition than can be found in the strains of any living poet
besides.' Another critic compared Mrs. Hewitt's ballads to those of
Lord Macaulay, while Mrs. Alaric Watts, in her capacity of Annual
editor, wrote to assure her old friend and contributor that, 'In thy
simplest poetry there are sometimes turns so exquisite as to bring the
tears to my eyes. Thou hast as much poetry in thee as would set up
half-a-dozen writers.' The one dissentient voice among admiring
contemporaries is that of Miss Mitford, who writes in 1852: 'I am for
my sins so fidgety respecting style that I have the bad habit of
expecting a book that pretends to be written in our language to be
English; therefore I cannot read Miss Strickland, or the Howitts, or
Carlyle, or Emerson, or the serious parts of Dickens.' It must be
owned that the Howitts are condemned in fairly good company.

The work of both husband and wife suffered from the inevitable defects
of self-education, and also from the narrowness and seclusion of their
early lives. Mary possessed more imagination and a lighter touch than
her husband, but her attempts at adult fiction were hampered by her
ignorance of the world, while her technique, both in prose and verse,
left something to be desired. It is evident that the publishers and
editors of the period were less critical than Miss Mitford, for, in
1848, we find that Mrs. Howitt was invited to write the opening volume
of Bradshaw's series of Railway novels, while in February 1850, came a
request from Charles Dickens for contributions to _Household
Words_. 'You may have seen,' he writes, 'the first dim announcements
of the new, cheap literary journal I am about to start. Frankly, I
want to say to you that if you would write for it, you would delight
me, and I should consider myself very fortunate indeed in enlisting
your services.... I hope any connection with the enterprise would
be satisfactory and agreeable to you in all respects, as I should
most earnestly endeavour to make it. If I wrote a book I could
say no more than I mean to suggest to you in these few lines.
All that I leave unsaid, I leave to your generous understanding.'

The Howitts were keenly interested in the gradual awakening of the
long-dormant, artistic instincts of the nation, the first signs of
which became faintly visible about the end of the forties. 'Down to
that time,' observes Mary, 'the taste of the English people had been
for what appealed to the mind rather than to the eye, and the general
public were almost wholly uneducated in art. By 1849 the improvement
due to the exertions of the Prince Consort, the Society of Arts, and
other powers began to be felt; while a wonderful impulse to human
taste and ingenuity was being given in the preparation of exhibits for
the World's Fair.' The gentle Quakeress who, in her youth, had
modelled Wedgwood figures in paper pulp, and clapped her
clear-starching to the rhythm of _Lalla Rookh_, was, in middle
life, one of the staunchest supporters of the Pre-Raphaelite Brethren,
and that at a time when the President of the Royal Academy had
announced his intention of hanging no more of their 'outrageous
productions.' Through their friend, Edward La Trobe Bateman, the
Howitts had been introduced into the Pre-Raphaelite circle, and
familiarised with the then new and startling idea that artistic
principles might be carried out in furniture and house-decoration.
Less than three-quarters of a century before, Mary's father had been
sternly rebuked by her grandfather for painting a series of lines in
black and grey above the parlour fireplace to represent a cornice.
This primitive attempt at decoration was regarded as a sinful
indulgence of the lust of the eye! With the simple charity that was
characteristic of them, William and Mary saw only the best side of
their new friends, the shadows of Bohemian life being entirely hidden
from them. 'Earnest and severe in their principles of art,' observes
Mrs. Howitt naively, 'the young reformers indulged in much jocundity
when the day's work was done. They were wont to meet at ten, cut
jokes, talk slang, smoke, read poetry, and discuss art till three
A.M.'

The couple had by this time renounced their membership of the Society
of Friends, but they had not joined any other religious sect, though
they seem to have been attracted by Unitarian doctrines. 'Mere
creeds,' wrote Mary to her sister, 'matter nothing to me. I could go
one Sunday to the Church of England, another to a Catholic chapel, a
third to the Unitarian, and so on; and in each of them find my heart
warmed with Christian love to my fellow-creatures, and lifted up with
gratitude and praise to God.' For many years the house in Avenue Road
was, we are told, a meeting-place for all that was best and brightest
in the world of modern thought and art. William Howitt was always
ready to lend an attentive and unbiassed ear to the newest theory, or
even the newest fad, while Mary possessed in the fullest degree the
gift of companionableness, and her inexhaustible sympathy drew from
others an instant confidence. Her arduous literary labours never
impaired her vigorous powers of mind or body, and she often wrote till
late into the night without appearing to suffer in either health or
spirits. She is described as a careful and energetic housewife;
indeed, her husband was accustomed to say that he would challenge any
woman who never wrote a line, to match his own good woman in the
management of a large household.

In 1851 came the first tidings of the discovery of gold in Australia,
and nothing was talked of but this new Eldorado and the wonderful
inducements held out to emigrants. William Howitt, who felt that he
needed a change from brain-work, suddenly resolved on a trip with his
two sons to this new world, where he would see his youngest brother,
Dr. Godfrey Howitt, who had settled at Melbourne. He was also anxious
to ascertain what openings in the country there might be for his boys,
both of whom had active, outdoor tastes, which there seemed little
chance of their being able to gratify in England. In June, 1852, the
three male members of the family, accompanied by La Trobe Bateman,
sailed for Australia, while Mary and her two daughters, the elder of
whom had just returned from a year in Kaulbach's studio at Munich,
moved into a cottage called the Hermitage, at Highgate, which belonged
to Mr. Bateman, and had formerly been occupied by Rossetti. Here they
lived quietly for upwards of two years, working at their literary or
artistic occupations, and seeing a few intimate friends. Mary kept her
husband posted up in the events that were taking place in England, and
we learn from her letters what were the chief topics of town talk in
the early fifties.

'Now, I must think over what news there is,' she writes in April,
1853. 'In the political world, the proposed new scheme of Property and
Income Tax, which would make everybody pay something; and the proposal
for paying off a portion of the National Debt with Australian gold. In
the literary world, the International Copyright, which some expect
will be in force in three months. In society in general, the strange
circumstantial rumour of the Queen's death, which, being set afloat on
Easter Monday, when no business was doing, was not the offspring of
the money market. Mr. and Mrs. Charles Kean, who were here the other
day, spoke of it, saying truly that for the moment it seemed to
paralyse the very heart of England.... [May 4th.] The great talk now
is Mrs. Beecher Stowe and spirit-rapping, both of which have arrived
in England. The universality of the latter phenomena renders it a
curious study. A feeling seems pervading all classes and all sects
that the world stands on the brink of some great spiritual revelation.
It meets one in books, in newspapers, on the lips of members of the
Church of England, Unitarians, and even Freethinkers. Poor old Robert
Owen, the philanthropist, has been converted, and made a confession of
faith in public. One cannot but respect a man who, in his old age, has
the boldness to declare himself as having been blinded and mistaken
through life.'

In December, 1854, William Howitt returned from his travels without
any gold in his pockets, but with the materials for his _History of
Discovery in Australia and New Zealand._ Thanks to what he used to
call his four great doctors, Temperance, Exercise, Good Air, and Good
Hours, he had displayed wonderful powers of activity and endurance
during his exploration of some almost untracked regions of the new
world. At sixty years of age he had marched twenty miles a day under a
blazing sun for weeks at a time, worked at digging gold for twelve
hours a day, waded through rivers, slept under trees, baked his own
bread, washed his own clothes, and now returned in the pink of
condition, with his passion for wandering only intensified by his
three years of an adventurous life. The family experiences were
diversified thenceforward by frequent change of scene, for William was
always ready and willing to start off at a moment's notice to the
mountains, the seaside, or the Continent. But whether the Howitts were
at home or abroad, they continued their making of many books, so that
it becomes difficult for the biographer to keep pace with their
literary output. Together or separately they produced a _History of
Scandinavian Literature, The Homes and Haunts of the Poets, a Popular
History of England_, which was published in weekly parts, a
_Year-Book of the Country_, a _Popular History of the United
States_, a _History of the Supernatural_, the _Northern Heights
of London_, and an abridged edition of _Sir Charles Grandison_,
besides several tales for young people, and contributions to
magazines and newspapers.

Even increasing age had no power to narrow their point of view, or to
blunt their sympathy with every movement that seemed to make for the
relief of the oppressed, the welfare of the nation, or the advancement
of the human race. Just as in youth they had championed the cause of
Catholic Emancipation and of political Reform, so in later years we
find them advocating the Repeal of the Corn Laws, taking part in the
Anti-Slavery agitation, working for improvement in the laws that
affected women and children, and supporting the Bill for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. A more debatable subject--that of
spiritualism--was investigated by them in a friendly but impartial
spirit. 'In the spring of 1856, 'writes Mrs. Howitt, 'we had become
acquainted with several most ardent and honest spirit mediums. It
seemed right to my husband and myself to try and understand the nature
of these phenomena in which our new acquaintance so firmly believed.
In the month of April I was invited to attend a _seance_ at
Professor de Morgan's, and was much astonished and affected by
communications purporting to come to me from my dear son Claude. With
constant prayer for enlightenment and guidance, we experimented at
home. The teachings that seemed given us from the spirit-world were
often akin to those of the gospel; at other times they were more
obviously emanations of evil. I felt thankful for the assurance thus
gained of an invisible world, but resolved to neglect none of my
common duties for spiritualism.' Among the Hewitts' fellow-converts
were Robert Chambers, Robert Owen, the Carter Halls and the Alaric
Watts's; while Sir David Brewster and Lord Brougham were earnest
inquirers into these forms of psychical phenomena.

In 1865 William Howitt was granted a pension by Government, and a year
later the couple moved from Highgate to a cottage called the Orchard,
near their former residence at Esher. Of their four surviving
children, only Margaret, the youngest, was left at home. Anna, already
the author of a very interesting book, _An Art Student at
Munich_, had, as her mother observes, taken her place among the
successful artists and writers of her day, 'when, in the spring of
1856, a severe private censure of one of her oil-paintings by a king
among critics so crushed her sensitive nature, as to make her yield to
her bias for the supernatural, and withdraw from the arena of the fine
arts.' In 1857 Anna became the wife of Alfred Watts, the son of her
parents' old friends, Alaric and Zillah Watts. The two boys, Alfred
and Charlton, born explorers and naturalists, both settled in
Australia. Alfred, early in the sixties, had explored the district of
Lake Torrens, a land of parched deserts, dry-water-courses, and
soda-springs, whose waters effervesced tartaric acid; and had opened
up for the Victorian Government the mountainous district of Gippsland,
with the famous gold-field of the Crooked River. In 1861 he had been
employed to head the relief-party that went in search of the
discoverer, Robert O'Hara Burke, and his companions, and a year later
he brought back the remains of the ill-fated explorers to Melbourne
for public burial. Later in life he was successfully employed in
various Government enterprises, and published, in collaboration with a
friend, a learned work on the aborigines of Australia.

Charlton Howitt, the younger son, after five years' uncongenial work
in a London office, emigrated to Australia in 1860. His quality was
quickly recognised by the Provincial Government, which, in 1862,
appointed him to command an expedition to examine the rivers in the
province of Canterbury, with a view to ascertaining whether they
contained gold. So admirably was the work accomplished that, on his
return to Christchurch, he was intrusted with the task of opening up
communications between the Canterbury plains and the newly-discovered
gold and coal district on the west coast. 'This duty was faithfully
performed, under constant hardships and discouragement,' relates his
mother. 'But a few miles of road remained to be cut, when, at the end
of June, 1863, after personally rescuing other pioneers and wanderers
from drowning and starvation in that watery, inhospitable forest
region, Charlton, with two of his men, went down in the deep waters of
Lake Brunner; a fatal accident which deprived the Government of a
valued servant, and saddened the hearts of all who knew him.'

After four peaceful years at Esher, the _Wanderlust_, that gipsy
spirit, which not even the burden of years could tame, took possession
of William and Mary once more, and they suddenly decided that they
must see Italy before they died. In May, 1870, they let the Orchard,
and, aged seventy-seven and seventy-one respectively, set out on their
last long flight into the world. The summer was spent on the Lake of
Lucerne, where the old-world couple came across that modern of the
moderns, Richard Wagner, and his family. By way of the Italian Lakes
and Venice they travelled, in leisurely fashion, to Rome, where they
celebrated their golden wedding in April, 1871. The Eternal City threw
its glamour around these ancient pilgrims, who found both life and
climate exactly suited to the needs of old age. 'I prized in Rome,'
writes Mrs. Howitt, 'the many kind and sympathetic friends that were
given to us, the ease of social existence, the poetry, the classic
grace, the peculiar and deep pathos diffused around; above all, the
stirring and affecting historic memories.... From the period of
arrival in Rome, I may truly say that the promise in Scripture, "At
evening time there shall be light," was, in our case, fulfilled.'

The simple, homely life of the aged couple continued unbroken amid
their new surroundings. William interested himself in the planting of
Eucalyptus in the Campagna, as a preventive against malaria, and had
seeds of different varieties sent over from Australia, which he
presented to the Trappist monks of the Tre Fontani. He helped to
establish a society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, and
struck up a friendship with the gardeners and custodians of the
Pincio, to whom he gave expert advice on the subject of the creatures
under their charge. The summer months were always spent in the Tyrol,
where the Howitts had permanent quarters in an old mansion near
Bruneck, called Mayr-am-Hof. Here William was able to indulge in his
favourite occupation of gardening. He dug indefatigably in a field
allotment with his English spade, a unique instrument in that land of
clumsy husbandry, and was amazed at the growth of the New Zealand
spinach, the widespread rhubarb, the exuberant tomatoes, and towering
spikes of Indian corn. Thanks to the four great doctors before
mentioned, he remained hale and hearty up to December, 1878, in which
month he celebrated his eighty-seventh birthday. A few weeks later he
was attacked by bronchitis, which, owing to an unsuspected weakness of
the heart, he was unable to throw off. He died in his house on the Via
Sistina, close to his favourite Pincio, on March 3, 1879.

Mrs. Howitt now finally gave up the idea of returning to end her days
in England. Her husband and companion of more than fifty years was
buried in the Protestant Cemetery at Home, and when her time came, she
desired to be laid by his side. The grant of a small pension added to
the comfort of her last years, and was a source of much innocent pride
and gratification, for, as she tells her daughter Anna, 'It was so
readily given, so kindly, so graciously, for my literary merits, by
Lord Beaconsfield, without the solicitation or interference of any
friend or well-wisher.' In May, 1880, she writes to a friend from
Meran about 'a project, which seems to have grown up in a wonderful
way by itself, or as if invisible hands had been arranging it; that we
should have a little home of our own _im heiligen Land Tirol_.
This really is a very great mercy, seeing that the Tyrol is so
beautiful, the climate so beneficial to health, and the people, taken
as a whole, so very honest and devout. Our little nest of love, which
we shall call "Marienruhe," will be perched on a hill with beautiful
views, surrounded by a small garden.' On September 29, 1881, Mrs.
Howitt and her daughter, Margaret, slept, for the first time, in their
romantically-situated new home near Meran.

At Marienruhe, the greater portion of the last seven years of Mary
Howitt's life was spent in peace and contentment. Here she amused
herself with writing her 'Reminiscences' for _Good Words_, which
were afterwards incorporated in her _Autobiography_. Age had no
power to blunt her interest in the events of the day, political or
literary, and at eighty-seven we find her reading with keen enjoyment
Froude's _Oceana_ and Besant's _All Sorts and Conditions of
Men_, books that dealt with questions which she and her husband had
had at heart for the best part of a lifetime, and for which they had
worked with untiring zeal. Of the first she writes to a friend: 'We
much approve of his (Froude's) very strong desire that our colonies
should, like good, faithful, well-trained children, be staunch in love
and service to old Mother England. How deeply we feel on this subject
I cannot tell you; and I hope and trust that you join strongly in this
truly English sentiment.' Of the second she writes to Mrs. Leigh
Smith: 'I am more interested than I can tell you in _All Sorts and
Conditions of Men_. It affects me like the perfected fruit of some
glorious tree which my dear husband and I had a dim dream of planting
more than thirty years ago, and which we did, in our ignorance and
incapacity, attempt to plant in soil not properly prepared, and far
too early in the season. I cannot tell you how it has recalled the
hopes and dreams of a time which, by the overruling Providence of God,
was so disastrous to us. It is a beautiful essay on the dignity of
labour.'

The last few years of Mary Howitt's life were saddened by the deaths
of her beloved sister, Anna, and her elder daughter, Mrs. Watts, but
such blows are softened for aged persons by the consciousness that
their own race is nearly run. Mary had, moreover, one great spiritual
consolation in her conversion, at the age of eighty-three, to the
doctrines of Roman Catholicism In spite of her oft-repeated
protestations against the likelihood of her 'going over,' in spite of
her declaration, openly expressed as late as 1871, that she firmly
believed in the anti-Christianity of the Papacy, and that she and her
husband were watching with interest the progress of events which, they
trusted, would bring about its downfall, Mrs. Howitt was baptized into
the Roman Church in May, 1882. Her new faith was a source of intense
happiness to the naturally religious woman, who had found no refuge in
any sectarian fold since her renunciation of her childish creed. In
1888, the year of the Papal Jubilee, though her strength was already
failing, she was well enough to join the deputation of English
pilgrims, who, on January 10, were presented to the Pope by the Duke
of Norfolk. In describing the scene, the last public ceremony in which
she took part, she writes: 'A serene happiness, almost joy, filled my
whole being as I found myself on my knees before the Vicar of Christ.
My wish was to kiss his foot, but it was withdrawn, and his hand given
to me. You may think with what fervour I kissed the ring. In the
meantime he had been told my age and my late conversion. His hands
were laid on my shoulders, and, again and again, his right hand in
blessing on my head, whilst he spoke to me of Paradise.'

Having thus achieved her heart's desire, it seemed as if the last tie
which bound the aged convert to earth was broken. A few days later she
was attacked by bronchitis, and, after a short illness, passed away in
her sleep on January 30, 1888, having nearly completed her
eighty-ninth year. To the last, we are told, Mary Howitt's sympathy
was as warm, her intelligence as keen as in the full vigour of life,
while her rare physical strength and pliant temper preserved her in
unabated enjoyment of existence to the verge of ninety. Although many
of her books were out of print at the time of her death, it was said
that if every copy had been destroyed, most of her ballads and minor
poems could have been collected from the memories of her admirers, who
had them--very literally--by heart.

William and Mary Howitt, it may be observed in conclusion, though not
leaders, were brave soldiers in the army of workers for humanity, and
if now they seem likely to share the common lot of the rank and
file--oblivion--it must be remembered that they were among those
favoured of the gods who are crowned with gratitude, love, and
admiration by their contemporaries. To them, asleep in their Roman
grave, the neglect of posterity brings no more pain than the homage of
modern critics brings triumph to the slighted poet who shares their
last resting-place.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Memoirs of the Nineteenth
Century, by George Paston





Produced by David Moynihan, D Garcia, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




LE DEPIT AMOUREUX.

COMEDIE.

THE LOVE-TIFF.

A COMEDY IN FIVE ACTS.

(_THE ORIGINAL IN VERSE_.)

1656.




INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

_The Love-tiff_ (_Le Depit-amoureux_) is composed of two
pieces joined together. The first and longest is a comparatively modest
imitation of a very coarse and indecent Italian comedy,
_L'Interesse_, by Signer Nicolo Secchi; its intrigue depends
chiefly on the substitution of a female for a male child, a change which
forms the groundwork of many plays and novels, and of which Shakespeare
has also made use. The second and best part of the _Love-tiff_
belongs to Moliere alone, and is composed chiefly of the whole of the
first act, the first six verses of the third scene, and the whole of the
fourth scene of the second act; these, with a few alterations and a few.
lines added, form, the comedy which the _Theatre Francaise_ plays
at the present time. It was first represented at Beziers towards the end
of 1656, when the States General of Languedoc were assembled in that
town, and met with great success; a success which continued when it was
played in Paris at the Theatre du Petit-Bourbon in 1658. Why in some of
the former English translations of Moliere the servant Gros-Rene is
called "Gros-Renard" we are unable to understand, for both names are
thoroughly French. Mr. Ozell, in his translation, gives him the
unmistakably English, but not very euphonious name of "punch-gutted Ben,
_alias_ Renier," whilst Foote calls him "Hugh." The incidents of
the _Love-tiff_ are arranged artistically, though in the Spanish
taste; the plot is too complicated, and the ending very unnatural. But
the characters are well delineated, and fathers, lovers, mistresses, and
servants all move about amidst a complication of errors from which there
is no visible disentangling. The conversation between Valere and Ascanio
in man's clothes, the mutual begging pardon of Albert and Polydore, the
natural astonishment of Lucile, accused in the presence of her father,
and the stratagem of Eraste to get the truth from his servants, are all
described in a masterly manner, whilst the tiff between Eraste and
Lucile, which gives the title to the piece, as well as their
reconciliation, are considered among the best scenes of this play.

Nearly all actors in France who play either the _valets_ or the
_soubrettes_ have attempted the parts of Gros-Rene and Marinette,
and even the great tragedienne Madlle. Rachel ventured, on the 1st of
July, 1844, to act Marinette, but not with much success.

Dryden has imitated, in the fourth act of _An Evening's Love_, a
small part of the scene between Marinette and Eraste, the quarrelling
scene between Lucile, Eraste, Marinette, and Gros-Rene, as well as in
the third act of the same play, the scene between Albert and
Metaphrastus. Vanbrugh has very closely followed Moliere's play in the
_Mistake_, but has laid the scene in Spain. This is the principal
difference I can perceive. He has paraphased the French with a spirit
and ease which a mere translation can hardly ever acquire. The epilogue
to his play, written by M. Motteux, a Frenchman, whom the revocation of
the Edict of Nantes brought into England, is filthy in the extreme. Mr.
J. King has curtailed Vanbrugh's play into an interlude, in one act,
called _Lover's Quarrels_, or _Like Master Like Man_.

Another imitator of Moliere was Edward Ravenscroft, of whom Baker says
in his _Biographia Dramatica_, that he was "a writer or compiler of
plays, who lived in the reigns of Charles II. and his two successors."
He was descended from the family of the Ravenscrofts, in Flintshire; a
family, as he himself, in a dedication asserts, so ancient that when
William the Conqueror came into England, one of his nobles married into
it.

He was some time a member of the Middle Temple; but, looking on the dry
study of the law as greatly beneath the attention of a man of genius,
quitted it. He was an arrant plagiary. Dryden attacked one of his plays,
_The Citizen turned Gentleman_, an imitation of Moliere's
_Bourgeois-Gentilhomme_, in the Prologue to _The Assignation_.

Ravenscroft wrote "_The Wrangling Lovers, or the Invisible
Mistress_. Acted at the Duke's Theatre, 1677. London, Printed for
William Crook, at the sign of the _Green Dragon_, without
_Temple-Bar_, 1677." Though the plot was partly taken from a
Spanish novel, the author has been inspired by Moliere's _Depit
amoureux_. The scene is in Toledo: Eraste is called Don Diego de
Stuniga, Valere Don Gusman de Haro, "a well-bred cavaliere," Lucile is
Octavia de Pimentell, and Ascanio is Elvira; Gros-Rene's name is Sanco,
"vallet to Gusman, a simple pleasant fellow," and Mascarille is Ordgano,
"a cunning knave;" Marinette is called Beatrice and Frosine Isabella.
The English play is rather too long. Don Gusman courts Elvira veiled,
whilst in the French play Ascanio, her counterpart, is believed to be a
young man. There is also a brother of Donna Elvira, Don Ruis de Moncade,
who is a rival of Don Diego, whilst in _le Depit-amoureux_. Valere
is not the brother but the husband of Ascanio and the rival of Eraste
(Don Diego) as well. The arrangement of the English comedy differs
greatly from the French. Though the plot in both plays is nearly
identical, yet the words and scenes in _The Wrangling Lovers_ are
totally different, and not so amusing. Mascarille and Gros-Rene are but
faintly attempted; Marinette and Frosine only sketched in outline; and
in the fifth act the ladies appear to have nothing else to do but to pop
in and out of closets. The scenes of the French play between Albert and
Metaphrastus (ii. 7); the very comical scene between Albert and Polydore
(iii. 4) and the reconciliation scene between Lucile and Eraste (iv. 3),
are also not rendered in the English comedy. There are very few scenes
which can be compared with those of _le Depit amoureux_.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

ERASTE, _in love with Lucile_.

ALBERT, _father to Lucile_.

[Footnote: This part was played by Moliere himself]

GROS-RENE, _servant to Eraste_.

VALERE, _son to Polydore_.

POLYDORE, _father to Valere_.

MASCARILLE, _servant to Valere_.

METAPHRASTUS, _a pedant_.

LA RAPIERE, _a bully_.

LUCILE, _daughter to Albert_.

ASCANIO, _Albert's daughter, in man's clothes_.

FROSINE, _confidant to Ascanio_.

MARINETTE, _maid to Lucile_.




THE LOVE-TIFF.

(LE DEPIT AMOUREUX.)

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT I.




SCENE I.--ERASTE, GROS-RENE.


ERAS. Shall I declare it to you? A certain secret anxiety never leaves
my mind quite at rest. Yes, whatever remarks you make about my love, to
tell you the truth, I am afraid of being deceived; or that you may be
bribed in order to favour a rival; or, at least, that you may be imposed
upon as well as myself.

GR.-RE. As for me, if you suspect me of any knavish trick, I will say,
and I trust I give no offence to your honour's love, that you wound my
honesty very unjustly, and that you show but small skill in physiognomy.
People of my bulk are not accused, thank Heaven! of being either rogues
or plotters. I scarcely need protest against the honour paid to us, but
am straightforward in every thing.

[Footnote: Du Parc, the actor who played this part, was very stout;
hence the allusion in the original, "_et suis homme fort rond de
toutes les manieres_." I have, of course, used in the translation the
word "straightforward" ironically, and with an eye to the rotundity of
stomach of the actor. Moliere was rather fond of making allusions in his
plays to the infirmities or peculiarities of some of his actors. Thus,
in the Miser (_l'Avare_) Act I, Scene 3, he alludes to the lameness
of the actor Bejart, "_Je ne me plais point a voir ce chien de
boiteux-la_." "I do not like to see that lame dog;" in the Citizen
who apes the Nobleman (_le Bourgeois gentilhomme_), Act iii. sc. 9,
he even gives a portrait of his wife.]

As for my being deceived that may be; there is a better foundation for
that idea; nevertheless, I do not believe it can be easily done. I may
be a fool, but I do not see yet why you vex yourself thus. Lucile, to my
thinking, shows sufficient love for you; she sees you and talks to you,
at all times; and Valere, after all, who is the cause of your fear,
seems only to be allowed to approach her because she is compelled so to
act.

ERAS. A lover is often buoyed up by false hope. He who is best received
is not always the most beloved. The affection a woman displays is often
but a veil to cover her passion for another. Valere has lately shown too
much tranquillity for a slighted lover; and the joy or indifference he
displays at those favours, which you suppose bestowed upon me, embitters
continually their greatest charms, causes this grief, which you cannot
understand, holds my happiness in suspense, and makes it difficult for
me to trust completely anything Lucile says to me. I should feel
delighted if I saw Valere animated by a little more jealousy; his
anxiety and impatience would then reassure my heart. Do you as yourself
think it possible for any one to see a rival caressed and be as
satisfied as he is; if you do not believe it, tell me, I conjure you, if
I have not a cause to be perplexed?

GR.-RE. Perhaps he has changed his inclination, upon finding that he
sighed in vain.

ERAS. When love has been frequently repelled it frees itself, and wishes
to flee from the object it was charmed with; nor does it break its chain
so quietly as to be able to continue at peace. When once we have been
fond of anyone who influenced our destiny we are never afterwards
indifferent in her presence; if our dislike does not increase when we
behold her our love is upon the point of returning again. Believe me,
however much a passion may be extinguished, a little jealousy still
dwells in our breast; no one can see, without feeling some pang, the
heart he has lost possessed by another.

GR.-RE. For my part, I do not understand so much philosophy. I candidly
believe what my eyes see, and am not such a mortal enemy to myself as to
become melancholy without any cause. Why should I try to split hairs,
and labour hard to find out reasons to be miserable? Shall I alarm
myself about castles in the air? Let Lent come before we keep it! I
think grief an uncomfortable thing; and, for my part, I never foster it
without good and just cause. I might frequently find a hundred
opportunities to become sad, but I do not want to see them. I run the
same risk in love as you do; I share in your bad or good luck. The
mistress cannot deceive you but the maid will do the same by me; yet I
carefully avoid thinking about it. I like to believe people when they
say "I love you." In order to be happy, I do not try to find out whether
Mascarille tears the hair out of his head or not. Let Marinette allow
herself to be kissed and caressed by Gros-Rene as much as he likes, and
let my charming rival laugh at it like a fool, I will laugh too as much
as I like, and follow his example; we shall then see who will laugh the
heartiest.

[Footnote: In several editions of Moliere we find, instead of Gros-Rene
the name of Jodelet. The latest, and and if I might be permitted to say
so, the most careful editor of our author, Mons. E. Despois, thinks that
"Gros-Rene" ought to be mentioned here. The sense shows he is right.]

ERAS. That is like your talk.

GR.-RE. But here she comes.




SCENE II.--MARINETTE, ERASTE, GROS-RENE.


GR.-RE. Hist! Marinette.

MAR. Hallo! what are you doing there?

GR.-RE. Faith! do you ask? We were just talking about you.

MAR. Are you there too, sir? Upon my word you have made me trot about
like a flunkey for this hour past.

ERAS. How so?

MAR. I have walked ten miles to look for you, and give you my word
that...

ERAS. What?

MAR. That you were neither at church, in the fashionable walk, at home,
nor in the market-place.

GR.-RE. You may swear to that.

ERAS. But pray, tell me who sent you?

MAR. One, in good truth, who bears you no great ill-will; in a word, my
mistress.

ERAS. Ah! dear Marinette, do your words really express what she feels?
Do not hide some ominous secret from me. I should not dislike you for
this. For Heaven's sake tell me if your charming mistress does not
merely pretend to love me?

MAR. Ha! ha! ha! What has put that funny notion into your head? Does she
not sufficiently show her inclination? What further security does your
love demand? What does it require?

GR.-RE. Unless Valere hangs himself, or some such trifle, he will not be
reassured.

MAR. How so?

GR.-RE. He is so very jealous.

MAR. Of Valere? Ha! a pretty fancy indeed! It could only be hatched in
your brain. I thought you a man of sense, and until now had a good
opinion of your intellect; but I see I was very much deceived. Have you
also got a touch of this distemper in your head?

GR.-RE. I jealous? Heaven forbid! and keep me from being so silly as to
go and make myself lean with any such grief. Your heart guarantees your
fidelity; besides, I have too good an opinion of myself to believe that
any other could please you after me. Where the deuce could you find any
one equal to me?

MAR. You really are right; that is as it should be. A jealous man should
never show his suspicions! All that he gains by it is to do himself
harm, and in this manner furthers the designs of his rival. Your
distrust often is the cause that a mistress pays attention to a man,
before whose merits your own have paled. I know a certain person who,
were it not for the preposterous jealousy of a rival, had never been so
happy as he now is. But, in any case, to show suspicion in love is
acting a foolish part, and after all is to make one's-self miserable for
nothing. This, sir (_to Eraste_), I mean as a hint to you.

ERAS. Very well, let us talk no more about it. What have you to say to
me?

MAR. You deserve to be kept in suspense, In order to punish you, I ought
to keep from you the great secret which has made me hunt for you so
long. Here, read this letter, and doubt no more. Read it aloud, nobody
listens.

ERAS. (_Reads_). "_You told me that your love was capable of
doing anything It may be crowned this very day, if you can but get my
father's consent. Acquaint him with the power you have over my heart; I
give you leave so to do; if his reply be favourable, I can answer for it
that I shall obey_." Ah I how happy am I! I ought to look upon you,
the bearer of this letter, as a divine creature.

GR.-RE. I told you so. Though you do not believe it, I am seldom
deceived in the things I ponder on.

ERAS. (_Reading the letter again_). "_Acquaint him with the power
you have over my heart; I give you leave so to do; if his reply be
favourable, I can answer for it that I shall obey_."

MAR. If I should tell her you are weak-minded enough to be jealous, she
would immediately disown such a letter as this.

ERAS. I beseech you, conceal from her a momentary fear, for which I
thought I had some slight foundation; or, if you do tell it her, say to
her at the same time that I am ready to atone for my fit of madness with
my life, and would die at her feet, if I have been capable of
displeasing her.

MAR. Let us not talk of dying; this is no time for it.

ERAS. However, you have laid me under a great obligation; I intend
shortly to acknowledge in a handsome manner the trouble so gentle and so
lovely a messenger has taken.

MAR. That reminds me. Do you know where I looked for you just now?

ERAS. Well?

MAR. Quite near the market-place; you know where that is.

ERAS. Where did you say?

MAR. There... in that shop where last month you generously and freely
promised me a ring.

ERAS. Um! I understand you.

GR.-RE. What a cunning jade!

ERAS. It is true; I have delayed too long to make good my promise to
you, but...

MAR. What I said, sir, was not because I wished you to make haste.

GR.-RE. Oh, no!

ERAS. (_Giving her his ring_). Perhaps this ring may please you;
accept it instead of the one I owe.

MAR. You are only jesting, sir; I should be ashamed to take it.

GR.-RE. Poor shame-faced creature! Take it without more ado; only fools
refuse what is offered them.

MAR. I will only accept it so that I may have something to remember you
by.

ERAS. When may I return thanks to that lovely angel?

MAR. Endeavour to gain over her father.

ERAS. But if he rejects me, should I...?

MAR. We will think about that when he does so! We will do our utmost for
you: one way or another she must be yours; do your best, and we will do
ours.

ERAS. Farewell! we shall know our fate to-day. (_Eraste reads the
letter again to himself_).

MAR. (_To Gros-Rene_). Well, what shall we say of our love? You do
not speak to me of it.

GR.-RE. If such people as we wish to be married, the thing is soon done.
I will have you. Will you have me?

MAR. Gladly.

GR.-RE. Shake hands, that is enough.

MAR. Farewell, Gros-Rene, my heart's delight.

GR.-RE. Farewell, my star.

MAR. Farewell, fair fire-brand of my flame.

GR.-RE. Farewell, dear comet, rainbow of my soul. (_Exit
Marinette_). Heaven be praised, our affairs go on swimmingly. Albert
is not a man to refuse you anything.

ERAS. Valere is coming here.

GR.-RE. I pity the poor wretch, knowing what I do know.




SCENE III.--ERASTE, VALERE, GROS-RENE.


ERAS. Well, Valere?

VAL. Well, Eraste?

ERAS. How does your love prosper?

VAL. And how does yours?

ERAS. It grows stronger and stronger every day.

VAL. So does mine.

ERAS. For Lucile?

VAL. For her.

ERAS. Certainly, I must own, you are a pattern of uncommon constancy.

VAL. And your perseverance will be a rare example to posterity.

ERAS. As for me, I am not very fond of that austere kind of love which
is satisfied with looks only; nor do I possess feelings lofty enough to
endure ill-treatment with constancy. In one word, when I really love, I
wish to be beloved again.

VAL. It is very natural, and I am of the same opinion. I would never do
homage to the most perfect object by whom I could be smitten, if she did
not return my passion.

ERAS. However, Lucile...

VAL. Lucile does willingly everything my passion can desire.

ERAS. You are easily satisfied then.

VAL. Not so easily as you may think.

ERAS. I, however, may, without vanity, believe that I am in her favour.

VAL. And I know that I have a very good share of it.

ERAS. Do not deceive yourself; believe me.

VAL. Believe me, do not be too credulous, and take too much for granted.

ERAS. If I might show you a certain proof that her heart...but no, it
would too much distress you.

VAL. If I might discover a secret to you...but it might grieve you, and
so I will be discreet.

ERAS. You really urge me too far, and though much against my will, I see
I must lower your presumption. Read that.

VAL. (_After having read the letter_). These are tender words.

ERAS. You know the handwriting?

VAL. Yes, it is Lucile's.

ERAS. Well! where is now your boasted certainty...?

VAL. (_Smiling and going away_). Farewell, Eraste.

GR.-RE. He is mad, surely. What reason has he to laugh?

ERAS. He certainly surprises me, and between ourselves I cannot imagine
what the deuce of a mystery is hidden under this.

GR.-RE. Here comes his servant, I think.

ERAS. Yes, it is he; let us play the hypocrite, to set him talking about
his master's love.




SCENE IV.--ERASTE, MASCARILLE, GROS-RENE.


MASC. (_Aside_). No, I do not know a more wretched situation, than
to have a young master, very much in love.

GR.-RE. Good morning.

MASC. Good morning.

GR.-RE. Where is Mascarille going just now? What is he doing? Is he
coming back? Is he going away? Or does he intend to stay where he is?

MASC. No, I am not coming back, because I have not yet been where I am
going; nor am I going, for I am stopped; nor do I design to stay, for
this very moment I intend to be gone.

ERAS. You are very abrupt, Mascarille; gently.

MASC. Ha! Your servant, sir.

ERAS. You are in great haste to run away from us: what! do I frighten
you?

MASC. You are too courteous to do that.

ERAS. Shake hands; all jealousy is now at an end between us; we will be
friends; I have relinquished my love; henceforth you can have your own
way to further your happiness.

MASC. Would to Heaven it were true!

ERAS. Gros-Rene knows that I have already another flame elsewhere.

GR.-RE. Certainly; and I also give up Marinette to you.

MASC. Do not let us touch on that point; our rivalry is not likely to go
to such a length. But is it certain, sir, that you are no longer in
love, or do you jest?

ERAS. I have been informed that your master is but too fortunate in his
amours; I should be a fool to pretend any longer to gain the same
favours which that lady grants to him alone.

MASC. Certainly, you please me with this news. Though I was rather
afraid of you, with regard to our plans, yet you do wisely to slip your
neck out of the collar. You have done well to leave a house where you
were only caressed for form's sake; I, knowing all that was going on,
have many times pitied you, because you were allured by expectations,
which could never be realized. It is a sin and a shame to deceive a
gentleman! But how the deuce, after all, did you find out the trick? For
when they plighted their faith to each other there were no witnesses but
night, myself, and two others; and the tying of the knot, which
satisfies the passion of our lovers, is thought to have been kept a
secret till now.

ERAS. Ha! What do you say?

MASC. I say that I am amazed, sir, and cannot guess who told you, that
under this mask, which deceives you and everybody else, a secret
marriage unites their matchless love.

ERAS. You lie.

MASC. Sir, with all my heart.

ERAS. You are a rascal.

MASC. I acknowledge I am.

ERAS. And this impudence deserves a sound beating on the spot.

MASC. I am completely in your power,

ERAS. Ha! Gros-Rene.

GR.-RE. Sir?

ERAS, I contradict a story, which I much fear is but too true. (_To
Mascarille_). You wanted to run away.

MASC. Not in the least.

ERAS. What! Lucile is married to...

MASC. No, sir, I was only joking.

ERAS. Hey! you were joking, you wretch?

MASC. No, I was not joking.

ERAS. Is it true then?

MASC. No, I do not say that.

ERAS. What do you say then?

MASC. Alas! I say nothing, for fear of saying something wrong.

ERAS. Tell me positively, whether you have spoken the truth, or deceived
me.

MASC. Whatever you please. I do not come here to contradict you.

ERAS. (_Drawing his sword_). Will you tell me? Here is something
that will loosen your tongue without more ado.

MASC. It will again be saying some foolish speech or other. I pray you,
if you have no objection, let me quickly have a few stripes, and then
allow me to scamper off.

ERAS. You shall suffer death, unless you tell me the whole truth without
disguise.

MASC. Alas! I will tell it then; but perhaps, sir, I shall make you
angry.

ERAS. Speak: but take great care what you are doing; nothing shall save
you from my just anger, if you utter but one single falsehood in your
narration.

MASC. I agree to it; break my legs, arms, do worse to me still, kill me,
if I have deceived you in the smallest degree, in anything I have said.

ERAS. It is true then that they are married?

MASC. With regard to this, I can now clearly see that my tongue tripped;
but, for all that, the business happened just as I told you. It was
after five visits paid at night, and whilst you were made use of as a
screen to conceal their proceedings, that they were united the day
before yesterday. Lucile ever since tries still more to hide the great
love she bears my master, and desires he will only consider whatever he
may see, and whatever favours she may show you, as the results of her
deep-laid scheme, in order to prevent the discovery of their secrets.
If, notwithstanding my protestations, you doubt the truth of what I have
told you, Gros-Rene may come some night along with me, and I will show
him, as I stand and watch, that we shall be admitted into her house,
after dark.

ERAS. Out of my sight, villain.

MASC. I shall be delighted to go; that is just what I want. (_Exit_).




SCENE V.--ERASTE, GROS-RENE.


ERAS. Well?

GR.-RE. Well! Sir, we are both taken in if this fellow speaks the truth.

ERAS. Alas! The odious rascal has spoken the truth too well. All that he
has said is very likely to have happened; Valere's behaviour, at the
sight of this letter, denotes that there is a collusion between them,
and that it is a screen to hide Lucile's love for him.




SCENE VI.--ERASTE, MARINETTE, GROS-RENE.


MAR. I come to tell you that this evening my mistress permits you to see
her in the garden.

ERAS. How dare you address me, you hypocritical traitress? Get out of my
sight, and tell your mistress not to trouble me any more with her
letters; that is the regard, wretch, I have for them. (_He tears the
letter and goes out_).


MAR. Tell me, Gros-Rene, what ails him?

GR.-RE. Dare you again address me, iniquitous female, deceitful
crocodile, whose base heart is worse than a satrap or a Lestrigon?

[Footnote: See Homer's Odyssey, X., v. 81-132.]

Go, go, carry your answer to your lovely mistress, and tell her short
and sweet, that in spite of all her cunning, neither my master nor I are
any longer fools, and that henceforth she and you may go to the devil
together.                                                 (_Exit_).


MAR. My poor Marinette, are you quite awake? What demon are they
possessed by? What? Is it thus they receive our favours? How shocked my
mistress will be when she hears this!

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT II.




SCENE I.--ASCANIO, FROSINE.


FROS. Thank Heaven! I am a girl who can keep a secret, Ascanio.

ASC. But is this place private enough for such a conversation? Let us
take care that nobody surprises us, or that we be not overheard from
some corner or other.

FROS. We should be much less safe within the house; here we can easily
see anybody coming, and may speak in perfect safety.

ASC. Alas! how painful it is for me to begin my tale!

FROS. Sure, this must be an important secret then?

ASC. Too much so, since I even entrust it to you with reluctance; even
you should not know it, if I could keep it concealed any longer.

FROS. Fie! you insult me when you hesitate to trust in me, whom you have
ever found so reserved in everything that concerns you--me, who was
brought up with you, and have kept secret things of so great an
importance to you; me, who know...

ASC. Yes, you are already acquainted with the secret reason which
conceals from the eyes of the world my sex and family. You know that I
was brought into this house, where I have passed my infancy, in order to
preserve an inheritance which, on the death of young Ascanio (whom I
personate), should have fallen to others; that is why I dare to unbosom
myself to you with perfect confidence. But before we begin this
conversation, Frosine, clear up a doubt which continually besets me. Can
it be possible that Albert should know nothing of the secret, which thus
disguises my sex, and makes him my father?

FROS. To tell you the truth, what you now wish to know has also greatly
puzzled me. I have never been able to get at the bottom of this
intrigue, nor could my mother give me any further insight. When Albert's
son died, who was so much beloved, and to whom a very rich uncle
bequeathed a great deal of property, even before his birth; his mother
kept his death secret, fearing that her husband, who was absent at the
time, would have gone distracted, had he seen that great inheritance,
from which his family would have reaped such advantage, pass into the
hands of another. She, I say, in order to conceal this misfortune formed
the plan of putting you into the place of her lost son; you were taken
from our family, where you were brought up. Your mother gave her consent
to this deceit; you took the son's place, and every one was bribed to
keep the secret. Albert has never known it through us, and as his wife
kept it for more than twelve years, and died suddenly, her unexpected
death prevented her from disclosing it. I perceive, however, that he
keeps up an acquaintance with your real mother, and that, in private, he
assists her; perhaps all this is not done without a reason. On the other
hand, he commits a blunder by urging you to marry some young lady!
Perhaps he knows that you took the place of his son, without knowing
that you are a girl. But this digression might gradually carry us too
far; let us return to that secret which I am impatient to hear.

ASC. Know then that Cupid cannot be deceived, that I have not been able
to disguise my sex from love's eyes, and that his subtle shafts have
reached the heart of a weak woman beneath the dress I wear. In four
words, I am in love!

FROS. You in love!

ASC. Gently, Frosine; do not be quite so astonished; it is not time yet;
this love-sick heart has something else to tell you that will surprise
you.

FROS. What is it?

ASC. I am in love with Valere.

FROS. Ha! I really am surprised. What! you love a man whose family your
deceit has deprived of a rich inheritance, and who, if he had the least
suspicion of your sex, would immediately regain everything. This is a
still greater subject of astonishment.

ASC. I have a more wonderful surprise for you yet in store--I am his
wife.

FROS. Oh, Heavens! his wife!

ASC. Yes, his wife.

FROS. Ha! this is worse than all, and nearly drives me mad.

ASC. And yet this is not all.

FROS. Not all!

ASC. I am his wife, I say, and he does not think so, nor has he the
least idea of what I really am.

FROS. Go on, I give it up, and will not say any thing more, so much
every word amazes me. I cannot comprehend anything of these riddles.

ASC. I shall explain if you will but hear me. Valere who admired my
sister, seemed to me a lover worthy of being listened to; I could not
bear to see his addresses slighted without feeling a certain interest in
him. I wished that Lucile should take pleasure in his conversation, I
blamed her severity, and blamed it so effectually, that I myself,
without being able to help it, became affected with that passion which
she could not entertain. He was talking to her, and persuaded me; I
suffered myself to be overcome by the very sighs he breathed; and the
love, rejected by the object of his flame, entered, like a conqueror,
into my heart, which was wounded by an arrow, not aimed at it, and paid
another's debt with heavy interest. At last, my dear, the love I felt
for him forced me to declare myself, but under a borrowed name. One
night I spoke to him, disguising my voice as if it were Lucile's, and
this too amiable lover thought she returned his love; I managed the
conversation so well that he never found out the deception. Under that
disguise which pleased so much his deluded imagination, I told him that
I was enamoured of him, but that, finding my father opposed to my
wishes, I ought at least to pretend to obey him; that therefore it
behooved us to keep our love secret, with which the night alone should
be acquainted; that all private conversation should be avoided during
the day, for fear of betraying everything; that he should behold me with
the same indifference as he did before we had come to an understanding;
and that on his part, as well as mine, no communication should take
place either by gesture, word, or writing. In short, without dwelling
any longer upon all the pains I have taken to bring this deception to a
safe termination, I went on with my bold project as far as it was
possible to go, and secured the husband I mentioned to you.

FROS. Upon my word, you possess great talents. Would any one think so,
on seeing her passionless countenance? However, you have been pretty
hasty, and though I grant that the affair has succeeded until now, what
do you think will be the end of it, for it cannot be long concealed?

ASC. When love is strong it overcomes all obstacles, until it is
satisfied; provided it reaches the wished-for goal, it looks upon
everything else as a mere trifle. I have told you all to-day, so that
your advice... But here comes my husband.




SCENE II.--VALERE, ASCANIO, FROSINE.


VAL. If you are conversing, and if my presence is any interruption, I
shall withdraw.

ASC. No; you may well interrupt it, since we were talking about you.

VAL. About me?

ASC. About yourself.

VAL. How so?

ASC. I was saying, that if I had been a woman, Valere would have been
able to please me but too well, and that if I had been beloved by him, I
should not have delayed long to make him happy.

VAL. This declaration does not cost you much, as there is such an
_if_ in the way; but you would be finely caught if some miraculous
event should put to the proof the truth of so obliging a declaration.

ASC. Not in the least; I tell you that if I reigned in your heart, I
would very willingly crown your passion.

VAL. And what, if you might contribute to my happiness, by assisting me
to further my love?

ASC. I should then, certainly, disappoint you.

VAL. This admission is not very polite.

ASC. What, Valere? Supposing I were a woman and loved you tenderly,
would you be so cruel as to make me promise to aid you in your love for
another lady? I could not perform such a painful task.

VAL. But you are not a woman.

ASC. What I said to you I said in the character of a woman, and you
ought to take it so.

VAL. Thus I ought not to imagine you like me, Ascanio, unless Heaven
works a miracle in you. Therefore, as you are not a woman, I bid
farewell to your affection; you do not care in the least for me.

ASC. My feelings are far more nice than people imagine, and the smallest
misgiving shocks me when love is in the case. But I am sincere; I will
not promise to aid you, Valere, unless you assure me that you entertain
precisely the same sentiments for me; that you feel the same warmth of
friendship for me as I feel for you; and that if I were a woman you
would love no one better than me.

VAL. I never before heard of such a jealous scruple, but though quite
unexpected, this affection obliges me to make some return for it; I here
promise you all you require of me.

ASC. But sincerely?

VAL. Yes, sincerely.

ASC. If this be true, I promise you that henceforth your interests shall
be mine.

VAL. I have a secret of the utmost consequence to reveal to you by and
by, and then I shall remind you of your words.

ASC. And I have likewise a secret to discover to you, wherein your
affection for me may show itself.

VAL. Indeed! what can that be?

ASC. I have a love affair which I dare not reveal, and you have
influence enough over the object of my passion to promote my happiness.

VAL. Explain yourself, Ascanio, and be assured beforehand that, if your
happiness lies in my power, it is certain.

ASC. You promise more than you imagine.

VAL. No, no; tell me the name of the person whom I have to influence.

ASC. It is not yet time, but it is a person who is nearly related to
you.

VAL. Your words amaze me; would to Heaven my sister...

ASC. This is not the proper time to explain myself, I tell you.

VAL. Why so?

ASC. For a certain reason. You shall know my secret when I know yours.

VAL. I must have another person's permission before I can discover it to
you.

ASC. Obtain it then; and when we shall have explained ourselves we shall
see which of us two will best keep his word.

VAL. Farewell, I accept your offer.

ASC. And I will be bound by it, Valere. (_Exit Valere_.)

FROS. He thinks you will help him as a brother.




SCENE III.--LUCILE, ASCANIO, MARINETTE, FROSINE.


LUC. (_Saying the first words to Marinette_). I have done it; it is
thus I can revenge myself; if this step torments him, it will be a great
consolation to me... Brother, you perceive a change in me; I am resolved
to love Valere, after so much ill-usage; he shall become the object of
my affection.

ASC. What do you say, sister? How do you change so suddenly? This
inconstancy seems to me very strange.

LUC. Your change of disposition has more cause to surprise me. You
formerly used always to plead in favour of Valere; for his sake you have
accused me of caprice, blind cruelty, pride and injustice; and now, when
I wish to love him, my intention displeases you, and I find you speaking
against his interest.

ASC. I abandon his interest, sister, out of regard to yours. I know he
is under the sway of another fair one; it will be a discredit to your
charms if you call him back, and he does not come.

LUC. If that is all, I shall take care not to suffer a defeat; I know
what I am to believe of his passion; he has shown it very clearly, at
least so I think; you may safely discover my sentiments to him: or if
you refuse to do it, I, myself shall let him know that his passion has
touched me. What! you stand thunderstruck, brother, at those words!

ASC. Oh, sister, if I have any influence over you, if you will listen to
a brother's entreaties, abandon such a design; do not take away Valere
from the love of a young creature, in whom I feel great interest, and
for whom, upon my word, you ought to feel some sympathy. The poor
unfortunate woman loves him to distraction; to me alone she has
disclosed her passion; I perceive in her heart such a tender affection,
that it might soften even the most relentless being. Yes, you yourself
will pity her condition when she shall become aware with what stroke you
threaten to crush her love; so sure am I of the excess of her grief,
that I am certain, sister, she will die, if you rob her of the man she
adores. Eraste is a match that ought to satisfy you, and the mutual
affection you have for one another...

LUC. Brother, it is sufficient! I do not know in whom you take such an
interest; but let us not continue this conversation, I beg of you; leave
me a little to my own thoughts.

ASC. Cruel sister, you will drive me to despair if you carry your design
into execution.




SCENE IV.--LUCILE, MARINETTE.


MAR. Your resolution, madam, is very sudden.

LUC. A heart considers nothing when it is once affronted, but flies to
its revenge, and eagerly lays hold of whatever it thinks can minister to
its resentment. The wretch! To treat me with such extreme insolence!

MAR. You see I have not yet recovered the effects; though I were to
brood over it to all eternity, I cannot understand it, and all my labour
is in vain. For never did a lover express more delight on receiving good
news; so pleased was he with your kind note that he called me nothing
less than a divine creature; and yet, when I brought him the other
message, there was never a poor girl treated so scurvily. I cannot
imagine what could happen in so short a time to occasion so great a
change.

LUC. Do not trouble yourself about what may have happened, since nothing
shall secure him against my hatred. What! do you think there is any
secret reason for this affront but his own baseness? Does the
unfortunate letter I sent him, and for which I now blame myself, present
the smallest excuse for his madness?

MAR. Indeed, I must say you are right; this quarrel is downright
treachery; we have both been duped, and yet, madam, we listen to these
faithless rascals who promise everything; who, in order to hook us,
feign so much tenderness; we let our severity melt before their fine
speeches, and yield to their wishes, because we are too weak! A shame on
our folly, and a plague take the men!

LUC. Well, well! let him boast and laugh at us; he shall not long have
cause to triumph; I will let him see that in a well-balanced mind hatred
follows close on slighted favours.

MAR. At least, in such a case, it is a great happiness to know that we
are not in their power. Notwithstanding all that was said, Marinette was
right the other night to interfere when some people were in a very merry
mood. Another, in hopes of matrimony, would have listened to the
temptation, but _nescio vos_, quoth I.

[Footnote: These two Latin words, which were in very common use in
France, during Moliere's time, are taken from the Vulgate, Matthew xxv.
12: _"Domine, domine, aperi nobis."--At ille respondens ait: "Amen
dico vobis, nescio vos."_]

LUC. How foolishly you talk; how ill you choose your time to joke! My
heart is full of grief. If ever fate wills it that this false
lover,--but I am in the wrong to conceive at present any such
expectation; for Heaven has been too well pleased to afflict me to put
it in my power to be revenged on him,--but if ever a propitious fate, I
say, should cause Eraste to come back to me, and lay down his life as a
sacrifice at my feet, as well as declare his sorrow for what he has done
to-day, I forbid you, above all things, to speak to me in his favour. On
the contrary, I would have you show your zeal by setting fully before me
the greatness of his crime; if my heart should be tempted ever to
degrade itself so far, let your affection then show itself; spare me
not, but support my anger as is fit.

MAR. Oh! do not fear! leave that to me; I am at least as angry as you; I
would rather remain a maid all my life than that my fat rascal should
give me any inclination for him again. If he comes...





SCENE V.--MARINETTE, LUCILE, ALBERT.


ALB. Go in, Lucile, and tell the tutor to come to me; I wish to have a
little talk with him; and as he is the master of Ascanio, find out what
is the cause that the latter has been of late so gloomy.




SCENE VI.--ALBERT, _alone_.


Into what an abyss of cares and perplexities does one unjust action
precipitate us. For a long time I have suffered a great deal because I
was too avaricious, and passed off a stranger for my dead son. When I
consider the mischief which followed I sincerely wish I had never
thought of it. Sometimes I dread to behold my family in poverty and
covered with shame, when the deception will be found out; at other times
I fear a hundred accidents that may happen to this son whom it concerns
me so much to preserve. If any business calls me abroad, I am afraid of
hearing, on my return, some such melancholy tidings as these: "You know,
I suppose? Have they not told you? Your son has a fever; or he has
broken his leg or his arm." In short, every moment, no matter what I do,
all kinds of apprehensions are continually entering into my head. Ha!




SCENE VII.--ALBERT, METAPHRASTUS.


MET. _Mandatum tuum euro diligenter_.

[Footnote: "I hasten to obey your order."]

ALB. Master, I want to...

MET. Master is derived from _magis ter_; it is as though you say
"thrice greater."

ALB. May I die if I knew that; but, never mind, be it so. Master,
then...

MET. Proceed.

ALB. So I would, but do not proceed to interrupt me thus. Once more,
then, master, for the third time, my son causes me some uneasiness. You
know that I love him, and that I always brought him up carefully.

MET. It is true: _filio non potest praeferri nisi filius_.

[Footnote: "To a son one can only prefer a son." An allusion to an
article of feudal law.]

ALB. Master, I do not think this jargon at all necessary in common
conversation. I believe you are a great Latin scholar and an eminent
doctor, for I rely on those who have told me so; but in a conversation
which I should like to have with you, do not display all your
learning--do not play the pedant, and utter ever so many words, as if
you were holding forth in a pulpit. My father, though he was a very
clever man, never taught me anything but my prayers; and though I have
said them daily for fifty years, they are still High-Dutch to me.
Therefore, do not employ your prodigious knowledge, but adapt your
language to my weak understanding.

MET. Be it so.

ALB. My son seems to be afraid of matrimony; whenever I propose a match
to him, he seems indifferent, and draws back.

MET. Perhaps he is of the temper of Mark Tully's brother, whom he writes
about to Atticus. This is what the Greeks call _athanaton_....

[Footnote: Immortal.]

ALB. For Heaven's sake! you ceaseless teacher, I pray you have done with
the Greeks, the Albanians, the Sclavonians, and all the other nations
you have mentioned; they have nothing to do with my son.

MET. Well then, your son...?

ALB. I do not know whether a secret love does not burn within him.
Something disturbs him, or I am much deceived; for I saw him yesterday,
when he did not see me, in a corner of the wood, where no person ever
goes.

MET. In a recess of a grove, you mean, a remote spot, in Latin
_secessus_. Virgil says, _est in secessu locus_...

[Footnote: "There is a remote spot"]

ALB. How could Virgil say that, since I am certain that there was not a
soul in that quiet spot except us two?

MET. I quote Virgil as a famous author, who employed a more correct
expression than the word you used, and not as a witness of what you saw
yesterday.

ALB. I tell you I do not need a more correct expression, an author, or a
witness, and that my own testimony is sufficient.

MET. However, you ought to choose words which are used by the best
authors: _tu vivendo bonos, scribendo sequare peritos_, as the
saying is.

[Footnote: "Regulate your conduct after the example of good people, your
style after good authors."]

ALB. Man or devil, will you hear me without disputing?

MET. That is Quintilian's rule.

ALB. Hang the chatterbox!

MET. He has a very learned sentence upon a similar subject, which, I am
sure, you will be very glad to hear.

ALB. I will be the devil to carry you off, you wretch. Oh! I am very
much tempted to apply something to those chops.

MET. Sir, what is the reason that you fly in such a passion! What do you
wish me to do?

ALB. I have told you twenty times; I wish you to listen to me when I
speak.

MET. Oh! undoubtedly, you shall be satisfied if that is all. I am
silent.

ALB. You act wisely.

MET. I am ready to hear what you have to say.

ALB. So much the better.

MET. May I be struck dead if I say another word!

ALB. Heaven grant you that favour.

MET. You shall not accuse me henceforth of talkativeness.

ALB. Be it so.

MET. Speak whenever you please.

ALB. I am going to do so.

MET. And do not be afraid of my interrupting you.

ALB. That is enough.

MET. My word is my bond.

ALB. I believe so.

MET. I have promised to say nothing.

ALB. That is sufficient.

MET. From this moment I am dumb.

ALB. Very well.

MET. Speak; go on; I will give you a hearing at least; you shall not
complain that I cannot keep silent; I will not so much as open my mouth.

ALB. (_Aside_). The wretch!

MET. But pray, do not be prolix. I have listened already a long time,
and it is reasonable that I should speak in my turn.

ALB. Detestable torturer!

MET. Hey! good lack! would you have me listen to you for ever? Let us
share the talk, at least, or I shall be gone.

ALB. My patience is really...

MET. What, will you proceed? You have not done yet? By Jove, I am
stunned.

ALB. I have not spoken...

MET. Again! good Heavens! what exuberant speechifying! Can nothing be
done to stop it?

ALB. I am mad with rage.

MET. You are talking again! What a peculiar way of tormenting people!
Let me say a few words, I entreat you; a fool who says nothing cannot be
distinguished from a wise man who holds his tongue.

ALB. Zounds! I will make you hold yours. (_Exit_).




SCENE VIII.--METAPHRASTUS, _alone_.


Hence comes very properly that saying of a philosopher, "Speak, that I
may know thee." Therefore, if the liberty of speaking is taken from me,
I, for my part, would as soon be divested of my humanity, and exchange
my being for that of a brute. I shall have a headache for a week. Oh!
how I detest these eternal talkers! But if learned men are not listened
to, if their mouths are for ever to be stopped, then the order of events
must be changed; the hens in a little time will devour the fox; young
children teach old men; little lambs take a delight in pursuing the
wolf; fools make laws; women go to battle; judges be tried by criminals;
and masters whipped by pupils; a sick man prescribe for a healthy one; a
timorous hare...




SCENE IX.--ALBERT, METAPHRASTUS.


(_Albert rings a bell in the ears of Metaphrastus, and drives him
off_).

MET. Mercy on me! Help! help!

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT III.




SCENE I.--MASCARILLE, _alone_.


Heaven sometimes favours a bold design; we must get out of a bad
business as well as we can. As for me, after having imprudently talked
too much, the quickest remedy I could employ was to go on in the same
way, and immediately to tell to our old master the whole intrigue. His
son is a giddy-brained mortal, who worries me; but if the other tells
what I have discovered to him, then I had better take care, for I shall
get a beating. However, before his fury can be kindled, some lucky thing
may happen to us, and the two old men may arrange the business between
themselves. That is what I am going to attempt; without losing a moment
I must, by my master's order, go and see Albert. (_Knocks at Albert's
door_).




SCENE II.--ALBERT, MASCARILLE.


ALB. Who knocks?

MASC. A friend.

ALB. What brings you hither, Mascarille?

MASC. I come, sir, to wish you good-morning.

ALB. Hah! you really take a great deal of pains. Good-morning, then,
with all my heart. (_He goes in_).

MASC. The answer is short and sweet. What a blunt old fellow he is.
(_Knocks_).

ALB. What, do you knock again?

MASC. You have not heard me, sir.

ALB. Did you not wish me good-morning?

MASC. I did.

ALB. Well, then, good morning I say. (_Is going; Mascarille stops him_).

MASC. But I likewise come to pay Mr. Polydore's compliments to you.

ALB. Oh! that is another thing. Has your master ordered you to give his
compliments to me?

MASC. Yes.

ALB. I am obliged to him; you may go; tell him I wish him all kind of
happiness. (_Exit_).

MASC. This man is an enemy to all ceremony. (_Knocks_). I have not
finished, sir, giving you his whole message; he has a favour to request
of you.

ALB. Well, whenever he pleases, I am at his service.

MASC. (_Stopping him_). Stay, and allow me to finish in two words.
He desires to have a few minutes' conversation with you about an
important affair, and he will come hither.

ALB. Hey! what affair can that be which makes him wish to have some
conversation with me?

MASC. A great secret, I tell you, which he has but just discovered, and
which, no doubt, greatly concerns you both. And now I have delivered my
message.




SCENE III.--ALBERT, _alone_.


ALB. Righteous Heavens! how I tremble! Polydore and I have had little
acquaintance together; my designs will all be overthrown; this secret
is, no doubt, that of which I dread the discovery. They have bribed
somebody to betray me; so there is a stain upon my honour which can
never be wiped off. My imposture is found out. Oh! how difficult it is
to keep the truth concealed for any length of time! How much better
would it have been for me and my reputation had I followed the dictates
of a well-founded apprehension! Many times and oft have I been tempted
to give up to Polydore the wealth I withhold from him, in order to
prevent the outcry that will be raised against me when everything shall
be known, and so get the whole business quietly settled. But, alas! it
is now too late, the opportunity is gone, and this wealth, which
wrongfully came into my family, will be lost to them, and sweep away the
greatest part of my own property with it.




SCENE IV.--ALBERT, POLYDORE.


POL. (_Not seeing Albert_). To be married in this fashion, and no
one knowing anything about it! I hope it may all end well! I do not know
what to think of it; I much fear the great wealth and just anger of the
father. But I see him alone.

ALB. Oh, Heavens! yonder comes Polydore.

POL. I tremble to accost him.

ALB. Fear keeps me back.

POL. How shall I begin?

ALB. What shall I say?

POL. He is in a great passion.

ALB. He changes colour.

POL. I see, Signor Albert, by your looks, that you know already what
brings me hither.

ALB. Alas! yes.

POL. The news, indeed, may well surprise you, and I could scarcely
believe what I was told just now.

ALB. I ought to blush with shame and confusion.

POL. I think such an action deserves great blame, and do not pretend to
excuse the guilty.

ALB. Heaven is merciful to miserable sinners.

POL. You should bear this in mind.

ALB. A man ought to behave as a Christian.

POL. That is quite right.

ALB. Have mercy; for Heaven's sake, have mercy, Signor Polydore.

POL. It is for me to implore it of you.

ALB. Grant me mercy; I ask it on my bended knees.

POL. I ought to be in that attitude rather than you.

[Footnote: The two old men are kneeling opposite to one another.]

ALB. Pity my misfortune.

POL. After such an outrage I am the postulant.

ALB. Your goodness is heart-rending.

POL. You abash me with so much humility.

ALB. Once more, pardon.

POL. Alas! I crave it of you.

ALB. I am extremely sorry for this business.

POL. And I feel it greatly.

ALB. I venture to entreat you not to make it public.

POL. Alas, Signor Albert, I desire the very same.

ALB. Let us preserve my honour.

POL. With all my heart.

ALB. As for money, you shall determine how much you require.

POL. I desire no more than you are willing to give; you shall be the
master in all these things, I shall be but too happy if you are so.

ALB. Ha! what a God-like man! how very kind he is!

POL. How very kind you are yourself, and that after such a misfortune.

ALB. May you be prosperous in all things!

POL. May Heaven preserve you!

ALB. Let us embrace like brothers.

POL. With all my heart! I am overjoyed that everything has ended so
happily,

ALB. I thank Heaven for it.

POL. I do not wish to deceive you; I was afraid you would resent that
Lucile has committed a fault with my son; and as you are powerful, have
wealth and friends...

ALB. Hey! what do you say of faults and Lucile?

POL. Enough, let us not enter into a useless conversation. I own my son
is greatly to blame; nay, if that will satisfy you, I will admit that he
alone is at fault; that your daughter was too virtuous, and would never
have taken a step so derogatory to honour, had she not been prevailed
upon by a wicked seducer; that the wretch has betrayed her innocent
modesty, and thus frustrated all your expectations. But since the thing
is done, and my prayers have been granted, since we are both at peace
and amity, let it be buried in oblivion, and repair the offence by the
ceremony of a happy alliance.

ALB. (_Aside_). Oh, Heavens! what a mistake I have been under! What
do I hear? I get from one difficulty into another as great. I do not
know what to answer amidst these different emotions; if I say one word,
I am afraid of betraying myself.

POL. What are you thinking of, Signor Albert?

ALB. Of nothing. Let us put off our conversation for a while, I pray
you. I have become suddenly very unwell, and am obliged to leave you.




SCENE V.--POLYDORE, _alone_.


I can look into his soul and discover what disturbs him; though he
listened to reason at first, yet his anger is not quite appeased. Now
and then the remembrance of the offence flashes upon him; he endeavours
to hide his emotion by leaving me alone. I feel for him, and his grief
touches me. It will require some time before he regains his composure,
for if sorrow is suppressed too much, it easily becomes worse. O! here
comes my foolish boy, the cause of all this confusion.




SCENE VI.--POLYDORE, VALERE.


POL. So, my fine fellow, shall your nice goings-on disturb your poor old
father every moment? You perform something new every day, and we never
hear of anything else.

VAL. What am I doing every day that is so very criminal? And how have I
deserved so greatly a father's wrath?

POL. I am a strange man, and very peculiar to accuse so good and
discreet a son. He lives like a saint, and is at prayers and in the
house from morning to evening. It is a great untruth to say that he
perverts the order of nature, and turns day into night! It is a horrible
falsehood to state that upon several occasions he has shown no
consideration for father or kindred; that very lately he married
secretly the daughter of Albert, regardless of the great consequences
that were sure to follow; they mistake him for some other! The poor
innocent creature does not even know what I mean! Oh, you villain! whom
Heaven has sent me as a punishment for my sins, will you always do as
you like, and shall I never see you act discreetly as long as I live?
(_Exit_).

VAL. (_Alone, musing_). Whence comes this blow? I am perplexed, and
can find none to think of but Mascarille, he will never confess it to
me; I must be cunning, and curb my well-founded anger a little.




SCENE VII.--VALERE, MASCARILLE.


VAL. Mascarille, my father whom I just saw knows our whole secret.

MASC. Does he know it?

VAL. Yes.

MASC. How the deuce could he know it?

VAL. I do not know whom to suspect; but the result has been so
successful, that I have all the reason in the world to be delighted. He
has not said one cross word about it; he excuses my fault, and approves
of my love; I would fain know who could have made him so tractable. I
cannot express to you the satisfaction it gives me.

MASC. And what would you say, sir, if it was I who had procured you this
piece of good luck?

VAL. Indeed! you want to deceive me.

MASC. It is I, I tell you, who told it to your father, and produced this
happy result for you.

VAL. Really, without jesting?

MASC. The devil take me if I jest, and if it is not as I tell you.

VAL. (_Drawing his sword_). And may he take me if I do not this
very moment reward you for it.

MASC. Ha, sir! what now? Don't surprise me.

VAL. Is this the fidelity you promised me? If I had not deceived you,
you would never have owned the trick which I rightly suspected you
played me. You rascal! your tongue, too ready to wag, has provoked my
father's wrath against me, and utterly ruined me. You shall die without
saying another word.

MASC. Gently; my soul is not in a fit condition to die. I entreat you,
be kind enough to await the result of this affair. I had very good
reasons for revealing a marriage which you yourself could hardly
conceal. It was a masterpiece of policy; you will not find your rage
justified by the issue. Why should you get angry if, through me, you get
all you desire, and are freed from the constraint you at present lie
under?

VAL. And what if all this talk is nothing but moonshine?

MASC. Why, then, it will be time enough to kill me; but my schemes may
perchance succeed. Heaven will assist his own servants; you will be
satisfied in the end, and thank me for my extraordinary management.

VAL. Well, we shall see. But Lucile...

MASC. Hold, here comes her father




SCENE VIII.--ALBERT, VALERE, MASCARILLE.


ALB. (_Not seeing Valere_). The more I recover from the confusion
into which I fell at first, the more I am astonished at the strange
things Polydore told me, and which my fear made me interpret in so
different a manner to what he intended. Lucile maintains that it is all
nonsense, and spoke to me in such a manner as leaves no room for
suspicion... Ha! sir, it is you whose unheard-of impudence sports with
my honour, and invents this base story?

MASC. Pray, Signor Albert, use milder terms, and do not be so angry with
your son-in-law.

ALB. How! son-in-law, rascal? You look as if you were the main-spring of
this intrigue, and the originator of it.

MASC. Really I see no reason for you to fly in such a passion.

ALB. Pray, do you think it right to take away the character of my
daughter, and bring such a scandal upon a whole family?

MASC. He is ready to do all you wish.

ALB. I only want him to tell the truth. If he had any inclination for
Lucile, he should have courted her in an honourable and open way; he
should have acted as he ought, and asked her father's leave; and not
have had recourse to this cowardly contrivance, which offends modesty so
much.

MASC. What! Lucile is not secretly engaged to my master?

ALB. No, rascal, nor ever will be.

MASC. Not quite so fast! If the thing is already done, will you give
your consent to ratify that secret engagement?

ALB. And if it is certain that it is not so, will you have your bones
broken?

VAL. It is easy, sir, to prove to you that he speaks the truth.

ALB. Good! there is the other! Like master, like man. O! what impudent
liars!

MASC. Upon the word of a man of honour, it is as I say.

VAL. Why should we deceive you?

ALB. (_Aside_) They are two sharpers that know how to play into
each other's hands.

MASC. But let us come to the proof, and without quarrelling. Send for
Lucile, and let her speak for herself.

ALB. And what if she should prove you a liar?

MASC. She will not contradict us, sir; of that I am certain. Promise to
give your consent to their engagement; and I will suffer the severest
punishment if, with her own mouth, she does not confess to you that she
is engaged to Valere, and shares his passion.

ALB. We shall see this presently. (_He knocks at his door_).

MASC. (To Valere). Courage, Sir; all will end well.

ALB. Ho! Lucile, one word with you.

VAL. (_To Mascarille_), I fear...

MASC. Fear nothing.




SCENE IX.--VALERE, ALBERT, LUCILE, MASCARILLE.


MASC. Signor Albert, at least be silent. At length, madam, everything
conspires to make your happiness complete. Your father, who is informed
of your love, leaves you your husband and gives his permission to your
union, provided that, banishing all frivolous fears, a few words from
your own mouth corroborate what we have told him.

LUC. What nonsense does this impudent scoundrel tell me?

MASC. That is all right. I am already honoured with a fine title.

LUC. Pray, sir, who has invented this nice story which has been spread
about today?

VAL. Pardon me, charming creature. My servant has been babbling; our
marriage is discovered, without my consent.

LUC. Our marriage?

VAL. Everything is known, adorable Lucile; it is vain to dissemble.

LUC. What! the ardour of my passion has made you my husband?

VAL. It is a happiness which causes a great many heart-burnings. But I
impute the successful result of my courtship less to your great passion
for me than to your kindness of heart. I know you have cause to be
offended, that it was the secret which you would fain have concealed. I
myself have put a restraint on my ardour, so that I might not violate
your express commands; but...

MASC. Yes, it was I who told it. What great harm is done?

LUC. Was there ever a falsehood like this? Dare you mention this in my
very presence, and hope to obtain my hand by this fine contrivance? What
a wretched lover you are--you, whose gallant passion would wound my
honour, because it could not gain my heart; who wish to frighten my
father by a foolish story, so that you might obtain my hand as a reward
for having vilified me. Though everything were favourable to your
love--my father, fate, and my own inclination--yet my well-founded
resentment would struggle against my own inclination, fate, and my
father, and even lose life rather than be united to one who thought to
obtain my hand in this manner. Begone! If my sex could with decency be
provoked to any outburst of rage, I would let you know what it was to
treat me thus.

VAL. (_To Mascarille_). It is all over with us; her anger cannot be
appeased.

MASC. Let me speak to her. Prithee, madam, what is the good of all these
excuses? What are you thinking of? And what strange whim makes you thus
oppose your own happiness? If your father were a harsh parent, the case
would be different, but he listens to reason; and he himself has assured
me that if you would but confess the truth, his affection would grant
you everything. I believe you are a little ashamed frankly to
acknowledge that you have yielded to love; but if you have lost a
trifling amount of freedom, everything will be set to rights again by a
good marriage. Your great love for Valere may be blamed a little, but
the mischief is not so great as if you had murdered a man. We all know
that flesh is frail, and that a maid is neither stock nor stone. You
were not the first, that is certain; and you will not be the last, I
dare say.

LUC. What! can you listen to this shameless talk, and make no reply to
these indignities?

ALB. What would you have me say? This affair puts me quite beside
myself.

MASC. Upon my word, madam, you ought to have confessed all before now.

LUC. What ought I to have confessed?

MASC. What? Why, what has passed between my master and you. A fine joke,
indeed!

LUC. Why, what has passed between your master and me, impudent wretch?

MASC. You ought, I think, to know that better than I; you passed that
night too agreeably, to make us believe you could forget it so soon.

LUC. Father, we have too long borne with the insolence of an impudent
lackey. (_Gives him a box on the ear_).




SCENE X.--ALBERT, VALERE, MASCARILLE.


MASC. I think she gave me a box on the ear.

ALB. Be gone! rascal, villain! Her father approves the way in which she
has made her hand felt upon your cheek.

MASC. May be so; yet may the devil take me if I said anything but what
was true!

ALB. And may I lose an ear if you carry on this impudence any further!

MASC. Shall I send for two witnesses to testify to the truth of my
statements?

ALB. Shall I send for two of my servants to give you a sound thrashing?

MASC. Their testimony will corroborate mine.

ALB. Their arms may make up for my want of strength.

MASC. I tell you, Lucile behaves thus because she is ashamed.

ALB. I tell you, you shall be answerable for all this.

MASC. Do you know Ormin, that stout and clever notary?

ALB. Do you know Grimpant, the city executioner?

MASC. And Simon, the tailor, who used formerly to work for all the
people of fashion?

ALB. And the gibbet set up in the middle of the market-place?

MASC. You shall see they will confirm the truth of this marriage.

ALB. You shall see they will make an end of you.

MASC. They were the witnesses chosen by them.

ALB. They shall shortly revenge me on you.

MASC. I myself saw them at the altar.

ALB. And I myself shall see you with a halter.

MASC. By the same token, your daughter had a black veil on.

ALB. By the same token, your face foretells your doom.

MASC. What an obstinate old man.

ALB. What a cursed rascal! You may thank my advanced years, which
prevent me from punishing your insulting remarks upon the spot: but I
promise you, you shall be paid with full interest.




SCENE XI.--VALERE, MASCARILLE.


VAL. Well, where is now that fine result you were to produce...?

MASC. I understand what you mean. Everything goes against me: I see
cudgels and gibbets preparing for me on every side. Therefore, so that I
may be at rest amidst this chaos, I shall go and throw myself headlong
from a rock, if, in my present despair, I can find one high enough to
please me. Farewell, sir.

VAL. No, no; in vain you wish to fly. If you die, I expect it to be in
my presence.

MASC. I cannot die if anybody is looking on: it would only delay my end.

VAL. Follow me traitor; follow me. My maddened love will soon show
whether this is a jesting matter or not.

MASC. (_Alone_). Unhappy Mascarille, to what misfortunes are you
condemned to-day for another's sin!

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT IV.




SCENE I.--ASCANIO, FROSINE.


FROS. What has happened is very annoying.

ASC. My dear Frosine, fate has irrevocably decreed my ruin. Now the
affair has gone so far, it will never stop there, but will go on; Lucile
and Valere, surprised at such a strange mystery, will, one day, try to
find their way amidst this darkness, and thus all my plans will
miscarry. For, whether Albert is acquainted with the deception, or
whether he himself is deceived, as well as the rest of the world, if
ever it happens that my family is discovered, and all the wealth he has
wrongfully acquired passes into the hands of others, judge if he will
then endure my presence; for, not having any interest more in the
matter, he will abandon me, and his affection for me will be at an end.
Whatever, then, my lover may think of my deception, will he acknowledge
as his wife a girl without either fortune or family?

FROS. I think you reason rightly; but these reflections should have come
sooner. What has prevented you from seeing all this before? there was no
need to be a witch to foresee, as soon as you fell in love with Valere,
all that your genius never found out until to-day. It is the natural
consequence of what you have done; as soon as I was made acquainted with
it I never imagined it would end otherwise.

ASC. But what must I do? There never was such a misfortune as mine. Put
yourself in my place, and give me advice.

FROS. If I put myself in your place, you will have to give me advice
upon this ill-success; for I am you, and you are I. Counsel me, Frosine,
in the condition I am in. Where can we find a remedy? Tell me, I beg of
you.

ASC. Alas! do not make fun of me. You show but little sympathy with my
bitter grief, if you laugh in the midst of my distress.

FROS. Really, Ascanio, I pity your distress, and would do my utmost to
help you. But what can I do, after all? I see very little likelihood of
arranging this affair so as to satisfy your love.

ASC. If no assistance can be had, I must die.

FROS. Die! Come, come; it is always time enough for that. Death is a
remedy ever at hand; we ought to make use of it as late as possible.

ASC. No, no, Frosine. If you and your invaluable counsels do not guide
me amidst all these breakers, I abandon myself wholly to despair.

FROS. Do you know what I am thinking about? I must go and see the....
But here comes Eraste; he may interrupt us. We will talk this matter
over as we go along. Come, let us retire.

[Footnote: Frosine means by "the..." the woman who knows the secret of
all this intrigue, and who is supposed to be the mother of Ascanio. This
is explained later on in Act V., Scene 4]




SCENE II.--ERASTE, GROS-RENE.


ERAS. You have failed again?

GR.-RE. Never was an ambassador less listened to. No sooner had I told
her that you desired to have a moment's conversation with her, than,
drawing herself up, she answered haughtily, "Go, go, I value your master
just as much as I do you; tell him he may go about his business;" and
after this fine speech she turned her head away from me and walked off.
Marinette, too, imitating her mistress, said, with a disdainful sneer,
"Begone, you low fellow," and then left me; so that your fortune and mine
are very much alike.

[Footnote: In the original it is _beau valet de carreau_. Littre,
in his "Dictionaire de la langue francaise," says that this word which
means literally "knave of diamonds," was considered an insult, because in
the old packs of cards of the beginning of the seventeenth century, that
knave was called _valet de chasse_, hunting servant, a rather
menial situation; while the knave of spades, _valet de pique_, was
called, nobleman's servant; the knave of hearts, valet de coeur, valet
de cour, court servant; and the knave of clubs, _valet de trefle,
valet de pied_, foot servant.]

ERAS. What an ungrateful creature, to receive with so much haughtiness
the quick return of a heart justly incensed. Is the first outburst of a
passion, which with so much reason thought itself deceived, unworthy of
excuse? Could I, when burning with love, remain insensible, in that
fatal moment, to the happiness of a rival? Would any other not have
acted in the same way as I did, or been less amazed at so much boldness?
Was I not quick in abandoning my well-founded suspicions? I did not wait
till she swore they were false. When no one can tell as yet what to
think of it, my heart, full of impatience, restores Lucile to her former
place, and seeks to find excuses for her. Will not all these proofs
satisfy her of the ardour of my respectful passion? Instead of calming
my mind, and providing me with arms against a rival who wishes to alarm
me, this ungrateful woman abandons me to all the tortures of jealousy,
and refuses to receive my messages and notes, or to grant me an
interview. Alas! that love is certainly very lukewarm which can be
extinguished by so trifling an offence; that scornful rigour, which is
displayed so readily, sufficiently shows to me the depth of her
affection. What value ought I to set now upon all the caprices with
which she fanned my love? No! I do not pretend to be any longer the
slave of one who has so little love for me; since she does not mind
whether she keeps me or not, I will do the same.

GR.-RE. And so will I. Let us both be angry, and put our love on the
list of our old sins; we must teach a lesson to that wayward sex, and
make them feel that we possess some courage. He that will bear their
contempt shall have enough of it. If we had sense enough not to make
ourselves too cheap, women would not talk so big. Oh! how insolent they
are through our weakness! May I be hanged if we should not see them fall
upon our neck more often than we wished, if it was not for those
servilities with which most men, now-a-days, continually spoil them.

ERAS. As for me, nothing vexes me so much as contempt; and to punish
her's by one as great, I am resolved to cherish a new passion.

GR.-RE. So will I, and never trouble my head about women again. I
renounce them all, and believe honestly you could not do better than to
act like me. For, master, people say that woman is an animal hard to be
known, and naturally very prone to evil; and as an animal is always an
animal, and will never be anything but an animal, though it lived for a
hundred thousand years, so, without contradiction, a woman is always a
woman, and will never be anything but a woman as long as the world
endures.

[Footnote: This passage is paraphrased from Erasmus, _Colloquia
familiaria et Encomium Moriae_, in which, after having called a woman
_animal stultum atque ineptum verum ridiculum, et suave_, Folly
adds, _Quemadmodum, juxta Graecorum proverbium, simia semper est
simia, etiamsi purpura vestiatur, ita mulier semper mulier est, hoc est
stulta, quamcunque personam induxerit_.]

Wherefore, as a certain Greek author says: a woman's head is like a
quicksand; for pray, mark well this argument, which is most weighty: As
the head is the chief of the body, and as the body without a chief is
worse than a beast, unless the chief has a good understanding with the
body, and unless everything be as well regulated as if it were measured
with a pair of compasses, we see certain confusions arrive; the animal
part then endeavours to get the better of the rational, and, we see one
pull to the right, another to the left; one wants something soft,
another something hard; in short, everything goes topsy turvy. This is
to show that here below, as it has been explained to me, a woman's head
is like a weather-cock on the top of a house, which veers about at the
slightest breeze; that is why cousin Aristotle often compares her to the
sea; hence people say that nothing in the world is so stable as the
waves.

[Footnote: Though "stable" is here used, it is only employed to show the
confusion of Gros-Rene's ideas, who, of course, wishes to say
"unstable."]

Now, by comparison--for comparison makes us comprehend an argument
distinctly,--and we learned men love a comparison better than a
similitude,--by comparison, then, if you please, master, as we see that
the sea, when a storm rises, begins to rage, the wind roars and
destroys, billows dash against billows with a great hullabaloo, and the
ship, in spite of the mariner, goes sometimes down to the cellar and
sometimes up into the garret; so, when a woman gets whims and crotchets
into her head, we see a tempest in the form of a violent storm, which
will break out by certain ... words, and then a ... certain wind, which
by ... certain waves in ... a certain manner, like a sand-bank ... when
... In short, woman is worse than the devil.

[Footnote: This long speech of Gros-Rene ridicules the pedantic
arguments of some of the philosophers of the time of Moliere. It also
attributes to the ancients some sayings of authors of the day; for
example, the comparison, from a Greek author, "that a woman's head is
like a quicksand," is from a contemporary; the saying from Aristotle,
comparing woman to the sea, is from Malherbe. Words very familiar look
more homely when employed with high-flown language, and Gros-Rene's
speech is no bad example of this, whilst at the same time it becomes
more muddled the longer it goes on. There exists also a tradition that
the actor who performs the part of Gros-Rene should in order to show his
confusion, when he says "goes sometimes down the cellar," point to his
head, and when he mentions "up into the garret," point to his feet.]

ERAS. You have argued that very well.

GR.-RE. Pretty well, thanks to Heaven; but I see them coming this way,
sir,--stand firm.

ERAS. Never fear.

GR.-RE. I am very much afraid that her eyes will ensnare you again.




SCENE III.--ERASTE, LUCILE, MARINETTE, GROS-RENE.


MAR. He is not gone yet, but do not yield.

LUC. Do not imagine I am so weak.

MAR. He comes towards us.

ERAS. No, no, madam, do not think that I have come to speak to you again
of my passion; it is all over; I am resolved to cure myself. I know how
little share I have in your heart. A resentment kept up so long for a
slight offence shows me your indifference but too plainly, and I must
tell you that contempt, above all things, wounds a lofty mind. I confess
I saw in you charms which I never found in any other; the delight I took
in my chains would have made me prefer them to sceptres, had they been
offered to me. Yes, my love for you was certainly very great; my life
was centred in you; I will even own that, though I am insulted, I shall
still perhaps have difficulty enough to free myself. Maybe,
notwithstanding the cure I am attempting, my heart may for a long time
smart with this wound. Freed from a yoke which I was happy to bend
under, I shall take a resolution never to love again. But no matter,
since your hatred repulses a heart which love brings back to you, this
is the last time you shall ever be troubled by the man you so much
despise.

LUC. You might have made the favour complete, sir, and spared me also
this last trouble.

ERAS. Very well, madam, very well, you shall be satisfied. I here break
off all acquaintance with you, and break it off for ever, since you wish
it; may I lose my life if ever again I desire to converse with you!

LUC. So much the better, you will oblige me.

ERAS. No, no, do not be afraid that I shall break my word! For, though
my heart may be weak enough not to be able to efface your image, be
assured you shall never have the pleasure of seeing me return.

LUC. You may save yourself the trouble.

ERAS. I would pierce my breast a hundred times should I ever be so mean
as to see you again, after this unworthy treatment.

LUC. Be it so; let us talk no more about it.

ERAS. Yes, yes; let us talk no more about it; and to make an end here of
all unnecessary speeches, and to give you a convincing proof, ungrateful
woman, that I forever throw off your chain, I will keep nothing which
may remind me of what I must forget. Here is your portrait; it presents
to the eye many wonderful and dazzling charms, but underneath them lurk
as many monstrous faults; it is a delusion which I restore to you.

GR.-RE. You are right.

LUC. And I, not to be behind-hand with you in the idea of returning
everything, restore to you this diamond which you obliged me to accept.

MAR. Very well.

ERAS. Here is likewise a bracelet of yours.

[Footnote: Formerly lovers used to wear bracelets generally made of each
others hair, which no doubt were hidden from the common view.
Shakespeare, in his _Mid-summer Night's Dream_, Act i., Scene I,
says, "Thou, Lysander, thou hast... stol'n th' impression of her fantasy
with bracelets of thy hair."]

LUC. And this agate seal is yours.

ERAS. (_Reads_). "You love me with the most ardent passion, Eraste,
and wish to know if I feel the same. If I do not love Eraste as much, at
least I am pleased that Eraste should thus love me.--LUCILE." You assure
me by this letter that you accept my love; it is a falsehood which I
punish thus. (_Tears the letter_).

LUC. (_Reading_). "I do not know what may be the fate of my ardent
love, nor how long I shall suffer; but this I know, beauteous charmer,
that I shall always love you.--ERASTE." This is an assurance of
everlasting love; both the hand and the letter told a lie. (_Tears the
letter_).

GR.-RE. Go on.

ERAS. (_Showing another letter_). This is another of your letters;
it shall share the same fate.

MAR. (_To Lucile_). Be firm.

LUC. (_Tearing another letter_). I should be sorry to keep back one
of them.

GR.-RE. (_To Eraste_). Do not let her have the last word.

MAR. (_To Lucile_). Hold out bravely to the end.

LUC. Well, there are the rest.

ERAS. Thank Heaven, that is all! May I be struck dead if I do not keep
my word!

LUC. May it confound me if mine be vain.

ERAS. Farewell, then.

LUC. Farewell, then.

MAR. (_To Lucile_). Nothing could be better.

GR.-RE. (_To Eraste_). You triumph.

MAR. (_To Lucile_). Come, let us leave him.

GR.-RE. (_To Eraste_). You had best retire after this courageous
effort.

MAR. (_To Lucile_). What are you waiting for?

GR.-RE. (_To Eraste_). What more do you want?

ERAS. Ah, Lucile, Lucile! you will be sorry to lose a heart like mine,
and I know it.

LUC. Eraste, Eraste, I may easily find a heart like yours.

ERAS. No, no, search everywhere; you will never find one so passionately
fond of you, I assure you. I do not say this to move you to pity; I
should be in the wrong now to wish it; the most respectful passion could
not bind you. You wanted to break with me; I must think of you no more.
But whatever any one may pretend, nobody will ever love you so tenderly
as I have done.

LUC. When a woman is really beloved she is treated differently, and is
not condemned so rashly.

ERAS. Those who love are apt to be jealous on the slightest cause of
suspicion, but they can never wish to lose the object of their
adoration, and that you have done.

LUC. Pure jealousy is more respectful.

ERAS. An offence caused by love is looked upon with more indulgence.

LUC. No, Eraste, your flame never burnt very bright.

ERAS. No, Lucile, you never loved me.

LUC. Oh! that does not trouble you much, I suppose; perhaps it would
have been much better for me if... But no more of this idle talk; I do
not say what I think on the subject.

ERAS. Why?

LUC. Because, as we are to break, it would be out of place, it seems to
me.

ERAS. Do we break, then?

LUC. Yes, to be sure; have we not done so already?

ERAS. And you can do this calmly?

LUC. Yes; so can you.

ERAS. I?

LUC. Undoubtedly. It is weakness to let people see that we are hurt by
losing them.

ERAS. But, hard-hearted woman, it is you who would have it so.

LUC. I? not at all; it was you who took that resolution.

ERAS. I? I thought it would please you.

LUC. Me; not at all; you did it for your own satisfaction.

ERAS. But what if my heart should wish to resume its former chain? If,
though very sad, it should sue for pardon...?

[Footnote: An imitation from Horace, book iii., ode ix., vers. 17 and 18.
  _Quid? si prisca redet Venus
  Diductosque jugo cogit aheneo?_]


LUC. No, no; do no such thing; my weakness is too great. I am afraid I
might too quickly grant your request.

ERAS. Oh! you cannot grant it, nor I ask for it, too soon, after what I
have just heard. Consent to love me still, madam; so pure a flame ought
to burn for ever, for your own sake. I ask for it, pray grant me this
kind pardon.

LUC. Lead me home.




SCENE IV.--MARINETTE, GROS-RENE.


MAR. Oh! cowardly creature,

GR.-RE. Oh! weak courage.

MAR. I blush with indignation.

GR.-RE. I am swelling with rage; do not imagine I will yield thus.

MAR. And do not think to find such a dupe in me.

GR.-RE. Come on, come on; you shall soon see what my wrath is capable of
doing.

MAR. I am not the person you take me for; you have not my silly mistress
to deal with. It is enough to look at that fine phiz to be smitten with
the man himself! Should I fall in love with your beastly face? Should I
hunt after you? Upon my word, girls like us are not for the like of you.

GR.-RE. Ay! and you address me in such a fashion? Here, here, without
any further compliments, there is your bow of tawdry lace, and your
narrow ribbon; it shall not have the honour of being on my ear any more.

MAR. And to show you how I despise you, here, take back your half
hundred of Paris pins, which you gave me yesterday with so much
bragging.

GR.-RE. Take back your knife too; a thing most rich and rare; it cost
you about twopence when you made me a present of it.

MAR. Take back your scissors with the pinchbeck chain.

GR.-RE. I forgot the piece of cheese you gave me the day before
yesterday--here it is; I wish I could bring back the broth you made me
eat, so that I might have nothing belonging to you.

MAR. I have none of your letters about me now, but I shall burn every
one of them.

GR.-RE. And do you know what I shall do with yours?

MAR. Take care you never come begging to me again to forgive you.

GR. RE. (_Picking up a bit of straw_). To cut off every way of
being reconciled, we must break this straw between us; when a straw is
broken, it settles an affair between people of honour.

[Footnote: A wisp of straw, or a stick, was formerly used as a symbol of
investiture of a feudal fief. According to some authors the breaking of
the straw or stick was a proof that the vassals renounced their homage;
hence the allusion of Moliere. The breaking of a staff was also typical
of the voluntary or compulsory abandonment of power. Formerly, after the
death of the kings of France, the _grand maitre_ (master of the
household) broke his wand of office over the grave, saying aloud three
times, _le roi est mort_ and then _Vive le roi_. Hence also,
most likely, the saying of Prospero, in Shakespeare's "Tempest" Act v.
Sc. I, "I'll break my staff," _i.e._, I voluntarily abandon my
power. Sometimes the breaking of a staff betokened dishonour, as in
Shakespeare's second part of "Henry VI." Act I. Sc. 2. when Gloster
says: "Methought this staff, mine office-badge in court was broke in
twain."]

Cast none of your sheep's eyes at me;

[Footnote: According to tradition, Gros-Rene and Marinette stand on the
stage back to back; from time to time they look to the right and to the
left; when their looks meet they turn their heads abruptly away, whilst
Gros-Rene presents over his shoulder to Marinette the piece of straw,
which the latter takes very good care not to touch.]

I will be angry.

MAR. Do not look at me thus; I am too much provoked.

GR.-RE. Here, break this straw; this is the way of never recanting
again; break. What do you laugh at, you jade?

MAR. Yes, you make me laugh.

GR.-RE. The deuce take your laughing! all my anger is already softened.
What do you say? shall we break or not?

MAR. Just as you please.

GR.-RE. Just as you please.

MAR. Nay, it shall be as you please.

GR. RE. Do you wish me never to love you?

MAR. I? As you like.

GR.-RE. As you yourself like; only say the word.

MAR. I shall say nothing.

GR.-RE. Nor I.

MAR. Nor I.

GR.-RE. Faith! we had better forswear all this nonsense; shake hands, I
pardon you.

MAR. And I forgive you.

GR.-RE. Bless me! how you bewitch me with your charms.

MAR. What a fool is Marinette when her Gros-Rene is by.

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT V.




SCENE I.--MASCARILLE, _alone_.


"As soon as darkness has invaded the town, I will enter Lucile's room;
go, therefore, and get ready immediately the dark lantern, and whatever
arms are necessary." When my master said these words, it sounded in my
ears as if he had said, "Go quickly and get a halter to hang yourself."
But come on, master of mine, for I was so astonished when first I heard
your order, that I had no time to answer you; but I shall talk with you
now, and confound you; therefore defend yourself well, and let us argue
without making a noise. You say you wish to go and visit Lucile
to-night? "Yes, Mascarille." And what do you propose to do? "What a
lover does who wishes to be convinced." What a man does who has very
little brains, who risks his carcass when there is no occasion for it.
"But do you know what is my motive? Lucile is angry." Well, so much the
worse for her. "But my love prompts me to go and appease her." But love
is a fool, and does not know what he says: will this same love defend us
against an enraged rival, father, or brother? "Do you think any of them
intend to harm us?" Yes, really, I do think so; and especially this
rival. "Mascarille, in any case, what I trust to is, that we shall go
well armed, and if anybody interrupts us we shall draw." Yes, but that
is precisely what your servant does not wish to do. I draw! Good
Heavens! am I a Roland, master, or a Ferragus?

[Footnote: Roland, or Orlando in Italian, one of Charlemagne's paladins
and nephew is represented as brave, loyal, and simple-minded. On the
return of Charlemagne from Spain, Roland, who commanded the rearguard,
fell into an ambuscade at Roncezvalles, in the Pyrenees (778), and
perished, with the flower of French chivalry. He is the hero of
Ariosto's poem, "Orlando Furioso." In this same poem Cant. xii. is also
mentioned Ferragus, or Ferrau in Italian, a Saracen giant, who dropped
his helmet into the river, and vowed he would never wear another till he
had won that worn by Orlando; the latter slew him in the only part where
he was vulnerable.]

You hardly know me. When I, who love myself so dearly, consider that two
inches of cold steel in this body would be quite sufficient to send a
poor mortal to his last home, I am particularly disgusted. "But you will
be armed from head to foot." So much the worse. I shall be less nimble
to get into the thicket; besides, there is no armour so well made but
some villainous point will pierce its joints. "Oh! you will then be
considered a coward." Never mind; provided I can but always move my
jaws. At table you may set me down for as good as four persons, if you
like; but when fighting is going on, you must not count me for anything.
Moreover, if the other world possesses charms for you, the air of this
world agrees very well with me. I do not thirst after death and wounds;
if you have a mind to play the fool, you may do it all by yourself, I
assure you.




SCENE II.--VALERE, MASCARILLE.


VAL. I never felt a day pass more slowly; the sun seems to have
forgotten himself; he has yet such a course to run before he reaches his
bed, that I believe he will never accomplish it; his slow motion drives
me mad.

MASC. What an eagerness to go in the dark, to grope about for some ugly
adventure! You see that Lucile is obstinate in her repulses....

VAL. A truce to these idle remonstrances. Though I were sure to meet a
hundred deaths lying in ambush, yet I feel her wrath so greatly, that I
shall either appease it, or end my fate. I am resolved on that.

MASC. I approve of your design; but it is unfortunate, sir, that we must
get in secretly.

VAL. Very well.

MASC. And I am afraid I shall only be in the way.

VAL. How so?

MASC. I have a cough which nearly kills me, and the noise it makes may
betray you. Every moment... (_He coughs_). You see what a
punishment it is.

VAL. You will get better; take some liquorice.

MASC. I do not think, sir, it will get better. I should be delighted to
go with you, but I should be very sorry if any misfortune should befall
my dear master through me.




SCENE III.--VALERE, LA RAPIERE, MASCARILLE.


LA RA. Sir, I have just now heard from good authority that Eraste is
greatly enraged against you, and that Albert talks also of breaking all
the bones in Mascarille's body, on his daughter's account.

MASC. I? I have nothing to do with all this confusion. What have I done
to have all the bones in my body broken? Am I the guardian of the
virginity of all the girls in the town, that I am to be thus threatened?
Have I any influence with temptation? Can I help it, I, poor fellow, if
I have a mind to try it?

VAL. Oh! they are not so dangerous as they pretend to be; however
courageous love may have made Eraste, he will not have so easy a bargain
with us.

LA RA. If you should have any need for it, my arm is entirely at your
service. You know me to be at all times staunch.

[Footnote: It is thought the introduction of Mons. de la Rapiere
contains an allusion to the poor noblemen of Languedoc, who formerly
made a kind of living by being seconds at duels, and whom the Prince de
Conti compelled to obey the edicts of Louis XIV. against duelling.
_The Love-tiff_ was first played in 1656 at Beziers, where the
States of Languedoc were assembled.]

VAL. I am much obliged to you, M. de la Rapiere.

LA RA. I have likewise two friends I can procure, who will draw against
all comers, and upon whom you may safely rely.

MASC. Accept their services, sir.

VAL. You are too kind.

LA RA. Little Giles might also have assisted us, if a sad accident had
not taken him from us. Oh, sir, it is a great pity! He was such a handy
fellow, too! You know the trick justice played him; he died like a hero;
when the executioner broke him on the wheel, he made his exit without
uttering a word.

VAL. M. de la Rapiere, such a man ought to be lamented, but, as for your
escort, I thank you, I want them not.

LA RA. Be it so, but do not forget that you are sought after, and may
have some scurvy trick played upon you.

VAL. And I, to show you how much I fear him, will offer him the
satisfaction he desires, if he seeks me; I will immediately go all over
the town, only accompanied by Mascarille.




SCENE IV.--VALERE, MASCARILLE.


MASC. What, sir? will you tempt Heaven? Do not be so presumptuous!
Lack-a-day! you see how they threaten us. How on every side...

VAL. What are you looking at yonder?

MASC. I smell a cudgel that way. In short, if you will take my prudent
advice, do not let us be so obstinate as to remain in the street; let us
go and shut ourselves up.

VAL. Shut ourselves up, rascal? How dare you propose to me such a base
action? Come along, and follow me, without any more words.

MASC. Why, sir, my dear master, life is so sweet! One can die but once,
and it is for such a long time!

VAL. I shall half kill you, if I hear anything more. Here comes Ascanio;
let us leave him; we must find out what side he will choose. However,
come along with me into the house, to take whatever arms we may want.

MASC. I have no great itching for fighting. A curse on love and those
darned girls, who will be tasting it, and then look as if butter would
not melt in their mouth.




SCENE V.--ASCANIO, FROSINE.


ASC. Is it really true, Frosine, do I not dream? Pray tell me all that
has happened, from first to last.

FROS. You shall know all the particulars in good time; be patient; such
adventures are generally told over and over again, and that every
moment. You must know then that after this will, which was on condition
of a male heir being born, Albert's wife who was _enceinte_, gave
birth to you. Albert, who had stealthily and long beforehand laid his
plan, changed you for the son of Inez, the flower-woman, and gave you to
my mother to nurse, saying it was her own child. Some ten months after,
death took away this little innocent, whilst Albert was absent; his wife
being afraid of her husband, and inspired by maternal love, invented a
new stratagem. She secretly took her own daughter back; you received the
name of the boy, who had taken your place, whilst the death of that
pretended son was kept a secret from Albert, who was told that his
daughter had died. Now the mystery of your birth is cleared up, which
your supposed mother had hitherto concealed. She gives certain reasons
for acting in this manner, and may have others to give, for her
interests were not the same as yours. In short, this visit,

[Footnote: That is the visit of which Frosine speaks, Act iv., Scene I]

from which I expected so little, has proved more serviceable to your
love than could have been imagined. This Inez has given up all claim to
you. As it became necessary to reveal this secret, on account of your
marriage, we two informed your father of it; a letter of his deceased
wife has confirmed all. Pursuing our reasoning yet farther, and being
rather fortunate as well as skilful, we have so cunningly interwoven the
interests of Albert and of Polydore, so gradually unfolded all this
mystery to the latter, that we might not make things appear too terrible
to him in the beginning, and, in a word, to tell you all, so prudently
led his mind step by step to a reconciliation, that Polydore is now as
anxious as your father to legitimize that connection which is to make
you happy.

ASC. Ah! Frosine, what happiness you prepare for me. ... What do I, not
owe to your fortunate zeal?

FROS. Moreover, the good man is inclined to be merry, and has forbidden
us to mention anything of this affair to his son.




SCENE VI.--POLYDORE, ASCANIO, FROSINE.


POL. Come hither, daughter, since I may give you this name now, for I
know the secret which this disguise conceals. You have shown so much
resolution, ingenuity, and archness in your stratagem, that I forgive
you; I think my son will esteem himself happy when he knows that you are
the object of his love. You are worth to him more than all the treasures
in this world; and I will tell him so. But here he comes: let us divert
ourselves with this event. Go and tell all the people to come hither
immediately.

ASC. To obey you, sir, shall be the first compliment I pay you.




SCENE VII.--MASCARILLE, POLYDORE, VALERE.


MASC. Misfortunes are often revealed by Heaven: I dreamt last night of
pearls unstrung and broken eggs, sir. This dream depresses my spirits.

[Footnote: In a little book still sold on the quays of Paris, and called
_la Cle des Songes_, it is said that to dream of pearls denotes
"embarrassed affairs," and of broken eggs, "loss of place and
lawsuits."]

VAL. Cowardly rascal!

POL. Valere, an encounter awaits you, wherein all your valour will be
necessary: you are to cope with a powerful adversary.

MASC. Will nobody stir to prevent people from cutting each other's
throats? As for me, I do not care about it; but if any fatal accident
should deprive you of your son, do not lay the blame on me.

POL. No, no; in this case I myself urge him to do what he ought.

MASC. What an unnatural father!

VAL. This sentiment, sir, shows you to be a man of honour; I respect you
the more for it. I know I have offended you, I am to blame for having
done all this without a father's consent; but however angry you may be
with me, Nature always will prevail. You do what is truly honourable, in
not believing that I am to be terrified by the threats of Eraste.

POL. They just now frightened me with his threats, but since then things
have changed greatly; you will be attacked by a more powerful enemy,
without being able to flee from him.

MASC. Is there no way of making it up?

VAL! I flee!--Heaven forbid! And who can this be?

POL. Ascanio.

VAL. Ascanio?

POL. Yes; you shall see him appear presently.

VAL. He, who has pledged his word to serve me!

POL. Yes, it is he who says he has a quarrel with you; he, who is
determined to decide the quarrel by single combat, to which he
challenges you.

MASC. He is a good fellow: he knows that generous minds do not endanger
other people's lives by their quarrels.

POL. He accuses you of deceit. His anger appears to me to have so just a
cause, that Albert and I have agreed you should give Ascanio
satisfaction for this affront, but publicly, and without any delay,
according to the formalities requisite in such a case.

VAL. What! father; and did Lucile obstinately...?

POL. Lucile is to marry Eraste, and blames you too; and the better to
prove your story to be false, is resolved to give her hand to Eraste
before your very face.

VAL. Ha! this impudence is enough to drive me mad. Has she lost, then,
all sense, faith, conscience, and honour?




SCENE VIII.--ALBERT, POLYDORE, LUCILE, ERASTE, VALERE, MASCARILLE.


ALB. Well! where are the combatants? They are bringing ours. Have you
prepared yours for the encounter?

VAL. Yes, yes; I am ready, since you compel me to it; if I at all
hesitated, it was because I still felt a little respect, and not on
account of the valour of the champion who is to oppose me. But I have
been urged too far. This respect is at an end; I am prepared for any
catastrophe! I have been treated so strangely and treacherously, that my
love must and shall be revenged. (_To Lucile_). Not that I still
pretend to your hand: my former love is now swallowed up in wrath; and
when I have made your shame public, your guilty marriage will not in the
least disturb me. Lucile, your behaviour is infamous: scarcely can I
believe my own eyes. You show yourself so opposed to all modesty, that
you ought to die for shame.

LUC. Such reproaches might affect me, if I had not one at hand to avenge
my cause. Here comes Ascanio; he shall soon have the pleasure, and
without giving himself much trouble, of making you change your language.




SCENE IX.--ALBERT, POLYDORE, ASCANIO, LUCILE, ERASTE, VALERE, FROSINE,
MARINETTE, GROS-RENE, MASCARILLE.


VAL. He shall not make me change my language, though he had twenty arms
besides his own. I am sorry he defends a guilty sister; but since he is
foolish enough to pick a quarrel with me, I shall give him satisfaction,
and you also, my valiant gentleman.

ERAS. A short time ago I took an interest in this, but as Ascanio has
taken the affair upon himself, I will have nothing more to do with it,
but leave it to him.

VAL. You do well; prudence is always timely, but...

ERAS. He shall give you satisfaction for us all.

VAL. He?

POL. Do not deceive yourself; you do not yet know what a strange fellow
Ascanio is.

ALB. He is blind to it now, but Ascanio will let him know in a little
time.

VAL. Come on, then; let him do so now.

MAR. What! before everybody?

GR.-RE. That would not be decent.

VAL. Are you making fun of me? I will break the head of any fellow who
laughs. But let us see what Ascanio is going to do.

ASC. No, no. I am not so bad as they make me out; in this adventure, in
which every one has put me forward, you shall see my weakness appear
more than anything else; you will discover that Heaven, to which we must
all submit, did not give me a heart to hold out against you, but that it
reserved for you the easy triumph of putting an end to Lucile's brother.
Yes; far from boasting of the power of his arm, Ascanio shall receive
death from your hands; nay, would gladly die, if his death could
contribute to your satisfaction, by giving you, in the presence of all
this company, a wife who lawfully belongs to you.

VAL. No, even the whole world, after her perfidy and shamelessness...

ASC. Ah! Valere, allow me to tell you that the heart which is pledged to
you is guilty of no crime against you; her love is still pure, and her
constancy unshaken; I call your own father himself to witness that I
speak the truth.

POL. Yes, son, we have laughed enough at your rage; I see it is time to
undeceive you; she to whom you are bound by oath is concealed under the
dress you here behold. Some question about property was the cause of
this disguise, which from her earliest youth deceived so many people.
Lately love was the cause of another which deceived you, whilst it made
of the two families but one. Yes, in a word, it is she whose subtle
skill obtained your hand at night, who pretended to be Lucile, and by
this contrivance, which none discovered, has perplexed you all so much.
But since Ascanio now gives place to Dorothea, your love must be free
from every appearance of deceit, and be strengthened by a more sacred
knot!

ALB. This is the single combat by which you were to give us satisfaction
for your offence, and which is not forbidden by any laws.

[Footnote: Severe laws were promulgated in the preceding reign against
duelling; Louis XIV. also published two edicts against it in 1643 and in
1651. _The Love-Tiff_ was first performed in 1656.]

POL. Such an event amazes you, but all hesitation is now too late.

VAL. No, no, I do not hesitate; if this adventure astonishes me, it is a
flattering surprise; I find myself seized with admiration, love, and
pleasure. Is it possible that those eyes...?

ALB. This dress, dear Valere, is not a proper one to hear your fine
speeches in. Let her go and put on another, and meanwhile you shall know
the particulars of the event.

VAL. Pardon me, Lucile, if my mind, duped by...

LUC. It is easy to forget that.

ALB. Come, these compliments will do as well at home; we shall then have
plenty of time to pay them to one another.

ERAS. But in talking thus you do not seem to think that there is still
occasion for manslaughter here. Our loves are indeed crowned, but who
ought to obtain the hand of Marinette, his Mascarille or my Gros-Rene?
This affair must end in blood.

MASC. No, no, my blood suits my body too well; let him marry her in
peace, it will be nothing to me. I know Marinette too well to think
marriage will be any bar to my courting her.

MAR. And do you think I will make my gallant of you? A husband does not
matter; anything will do for that. We do not stand, then, upon so much
ceremony; but a gallant should be well made enough to make one's mouth
water.

GR.-RE. Listen! When we are united by marriage, I insist that you should
turn a deaf ear to all sparks.

MASC. Do you think, brother, to marry her for yourself alone?

GR.-RE. Of course; I will have a virtuous wife, or else I shall kick up
a fine row.

MASC. Ah! lack-a-day, you shall do as others, and become more gentle.
Those people who are so severe and critical before marriage, often
degenerate into pacific husbands.

MAR. Make yourself easy, my dear husband, and do not have the least fear
about my fidelity; flattery will produce no impression on me, and I
shall tell you everything.

MASC. Oh! what a cunning wench to make of a husband a confidant.

MAR. Hold your tongue, you knave of clubs.

[Footnote: The original has _as de pique_, and different
commentators have of course given various explanations. But why, says M.
Despois, should Marinette, who appears to be fond of cards, not call
people by names derived from her favourite game? She calls Gros-Rene in
another place _beau valet de carreau_.]

ALB. For the third time, I say, let us go home, and continue at leisure
such an agreeable conversation.

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Love-Tiff, by Moliere





Produced by Eric Eldred, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





MALAYAN LITERATURE

Comprising

Romantic Tales, Epic Poetry

And

Royal Chronicles

Translated Into English For The First Time

With A Special Introduction By

CHAUNCEY C. STARKWEATHER, A.B., LL.B.




SPECIAL INTRODUCTION



Easily the most charming poem of Malayan Literature is the Epic of
Bidasari. It has all the absorbing fascination of a fairy tale. We are
led into the dreamy atmosphere of haunted palace and beauteous
plaisance: we glide in the picturesque imaginings of the oriental poet
from the charm of all that is languorously seductive in nature into the
shadowy realms of the supernatural. At one moment the sturdy bowman or
lithe and agile lancer is before us in hurrying column, and at another
we are told of mystic sentinels from another world, of Djinns and
demons and spirit-princes. All seems shadowy, vague, mysterious,
entrancing.

In this tale there is a wealth of imagery, a luxury of picturesqueness,
together with that straightforward simplicity so alluring in the story-
teller. Not only is our attention so captivated that we seem under a
spell, but our sympathy is invoked and retained. We actually wince
before the cruel blows of the wicked queen. And the hot tears of
Bidasari move us to living pity. In the poetic justice that punishes
the queen and rewards the heroine we take a childish delight. In other
words, the oriental poet is simple, sensuous, passionate, thus
achieving Milton's ideal of poetic excellence. We hope that no
philosopher, philologist, or ethnologist will persist in demonstrating
the sun-myth or any other allegory from this beautiful poem. It is a
story, a charming tale, to while away an idle hour, and nothing more.
All lovers of the simple, the beautiful, the picturesque should say to
such learned peepers and botanizers, "Hands off!" Let no learned
theories rule here. Leave this beautiful tale for artists and lovers of
the story pure and simple. Seek no more moral here than you would in a
rose or a lily or a graceful palm. Light, love, color, beauty,
sympathy, engaging fascination--these may be found alike by philosopher
and winsome youth. The story is no more immoral than a drop of dew or a
lotus bloom; and, as to interest, in the land of the improviser and the
story-teller one is obliged to be interesting. For there the audience
is either spellbound, or quickly fades away and leaves the poet to
realize that he must attempt better things.

We think that these folk-stories have, indeed, a common origin, but
that it is in the human heart. We do not look for a Sigurd or Siegfried
on every page. Imagine a nation springing from an ignorant couple on a
sea-girt isle, in a few generations they would have evolved their
Sleeping Beauty and their Prince Charming, their enchanted castles, and
their Djinns and fairies. These are as indigenous to the human heart as
the cradle-song or the battle-cry. We do not find ourselves siding with
those who would trace everything to a first exemplar. Children have
played, and men have loved, and poets have sung from the beginning, and
we need not run to Asia for the source of everything. Universal human
nature has a certain spontaneity.

The translator has tried to reproduce the faithfulness and, in some
measure, to indicate the graceful phrases of the original poem. The
author of Bidasari is unknown, and the date of the poem is a matter of
the utmost uncertainty. Some have attributed to it a Javanese origin,
but upon very slight evidence. The best authorities place its scene in
the country of Palembang, and its time after the arrival of the
Europeans in the Indian archipelago, but suggest that the legend must
be much older than the poem.

The "Makota Radja-Radja" is one of the most remarkable books of
oriental literature. According to M. Aristide Marre, who translated it
into French, its date is 1603. Its author was Bokhari, and he lived at
Djohore. It contains extracts from more than fifty Arab and Persian
authors. It treats of the duties of man to God, to himself and to
society, and of the obligations of sovereigns, subjects, ministers, and
officers. Examples are taken from the lives of kings in Asia. The
author has not the worst opinion of his work, saying distinctly that it
is a complete guide to happiness in this world and the next. He is
particularly copious in his warnings to copyists and translators,
cautioning them against the slightest negligence or inaccuracy, and
promising them for faithfulness a passport to the glories of heaven.
This shows that the author at least took the work seriously. That there
is not a trace of humor in the book would doubtless recommend it to the
dignified and lethargic orientals for whom it was written. Bokhari
seemed to consider himself prophet, priest, and poet-laureate in one.
The work has a high position in the Malayan Peninsula, where it is read
by young and old. The "Crown of Kings" is written in the court language
of Djohore. The author was a Mohammedan mendicant monk. He called the
book the Crown of Kings because "every king who read and followed its
precepts would be a perfect king, and thus only would his crown sit
well on his head, and the book itself will be for him a true crown."

La Fontaine and Lamartine loved stories. The schoolmates of the latter
called the latter "story-lover." They would have loved the story of the
Princess Djouher Manikam, which is written in a simple and natural
style and is celebrated in the East, or, as the Malays say, in the
"country between windward and leeward."

From the "Sedjaret Malayou," worthless as it is as history, one may
obtain side lights upon oriental life. Manners are portrayed in vivid
colors, so that one may come to have a very accurate knowledge of them.
Customs are depicted from which one may learn of the formality and
regard for precedents which is a perspicuous trait of oriental
character. The rigid etiquette of court and home may be remarked. From
the view of morals here described, one may appreciate how far we have
progressed in ethical culture from that prevailing in former times
among the children of these winterless lands.

The readers of this series are to be congratulated in that they are
here placed in possession of a unique and invaluable source of
information concerning the life and literature of the far-away people
of the Indian archipelago. To these pages an added interest accrues
from the fact that the Philippines are now protected by our flag.

The name Malay signifies a wanderer. As a people they are passionate,
vain, susceptible, and endowed with a reckless bravery and contempt of
death. The Malays have considerable originality in versification. The
pantoum is particularly theirs--a form arising from their habits of
improvisation and competitive versifying. They have also the epic or
_sjair_, generally a pure romance, with much naive simplicity and
natural feeling. And finally, they have the popular song, enigma, and
fable.

And so we leave the reader to his pleasant journey to the lands of
Djinns and Mantris and spells and mystic talismans. He will be
entertained by the chrestomathy of Bokhari; he will be entranced by the
story of the winsome and dainty Bidasari.

CHAUNCEY C. STARKWEATHER




CONTENTS


BIDASARI:

  Song I

  Song II

  Song III

  Song IV

  Song V

  Song VI

SEDJARET MALAYOU

THE PRINCESS DJOUHER-MANIKAM

MAKOTA RADJA-RADJA





THE EPIC OF BIDASARI

_Metrical Translation by Chauncey C. Starkweather, A.B., LL.B._

BIDASARI

SONG I

  Hear now the song I sing about a king
  Of Kembajat. A fakir has completed
  The story, that a poem he may make.
  There was a king, a sultan, and he was
  Handsome and wise and perfect in all ways,
  Proud scion of a race of mighty kings.
  He filled the land with merchants bringing wealth
  And travellers. And from that day's report,
  He was a prince most valorous and strong,
  Who never vexing obstacles had met.
  But ever is the morrow all unknown.
  After the Sultan, all accomplished man,
  Had married been a year, or little more,
  He saw that very soon he'd have an heir.
  At this his heart rejoiced, and he was glad
  As though a mine of diamonds were his.
  Some days the joy continued without clouds.
  But soon there came the moment when the prince
  Knew sorrow's blighting force, and had to yield
  His country's capital. A savage bird,
  Garouda called, a very frightful bird,
  Soared in the air, and ravaged all the land.
  It flew with wings and talons wide outstretched,
  With cries to terrify the stoutest heart.
  All people, great and small, were seized with dread,
  And all the country feared and was oppressed,
  And people ran now this way and now that.
  The folk approached the King. He heard the noise
  As of a fray, and, angry, asked the guard,
  "Whence comes this noise?" As soon as this he said
  One of his body-guard replied with awe,
  "Illustrious lord, most merciful of kings,
  A fell garouda follows us about."
  The King's face paled when these dread words be heard.
  The officers arose and beat their breasts.
  The sorrow of the King was greater still
  Because the Queen was ill. He took her hand
  And started without food or anything.
  He trusted all to God, who watches o'er
  The safety of the world. The suff'ring Queen
  Spoke not a word and walked along in tears.
  They went by far _campongs_ and dreary fields
  Beneath a burning sun which overwhelmed
  Their strength. And so the lovely Queen's fair face
  From palest yellow grew quite black. The prince
  Approached the desert with his body torn
  By thorns and brambles. All his care and grief
  Were doubled when he saw his lovely wife
  Who scarce could drag herself along and whom
  He had to lead. Most desolate was he,
  Turning his mind on the good Queen's sad lot.
  Upon the way he gave up all to her.
  Two months they journeyed and one day they came
  Unto a _campong_ of a merchant, where
  They looked for rest because the Queen was weak.
  The path was rugged and the way was hard.
  The prince made halt before the palisades,
  For God had made him stop and rest awhile.
  The Sultan said: "What is this _campong_ here?
  I fain would enter, but I do not dare."
  The good Queen wept and said: "O my beloved,
  What shall I say? I am so tired and weak
  I cannot journey more." The King was quite
  Beside himself and fainted where he sat.
  But on they journeyed to the riverside,
  Stopping at every step.

                  And when the King
  Had gained the bank he saw a little boat
  With roof of bent bamboos and _kadjang_ screen.
  Then to the Queen, "Rest here, my precious one."
  The silver moon was at the full, but veiled
  With clouds, like to a maid who hides her face
  And glances toward her lover timidly.
  Then there was born a daughter, like a flower,
  More beautiful than statue of pure gold,
  Just like the tulips that the princess plucked.
  The mother's heart was broken at the thought
  That she must leave the babe, the child beloved
  They both adored, such beauty it presaged.
  The King with tears exclaimed, "How can we take
  The infant with us o'er this stony road
  Beset with thorns, and burned with dreadful heat?
  Pearl of my palace," said he to the Queen,
  "Weep not so bitterly about the child.
  An offering let us make of her to God.
  God grant she may be found by loving hearts
  Who'll care for her and raise her in their home."
  As soon as they had quite determined there
  To leave the infant princess, their great grief
  No limit knew. But ere they went away
  The King took up the infant in his arms
  And rocked her on his knees until she slept.
  "Sleep on, heart's love, my soul, my little one,
  Weep not for thy dear mother's lot. She fain
  Would take thee with her, but the way is hard.
  Sleep on, dear child, the apple of my eye,
  The image of thy sire. Stay here, fear not.
  For unto God we trust thee, Lord of all.
  Sleep on, my child, chief jewel of my crown,
  And let thy father go. To look at thee
  Doth pierce my heart as by a poniard's blow.
  Ah, sweet my child, dear, tender little one,
  Thy father loves yet leaves thee. Happy be,
  And may no harm come nigh thee. Fare thee well."
  The little princess slept, lulled by his voice.
  He put her from his knees and placed her on
  A finely woven cloth of Ind, and covered her
  With satin webbed with gold. With flowing tears
  The mother wrapped her in a tissue fine
  Adorned with jewels like to sculptured flowers.
  She seized the child and weeping murmured low:
  "O dearest child, my pretty little girl!
  I leave thee to the Master of the world.
  Live happily, although thy mother goes
  And leaves thee here. Ah, sad thy mother's lot!
  Thy father forces her to quit thee now.
  She would prefer with thee to stay, but, no!
  Thy father bids her go. And that is why
  Thy mother's fond heart breaks, she loves thee so,
  And yet must leave thee. Oh, how can I live?"
  The mother fainted, and the grieving King
  Was fain to kill himself, so was he moved.
  He took the Queen's head on his knees. And soon
  By God's decree and ever-sheltering grace
  She to her senses came and stood erect.
  Again she wept on looking at the child.
  "If I should never see thee more, sweet soul,
  Oh, may thy mother share thy fate! Her life
  Is bound to thine. The light is gone from out
  Thy mother's eyes. Hope dies within her heart
  Because she fears to see thee nevermore.
  Oh, may some charitable heart, my child,
  Discover thee!" The prince essayed to dry
  Her tears. "Now come away, my dearest love.
  Soon day will dawn." The prince in grief set out,
  But ever turned and wanted to go back.
  They walked along together, man and wife
  All solitary, with no friends at hand,
  Care-worn and troubled, and the moon shone bright.


SONG II

  I sing in this song of a merchant great
  And of his wealth. His goods and treasures were
  Beyond all count, his happiness without
  Alloy. In Indrapura town there was
  No equal to his fortune. He possessed
  A thousand slaves, both old and young, who came
  From Java and from other lands. His rank
  Was higher than Pangawa's. Wives he had
  In goodly numbers. But he lacked one thing
  That weighed upon his heart--he had no child.
  Now, by the will of God, the merchant great
  Came very early from the palace gates,
  And sought the river-bank, attended by
  His favorite wife. Lila Djouhara was
  The merchant's name. He heard a feeble voice
  As of an infant crying, like the shrill
  Tones of a flute, and from a boat it seemed
  To come. Then toward the wondrous boat he went
  And saw an infant with a pretty face.
  His heart was overjoyed as if he had
  A mine of diamonds found. The spouses said:
  "Whose child is this? It surely must belong
  To one of highest rank. Some cause he had
  To leave her here." The merchant's heart was glad
  To see the bright eyes of the little one.
  He raised her in his arms and took her home.
  Four waiting-maids and nurses two he gave
  The pretty child. The palace rooms were all
  Adorned anew, with rugs and curtains soft,
  And tapestries of orange hue were hung.
  The princess rested on a couch inlaid with gold,
  A splendid couch, with lanterns softly bright
  And tapers burning with a gentle ray.
  The merchant and his wife with all their hearts
  Adored the child, as if it were their own.
  She looked like Mindoudari, and received
  The name of Bidasari. Then they took
  A little fish and changing vital spirits
  They put it in a golden box, then placed
  The box within a casket rich and rare.
  The merchant made a garden, with all sorts
  Of vases filled with flowers, and bowers of green
  And trellised vines. A little pond made glad
  The eyes, with the precious stones and topaz set
  Alternately, in fashion of the land
  Of Pellanggam, a charm for all. The sand
  Was purest gold, with alabaster fine
  All mixed with red pearls and with sapphires blue.
  And in the water deep and clear they kept
  The casket. Since they had the infant found,
  Sweet Bidasari, all the house was filled
  With joy. The merchant and his wife did naught
  But feast and clap their hands and dance. They watched
  The infant night and day. They gave to her
  Garments of gold, with necklaces and gems,
  With rings and girdles, and quaint boxes, too,
  Of perfume rare, and crescent pins and flowers
  Of gold to nestle in the hair, and shoes
  Embroidered in the fashion of Sourat.
  By day and night the merchant guarded her.
  So while sweet Bidasari grew, her lovely face
  Increased in beauty. Her soft skin was white
  And yellow, and she was most beautiful.
  Her ear-rings and her bracelets made her look
  Like some rare gem imprisoned in a glass.
  Her beauty had no equal, and her face
  Was like a nymph's celestial. She had gowns
  As many as she wished, as many as
  A princess fair of Java. There was not
  A second Bidasari in the land.

  I'll tell about Djouhan Mengindra now,
  Sultan of Indrapura. Very wide
  His kingdom was, with ministers of state
  And officers, and regiments of picked
  Young warriors, the bulwark of the throne.
  This most illustrious prince had only been
  Two years the husband of fair Lila Sari,
  A princess lovable and kind. The King
  Was deemed most handsome. And there was within
  All Indrapura none to equal him.
  His education was what it should be,
  His conversation very affable.
  He loved the princess Lila Sari well.
  He gave her everything, and she in turn
  Was good to him, but yet she was so vain.
  "There is no one so beautiful as I,"
  She said. They were united like unto
  The soul and body. And the good King thought
  There could not be another like his wife.
  One day they were together, and the Queen
  Began to sing: "Oh, come, my well-beloved,
  And listen to my words. Thou tellst me oft
  Thou lovest me. But I know not thy heart.
  If some misfortune were to overwhelm
  Wouldst thou be true to me?" He smiled and said:
  "No harm can touch thee, dear. But should it come,
  Whenever thou art 'whelmed I'll perish too."
  With joy the princess said: "My noble prince,
  If there were found a woman whose flower face
  Were fairer than all others in the world,
  Say, wouldst thou wed her?" And the King replied:
  "My friend, my fairest, who is like to thee?
  My soul, my princess, of a noble race,
  Thou'rt sweet and wise and good and beautiful.
  Thou'rt welded to my heart. No thought of mine
  Is separate from thee."

                  The princess smiled;
  Her face was all transfigured with her joy.
  But suddenly the thought came to her mind,
  "Who knows there is none more fair than I?"
  And then she cried: "Now hear me, O my love!
  Were there a woman with an angel-face,
  Wouldst them make her thy wife? If she appeared
  Unto thine eyes more beautiful than I,
  Then would thy heart not burn for her?"

                  The prince
  But smiled, and answered not. She also smiled,
  But said, "Since thou dost hesitate, I know
  That thou wouldst surely wed her." Then the prince
  Made answer: "O my heart, gold of my soul,
  If she in form and birth were like to thee
  I'd join her with thy destiny." Now when
  The princess heard these words she paled and shook.
  With eyes cast down, she left her royal spouse.
  But quick he seized her. With a smile he said:
  "Gold, ruby, dearest friend, I pray thee now,
  Oh, be not vexed with me. Light of my eyes,
  Keep not within thy heart a bitterness
  Because I answered thus unto thy words."
  He took her in his arms and kissed her lips
  And wooed her. And her face again grew sweet
  The while she heard. And yet her woman's heart
  Was grieved and saddened. And she sat apart,
  And swift these thoughts came to her anxious mind:
  "I'll seek to-morrow through this kingdom wide,
  Lest there should be within the land a maid
  More fair than I. To death I shall condemn
  Her straight, lest rival she may be to me.
  For if my lord should marry her, he'd love
  Her more than me. He'd love the younger one,
  And constantly my tortured heart would bleed."
  They angered her, these thoughts, as if her heart
  Were filled with gall. "Now may I be accursed
  If I go not unto the end in love."
  Her heart was not assuaged; she sighed alone.
  Upon the morrow morn the King went out,
  And with him many officers and men.
  Meanwhile the Princess Lila Sari sent
  A summons to a jeweller of skill,
  And at the same time called her four _dyangs_,
  Who came and sat. Dang Wilapat bowed low
  And said, "Our greetings to thee, princess great."
  The Queen replied: "Go forth, _dyangs_, at once
  And find me gold and dust of gold, and take
  It all unto a goldsmith. Let him make
  For me a fan, all decked with beauteous gems,
  With rubies red and pearls; and after that
  A girdle virginal. Count not the price.
  I want it all as quickly as may be."
  And so they hastened, took the gold, and went
  Outside the city, through the whole _campong_
  Of goldsmiths, seeking there the best to make
  The fan and girdle. And the hammered gold
  Soon shone with many amethysts and gems.
  It was a marvel to behold those rare
  And quaintly fashioned ornaments, to deck
  A sultaness. Of priceless worth they were.
  Four days, and all was ready for the Queen.
  But she had never eaten all this time
  Because of grief. She thought the fan more fine
  Than Java princess ever yet possessed.
  She called the four _dyangs_ and said to them:
  "A secret mission have I now for ye.
  Go up and down among the officers
  And show this fan for sale, but never name
  The price. Seek ever if there be a face
  More beautiful than mine; and should ye find
  A face more fair, come tell it straight to me.
  If ye obey my will I'll make ye all
  Inspectresses within the royal home."
  Then forth the women went upon the quest.
  And first among their friends they went with words
  Of mystery and hints of wondrous things
  They had for sale. And so these servants bore
  The story to their masters, "The _dyangs_
  Have something wonderful to sell." And soon
  The daughters of the houses rich began
  To clamor for a sight of this great prize.
  Then the _dyangs,_ went to the houses all.
  The young girls said, "Oh, tell us now the price."
  Dyang Wiravan quickly answered, then
  Dyang Podagah: "Tis a princely thing;
  I'll go and ask the price and tell it thee."
  And so they spoke, and so they looked about
  To find a face more beautiful and rare
  Than their own Queen's, and wearied in the search.
  "Where can we further look?" they said, and then
  Bethought them of the strangers and the priests.
  But in that quarter no one dared to touch
  The precious things, but thought it passing strange
  The Queen should wish to sell. To the _campong_
  Of merchants next they went. A double line
  Of ramparts guarded it. "Here is more stir
  And gayety," they said, "with sport and song,
  Than elsewhere have we found." And so they sought
  The richest merchants. "We have something rare,"
  They said, "made by an artist Javanese."
  When Bidasari's servants saw these folk
  They said: "Bring these things to our house and we
  Will show them to our master. He will buy."
  Then the _dyangs_ with smiles replied: "They are
  Not ours, but our good Queen's. And only we
  May show them, lest a stone be lost, perchance,
  And we be punished." Bidasari's maids
  Were glad and said, "Wait but a moment here
  Until we find what Bidasari wills."
  They found her with her maids, and told the tale.
  Then Bidasari bade them bring to her
  The stranger folk, and said, "If I be pleased
  I'll buy." Dang Ratna Watie went and told
  The women that young Bidasari wished
  To see their wares. The four _dyangs_ came in
  Together. Joy their faces all suffused,
  But they seemed timid, modest, full of fear.
  Then Bidasari's women said to them:
  "Come, O young women, all are loyal here.
  Enter, our sisters and our friends."

                  Now when
  The Queen's _dyangs_ had looked about them there
  They all were dazzled, Bidasari's face
  So beautiful appeared. How beat their hearts!
  As they upon her lovely features gazed,
  Each murmured to herself, "She is more fair
  Than our great Queen."

                  Then Bidasari wished
  To buy the fan, and sent a maid to ask
  Her parents for the gold. The merchant said,
  "Go see what thing it is, and weigh the gold
  For her." The mother feared a trap or trick.
  "Oh, do not buy the fan, my child," she said;
  "I'll buy a finer one for thee. Send this
  Away." But when her father saw her tears
  Of disappointment, "It is thine," he said.
  "What is the price? I'd buy it though it cost
  Thy weight in gold, my darling. Tell me now,
  _Dyangs_." Tjendra Melinee answered him,
  "Are two timbangs too much?" "I'm very poor,"
  He said; "but I will buy it for the child."
  The gold was weighed. The four _dyangs_ straightway
  Departed, hurried to the Queen and said:
  "At last we have discovered, O our Queen,
  What thou hast sought. 'Tis in a near _campong_
  Of merchants very rich and great. Oh, there
  We found a princess fairer than the day;
  More like an angel than a mortal maid.
  No woman in this land compares with her.
  Her name is Bidasari. And the King
  Would surely marry her if once they met,
  For soon she will be ready for a spouse;
  Her innocence is charming. Like a cloud
  The merchant and his wife keep watchful guard.
  Her hair is curly, like a flower full blown.
  Her brow is like the moon but one day old.
  She's like a ring in Peylou made. She would
  Outshine thy beauty, shouldst thou bring her here."
  The princess heard and quickly said: "I feel
  My hatred rise. Oh, may I never see
  Her face! To hear ye speak of her inflames
  My heart with anger. Say, why do ye think
  That she's more fair than I?" Then made reply
  The women: "Bidasari's eyes are soft.
  Her smile is sweet, her skin is tinted like
  The green _tjempakka_, and her graceful form
  Resembles some famed statue nobly made.
  Her cheeks are like the bill of flying bird.
  We loved to look upon her neck. Her nose
  Is like a jasmine bud. Her pretty face
  Is like the yellow of an egg. Her thoughts
  Are pure as crystal. And she wears her hair
  In such a charming way. Her lips are like
  A little polished box. The flowers she wears
  But make her look the prettier. Her teeth
  Are like a bright pomegranate. Ah, the heart
  Doth open when one looketh on her face.
  She's like a princess of the Mount Lidang.
  Her features are like those of Nilagendi,
  Her heels are like the eggs of hens, and make
  Her seem a princess of Siam. Her fingers
  More tapering are than quills of porcupine.
  And solid is the nail of her left hand.
  No noble's girl is Bidasari's peer."
  Now when the princess heard them sing her praise
  Her soul was wounded as if by a thorn.
  Her dark eyes flashed. "Ah, speak no more of her,"
  She said, "nor speak abroad what ye have seen.
  But bring me Bidasari. I would see
  If what ye say be true."

                  "Then we must take
  Her presents first, and strive to gain by them
  Her friendship, and attain our end at last."
  They went to see her every day, and bore
  Rich gifts.

                  The merchant and his wife remarked
  The visits of the Queen's _dyangs_, and how
  They loved their daughter. That is why they gave
  Them all that they desired. But the _dyangs_
  Among themselves kept saying: "How can we
  Take her away? We love her so, and deep
  Within our hearts we pity her. And now
  Her parents have such trust in us, and load
  Us down with gifts. But when, alas, at home
  The princess questions us, what shall we say?
  For she's a powerful Queen. Yet if we make
  Unhappy this dear girl of these good folk,
  Shall we not sin? And still the princess is
  So violent and harsh! Her jealousy
  Would know no limit should the King but hear
  Of this affair."

                  Dang Djoudah answering spoke:
  "We all can go to her and quiet her.
  A word suffices oft. She is our Queen,
  But to the King belongeth power supreme.
  If Bidasari should disdain the throne
  We shall renounce our functions at the court,
  For what the Queen desires is most unjust.
  And if we prove unfaithful we shall be
  O'erwhelmed with maledictions." Thus they spoke
  And went back to the busy-lived _campong_
  Of merchants. Here they thought to go and find
  Djouhara, and obtain what they desired.
  A messenger went after them and said:
  "To Dang Bidouri: Come at once; my friend
  The princess summons you." Then the _dyangs_
  Went to the Queen and found her with the King
  At dinner. With malicious wink of eye
  She made them understand they must not talk
  Before the prince. When he had dined he took
  Some _siri_ from the betel-box, himself
  Anointed with a perfume sweet, and went
  To teach the young folk how to ride and shoot
  The arrow straight, and played at many games.
  Meanwhile the princess Lila Sari called
  Before her the _dyangs_ and questioned them:
  "Why have ye come so late?" Bidouri bowed
  And said: "'Twas very hard to bring her here
  To thee. The merchant and his wife do not
  A moment leave her, for they love her so.
  Her tiring-women ever are about.
  Thou shouldst demand her of her parents, if
  Thou dost desire to see her. Treat her like
  Thy child, for she is still so very young!
  From Bidasari's father thou wilt gain
  All that thou canst desire, he is so rich,
  If thou wilt only love his daughter dear.
  And dost thou give command to bring her here?
  Let us go all alone and summon her
  For Bidasari'll freely follow us."
  They tried to calm the anger of the Queen.
  She bowed her head in silence, but her soul
  Was very heavy, and hypocrisy
  With hate and envy vied within her heart.
  "They love the child, these _dyangs_," to herself
  She said, "and I shall have no easy task.
  I shall attract her here by trickery,
  But she shall never my companion be.
  With Bidasari once within my power
  My heart will be no longer on the rack.
  Go now, _dyangs_," she said, "and seek for me
  The merchant and his wife and hither bring
  Young Bidasari, whom I'll elevate
  Unto the rank of princess, for I have
  No child. Mazendra take with ye. And when
  Young Bidasari shall arrive, conceal
  Her for a day or two. And gently speak
  Unto the merchant and his wife, and say
  Concessions will be granted to the priests
  And strangers in their quarter, should she come.
  Console Lila Djouhara thus, and pledge
  That he may come to see his child whene'er
  His heart impelleth him." An escort went
  With them, and the _dyangs_ bowed low before
  The merchant and his wife, and greeted, too,
  Fair Bidasari. But the merchant said:
  "Why come ye here in so great numbers?" Then
  They straight replied: "Our most beloved Queen
  Hath sent us here with greetings unto thee,
  The master of the house. If thou'lt permit,
  We've come to seek fair Bidasari here."
  They beat their breasts, the merchant and his wife.
  "Our darling, only child! It will be hard
  For her to be the servant of a prince;
  For she hath had her way so long! Her traits
  Are not yet formed. Go back, _dyangs_, and pray
  The Queen to pardon us. Say how we grieve."
  But the _dyangs_ repeated all the words

  Said by the Queen, and so their fears were calmed.
  They hoped Queen Lila Sari would love well
  Fair Bidasari. Then the merchant said:
  "I will obey, and let my darling go,
  So that she may become unto the Queen
  A servant, and perchance a daughter loved.
  Now shall she go with ye. Only I beg
  The Queen to let her come back home to us
  At three days' end. She is not used to stay
  With strangers. Never hath she left us for
  A single day." Then Dang Bidouri said:
  "We'll do our best before the Queen; and why
  Should she not grant to Bidasari this?"
  They bathed fair Bidasari with sweet scents,
  And then arranged her in rich raiment new.
  A fine _sijrash_ she wore with broidered flowers
  Of Pekan, and a satin robe all fringed
  With gold. She bore a plaque of beaten gold
  Bound to a necklace, chiselled, gem-bedecked;
  Her over-tunic was of yellow silk
  With tiny serpents on the buttons 'graved.
  Three bracelets wore the maid, and rarest rings,
  And ear-rings like a wheel in motion wrought.
  Chaste links of gold set forth her beauty rare,
  A fair flow'r in a vase, whose perfume sweet
  Wafts scented breaths as far as one may see.
  They kissed her then with tears and held her close

  Upon their breasts. "Be humble to the Queen,"
  They said, "remember that thou art before
  The King, and near the throne. Ask leave to come
  To see us when thou dost desire. Speak sweetly
  With low and gentle voice."

                  Thus they enjoined.
  And then the merchant said, "_Dyangs_, if ye
  Love Bidasari, see ye vex her not."
  They dried their tears and said: "Be without fear.
  Intrust thy daughter to our mistress dear."
  "My child," he said, "I'll come to see thee oft.
  Thou wilt be better there, my love, than here."
  But Bidasari wept and cried: "Oh, come,
  Dear mother, with me! Wilt thou not, alas?"
  But the fond parents were astounded then
  To learn the mother was not asked to come.
  She stayed with tears, the while the father went.
  As far as to the city's gates. With tears
  He said: "Farewell, O apple of my eye
  I leave thee here. Fear not, my dearest child."
  Then Bidasari wept. Her heart was wrung.
  She went. The merchant followed with his eyes.
  She entered by a hidden door. _Dyangs_
  And _mandars_ flocked to see her, but she hung
  Her head and kept her eyes downcast.

                  The sun
  Announced the evening, and the King was still
  Surrounded by his officers. 'Twas then
  Fair Bidasari to the palace came,
  And stood before the Queen. All the _dyangs_
  Sat on the floor, with servants of the house.
  Like the _pengawas_ Bidasari bowed,
  'Mid the _dyangs_, in presence of the Queen.
  They gave her all the merchant's gifts, as sign
  Of homage. All astonished was the Queen
  At Bidasari's beauty. She appeared
  Almost divine. Bidouri spoke and said,
  "Thou seest Bidasari, O our Queen,
  Lila Djouhari's daughter." At these words
  The Queen was stupefied, and thought: "In truth
  'Tis as they said. She is more lovely than
  The fairest work of art." Bidouri told
  All that the merchant and his wife had said.
  The Queen inclined her head and silence kept,
  But wicked thoughts were surging in her brain.
  A combat raged within her heart. She feared
  The King might see the maiden. "Send away,"
  She said, "the nurses and the women all."
  Fair Bidasari wept when they retired.
  The princess called her to her side and said:

  "Thou must not weep so, Bidasari. They
  Will all return. When thou dost wish to go,
  They will go with thee. Now depart, _dyangs_.
  Ye need not care for Bidasari more.
  I will procure her dames of company
  And servants. You may come from time to time."
  So they arose, and, with prostrations, went.
  The Queen conducted Bidasari then
  Into a room and left her all alone,
  And all afraid.

                  When evening shadows fell,
  The great King bade the Queen to sup with him.
  He sat beside her, smiled and gayly talked,
  As he had been young Bedouwandas, on
  His horse, with sword at belt. "My royal spouse,
  How thou dost love me! for thou wouldst not sup
  Without me, though thou needest food and drink."
  Now when the King had eaten, he retired
  Unto his sleeping-chamber.

                  Still alone
  And weeping much, fair Bidasari stayed,
  In darkness with no one to speak to her.
  She thought on her dear parents. "O my God!
  Why dost Thou leave me here?" The solitude
  Filled her with terror, and she wept until
  The middle of the night, and thought of home.
  Out spake the King: "Now what is that I hear?
  What voice is that so sorrowful and sweet?"
  "It is an infant crying," said the Queen.
  "In all the darkness it has lost its way."
  Her heart was burning, and she sent a word
  To Bidasari that she must not weep,
  And held her peace and waited till the dawn.
  But Bidasari wept the whole night long
  And cried for home. When the _dyangs_ all ran
  To comfort her, they found the door was locked,
  And none could enter. Bidasari thought,
  "What wrong have I committed, that the Queen
  Should be so vexed with me?" When day appeared,
  To the pavilion went the King. The Queen
  Threw wide the door of Bidasari's room
  And entered all alone.

                  Then Bidasari
  The Queen's hand kissed, and begged that she would let
  Her homeward fare. "O gracious Queen," she said,
  "Take pity on me; let me go away.
  I'll come to thee again."

                  The wicked Queen
  Struck her, and said, "Thou ne'er shalt see again
  Thy home." The gentle Bidasari drooped
  Her head and wept afresh, shaking with fear.
  "Forgive the evil I have done, my Queen,
  For I am but a child, and do not know
  How I have sinned against thee," falling at
  Her feet she said. The Queen in anger struck
  Her once again. "I know full well," she said,
  "All thy designs and projects. What! Am I
  To rest in peace and see thy beauty grow,
  And thee become my rival with the King?"
  Then Bidasari knew 'twas jealousy
  That caused the fury of the Queen. Her fear
  Increased, she trembled and bewailed her fate.
  The livelong day she was insulted, struck,
  And of her food deprived.

                  Before the King
  Returned, the Queen departed from the room
  Of Bidasari. The poor child had lost
  Her former color. Black her face had grown
  From blows, as if she had been burnt. Her eyes
  She could not open. Such her sufferings were
  She could not walk. Then unto God she cried:
  "O Lord, creator of the land and sea,
  I do not know my fault, and yet the Queen
  Treats me as guilty of a heinous crime.
  I suffer hell on earth. Why must I live?
  Oh, let me die now, in the faith, dear Lord.
  My soul is troubled and my face is black
  With sorrow. Let me die before the dawn.
  My parents do not help me. They have left
  Me here alone to suffer. In the false
  _Dyangs_ I trusted, as to sisters dear.
  Their lips are smiling, but their hearts are base.
  Their mouths are sweet as honey, but their hearts
  Are full of evil. Oh, what can I say?
  It is the will of God."

                  Such was the grief
  Of Bidasari, and her tears fell fast.
  Now when the King went forth again, the Queen
  Began anew her persecutions harsh.
  With many blows and angry words, she said:
  "Why dost thou groan so loudly? Dost thou seek
  By crying to attract the King, to see
  Thy beauty? 'Tis thy hope, I know full well,
  His younger wife to be. And thou art proud
  Of all thy beauty." Bidasari was
  Astounded, and replied with many tears:
  "May I accursed be if ever I
  Such plottings knew. Thou art a mighty Queen.
  If I have sinned against thee, let me die
  At once. For life is useless to the hearts
  That suffer. Hast thou brought me here to beat?
  How thou hast made me weep! O Queen, art thou
  Without compassion?"

                  All possessed with rage
  The Queen replied: "I do not pity thee.
  I hate thee, when I see thee. Open not
  Thy mouth again." The wicked Queen then seized
  The lovely tresses of the beauteous maid,
  And took a piece of wood with which to strike;
  But Bidasari wept and swooned away.
  The King's voice sounded through the corridor,
  As he returned. The Queen then hastened forth
  And left a _mandar_ there to close and guard
  Fair Bidasari's room, that nothing should
  Be seen. Then asked the King of her, "Whom hast
  Thou beaten now?" The hypocrite replied,
  "It was a child that disobeyed my will."
  "Are there not others for that discipline?
  Is it for thee to strike?" His _siri_ then
  He took, and kissed the Queen with fondest love.
  All the _dyangs_ fair Bidasari's plight
  Observed, and kindly pity filled their breasts.
  "How cruel is the conduct of the Queen!"
  They said. "She made us bring her to her side
  But to maltreat the child the livelong day.
  It seems as if she wished to slay her quite."
  Then secretly they went, with some to watch,
  And sprinkled Bidasari's brow. To life
  She came, and opened those dear wistful eyes.
  "My friends," she said, "I pray ye, let me go
  Back home again unto my father's house."
  "Oh, trust in God, my child," said one in tears.
  "My lot is written from eternity.
  Oh, pray the princess great to take my life,"
  The poor child cried; "I can no longer stand;
  My bones are feeble. Oh, she has no heart!"
  But the _dyangs_, for fear the Queen might see,
  All fled.

  Meanwhile the merchant and his wife
  Wept all the day, and sighed for their dear child,
  Sweet Bidasari. Nor did gentle sleep
  Caress their eyes at night. Each day they sent
  Rich presents of all kinds, and half of them
  Were for the child. But naught the wicked Queen
  To Bidasari gave. So five days passed
  And then Dyang Menzara forth they sent.
  The merchant said: "Oh, tell the mighty Queen
  That I must Bidasari see. I'll bring
  Her back in three days' time." The good
  _Dyang_ went to the queen and bowing low:
  "The merchant fain would see his child," she said.
  At this the features of the Queen grew hard.
  "Did they not give their child to me? Now scarce
  A day has passed, and they must see her face.
  Is it thine own wish or the merchant's? I
  Have said the girl could go where'er she would.
  Can I not have her taken back myself?"
  Then the _dyang_ bowed, beat her breast, and went,
  Sad that she could not Bidasari see,
  And quaking at the anger of the Queen.
  Of the _dyang_, fair Bidasari heard
  The voice, and felt her heart break that she could
  Not speak to her and send a message home.

  Upon the morrow, when the King had gone
  Among his ministers and men of state,
  The Queen again to Bidasari's room
  Repaired, to beat her more. As soon as she
  Beheld the Queen, poor Bidasari prayed
  To her, "O sovereign lady great, permit
  That I may go unto my father's house."
  The princess shook with rage, her face on fire.
  "If thou but sayest a word, I'll slay thee here."
  To whom could Bidasari turn? She bent
  Before the will of God, and in a sweet
  Voice said: "O Lord, my God, have pity now
  Upon me, for the cruel world has none.
  Grant now the Queen's desire and let me die,
  For she reproacheth me, though naught I've done.
  My parents have forgotten me, nor send
  A word." The angry princess struck again
  Her piteous face, and as she swooned away
  A napkin took to twist into a cord
  And strangle her. She summoned to her aid
  Dang Ratna Wali. "Help me pluck this weed;
  I wish to kill her." But the woman fled,
  As base as cruel. Bidasari's ghost
  Arose before her. Yet the child came back
  To consciousness, and thought amid her tears:
  "I'll tell the story of the golden fish
  Unto the Queen, that she may know it all;
  For I can but a little while endure
  These pains." She spoke then to the Queen and said:
  "O Queen, thou dost desire that I shall die.
  Seek out a little casket that doth lie
  All hidden in the fish-pond at our house.
  Within it is a fish. Have it brought here
  And I will tell thee what it signifies."
  The princess called Dyang Sendari: "Go
  And bring here the _dyangs_, with no delay
  From out the merchant's house." When they arrived:
  "Go, now, _dyangs_, for Bidasari saith
  There is a little casket in the pond
  Where she is wont to bathe. Go bring it me,
  In silence, letting no one see ye come."
  Then the _dyangs_ replied: "Oh, hear our prayer
  For Bidasari. How her parents grieve!
  Oh, pardon, princess, let her go with us."
  The Queen with smiles responded: "The young girl
  Is very happy here, and full of joy.
  Her parents must not grieve, for in two days
  If Bidasari doth desire to go
  I'll send her freely. She is vexed that ye
  Come here so often." The _dyangs_ bowed low,
  And smiled, and called enticingly: "Come forth,
  O charming child, pure soul; it is not right
  To treat us so, for we have come to see
  Thy lovely face, and in its beauty bask."
  Sweet Bidasari heard, and could not speak,
  But answered with her tears. The cruel Queen
  Said to them: "Speak no more. But if ye bring
  The little casket, ye will fill the heart
  Of Bidasari with great joy." Forth fared
  Then the _dyangs_, and found the casket small,
  And brought it to the palace of the Queen.
  Again to Bidasari called the good
  _Dyangs_: "Oh, come, dear heart, and take it from
  Our hands yourself." "She sleeps," the princess said.
  "Come back to-morrow." So they bowed and went.
  The princess hastened with the casket rich
  To Bidasari's room, and opened it
  Before her eyes. Within it was a box
  Of agate, beautiful to see, and filled
  With water wherein swam a little fish
  Of form most ravishing. The princess stood
  Amazed to see with eyes of fire a fish
  That swam. Then was she glad, and spoke with joy
  To Bidasari: "Say what signifies
  The fish to thee? What shall I do with it?"
  Then Bidasari bowed and said: "My soul
  Is in that fish. At dawn must thou remove
  It from the water, and at night replace.

  "Leave it not here and there, but hang it from
  Thy neck. If this thou dost, I soon shall die.
  My words are true. Neglect no single day
  To do as I have said, and in three days
  Thou'lt see me dead."

                  The Queen felt in her heart
  A joy unspeakable. She took the fish
  And wore it on a ribbon round her neck.
  Unto the Queen then Bidasari spoke,
  "Oh, give my body to my parents dear
  When I am dead." Again the young maid swooned.
  The Queen believed her dead, and ceased to beat
  Her more. But she yet lived, though seeming dead.
  The joyful Queen a white cloth over her
  Then spread, and called aloud to the _dyangs_,
  "Take Bidasari to her father's house."
  They groaned and trembled when they saw that she
  Was dead, and said with many tears: "Alas!
  O dearest one, O gold all virginal!
  What shall we say when we thy parents see?
  They'll beat their breasts and die of grief. They gave
  Thee to the King because they trusted us."
  But the proud Queen, her face all red with hate:
  "Why stay ye? Take the wretched girl away."
  They saw the Queen's great rage, and bore the maid
  Upon their shoulders forth, and carried her
  Unto her father's house at dead of night.
  Fear seized the merchant. "Say what bring ye here?
  Tell me, _dyangs_." They placed her on the ground.
  The merchant and his wife, beside themselves,
  With tears embraced her form. "I trusted in
  The Queen, and so I sent my child to her.
  O daughter dear, so young, so pure, so sweet,
  What hast thou done that could the Queen displease,
  That she should send thee home like this to me?
  How could the Queen treat Bidasari so?
  For seven days she imprisoned her and sent
  Her home in death. Ah, noble child! alas!
  Thy father's heart will break, no more to hear
  Thy voice. Speak to thy father, O my child,
  My pearl, my gem of women, purest gold,
  Branch of my heart; canst thou not quiet me?
  O Bidasari, why art thou so still?
  Arise, my pretty child, arise and play
  With all thy maids. Here is thy mother, come
  To greet thee. Bid her welcome. Why art thou
  So motionless? Hast thou no pity, dear,
  To see thy father overwhelmed with woe?
  My heart is bursting with despair because
  Thou'rt lost to me."

                  Long time the merchant thus
  Lamented. "What have I to live for now?
  Since thou art dead, thy father too shall die.
  It is his lot both night and day to sigh
  For thee. My God, I cannot understand
  Why this dear child should thus a victim be!
  'Tis the _dyangs_ who have this evil wrought."
  Then, through the whole _campong_, the merchants all
  Made lamentations, rolling on the ground,
  With noise of thunder, and their hearts on fire.
  They sought to speak and could not. Then began
  Again the merchant, and unto his friends
  Told his misfortune, asking back his child.

  The Queen's _dyangs_ shed tears, and gently said:
  "Speak not so loudly. Thou dost know that we
  Are but poor servants, and we tremble lest
  The Queen should hear. If any one of us
  Had done this wrong, we'd tell it to the King.
  Fate only is at fault. Oh, be not wroth
  With us. Our will was good. We had no end
  Except to see thy lovely daughter great
  And powerful. Naught the King hath known of this.
  It was the Queen's mad jealousy and hate."

  The merchant and his wife accepted these,
  The _dyangs'_ words. "It is as they declare.
  The Queen was jealous and embittered thus
  Against our Bidasari. To your home
  Return, _dyangs_. I fear me that the Queen
  May learn of your delay and punish ye."
  They bowed and went, with hearts of burning grief.

  The merchant and his wife then lifted up
  Poor Bidasari. They were all but dead
  With sorrow. On his knees the father took
  The body wrapped in crimson silk. He felt
  A warmth. Then he remembered that within
  The water was her vital spirit still,
  And, placing her upon a mat, sent Dang
  Poulam, the casket from the pond to bring.
  But 'twas not there. Then all the household searched,
  But found it not. The merchant beat his breast.
  "Branch of my heart," he said, "we all had thought
  Thou wouldst become a princess. I have lost
  My reason. I hoped now to summon back
  Thy spirit vital, but the casket's lost.
  My hope is gone. It may be the _dyangs_
  Have stolen it. They're faithful to the Queen.
  We may not trust in them. They're filled with hate
  And trickery." Unconscious all the time
  Lay Bidasari; but at midnight's hour
  She for the first time moved. They torches brought
  And there behind Egyptian curtains, right
  And left, ignited them, with many lamps'
  Soft flames. The servants watched and waited there.
  The father, always at his daughter's side,
  With fixed glance looked for life to come once more
  Back to his darling one. She moved again.
  With opening eyes she saw and recognized
  Her own soft couch, her parents, and her maids.
  She tried but could not speak. Her hot tears fell,
  She slowly turned and looked with fondest love
  Upon her parents.

                  When the merchant saw
  That Bidasari's spirit had returned,
  He took her on his knees and gave her rice.
  She could not walk because such pain she felt.
  She thought upon the Queen and wept afresh.
  They dried her tears, and placed within her mouth
  What food she liked. The merchant tenderly
  Said, "Bidasari, dear, what has thou wrought
  To cause the Queen against thee thus to act?"
  Young Bidasari, with a flood of tears, replied:
  "No wrong at all I wrought the cruel Queen.
  All suddenly her insults she began,
  And beatings." They were stupefied to hear
  Such tales. "Light of my eyes," the father said,
  "We do not doubt thine innocence. Her deeds
  Were those of madness. For her haughty birth
  I care no whit. Wisdom and virtue bind
  True hearts alone. As friends we ne'er must name
  Those false _dyangs_. Not plants medicinal,
  But poison foul, are they. These days are bad.
  Injustice reigns. Believe me, friends, it is
  A sign the last great day shall soon appear.
  Those false _dyangs_ are but a race of slaves,
  Insensible to all that's good. The hour
  The princess knoweth Bidasari lives,
  We all shall die, the princess is so wroth.
  Illustrious Queen they call her--but her words
  Are hard and cruel. May the curse of God
  O'erwhelm her and annihilate! From thee,
  O God, she shall receive the punishment
  Deserved. She who pursueth thus a soul
  Shall know remorse and pain. So God hath willed.
  So God hath willed. Who doth another harm
  Shall suffer in his turn. It shall be done
  To him as he hath done to others. So,
  My child, my crown, have no more fear at all.
  Intrust thyself to God. The cruel Queen
  Shall yet be treated as she treated thee."
  The merchant thus lamented till the night
  Was half departed, shedding sapphire tears.
  The innocent young girl, like marble there,
  Slept till the evening twilight came. Toward dawn
  She swooned anew.

                  The merchant and his wife
  Were much disturbed to see at night she came
  To life, but when the daylight shone again
  They lost her, and her spirit fled away.
  This so distressed the merchant's heart, a lone
  Retreat he sought to find. The parents cried:
  "O dearest child, there's treason in the air.
  Hatred and anger the companions are
  Of lamentations and of curses dire.
  Foul lies for gold are uttered. Men disdain
  The promises of God, the faith they owe.
  Oh, pardon, God! I ne'er thought the _dyangs_
  Would thus conspire. But since they are so bad
  And treated Bidasari thus, we'll go
  And in the desert find a resting-place.
  And may it be a refuge for us all,
  Hidden and unapproachable."

                  His goods
  He gathered then, and all his servants paid,
  And built a home far in the desert land,
  A spot agreeable. A cabin there
  He raised, with ramparts hemmed about, and strong
  _Sasaks_, and seven rows of palisades.
  They placed there many vases full of flowers,
  And every sort of tree for fruit and shade,
  And cool pavilions. This plaisance so fair
  They called Pengtipourlara. It was like
  The garden of Batara Indra. All
  About, the merchant set pomegranate-trees
  And vines of grape. No other garden was
  So beautiful. 'Twas like the garden fair
  Of great Batara Brahma, filled with fruits.
  When all was ready, forth they went, toward night,
  And took young Bidasari, and much food.
  They fared two days and came unto the spot,
  A garden in the desert. Softest rugs
  From China there were spread and of bright hue
  The decorations were, in every tint.
  The house was hung with tapestries, and ceiled
  To represent the heavens flecked with clouds.
  And all about were lanterns hung and lamps.
  Soft curtains and a couch completed this
  Enchanted resting-place. Always the light
  Was uniform, and brilliant as the day.
  'Twas like a palace of a mighty king,
  Magnificent and grand beyond compare.
  There was a table on a damp rug set,
  With drinks for Bidasari, and with bowls
  Of gold, and vases of _souasa_, filled
  With water. All of this beside the couch
  Was placed, with yellow _siri_, and with pure
  _Pinang_, all odorous, to please the child.
  And all was covered with a silken web.
  Young Bidasari bracelets wore, and rings,
  And ear-rings diamond studded. Garments four
  All gem-bedecked upon a cushion lay,
  For Bidasari's wear. When night had come
  Young Bidasari waked. Her parents dear
  Then bathed her, and her tender body rubbed
  With musk and aloes. Then she straight was clad
  In garments of her choosing. Her dear face
  Was beautiful, almost divine. She had
  Regained the loveliness she erst possessed.
  The merchant was astonished, seeing her.
  He told her then that they would leave her there,
  "Branch of my heart and apple of my eye,
  My dearest child, be not disturbed at this.
  I do not mean to work thee any harm,
  Nor to disown thee, but to rescue thee
  From death." But as she listened to these words
  Young Bidasari wept. She thought upon
  Her fate. Into her father's arms she threw
  Herself, and cried: "Why wilt thou leave me here,
  O father dearest, in this desert lone?
  I'll have no one to call in case of need.
  I fear to stay alone. No one there'll be
  To talk to me. I only count those hours
  As happy when I have my parents near."
  The merchant heard fair Bidasari's words
  And wept with his dear wife. With bitter grief
  Their hearts were shattered. Counsels wise they gave
  To Bidasari. "Dearest daughter mine,"
  The father said, "gem of my head, my crown,
  Branch of my heart, light of my eyes, oh, hear
  Thy father's words, and be thou not afraid.
  We brought thee hither, to this fair retreat,
  Far from the town, for, if the Queen should know
  Thou liv'st at night, the false _dyangs_ would come,
  And who against the princess can contend?
  They'd take thee back, and thus exonerate
  Themselves. I'd let myself be chopped in bits
  Before thou shouldst unto the Queen return.
  Thy father cannot leave companions here,
  But after three days he will come to thee.
  Thy parents both will soon come back again."
  Then Bidasari thought: "My parent's words
  Are truth, and if the Queen should find I live
  She would abuse me as before. Give me
  One maid-companion here to be with me,"
  She asked. "My child, trust not," he said, "in slaves,
  Nor servants, for they only follow pay."
  Then Bidasari silence kept, and they,
  The father all distraught and mother fond,
  Wept bitterly at thought of leaving her.
  Fair Bidasari bade them eat, before
  They started. But because of heavy hearts
  They but a morsel tasted. At the dawn
  Young Bidasari swooned again. They made
  All ready to return to town. With tears
  The father said: "O apple of my eye,
  Pearl of all women, branch of my own heart,
  Pure gold, thy parents leave thee with distress.
  No more they'll have a daughter in the house.
  But, dear, take courage, we shall soon come back."
  They left here with a talking bird to cheer
  Her loneliness, close shutting all the gates
  Of all the seven ramparts. Through a wood
  Bushy and thick they took a narrow path,
  In sorrow, but with confidence in God.
  "O sovereign God, protect our child," they said.
  When they had fared unto their house, they prayed
  And gave much alms.

                  When evening shadows came
  Young Bidasari waked, and found herself
  Alone, and was afraid. With bitter tears
  Her eyes were filled. What could she say? She gave
  Herself to God. Alas, our destiny
  Is like a rock. Twas hers to be alone.
  It is in no man's power to turn aside
  Or change whatever is by fate decreed.
  All desolate sat Bidasari. Sleep
  Wooed not her eyes. Now when he heard the cry
  Of "Peladou," the owl lamented loud.
  Upon her parents coming, loaded down
  With dainties for the child, she for a while
  Her woe forgot, and ate and drank with joy.
  The little bird with which she talked upheld
  Her courage with its soothing voice. So ran
  The days away. Upon pretext he gave
  Of hunting deer, the merchant daily came.


SONG III

  Hear now a song about the King Djouhan.
  The wise and powerful prince e'er followed free
  His fancy, and the Princess Lila Sari
  Was very happy in her vanity.
  Since she had killed (for so she thought) the maid,
  Young Bidasari, tainted was her joy.
  "The King will never take a second wife,"
  She mused, "since Bidasari is now dead."
  The King loved Princess Lila Sari well.
  He gratified her every wish, and gave
  Her all she asked, so fond was he of her.
  Whene'er the princess was annoyed, the King,
  With kisses and soft words would quiet her,
  And sing to her sweet songs till she became
  Herself again. "Poor, little, pretty wife,"
  He'd say, and laugh her fretful mood away.
  One night as he lay sleeping on his bed,
  A dream tormented him. "What may it mean?"
  He thought. "Ah, well, to-morrow morn I'll seek
  An explanation." At the dawn he sat
  Upon a rug Egyptian, breaking fast,
  And with him was the princess. When she had
  The dainties tasted, the _dyangs_ arrived
  With leaves of perfume. Then the King went forth
  Into the garden. All the officers
  Were there assembled. When they saw the King
  They all were silent. To a _mantri_ spoke
  The King: "My uncle, come and sit thee here.
  I fain would question thee." The King had scarce
  These words pronounced, when, bowing very low,
  The _mantri_ in respectful tones replied,
  "My greetings to thee, O most merciful
  Of kings." He sat him near the throne. "I dreamed
  Last night," the King continued, "that the moon
  In her full glory fell to earth. What means
  This vision?" Then the _mantri_ with a smile
  Replied: "It means that thou shalt find a mate,
  A dear companion, like in birth to thee,
  Wise and accomplished, well brought up and good,
  The one most lovable in all the land."
  The King's eyes took new fire at this. He said
  With smiles: "I gave the Queen my promise true
  That never I would take a second wife
  Until a fairer I could find than she.
  And still she is so lovely in my eyes,
  Her equal cannot anywhere be found.
  You'd take her for a flow'r. Yet when arise
  Her storms of anger, long it takes to calm
  Her mind, so waspish is her character.
  The thought of this doth sadden me. Should one
  Not satisfy her heart's desire, she flies
  Into a passion and attempts to kill
  Herself. But 'tis my destiny--'tis writ.
  The Queen is like a gem with glint as bright
  As lightning's flash. No one can ever be,
  I tell thee now, so beautiful to me."
  The _mantri_ smiled. "What thou dost say is just,
  O King, but still if thou shouldst someone find
  More beautiful, thou yet couldst keep thy word.
  The beauty of the Queen may fade away.
  The princess thou shalt wed, O King, hath four
  High qualities. She must, to be thy queen,
  Be nobly born, and rich, and fair, and good."
  The prince replied: "O uncle mine, thy words
  Are true. Full many princesses there live,
  But hard it is to find these qualities.
  The Queen is good and wise and lovable.
  I do not wish another wife to wed,
  And wound the Queen with whom three years I've lived
  In love and harmony. Yet if I saw
  A quite celestial maid, perhaps I might
  Forget, and marry her, and give the Queen
  A gay companion." "O accomplished prince,
  Thou sayest truly. Stay long years with her
  Thy Queen, thy first beloved, for she hath all--
  Great beauty and intelligence." They bowed
  As forth from them the King went palaceward.
  He sat beside the Queen, and kissed her cheeks,
  And said: "Thy features shine with loveliness,
  Like to a jewel in a glass. When I
  Must leave thy side, I have no other wish
  But to return. Like Mount Maha Mirou
  Thou art." The princess said: "Wherefore art thou
  So spirited to-day? Thou'rt like a boy."
  "Branch of my heart, my dearest love," he said,
  "Vex not thyself. Thou know'st the adage old:
  First one is taken with a pretty face,
  Then wisdom comes and prudence, and, with these,
  One loves his wife until the day of death.
  If thus thou dost deport thyself, my dear,
  My heart between two wives shall never be
  Divided; thou alone shalt own it all."
  The Queen was charmed to hear his loving words.
  At night the Queen slept, but King remained
  Awake, and watched the moon, and called to mind
  His dream. As dawn approached he slept, and seemed
  To hear an owl's shrill voice, like Pedalou's.
  When it was fully day, the royal pair
  Together broke their fast. The King went forth
  And orders gave, in two days to prepare
  A mighty hunt, to chase the dappled deer,
  With men and dogs and all apparel fit.
  Then back into the palace went the King,
  And told the Queen, who straightway gave commands
  For food to be made ready. At midnight
  Behind Egyptian curtains went to rest
  The King and Queen, but slept not. Still the dream
  Was ever in his thoughts and worried him.
  At dawn he said farewell unto the Queen.
  She was all radiant, and smiling, said:
  "Bring me a fawn. I'll tell the servants all
  To take good care of it, so it may grow
  Quite tame." "What we can do, my dear, we shall,
  So all of thy desires may come to pass."
  And so the King took leave, with kisses fond,
  And, mounted on a hunter brown, set forth,
  With velvet saddle decked with fringe of pearls.
  Lances and shields and arrows and blow-guns
  They bore. The wood they entered, and the beasts
  All fled before their steps at dawn's first ray.
  And when the sun was up, they loosed the hounds
  With savage cries. Toward noon an animal
  In flight they saw, and would have followed it,
  But then up spake the King and said, "We are
  So hot and weary, let us linger here
  For rest." One-half the company astray
  Had gone, each striving to be first of all.
  The King, attended by a faithful three,
  Reclined upon the ground, and sent them forth
  For water. So the _mantris_ went to find
  A river or a pond, and faring far
  To Bidasari's plaisance came at last.
  They stopped astounded, then approached the place.
  When they were near the lovely garden close,
  They said: "There was no garden here before.
  To whom does this belong? Perchance it is
  A spirit's bower. No human voice is heard
  But just the cry of 'minahs' and 'bajans.'
  Whom shall we call, lest spectres should appear?"
  They wandered round the ramparts, and a gate
  Discovered, shut with heavy iron bar,
  And vainly tried to open it. Then one
  Of them went back, and found the King, and said:
  "Hail, sovereign lord, we have no water found,
  But a _campong_ here in the desert lone,
  As splendid as a sultan's, with all sorts
  Of trees and flow'rs, and not a mortal there.
  'Tis girt about with double ramparts strong.
  No name is seen, and all the gates are shut,
  So that we could not enter."

                  Scarce the King
  Had heard the _mantri's_ word when off he rushed
  To see the fair domain. Before the gate
  He stood astonished. "Truly, _mantris_ mine,
  It is as you have said. I once was here
  And then the wood was filled with thorns and briers."
  "'Tis not a nobleman's _campong_. It must
  Have recently been made. Now summon all
  The _mantris_ here and see what they will say."
  They called aloud, "Oh, hasten, friends, and bring
  The water here." Seven times they called, but none
  Responded. Said the King, "It is enough.
  'Tis like as if one called unto the dead."

  "We'd best not enter," said the _mantris_ then,
  "It may be the abode of demons fell.
  We are afraid. Why should we linger here?
  Return, O King, for should the spirits come
  It might to us bring evil. Thou shouldst not
  Expose thyself to danger." But the King
  Upon the _mantris_ smiled. "Ye are afraid
  Of demons, spectres, spirits? I've no fear.
  Break down the barriers. I'll go alone
  Within the precincts." When the gates were forced,
  He entered all alone. The _mantris_ all
  Were terrified lest harm should come to him.
  They sought with him to go. He lightly said:
  "No, _mantris_ mine, whatever God hath willed,
  Must happen. If in flames I were to burn,
  In God I still should trust. 'Tis only He
  That evil can avert. We mortal men
  No power possess. With my own eyes I wish
  To see this apparition. Should it be
  The will of God, I'll come forth safe and sound.
  Be not disturbed. In case of urgent need
  I'll call upon ye. All await me here."
  The _mantris_ made obeisance and replied,
  "Go, then, alone, since thou hast willed it so."
  Into the plaisance strode the King. He saw
  That all was like a temple richly decked,
  With rugs of silk and colored tapestries
  Of pictured clouds and wheels all radiant,
  And lamps and candelabra hung about,
  And lanterns bright. 'Twas like a palace rich.
  The eyes were dazzled with magnificence.
  And seats there were, and dainty tables rare.
  As through the palace went the King, the more
  Astonished he became at all he saw,
  But nowhere found a trace of human soul.
  Then spake the little bird: "Illustrious King,
  What seek'st thou here? This mansion is the house
  Of ghosts and demons who will injure thee."
  The King was filled with wonder thus to hear
  A bird address him. But it flew away,
  And hid behind a couch. "The bird I'll find,"
  He said, and ope'd the curtains soft. He saw
  Full stretched, upon a bed in dragon's shape,
  A human form, in heavy-lidded sleep
  That seemed like death, and covered with a cloth
  Of blue, whose face betokened deepest grief.
  "Is it a child celestial?" thought the King,
  "Or doth she feign to sleep? Awake, my sweet,
  And let us be good friends and lovers true."
  So spake the King, but still no motion saw.
  He sat upon the couch, and to himself
  He said: "If it a phantom be, why are
  The eyes so firmly shut? Perhaps she's dead.
  She truly is of origin divine,
  Though born a princess." Then he lifted high
  The covering delicate that hid the form
  Of Bidasari sweet, and stood amazed
  At all the magic beauty of her face.
  Beside himself, he cried, "Awake, my love."
  He lifted her and said, with kisses warm,
  "Oh, have no fear of me, dear heart. Thy voice
  Oh, let me hear, my gold, my ruby pure,
  My jewel virginal. Thy soul is mine.
  Again he pressed her in his arms, and gave
  Her many kisses, chanting love-songs low.
  "Thou dost not wake, O dearest one, but thou
  Art yet alive, because I see thee breathe.
  Sleep not too long, my love. Awake to me,
  For thou hast conquered with thy loveliness
  My heart and soul." So fell the King in love
  With Bidasari. "Ah, my sweet," he said,
  "In all the world of love thou'rt worthiest."
  The _mantris_ grew uneasy at his stay.
  They rose and said: "What doth the King so long?
  If harm befell him, what would be our fate?
  Oh, let us call him back at once, my lords."
  So one approached the palace, and cried out:
  "Return, O prince accomplished, to us now.
  Already night is near. Back thou may'st come
  To-morrow ere the dawn. We are afraid
  Lest spirits harm thee. Come, O King, for we
  A-hungered are, and wait for thy return."
  But the illustrious prince was mad with love
  Of Bidasari. Pensively he cried:
  "Branch of my heart, light of mine eyes, my love,
  Pure gold, thou'rt like angel. Now must I
  Depart. To-morrow I will come again."
  With no more words he left her, but returned.
  "My heart would tell me, wert thou really dead.
  Some trouble hast thou, dearest one?" he cried.
  "What bitter grief hath caused thee thus to sleep?"
  He found the nobles murmuring and vexed.
  "O King," they said, "our hearts were filled with fear
  Lest evil had befallen thee. What sight
  So strange hath kept thee all these hours?" The King
  Replied with laughter, "There was naught to see."
  But they remarked his brow o'ercast with thought,
  And said, "O King, thy heart is sorely vexed."
  "Nay, nay," the King replied, "I fell asleep.
  Naught did I hear except the _mantri's*_ voice.
  It surely is the home of demons dread
  And spirits. Let us go, lest they surprise
  Us here." He seemed much moved. "We naught have gained
  But weariness. So let us all go home
  To-night, and hither come again at dawn.
  For I a promise gave the Queen to bring
  A fawn and a _kidjang_." The _mantris_ said:
  "None have we taken yet. But game we'll find
  To-morrow, and will save a pretty fawn."
  The King, when they returned, went straight within
  The palace. There he saw the Queen, but thought
  Of Bidasari. "O my love," he said,
  "To-morrow I'm resolved to hunt again,
  And bring thee back a fawn, and win thy thanks.
  I'm never happy when away from thee,
  My dearest love. Thine image is engraved
  Upon my heart." Then he caressed the Queen
  And fondled her, but still his heart went out
  To Bidasari. All night long his eyes
  He did not close in sleep, but thought of her,
  In all her beauty rare. Before the dawn
  The royal couple rose. The King then gave
  Command that those who wished should hunt again
  With him. At sunrise forth they fared.

  On Bidasari let us look again.
  When night had gone, in loneliness she rose,
  And ate and drank. Then to the bath perfumed
  She went, and coming to her chamber, took
  Some _siri_ from the betel-box. She saw
  A _sepah_ recently in use and cast
  It forth. She thought within herself:
  "Who could have used it? Someone hath been here."
  She ran through all the rooms, but nothing found
  Except the _sepah_ in the betel-box.
  "Had it my father been, he would have left
  Some food for me. Oh, he is very rash
  To leave me here alone." Upon the couch
  She sat and wept, and could not tell her grief
  To anyone. "When we no longer may
  Live happily," she said, "'tis best to die.
  My parents never can forgiven be,
  To leave me here like any infidel.
  And if I suffer, they will sorrow, too."
  The _minahs_, the _bajans_, and talking birds
  Began to sing. She took a 'broidered cloth,
  And 'neath its folds she sweetly fell asleep.

  The King's horse flew apace to the _campong_
  Of Bidasari. All the _mantris_ said:
  "Thou takest not the path for hunting, sire;
  This is but the _campong_ of demons dread
  And spectres. They may do us deadly harm."
  The great prince only laughed, and made as if

  He heard not, still directing his fleet course
  To Bidasari's garden, though they sought
  His wishes to oppose. When they arrived
  Before the palisades, the _mantris_ cried:
  "Avaunt, ye cursed demons, and begone
  Into the thorns and briers." Then to the King:
  "If thou wilt prove the courage of thy men,
  Lead us behind the barriers, among
  The evil spirits. We will go with thee."
  "Nay. Let me go alone," the prince replied,
  "And very shortly I'll come forth again."
  They said: "O prince, to us thy will is law.
  To God most high do we commend thy soul."
  Alone the prince in Bidasari's home
  Set foot. He was astonished, for he saw the bath
  Had recently been used, and all the lamps
  Were trimmed and full of oil. Then opening
  The chests, he saw the traces of a meal,
  And glasses freshly drained. The chambers all
  He searched, and came to Bidasari's couch,
  And, lifting up the curtains, saw her there,
  Asleep beneath the 'broidered covering.
  "Tis certain that she lives," he said. "Perchance
  It is her lot to live at night, and die
  At dawn." Then came he nearer yet, and gazed
  Upon her beauty. Ling'ring tears he saw
  Bedewed her lashes long, and all his heart
  Was sad. Her face was beautiful. Her locks
  Framed * with curls most gracefully. He took
  Her in his arms and cried, with kisses warm:
  "Why hast thou suffered, apple of my eye?"
  He wept abundantly, and said: "My gold,
  My ruby, my carbuncle bright, thy face
  Is like Lila Seprara's, and thy birth
  Is pure and spotless. How could I not love
  A being fair as thou dost seem to me?
  Thy beauty is unspeakable; thou art
  Above all crowns, the glory of all lands.
  My soul adores thee. Lord am I no more
  Of my own heart. Without thee, love, I could
  No longer live; thou art my very soul.
  Hast thou no pity to bestow on me?"
  The more he looked the more he loved. He kissed
  Her ruby lips, and sang this low _pantoum_:


SONG

  Within a vase there stands a china rose;
    Go buy a box of betel, dearest one.
  I love the beauty that thine eyes disclose;
    Of my existence, dear, thou art the sun.

  Go buy a box of betel, dearest one.
    Adorned with _sountings_ brave of sweet _campak_,
  Of my existence, dear, thou art the sun;
    Without thee, everything my life would lack.

  Adorned with _sountings_ fair of sweet _campak_,
    A carafe tall will hold the sherbet rare;
  Without thee, everything my heart would lack;
    Thou'rt like an angel come from heaven so fair.

  A carafe tall will hold the sherbet rare,
    Most excellent for woman's feeble frame.
  Thou'rt like an angel come from heaven so fair,
    Love's consolation, guardian of its flame.

  At the approach of night the _mantris_ said,
  "What doth the King so long away from us?"
  They were disturbed, the prince seemed so unlike
  Himself and filled with such unrestfulness.
  "I fear me much," then said a _mantri_ there,
  "That some mishap hath overwhelmed the King.
  Perhaps by some bad spirit he's possessed,
  That he to this weird spot should fain return."
  One went and cried: "Come hither, O our King!
  The day declines; we've waited here since dawn."
  The King responded to the call, and came
  With smiling face, though pale, unto the gate:
  "Come here, my uncle; come and talk with me,
  Thy King. No evil thing hath come to pass."
  "O lord supreme, most worthy prince, return.
  If harm should come to thee, we all should die."
  "Be calm, my uncle, I will not this night
  Return, but he may stay with me who wills."
  "O King, with spirits what hast thou to do?
  Thy face is pale and worn, and tells of care."
  The King but sighed, and said: "My heart is full
  Of trouble, but the will of God is good.
  Here yesterday a fair celestial form
  With angel face I saw. 'Twas here alone."
  And so the King told all that had occurred.
  "Go back," he added. "Leave me here with her.
  Say to the Queen I've lingered still a day
  For my amusement, with my retinue."
  Then half the escort stayed, and half repaired
  Back to the palace to acquaint the Queen
  The King would stay another day and hunt.
  When all was dark, sweet Bidasari waked
  And saw the King, and tried to flee away.
  He seized and kissed her. "Ruby, gold," he said,
  "My soul, my life, oh, say, where wouldst thou go?
  I've been alone with thee for two whole days,
  And all the day thou wrapped in sleep didst lie.
  Where wouldst thou go, my dove?" The gentle girl
  Was much afraid and trembled, and she thought:
  "Is it a spirit come to find me here?
  Avaunt thee and begone, O spectre dread,"
  She said, amid her tears. "No phantom I,"
  Replied the King; "be not afraid. I wish
  To marry thee." Then Bidasari strove
  Again to flee. Then sang the King a song
  That told of love and happiness. Its words
  Astonished Bidasari, and she cried:
  "Art thou a pirate? Why dost thou come here?
  Speak not such things to me. If thou shouldst be
  Discovered by my father, he would cut
  Thee into pieces. Thou shouldst go alone
  To death, and find no pardon in his heart.
  Take all my gems and hasten forth at once."
  The King replied: "'Tis not thy gems I want,
  But thee. I am a pirate, but thy heart
  Is all I want to steal. Should spectres come
  In thousands, I would fear them not at all.
  No tears, my love, bright glory of my crown.
  Where wouldst thou go? Hast thou no pity, sweet,
  For me? I am a powerful prince. Who dares
  Oppose my will? Pure gold, all virginal,
  Where wouldst thou go?" So spake the King, and fair
  Young Bidasari trembled more and more.
  "Approach me not," she cried, "but let me bathe
  My face." "I'll bathe it for thee, dear," he said.
  But Bidasari threw the water pure
  Into his face. "Not that way, child," he laughed;
  "My vesture thou hast wet. But I shall stay
  And meet thy parents here. Oh, hearken, love.
  I followed far the chase, and wandered here.
  I sought a pretty fawn to take the Queen;
  But now thy face I've seen, no more I wish
  To go away. Oh, have no fear, my child;
  I would not harm thee. When thy parents come,
  I'll ask them for thy hand. I trust they'll grant
  My prayer. I'll lead thee forth from this fair spot
  Unto my palace. Thou shalt sit beside
  The Queen, and live in happiness complete."
  Sweet Bidasari bowed her head and wept,
  All red with modesty. Unto herself she said:
  "I never thought it was a king. How rude
  I was! I hope the King will not be vexed."
  He calmed her fears with tender words of love.
  "Branch of my heart," he said, "light of my eyes,
  Have no more fear. Soon as thy parents fond
  Have given their consent, I'll lead thee forth.
  My palace is not far. A single day
  Will take us there. It is not difficult
  To go and come." Then Bidasari knew
  It was the King of that same land. With fright
  She nearly swooned at thought of all the woe
  The Queen had caused her. "O my lord," she said,
  "I'm but a subject humble. Give me not
  The throne. I have my parents, and with them
  Must stay." The King was overjoyed. "My dear,"
  He said, "by what names are thy parents known?"
  With low, sweet voice the tender girl replied:
  "Lila Djouhara is my father's name.
  He dwelleth in Pesara." "Dearest one,
  Tell me the truth. Why have they treated thee
  In such a fashion--why abandoned thee
  In solitude? Thy father is not poor
  A merchant rich is he, of birth, who hath
  A host of slaves and servants. For what cause
  Hath he his daughter left in this far spot?
  He is renowned among the merchants all,
  Both good and honest. What hath forced him here
  Within this lonely wood to hide thee, dear?
  Oh, tell me all; let nothing be concealed."
  She thought: "It was the fault of his own Queen.
  But if I tell him all--he never saw
  Me there, within the palace--should he not
  Believe, I'll be a liar in his eyes."
  She feared to speak and tell him of the Queen.
  She thought, "So cruel was the Queen to me
  When she but feared a rival, what would come
  If I should sit beside her on the throne?"
  Then in her sweet voice Bidasari said:
  "My glorious King, I am afraid to speak.
  I am not suited to a royal throne.
  But since thou lovest me, how dare I lie?
  If thou dost favor me, the Queen will vex
  Her heart. My parents fear her. 'Tis the cause
  Why hither they have brought me. Three long months
  Ago I came, for terror of the Queen."
  She thought on all the horror of those days,
  And choked with sobs, and could no longer talk.
  Then tenderly the King spake to the girl:
  "Ah, well, my darling love, confide in me
  The secret thy dear heart conceals. Fear naught;
  The Queen is good and wise, and knoweth how
  To win all hearts. Why should she render thee
  Unhappy? Speak not thus, my pretty one;
  The Queen could never do an evil deed.
  When thou art near her, thou shalt see, my dear,
  Whether she loves or hates thee."

                                 At these words
  Young Bidasari knew the King esteemed
  The Queen, and felt her heart sink in her breast.
  "My words are true," she said, "but still perchance
  My prince cannot believe. But was I not
  Within thy palace six or seven nights?
  The sweat of pain became my couch, so great
  Was my desire to see my parents dear.
  They sent me dainties, but all the _dyangs_
  Were kept as prisoners by the princess there.
  She said she'd take me back herself. One day
  I was, indeed, sent home, but scarce alive."
  She told him everything that came to pass.
  He listened stupefied, and said: "How could
  It be that thou wert in the palace hid,
  And I not see thee there? Why was it thou
  Wert not beside the Queen? I've never left
  The palace for a single day. Where wert
  Thou hid? Thy strange words I believe, my dear.
  Speak without fear and let me know the whole."
  Urged by the King, young Bidasari told
  Him all. And when the conduct of the Queen
  He learned, the King was wonder-struck. A rage
  Most terrible possessed him. But his love
  For Bidasari mounted higher still
  And his compassion. "So the Queen thus wrought!
  I never thought hypocrisy could be
  So great! I never in the princess saw
  Such bent for evil. But be not, my dear,
  Disconsolate. It is a lucky thing
  Thou didst not quite succumb. No longer speak
  Of that bad woman's ways. Thank God we've met!
  So weep no more, my love. I'll give to thee
  A throne more beautiful than hers, and be
  Thy dear companion until death." "O King,"
  She said: "I have no beauty fit to grace
  A throne. Oh, let me stay a simple maid,
  And think of me no more." The King replied:
  "I will not give thee up. But I must still
  Return, and meditate how I may win
  Thee back to life complete." With kisses warm
  He covered her fair face. She bowed her head,
  And silence kept; and when the morning dawned
  She swooned anew. It was a proof to him
  That she had told the truth. A mortal hate
  Then filled the prince's heart against the Queen.
  Touched with deep pity for the maiden young,
  He kissed her once again, and left her there,
  So white and still, as if she lay in death.
  What of the _mantris_? They awaited long
  The King, in silence. Then the oldest said:
  "O sovereign lord, O caliph great, wilt thou
  Not now return?" "I'll come again, dear heart,"
  He said, and sought the city. Straight he went
  Into the palace, to the Queen, who asked:
  "What bringest thou from hunting?" He replied
  In murmurs: "I have taken naught at all.
  For my own pleasure I remained all night."
  "'Tis nothing, lord, provided no harm came
  To thee. But say what thou didst seek, to stay
  So long? I always have prepared for thee
  The food for thy great hunts, but never yet
  Have I received a recompense?" The King
  To this replied with smiles: "Prepare afresh,
  For I to-morrow shall depart again.
  If I take nothing, I'll return at once."
  As he caressed the Queen, upon her breast
  He felt the little magic fish of gold
  All safe. Then gave he quick commands to all.
  "I'll hunt to-morrow, and shall surely bring
  Some wondrous game." Now when the princess fell
  Asleep he found upon her heart no more
  The little fish. "'Tis as the maiden said,"
  He thought. "The princess hath a wicked soul.
  With such a heart I cannot go with her
  Through life." Through all the night he could not sleep,
  But thought upon the girl. He was as sad
  As though he heard a touching song. At dawn
  The royal couple rose and went to bathe.
  The King into the palace came again
  And sat upon the throne adorned with gems.
  He donned the royal robe to wear before
  The dear young girl. A vestment 'twas of silk,
  All gold embroidered, with a tunic bright,
  Of orange hue. His mien was most superb,
  As doth become a mighty king. He bore
  A quiver of Ceylon, most deftly wrought.
  When all the _mantris_ had assembled there,
  The King within the palace once more went
  And met the Queen. Caressing her he took
  The little fish that lay upon her breast.
  The princess wept, and at the door she cried:
  "Why takest thou my little ornament?"
  The great King gave no heed, and went away,
  At dawn's glad hour, when birds begin to sing.
  Swords gleamed and lances shone, and through the wood
  They hastened on, with quivers and blow-guns,
  And seemed a walking city.

                  Now again
  To Bidasari let us turn. When dawn
  Appeared, she rose and sat in loneliness,
  Her face grew still more beautiful. Her state
  Astonished her. "Perhaps it is the King
  Who hath this wonder wrought. How happy I
  To be no longer dead!" She washed her face
  And felt still sad, but with her pensiveness
  A certain joy was mingled, for her pain
  Was passed. Her grief the "talking bird" allayed
  With songs about the mighty King and love.


SONG

    There's _siri_ in a golden vase,
    Good Dang Melini plants a rose;
    The King admires a pretty face,
    To-day he'll come to this fair close.

    Good Dang Melini plants a rose,
    Here in the garden they will meet;
    To-day he'll come to this fair close,
    To man and maiden love is sweet.

    Here in the garden they will meet,
    Go seek the fairest fruit and flower;
    To man and maiden love is sweet,
    The King is coming to the bower.

  Lo! At this very instant they approached.
  Dear Bidasari hid behind the couch.
  The King searched everywhere, and found at last
  The maiden hiding, bathed in bitter tears.
  Then kissing her, the King inquired: "My love,
  Bright glory of my crown; pray tell to me
  Why thou art sad." He dried her tears. But she
  Still hung her head in silence. Then the King
  For elephants and horses to be sent
  Gave orders. "Go with _mantris_ two at once,
  And bring the merchant and his wife, and bid
  Forty _dyangs_ to hasten here forthwith."
  Then went the _mantris_ forth in haste, and found
  The merchant and his wife and said, "The King
  Inviteth ye to come." Then through the wood
  The parents hurried to the plaisance fair
  Of Bidasari, there to meet the King.
  Before his Majesty they bowed with fear.
  The great King smiled. "Be not afraid," he said,
  "My uncle and my mother. Let us go
  Within, to see thy lovely child. I make
  Ye now my parents. We have friendly been,
  And still shall be." Beside the King they saw
  Fair Bidasari seated, as with steps
  Still hesitating they the palace sought.
  The father fond was glad within his heart,
  His daughter was so beautiful. She seemed
  A princess lovely of the Mount Lidang.
  "Dear Bidasari, sweetest child," they said,
  "Behind the King, dear daughter, thou should stand."
  She made as if to go, but still the King
  Restrained her, "No, my pretty one," he said;
  "Thy place is at my side. So God hath willed."
  The oldest _mantri_, called for counsel, spoke:
  "Lila Djouhara good, what sayest thou?
  Art thou not glad to see thy daughter made
  A queen? What happiness hath come to thee!"
  The merchant bowed before the King, and said:
  "Make her thy servant, not thy wife, my lord.
  Thy glorious Queen we fear. She e'er hath shown
  For Bidasari hatred dire, because
  A child so lovely might attract the King."
  The monarch hearing him thus speak, still more
  Toward him was borne. "My uncle," then he cried,
  "Have no more fear. But never shall I make
  A servant of thy daughter."

                  Then he gave
  Command to build a castle in the wood.
  And all the workers came, and built it there,
  With ramparts three. As if by magic then
  A golden palace rose. The outer gate
  Was iron, loaded down with arms, and held
  By demons and by Ethiopians.
  These were the keepers of the gates, with steeds
  Untamed. With swords unsheathed they stood alert
  And waited for the King's commands. Of brass
  All chiselled was the second gate, supplied
  With cannons and with powder, guarded safe
  By beings supernatural. The third
  Was silver, such as may be seen in far
  Eirak. The beauty of the castle was
  Beyond compare! From far it seemed to be
  As double, like an elephant with two
  White ivory tusks. Where may its like be found?
  Three diamonds pure reflected all the light,
  Big as a melon. Now the castle built,
  The King a plaisance beautiful desired
  With gay pavilions, and all kinds of plants.
  The middle booth nine spacious rooms displayed,
  One for the royal audiences, adorned
  And pleasant as a bed of flowers.

                  The King
  A festival maintained for forty days,
  With games and sports and dances to divert.
  And never was such animation seen!
  All ate and drank to sound of music sweet.
  They passed the loving-cup and drank to each
  In turn.

                  For forty days resounded there
  The gongs and _gendarangs_, and joyous tones
  Of gay _serouni_ and _nefiri_ glad.
  "How beautiful is Bidasari!" all
  Exclaimed; "a thousand times more lovely than
  The Queen. Thrice happy are the merchant now
  And his good wife; by marriage they're allied
  To our great King, though strangers to the land.
  We count it strange that Bidasari's face
  In naught is like the merchant nor his wife.
  Who knoweth but that she, in mortal shape,
  An angel fair may be? Full many slaves
  The merchant hath, but never children own."
  "He found her when a babe, upon the shore,"
  Another said, "and brought her up."

                  The King
  Heard all their words. He thought: "It is the truth
  And this I take as proof of her high birth.
  She certainly is noble or come down
  From heaven."

                  When four days had fled, the wives
  Of _mantris_ dressed the beauteous girl. They clad
  Her form in satins soft of Egypt, shot
  With gold, adorned with precious stones inset
  And many gems. Her beauty was enhanced
  The more, till she a radiant angel seemed.
  She wore a tunic, crimson and pomegranate,
  With buttons shaped like butterflies. She was
  Adorned with _padaka_ of five quaint clasps,
  And belt called _naga souma_. Ear-rings rich
  She had, of diamonds set in gold, and wrought
  Most wondrously, as bright as daylight's gleam;
  A ring most marvellous and rare she wore
  Called _astakouna_, and another named
  _Gland kana_, and a third from far Ceylon,
  Studded with precious stones. Her eyes were like
  The stars of orient skies. Her teeth were black,
  Her face like water shone. Her chiselled nose
  Was prominent and Mike a flower fresh culled.
  When she was dressed, upon a couch of pearls
  Her mother put her. Supple was her form,
  And white, as she reclined, by many maids
  Surrounded. In his royal garb the prince
  Was clad, and dazzling to the eyes of all
  Who saw. He wore a kingly crown which shone
  With diamonds bright and lucent amethysts
  And many stones, and all majestic seemed.
  Then rice was brought. The King with pleasure ate
  And what was left he gave the _mantris'_ wives.
  When all had finished he perfumed himself
  And gazed upon his lovely wife. Her face
  And form were charming. Her soft tresses curled
  In grace. Her eyes still kept the trace of tears,
  Which made her lovelier. The silken folds
  Of soft Egyptian curtains fell. They were alone.
  "Awake, my darling," said the prince at dawn,
  "Crown of my life, awake, my pretty one."
  Then Bidasari waked and said, with tears:
  "My friend, I had all sorts of wondrous dreams.
  I saw a palm-tree tall with tufted limbs,
  And fruits all ripe." When three days more had fled
  And all the people saw and loud acclaimed,
  Then Bidasari took the rank of Queen.
  The King o'erloaded her with gifts and loved
  Her tenderly. "Oh, let us live and die
  Together, dear, and, as the days go by,
  Think more of one another, and our love
  Preserve, as in the hollow of the hand
  Oil is upheld, nor falls a single drop."
  So spake the King.

                  The merchant and his wife
  Were soon established in the neighborhood,
  Near to Queen Bidasari's palace grand.
  A hundred servants had they to fulfil
  Their orders. They sent gifts to all their friends,
  And food to last a month.

                  A certain day
  It chanced that Bidasari said: "O King,
  Why goest thou no more within the gates
  Of that thine other palace? Of a truth
  Queen Lila Sari will be vexed, because
  Thou hast abandoned her so long a time.
  She'll think that I have kept thee from her side
  Unwilling thou shouldst go." So, with all sorts
  Of words, fair Bidasari strove to urge
  The King to visit Lila Sari. "I
  Will go to-morrow," finally he said.
  He went, when morning came, and met the Queen.
  She turned him back, and with sharp, bitter words
  Reproached him. "Wretched one, I will not see
  Thy face. I love thee not. I hate thee. Go!
  Lila Djouhara's son-in-law, thou'rt not
  To me an equal. Thy new wife's an ape,
  Who liveth in the woods."

                  But when the King
  Heard these vociferations of the Queen,
  He said: "Branch of my heart, light of my eyes,
  Oh, be not vexed, my dear. It was not I
  Who wrong began, but thou didst cause it all.
  For thou didst hide thy deed from me, and drive
  Me on to this extremity. Oh, why
  Art thou now angry with me? If thou wilt
  But love her, and attach thy heart to hers,
  She'll pardon thee, and take thee as a friend."
  As more and more enraged the Queen became,
  Her wrath with strong reproaches overflowed.
  "Depart from here, accursed of God! Thou art
  No longer husband mine. Go live with her
  Whom God hath struck, but whom thou dost delight
  To honor. Formerly of noble blood
  Thou wert, but now no more than broken straw.
  Thou needst not further try to flatter me.
  Though thou shouldst purify thyself seven times, false one,
  I'd not permit thee to approach my side."
  The King grew angry and replied: "Tis thou
  Who art despicable. Thy cunning tricks
  Are worthless now. Thy jealousy insane
  Was without cause, and common were thy acts.
  Thy wit is much below thy beauty.
  Will follow thee, should I protection cease."
  "Have I forgot my noble birth?" she asked.

  "But thou hast erred, to lower thine high estate
  To people of such base extraction. Here
  And everywhere thy shame is known, that thou
  Art wedded to a gadabout. Is it
  For princes thus to wed a merchant's child?
  She ought far in the woods to dwell, and know
  Most evil destiny." The King but smiled
  And said: "If this event is noised abroad,
  'Tis thou who wilt receive an evil name.
  For who in all the land would dare prevent
  The King from marrying? I ought to take
  From thee all I have given. But before
  The people I've no wish to humble thee.
  Is it because I met thy every wish
  That thou art grown so bad? Most evil hath
  Thy conduct been, and I with thee am wroth,"
  And in hot anger rushed the King away,
  And straight repaired to Bidasari's side.



SONG IV


  This song will tell again about the prince
  Of Kembajat, most powerful. He was chased
  By fell _garouda_, horrid bird of prey,
  And sought another land. His way he took
  Toward Indrapura. At the break of dawn
  A daughter fair was born, a princess true,
  Within a boat that lay upon a shore.
  The Queen and he abandoned her, and went
  Back to the royal palace and for days
  Bemoaned her fate. Of her they nothing heard.
  "Alas my child!" the father cried, "my dear,
  In whose care art thou now? We do not know
  If thou art dead or living. Thus thy sire
  Hath no repose. Light of mine eyes, my love,
  My purest gold, our hearts are torn with grief.
  An evil fate was ours to hide thee there.
  We do repent the deed. To think that thou
  Perchance hath fallen among the poorest folk!
  A slave perhaps thou art!" The prince's son
  Remarked the sorrow of his parents dear,
  And was profoundly moved. "Have I," he asked,
  "A sister? Tell me why have ye concealed
  Her far away? Did ye not care for her?
  Was she a burden that ye must forsake
  Her thus? Doth shame not fill your parents' hearts?"
  But when he heard the tale in full, he said:
  "O father, let me go to seek for her,
  My sister dear. If I succeed I'll bring
  Her back to thee." "Oh, leave us not, my son,"
  The father said. "Thou art our only heir.
  Like a tamed bird upon our shoulders fain
  We've carried thee, and watched thee, day and night.
  Why shouldst thou leave us now? Oh, go not forth.
  Vex not thyself about thy sister dear.
  From travellers we shall get news of her,
  And her abode discover."

                        Then the prince
  Bowed low and said: "My father, lord, and King,
  I am but strengthened in my wish to go
  And find my sister. Let me now depart,
  And seek for news of her." The King replied:
  "Well, go, my dearest son; thy heart is good.
  Though but a child thou still dost bear a brain."
  Then summoned the young prince the merchants all,
  And bought much goods and questioned them in turn
  About all neighboring villages and camps.
  They told whate'er they knew most willingly,
  For much the young prince was beloved by them.
  Among them was a youth of handsome face,
  Fair Bidasari's foster-brother tall.
  Amid the strangers sat he near the throne;
  His name was Sinapati. He was brave
  And wise. Now as he watched the prince he thought,
  "How strangely like dear Bidasari's face
  Is his, as when a reed is split in twain
  There is no difference between the halves."
  His home he left when Bidasari fair
  Became the Queen. He thought of her and wept.
  The prince observed him there, and said, with smiles:
  "Young man, my friend, from what far town art thou?
  Why dost thou weep so bitterly? What thoughts
  Arise in thee and make thy visage dark?"
  Young Sinapati bowed and said: "My lord,
  I came from Indrapura, in a ship,
  My wares to sell. For that I do not weep.
  But sorrow cometh to my heart whene'er
  I think upon my home, and brothers dear,
  And sisters."

                  At these words the prince rejoiced.
  He thought, "From him some news I'll surely learn."
  Sherbets and dainties then to all the folk
  He offered, and the cup went 'round from dawn
  Till noon, and then the merchants went away;
  But the young prince kept Sinapati there.
  Now he already strong affection felt
  For him and said: "My friend, toward thee I'm moved
  And look upon thee as a brother dear.
  Thou dost at Indrapura live, but who
  May be thy patron there?" Then with a smile
  Young Sinapati said: "My patron's called
  Lila Djouhara, merchant great. He owns
  Some six or seven swift ships, and toileth more
  Than ever since he Bidasari took
  As child." In two days' time the young prince went
  With Sinapati to his father's house.
  "I bring thee news," he said, "but nothing yet
  Is sure. Behold from Indrapura far
  A youth, from whom I've things of import great.
  A merchant of Pesara, very rich,
  My sister must have found. All well agrees
  With what to me thou saidst. Now must we seek
  For confirmation of the glad report."
  To Sinapati gold and gems they gave.
  Then spake the King: "If this be so I'll send
  An envoy bearing richest gifts, and thanks
  Within a letter writ."

                  The youthful prince
  Bowed low and said: "Oh, send me on this quest!
  Lila Djouhara I would like to see.
  Perhaps he's virtuous and just. If I
  Am made full sure it is my sister dear,
  I'll send a messenger. And if it be
  I'll bring her back."

                  The King was moved
  To hear his son thus speak. "O dearest child,"
  He said: "I'm very loath to let thee go.
  But thou must many horsemen take with thee,
  Lest thou shouldst long be absent."

                  "Why should I
  Be long away?" the prince replied, with bows;
  "For if Lila Djouhara will not let
  Her come, I shall forthwith return to thee."
  The King could now no more object. He gave
  Commands to make an expedition great.
  With richest gifts, and food, and princely things,
  And sent him forth with blessings on his head.
  "Stay not too long; thou art my only hope,"
  The King exclaimed; "I'm getting old, my son,
  And thou my heir upon the throne must be."
  They started early on the fourteenth day
  Of that same month. And Sinapati rode
  Beside the Prince.

                  Some went on foot and some
  On horses. When they far had gone, the prince
  Said to the youth: "Now listen, friend. When we
  Arrive thou must not name my family
  And rank. I'm someone from another town.
  It doth not please me to declare my rank
  To strangers. Should the girl my sister prove,
  Thou mayst tell all, for I shall soon return."
  Thus speaking, the young prince his way maintained,
  And soon arrived near to the city sought.
  He Sinapati left, and went within
  The gates, with four companions, true as steel,
  And six attendants. They at once repaired
  To the _campong_ of good Lila Djouhara.
  They found it closed, with a forsaken look.
  "There's no one here. The King hath taken all
  Away, both old and young," said the _mandar_.
  Then Sinapati beat his breast and said:
  "What hath become of my dear patron, then?"
  "Be not disturbed. No harm hath come to him.
  The merchant with the King hath gone, because
  The King hath married Bidasari fair,
  And made of her a queen, and built a fine
  New palace in the country wild. There all
  Is joy and happiness." Beyond all count
  Was Sinapati glad to hear these words.
  Then to the prince he said: "My gracious lord,
  Lila Djouhara's near at hand. He is
  In highest favor with the King, and bears
  A title new." They hurried forth to find
  His residence. "It is the left _campong_,"
  Remarked a country-man. "Thy lord is grand
  And powerful now, and master of us here.
  The King hath now become his son-in-law."
  Then Sinapati went within the gates
  And saw his mother there. Her heart was touched.
  She kissed him and inquired, "Whom hast thou brought?"
  "It is a friend," he answered. "Come, my lord,"
  She to the young prince said, "enter and rest."
  "He's so like Bidasari," to herself
  She said. "What is thy name, my brave young man,
  Thou seemest nobly born. In very truth
  Thou'rt handsome and well mannered." Then the prince
  Said: "Poutra Bangsawan I'm called. Thy son
  I've followed here." But Sinapati paid
  Him homage, and they knew him for a prince.
  Before his door young Sinapati slept
  At night to guard him safe. Next day there came
  An invitation from Lila Mengindra
  (Before, Djouhara). So they started forth.
  Lila Mengindra was astonished quite
  To see the prince's face so beautiful.
  "Who is this most distinguished stranger here?"
  He asked himself. "My master, speak a word
  To Poutra Bangsawan, a friend of mine,"
  Said Sinapati. So the old man turned
  And spoke unto the prince, "Come here, my son,
  And sit thee near thy father." He felt drawn
  To him, he looked so much like Bidasari.
  The young prince smiled and on the dais sat.
  "What is thy visit's purpose?" then inquired
  The good old man. The prince with bows polite
  Replied: "I'm but a humble stranger, come
  To find my sister. I bespeak thine aid."
  "Be not afraid, my son, but trust in me,
  Nor fear to give thy sister's name. If thou
  Wilt have it so I'll take thee for a son;
  I love thee for thou hast a face so like
  My daughter's." Then the brave young prince began
  And told his sister's story, how she was
  In time of stress abandoned on the shore.
  "And if I only knew," he said, "where now
  She is, I'd be her master's willing slave."
  Now when Lila Mengindra heard his tale
  His joy was quite unspeakable. His love
  For Bidasari's brother greater grew.
  With smiles he asked: "Now, Poutra Bangsawan,
  Say of what family thou art, that I
  May aid thee in thy quest, and help thee find
  Thy sister." Then the young prince bowed his head
  And pondered, "Shall I lie?" For he knew not
  If 'twere his sister. Lila saw his mood
  And said: "Be not disturbed. It is most sure
  That thy dear sister's here. So speak the truth,
  That my old heart may be surcharged with joy.
  Thy sister's seated on a throne, and like
  A brilliant jewel is her family.
  Be no more sorry. As for me, my heart
  Is full of joy."

                  The prince looked in his face
  And said: "Can I confide in him? I am
  A stranger here and fear to be deceived."
  Said Sinapati: "Speak not thus, I pray,
  For everybody knows this man can tell
  Ten-carat gold from dross. Now list, my lord.
  Although he bids me silent be, a prince
  He is, son of a powerful king, and comes
  To seek his sister." Then within his heart
  The former merchant much rejoiced, as if
  He'd found a mountain of pure gems. He paid
  His homage to the prince in proper form,
  And took him into his abode, to meet
  His wife and all within. The spouses two
  To him exclaimed: "Dear prince, in our old age
  We're very happy. When thy sister sweet
  We found, o'erjoyed were we. And now the King
  Hath married her, and raised her to the throne.
  He hath our family to noble rank
  Upraised, and covered us with benefits."
  Then smiling said the prince: "I learn with joy
  My sister sweet is here. When may I go
  Before the King and see her? For I've come
  To take her home. And yet I fear the King
  Will never let her go away from him.
  When I have seen her I'll return again."
  In three days' time the King gave audience.
  The former merchant with him took the prince,
  Who sent the richest presents on before.
  The princeling was most gorgeously attired
  And bore himself with haughty dignity.
  His robe was rich, his tunic violet
  And fire. His many-colored turban bore
  Bright agates. At his girdle hung his kriss.
  He was entirely clad as prince should be,
  And bracelets wore with little bells and rings.
  His leggings were embroidered with bright flowers
  Called _pouspa angatan_. He seemed divine--
  His beauty was extraordinary. Pearls
  In numbers countless covered all his garb;
  An amulet he had with sacred verse
  From the Koran, a diamond pure. He rode
  A steed most richly housed, with _shabraque _decked
  With gleaming jewels casting rays of light.
  Twas thus the prince set out to meet the King.
  Lila Mengindra with him went. The prince
  Approached the King's pavilion, and at once
  The King remarked his beauty and his mien
  Of noble grace. "Who can he be?" he thought.
  Meanwhile the prince dismounted and appeared
  Before the King. Full seven times he bowed
  And said, "O may your happiness increase,
  Illustrious sovereign!"

                  Then the King with smiles
  Lila Mengindra questioned, "Who is this
  Thou hither bringest, of such noble mien
  And amiable face?"

                  With humble bow
  The former merchant said: "This slave of thine
  Has come from lands remote, from Kembajat,
  Upon the seashore, since thy Majesty
  He wished to see. His presents few he sent
  Before him, which he hopes thou wilt accept."
  The former merchant thought: "I would his rank
  Divulge. But some might think I lied because
  The King hath Bidasari wed, and if
  She knew she was a princess born she might
  Be very vain and haughty."

                  To the prince
  The King was very friendly. "Come and sit
  Here by my side," he said, "for thee I deem
  A brother." "Let me here remain, my lord,
  I am a poor unworthy servitor.
  I hope that thou wilt pardon me. I would
  I might become a subject of thy crown."
  The King thought: "This may be some royal heir
  Who here hath wandered. He resembles much
  Our Bidasari, Pity 'tis that he
  Unto another nation doth belong."
  Then pleasantly he said: "Pray, truly tell
  What is thine origin? Keep nothing back.
  What is thy name? The whole truth let me know."
  The young prince bowed him low and said: "My name
  Is Poutra Bangsawan, of family
  Most humble. I am searching everywhere
  To find a sister lost. When she is found
  I shall return at once." Then said the King:
  "Where is thy sister? I will help thy search.
  Stay here with me a month or two, that we
  May learn to know each other and become
  Fast friends." The young prince then obeisance made
  And said: "I bear thine orders on my head.
  Thou art a king illustrious, and I
  A humble servitor. I am the son
  Of good Lila Mengindra, but for long
  I've absent been. My sister dear I seek.
  Thine aid I do bespeak. From Kembajat
  I come, a subject of thy father there, the King.
  Forgive me, lord, for now thou knowest all."
  The King rejoiced to hear a voice that seemed
  So much like Bidasari's, and inquired
  Of Sinapati, "Tell me now his race."
  Then Sinapati bowed and said: "My lord,
  Of princes and of caliphs is his race.
  His kingdom, not so far, is most superb;
  His palace is most beautiful and grand.
  Swift ships within the harbor lie, all well
  Equipped." At this the King enchanted was,
  To find a prince was brother to his wife.
  Still more he asked and Sinapati said:
  "Because his realm was ravaged by the foe
  He hath misfortunes suffered manifold."
  Then knew the King he was of royal blood
  And had adversity experienced.
  The King came from his throne and said, "My friend,
  My palace enter." So the King and prince
  Went in. They met fair Bidasari there.
  She sat beside a Chinese window quaint,
  All choicely carved. She saw the King and thought,
  "What fine young man is this he bringeth here?"
  When they were seated all, the young prince looked
  At Bidasari: "Beautiful is she,"
  He thought, "my sister dear, and very like
  My father." Then the King with smiling face
  Said: "Bidasari, darling, speak to him.
  He is thy younger brother, come to seek
  Thee here. From Kembajat he came. And thy
  Dear father mourns for thee the livelong day."
  At this fair Bidasari sighed. She bowed
  Her head and silence kept. She much was moved
  Because she had not known her parents true,
  But fancied them Djouhara and his wife.
  "I'm but a merchant's daughter," finally
  She said. "Things all uncertain this young prince
  Hath told. If I'm the daughter of a King,
  Why hath he left me here, and never sought
  For me through all these years? 'Tis not so far
  From here to Kembajat." The young prince bowed.
  "Thy words I bear upon my head," he said,
  "O sister dear. Pray banish from thy heart
  All hatred. If thou'rt lowly born, I am
  Likewise. Our realm was ravaged at thy birth.
  But shortly afterward fair peace returned,
  And to his own my father came again.
  I've seen how much he suffers in his heart.
  Thy name he never utters without tears--
  He never hath forgotten thee. Forgive
  Him, then, in what he was remiss. Except
  For stern necessity he never would
  Have thee abandoned."

                  Then the King with smiles
  Said: "Speak to him, my dear. He tells the truth.
  Thy parents wandered through a desert land
  Beneath a cruel sun. Impossible
  It was to carry thee through brier and brush."
  Down at his sister's feet the young prince knelt.
  Then Bidasari clasped him in her arms.
  The brave young prince to them recounted all
  The sorrows of his parents. Much he wept,
  And they wept, too, as he the story told.
  Then sat they down to dine. And afterward
  They _siri_ took and perfumes of all kinds.
  Then the young prince took leave. "Where goest thou,
  My brother?" asked the King. "I fain would go
  Straight home to my dear parents," said the prince.
  But, with a voice affectionate, the King
  Replied: "Seek not Lila Mengindra. Here
  Thou shouldst remain, for thou hast met within
  This palace thy dear sister. There is room
  Enough for thee. Stay here with all thy folk
  And retinue." The prince bowed low, and forth
  Unto the merchant went, and to him said:
  "Within the palace now I shall remain
  With all my retinue, for thus the King
  Commands." The merchant said: "'Tis very well
  For where can one lodge better than within
  The palace?" So the prince returned, with all
  His people, to the palace of the King.
  Then all the _mantris_ came, and festivals
  And feasts were held. As long as he remained
  At Indrapura, the young prince received
  All courtesies. And Bidasari fair
  Was known as daughter of a mighty king.
  The news was carried far and wide, and all
  Repeated how her brother brave had come
  To seek for her.

                  Queen Lila Sari heard
  And was surprised. She sighed in solitude,
  And felt a woe unspeakable. She said
  To a _mandar_: "I was in too much haste.
  On the _dyangs_ I counted, but they come
  No more. All four have gone and homage paid
  To Bidasari. All my tricks are foiled.
  In no one can I trust." Dang Lila then
  Approached and said: "Acts of unfaithfulness
  Bring never happiness. God's on the side
  Of loyalty. Now those _dyangs_ are sad
  And languish after thee, but fear the King,
  Dost thou not think, O Queen, thou ill hast wrought?
  For while the King is absent none will come
  Thy heart to cheer." The Queen replied with ire:
  "Seek not to consolation give. The King
  Esteems me not. I'll not humiliate
  Myself before him. Who is that young prince,
  So called, who hither came? A pirate's son
  He well may prove, and calls himself a prince.
  Go ye, _dyangs_, pay service to the King,
  And he may favor ye as he did her."
  She seemed most wroth. But she repented sore
  In truth, and pined away in sorrow deep.
  In other days she had no wish nor whim
  Unsatisfied. Now all were for the King.
  The Queen's heart angrier grew from day to day
  As if a scorpion's sting had wounded her.
  And her distress grew greater when she thought
  Upon the love of other days. Her heart
  Was inconsolable because so bitterly
  She missed the pomp and glory of her court.
  But Bidasari to the King one day
  Said: "Send back these _mendars_; for if they all
  Stay here, Queen Lila Sari all alone
  Will be." The King with smiles replied: "Oh, no!
  I will not let them go. She is so fell
  And barbarous, she no one loves. She is
  Much better all alone." Then to the King
  Fair Bidasari said: "Thine anger was
  Too prompt. She spoke in wrath because she was
  Accustomed to a court. In what to thee
  Hath she been wanting, that thou shouldst repel
  Her thus? Thou gav'st her love, and now thou dost
  Abandon her in sorrow. Be not thus
  Incensed with her, for should she come to want
  The shame would be reflected on thy head."
  The King's face lighted, and he said: "My dear,
  I went to see her, but she drove me forth
  With bitter words. Her conduct was beyond
  All bearing. And she heaped on me abuse."
  But Princess Bidasari said: "Dwell not
  On that, my friend. She was disturbed by wrath
  And jealousy. In other days thou didst
  Embrace and kiss her. Now she is alone.
  And thou perchance didst somehow hurt
  Or bruise her body." All his anger left
  The King at this. He said: "O purest soul,
  Thou speakest well and wisely. How could I
  Not love thee, dear, and cling to thee for life?
  Oh, never may we separated be!
  Branch of my heart, light of my eyes, thou dost
  But good desire. Thou'rt all the world to me.
  I'll go to her, since thou doth ask. Perchance
  A reconciliation may be made.
  But she must first admit her faults. If she
  Repentance shows, to see her I will go."
  The merchant's wife had come and heard these words.
  Her warm tears fell. She thought within herself,
  "My daughter hath no vengeance in her heart."
  Then Dang Bidouri brought delicious rice
  Unto the King and Queen. They ate and drank,
  And stronger grew their love from hour to hour.
  Then gave the King commands to call the prince.
  He came with smiling face and graceful bows.
  "Sit here beside us," said the King, and all
  The three dined there together, royal ones,
  Surrounded by deft servants and _dyangs_.
  They chatted gayly, and, with laughter, ate.
  When all was finished, from the betel-box
  The King of _siri_ took, perfumed himself,
  And then the prince retired.

                  When two short months
  Had fled, the prince bethought him of his home
  And parents. To himself he said, "I'll go."
  He gave commands to preparation make
  For his departure. "I am loath to leave
  My sister," he to Sinapati said.
  "My life is joyous here. But there at home
  I've left my parents in solicitude."
  Then Sinapati bowed and said, "With thee
  I'll go."


SONG V

  A certain day the _mantris_ came
  Before the King, in the pavilion grand.
  And with them came the youthful prince, and cast
  Himself before the throne. The King with smiles
  Said: "Sit thou at my side, my brother dear,
  I have not seen thee for a day entire."
  The princeling bowed and said: "My gracious lord
  If thou wilt pardon me, I would return
  And give my parents dear the joyful news.
  My father bade me seek my sister lost,
  And still he nothing knows of her good fate."
  The King replied with sorrow: "Brother mine,
  Why wilt thou go so soon? We scarcely are
  Acquainted, and I have not had enough
  Of thy dear company." The prince replied:
  "Oh, be not sorrowful, my gracious lord.
  As soon as I have my dear father seen
  I'll tell him what good things have come to pass.
  'Twill soothe his heart to hear my sister's joy.
  My parents will be glad in learning all
  Thy goodness great. And pray consider me
  Thy subject leal. Soon I'll return again."
  The King's emotion grew. With pleasant voice
  He said: "Take counsel of thy sister. Heed
  What she may say." They found the Queen within,
  Fair Bidasari, and attending her
  Dyang Agous Djouhari. All sat down
  And took some _siri_ from the betel-box.
  The Queen to the young prince then spoke: "Come here.
  My brother, why have I thy face not seen
  For two long days?" With bows the prince replied:
  "I've had a multitude of things to do.
  Thus came I not; for my companions all
  Seek homeward to return. So I must take
  My leave of thee upon the morrow morn,
  When pales the silver moon before the dawn."
  The Queen was grieved to hear these words, and shed
  A flood of tears. Her tender heart was touched.
  Beside herself with sorrow she exclaimed:
  "O prince illustrious! How canst thou go,
  Since we have met? I've loved thee from the time
  I knew thou wert my brother. I am grieved
  To hear thee say thou wilt so soon depart.
  Of low extraction must I be! 'Twas wrong
  For thee to call thyself my brother. I
  A poor and feeble orphan am, and how
  Should I the love deserve of a great prince?"
  When this he heard the prince bowed low his head
  And was much troubled. "Sister sweet," he said,
  "Grieve not like this. I only do return
  Because our parents must so anxious be.
  I love thee so, my darling, that my heart
  Is nearly breaking. If thou speakest thus
  To me, my dear, my grief will still increase.
  I could not leave thee, but I must respect
  Our parents' wishes. They commanded me
  All haste to make. So--sweet--I pray thee have
  Compassion on me."

                  Much disturbed, the King
  Observed the sorrow of the princess fair.
  He kissed her lips, to her a _sepah_ gave,
  And said with tender voice: "My darling wife,
  What dost thou wish? Let now thy brother go.
  We'll see thy parents here ere many days."
  The Queen wept bitterly, and said to him:
  "His wishes I do not oppose. Let him
  Do whatsoe'er it pleaseth him to do.
  For I am but a stranger, a lost child,
  And who should think of me or love me true?"
  Then bowed the prince and said: "In very truth,
  I know thou art my sister. Speak not thus.
  God knows how much I love thee, sister mine.
  If thou dost not permit me to depart
  I'll not resist. I'm happy here with thee,
  But our dear parents are in cruel doubt,
  And look for news of thee. Now that I know
  Thy husband is a king, our parents dear
  Would be so overjoyed to learn it too!"
  Then spoke the King with face all radiant,
  "Return not, brother mine," he said. "I'll send
  Swift messengers to bear the gladsome news
  That Bidasari's found. Then, if he wills,
  Thy royal father here we'll hope to see.
  I'll go myself to meet him when he comes."
  The young prince bowed and said: "Nay, rather send
  Thy messengers, a great king cannot go
  So far away." Queen Bidasari heard
  These words and much rejoiced, and gayly gave
  Her brother then her betel-box.

                  The King
  Caressed his wife and said, "My dearest soul,
  Love not thy brother more than me." He called
  Lila Mengindra. Soon the merchant came
  Before the King and prince. The King exclaimed:
  "Come here, my uncle. Tell me, wilt thou take
  A letter to the King of Kembajat--
  To prove to him we live?"

                  So spake the King
  And called his counsellor of state, who came
  And kissed his hands. The King then bade him write
  A letter, all in characters of gold.
  "Well," cried the King, "let's hear the letter now,"
  "Now glory be to God," it thus began,
  And all fair Bidasari's history
  Recited. Then the King a mighty host
  Assembled and with elephants and steeds
  Ten _mantris_ took the letter of the prince
  Unto his parents. With the cavalcade
  There went a _laksimana_ great, who bore,
  As king's ambassador, bejewelled flags
  And standards rich, and presents of much worth.
  Then Sinapati by the King was called
  A _laksimana mantri_, and received
  A fine equipment, with a hundred men
  To follow him. 'Twas thus the King preserved
  His reputation as a mighty king.

  When he had sent the embassy, the King
  Went to his wife, and they were very gay.
  His love for her grew greater every day.
  The former merchant also was beloved.
  He gave the King good counsel, and obeyed
  His orders willingly. He often dined
  Together with the King and Queen. His wealth
  Grew vast. No one at all could with him vie,
  In Indrapura. He was much attached
  To the chief _mantri_. They were equals both
  In prudence, wisdom, and fidelity,
  With power unquestioned over all the folk.
  Beneath their sway prosperity increased,
  And many merchants came from far and wide.
  The kingdom was at peace. The King rejoiced,
  And everyone was happy in the land.



SONG VI

  The _laksimana mantri_ now I'll sing,
  Who went upon the embassy. As soon
  As the great King of Kembajat had news
  Of his arrival, he was much rejoiced.
  He told the Queen, and in the audience-hall
  Awaited. Then went forth the officers
  With elephants and _payongs_. A countless throng
  Attended them, with music and with flags.
  They met the embassy, and, with rich gifts,
  They gave the King's commands. Into the town
  Then entered all. The King was very glad,
  As if his only daughter had returned.
  All bowed before the King, who took the gifts,
  While servants took the letter to the chief
  Of _mantris_. And he gave it to the King,
  The monarch read, and was possessed with joy.
  He could not thank enough the merchant good,
  Who raised his daughter to a royal throne.
  He wished forthwith to go and see his child.
  The letter cordial invitation gave.
  But one thing troubled him: "He straight inquired,
  'Hath not the prince, my son, the liberty
  To come back home?'" The _laksimana_ bowed
  And said: "The King wished not to let him come
  And begged with tears that he would stay. The Queen
  Feared if her brother went she'd never see
  Her father. From your children both I bring
  Warm greetings. Kind indulgence from your heart
  They ask, and press their invitation. I
  Crave pardon for myself, O King, and hope
  Thy children dear may see their father's face,
  And that the kingdoms may become one realm."
  At these words smiled the King. "Ah, well!" he said,
  "I'll wait for seven days still." Then questions flew,
  And the great king learned all about his child.

  The Indrapura _mantris_ went apart
  When evening came. A separate palace grand
  The King assigned them, with the best of food.
  He orders gave for preparations great.
  Unto the Queen he said: "In seven days' time,
  My dear, I look to start, for I shall have
  No peace until I've seen our darling child."
  Then he assembled there his _mantris_ all,
  Both young and old, with elephants and steeds.
  And all was ready to set forth, as he had wished.
  The while the morning stars were twinkling still,
  The royal gong resounded many times.
  The guards leaped forth with joy. The officers
  Came out and took their shining helms of war.
  Their naked swords all glistened. It was thus
  They made the glittering royal cavalcade.
  Their flags and banners flaunted in the air,
  All those who stayed behind were sad, as if
  A knife had cut them. All together marched,
  The lancers and the horsemen, and they seemed
  A moving city. Soon all darkened was
  The moon, as someone sorrowful. The swords
  And lances glistened like an island in
  The middle of the sea. Thus is described
  The royal escort marching through the land.
  The King was mounted on an elephant,
  His _siri_-bearer seated close behind.
  A rich _payong_ of royalty, all tricked
  With bells, was stretched above his head,
  And drums and other instruments without
  Cessation sounded. Thus went forth the King,
  And soon to Indrapura came.

                  When near
  He halted and forthwith an envoy sent
  His coming to announce, together with
  The _laksimana mantri_. "Mighty King,"
  They said, "thy royal father hath arrived."
  The King his heralds ordered then to call
  Lila Mengindra. With a smile he said
  To him: "Assemble in the square the folk
  And army. Straight to my pavilion let
  Them come, and all in holiday attire,
  For I my father am to meet to-day."
  Lila Mengindra bowed and hied him forth
  To execute the orders of the King.
  The King within his palace went, and sat
  Upon a jewelled seat. The Queen was there,
  And good Lila Mengindra at her side.
  The King said smilingly: "Light of my eyes,
  Let all the palace decorated be.
  Assemble all the palace folk and all
  The younger girls. For now without the gates
  Our parents wait. To-morrow I shall go
  To meet them." Then Queen Bidasari cried,
  With smiles: "My brother they have come to see.
  I cannot go before them and declare
  Myself their daughter." But the young prince said:
  "Oh, speak not thus, my sister, but give heed
  To what I say to thee, and be not wroth.
  If I'm the only one they love, alone
  I'll go with them away." Then to the King
  He said: "With my dear sister I but jest,
  To quiet her alarms." He bowed before the King
  And asked permission forth to go at once
  To meet his father. "Nay," replied the King,
  "We'll go together." A repast was served
  With every kind of food. The royal three
  Together ate. Then from the betel-box
  They _siri_ took, and perfumes sweet they used.
  The prince then from the palace forth did go.
  Next day the King invited him to start
  With him upon the royal progress. All
  The banners waved, and everyone was glad.
  Then to the Queen he said: "Stay here, my love,
  And I will hither bring thy father dear."
  These words rejoiced the Queen. She said: "Go forth,
  My dear, and I will follow with my eyes."
  The King then took his leave with the young prince,
  With many _mantris_ following. The strains
  Of gladsome music sounded. All the bells
  Were rung, and those without the cavalcade
  Were sad.

  Ere long they came to the frontier,
  And King met King. The folk of Kembajat
  Were all astonished at the young King's face,
  As beautiful as painter's masterpiece.
  The old King looked with smiles on all. His joy
  Was great. The King of Indrapura bowed
  Respectfully, and made them bring to him
  The elephant that bore 'neath gay _payong_
  His consort's father. "Son, where goest thou?"
  "I've come to seek thee." Then the old King said:
  "Why didst thou come in person? 'Twould have been
  Enough if thou hadst _mantris_ sent instead."
  His joy o'erflowed his heart. His son-in-law
  He greatly loved. Upon his elephant
  He said: "Approach, my son, thou art a king
  Renowned. Thy body and thy soul are both
  Alike, and both of royal stock!" He pressed
  Him in his arms and said: "Light of my eyes,
  Almighty God hath heard my many prayers,
  And granted me a perfect son-in-law."
  The King of Indrapura bowed and smiled
  Most graciously. Then to the young prince said
  His father: "Mount, my son, beside me, here."
  The young prince mounted at his father's side.
  He was as beautiful as chiselled gold.

  Within the town the kings made entry then
  Amid a joyous throng. When they had come,
  The former merchant bowed before them both,
  The _mangkouboumi_ now. The mighty King
  Of Indrapura bowed and said: "My sire,
  Speak to my uncle here; for he brought up
  Thy daughter." Scarcely had the old King heard
  These words than he exclaimed with joy: "Come here,
  My brother, let us now acquaintance make."
  The old King, seated on his elephant,
  Shed all about him rays of happiness,
  And all the people there were greatly moved.
  "This is my brother well beloved," he said,
  And kissed his brow. "How great hath been his love,
  His faithfulness has proved beyond compare."
  The former merchant bowed, and to the King
  Replied: "I am thy slave, O King, and bear
  Thine orders on my head. Thou dost o'erwhelm
  Thy servant with thy favor." Then upon
  The royal throne, which was all gem-bedecked,
  The old King sat, the young prince at his side,
  With all the _mantris_ near. Then came the Queen
  Consort. The prince and Bidasari fair
  Came from their seats, their mother to receive.
  All entered then the palace. The young Queen,
  Fair Bidasari, bowed and was embraced
  By both her parents. With a flood of tears
  Her father said: "Alas, my darling child,
  Fruit of my heart, light of my eyes, keep not
  A hatred in thy soul against us now.
  The will of God is now made manifest.
  We long have separated been. At last
  We see each other with our very eyes.
  Great wrong we did thus to abandon thee,
  But still let not thy heart a stranger be
  To us. Peace later came to our dear land--
  Such was our destiny. What could we do?
  We were in flight. We thought, 'May God decree
  Some honorable man shall find her here!'
  How can we now be glad enough 'twas thus
  Ordained! What recompense can we present?"
  Sweet Bidasari wept as she recalled
  The past. The King her husband was much moved,
  And felt great pity when her tears he saw.
  And all were sad with sorrow mixed with joy,
  Because they knew she was of royal birth.
  Food now was served, and quickly the _dyangs_
  Brought salvers for the princes. The two kings
  Ate of the rice till they were surfeited,
  Then to their children offered it. All took
  The _siri_ placed before them, and straightway
  Themselves anointed with rare perfumes sweet.
  When all had eaten, the five royal ones
  Lila Mengindra called, and gave to him
  The remnants of the feast. The kings then spoke
  To him and to his wife. They both bowed low
  And kissed the royal hands. Then said the King
  Of Kembajat: "My children, I had planned--
  In case we ever met on earth and ere
  The prey of death became--a feast to give,
  To last a month, and to it ye invite.
  In triumph I my daughter fain would bear,
  With all of ye. I would at once repair
  Unto the isle of Nousa Antara,
  And there I'd hold a royal festival
  With all the members of our family,
  And all the _bitis_, _mandars_, and _dyangs_.
  Such was my plan--if ever I should find
  My daughter dear. Now while this moon doth last
  Let me the project see fulfilled before
  Your parents come to die."

                        The gracious King
  Of Indrapura at these words bowed low
  And said: "I bear thy words upon my head.
  It shall be done as thou hast wished, my King."
  And when the evening came all was prepared.
  Soft mattresses were spread, and the two queens
  Betook them to their chambers, and the rich
  Egyptian curtains fell. They vainly sought to sleep.
  They talked together of their sorrows past
  And evil days. And neither kings nor queens
  That night could slumber.

                       At the break of day
  The talking bird began to sing and prate.
  A little later the _bajangs_ began
  Their song. Then all arose, and bathed, and broke
  Their fast, and chattered and amused themselves.
  The King of Indrapura then gave word
  Unto the _mangkouboumi_: "All prepare
  That's necessary, ere the moon be full.
  Get ready all the various kinds of ships,
  And load them down with every sort of arms.
  Prepare all sorts of games to pass the time,
  And get in order all the cannons great
  And fire-arms. Thus the King commands."

                    Straightway
  The _mangkouboumi_ bowed before the King,
  And went his orders to obey. He made
  The ships all ready, with new paint and gold.
  When three were well equipped, on board he took
  The people of the city. All the old
  Were left behind, but of the young none stayed.
  Then to the King the _mangkouboumi_ said,
  "All is prepared." At this the King rejoiced,
  And to the King of Kembajat sent word,
  Who told his wife, and she was all aglow.
  They started from the palace, kings and queen
  And prince, and lovely Bidasari, too,
  Attended by the courtiers all. The strains
  Of music sounded and the bells were rung.
  All those whose lot it was to stay at home
  Were pained, as if a knife had stricken them.
  The cannons roared; the royal banners waved.

  In three days' sail they reached the island fair,
  Of Nousa Antara, and the ships made fast.
  The two queens sat and watched the deft _dyangs_
  Take up the coral white and pink, and toyed
  With pretty shells. The King set foot upon
  The isle of Nousa Antara. The King
  And his dear wife upon the shore came forth,
  With their sweet daughter Bidasari pure.
  The King of Indrapura with them went,
  The prince walked near them on the left.

                    The King
  Of Indrapura ordered that a tent
  Be raised, and one was made. It was as large
  As any palace, set with royal throne.
  The two queens entered it and sought repose.
  The prince before his father bowed and said,
  "My royal father, let me go and hunt."
  To this the King of Kembajat replied,
  "Do what thou dost desire, light of my eyes."
  The King of Indrapura said with smiles,
  "I'll go with thee to hunt, my brother dear."
  The prince replied, "I shall in truth be charmed,
  My brother." "Forth we'll fare to-morrow morn,"
  Returned the King of Indrapura. "Call
  The folk together."

                    When the dawn appeared,
  The King and prince together started forth,
  Escorted by a band of hunters tried,
  And beat the woods for game. The King and prince
  And all their following made rapid work.
  The game took flight. The King then drew his bow
  And many animals were killed. A deer
  Came running by. His arrow struck him full
  Upon the shoulder, and the huntsmen seized
  And quickly killed him. In the pathless woods
  Of Nousa Antara there was much game.
  A tiger roared, the King and prince pursued.
  The tiger swiftly fled. The prince sat down
  Within the forest deep. To overtake
  The beast he was unable. To return
  He sought, but could not find the way. Alone
  He was, and in perplexity, because
  His huntsmen he no longer could descry.
  Then, wandering to and fro, he found at last
  A pleasure garden of the days gone by,
  Belonging to King Lila, beautiful
  And without flaw. He was astonished quite
  When he perceived a palace. All alone
  He found himself, when he had entered there.
  He walked about, but found no living soul.
  Unto himself he said: "Can this domain
  A habitation be of demons dread
  And spirits? Can this be the cause of all
  The solitude which reigns?" On all sides then
  He looked. All suddenly a voice he heard,
  But still no one could see. Amazed he stood.
  The mystic voice exclaimed, "Have pity, lord,
  And free me from this room." As in a dream
  The prince these accents heard. He answered then:
  "Who art thou? Whose strange voice is this I hear,
  The while I no one see? Dost thou belong
  Unto the race of demons and of spectres?
  Where is the key, that I may ope the door?"
  Then the _dyang_ of Mendoudari said
  Unto the prince: "Look toward the left, for there
  The key thou'lt find that opes the palace tower."
  He took the key and opened wide the door.
  All those who were within, when they beheld
  The prince's face, fell prostrate at his feet.
  To them the prince cried out: "Say to what race
  Ye do belong. This quickly tell. And whose
  This palace beautiful?" Then answered him
  Dang Tjindra Melini: "O Royal prince,
  We are God's creatures, like to thee. And this
  Fair palace of the King Lila is now
  By Ifrid occupied, a spirit-king,
  With whom now lives the prince illustrious,
  Lila. His daughter, Princess Mendoudari,
  Is shut alone within a chamber here,
  And Ifrid, king of spirits, cometh oft.
  On every third day cometh he. His eyes
  Are brilliant as the sun." When this he heard
  The prince was glad. The room he entered then.
  The Princess Mendoudari sought to flee.
  "Where wouldst thou go, my friend," he said. "I've sought
  And found thee. Do not flee away from me."
  The Princess Mendoudari said with tears:
  "And art thou mad enough hither to come?
  The spirits will destroy thee without doubt."
  These words rejoiced the prince, and to her then
  He sang a low sweet song of love and wooing.
  The princess answered with a dreamy chant.
  And when the young prince heard her gentle lay
  He felt a yearning pity for her fate.
  "Be not afraid, my dear," he said, "for I
  Will triumph over all thine enemies."
  Then Dang Sendari served them dainty food;
  And what was left, to her the princess gave.
  The prince too _siri_ from the betel-box
  And rare sweet perfumes used. When evening came,
  A soft couch for the prince was spread. And then
  The princess sought her room, and curtains drew
  Of rich Egyptian stuff. The prince had asked,
  "When comes the spirit-king?" And she had said,
  "At early dawn." The young prince could not sleep,
  But through the long night hours sang soft _pantoums_.
  When daylight came the prince arose. He heard
  A spirit coming to the palace. Then with fear
  Was seized the princess fair. "Behold," she cried,
  "He cometh." Then the young prince took his arms.
  "Fear not," he said; "have confidence in God.
  What he decrees must always come to pass.
  If I'm destroyed, then follow me in death.
  I only ask one thing of thee, my love.
  When I am dead, I pray thee weep for me,
  And let thy mantle be my winding-sheet.
  Now let thy glances follow as I go."

  I'll tell of Ifrid now--the spirit-king.
  He lurked beneath the palace. When he heard
  The princess talking with the prince his ire
  Arose like burning flame. His cry was like
  A thunder-burst. The very palace shook.
  "Depart from here," unto the prince he roared,
  "And feel my mighty power." Then sweet love-songs
  Exchanging with the princess went he forth.
  His mien was like Sang Samba's, and his face
  Was nobly firm, as if he went to meet
  A roaring tiger. At his side he wore
  A rare carbuncled sword, and arrows bore
  With points in deadly poison dipped. Ifrid,
  The creature with two heads, like spectre came
  With laughter horrid. He took up a stone
  And hurled it at the prince, who dodged its flight.
  Then full of wrath Ifrid upon him rushed.
  But swift the prince let fly an arrow sharp,
  And pierced his heart. One groan, and then he fell,
  And died beside the river. Then the prince
  Made haste to join the princess.

                                  When she saw
  The spirit Ifrid dead she much rejoiced
  And bowed before the prince. Great gladness shone
  In her fair face, because her woe had ceased,
  And she was happy that 'twas to the prince
  She owed her rescue. 'Twas as if she'd found
  A mountain great of jewels. Then she said:
  "Caliph a high divinity once was
  And called himself King Lila. God will bless
  Thee for thy deeds, O mighty prince."

                                       The prince
  With kisses said: "Thou hast a charming mouth.
  Thy form is supple. Prithee tell me why
  I should not love thee? Thou art beautiful
  As a statue of pure gold, and thou shalt be
  A princess in my palace. Well I know
  Thine origin is noble, and thy race
  Is high." They gayly chatted while some food
  Was served. The prince, with pleasure, at the side
  Of the fair princess ate. When all was done
  He took some _siri_ from the betel-box
  And perfumes used. "Thou art a jasmine sweet,"
  He said, "an antidote to every ill,
  And thou shalt be my wife."

                             Next day the prince
  Took her behind him on his horse, and they
  Departed. The _dyangs_ accompanied them.

  Now will I tell about the _mantris_ all.
  Until the fall of evening, with the King
  Of Indrapura, they in waiting stayed,
  To welcome back the prince. And much disturbed
  They were that he delayed so long to come.
  The King then bade them seek the prince, and see
  Why he remained so long apart from them.
  Then _mantris_ four set out, and hunted far
  And wide, but found him not. They brought the news
  That he could not be found. The King was sad
  And ordered them to go and tell the King,
  His wife's dear father, that the prince was lost.
  The old King fainted when he heard the tale.
  With oil of rose they sprinkled him, and back
  Unto his senses came he. "O my child,"
  He said, "my heart hath lost all hope. Where now
  Art thou? I'll go, myself, to seek."

                                      The King
  Wept much, and his dear wife. And as for her--
  Sweet Bidasari--she appeared to wish
  To kill herself, for never on the earth
  Did brother love his sister like the prince
  And Bidasari. At the fall of day
  Back came the King of Indrapura, sad
  And weeping. Then the King of Kembajat
  Said: "O my son, be silent. Do not weep,
  For thou dost but increase the pain I feel."
  But Indrapura's King replied: "Alas!
  He was my brother true, so brave and good!"
  But while they were lamenting thus the prince
  Stood there before them with his consort fair.
  He bowed to all. The King, his father, saw
  And could not speak. He thought, "It is the voice
  Of my dear son." Then recognition came
  And he was wild with joy. The prince then told
  How he had chased the tiger, and had lost
  His way within a wood: how he had killed
  A spirit there, Ifrid, the dread.

                                   The King
  Heard all he said and much rejoiced. Then came
  The servants serving tasteful food to all.
  The King ate with his wife and children dear.
  Together they were six. All sorts of rare
  And dainty food were served them, and the King
  Took _siri_ from the betel-box, and used
  Sweet perfumes. The great King of Kembajat
  Then gave a festival which lasted quite
  Seven days, with music and diversions gay.
  Glad joy was at its height, of pleasure born
  And of the dance. The kings amused themselves.
  All kinds of games they had. Intji Bibi,
  A singer of Malacca, sang with grace.
  The seven days passed, the Princess Mendoudari
  Was all in finery arrayed. The wives
  Of the two kings took her in hand. The prince
  Was by the _mangkouboumi_ ta'en in charge.
  The princess sweetest perfumes did exhale.
  Her manners were most gracious and polite
  As of a well-born person. Every sort
  Of gem and jewel sparkled from her robes.
  She wore a ring--'twas _astokouna_ called--
  And yet another one, _glangkano_ named,
  And still another, with bright stones all carved
  In fashion of Ceylon. Her tresses curled
  Like to a full-blown flower, and on them shone
  Full many precious stones. The _tourie_ buds
  Became her well. Her features were as bright
  As those of some celestial being pure.
  Fair Mendoudari thus was clad, and led
  To the bride's seat, and at her either hand
  Stood _mantris'_ daughters seven with waving fans.
  Meanwhile the _mangkouboumi_ patiently
  Achieved the tiring of the prince. He wore
  A royal crown, made in the island fair
  Called Nousa Antara, and a rich coat
  Which opened at the sides, made in the West.
  A chiselled necklace hung about his neck.
  His tunic flamed with orange, like the robe
  Of great Schahid Schah Pri. His girdle bright
  Was cloth of _tjindi_, fringed with agates rare.
  An amulet he wore with diamond pure,
  With sacred words engraved of the Koran.
  He wore a jewel like a butterfly,
  Most beautiful, and many rings and gems.
  His features of the rarest beauty were,
  Like those of some divinity of heaven.
  When thus arrayed, the youthful prince came forth
  And made obeisance to his parents both.
  He went to the appointed place, and all
  The children of the court assembled there
  Before him, while two sons of heralds stood
  Beside him, waving fans like floating clouds.
  All kept the strictest silence. Then a band
  Of soldiers came, with blades all glittering.
  The royal sword, all diamond decked, flashed rays
  Of light. Three times around the island went
  They all, with sound of music and the noise
  Of bells. And all who heard in vain essayed
  To estimate the number. Everyone
  Ran forth to see the progress--men and women.
  Some tore their garments, some their children lost,
  Distracted by the pleasure and the noise.
  When ended the procession, the young prince
  At Princess Mendoudari's right was placed,
  Within the palace. Then to them was brought
  Rice called _adapadap_, and they became
  A wedded pair. And all the folk dispersed.
  In three days' time was Mendoudari dressed
  Anew by Bidasari. She was robed
  With vesture of embroidered silk. The prince
  Was likewise gayly clad, to suit the glad
  Occasion. Now again they made, in state,
  A royal progress round about the isle.
  The King and Bidasari rode in one
  Grand chariot, and, within another, went
  The prince and Mendoudari, his fair bride.
  Then back they came for rest, upon the soft
  Rich palace cushions. Then the mighty King
  Of Kembajat inquired of his dear wife:
  "What think'st thou, love? Shall we to-morrow morn
  Return?" With smiles the Queen replied, "I bear
  Thine orders on my head." Next day the hearts
  Of all the royal company were filled
  With joy. The officers assembled then
  To take the King's commands, and he was pleased
  To see them dutiful. The following morn
  The song of the _bajans_ awaked the King.
  At early dawn each princess with her lord,
  And all the officers, embarked upon
  The ship. They sailed far from the island fair,
  Nousa Antara, and in three days came
  To Indrapura and the river's mouth.
  When at the palace they arrived again,
  The _mantris_ came in joy and kissed their hands.
  The King of Kembajat said that he wished
  To go. Scarce had fair Indrapura's King
  Heard that his parents to their home desired
  At once to go, when he the _mantris_ called
  And orders gave. The King of Kembajat
  Set out with his dear wife next day at dawn.
  Within the palace of their daughter sweet
  They met fair Indrapura's King. The King
  Of Kembajat sat at his side, and said
  In softest tones: "Well, Bidasari, child,
  Thy parents now will homeward fare. Obey
  The King, thy gracious husband, in all things.
  The former merchant brought thee up. He will
  A father be to thee. Strive hard to win
  Thy husband's heart, and never disregard
  His wishes." Scarcely had she heard these words
  Than at her father's knees she fell, and shed
  A flood of tears. The King embraced his child
  And, weeping, said: "My daughter dear, pure gold,
  My crown's chief gem, light of my very eyes,
  Branch of my heart, be not disturbed, my soul,
  Nor let thy heart be sad." The royal four
  All wept together. Then the father said:
  "My son, accomplished prince, we trust to thee
  Our Bidasari. Show her the right path
  If she aside should step, for hither she
  As prisoner came. Correction should she need,
  For us it will not be a shame." At this
  Fair Indrapura's King was greatly moved.
  He bowed and said: "My father, speak not thus.
  I have the best opinion of the girl.
  Our hearts are one, as body with the soul.
  This kingdom all is hers, the guardian I
  Of her possessions, and I'll satisfy
  Her every wish." The King with joy replied:
  "Well, daughter, jewel of my crown, thou art
  No more beneath my sway, but wholly now
  Under the orders of thy husband dear."
  He much was moved, and to the _mangkouboumi_
  Said, "Brother, take my treasures all, for we
  Can never all thy goodness recompense."
  The former merchant and his wife bowed low:
  "Your gratitude, O prince, is great, but all
  Thy treasures are thy royal daughter's meed.
  For her we'll guard them." But the King replied:
  "Nay, speak not thus, my brother. Should I give
  All Indrapura's weight in purest gold
  It would not pay thee for thy care and love.
  We are to thee devoted from our hearts."
  At dawn they breakfasted, but all were sad,
  Because from Bidasari now must part
  Her parents dear and brother. Much she wept
  Because she felt her heart go out to him
  Her brother. Then she said: "I've one to take
  The place of parents, but where shall I find
  A brother?" Princess Mendoudari bowed
  To Bidasari, and they kissed with tears.
  Fair Bidasari said: "My sister dear,
  Sweet Mendoudari, when wilt thou return?
  Stay not too long at Kembajat, for I
  Could not thine absence bear. Farewell, my love."
  The King embraced his daughter. Bitterly
  Both wept. The royal father said, "Stay here,
  My son-in-law, with thy dear wife." The King
  Before his parents bowed. The youthful prince
  Before the King his brother bowed, and went
  To Bidasari's side, his sister dear,
  With heavy heart. Then, weeping much, he said:
  "O sister mine, gem of my crown, be not
  So sorrowful. I go, but if thou dost
  Desire, I'll come each year to visit thee."
  Sweet Bidasari kissed him. But her grief
  Was inexpressible. "O brother dear,
  Illustrious prince," she said, "thine absence would
  E'en then be much too long." The prince replied,
  With bows: "Assuage thy grief, my sister dear.
  For if the King permits, perhaps I may
  Come sooner back to thee."

                             The mighty King
  Of Indrapura said, in friendly tones:
  "Although he be thy brother, still, my dear,
  I love him much. We ne'er have had the least
  Misunderstanding. Why art thou not gay?
  And why art thou not willing he should go?
  If 'twere not for thy father I would keep
  Him here."

             The King departed, followed by
  His son, who took his father just beyond
  The gates. The _mangkouboumi_ bowed his head
  Before the King, who with much ardor said,
  "O father of dear Bidasari, give
  Aid and protection to thy lovely child."
  The _mangkouboumi_ bowed again, and said:
  "Whate'er is fit, I'll do. Upon my head
  I bear thine orders. I thy servant am."
  The prince embraced the former merchant too,
  And said, "O uncle dear, my sister guide,
  And counsel her if any fault she doth."
  Then said the King of Kembajat, "My son,
  Come, let us start at once."

                               So forth he fared.
  The prince and all the escort with him went.
  A few days passed and they were home again.
  New garments to the escort all were given,
  And many presents to the officers.
  By _mantris_ four the King rich treasures sent
  Unto his children loved, with many steeds
  And elephants. When safely they arrived
  At Indrapura, they appeared before
  The _mangkouboumi_. He presented them
  Unto the King, and said: "O sire, these gifts
  Are from thy son." The King replied: "Why dost
  Thou bring them here, my uncle? Keep them all
  In thine own treasury." Then he retired
  Within and said to Bidasari sweet:
  "Thy father, dear, hath sent us presents rare,
  And four young _mantris_, and a thousand men
  With elephants and horses. All is thine."
  The fair young Queen with smiles to him replied:
  "All that with me to share thou dost desire.
  Whatever be thy wish, I wish it too."
  The King adored his wife, and was to her
  Devoted. His great happiness increased
  And his domains extended every year.
  When Bidasari's royal birth was known,
  The news spread far and wide, and everywhere
  Was told. The realm of Indrapura grew
  More populous and powerful year by year.

  The wicked Princess Lila Sari lived
  Alone and desolate, in sadness deep
  And full repentance for her evil deeds.

  This song is weak because my skill is small.
  My heart was deeply stirred. And that is why
  I made, poor fakir I, this poem here.
  I have not made it long, because too sad
  I was, and troubled. Now at last 'tis done.
  For this, at least, your blessings I deserve.

THE END.




SEDJARET MALAYOU

LEGENDS OF THE MALAY ARCHIPELAGO

[Translated by M. Devic and Chauncey C. Starkweather]


Once upon a time lived King Iskender, son of King Darab. He traced his
origin to Roum; Macedonia was his native country, and Dhoul-Garnein his
surname. Now it happened that this prince set out upon his travels to
find the place where the sun rose; and he arrived at the frontier of
India. There reigned in this country a very powerful king, to whom half
of India was in subjection; and his name was King Kida Hindi. As soon
as King Kida Hindi heard of King Iskender's approach, he gave orders to
his prime minister, who gathered together the armies and princes who
were subject to him. When all were met together, he marched forth to
meet King Iskender. The two armies engaged and the conflict was carried
on with extreme activity on both sides, as is related in the history of
King Iskender. Kida Hindi was defeated and taken alive. Iskender
ordered him to embrace the true faith, and Kida Hindi embraced the
faith and became enrolled in the religion of the prophet Abraham, the
friend of God, to whom be the glory! Then King Iskender caused him to
be clothed in a garment like his own, and bade him return to his own
country.

King Kida Hindi was the father of a very beautiful girl, whose equal
was not to be found in her day. Her face had the dazzling lustre of the
sun or the moon; she was modest and discreet. Her name was Chehr-el-
Beria. King Kida Hindi took his prime minister aside and said to him:

"I have summoned you to ask your advice on the subject of my daughter,
whose equal in these days cannot be found. I have formed the project of
presenting her to King Iskender."

The minister answered: "Your Majesty has made a wise decision."

"Very well," replied the King, "to-morrow, God willing, you shall go
and find the prophet Khidar and relate to him the whole matter."

Next day accordingly the minister set out to find the prophet Khidar.
After his departure King Kida Hindi commanded that the name of King
Iskender should be inscribed on the coins and standards of his realm.
When the minister approached the prophet Khidar he made a salaam to
him, which the prophet returned and asked him to be seated. Then the
minister spoke as follows:

"You must know, O prophet of God, that my King entertains for King
Iskender an affection so fervent that I cannot describe it. He is the
father of a girl who has no equal among the children of this world's
monarchs from the rising to the setting sun. She is without a rival in
face, wit, and goodness of disposition. Now the desire of the King is
to present the princess before King Iskender, with the view of
ultimately giving her to him for his wife."

Now the soldiers of King Souran laid siege against the walled town of
Gangga-Chah Djouhan; but those on guard repulsed them, so that they
could not get near. Seeing this, King Souran advanced, mounted on an
untamed elephant. Taking no heed to the arrows that were launched
against him by the defenders of the wall, he reached the gate and
struck it with his mace. The gate gave way and King Souran entered,
followed by his warriors.

When King Gangga-Chah Djouhan saw King Souran approaching, he seized
his bow and shot an arrow with haste. The arrow struck the forehead of
King Souran's elephant. The elephant fell on his knees. King Souran
quickly leaped to the ground, drawing his sword as he did so; at a
single stroke he struck through the neck of King Gangga-Chah, and the
severed head rolled to the ground. The forces of Gangga-Nagara, as soon
as they saw their prince fall, demanded the _aman_ (i.e., truce).

King Gangga-Chah Djouhan had a sister, named Princess Zaras Gangga. She
was exceedingly beautiful. The victorious prince took her for his wife.
Then he resumed his march.

Some time afterward he reached the city of Ganggayon. It was formerly a
great city, the black stones of whose fortress survive even to this
day. This fortress is at the extremity of the river Djoher. The name
Ganggayon in the Siamese tongue means "treasury of emeralds." The King
of the city was Rajah Tchoulin; he was a powerful prince, to whom all
the kings of the land did obeisance.

On the news of King Souran's approach, King Tchoulin called together
all his troops and sent word to the kings who were his tributaries.
When all were assembled he set out to repel the invaders. The multitude
of his soldiers was like the waves of the sea; his elephants and
horses stood up among them like islands; his flags and standards
presented the appearance of a forest, and the cows' tails fluttering at
the pike-heads presented the appearance of _lalang_ ploughers.

The army came in four bodies and reached the banks of a river. There
they saw the soldiers of King Souran, ranged like forest-trees. The
Siamese exclaimed, "Pangkal," a word which means "river," and hence
that river became known as the river Pangkal.

The soldiers of Siam at once joined battle with the soldiers of Kling,
who were Hindoos; and the battle raged with indescribable confusion.
The soldiers mounted on elephants pressed forward these great beasts;
the men on horseback made their horses champ with fury; the lancers
pressed home their lances; those who carried pikes plied them
furiously; and those who bore sabres dealt many a doughty stroke. Blood
flowed like rain. The crash of thunder would have been drowned by the
shouts of the warriors and the clash of arms. The dust that rose from
the plain obscured the brightness of the day like an eclipse of the
sun. So complete was the confusion with which the contestants mingled
that it was not possible to distinguish the combatants of either side:
each assailant was at the same time the assailed, and he who struck
with his weapon himself at the same moment was stricken with a blow.
Sometimes the soldiers attacked a comrade by mistake. Every moment
crowds of people on either side were killed and wounded, many horses
and elephants had their throats cut, and the blood shed covered the
ground. The dust had disappeared; the combatants were seen struggling
in masses so compact that neither party was able to retire from the
battle.

King Tchoulin managed to force a way by means of the elephant he rode
through the innumerable horde of King Souran's soldiers; the corpses
were piled up beneath his feet. A crowd of Hindoo warriors lost their
lives. The rest of them began to give way. King Souran, on perceiving
this, dashed forward to meet King Tchoulin in single combat. He mounted
an untamed elephant eight cubits high that had no driver. But the
elephant of King Tchoulin was also very brave. The two animals met;
they attacked each other; the clash of their encounter was like the
thunder that rends the earth; their tusks clashing and intertwining
made a sound like that of a storm that never ceases. Neither could
triumph over the other.

Then King Tchoulin raised himself upon the beast he rode and brandished
a javelin. He hurled it against King Souran; the javelin struck the
elephant on his flank and pierced deep. At the same time King Souran
shot an arrow which smote King Tchoulin in the breast and came out at
his back. That prince fell to the earth and expired. The soldiers
seeing their king dead, broke ranks and took flight in utter disorder,
pursued by the Hindoos, who put to the sword all they overtook.
Penetrating the ramparts of Ganggayon the Hindoo soldiers pillaged the
town; the booty was immense.

King Tchoulin had a daughter, extremely beautiful. Her name was the
princess Ouangkion; she was presented to King Souran, who took her for
his wife.

The King then resumed his march and arrived at Temasik. The rumor of
his approach soon reached China. People said, "Lo! King Souran comes
with a countless army to conquer China. He has already reached
Temasik." This news was heard with dire alarm by the King of China. He
said to his ministers and to his officers:

"What must be done to repel this invading multitude? If the King of
Kling arrives here, he will doubtless ruin our country."

The prime minister said: "O King of the world; I have a device for
repelling him."

"Very good," said the King; "do not fail to try it."

The prime minister therefore caused a _pilo_, or ship, to be fitted out
with rusty needles. They took also two kinds of trees, kamses and
jujube trees, laden with fruit; these were placed on board ship with
the soil in which they grew. Old men who had lost their teeth were
chosen for passengers and crew. To these the minister gave his
instructions and they started for Temasik.

When they had reached this place King Souran was informed that a ship
had arrived from China. "Go and ask these strangers," he said to his
attendants, "at what distance does this country lie from us." The
attendant put this question to the crew of the _pilo_ and received the
following reply:

"When we left China we were all still young, being scarcely twelve
years old; and these trees were seeds which we had sown. But you see
how old we are now, and how our teeth are fallen out; the grains of
seed have become trees in fruit, and all this has happened during the
time it has taken us to reach here."

At the same time they took the needles of which they had a large
quantity and said as they showed them to the Hindoos:

"When we started from China, these were as thick as a man's arm, and
now see how they are worn out by the rust. This will give you an idea
of the length of the voyage: we could not keep count of the years and
the months."

On hearing this answer of the Chinese, the Hindoos ran to report it to
King Souran, to whom they repeated all they had heard.

"If the thing is as they say," replied the prince, "the land of China
is still a very long way off. When shall we arrive there? We had better
return home."

"His Majesty is undoubtedly right," said the officers.

King Souran meditated thus: "Behold, the contents of the land is known
to me, but how can I learn the contents of the sea? I must needs enter
the sea, in order to know it."

Then he summoned his engineers and skilful men, and ordered them to
fashion a box of glass with lock and fastenings within, in order that
he might shut himself in it. The engineers made the box of glass just
as the King desired it; they furnished it with a chain of the purest
gold; then they presented it to King Souran, who was exceedingly well
pleased with it, and rewarded them all with rich presents.

The prince entered into the box, disappeared from the eyes of all
present, and shut the door upon himself. They took the box to the sea,
and let it descend even to the bottom. What treasures, what wealth,
works of the Almighty, were seen by King Souran! The box fell until it
reached a land called Dika. There King Souran came out of the box, and
went forward, seeing most wonderful things. He arrived at a great and
strongly fortified town, which he entered and saw a vast population,
whose number God alone knows. This people, who call themselves the
Badsam people, were composed of believers and unbelievers.

The inhabitants of the town were astonished to see the face of King
Souran, and his garments they looked upon with astonishment. They
conducted him to the presence of their King, whom they call Agtab-al-
Ard (_i.e._, Bowels of the Earth). This prince asked, "What man is
this?"

"My lord," was the reply, "it is a stranger, who arrived a moment ago."

"Whence does he come?"

"We do not know."

Then the King addressed King Souran himself and said, "Who are you, and
whence do you come?"

King Souran replied: "I come from the world; I am the king of men; my
name is King Souran."

King Agtab-al-Ard was very much astonished on hearing these words.
"There is, then," he said, "another world beside ours?"

"The world," replied King Souran, "contains many races."

"Glory to God almighty," said the King, full of surprise. Then he made
King Souran ascend and sit with him on the royal throne.

Agtab-al-Ard had a daughter, of great beauty, named Princess Mah-tab-
al-Bahri ("Moon of the Sea"). He gave her in marriage to King Souran.
That prince dwelt three years with her and had three male children by
her. When he thought about these three children King Souran felt much
troubled. He said to himself: "What will become of them, here, under
the earth? Or how shall I withdraw them hence?"

He went to see Agtab-al-Ard, and said to him: "If my sons grow up, will
your Majesty allow me to see that they are brought into the upper
world, in order that the royal line of Sultan Iskender Dhoul-Quameen
may not be broken to the end of time?"

The King answered, "I shall not hinder you."

Then King Souran took leave of the King and prepared for his return.
The King and his daughter shed many tears at parting. Then the King
gave orders to bring the horse Sembrani, named Paras-al-Bahri
("Sea-horse"), which he gave to King Souran. The prince mounted the
horse, which bore him from the sea, and carried him in the air above
the billows.

The troops of King Souran caught sight of the horse Sembrani, and
recognized in its rider their King. The prime minister at once took a
beautiful mare and led it to the shore. The sea-horse saw the mare and
came to land to meet her, and King Souran descended. Then the horse
Sembrani went back into the sea.

King Souran said to his wise men and engineers: "Raise a monument which
shall witness to my journey in the sea; for I wish the memory of it to
be preserved even to the Resurrection day. Write out the story, so that
it may be told to all my descendants."

In obedience to the words of the King the wise men and engineers set up
a stone on which they traced an inscription in the tongue of Hindostan.
This done, King Souran gathered a quantity of gold, silver, jewels,
gems, and precious treasures, which he laid up under the stone.

"At the end of the centuries," he said, "there will come a king among
my descendants who will find these riches. And this king will subdue
every country over which the wind blows."

After this, King Souran returned to the land of Kling. There he built a
mighty city, protected by a wall of black stone having seven rows of
masonry thick and nine fathoms high; the engineers made it with such
skill that the joints of the stones were invisible, and the wall seemed
cast of a single substance. The gate was of steel, enriched with gold
and precious stones.

This rampart enclosed seven hills. In the centre of the city extended a
pool vast as the sea; from one bank it was impossible to discern an
elephant standing up on the other. It contained very many kinds of
fishes. In the midst of it rose a very lofty island, always covered
with a mantle of mist. The King caused to be planted there every sort
of flowering and fruit-bearing tree to be found in the world. None was
lacking, and to this island the King would repair when he wished for
recreation.

He caused also to be planted on the banks of the pool a vast forest
wherein wild animals were at large. And when the King wished to hunt,
or catch elephants in the snare, he went to this forest. When the town
was completed the King called it after himself, Souran-Bidgi-Nagara,
and this town still exists in the province of Kling.

In short, if one wished to relate all the rest of King Souran's history
he would find it as long as that of Sidi Hanza.



THE ADVENTURES OF BADANG

It is related that there once lived at Salouang a husbandman who owned
a slave named Badang, whom he employed in clearing forest-land. It
happened one day that Badang spread his nets in the river; but on the
following morning he found his net quite empty, and by its side some
fish-scales and fish-bones. The same thing took place for some days
following. Badang flung the fish-scales (_sisik_) into the river; from
which circumstance was derived the river's name, Besisik.

Meanwhile the slave said to himself: "Who is it who eats the fish
caught in my net? I must watch and find out."

With this intention he hid one day behind some trees and saw a
_hantou_, or evil genius, or monster, who was eating the fish taken in
his net. This _hantou_ had eyes red as fire, his hair was like woven
osiers, and his beard fell down to his waist. Badang drew his knife,
and, screwing up his courage, rushed up to the _hantou_ and seized him.

"Every day," he said, "you eat up my fish. But this time you shall die
at my hands."

On hearing these words, the _hantou_ was afraid, and slipped aside,
wishing to avoid the hands of his adversary; but failing to do so, he
said to him: "Do not kill me; I will give you what you wish, on
condition that you spare my life."

Badang thought: "If I ask for riches, my master will claim them. If I
ask the power to become invisible, they will put  me to death as a
sorcerer. Therefore it is best for me to ask for the gift of physical
strength, in order that I may do the work of my master."

In accordance with this resolution, Badang said to the _hantou_, "Give
me the gift of physical strength; let me be strong enough to tear down
and to uproot the trees; that is, that I may tear down, with one hand,
great trees, a fathom or two in girth."

The _hantou_ answered: "Your prayer is granted. You wish for strength;
I will give it to you; but first it is necessary that you eat up what I
vomit."

"Very well," said Badang; "vomit, and I will eat it up." The _hantou_
vomited, and Badang set to work to eat it. He held the _hantou_ by the
beard, and would not let him go. Then he attempted the uprooting of
great trees; and, seeing that he tore them up with ease, he let go the
beard of the _hantou_.

Afterward, coming and going through the forest, he tore down enormous
trees; he carried off, roots and all, those of a fathom or two in
girth. As for the small ones, he tore them up by handfuls and flung
them on all sides. In a moment the forest which had been a wilderness
became level as a great plain.

When his master saw this work he said: "Who has cleared our land? For I
see that it is suddenly freed entirely from trees and brushwood."

"It is I," said Badang, "who have effected this clearance."

Then answered the master: "How have you been able to do this, single-
handed, so quickly and in one job?"

Then Badang related all the details of his adventure, and his master
gave him his liberty.

The report of these occurrences reached Singapore. King Krama
immediately ordered that Badang be brought before him, and he called
him Raden (_i.e._, Royal Prince).

Once upon a time the King of Singapore ordered Badang to fetch for his
repast the fruit of _kouras_, at the river Sayang. Badang went there
alone in his _pilang_, or boat, which was eight fathoms long, and he
punted it with a pole cut from the trunk of a kampas-tree a fathom in
girth.

When he arrived at the river Sayang, he clasped the _kouras_-tree. The
branches broke, the tree fell, and his head struck against a huge rock.
His head was not injured, but the rock was split in two. This stone is
still seen to-day on the river Sayang, and it bears the name of Balou-
blah, which means the "Riven Rock." His pole and boat have also been
preserved to the present day. The day following his exploit Badang
started back for Singapore, with his _pilang_ completely laden with
sugar-cane, bananas, and _keladion_, or edible lily, root. He had eaten
the whole cargo before he arrived at Djohor-the-Old.

On another occasion the King of Singapore had caused a large ship to be
built, fifteen fathoms long, in front of the palace. The vessel being
finished, between forty and fifty men were ordered to push it into the
water. They were unable to launch it. As many as 2,000 or 3,000 persons
were equally unsuccessful. Then the King ordered Badang to undertake
the operation. Badang undertook the task unaided, and pushed with such
force that the vessel went right across the strait to the other shore.
For this feat the King appointed him _houloubalong_, or officer of
military rank.

A report reached the province of Kling that among the officers of the
King was a man of extraordinary strength, named Badang. Now there was a
powerful athlete at the court of the King of Kling, who had no rival in
the country. His name was Madia-Bibjaya-Pelkrama. The King ordered him
to go to Singapore with seven vessels; "Go," said he, "and wrestle with
this officer. If he defeat you, give him as a prize the cargo of the
seven vessels; if you are victorious, demand of him an equal forfeit."

"I obey, your Majesty," said the athlete, and started off with the
seven vessels.

When he arrived at Singapore they brought news to the King of the city,
saying: "An athlete has arrived from the land of Kling to compete with
Badang in many kinds of sports. If he is defeated, he will leave the
cargo of his seven vessels as forfeit."

The King came out of his palace to give audience. The Hindoo athlete
presented himself. The prince told him to try a bout with Badang.
Badang beat him in every round.

Now facing the _balerong_, or court of audience, was an enormous rock.
The athlete said to Badang: "Come, let us match our strength by lifting
this stone. Whoever cannot lift it will be conquered."

"Do you try first," said Badang.

The athlete commenced, and made many attempts without succeeding in
lifting it. At last, mustering all his strength, he raised it to the
height of his knee and let it fall again.

"Now it is your turn, my master," he said.

"Very good," answered Badang, and lifting the stone he swung it in the
air, then hurled it toward the river, at the entrance to the town,
where it is still seen at the extremity of the point of Singapore.

The athlete of Kling, thus vanquished, handed to Badang the seven
vessels and their cargoes; then he returned, very much saddened and
mortified by his defeat.

Now the report came to the country of Perlak that there was at
Singapore an officer of the King named Badang without a rival in
extraordinary strength. The King of Perlak, so runs the story, had an
athlete named Bandarang, also very strong and of a great reputation.
This athlete was before the King when they spoke of Badang.

"My lord," he asked, "is Badang stronger than I am? If you will permit
me, I will go to Singapore to try an assault with him."

"Very well; go to Singapore," said the King. Turning to the prime
minister, Toun Parapatih, he said:

"Get ready a _praho_, for I am going to send Bandarang to Singapore."
When all was ready, a royal litter was prepared and the minister
embarked with the athlete, and after a while reached Singapore. Prince
Sri Rana Ouira Krama received the King's litter in the audience-
chamber, among the radjas, ministers, body-guards, heralds, and other
grand officers upon his command.

Then the prince, addressing the ambassador, asked: "With what
commission is our brother charged?"

The ambassador replied: "Behold, I have received the command of your
illustrious younger brother to bring here this subject Bandarang, to
try his strength with Badang. If Bandarang is vanquished, your brother
will place at your Majesty's feet the contents of a storehouse; and if
Badang succumbs, you shall offer us the equivalent."

"Very well," said the King; "to-morrow everything shall be arranged for
the struggle." The King retired to the palace, summoned Badang, and
said to him:

"You know, Badang, that to-morrow you will have to contend with
Bandarang."

"My lord," answered Badang, "know that this man is a powerful athlete,
of extraordinary strength, famous in all countries. If your slave is
vanquished will it not cast some discredit on the sovereign? If your
Majesty thinks it wise, let us both be called into your presence
together, so that I may test him; and if I feel myself capable of
competing with him, we will have the contest; but if he is too strong
for me, then your Majesty can oppose the struggle."

"You are right," said the King. That is why, when night came, the
prince invited Toun Parapatih Pendek, Bandarang, and their companions.
When they arrived they were served with a collation. Bandarang was
seated beside Badang, who began to test him. They tried each other's
strength without attracting attention.

At the end of an hour, when the guests were in wine, the King asked
Badang if he were strong enough to struggle with Bandarang, who
declared that he was equal to him. On the other hand, when Toun
Parapatih Pendek had returned to the ship, Bandarang said to him:

"Lord, if you will permit me to advise, there will be no contest
between Badang and me. I might not conquer, for I have learned how
powerful he is."

"Very well," said the minister; "it is very easy to arrange that."

So the minister said to the King: "It is my opinion that we should
prevent this struggle; for if one of the contestants should be
vanquished in some bad way, a quarrel might arise out of it between
your Majesty and the sovereign your brother."

The King agreed, and the ambassador asked leave to return home. The
prince had a letter written for the King of Perlak. It was carried in
state on board the ship and the envoy, after receiving vestments of
honor, set sail to his own country. Arriving, he told the King all that
had taken place. Later Badang died and was buried at Bourou. When the
news of his death arrived at that country, the King of Kling sent a
carved stone, which is now seen at Bourou.

And now as to the kings of Pasey. The authors of this story declare
that there were two brothers named Marah who lived near Pasangan. They
were originally from the mountain of Sanggong. The elder was named
Mara-Tchaga, and the younger Marah-Silou. Marah-Silou was engaged in
casting nets. Having taken some _kalang-kalang_, he rejected them and
cast his net anew. The _kalang-kalang_ were caught again. After several
attempts with the same result, Marah-Silou had these _kalang-kalang_
boiled. And behold, the wretched things became gold and their froth
became silver. Marah-Silou caught more _kalang-kalang_, boiled them,
and again saw them become gold and silver. He had thus acquired much
store of gold and silver, when one day the news came to Marah-Tchaga
that his younger brother was catching _kalang-kalang_, and he was so
irritated that he wished to kill him. When Marah-Silou learned of this
design, he took refuge in the forest of Djawn. The place where he
fished is still called the Plain of Kalang-Kalang.

Marah-Silou, established in the forest of Djawn, gave gold to those who
dwelt there, and they all obeyed his commands. One day when he was
hunting, his dog, named Si Pasey, began to bark on a slight hill which
one would have believed made by the hand of man. Climbing the small
hill he saw an ant as big as a cat. He took it and ate it up. The place
was afterward called Samodra; that is to say, "The Big Ant." Now it is
said that the prophet of God--blessings be upon him!--once told his
companions:

"There will be a country some day, toward the south, called Samoudra.
When you hear it spoken of, hasten thither to convert the inhabitants
to Islam, for in that country many will become the friends of God. But
there will also be the king of a country called Mataba, whom you must
take with you."

A long time after this decree of the prophet, the fakir Mahomet went to
Samoudra. Reaching the shore, he met Marah-Silou, who was gathering
shells. The fakir asked him:

"What is the name of this country?"

"Its name is Samoudra," answered Marah-Silou.

"And what is the sovereign's name?"

"I am the sovereign of all who dwell here," said Marah-Silou.

The fakir Mahomet converted Marah-Silou to Islam and taught him the
words of the creed. Now Marah-Silou being asleep dreamed that he was in
the presence of the prophet of God, and the prophet said to him,
"Marah-Silou, open your mouth." He opened it and the prophet spat in
it, and Marah-Silou, awaking, perceived throughout his whole body a
perfume like that of spikenard. When day broke he told his dream.

"This is truly the country of Samoudra of which the prophet of God has
spoken," said the fakir Mahomet. Bringing from the ship all the royal
ensigns aboard, he proclaimed Marah-Silou king with the title of Sultan
Melik-es-Salih.

Sultan Melik-es-Salih sent Sidi Ali Ghaiath-ed-Din to the country of
Perlak. This prince had three daughters, two of blood-royal on their
mother's side, and one born of a concubine. The latter was called the
princess Ganggang. When Sidi Ali Ghaiath arrived at Perlak they showed
him the three daughters. The two sisters of the blood-royal were seated
lower than the princess Ganggang, who occupied a high seat. The latter,
by order of her father, was cleaning arec nuts for her two sisters,
like one doing the honors of the household. She wore rose-colored
garments and a violet cloak. Her ears were adorned with _soubangs_ made
with the young leaves of the _lontar_. She was very beautiful.

Sidi Ali Ghaiath-ed-Din said to the King of Perlak, "That one of your
daughters who is seated above is the one I ask in marriage for my
master, your son." The envoy knew not that Princess Ganggang was the
daughter of a concubine.

The King burst out laughing. "Very well," he said, "let the will of my
son be accomplished." Then he gave orders to equip 100 _prahos_, and
Toun Parapatih received the command to accompany the princess to the
country of Samoudra.

Sultan Melik-es-Salih went to meet the princess as far as Djambou Ayer.
He introduced her into Samoudra with a thousand honors and splendors,
and married her. The marriage accomplished, the prince gave presents to
the ministers and to the officers, and showed himself lavish in gold
and silver to the poor of the country. As for Toun Parapatih Pendek, he
took leave to return to Perlak. Sultan Melik-es-Salih and the princess
Ganggang had two sons who received from the prince the names of Sultan
Melik-ed-Dhahir and Sultan Melik-el-Mansour. The elder was confided to
Sidi Ali Ghaiath-ed-Din and the other to Sidi Ali Asmai-ed-Din. Years
passed and the two young princes had grown up. Perlak had been
conquered by an enemy come from the opposite coast, and the inhabitants
of the country had migrated to Samoudra. Sultan Melik-es-Salih
conceived the plan of founding a city to establish his sons there. He
said to the great ones, "To-morrow I shall go hunting." The next
morning he set out, mounted on an elephant called Perma Diouana. He
passed to the other side of the water. When he came to land his dog Si
Pasey began to bark. The prince ran up and saw that he was barking
before a hillock, sufficiently extended for the erection of a palace
and its dependencies, level on top and well disposed. Sultan Melik had
the ground cleared and built a palace and a city there. After the name
of his dog he called the palace Pasey, and established as king his son
Sultan Melik-ed-Dhahir, with Sidi Ali Ghaiath as minister. He divided
his men, his elephants, and his royal standards into two parts, one for
each of his sons.

Some time after this, the prince, having fallen ill, commanded the
grandees to assemble and called his two sons and spoke as follows: "Oh,
my two sons, and you all, my companions, my last hour is approaching.
You men be good to those whom I leave behind. And you, my sons, beware
of being envious of another's good, and of the wives and daughters of
your subjects. Maintain between you the union of two brothers, abstain
from all injustice, and avoid between you every cause of quarrel." He
said also to Sidi Ali Gaiath-ed-Din and to Sidi Asmai-ed-Din:

"Oh, my brothers, take care of these two sons. Stir not up trouble
between them. Be faithful to them and never give your allegiance to
another king." The two young princes bowed their heads and wept.

As for the two ministers, "Lord," they said, "light of our eyes, we
swear by the sovereign Master who created the worlds that we will never
break our promises, that we will never lack in our fidelity or render
homage to another king than your two well-beloved sons."

Then Sultan Melik-es-Salih named his son Melik-el-Mansour, King of
Samoudra. Three days later he died and was buried in the interior of
the palace. Their father dead, the two young princes, his sons,
commanded the royal herald to assemble the officers and soldiers,
elephants and horses, as well as the royal insignia of the country of
Pasey. And the two cities grew and flourished more and more. God knows
best the truth. He is our aid and our refuge.

Now this is the story of the King Chehr-en-Naoui. His power was great,
his officers and soldiers innumerable. They told this prince that the
country of Samoudra had a large population, many merchants, and a
powerful king. Chehr-en-Naoui said to his officers:

"Which of you would be able to take the King of Samoudra?"

One of his officers very strong and brave, Aoui Ditchou, bowed and
said: "Lord, if your Majesty will give me 4,000 chosen warriors, I will
take the King of Samoudra alive and bring him to the foot of your
Majesty's throne."

The King gave him the 4,000 warriors and 100 ships. When they were
ready Aoui Ditchou sailed toward Samoudra, feigning that the ships were
bent on commerce up to the very moment when they reached the end of the
voyage. Then he caused it to be said that he was an ambassador of the
King Chehr-en-Naoui, and the King of Samoudra sent some officers to
receive him.

Landing, Aoui Ditchou put into four chests four lusty _houlou-balongs_,
to whom he said: "Presently, when you are in the presence of the King
of Samoudra, open the chests, leap out, and seize the King." The chests
were fastened from within. They took them ashore in state as presents
from the King Chehr-en-Naoui. When they were in the presence of the
prince, a message couched in flattering terms was read, and the chests
were brought in. Immediately the _houlou-balongs_ opened the chests,
sprang out, and seized the sovereign. The soldiers uttered fierce cries
and unsheathed their arms to attack the band of Chehr-en-Naoui's men.
But the latter cried:

"If you fall upon us, we will kill your King."

So the soldiers paused in their attack. Aoui Ditchou and his people
returned, bringing with them the King of Samoudra. They crossed the sea
and regained their own country. There the prisoner-King was conducted
by Aoui Ditchou before King Chehr-en-Naoui, who was very joyful and
loaded the head of the expedition and all his companions with honors.
As for the King of Samoudra, they made him a poultry-keeper.

Now let us talk of Sidi Ali Gaiath-ed-Din. Having consulted with the
principal ministers in the country of Samoudra, he equipped a ship and
purchased a cargo of Arabic merchandise, for the inhabitants of Pasey
at that time all knew the Arabic language. Sidi Ali and the soldiers
whom he embarked on the ship with him took all the ways and manners of
the Arabs. The minister being on board and all being made ready, they
set sail for the country of Chehr-en-Naoui, where they arrived after a
short voyage. Sidi Ali landed and went to present himself to the King,
bearing as a gift a tree of gold, of which the fruits were all sorts of
precious stones, and which was worth an almost inconceivable sum. When
the prince saw this present he asked:

"What do you want of me?"

Sidi Ali replied, "We want nothing."

The King was highly pleased, although surprised by such a magnificent
present. And he said to himself, "Now, what can be the aim of these
people giving me all this?" The pretended Arabs returned to their
ships. A few days after, the master of the ship returned to visit the
King. This time he brought as a present a chess-board of gold of which
the chessmen were of precious stones, which was worth an enormous sum.

"What do you want of me?" again asked the prince. "Speak, that I may
satisfy you."

And they replied, "We ask for nothing."

Then they returned to the ship. Some time later, when the favorable
monsoon blew for their return homeward, Sidi Ali Ghaiath thought upon
his departure. He went to see the King, laden with a present which
consisted of two golden ducks, male and female, enriched with precious
stones, and in a big golden basin. He filled this golden basin with
water, put in the ducks. They began to swim, dive, and pursue each
other, a sight at which the King marvelled much.

"I beg of you to tell me," he said, "what you desire of me. By the God
whom I worship, I swear to fulfil your wishes."

Then Sidi Ali answered: "Lord, if it is the accomplishment of your
favor, we beg that you will give us your poultry-keeper."

"It is the King of Pasey that you ask of me. But, very well, I grant
him to you."

"It is because he is a Mussulman," said the strangers, "that we ask him
of your Majesty."

The King Chehr-en-Naoui delivered therefore the Sultan Melik-ed-Dhahir
to Sidi Ali Gaiath-ed-Din, who took him on board the ship, gave him a
bath, and then clothed him in royal raiment. The wind blew, they
weighed anchor, set sail, and after a certain time arrived at the
country of Samoudra. And God knows the truth. He is our aid and our
refuge.

Now we are going to speak of the King Melik-el-Mansour at Samoudra.
This prince said one day to Sidi Ali Asmai-ed-Din:

"I would like to go and see how my brother is getting along."

The minister answered, "Do not go, my lord, for fear of misfortune."
And, indeed, he tried to restrain his master. The prince would listen
to nothing, and finally the minister was silent. He ordered the drums
to beat, in order to make the announcement, "Sultan Melik-el-Mansour is
going to see the country of his brother."

Sidi Ali Asmai-ed-Din was not satisfied. He was an old minister who
knew that out of every affair causes of trouble may arise. But it was
his duty to obey. The prince started. He made the tour of the city of
Pasey, and then entered the palace of the Sultan Melik-ed-Dhahir. There
he fell in love with one of the ladies-of-honor of his brother's court,
and a quarrel arose between the two brothers on her account. Sultan
Melik-ed-Dhahir felt in the bottom of his heart a violent irritation
toward his brother.

Now he had a son named Radja Ahmed, very young when his father was
captured, but grown up when the prince was restored from the hands of
Chehr-en-Naoui. Sidi Ali Ghaiath-ed-Din having withdrawn from affairs,
a minister named Parapatih Toulous Toukang Sikari had replaced him in
his ministerial functions. One day the King said to the minister:

"What is your opinion concerning the act of Sultan Melik-el-Mansour?"

The minister answered: "We have a means----"

"But," answered the King, "it might involve his death."

"If he dies," replied the minister, "my name shall be no longer
Toukang."

"Give a family fete for your son Sultan Ahmed. We will invite Sultan
Melik-el-Mansour to the festival."

Sultan Melik-ed-Dhahir gave orders then to decorate the city and made
preparations for the fete, and sent to find Sultan Melik-el-Mansour.
This prince was with Sidi Ali Asmai-ed-Din and his officers. They
introduced the prince and his minister, but left the officers outside.
When they had entered, Sultan Melik-ed-Dhahir caused them both to be
seized and ordered one of his officers to conduct his brother to
Mandjang. "As for you," he said to Sidi Ali, "stay here. Do not try to
go with your master or I'll cut off your head."

Sidi Ali answered: "Rather let my head be separated from my body than
that the servant should be separated from his master."

So the King had his head cut off. The head was thrown into the sea and
the body impaled at the entrance to the Bay of Pasey. While they were
taking the Sultan Melik-el-Mansour toward the east in a _prabo_, at the
moment when they arrived near Djambou Ayer, the pilot saw a human head
floating in the water near the rudder. He recognized the head of Sidi
Ali. Informed of this event, Sultan Melik-el-Mansour caused the head to
be taken from the water. It was indeed that of his minister. Casting
his glances toward the land: "Behold," he said, "the Plain of
Illusions." And it bears that name, "Padang-Maya," to this day. The
prince sent to his brother and demanded the body of Sidi Ali; joined
the head with the body, and buried both in the Plain of Illusion. Then
he went back to Mandjang.

After the departure of the Sultan Melik-el-Mansour, King Melik-ed-
Dhahir had the family festival. The Sultan Melik-el-Mansour had been at
Mandjang three years when the Sultan Melik-ed-Dhahir bethought him of
his brother.

"Alas," he said, "I was truly too unwise. For a woman my brother
dethroned, and his minister is dead."

And the prince repented. He ordered some of his officers to go and find
his brother at Mandjang. They therefore brought back Sultan Melik-el-
Mansour with the regard due to a king. When they arrived near the Plain
of Maya, the prince landed to visit the tomb of Sidi Ali Asmai-ed-Din.
"I salute you, my father," he said. "Stay here, my father. As for me I
go away, called by my brother."

From the interior of the tomb Sidi Ali answered: "Where would the
prince go? It is better to remain here."

When the prince heard these words, he made his ablutions, said a couple
of prayers, then stretched himself upon the tomb and expired. They bore
to Sultan Melik-ed-Dhahir the news that his brother was dead, in the
Plain of Maya, in the tomb of Sidi Ali Asmai-ed-Din. He started at
once, went to the place, and had his brother, Sultan Melik-el-Mansour,
buried with the ceremonies of great kings. Then, after returning to
Pasey, a prey to grief, he abdicated the throne in favor of his son,
Sultan Ahmed.

Some time after this, Sultan Melik-ed-Dhahir fell ill. He gave Sultan
Ahmed his last instructions. "O my son," said he, "light of my eyes,
treasure of my heart, never neglect the advice of your old servitors.
In every affair take counsel with your ministers. Neglect not the
duties of piety to God, the sovereign Master. Beware of injustice to
men."

Sultan Ahmed heard in tears the last words of his father. The prince
died, and they buried him near the mosque.

Sultan Ahmed was for many years on the throne and governed with much
justice. Now, the author of this story says: "There was at Pasey a
servant of God named Toun Djana Khatite. This man made the voyage to
Singapore with two companions. Crossing the square of Singapore he
passed by the palace of the King and saw the Queen. Near the palace was
an areca tree, and while Toun Djana was looking at the Queen the tree
split in two. At sight of this, King Sri Maharadja was extremely
irritated. 'You see,' he cried, 'the conduct of Toun Djana Khatite. To
call the attention of the Queen, he has acted thus. And he ordered him
to be killed. So Toun Djana was led to the place of punishment, near a
cake-shop, where Toun Djana Khatite received the blow of the poniard;
his blood ran on the earth, but his body disappeared and no one could
ever tell what became of it. The cake-shop-keeper covered the blood
with the cake-cover, and the cake-cover was changed into stone, which
is still seen at Singapore. According to a tradition, the body of Toun
Djana Khatite was transported to Langkaoui and there buried."

Some time later came the sea-monsters called _toudaks_ and attacked
Singapore. They leaped upon the shore, and people who were there died
in great numbers, overtaken by these _toudaks_. If they struck a man on
the breast, they pierced to his back. If they struck the neck or the
loins, they pierced clear through from one side to the other. There
were many killed. People ran about crying:

"The _toudaks_ are attacking us!"

"What shall we do?"

"How many dead? We shall all perish!"

Padouka Sri Maharadja in great haste mounts the elephant and goes
forth, followed by his ministers, his body-guards, and all his
officers. Arriving at the seashore he sees with horror the work of
these monsters, the _toudaks_. Whoever was wounded by them inevitably
perished. The number of the victims became larger and larger. The
prince ordered the men to make a rampart of their legs, but in their
boundings the _toudaks_ succeeded in passing this barrier. They came
like the rain, and the slaughter was terrible. While this was happening
a young boy said:

"Why make thus a rampart of our legs? That is an artifice very much to
our hurt. If we should make a rampart of the trunks of banana-trees,
would not that be better?"

When Padouka Sri Maharadja heard the words of the child, "He is right,"
he said. And on his orders they hastened to construct a barrier of
banana-tree trunks. When the _toudaks_ came bounding along their snouts
were buried in the tree-trunks, and the men ran up and killed them.
There perished thus of these _toudaks_ a number beyond computation.
Their bodies formed heaps on the shore, and all the population of
Singapore did not suffice to eat them. And the _toudaks_ ceased their
leapings. They say, by the force of their boundings the _toudaks_
reached the elephant of the prince and tore the sleeve of his cloak.
About this they made a song:

  "The boundings of the _toudaks_ tore
   The mantle which the Sultan wore,
   But here they ceased their onset wild,
   Thanks to the wisdom of a child."

While Padouka Sri Maharadja was returning, the grandees said to him:
"Lord, this child, though so young, has much wit. What will it be when
he has grown up? You had better get rid of him." That is why they found
it just that the King should give the order for him to be killed.

After they had caused this young boy to perish, it seems that the city
of Singapore felt the weight of his blood.

Padouka Sri Maharadja reigned some time still and then died. He had as
successor his son Padja Is Keuder Chah, who married the daughter of
Toun Parapatih Toulous, and by her had a son named Radja Ahmed Timang-
timanganga Radja Besar Mouda. This young prince was handsome and well
formed, without equal in those days. When he was of age his father
married him to the daughter of the King Salamiam, King of Kota-
Mahlikie, who was named Kamar-al-Adjaaib, a princess of unrivalled
beauty. King Is Keuder Chah had a _bendahari_, or major-domo, named
Lang Radjouna Tapa, of the race of ancient inhabitants of Singapore,
father of a very beautiful girl in the court of the King. The other
court ladies calumniated this young woman, and the King in a rage
ordered her to be impaled in the corner of the marketplace.

Lang Radjouna Tapa was extremely wounded by the treatment of his
daughter. "If in truth my daughter had offended," said he, "you might
have simply had her killed. But why dishonor us thus?" On this he wrote
a letter to Java saying, "If the Batara of Madjapahit wishes to attack
Singapore let him come at once, for I will give him entrance into the
fortifications."

When the Batara of Madjapahit had read this letter he caused to be
equipped 300 junks and a great quantity of other boats. A hundred
thousand Javanese embarked, crossed the sea, and attacked Singapore. At
the end of several days King Is Keuder commanded his major-domo to
carry rice for the rations of the troops. Lang Radjouna Tapa answered,
"There is no more, my Lord." For he wished to betray him. At daybreak
he opened the gates of the fortifications and the Javanese entered.
Inside the town there was a frantic combat. So many people were killed
on each side that blood flowed like water. From this came the marks of
blood which are seen to this day in the Plain of Singapore. The natives
ceased their struggle and King Is Keuder escaped, descending from
Salitar to the Moara coast. By the will of God, the house of Lang
Radjouna Tapa was overturned, the storehouse for rice fell to pieces,
and the rice was changed to earth. The _bendahari_ himself and his wife
were changed to stone, and these stones are still found in the ditch at
Singapore. After this victory the Javanese returned to Madjapahit.

On arriving at Moara, King Is Keuder halted at nightfall. Now there
came a multitude of iguanas, and, when day dawned they saw them
gathered in a crowd near the halting-place. They killed them and threw
their bodies into the river. But at night, iguanas again came in mass.
The next morning the Singaporeans killed them, but that night as many
more arrived. So that the place became putrid from the multitude of
their bodies. The quarter is still called Biaoak Bousok, or "Putrid
Iguanas."

King Is Keuder Chah set out and came to another place, where he built a
fort. But all they constructed by day was overturned by night. And the
place still bears the name of Kota-Bourok, or "Ruined Fort."

Starting from there the King advanced into the interior during many
days and came to the Saning Oudjong. He found this place agreeable and
left a minister there. Hence comes it that to this day Saning Oudjong
is the residence of a minister. Then the King returned toward the coast
near a river at the shore of the sea. The river was called Bartain. Is
Keuder Chah halted at the foot of a very bushy tree. Then he began
hunting. His dog, chasing some game, was struck by the foot of a little
white gazelle and fell into the water. On this the prince cried:

"Here is a good place to build a city, for even the little gazelles are
valiant here."

And all the grandees said, "His Majesty is right." The King therefore
gave orders for the construction of a city at this place. He asked,
"What is the name of this tree against which I have been leaning?"

Someone answered, "It is a malaka-tree." "Very well," said he, "let
Malaka be the name of the city."

The prince established himself at Malaka. He had lived thirty-two years
at Singapore, up to the capture of that town by the Javanese. He lived
for three years more at Malaka, and then died, by the vicissitudes of
this world, and had as successor his son Radja Besar Mouda.

This prince governed with justice. He regulated the etiquette of the
court. He first established a ministry of ceremonies to direct people
who came to Balerong, and forty heralds who stood below the throne
ready to take the orders of the King and carry to him the words of the
public. He instituted among the sons of the grandees a body of pages
serving as royal messengers and bearing everywhere the royal equipage.

This prince had three sons, Radeu Bagousa, Radeu Tengah, and Radeu
Anoumah, who all married daughters of Bauhara Toun Parapatih Toulous.
At his death, Radeu Bagousa took his functions with the title of Toun
Parapatih Permouka Berdjadjar.

When, by the vicissitudes of the world, King Besar Mouda died, his son
Radeu Tengah succeeded him. The latter had a son called Radja Kitchil
Bessar, who at his death was his successor. He was just and guarded the
interests of his subjects. No one in his time among the kings of the
world equalled him in liberality. And the city of Malaka became large,
well peopled, and the meeting-place of merchants. This King married a
daughter of Toun Parapatih Permouka Berdjadjar, and by her had two
sons, Radja Kitchil Mainbang and Radja Makat. He reigned for a certain
time, when one night he dreamed that he was in the presence of the
glorious prophet of God, on whom be blessings! And the prophet said to
him, "Recite the words of the creed." And Radja Kitchil Bessar did as
the prophet commanded.

"Your name shall be Sultan Mahomet," said the prophet. "To-morrow at
the moment of the Asr (in the afternoon) there will arrive a ship from
Djedda, from which the men will descend to pray on the shore of Malaka.
Follow all their orders."

"Yes, Lord," replied the prince, "I shall obey your word."

And the prophet disappeared. When day came the King awaked. He
perceived upon his body the odor of spikenard and saw that he bore
certain marks. "It is clear," he thought, "that my dream does not come
from Satan." And he began to recite without relaxation the words of the
creed.

The ladies-of-honor who were in the palace were very much surprised to
hear the King speak thus. "Has the King been touched by Satan, or has
he lost his wits? Let us hasten to inform the _bendahari_." They ran to
tell the _bendahari,_ who came at once, entered the palace, and saw the
King repeating without cessation the words of the creed.

"What is this language in which the King is speaking?" said the
minister.

"Last night," said the King, "I dreamed that I was in the presence of
the glorious prophet." And he told his dream to the _bendahari_.

"If your dream is not an illusion," said the latter, "what is the
sign?"

"Here is the sign that proves that I have really seen in a dream the
prophet of God. Furthermore, the prophet told me: 'To-day, at Asr,
there will arrive a ship from Djedda, from which the people will
descend to say their prayers on the shore of Malaka. Follow their
directions.'"

The _bendahari_ was surprised at seeing the marks on the King.

"Truly," he said, "if a ship arrives at the hour stated, then your
dream is a reality. If it does not arrive, we shall judge that Satan
must have troubled your spirit."

The King replied, "My father is right." And the _bendahari_ returned to
his house.

Now at the hour of Asr there arrived a ship from Djedda which cast
anchor. The master came on shore. He was called Sidi Abd-el-Aziz. He
said his prayers on the shore of Malaka. The inhabitants, astonished at
the sight, said:

"Why does he stoop so and prostrate himself so?"

And to see him better, the people pressed around, leaving no spot
vacant, and making a great tumult.

The noise reached the palace, and the King mounted an elephant and came
in haste, accompanied by his grandees. He saw the master making all the
ceremonies of his prayer, and all was in evident accord with the dream.

"It is exactly as in my dream," he exclaimed to the _bendahari_ and the
grandees.

When the master had finished praying, the King made his elephant stoop,
and took up the master with him and carried him to the palace. The
_bendahari_ and the grandees all became Mussulmans, and by command of
the King so did all the population, men and women, great and small,
young and old. The master taught the King the ceremonies of prayer, and
gave him the name of Sultan Mahomet Chah. The _bendahari_ received the
title of Sri Ouak Radja; that is to say, "Paternal Uncle of the King,"
which he was in fact. And that is the first title of the _bendahari_.

Sultan Mahomet regulated the ceremonial customs of the court. He was
the first to prohibit yellow for the clothes of the person strange to
the court, for handkerchiefs, borders of curtains, pillow-cases,
mattresses, coverings of all kinds, ornaments of every nature, as well
as for the decoration of houses.

Furthermore the use of only three kinds of garments was permitted--the
_kain_, the _badjoa_, and the _destar_. It was also forbidden to
construct houses with projections sustained upon pillars not touching
the ground, or with pillars extending beyond the roof or with
observatories. The _prahos_ could have no windows in front. It was
forbidden to carry clasps or ornaments of gold on the _kris_. No one
strange to the court could have gold rings nor pins nor jingling
bangles of gold and silver. Nobody without the royal consent had the
right to wear on his clothes gilding of any sort; but the authorization
once granted, one might wear it indefinitely. When a man presented
himself at the palace, if he had a vesture falling beneath the girdle,
if his _kris_ was not attached in front, if he was not clad in a
_sabec_, he was not admitted, whatever might be his distinction. If
anyone entered with his _kris_ attached behind, the officer took it
away from him.

Such were formerly the prohibitions of the Malay kings. Whoever
transgressed was guilty of _lese-majeste_ and was condemned to pay a
fine of one to five katis. White parasols were held in higher esteem
than yellow ones, because they could be seen at a greater distance.
That is why they were ranked higher; the first were for the King and
the second for the princes. The objects of the king's private use, such
as the spittoon, the ewer for his ablutions, the fan, and other like
objects, had no fixed place, except the betel-tray and the sword, which
they kept at the right and left of the sovereign. At the arrival and
departure of an ambassador, the servitors of the King brought from the
palace dishes and basins which were received by the head of the
_bataras_ and deposited near the _bendahari_. They gave a dish and a
scarf to the bearer of the letter. If the missive came from Pasey or
from Harau, it was received with all the royal pomp--drum, flute,
trumpet, kettledrum, and two white parasols together; but the bugle did
not figure at this reception. The ministers preceded the elephant
bearing the message, the bataras followed it with the _sida-sida_. The
letter was borne by the chief of the _bedaouenda_, and they placed the
elephant at the extremity of the _balei_. For the kings of these two
countries were equal in greatness to the King of Malaka. Younger or
older, all gave the salaam.

Having reached the audience-chamber, the letter was received by the
chief of heralds of the right, the one of the left being charged with
transmitting the words of the King to the ambassador, and the herald of
the right transmitted the answer. If the message came from another
country than Pasey and Harau, they suppressed part of the men. The
_cortege_ included only the drum, the flute, and a yellow parasol. They
took, as was suitable, now an elephant, now a horse, and they halted
outside the first exterior gate. When the message came from a more
considerable sovereign, they employed the flute and two parasols, one
white and one yellow. The elephant passed through the exterior gate,
for formerly the royal entrance included seven fortifications. At his
departure, the ambassador received a complete investiture, even were he
only a simple ambassador of Rakan. The same gift was offered to our own
ambassadors at the moment of their departure.

When the King conferred a title, he gave audience in the _falerong_,
with the following procedure: According to the rank, the person to be
honored was brought on an elephant, on horseback, or simply on foot,
with parasol, drum, and flute. There were green, blue, and red
parasols. The noblest were the yellow and the white, which with the
kettle-drums represented the height of distinction. The yellow with the
trumpet was also very distinguished; they were the parasols of the
princes and greatest personages. The violet, red, and green parasols
were those of the _sida-sida_, of the _bataras_, and of the _houlou
balongs_. The blue and black ones served for any other person summoned
to receive a title. When the personage arrived at the palace, he was
detained without. Then they read before the King a very fine piece. It
was a descendant of Batl that held this office. The piece read, they
took it out. He who received it was of the family of the candidate for
honors. With this piece they brought a _tetampan_ scarf with which the
reader invested the candidate, whom he then introduced into the
audience-chamber. There a mat was stretched for him to sit upon in
whatever place the King designated.

Then arrived the vestments. For a personage promoted to the ranks of
the _bendahari_ there were five trays. The sons of radjas and the grand
officers had four trays only, and so on down through the various ranks.
The servitors of the King charged with this duty approached the
beneficiary and placed the vestments upon his shoulders. He crossed his
arms, to hold the vestments in place, and they took him outside. The
etiquette in that was the same for ambassadors awarded an investiture,
each according to the rights of his rank. The beneficiary dressed
himself outside and then re-entered. They decorated him with a frontlet
and with bracelets, for every man who received a title wore bracelets,
each according to his dignity. Some had bracelets in the form of a
dragon with amulets, others had bracelets of precious stones, others of
blue enamel, others of silver. These wore them on both wrists, those on
only one. The beneficiary thus decorated went and bowed before the
King. Then he returned accompanied according to his rank, or by the
person who introduced him. The _cortege_ included now a drum and a
flute alone, now trumpets or kettledrums, sometimes a white parasol;
but the white parasol was a rare honor, as well as the kettle-drums,
for the yellow parasol and the trumpet were very hard to obtain in
those times.

On festival days, when the King went forth in a palanquin, he was
surrounded by high officers of state. At the head, before the
sovereign, marched the _bataras_ and the _houlou balongs_, each
following their charge. Footmen, also before the King, bore the royal
insignia. The royal pikes were at the right and left; the _bataras_ had
sword at shoulder. Before them marched the lancers. When the King gives
a festival it is the _panghoulou bendahari_ who arranges everything
inside the palace, stretches mats, decorates the _balerong_, and places
the _bangings_ on the ceilings. It is he who looks after the repasts
and sends the invitations; for the servitors of the King, his
_bendahari_, his tax-gatherers, and the receiver of the port all depend
on the administration of the _panghoulou bendahari_. He invites the
guests and the _temonggoreg_ seats them. In the hall the guests eat
four at a dish, to the end of the platform. If any one of the various
fours are lacking the others eat without him, by threes or by twos or
even one alone. For it is not permitted for those below to ascend to
make up the number. The _bendahari_ eats alone or from the same dish as
the princes.

Such was in former days the etiquette of Malaka. There were many other
regulations, but to relate them all would weary the attentions of my
readers. At the month of Ramadhau, at the twenty-seventh night, while
it was still light, they went in state to make adorations to the
mosque. The _Temonggoreg_ was at the head of the elephant. They first
took in state to the mosque the betel-tray, the royal insignia, and the
drum. When night came, the King started for the mosque, following the
ceremonial of festival days, made the prayer of perfumes, and returned.

The next day the _laksamana_ carried in state the turban, for the Malay
kings were accustomed to go to the mosque in a turban, a _badjon_, and
a _sarong_. These vestments were forbidden at weddings except by
express permission. It was also forbidden to dress in the Hindoo
fashion. Only those persons who had worn this costume for a long time
were allowed to wear it at prayers and at weddings. Festival days,
great or small, the _bendahari_ and the grandees assembled at the
palace, and the _panghoulou bendahari_ brought in pomp the palanquin.
As soon as they saw it appear, the persons seated in the _balei_
descended and stood about. Seven times they beat upon the drum, and
each time the trumpet sounded. After the seventh, the King set out on
an elephant and came to the platform erected for that purpose, which he
mounted. At sight of him, all those present bowed to the earth, except
the _bendahari_, who mounted the platform to receive him. The palanquin
having approached, the King placed himself in it, and they started for
the mosque according to the ceremonial above mentioned.

Such was formerly the etiquette of the Malay kings. Such I learned it,
such I tell it. If I commit any error, I desire to be convicted by
anyone who has given attention to this story, and implore the
indulgence of the reader.




THE PRINCESS DJOUHER-MANIKAM

[_Translated by Aristide Marre and Chauncey C. Starkweather_]


This is the history of the Princess Djouher-Manikam, whose renown is
celebrated in all lands, windward and leeward.

There was in the city of Bagdad a king named Haroun-er-Raschid,
sovereign of a vast empire. He was a prince who feared God the
almighty, and worthy of all praise, for he was a king descended from
the prophet. After having lived for some time in his kingdom, he
desired to start on a pilgrimage. So he addressed his ministers and his
military chiefs and spoke to them as follows:

"O you all, my subjects, my officers, what is your opinion? I would
fain make a pilgrimage to the house of God."

The cadi, prostrating himself, answered: "Sire, King of the world, the
will of your sublime Majesty is very just, but in my opinion your
departure would cause the ruin of the inhabitants of the fields, and
those of your subjects who accompany you will have much to suffer."

The prince, having heard these words, said: "The opinion of the cadi is
loyal, and you, my officers, tell what is your advice."

The officers arose, then they prostrated themselves and spoke as
follows: "Sire, King of the world, we, your servants, beg you a
thousand and a thousand times to cause your forgiveness to descend upon
our heads, but how will your Majesty accomplish the pilgrimage? In whom
can you trust to protect the country and watch over the palace?"

The prince having heard these words of his officers, none of whom
approved of the pilgrimage, kept silence and restrained his anger, and
then departed and returned to the palace. Some days after this, by the
will of the most high God, the heart of the prince felt more keenly
still the desire to make the pilgrimage. He gave orders to gather
together the interpreters of the law, the wise men, and the _muftis_,
as well as the officers. When they were all assembled, the prince went
to the audience-chamber, and there before the officers of the court he
questioned one of the doctors. It was the _mufti_ of the city of
Bagdad. He, prostrating himself, said: "The pilgrimage of his Majesty
would be an excellent work, but is it of absolute necessity? For the
voyage will be very long, and there is no one, my lord, who would be
capable of ruling in the place of your sublime Majesty."

The prince answered: "He in whom we first of all place our trust is
God. We shall hope then in the blessing of his envoy. We shall leave
the cadi here, and if it pleases God the most high, we shall return
promptly as soon as we have accomplished the pilgrimage."

The King therefore caused to be equipped and provided with all sorts of
provisions, those of his subjects who were going to accompany him, and
when, the favorable moment had arrived he started with the Queen, some
of the maids-of-honor, and his son named Minbah Chahaz. He took his
son, but he left behind, guarded in the palace, his daughter called the
Princess Djouher-Manikam. In those times there was no one in the
country of Bagdad who surpassed in beauty the Princess Djouher-Manikam.
Furthermore, she had in her heart the fear of God the most high and
worthy of all praise, and would not cease her prayers.

After travelling for some time, the prince her father arrived at Mecca,
and fulfilled his duties as a pilgrim. He recited the appropriate
prayers. But observing that there was still a great quantity of
provisions, the prince said to his officers:

"It is good for us to wait a year or so, for our provisions are yet
considerable."

The officers replied: "It is well, lord of the world! Whatever may be
your Majesty's commands, we place them above our heads." "Since it is
thus," answered the prince, "it is fitting that we should send a letter
thus conceived: Peace and blessing upon the cadi: I place my trust in
God first of all, and in the cadi, to guard my kingdom, palace, and my
child the Princess Djouher-Manikam. Be a faithful guardian, neglect
nothing in the cares to be given to my kingdom, for I am going to
remain another year for the great pilgrimage.'"

The prince's letter reached the cadi. The latter gave all his efforts
to the good administration of the country, and, according to the words
of the prince, he avoided every negligence.

But one night while he was on watch near the fortifications of the
King's palace, Satan came to him and slid into his heart a temptation.
The cadi thought in his heart: "The King's daughter is of a marvellous
beauty; her name, Djouher-Mani-kam, is charming; and her face is
lovely. Since it is thus, I must marry this daughter of the King." The
cadi called the man who was guarding the gate, exclaiming:

"Ho! Guardian of the gate! Open unto me."

The guardian of the gate demanded, "Who is there?"

The cadi replied, "It is I, the cadi."

So the guardian promptly opened the gate, and the cadi entered within
the fortification, then went up into the palace and found the princess
there saying her evening prayers. He hid behind the lamp in a corner
which was dark. When her prayer was finished, the Princess Djouher-
Manikam cast her eyes in that direction and saw there was someone
standing there in the shadow, so three times again she said the "verse
of the Throne"; but she saw that the vision had not yet vanished from
her eyes.

Then the princess said in her heart: "What in the world is that? Is it
a ghost? Is it a demon? Is it a djinn? If it were, it would have
necessarily disappeared when I recited the 'verse of the Throne.'"

The cadi heard these words and said: "O Princess Djouher-Manikam, it is
I, the cadi."

"What are you doing here?" asked the princess. He answered, "I wish to
marry you."

The Princess Djouher-Manikam said: "O cadi! Why do you act so to me?
Have you then no fear of God the most high and worthy of all praise? Do
you not blush before the face of my ancestor the prophet Mahomet, the
envoy of God?  May the peace and blessings of God be upon him! As for
me, I am the servant of the Lord and I belong to the religion of the
envoy of God. I fear to marry now. And you, cadi, why do you act so? My
father gave you a charge. He sent you a letter which commanded you to
protect the country and all who dwelt in his palace. Why do you conduct
yourself in this fashion toward me?"

The cadi, hearing these words of the Princess Djouher-Manikam, felt a
great confusion in his heart. He went out of the palace and returned
home full of trouble and emotion. When it was day, the cadi sent a
letter to the King Haroun-er-Raschid at Mecca. It was thus conceived:
"Your Majesty left me to be guardian of his kingdom, his palace, and
his daughter. Now, the Princess Djouher-Manikam desires to marry me.
This is the reason why I send this letter to your Majesty." Thus spake
the cadi in his letter.

When it reached the prince and he had read it, he immediately summoned
his son Minbah-Chahaz. He came in haste, and the King gave him a
cutlass and said, "Return to Bagdad and slay your sister, because she
will bring shame upon the family by marrying now."

Minbah-Chahaz bowed before his father. Then he set out to return to his
own country.

Arriving at the end of his journey, he entered the city, and went up to
the palace of the Princess Djouher-Manikam. She was filled with joy and
said, "Welcome, O my brother!"

Minbah-Chahaz answered, "O my little sister, our parents will remain
for the great pilgrimage."

The brother and sister thus chatting together, the Princess Djouher-
Manikam said, "O my brother, I wish to sleep."

"It is well, my sister," answered Minbah-Chahaz; "sleep while your
brother combs his little sister's hair." And the princess Djouher-
Manikam slept.

Her brother then took a cushion, which he slipped under the head of the
young virgin his sister; then he thought in his heart: "If I do not
execute the commands of my father, I shall be a traitor to him. But,
alas, if I kill my sister, I shall not have a sister any more. If I do
not kill her, I shall certainly commit a crime against the most high,
because I shall not have obeyed the order of my father. I will fulfil
then my father's will. It is a duty obligatory on all children. What
good are these subterfuges?" His resolution thus confirmed, he bound
his handkerchief over his eyes and directed his cutlass against his
sister's neck. But at that instant, by the will of God the most high, a
little gazelle came up and, by the power of God the most high, placed
its neck upon the neck of the princess Djouher-Manikam, saying, "I will
take the place of the princess Djouher-Manikam." And the little gazelle
was killed by Minbah-Chahaz. That done he unbound his eyes and saw a
little gazelle lying dead with its throat cut, by the side of his young
sister the princess Djouher-Manikam.

At this sight, Minbah-Chahaz was stricken with astonishment. He thought
in his heart: "Since it is so with my sister, she must be entirely
innocent, and cannot have commited the least fault. Nevertheless,
although I am confident that she was calumniated by the cadi I must
tell my father that I have killed her."

Minbah-Chahaz set out then for Mecca, to find the prince his father.
When he had arrived at Mecca he presented to his father the cutlass
still stained with blood. The King Haroun-er-Raschid cried, "Praise be
to God, the Lord of the worlds. Our shame is now effaced, since you
have poniarded your sister and she is dead." Such were the deeds of
this first story.

The princess Djouher-Manikam, having awakened after the departure of
Minbah-Chahaz, saw that her brother was no longer there, but that at
her side there was a little gazelle with its throat cut. She thought in
her heart: "The cadi has slandered me to my father, and that is why my
brother came here with orders to kill me." The princess Djouher-Manikam
felt a great shame and thought in her heart, "Since it is so, I must
retire to a hidden place." Now in the King's park there was a solitary
place in the midst of a vast deserted plain. There was a pond of very
agreeable appearance there, many kinds of fruit-trees and flowers, and
an oratory beautifully built. The princess Djouher-Manikam set out and
retired to this place to pray to God the most high and worthy of all
praise. She was established there for some time when, by the will of
God the most high, a certain thing happened.



SECOND STORY


There was in the country of Damas a king who was named Radja Chah
Djouhou. This King wished to go hunting in the deserted forests. His
first minister said to him, bowing low: "O my lord, King of the world,
why does your Majesty wish to go hunting in foreign countries?"

King Chah Djouhou replied: "I insist upon my plan of going to hunt in
foreign lands, in forests far removed from ours. I wish to go from
place to place, from plain to plain. Such is my will." The prince set
out therefore accompanied by his ministers, his chiefs, and his
servants.

They had all been hunting for some time and had not yet found a single
bit of game. The prince had directed his march toward the forests of
the country of Bagdad. These forests were of immense extent. The heat
was excessive, and the prince, being very thirsty, wanted a drink of
water. The people who generally carried water for the King said to him:
"O lord, sovereign of the world, your Majesty's provision of water is
entirely exhausted."

The prince then asked of his officers and servants: "Which of you can
get me water? I will reward him with riches and with slaves."

These words were heard by one of his officers named Asraf-el-Kaum. He
said: "O my lord, sovereign of the world, give me the vase which will
serve for water, and I will go and seek water for your Majesty."

Then the prince said to the people who had brought water for his use,
"Give my emerald pitcher into the hands of Asraf-el-Kaum."

The latter bowed low and started to seek water. Seeing from afar a very
large fig-tree, he advanced in that direction. Arriving near the tree
he saw at its base an oratory and a pond. At the oratory there was a
woman of very great beauty. The splendor of her countenance shone like
that of the full moon at its fourteenth day. Asraf-el-Kaum, astonished
and moved with admiration, thought in his heart: "Is this a human
creature, or is it a peri?" and Asraf-el-Kaum saluted the princess
Djouher-Manikam, who returned the salutation.

Then the princess asked him, "What is your desire in coming here to my
dwelling?"

Asraf-el-Kaum answered, "I have come here to ask you for water, for I
have lost my way."

The princess said, "Take water, lord."

Asraf-el-Kaum plunged the emerald pitcher into the pond, and filled it
with water. Then he asked permission to return.

Arriving near the King Chah Djouhou he presented the pitcher to the
prince, who seized it quickly and drank.

"Asraf-el-Kaum," said the prince, "where did you find such fresh and
delicious water? In all my life I have never drunk the like."

Asraf-el-Kaum answered: "O my lord, sovereign of the world, there is a
garden in the middle of the plain, and in this garden there is a very
large and bushy fig-tree, and at the foot of this tree there is a pond,
and near this pond there is an oratory. At this oratory there was a
woman who was reading the Koran. This charmingly beautiful woman has no
equal in this world. I saluted her and then returned to the presence of
the sovereign of the world. That is what I saw, my lord."

"Conduct me to this place," said the King.

"O sovereign of the world, if your Majesty wishes to go thither, let it
be with me alone. Let not my lord take his people with him, for it is a
woman, and naturally she would be ashamed."

The prince set out then on horseback with Asraf-el-Kaum. The princess
Djouher-Manikam, seeing two cavaliers approach, thought in her heart:
"I must hide myself, so that I may not be seen." So she left the
oratory and went toward the fig-tree. She addressed a prayer to God the
most high and worthy of all praise, in these terms:

"O God, I beseech thee, give me a refuge in this tree, for thy servant,
O Lord, is ashamed to look upon the faces of these infidels."

Then by the will of God the most high, the tree opened in two and the
princess Djouher-Manikam entered by the split, and the tree closed and
became as it was before. The King Chah Djouhou and Asraf-el-Kaum
arrived at the oratory, but the prince saw nothing of the princess
Djouher-Manikam. He was astonished and said:

"O Asraf-el-Kaum, the woman has gone. But just a moment ago I saw her
from afar, seated at the oratory, and now she has suddenly
disappeared." The prince added: "O Asraf-el-Kaum, perhaps, as with the
prophet Zachariah (upon whom be blessings!), her prayer has been
answered and she has entered this tree."

Then he offered this prayer to God the most high and worthy, of all
praise: "O God, if thou wilt permit that this woman be united to thy
servant, then grant her to him."

The prayer of the King Chah Djouhou was heard, and a woman of dazzling
beauty appeared before his eyes. He desired to seize her, but the
princess Djouher-Manikam pronounced these words: "Beware of touching
me, for I am a true believer." Hearing these words the King Chah
Djouhou drew back, a little ashamed. Then he said:

"Woman, what is your country? Whose child are you, and what is your
name?"

The princess answered: "For a long time I have dwelt here, and I have
no father nor mother. My name is Djouher-Manikam."

The King, hearing these words of the princess Djouher-Manikam, took off
his cloak and gave it to the princess, who covered all her body with
it. Then she got up and descended to the ground. Then King Chah
Djouhou, dismounting from his horse, received her, put her on his
horse, and took her to the country of Damas.

Asraf-el-Kaum then said to the King: "O my lord, sovereign of the
world, you made a promise to your servant. Be not careless nor
forgetful, my lord."

"Asraf-el-Kaum, be not disturbed. I will fulfil my promise to you. If
it pleases God, when I have arrived in our own country, I shall
certainly give you all that I promised you."

King Chah Djouhou set out for the country of Damas.

After a certain time on the way, the prince came to the city of Damas
and entered his palace. He commanded one of his pages to summon the
cadi, and a page went promptly to call him. The latter, in all haste,
entered the presence of the King. Chah Djouhou said: "O cadi, marry me
to the princess Djouher-Manikam." And the cadi married them. After the
celebration of the marriage the prince Chah Djouhou gave to Asraf-el-
Kaum 1,000 dinars and some of his slaves, both men and women. King
Djouhou and Princess Djouher-Manikam were happy and full of tenderness
for each other. Within a few years the princess had two sons, both very
beautiful. The prince loved these children very fondly. But above all
he loved his wife. He was full of tender solicitude for her, and bore
himself with regard to her with the same careful attention that a man
uses who carries oil in the hollow of his hand. Some time later
Princess Djouher-Manikam had another son of great beauty. The prince
loved this third child tenderly. He gave him a great number of nurses
and governesses, as is the custom for the children of the greatest
kings. And he never ceased to bestow upon him the most watchful care.

It happened one day that the ministers, the chiefs, and the courtiers
of the King, all gathered in his presence, were enjoying all sorts of
sport and amusements. The prince showed himself very joyous, and the
princess herself played and amused herself with the three children. Her
countenance shone with the brightness of rubies; but happening to think
of her father, her mother, and her brother, she began to weep and said:
"Alas, how unhappy I am! If my father, mother, and brother could see my
three children, necessarily their affection for me would be greater."
And the princess Djouher-Manikam burst into sobs. The prince, who was
not far from there, heard her, and as the princess did not stop weeping
he asked her: "O princess, why do you weep thus? What do I lack in your
eyes? Is it riches or physical beauty or noble birth? Or is it the
spirit of justice? Tell me what is the cause of your tears?"

Princess Djouher-Manikam answered: "Sovereign of the world, your Majesty
has not a single fault. Your riches equal those of Haroun. Your beauty
equals that of the prophet Joseph (peace be upon him!). Your extraction
equals that of the envoy of God (Mahomet). May the benediction of God
and blessings rest upon him! Your justice equals that of King
Rouchirouan. I don't see a single fault in you, my lord."

King Chah Djouhou said: "If it is thus, why then does my princess shed
tears?"

Princess Djouher-Manikam answered: "If I wept thus while playing with
my three children, it is because I thought that if my father, my
mother, and my brother should see my three children, necessarily their
affection for me would be greater. And that is why I shed tears."

King Chah Djouhou said to her: "O my young wife, dear princess, are
your father and mother still living? What is your father's name?"

Princess Djouher-Manikam answered, "O my lord, my father is named
Haroun-er-Raschid, King of Bagdad."

Clasping her in his arms and kissing her, the prince asked her: "Why,
until this day have you not told the truth to your husband?"

And the princess answered: "I wished to avow the truth, but perhaps my
lord would not have had faith. It is on account of the children that I
tell the truth."

King Chah Djouhou answered: "Since it is so, it is fitting that we
should start, and make a visit upon King Haroun-er-Raschid."

He called his ministers, ordered them to make all the preparations, and
commanded them to place in order ingots of gold and ingots of silver on
which were graven the name of King Haroun-er-Raschid; and his
ministers' vestments woven of goats' hair and fine wool, stuffs of
price, many kinds of superb precious stones of various colors, formed
the burden of forty camels, which bore these presents to the King, his
father-in-law, in the city of Bagdad.

During the night Princess Djouher thought in her heart: "If the two
kings meet, there will necessarily be discord, and at the end
separation." Having thus thought she said to her husband: "O sovereign
of the world, do not set out at the same time with me, for in my
opinion the meeting of the two kings would have as a final result a
disagreement. Permit me therefore to start first with the three
children, that I may present them to my father and mother. Give the
command to conduct me to the country of Bagdad, near my father, to
whomsoever you shall judge worthy of your confidence for this mission."

When the prince heard these words of the princess whom he loved so
tenderly and whose wishes he granted, he ordered his ministers and
chiefs to arrange the transport of the princess and her children.
Addressing the ministers he said as follows: "O you my ministers, whom
among you can I charge to conduct safely my wife and three children to
Bagdad, near their ancestor King Haroun-er-Raschid?"

No one among them dared approach and speak. All held silence. Then the
prince, addressing the oldest minister of all, said:

"O my minister, it is you to whom, following the dictates of my heart,
I can trust to accompany my wife and three children. For I have always
found you loyal and faithful to me. Beside, you are older than the
other ministers. And you have the fear of God the most high and worthy
of all praise as well as respect for your King."

The minister said: "O my lord, it is in all sincerity that your servant
puts above his head the commands of your Majesty. I shall do my whole
duty in conducting the princess and her children to the King Haroun-er-
Raschid."

So the King Chah Djouhou trusted his wife and his three children to
this perfidious minister, reposing upon the promise he had made. Forty
camels were laden with presents, forty nurses for the children, one
hundred ladies in the suite of the princess, a thousand cavaliers, well
armed and well equipped, formed the escort. The princess took leave of
her husband. He held her clasped in his arms, and, weeping, covered her
and his three children with kisses. He bade her to present his homage
to her father the Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid, his salutations to her
elder brother Minbah-Chahaz, and to place at the feet of their
majesties a thousand and a thousand apologies, and to make his excuses
to her brother Minbah-Chahaz. Then the prince said to the wicked
minister:

"O my minister, you must go now, and lead the camel of my wife, for I
have perfect confidence in you. Above all, guard her well."

But the King did not lean upon God the most high and worthy of all
praise, and that is why God punished him.

When the prince had finished speaking to the minister the latter said:
"O my lord, King of the world, your servant bears your command on his
head." So the cavalcade started on the march. Princess Djouher-Manikam
mounted her camel with her three children. A body-guard held the van.
She proceeded accompanied by the wretched minister and all the escort,
wending from day to day toward the city of Bagdad. They had reached one
of the halting-places when day was turning into night. The minister
then erected a tent so that the princess might repose in it. The people
put up their tents all about. Princess Djouher-Manikam dismounted from
her camel and entered the tent, with her three children. The tents of
the nurses and ladies-in-waiting surrounded the tent of the princess in
a circle. In the middle of the night a violent rain began to fall. Then
the wretched minister, stirred by Satan, was stirred in his heart. He
thought: "The King's wife is most beautiful; beautiful, indeed, as her
name, Djouher-Manikam. I must marry her."

So the rebel minister started, and entered the tent of the princess,
and asked her to marry him. He found her seated by her three children,
occupied in chasing away the mosquitoes. When the princess saw him
enter her tent she asked him: "O my minister, what brings you to my
tent at this hour in the middle of the night?"

The minister answered, "I have come to beg you to marry me."

The princess then said: "Is that what brings you here? And it was to
you that the King intrusted me on account of your great age, and as if
you were my father. It was in you that he put all his confidence that
you would take us safely, me and my children, to my venerable father,
King Haroun-er-Raschid. What must be your nature, that you should so
betray his trust?"

The wretched minister replied: "If you refuse to marry me, I will kill
your children."

"Never," said the princess, "never shall I consent to marry you. And if
you kill my children, what can I do against the decree of God, save to
invoke his name?"

The minister killed one of the children. When it was dead, he made the
same demand on the princess for the second time, and she answered:
"Never shall I consent to marry you."

The minister said: "If you refuse, I shall kill another of your
children."

The Princess Djouher-Manikam answered: "If you slay my child, it is by
the decree of God, and I submit to his will."

The minister killed the second child.

"No," repeated the princess. "Never shall I consent to wed you."

The wretched minister said: "Then I will kill your third child."

"If you kill him, what can I do but to submit to the will of God, and
invoke his name?" The third son of the King was killed.

Questioned anew, the princess said again, "Never shall I marry you."

And the wicked minister said: "If you will not marry me, I will kill
you, too."

Then the princess thought in her heart: "If I do not appear to yield,
he will kill me, too, without a doubt. I must employ a trick." Then she
said: "Await me here, until I wash from my clothes and my body the
stains of my children's blood."

The minister accursed of God replied: "Very well. I await you here."

Then the princess Djouher went out of her tent. The rain was falling in
torrents. The princess, fleeing precipitately, walked during the whole
night, not knowing where she was going. She had walked many hours when
day broke. The princess arrived thus near a tree in the midst of the
plain, and, having measured its height with her eyes, she climbed into
it. At this moment there passed along the road a merchant who had made
his sales and was returning to the city of Bassrah. His name was
Biyapri. Passing beneath the tree he raised his eyes and beheld a woman
seated in the tree.

"Who are you?" he said; "are you woman or djinn?"

"I am neither demon nor djinn, but a descendant of the prophet of God
(may blessings rest upon him), a disciple of the prophet Mahomet, envoy
of God."

Biyapri climbed up the tree, put her on his camel, and taking up his
journey conducted her to the country of Bassrah. Arriving at his house
he desired to marry her. But she put him off saying: "Wait, for I have
made a solemn vow before God not to look upon the face of a man for
forty days. When the time expires, that will be possible. But if these
forty days have not yet run I should surely die." So Biyapri installed
her on his latticed roof and lavished attention and care upon her.

Immediately after the flight of the princess Djouher-Mani-kam the
minister commanded the whole escort to return and present itself to the
King Chah Djouhou. He said to his people: "O all your servants of the
Queen, see what has been her conduct. Her three children are dead, and
it is she who killed them. After that she disappeared. Where has she
taken refuge? Nobody in the world knows that. As for you, depart, bear
the bodies of his three children to King Chah Djouhou, and tell him all
the circumstances."

Arriving in the presence of the King, they reported all the
circumstances of the minister's treachery toward the princess, and the
murder of his three children. They added that the minister had
departed, leaving word that he had gone to find the princess, and had
taken with him his own three sons, forty soldiers, and the treasure.

When the prince had heard these words he was struck with a stupor. But
his sorrow at having let the princess go without him was useless. He
caused the three young princes to be buried. The King shed tears, and
all the people of the household filled the air with cries and sobs, so
that the noise seemed like the bursts of thunder, while the funeral
ceremonies were proceeding according to the customs of the greatest
kings. After that the King descended from his royal throne and became a
dervish, the better to seek in all lands his well-beloved spouse. He
had with him three slaves only. One of them was named Hestri.

"Go," he said to him, "go seek your mistress in all countries." And he
gave him a horse and some provisions.

Hestri said: "May your Majesty be happy! O lord, King of the world,
whatever be your commands, your servant places them upon his head."
Hestri bowed low, then mounted his horse and rode away toward the city
of Bassrah.

After proceeding some time he reached Bassrah, and passed by the house
of Biyapri. At this very moment the princess Djouher-Manikam was
sitting on the roof of Biyapri's house. She looked attentively at the
face of Hestri as he was passing by the house and called to him saying:
"Hestri, what brings you here?"

Hestri, casting his glance toward the roof, saw the princess Djouher-
Manikam and said to her: "I was sent by your husband to seek you,
princess."

She replied: "Go away, for the present. Come back when it is night. As
it is broad daylight now I fear lest Biyapri should discover our
departure."

Hestri, bowing low, replied, "Very well, princess." He walked here and
there, waiting till night should come. When it was dark he returned to
the house of Biyapri and waited a few minutes. Then he called the
princess.

"Wait," she said, "for Biyapri is still watching." Hestri stooped down,
and fell asleep near Biyapri's house, having first of all tied the
bridle of the horse to his girdle.

The princess Djouher-Manikam descended from the roof, and mounted the
horse while Hestri was yet sleeping. She sat on the horse waiting till
Hestri should awake. But an Athiopian robber, who had come to rob the
storehouse of Biyapri, saw the horse whose bridle was attached to the
belt of Hestri. He unfastened the bridle and led the horse to the
middle of the plain. In the mind of the princess it was Hestri who was
thus leading the horse. But the moon having risen, the Athiopian saw
seated upon the horse a woman of a striking and marvellous beauty. The
heart of the Athiopian was filled with joy. He said in his heart:

"For a very long time have I been stealing riches. Truly, I have
acquired no small store of jewels, pearls, precious stones, gold and
silver, and magnificent vestments of all sorts. But all that is nothing
in comparison with the marvel I have just now found and who will become
my wife, the light of my eyes, and the fruit of my heart. Now shall I
enjoy in peace the happiness of having such a wife."

The house of the Athiopian robber was seated on the top of a hill. He
conducted the princess thither, showed her all it contained, and gave
it to her, saying: "O my future bride, it is to you that all which this
house contains belongs. Make use of it according to your good
pleasure." The princess said, "First of all, be tranquil." And she
thought in her heart: "This is my destiny. First I was with Biyapri,
and now I have fallen into the hands of an Aethiopian robber. It is by
the will of God that this has happened to his servant." The Athiopian
robber was bent on having the marriage celebrated at once, but the
princess said: "I cannot be married now, for I have made a vow to God
the most high not to see the face of a man for three days."

The Athiopian robber desired to drink, and said: "Come, let us drink
together."

"In my opinion," observed the princess, "if we begin to drink both
together you will become heavy with wine, and I, too. Then they will
take me far from you and kill you. Come, I will fill your cup and you
shall drink first. When you have drunk enough, then I will drink in my
turn, and you shall fill my cup."

The Athiopian robber was very joyful at these words of the princess.
"What you say is true," said he. He received with great pleasure the
cup from the hands of the princess and drank. After emptying the cup
many times he fell down in the stupor of intoxication, losing his
senses and becoming like a dead man. The princess Djouher-Manikam put
on a magnificent costume of a man, and adding a weapon something like a
_kandjar_, went out of the house. Then mounting her horse she rode
forward quickly and came to the foot of the hill. She directed her
course toward the country of Roum, and continuing her journey from
forest to forest, and from plain to plain, she reached the gate of the
fortifications of the city of Roum at the moment when the King of that
country had just died.

When the princess Djouher-Manikam had arrived outside the
fortifications of Roum, she sat down in the _baley, near the fort. She
was marvellously beautiful, and her vestments, all sparkling with gold,
were adorned with precious stones, pearls, and rubies. A man happening
to pass by saw her, and was seized with astonishment and admiration.
For in the country of Roum there was nobody who could compare with this
young man, so handsome and so magnificently attired. He asked:

"Whence come you and why did you come here?"

The princess answered: "I know not the place where I am at this moment.
I came from the city of Damas."

This citizen of Roum took leave and went away to present himself to the
vezir and tell what he had seen. The vezir, having heard him, went out
promptly to find the young man. As soon as he had approached him and
had seen his remarkable beauty and his splendid vestments decorated
with precious stones, pearls, and rubies, the vezir seated himself by
him and said:

"Young man, whence do you come, and why did you come to this land?"

The princess answered: "I wish to travel through the world for my
pleasure. That is my will."

The vezir replied: "Would you like to have us make you King of this
country?" The princess replied: "For what reason should I wish to be
king in this country? And by what means could it be achieved?"

The vezir replied: "Our King is dead."

"Is there no child?" asked the princess.

"The King has left a child," answered the vezir, "but he is still very
little, and incapable of governing his subjects. That is why we will
make you King of this country."

The princess Djouher-Manikam answered: "Why not? What prevents? If you
all will follow my counsel I will accept the throne of this country."

The ministers said, "And why should we not follow the commands of my
lord?"

The vezir conducted her to the palace. All the ministers of state and
the high officers assembled to proclaim as their king the princess
Djouher-Manikam. That done, the princess took the name of Radja Chah
Djouhou.

After reigning some time her spirit of justice and her perfect equity
in the government of her subjects rendered her name celebrated in all
the foreign countries. Radja Chah Djouhou said to her minister:

"O minister, have built for me a _baley_ outside the fort." And the
ministers and the officers commanded them in haste to construct the
_baley_. As soon as it was built they came to announce it to the King.
The latter said:

"O my vezir, is there in my kingdom a man who knows how to paint?"

"Yes, my lord, king of the world, there is a very skilful painter
here."

"Let him come to me."

"Immediately, my lord," said the vezir, and he ordered a slave to go
and summon the painter. The painter came in all haste and entered the
presence of Radja Chah Djouhou, bowing his head to the floor. The
prince said to him:

"O painter, have you a daughter who knows how to paint?"

The painter answered: "Yes, my lord, king of the world, I have a
daughter very skilful in the art of painting."

"Tell your child to come here."

The painter bowed again and went to find his daughter. "O my child," he
said, "the fruit of my heart, come, the King calls you."

Then the painter's daughter quickly set out, accompanied by her father.
They together entered the presence of the King, who was still
surrounded by his ministers and his officers. The painter and his
daughter bowed their heads to the floor. The prince said:

"Painter, is this your daughter?"

"O my lord, king of the world, yes, this is my daughter."

"Come with me into the interior of the palace." And at the same time
the prince started and entered his apartments, followed by the daughter
of the painter. He led the way to a retired place, and said: "My
daughter, make my portrait, I pray you, and try to have the resemblance
good." Then the princess Djouher-Manikam clothed herself in woman's
raiment, and in this costume she was ravishingly beautiful. That done,
she commanded the artist to paint her thus. She succeeded perfectly and
the portrait was a remarkable likeness, for the daughter of the painter
was very skilful. When her work was finished she received a large sum
in gold. The prince said to her:

"Come, sister, let this remain a secret. Reveal it not to anyone in the
world. If you tell it I will slay you, with your father and your
mother."

The daughter of the painter said: "O my lord, king of the world, how
could your servant disobey your Majesty's commands?"

She bowed low, and asked permission to go home.

Radja Chah Djouhou, in the presence of his ministers and his subjects,
said to the vizier: "O vizier, place this portrait in the _baley_
outside the fort, and have it guarded by forty men. If anyone coming to
this portrait begins to weep or kiss it, seize him and bring him before
me." The portrait hung in the _baley_, and the vezir ordered an officer
to guard it with forty soldiers.

When the Athiopian robber came out of his drunken slumber he saw that
the princess Djouher-Manikam was no longer in his house. So he went
out-of-doors weeping, and took up his journey, going from country to
country until he arrived at the city of Roum. There he saw a _baley_,
and hanging there a portrait which bore a perfect resemblance to the
princess Djouher-Manikam. Quickly he climbed to the _baley_, and,
holding the portrait in his arms, he wept and covered it with kisses.

"O unhappy man that I am! Here is the portrait of my well-beloved for
whom I was seeking. Where can she be?"

The guards of the _baley_, seeing the act of the Athiopian, seized him
and bore him before the King. They told the deed.

The prince said: "Athiopian robber, why did you act thus in reference
to this picture?"

The Athiopian answered: "O my lord, king of the world, I ask you a
thousand and a thousand pardons. Your servant will tell the truth. If
they kill me I shall die; if they hang me I shall be lifted very high;
if they sell me I shall be carried very far away. O king of the world,
hear the words of your humble slave. A certain night I had started out
to rob. I found a horse, and on its back there was a woman of the most
marvellous beauty. I took her to my house. I fell asleep in my cups. My
beloved one disappeared. I became mad, and so it is, O king of the
world, that your slave came to the fort and saw the portrait hanging at
the _baley_. This portrait is the faithful picture of my well-beloved.
That is why I weep."

The prince said: "O my vezir, let this man be carefully guarded. Treat
him well and give him plenty to eat." On the other hand, Biyapri, after
forty days, mounting the roof, saw that the princess Djouher was no
longer there. He became mad, abandoned his house and all his wealth,
and, becoming a dervish, went from country to country seeking the
princess Djouher-Manikam, without ever finding her. Coming to the
country of Roum he saw the _baley_ situated outside the fort, and
stopped there. Then he saw the portrait, and, observing it with the
closest attention, he began to weep. Then he took it in his arms and
covered it with kisses.

"Alas, my well-beloved!" he cried, "here indeed is your picture, but
where can I find you?" He was immediately seized by the guard and led
before the King of Roum.

"Biyapri," said the prince, "whence do you come, and why did you act
thus?" Biyapri answered: "O my lord, king of the world, your slave asks
pardon a thousand and a thousand times. I will tell the whole truth. If
they kill me, I shall die; if they hang me, I shall be lifted very
high; if they sell me, I shall be taken very far away. When I was
engaged in commerce I passed under a tree, and saw that in this tree
there was a woman of the most marvellous beauty. I took her and carried
her to the city of Bassrah and installed her on the roof of my
storehouse. A certain night she disappeared without my knowing where
she had gone. Then, O king of the world, I became as one mad and left
my native land. Arriving at the country of Roum I saw a _baley_ outside
the fort and came to sit down there. Then, my lord, I saw the portrait
hanging at the _baley_. It exactly resembles my beloved, whom I lost. I
pressed it in my arms and covered it with kisses. Such is the truth, O
king of the world."

The prince then said to his minister: "O minister, let this man be
carefully guarded and give him food and clothes."

The King of Damas, after abdicating the throne, had left his kingdom,
and in the costume of a dervish had started to travel through the
different countries. Arriving at Roum, the King Chah Djouhou saw a
_baley_ situated outside of the fort, and went to sit down near it. The
prince looking closely at the portrait, which was exactly like the
princess Djouher-Manikam, burst into a flood of tears and exclaimed:

"Alas! Fruit of my heart, my well-beloved, light of my eyes! It is,
indeed, your picture. But you, whom I seek, oh, where are you?"

Speaking thus, the prince took the portrait in his arms and covered it
with kisses. Seeing this, the guards of the _baley_ seized him and
carried him before the King.

The King said to him: "My lord, whence do you come? How have you
wandered into this country? And why did you behave thus about my
portrait?"

The King Chah Djouhou answered: "Know that my wife, who is named the
princess Djouher-Manikam, has disappeared far from me. It is for that
reason that I have left my kingdom, and that I, dressed as a dervish,
have walked from country to country, from plain to plain, from village
to village, seeking her whom I have never been able to find. But
arriving in your Majesty's country I saw hanging at the _baley_ that
portrait, which is of a striking resemblance to my wife. It is for this
reason that I wept in contemplating this picture."

The princess smiled, and at the same time her heart was softened at
seeing the conduct of her husband. She said to her prime minister: "O
my minister, I confide this person to your care. Treat him worthily,
give him the best of food and a suite of attendants. He is the King of
Damas."

The minister therefore, by command of the princess, departed and
conducted the King of Damas to a fine house, furnished and equipped
according to the needs of kings.

The minister took all the riches which had been intended as presents
for the King Haroun-er-Raschid. The ingots of gold and of silver, the
rich garments in fine stuffs of the country of Rouzoungga, as well as
the vestments of the princess Djouher-Manikam and of her three
children, were transported and sold in the city of Bagdad. But the King
Haroun-er-Raschid, seeing that his name and that of his daughter, the
princess Djouher-Manikam, were graven on these ingots of gold and
silver, seized all these riches.

The minister of the country of Damas said, "These riches are mine."

On his side the King Haroun-er-Raschid said: "These riches are mine,
for my name and that of my child are engraved on these ingots of gold
and silver."

The minister said, "Since your Majesty declares that these treasures
are yours, we must try this case in a court of justice."

 The King of Bagdad answered: "It is well. We will go wherever you
wish."

"Very well," said the minister; "let us go then before the King of the
country of Roum. That prince has the reputation of being extremely
just. Each of us shall plead his cause."

The prince answered: "It is well." The minister replied: "O king of the
world, let us start without delay."

So the King Haroun-er-Raschid set out with his son Min-bah-Chahaz, his
chief warrior, and his soldiers. The cadi accompanied the prince. On
his side, the minister of the country of Damas started, accompanied by
his three sons and forty soldiers of the country of Damas. After
proceeding some time, they arrived at the city of Roum and entered the
fortifications. Each one of them presented himself before the King and
pleaded his cause.

The King Haroun-er-Raschid expressed himself as follows: "O king of the
world! I present myself before your Majesty to ask your impartial
judgment. The minister of the country of Damas brought to Bagdad, among
other precious objects, ingots of gold and ingots of silver, on which
are engraved my name and that of my daughter, the princess Djouher-
Manikam. I seized these, and come to your Majesty to decide my claim to
them."

The King of Roum said: "If it pleases God the most high, this affair
shall be judged with the best of my powers." The King of Roum
continued: "My officers and you, my ministers and chiefs, seek all the
divine inspiration to decide the difference existing between the King
of Bagdad and the minister of Damas."

The officers bowed low and said: "O my lord, king of the world,
whatever they may be, we shall put the commands of your Majesty above
our heads and shall carry them out to the letter." And they deliberated
on the character of the dispute.

The King of Bagdad declared: "These objects are precious to me, for
they bear engraven upon them the names of myself and my child."

On the other hand, and at the same time, the minister Damas declared,
"These precious objects are mine."

The ministers and chiefs were very much embarrassed, and said to the
King: "O king of the world, we, all of us, are unable to judge this
dispute. It is too difficult for us. Only the impartial judgment of
your Majesty can decide it."

The prince said: "It is well. I will pronounce sentence, if it please
God the most high, provided that you consent to accept it."

The King of Bagdad answered: "O king of the world, judge between us
according to your impartial justice."

The King of Roum then said: "O minister of Damas, and you, King of
Bagdad, is it the wish of both of you that I should give judgment
according to the judgment of God the most high?"

And they both answered: "That is what we ask, the judgment of God."

The prince replied: "If you consent on both sides, it is well."

"I consent to it," said the minister of Damas.

"And I, too," said the King of Bagdad.

The King of Roum then spoke in these terms: "In conformity with the law
of the most high God, I ask this question of the King of Bagdad: Have
you a daughter?"

The King of Bagdad replied: "Yes, king of the world, I have a daughter
and a son."

"And have you at present these two children?"

The King of Bagdad answered: "I have my son, but my daughter--I lost
her."

The King of Roum, continuing, said: "What is the cause of the loss of
your daughter?" The King of Bagdad answered: "O king of the world, hear
my story. While I was gone on a pilgrimage with my wife and my son,
whose name is Minbah-Chahaz, I left my daughter to watch over my
palace. Arriving at the end of my pilgrimage, I sent home a letter to
the cadi, conceived as follows: 'May peace be with the cadi: I shall
wait still for the grand pilgrimage about a year longer. As for all
that concerns my kingdom, my palace, and my daughter, the princess
Djouher-Manikam, watch with greatest care, and beware of any negligence
in the protection of my kingdom and my child.' Some time later the cadi
sent me a letter at Mecca, couched in these words: 'O king of the
world, your servant has received the command to watch over the palace
and the princess. But the princess now desires to marry me.' After I
had read the letter from the cadi I called my son Minbah-Chahaz, and
said to him: 'Start at once for Bagdad, and slay your sister.' My son
Minbah-Chahaz started immediately for Bagdad, and killed his sister.
Then he returned and found me at Mecca. His cutlass was still blood-
stained. Then I cried: 'Praise be to God the Lord of the universe, our
shame is effaced.' Such is my story, O king of the world."

The King of Roum said: "It is well. Now I shall pronounce judgment."
And addressing the minister of Damas he said to him: "O minister of
Damas, tell me the truth if you wish that at the day of judgment the
prophet should intercede for you (may the peace and blessings of God be
upon him!). Speak and tell the truth. Say whence come these riches, in
order that I may pronounce my judgment between you."

The minister of the King of Damas said: "O my lord, king of the world,
I will lay at the foot of your Majesty's throne the completed story
from the beginning. I received a mission from the King Chah Djouhou: 'O
my minister,' he said, 'start, I send you to the city of Bagdad, taking
my three children to their grandfather, and my wife, the princess
Djouher-Manikam, to her mother and her father, the King Haroun-er-
Raschid.' I set out, therefore, with the escort which accompanied the
princess Djouher-Manikam, and we arrived at our first halting-place.
When it was night I erected a tent, and the people of the escort all
put up tents around that of the princess. But Satan breathed into my
heart a temptation. This thought came to me: 'The wife of the King is
wonderfully beautiful, and she has such a pretty name! I will go and
ask her to marry me.' So I entered her tent. At that moment she was
seated by her sleeping children, occupied in keeping away the
mosquitoes. The princess demanded, 'O my minister, why do you come
here?' And I answered, 'I have come to ask you to marry me.' The
princess said: 'Have you no fear of God the most high? No, I cannot
marry you. What would become of me if I should do such a thing?' Then I
said, 'If you will not agree to marry me, I will kill one of your
children.' The princess answered: 'If you kill my child it will be by
the judgment of God, and what can I do but to invoke his name?' Then I
killed one of the children. When he was dead I asked again if she would
marry me, and I killed another of the children. When this one was dead
I asked the same question. The princess answered, 'I cannot marry when
I am already married.' I said to her, 'If you will not, then I will
kill the third of your children.' The princess Djouher-Manikam
answered, 'If you kill my third child, it will be by the judgment of
God, and what can I do but invoke his name, for I am only a woman?' So
I killed the third child. After the death of this last child of the
King, I put again my question to the princess. She would not consent to
marry me. I said to her, 'If you don't, I will kill you.' She answered:
'If you kill me, it is the decree of God. But wait awhile, for I wish
to wash my garments and cleanse the traces of my children's blood from
my body.' I said, 'It is well. We will have the wedding-feast to-
morrow.' She left the tent. It was raining in torrents. I could not
discover where she went. Such is my story, O king of the world."

The King said, "Minister of the country of Damas, have you any sons?"

He answered, "Yes, my lord, king of the world, I have three sons."

The prince said: "Let your three sons come here, in order that I may
give judgment quickly, according to the law instituted by the prophet
(may the peace and blessings of God be upon him!). Behold what his law
prescribes: The minister killed the children of the princess Djouher-
Manikam. It is not, therefore, the minister who should be punished with
death, but his children should be slain. The execution of this judgment
will be the just application of the law of retaliation between the
minister and the princess."

The minister summoned his three sons. As soon as they had come, he
pointed them to the King of Roum.

The latter said to his minister, "O minister, where is the Athiopian
whom they brought here?" The Athiopian robber was brought out, and
prostrated himself before the King of Roum.

The King of Roum said to him: "Athiopian, return to your own country
and change your mode of life. You will never see again the woman for
whom you are seeking." And the prince gave him a _keti_ of gold.

Then the prince said: "O my minister, where is Biyapri? Let them bring
him here." So they brought Biyapri. When he arrived he bowed low before
the prince.

The prince said: "Biyapri, go back to your own country and change your
conduct. The woman whom you seek you will never see again." And the
prince made him a gift of two _keti_ of gold.

The King of Roum then said: "Let all assemble. I am about to pronounce
judgment between the King of Bagdad and the minister of Damas." The
minister and the officers assembled therefore in the presence of the
King, together with many of his subjects.

The King of Roum said: "O my executioner, let the three children of the
minister of Damas be all killed; such is the divine command." So the
children of the minister of Damas were all three killed.

After they were dead the prince said: "Minister, return to the country
of Damas, with a rag for your girdle, and during your last days change
your conduct. If you do not know it, I am the princess Djouher-Manikam,
daughter of the Sultan of Bagdad, wife of Chah Djouhou, my lord, and
the sister of Minbah-Chahaz. God has stricken your eyes with blindness
on account of your crimes toward me. It is the same with the cadi of
the city of Bagdad."

The minister of Damas, seized with fear, trembled in all his limbs. He
cast himself at the feet of the princess Manikam, and thus prostrated
he implored pardon a thousand and a thousand times. Then he returned to
Damas all in tears, and overwhelmed with grief at the death of his
three sons. The cadi, covered with shame on account of his treachery to
the Sultan of Bagdad, fled and expatriated himself.

The King of Roum commanded them to bring the King Chah Djouhou and give
him a garment all sparkling with gold, and he sent him to dwell in the
company of his father-in-law, the Sultan of Bagdad, and his brother-in-
law, the prince Minbah-Chahaz.

Then the princess Djouher-Manikam retired. She entered the palace and
returned clad in the garments of a woman. She then went out,
accompanied by ladies of the court, and went to present herself to her
father, the Sultan of Bagdad. She bowed before her father, her brother
the prince Minbah-Chahaz, and her husband, the King Chah Djouhou. The
princess said: "O all of you, lords and warriors of the country of
Roum, know that I am a woman, and not a man. Behold my father, the
Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid, King of Bagdad. Behold my brother, whose name
is Minbah-Chahaz; and behold my husband, the King Chah Djouhou, who
reigns over the country of Damas. From the time when you placed me upon
the throne of Roum, if I have committed any fault by error or by
ignorance, you must excuse me, for constantly the servants of God
commit faults by error or ignorance. It is only God alone who forgets
not, nor neglects, and is free from error or ignorance."

The grandees of the country of Roum said: "Never has your Majesty
committed the least fault, either by ignorance or by error, during the
time you have reigned over the country of Roum. Nevertheless, among the
judgments just now rendered there was a fault committed by your
glorious Majesty. The minister killed, the princess killed, both did it
voluntarily. It was a fault of judgment for the princess Djouher-
Manikam to have killed the children of the minister, just as the
minister committed a fault in killing the children of the princess.
There was a likeness there. Still, if it pleases her Majesty to remain
upon the throne of Roum, we should all be very glad of it."

The princess Djouher said: "I shall take leave of you, my lords. It is
good that we should make the young prince king, and that he should
replace me on the throne."

The ministers and the officers of Roum responded, "Whatever be the
commands of your Majesty, we place them above our heads."

Then the princess made the royal prince her successor, and the
ministers and officers and subjects all bowed low, placed their hands
above their heads, and proclaimed him King.

The princess Djouher-Manikam said: "O my child, here are the last
instructions your mother gives you: You must practise justice so that
God will make strong your realm. To you, my ministers and officers, I
confide my child. If he commits some faults by negligence or by
ignorance, I pray you take them not too much to heart, for my child is
young, and he has not yet attained all the maturity of his judgment."

The ministers and officers answered: "O your Majesty, may your
prosperity grow forever! How could it be possible for us to disobey
your commands?"

The princess replied: "O my child, above all must you observe justice
and be patient and liberal toward your ministers and officers and all
your subjects, so that the favors of God may increase upon your person
and that your kingdom may be protected by God the most high by the
grace of the intercession of the prophet Mahomet, the envoy of God (may
the, peace and blessings of God be with him!). O my child, you must
govern all your subjects with a spirit of justice, for in this world,
until death, we ought to seek the truth. O my child, above all forget
not my last instructions." Then, taking in her arms the royal child,
she kissed him.

The Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid having told the Sultan of Roum that he
wished to return to the country of Bagdad, the Sultan gave orders to
his ministers to assemble the grandees, the officers, and the soldiers,
with elephants, horses, and instruments of music. All came with
presents, for the Sultan of Roum wished to accompany the Sultan Haroun-
er-Raschid as far as Bagdad and carry him the presents. The favorable
moment having arrived, the Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid departed from Roum,
directing his way to the country of Bagdad, from plain to plain, and
from halting-place to halting-place. After journeying some time, they
rejoicing all the way, they arrived at the country of Bagdad.

The ministers, the chiefs, and the soldiers came out to meet the Sultan
Haroun-er-Raschid, and they entered the palace. Then the Queen hastened
to find the Sultan and her daughter, the princess Djouher-Manikam.
Meeting her daughter, she pressed her in her arms and covered her with
kisses. She said in tears: "Alas, my child! the fruit of my heart! I,
your mother thought that she would never see you again." And she
covered her body with tears and kisses, while she kept repeating,
"Alas, my child! I thought you lost forever." Then the Queen bowed
before the Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid. Her son, Minbah-Chahaz, then came
to bow before his mother, but the latter pressed him in her arms and
kissed him. Then her son-in-law, King Chah Djouhou, advanced and bowed
before the Queen in his turn. And she pressed him in her arms and
kissed him. All were in tears.

The Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid started for the hall of audience, and gave
orders to one of his heralds to assemble his ministers, his warriors,
and his subjects. When they were all gathered together the Sultan said:
"Now I wish to entertain the ministers, the chiefs, and the officers
who escorted us here." When the Sultan had finished entertaining them
they desired to take leave and return to the country of Roum. The
Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid made them gifts of vestments of honor, to each
according to his rank. They prostrated themselves at his feet, and then
returned in peace to the country of Roum.

Afterward, the Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid ordered one of his heralds to
assemble his ministers, his officers, and his subjects. Once gathered
together, the prince said: "O all of you, my ministers and my officers,
you must build me a house of baths seven stories high, on the public
square of Bagdad."

All responded, "O my lord, king of the world, whatever your commands
may be, your servants place them above their heads." And all,
ministers, officers, and subjects, gave themselves to the work, each of
them doing what was directed by the architect. After some time, the
palace of baths was finished. It was sumptuously adorned with curtains
of silk, canopies, tapestries woven with gold and fringed with pearls.
Rugs embroidered with gold were stretched on the different floors, and
there was a quantity of torches and lanterns.

Then the builders came before the King and said: "O my lord, king of
the world, your slaves have finished their work according to the
commands of your Majesty."

The King Haroun-er-Raschid gave thanks unto God the most high, worthy
of all praise, the true Lord who accords to his servants all their
needs.

Then the festivals began. For forty days and forty nights the bands
never stopped playing. There were sports, banquets, amusements of all
sorts. They gave themselves noisily to pleasure, because the Sultan was
going to proceed to the ceremony of the bath of the two spouses, his
children. When the watches were finished and the favorable moment had
come, the Sultan was arrayed in a magnificent garment embroidered with
gold, while the princess Djouher-Manikam was adorned by her mother with
superb veils and vestments trimmed with jewels, with pearls and
precious stones of an incomparable richness. The spouses thus adorned,
the Sultan made them mount a palanquin. His son, Minbah-Cha-haz, was
clad in a splendid costume.

The Sultan mounted his horse Sembaran, and his saddle was of carved
gold. Surrounded by young princes and lords, by officers of his court
and the standards, Haroun-er-Raschid marched at the head. He advanced,
followed by princes, ministers, and officers. The wives of the grandees
accompanied the Queen with her maids-of-honor, and all the musical
instruments gave forth their harmonious sounds. Seven times they made
the circuit of the city. When the two spouses had arrived at the foot
of the Palace of Baths the Sultan made them ascend. Then came the
spouses of the grandees with the Queen, who showered them with rice-
powder mixed with amber and musk, and poured on their heads spikenard
and _curcuma_ (turmeric). They were both plunged into a bath of rose-
water and extracts of all sorts of aromatic flowers, together with
water from the sacred fountain of Zemzem.

The ceremonies of the bath finished, the two spouses went out of the
Palace of Baths and went into the King's palace. On their arrival, they
served a repast to the princes, the _orilemas_, the doctors of the law,
the priests, the ministers, the officers, the common people, men and
women. All without exception took part in the feast. When it was ended
one of the doctors of the law recited the prayer asking God for perfect
happiness, sheltered from all danger in this life and the next. Then he
sprinkled showers of the most charming perfumes.

After that the Chah Djouhou went to find the Sultan, and said to him:
"O my lord, king of the world, I have to ask your Majesty a favor and
pardon. I wish to take leave of your Majesty and return to the country
of Damas, for the country of Damas is forsaken, O my lord."

The Sultan said, "It is well, my lord. Your country, truly, is
separated from its King. If it were not for your kingdom I would wish
never to be separated from you, now that I have my daughter back again.
But if I am inclined to commit a fault, do not comply with it."

Radja Chah Djouhou answered; "Your daughter is like a soul which has
entered my body. That is how I feel. But the countless favors of your
Majesty to me, I place them above my head."

The Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid then said to his prime minister: "O my
minister, get ready to start 3,000 soldiers and 300 horsemen. And have
elephants or horses well equipped to transport my two children, husband
and wife." When the escort was ready, then the Sultan commanded them to
open the place where his treasures were stored, and forty-four camels
were laden with riches, with vestments of woven gold and precious
objects such as are found only in the palaces of kings.

All these preparations being finished, Radja Chah Djouhou took leave of
his father-in-law, his mother-in-law, and his brother-in-law, Minbah-
Chahaz. The latter all held in their arms and covered with kisses the
princess Djouher-Manikam, as well as Radja Chah Djouhou. He and his
brother-in-law Minbah-Chahaz wept as they embraced, and the people of
the palace burst into sobs with a noise like that of the waves breaking
on the seashore. Finally the princess Djouher and the King Chah
Djouhou, after bowing before their father, mother, and brother, set out
for the country of Damas, to the imposing sound of all the instruments
of music. The Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid and his son, Minbah-Chahaz,
conducted them outside of the fortifications. When they were far off,
the Sultan went back to his palace, walking sadly with his son, Minbah-
Chahaz, and praying God to bless his children.

After some time on the journey, the King Chah Djouhou arrived at the
country of Damas. The officers and the soldiers sallied from the
fortifications of Damas and went to meet the prince. The ministers and
the officers bowed low at his feet, all rejoicing over the happy return
and perfect health of the King and Queen. The prince entered his
palace, and the two spouses lived full of tenderness for each other.

I will not prolong this story of the princess Djouher-Manikam, which
has become celebrated in all countries to windward and to leeward. I
close it here, giving my best wishes to those who shall read or hear
it, and particularly to those who shall copy it!




MAKOTA RADJA-RADJA;

OR,

THE CROWN OF KINGS

[_Translated by Aristide Marre and C. C. Starkweather_]


Kings who are of the true faith, who have wisdom and follow justice,
cause men worthy of their confidence to travel through their kingdom,
to serve as their eyes and ears, and to make reports on the state and
condition of their subjects, so that, knowing the cause, they may
examine for themselves the conduct of the servants of God. But there
are kings who do not rest contented with the report of their servants,
and go themselves by night to see the condition and hear the complaints
of subjects. Then they make by day a thorough examination of the
matters thus come to their knowledge, in order to regulate them with
justice and equity.

A story will illustrate this. Zeyd Ibries Selam tells what follows: The
prince of the believers, the Caliph Omar (may God be satisfied with
him!), judged the servants of God with equity during the day, and after
pronouncing his judgments he went out of the city on the side toward
the cemetery called Bakia-el-Gharkada. There he cut stone to gain money
enough for the maintenance of his house, and when night had come he
went through the city to know the good and evil of the servants of God.
One night, says Zeyd Ibries Selam, "I accompanied the prince of the
believers, Omar. When he was outside of Medina, he perceived a fire in
an out-of-the-way place, and turned his steps thither. Scarcely had he
arrived when he heard a woman with three children, and the latter were
crying. The woman said: 'O God the most high, I beseech thee, make Omar
suffer what I am suffering now. He sleeps satiated with food, while I
and my children are starving.' The prince of the believers, Omar,
hearing these words, went to the woman, and with a salutation said,
'May I approach?'

"The woman answered, 'If it be by way of goodness, come.'

"He approached her and questioned her about her situation.

"The woman said: 'I come from a far place; and as it was dark when I
arrived here, I could not enter the city. So I stopped at this place.
My children and I are suffering from hunger and we cannot sleep.'

"The Caliph inquired, 'What is there in this kettle?'

"The woman answered: 'Nothing but water. I put it in the kettle so that
the children should imagine that I was cooking rice--perhaps, then,
they would go to sleep and stop crying so loudly.'

"As soon as Omar had heard these words he returned promptly to the city
of Medina. Arriving at a shop where they sold flour, he bought some and
put it into a sack. In another shop he bought some meat. Then lifting
the sack to his shoulders he carried it out of the city. I said to him:

"'O prince of the believers, give me this sack, that I may carry it for
you.'

"'If you bear the weight of this sack,' said his glorious Majesty to
me, 'who will bear the weight of my fault, and who will clear me from
the prayer of this woman in the affliction of her heart when she
complained to the Lord of my negligence?'

"Omar, having said these words, continued to walk in tears until he had
come near the woman and her children. Then he gave her the flour and
the meat, and they ate till their hunger was appeased. The woman with a
satisfied heart cried:

"'May God the most high hear my prayer and render you benefits, since
you are so full of compassion for the servants of God and are so much
better than Omar.'

"The Caliph said to her, 'O woman, blame not Omar, for he knew not how
you fared.'"

There was once a king in the country of Syria named Malik-es-Saleh,
very pious and just, and continually preoccupied with the state of his
subjects. They say that every night he went to the mosque, cemeteries,
and other solitary places, in search of strangers, fakirs, and poor
people who had neither home nor family. One night, arriving near a
mosque, he heard the voice of a man inside the edifice. He entered and
saw a fakir there. He could not see him distinctly, because he was
covered with a mat. But he heard him, and this is what he said: "O
Lord, if on the judgment-day thou shalt give a place in heaven to kings
who are forgetful of the fakirs and the poor, then, O Lord, grant that
I may not enter there."

Malik-es-Saleh, hearing these words, shed tears. He placed a piece of
stuff before the fakir with 100 tahil of silver, and said to him:

"O fakir, I have learned from the glorious prophet (may peace be with
him!) that fakirs become kings in heaven, after a life of self-
sacrifice on earth. Since I am King in this perishable world, I come to
you with the weakness of my nature and baseness of my being. I ask you
to be at peace with me, and to show yourself compassionate to me when
the moment of your glory in heaven shall have arrived."

When the Sultan Zayad sat upon the royal throne of Ikak, the country
was infested with malefactors, brigands, robbers, assassins, and the
like. The compounds were destroyed, the houses pillaged, and the people
killed. The inhabitants could not sleep a single night in quiet, nor
pass a single day in safety at home. A crowd of people came with their
complaints to the Sultan Zayad, saying:

"The compounds are destroyed, the houses are pillaged, and the men are
killed." All throughout Irak one heard nothing but reports of this
kind.

One Friday the Sultan went to the mosque to pray. He then shut all the
doors and said to the people in the mosque: "O servants of God now
present in this mosque, know that a duty is imposed upon me. I must
protect my subjects, for I shall have to give an account of my actions
on the day of judgment. There are now in this country large numbers of
malefactors, and many of my people have been ruined by them. It is my
duty to repress these disorders. So, then, listen to what I have to
say, and repeat it to those who are not present. I swear to you that
all who shall, three days from now, leave his house after the hour of
evening prayer, shall be put to death."

When the three days had passed and the fourth night arrived, Sultan
Zayad mounted his horse and traversed the city with an escort of
cavaliers. Outside of the city he came to a place and saw a man
standing under a tree in the middle of a flock of sheep and goats. He
said to him, "Who are you?"

The man said: "I come from a far-off village, and I am bringing sheep
and goats to the city to sell them, and with their price to buy what I
can for my wife and children. When arrived at this place I was so tired
that I could not enter the city, and was obliged to stay here, with the
intention of entering at daybreak and selling my sheep and goats."

Sultan Zayad, having heard this response, said: "Your words are true,
but what can I do? If I do not put you to death to-morrow, when the
news spreads, they will say Sultan Zayad is not faithful to his word.
They will regard me with disdain, and no one will obey my orders. And
the wicked ones will commit violent acts upon the good ones, and my
country will be ruined. Heaven is better for you than this world." So
he had him put to death and ordered that they should take his head.

During that same night all that he met were killed and beheaded. They
say that in the course of that first day 500 persons were put to death.
At dawn he had all these heads exposed on the highways, and published
this proclamation:

"Whosoever shall not obey the commands of Sultan Zayad shall suffer the
same fate."

When the people of the country saw these heads exposed at all sides on
the earth, they were frightened, and a respectful fear of Sultan Zayad
filled all hearts.

The second night Sultan Zayad went out again from the city, and that
night 500 persons were killed.

The third night he remained out of the city till morning, but he did
not meet a soul.

The following Friday Sultan Zayad went to the mosque, said his prayers,
and declared: "O servants of God, let no one after to-day shut the door
of his house nor his shop. I take upon myself the charge of replacing
those of your goods which shall be destroyed or stolen."

They all obeyed his orders, for they feared him greatly. Their doors
remained opened for several nights, and they never suffered the
slightest loss. But after a while a man complained to the Sultan,
saying, "Last night someone stole from me 400 tahil."

The Sultan said: "Can you swear to it?"

The man swore to the facts, and the Sultan had 400 tahil counted out to
him in place of those he had lost. The following Friday, after prayers,
forbidding anyone to leave the mosque, the Sultan said: "O servants of
the Lord, know that 400 tahil have been stolen from the shop of a
certain man. Unless you denounce the robber, not one of you shall
escape, but to-day shall all of you be put to death."

Now, as he had rigorously commanded attendance at Friday's prayer
service, the whole town had come to the mosque. They were seized with
fright, for they knew that the Sultan kept his word, and they denounced
the robber. The latter gave back the 400 tahil and received his
punishment.

A long time afterward the Sultan Zayad asked, "At what place in my
kingdom do they fear robbers most of all?"

"In the Valley of the Beni Ardou, in the country of Bassrah, for there
they are numerous."

Sultan Zayad one day had the highways and paths of the valley strewn
with gold and silver, precious stones, and stuffs of great price. All
these things lay there a long time and not one was taken. Then the
Sultan ordered them to take up these riches and give them to the fakirs
and the poor. Then he rendered thanks unto God that he had thus
securely established his law among his subjects.

Now it was in the times when Nouchirvau governed with justice and
equity, protecting his subjects and causing his kingdom to prosper. One
day he asked the grandees of his court, "Are there in my kingdom any
places deserted and without inhabitants?"

The grandees who were there answered, "O king of the world, we know not
in all your Majesty's realm a place which is not inhabited."

Nouchirvau kept silence, and for many days did not leave the palace. He
summoned to his private chamber a learned doctor named Bouzor Djambour,
and said to him:

"I desire to know with certainty if all parts of my realm are peopled,
or if there is any which is not. How can I be sure of this?"

"To have your Majesty's desire fully satisfied you have only to abstain
from leaving the palace."

Saying this, Bouzor Djambour took leave of the King and went to the
audience-chamber of the King. He spoke to those assembled there as
follows: "O ministers, generals, and all present, know that his Majesty
is ill. Now, in order to cure him you must find for me a little bit of
earth from a place in ruins and uninhabited. Those who are faithful
servants of the King will not hesitate to accomplish immediately this
act of devotion in his service, and to start at once in search of the
remedy I have named."

These words were scarcely uttered when men were sent out to search the
towns and villages and find some earth from a place in ruins and
uninhabited. They found only one house in ruins, and the governor of
the town said as follows about it: "A merchant once established in this
dwelling. He died and left much wealth. As none of his heirs came
forward, we closed the doors with stones and mortar, waiting for them
to arrive. So the house has fallen to ruin."

Then the people took a little earth from beneath the house and took it
to the King, telling him what had happened. Then the King called an
assembly and said:

"Know all that my illness proceeded only from my fear that there might
be in my kingdom a house in ruins. Now that it has been shown to me
that there exists in my whole realm not a single place in ruins, but
that the country is well populated, my malady is cured, seeing that my
kingdom is in a perfect condition."

In the time of Nouchirvau a man sold his compound to another man. The
buyer of this property, while engaged in making repairs, found in the
earth many jars filled with gold which someone had buried there. He
went immediately to the one who sold him the premises and told him the
news. The seller said:

"That gold is not mine, for I did not put it in the ground. I sold you
the compound; the discovery that you have made is yours."

The buyer replied: "I bought the premises alone, I did not buy gold;
so it is yours." As each refused to take the treasure, they went to the
King Nouchirvau and recounted the affair to him, saying, "This gold
should be the property of the King." But King Nouchirvau would not take
the gold. He asked the two men if they had children. They replied,
"Yes, my lord, we have each a child, a boy and a girl."

"Well," said the King, "marry the girl to the boy, and give them the
gold you found."

In ancient times a King of China fell ill and as a result of his malady
he lost his hearing. He wept in sorrow over this affliction and grew
very thin and pale. His ministers came one day and asked him to tell
them in writing his condition. He answered: "I am not ill, but so
weakened by my inquietude and distress that I can no longer hear the
words of my subjects when they come to make their complaints. I know
not how to act not to be guilty of negligence in the government of my
kingdom."

The ministers then said: "If the ears of your Majesty do not hear, our
ears shall replace those of the King, and we can carry to his Majesty
the complaints and regrets of his subjects. Why, then, should his
Majesty be so much disturbed over the weakening of his physical
forces?"

The King of China answered: "At the day of judgment it is I, and not my
ministers, who will have to render account of the affairs of my
subjects. I must therefore myself examine into their complaints and
troubles. I am sure that the burden of ruling would be lighter for me
if I could have tranquillity of spirit. But my eyes can see, although
my ears are deaf."

And he commanded them to publish this edict: "All who are victims of
injustice must reduce their complaints to writing, and bring them to
the King so that he may look into their troubles."

They tell also the following story: There was formerly in the city of
Ispahan, a king whose power and glory had filled him with pride. He
commanded his ministers to build him a palace in a certain place. The
ministers, with the architects, ordered the slaves to level the ground
so as to form a vast esplanade and cause to disappear all the houses of
the neighborhood. Among these houses, they say, there was one belonging
to an old woman who was very poor and without a family to help her. In
spite of her great age, she went to work as well as she could, in
different places, but could scarcely exist on her earnings. Her house
near the site selected for the new palace was old and in a tumble-down
condition. They tell that one day having gone a long distance to find
work she fell ill and remained a long time without being able to return
to her house. Then the architects who were building the palace said,
"We must not let this hovel remain standing so near the King's palace."
So they razed the hut and levelled the earth, and finished the palace
with all sorts of embellishments. The King, taking possession, gave a
grand house-warming festival.

Now on this very day it so happened that the old woman returned home.
Arriving she could find no traces of her house, and was stupefied. In
one hand she held a stick, in the other some dry wood for her fire. On
her back she bore a package of rice and herbs for cooking. She was
fatigued with a long journey and faint with hunger. When she saw that
her house had disappeared she knew not what to do nor where to go. She
burst into tears. The servants of the King drove her away, and as she
went, she fell and spilled her rice and herbs and fell down in the mud.
In this state of indescribable desolation she exclaimed, "O Lord,
avenge me on these tyrants!"

The old woman had hardly ceased speaking when the voice of some unseen
being was heard above her saying, "O woman, fly quickly from this spot,
for the anger of God is advancing upon the King." In horror she got up
and fled in all haste. Again she heard the voice saying, "O woman, look
behind you at the palace." She looked behind her and saw the palace,
the King, and all his ministers and servants engulfed in the bowels of
the earth by the will of God. And to this day that place vomits fire
and smoke as a mark and a warning.

In the Kitab Tarykh it is told that in ancient times under the kings of
Persia named Moah, who followed the rules of justice, men were happy.
But after these kings, Izdegherd-ibn-Chahryar reigned over Persia. By
his harsh tyranny he destroyed the high reputation of the kings of
Persia and wretchedly closed a series of reigns lasting 4,000 years and
noted all over the world for justice and equity. Under the rule of this
miserable tyrant countless numbers of men perished and a great many
prosperous and famous cities were devastated. All the better classes of
citizens were plunged into the most frightful distress and the most
lamentable desolation, and it would be impossible to tell how great and
wide-spread was the mourning. Now while all were groaning in affliction
the King made merry.

One day in his presumptuous pride he assembled his ministers and his
generals to show his royal power and his domination over the people. He
was seated on his throne, surrounded by a crowd of courtiers, when
suddenly a beautiful horse crossing the city at a gallop went straight
into the palace of the King, among the ministers and the grandees. They
all admired the beautiful horse, the like of which none had ever seen.
Nobody dared to seize him as he pranced from right to left. Suddenly
the horse approached the throne and laid down at the feet of the King.
The King patted and stroked him, and the horse never moved. Then the
wicked King began to laugh and said: "O my ministers, you see how far
my greatness goes. It is only at my throne that this wonderful horse
has stopped. I will mount and ride him on the esplanade." The King
ordered a saddle brought, and was placing it on the horse with his own
hands, when he received such a kick over the heart that he was
immediately killed. Then the wonderful horse vanished, and no one saw
where it went. The people all rejoiced and said, "Of a truth, this
mysterious horse was one of the angels of God sent to exterminate a
tyrant."

It was in the time of this King, and by his tyranny, that the kingdom
of the sovereign of Persia was ruled and fell into the hands of another
people. King Khochtacab, the most celebrated of all the kings of his
time, by his power, greatness, and magnificence, had raised in rank a
man named Rassat Rouchin, a name which in Persia signifies "sincere and
brilliant." Influenced by this fine name, the King forgot all prudence,
and without any proof of his capacity he raised this man to power and
made him minister, turning over to him the care of the most important
affairs in his kingdom and giving him all his confidence. His
ostensible conduct was irreproachable, and his acts had for everybody
the appearance of honesty and truth. One day the minister Rassat
Rouchin said to the King: "The people, on account of our leniency and
goodness, are forgetting their duty, and are showing no more deference
nor respect We must inspire them with fear, or affairs will not
prosper."

The King in his blind confidence responded, "Do whatever you think is
right." As soon as the minister had come from the palace of the King he
addressed a proclamation to the towns and villages in which he said:
"His Majesty is irritated with his subjects. You must all come with
presents to appease his anger." From all sides arrived princes and
ministers and grandees of the realm, with precious and magnificent
objects. Seized with fear they sought counsel of the minister Rassat
Rouchin.

"How," said they, "dare we present ourselves before his Majesty in his
present state of anger against us?"

Then the minister responded: "If the instant of death is not yet come
for you, I will try to save you. I tremble to admit you to the King.
But what can I do? On account of the critical situation I will go alone
before the King and present your case." So every day he conducted them
only as far as the door of the King. There they were told of the fines
to which they had been condemned. He took in this way what they had,
and sent them home.

This sort of thing continued for a long while until the means of the
people were exhausted and the treasury became absolutely empty. The
King, always full of confidence in the uprightness of the minister, was
in complete ignorance of all this. But at that time there was a king
who was an enemy of King Khochtacab. When he learned that the subjects
of the latter were suffering cruelly from the oppression of his
minister and that his generals were weakened by hunger, he took heart
and invaded the kingdom. Then King Khochtacab commanded that his
treasury should be opened, and that they should take out all the wealth
to gratify the army, gain the hearts of the generals, and defray the
expenses of the war. But he found that there was nothing left in the
treasury. The army, weakened, was incapable of resisting. The King,
shut up in his fort, found it impossible to attack the enemy, and they
ravaged and despoiled the kingdom.

The King, having been considered so great, was cruelly wounded by shame
at his defeat. He knew not which way to turn his steps. His soul was
profoundly troubled. One day, when he had gone forth from the city,
wandering at random through plain and forest, he saw a shepherd's hut
in the distance, at the door of which were two dogs hanging by the
neck. Seeing the King, the shepherd approached and led him to his hovel
and served him with the best food he could afford. But the King said:

"I shall not eat until you have told me why you have hanged these two
dogs at your cabin-door."

The shepherd responded: "O king of the world, I hanged these two dogs
because they betrayed my flock. As my flock was wasting away, I hid one
day to see what took place. The wolf came and the dogs played with him
and let him carry off sheep and goats. So I hanged the two dogs as
faithless traitors."

The King returned to the city and thought over this singular story. "It
is a lesson for me," he said, "a revelation. It is impossible not to
see that my subjects are the flock and I am the shepherd, while my
minister has acted like the shepherd's dogs, and the enemy who has my
kingdom is the wolf. I must examine into the conduct of my minister and
see with what fidelity he has served me."

When he had returned to the palace he called his secretaries and bade
them bring the registers in which the accounts of the kingdom were
kept. When these registers were opened he saw that they mentioned only
the name of the minister Rassat Rouchin, and included such statements
as: "Intercession of Rassat Rouchin in favor of princes so and so,
ministers such and such, and grandees this and that, who ask pardon for
their faults. Rassat Rouchin took their treasures and granted them
grace." There was nothing else in the registers. When the King saw this
he said:

  "Who rests his faith upon a name goes often without bread,
   While he who faithless proves for bread shall lose his soul
instead."

These words the King had engraved in letters of gold and fastened to
the gate. And at this gate he had the false minister hanged as the dogs
were hanged at the cabin-door.

A King of Persia, in a fit of anger against his wife for a certain
fault which she had committed, commanded his prime minister to put her
to death, together with her nursing infant. The minister, on account of
the furious anger of the King, did not dare to plead the Queen's cause,
but took her to his mother's house. The minister found another woman
who had been condemned to death and had her executed, telling the King
that it was the Queen who was beheaded. The King's child grew and
nourished until he had become a handsome young man. But the King grew
more and more morose and melancholy, and shut himself up in the palace.
The minister, noticing this continual sadness of the King, said:

"O king of the world, what has come over the heart of your Majesty?
Pray tell me the cause of your sorrow."

And the King said: "O minister, how should I not be sad and disturbed?
Here I am getting old and I have no son to cause my name to live and
protect my kingdom. That is the cause of my sorrow and unhappiness."

When the minister heard these words he said, "O king of the world, your
sorrow shall not long endure, for you have a son, capable of preserving
and protecting your kingdom. This son of yours has intelligence,
education, natural gifts, and great personal beauty, and is of most
excellent character."

The King said, "Where is this son of whose existence I have been
unaware?"

The minister answered, "Your Majesty is not aware of his existence, but
I know that he is very much alive." The minister then related how he
had spared the lives of the Queen and her child. The King was
transported with joy, and cried, "Happy the king who has such a
minister!"

The minister bowed low and said, "When shall your son, the prince,
present himself?"

The King answered: "Go seek forty young men of his age, build, figure,
and complexion. Have them all dressed alike. Bring these forty young
men with my son to a certain place in the plain. Await me there, but
tell not this secret to a soul. When I have arrived at the spot then
cause these forty young men to present themselves before me. If my son
is among them I shall most certainly recognize him."

The minister took leave of the King, and with a heart filled with joy
set about doing what the King had ordered. When the King had arrived at
the spot chosen his minister advanced, followed by forty-one youths,
all dressed alike. As soon as the King had seen them he recognized his
son and called him to his side. Then he went back to the city with him
and all the grandees. The next day he invited the latter to a great
festival, and gave to each of them a splendid present. He turned over
his kingdom to his son, taking care to place him and his government
under the tutelage of the good minister who had saved his wife and
brought him up. Then the King went into a religious retreat, and as
long as he lived occupied himself in the service of God.

The Sultan Alexander, called the Two-Horned, at the beginning of his
reign sent an ambassador to King Darius, who was then at the zenith of
his greatness. On his return, this ambassador made his report to King
Alexander. The latter read it, but had doubts over a certain word
therein contained. He questioned his ambassador about the word, saying,
"Did you hear that exact word from the mouth of King Darius?"

The ambassador replied, "I heard it with my own ears."

King Alexander, not being able to believe it, wrote a second letter,
mentioning this word, and despatched to King Darius another ambassador,
charged to deliver it. When King Darius, reading the letter of King
Alexander, came to this special word, he took a knife and cut it out,
then wrote a letter to King Alexander, in which he said: "The sincerity
of the soul of the King is the foundation of his realm and his
greatness. His words, therefore, should be faithfully transmitted and
reproduced by his ambassador. I have cut out of your letter a certain
word, because it was never pronounced by me. And if your former
ambassador were only here I would cut out his lying tongue even as I
have cut out the word from your letter."

When this answer of King Darius's was borne to King Alexander he read
it and summoned before him the faithless ambassador. "Why," said he,
"were you willing, with a word, to cause the loss of many men and
countries?"

"Because they showed me little deference and did not treat me well."

King Alexander said: "Foolish man! And you thought that we sent you to
look after your own personal interests, and neglect those of the
nation?" He commanded that his tongue should be torn out, and made a
proclamation, saying, "This is the fate of traitors who falsely report
the words of kings."

In the Kitab Tarykh the following is recounted: The Sultan Homayoun
sent an ambassador to the King of Khorassan. When this ambassador, on
his arrival in the country, had delivered the letter of the Sultan to
the King, the latter asked:

"How does your King conduct himself regarding his subjects? How does he
govern them?"

"The rule of conduct and the mode of government used by my King,"
answered the ambassador, "are to make himself loved by all his
subjects."

The King asked, "Of what nature is the affection of your King for his
subjects?"

"That of a mother and father for their children and grandchildren."

"In hard and calamitous times, how does your King conduct himself?"

"He shows that he cares not for riches, for the door of his treasury is
always open."

"In the daily receptions how does your King behave?"

"The receptions of my King resemble the gardens of Paradise refreshed
by sweet breezes and scented with the balmy breath of sweetly smelling
plants or like a sea filled with pearls and corals."

The King asked again, "And in council how speaks your King?"

The ambassador answered, "All those who hear my King in council become
wise if they lack wisdom, and brave if they lack courage."

The King of Khorassan was enchanted with the answers of the ambassador,
loaded him with presents, and said to him: "The spirit and judgment of
your King are reflected in the person of his ambassador. They should
all be like you." And he addressed in answer to the Sultan a letter
filled with compliments and felicitations.

In the Kitab Tarykh it is related that the Sultan Mahmoud was fond of
his servant Ayaz on account of the excellence of his wit and judgment.
The other servants of the Sultan were jealous of Ayaz, and murmured
against him. One day the ministers and grandees were in the presence of
the Sultan Mahmoud, and Ayaz was standing respectfully before him.
Someone brought a cucumber as a present to the Sultan. The Sultan
sliced it and ate a morsel. He found it very bitter, but gave no sign
of this. He handed a piece of it to Ayaz, saying, "Eat some of this
cucumber and tell me how it tastes, so that the others present may eat
some of it also, and tell us if they ever ate anything like it." Ayaz
saluted, and ate of the cucumber with an appearance of pleasure.

"It is very good."

The King made the others eat of it. They found that it was bitter, and
were angry with Ayaz, and asked how he dare to lie in such a manner.

"It is true," said the Sultan; "how could you say it was good?"

Ayaz answered with respect: "May the Lord bless the king of the world!
How many favors have you given me! How many sweet and savory dainties!
How, then, could I make a wry face over one bitter morsel? I ought, on
the contrary, to declare that the bitterness of this mouthful is
completely annulled by the delicious sweetness of the others, so that
your Majesty shall continue to bestow dainties upon me as before."

A certain king, vain of his royal power, had a servant who was very
pious and a true believer, very punctilious in the practice of his
religious duties. The King distinguished him above all the others as
one in whom he could trust on account of the integrity of his heart. He
had given him this order: "Go not far away from here, day or night.
Keep close watch, and neglect not my service." The servant, after
finishing his religious duties, took his post, where the King from time
to time sent for him. But the King had need of him, and he was not to
be found. They sent to look for him, but in vain, and the King grew
very angry with him. Finally the servant arrived and prostrated himself
before the King. The latter, full of wrath, demanded:

"Why are you late? Why don't you pay attention to my orders?" And he
commanded that the man be punished, to make him more attentive to the
King's service.

But the servant replied, "If I am late, it is only on account of the
great embarrassment in which I find myself placed."

"What embarrassment? Tell me."

The servant, bowing low, spoke as follows: "My embarrassment comes from
the fact that I have two masters to serve. The first is the true
Master, he who created the universe and the children of Adam, whose
punishments are very severe. The second is only the servant of the
former, and not the true master. I am obliged to attend to the service
of the true Master before the service of the second. That is the
embarrassment in which I find myself."

When the King heard these words he shed abundant tears, and said: "From
this day forth you are free. Follow the service of the Lord, and do not
forget to pray for me."

The servants of the King should love their King more than they love
their own life, their mother, their father, their children, their
grandchildren, their family, their riches, and all that belongs to
them. In a word, for them the person of their King should be above all,
so that one may call them true servants of the King, and that in all
truth they may be termed his favorites. They tell the story that one
day the Sultan Mahmoud Ghazi (may grace be upon him!) was seated on his
throne, surrounded by his ministers and his officers, among whom was
Ayaz. The Sultan said to his treasurer:

"Go to the treasure-chamber. Take to a certain place gold, silver,
precious stones, and other objects of great value. For we are going
there to amuse ourselves, and present these treasures to those who
shall accompany us."

One day the Sultan started to go and amuse himself at that place, and
as soon as the news spread abroad, a great number of people followed
him there. When he arrived he halted at a spot level, clean, and well
lighted, and said to his treasurer:

"Expose my treasures here, in this place, so that all those who are
happy shall obtain a present according to their degree of happiness,
and that one may know who are those who have the most luck and those
who have the least."

All hearing these words quickly approached, pressing forward, with
their eyes wide open and their looks fixed on the treasurer, praying
him to exhibit the presents at the designated place. At this very
moment the Sultan spurred his horse to a gallop and rode from their
presence. When he was far away and out of their sight, he stopped and
looked behind him. There he saw Ayaz, the only one who had followed
him. The others, preoccupied with getting their share of the treasures,
never suspected that the Sultan had gone and was already far away from
them. The Sultan, halting a moment, returned to the city.

On their side, the ministers and the grandees, having taken possession
of the most precious objects, returned joyfully to their homes. On the
way they compared notes with each other about their shares of the
treasure. One said, "I had the best luck"; and another, "No, I had the
best." And all, whoever they were, said the same thing, for all except
Ayaz had their share of the King's presents. So they said among
themselves, "It is clear that the one who has no luck is Ayaz."

Some jealous ones added: "In truth, Master Ayaz has no luck at all. By
his lack of intelligence and good judgment he has had none of the
Sultan's presents."

Ayaz heard all these remarks, but kept silence. Some days later, the
Sultan came out of his palace and sat upon the throne. All the grandees
came into his presence. Ayaz was standing before him. The Sultan asked:

"Who among you had no luck?"

The ministers answered: "It is Ayaz! He did not get a single one of
your Majesty's many presents. It is clear that he has no luck, for he
left all those precious objects and came back with empty hands."

The Sultan said: "O Ayaz, are our presents without value in your eyes,
that you disdain them? I don't know why you took nothing that was
within your grasp. You would have prevented them from saying that you
have no luck. What was your motive in doing a thing that has the
approbation of nobody?"

Ayaz responded: "May the days and prosperity of the King increase! May
the presents never tarnish that he has given to his servants. As for
me, I have more luck than those who received the presents of your
Majesty."

The Sultan said, "O Ayaz, prove to me the truth of your words."

Ayaz responded: "If they found some part in the largesses which were
given them, I found the author himself of those great gifts. If they
found gold, I found the master of the gold. If others found silver, I
found the master of silver. If others found precious stones, I found
the master of precious stones. If others yet found some pearls, I found
the ocean of pearls. Who, therefore, O king of the world, among all
those who vaunt themselves as having luck, has more than I have?"

The Sultan replied: "O Ayaz, tell me what is the meaning of your words.
Where is all that which you say you found?"

Ayaz responded: "May the most high protect the person of the king of
the world, more precious to me than all those objects of price! In
whatever place may be his august person, there I am, and I thus obtain
all that my heart desires. When I am with your Majesty, and your
Majesty is with me, what do I lack? Who, then, has more luck than I
have?"

One day the Sultan Alexander was plunged in sadness, and kept himself
shut up in his palace. The wise Aristotle came before him, and seeing
him absorbed in sad thoughts, asked him:

"Why is the Sultan so sad and what keeps him from going out of his
palace?"

The Sultan Alexander answered: "I am grieving at the thought of the
smallness of this world, and of all the troubles I am giving myself and
others for the sake of reigning over a world that is so little worth.
It is the vanity of my works that renders me sad."

Aristotle replied: "The reflection of the Sultan is just, for what, in
truth, is the world? Certainly it has not enough importance by itself
that the Sultan should occupy himself with a vain kingdom. But the
government of this world is a mark of the sublime and eternal kingdom
of the other world, and this kingdom the Sultan can obtain by governing
this present world with justice. Your Majesty must therefore give all
his cares to the government of this world, to obtain finally in the
other world a kingdom of which the greatness is beyond measure and the
duration is eternal."

The Sultan Alexander heard with pleasure the words of his wise
counsellor.

Two qualities are essential to kings, generosity and magnanimity. When
a minister remarks, in his king, sentiments unworthy of his rank, he
should warn him of the fact, and should turn him from unworthy actions.
They tell that a king, having made a gift of 500 dirhems, his minister
said to him: "I have heard from the mouth of wise men that it is not
permitted to kings to make a present of less than 1,000 dirhems!"

One day Haroun-er-Raschid made a gift of 500 tahil. His minister, named
Yahya, made by signs and by gestures every effort to prevent him from
doing this. When all those who had been present were gone, Haroun-er-
Raschid said:

"O Yahya! what were you trying to do with all your signs?"

The latter replied: "O prince of true believers! I was trying to say
that kings should never let it be seen that they are capable of making
presents of less than 1,000 dirhems."

One day King Mamoun-er-Raschid heard his minister, named Abbas, say to
a servant, "Go to the bazaar and buy something with this half-tahil."

Mamoun-er-Raschid was angry with him and said: "You are capable of
dividing a tahil in two! That is not proper in a minister; you are not
worthy of the name," and he forthwith deposed him from office.

In the Kitab Sifat-el-Molouk it is related that the King Chabour,
giving his last instructions to his son, said as follows: "O my son!
whenever you make a present to anyone, do not bestow it with your own
hands. Do not even examine or have brought into your own presence the
gifts that you make. Whenever you give a present, see that it be at
least the equivalent of the revenue of a town in value, so that it will
enrich the recipients, and make them and their children and
grandchildren free from adversity. Furthermore, my child, beware all
your life of giving yourself up to operations of commerce in your
kingdom. For this kind of affairs is unworthy a king who has greatness
of character, prosperity, and birth."

King Harmuz received one day a letter from his minister in which he
said: "Many merchants being in town with a great quantity of jewels,
pearls, hyacinths, rubies, diamonds, and other precious stones, I
bought all they had for your Majesty, paying 200,000 tahil. Immediately
afterward there arrived some merchants from another country who wanted
to buy these and offered me a profit of 200,000 tahil. If the King
consents I will sell the jewels, and later buy others."

King Harmuz wrote to his minister the following response: "What are
200,000 tahil? What are 400,000 tahil, profit included? Is that worth
talking about and making so much ado? If you are going into the
operations of commerce who will look after the government? If you buy
and sell, what will become of the merchants? It is evident that you
would destroy thus our good renown, and that you are the enemy of the
merchants of our kingdom, for your designs would ruin them. Your
sentiments are unworthy a minister." And for this he removed him from
office.

In the Kitab Sifat-el-Houkama it is said: "There is a great diversity
of inclinations among men. Everyone has his own propensity. One is
borne naturally toward riches, another toward patience and resignation,
another toward study and good works. And in this world the humors of
men are so varied that they all differ in nature. Among this infinite
variety of dispositions of soul, that which best suits kings and
ministers is greatness of character, for that quality is the ornament
of royalty.

"One day the minister of the Sultan Haroun-er-Raschid was returning
from the council of state to his house when he was approached by a
beggar who said: 'O Yahya! misery brings me to you. I pray you give me
something.'

"When Yahya had arrived at his house he made the beggar sit down at the
door, and calling an attendant said to him: 'Every day give this man
1,000 dinars, and for his food give him his part in the provisions
consumed in your house.'

"They say that for a month the beggar came every day and sat at Yahya's
door, and received the sum of 1,000 dinars. When he had received them
at the end of the month, 30,000 dinars, the beggar went away. When
informed of his departure, Yahya said: 'By the Lord! if he had not gone
away, and had come to my door for the rest of his life, I should have
given him the same daily ration.'"

In the Kitab Tarykh the following is told: "There was once upon a time
a Persian king named Khrosrou, remarkable among all the kings of Persia
for his power, his greatness of character, his goodness, and the purity
of his morals. His wife, named Chirine, was of a rare beauty, and no
one at that time could be compared to her, for she possessed all the
virtues. Khrosrou passionately loved Chirine, and among the books,
famous in the world, which speak of loving couples, there is one called
'Khrosrou and Chirine.' One day Khrosrou was seated in the palace with
his wife Chirine, when a fisherman brought in a fine fish as a present
to Khrosrou. The latter ordered them to give him a present of 4,000
dirhems.

"'You are wrong,' said Chirine.

"'And why?' asked the King.

"'If, in the future, you made one of your servants a present of 4,000
dirhems he will not fail to say forthwith, "I am considered as the
equal of a fisherman." If your present is less than 4,000 dirhems, then
necessarily he will say, "I am considered as being less than a
fisherman," and your actions will sadden his heart.'"

"Khrosrou said: 'Your observation is just. But I have spoken, and I
cannot reverse what I have said, for it is shameful for a king to fail
in keeping his word.'

"Chirine replied, 'Never mind, I know a way, and no one can say that
you broke your promise.'

"'What is this way?' asked Khrosrou.

"Chirine answered: 'Put this question to the fisherman, "Is this a
fresh-water or a salt-water fish?"

"'If he answers, "It is a fresh-water fish," say, "I want a salt-water
one," and the contrary. Then he will go away and you will be released
from your foolish promise.'"

"Khrosrou, who by love of Chirine could not help hearing her advice and
following it, put the question to the fisherman. But the latter,
suspecting a trap, said, 'It is both.' King Khrosrou began to laugh,
and gave him 4,000 dirhems in addition.

"The fisherman, having received his 8,000 dirhems, put them in a sack
and went away. On the journey, a dirhem fell to the ground, and the
fisherman, lowering his sack, began to search for the dirhem that had
fallen. When he found it, he placed it with the others and took up his
march again.

"Khrosrou and Chirine had both been witnesses of his action. Chirine
said to Khrosrou: 'Behold the baseness and the lack of judgment of the
fisherman. He wearied himself to hunt for one dirhem when he had a sack
full of them. Recall him and do him shame.'

"Khrosrou, who from his love for Chirine was incapable of resisting her
words, and always obeyed them, recalled the fisherman and said to him:
'Of a truth, you have a low soul, and possess neither judgment nor
dignity. What! One of your 8,000 dirhems was lost and you deferred your
journey until you had found it? That shows the baseness of your soul
and your lack of judgment.'

"The fisherman made obeisance and answered: 'May the prosperity of the
king of the world increase! I sought not the dirhem on account of its
money value, but only on account of the greatness and importance of the
words engraved upon the coin. On one of its sides is written the name
of God most high. On the other side is written the name of the King.
Had I not found the dirhem, and had left it on the ground, then people
passing would have trodden upon it, and the two names inscribed upon
it, and which ought to be glorified by all men, would have been
despised and disgraced, and I would have been the accomplice of all the
passers-by who trod upon it. That is why I took the trouble to find the
dirhem.'

"Khrosrou was pleased with this answer and gave him still another 4,000
dirhems. The fisherman, filled with joy, took his 12,000 dirhems and
returned to his home."

A man had committed a serious offence against King Haroun-er-Raschid.
Condemned to death, he succeeded in escaping. But he had a brother. The
King summoned the latter and said to him: "Find your brother so that I
may kill him. If you do not find him I will kill you in his place."
This man not finding his brother, the King Haroun-er-Raschid ordered
one of his servants to bring him to be killed. But this servant said:
"O prince of believers! if the one who received the command to put this
man to death brings him for that purpose and at the same time a
messenger comes from your Majesty with an order not to kill him, ought
he not to release him?"

King Haroun-er-Raschid answered, "He certainly ought to release him, on
account of my orders."

"O prince of believers," answered the servant, "the Koran says, 'He who
has a burden shall not bear another's.'"

Then the King said: "Set the man free, for this must cover his case,
and means that the innocent should not perish for the guilty."

They tell that, a pundit appearing one day before the Sultan Ismail
Samani, King of the country of Khorassan, the Sultan received him with
great distinction, and at his departure saluted him most respectfully
and escorted him to the door, taking seven steps behind him.

The next night he dreamed that the glorious prophet (with whom be
peace!) spoke thus to him: "O Ismail, because you honored one of my
pundits, I will pray God that after you seven of your children and
grandchildren shall become great and glorious kings." They say that for
many years the kingdom of Khorassan flourished under the paternal
government of the successors of this Sultan.

The Sultan Abdallah Tlahir, as soon as he had taken possession of the
throne of Khorassan, received the homage of a large number of his
subjects. At the end of several days he asked, "Is there anyone of
distinction in the country who has not come to present himself before
me?" They told him, "There are two persons that have not come, one
named Ahmed Arab, and the other named Mahomet Islam. But these two men
never present themselves before kings and ministers."

The Sultan replied, "Since they will not come to find kings and
ministers, I must go to them." So one day the Sultan repaired to the
house of Ahmed Arab. The latter, immediately arising, remained standing
a long time facing the Sultan. Then regarding him fixedly he said to
him: "O Sultan, I had heard tell of your beauty, and I now see that
they spoke the truth. Make not of that body the embers of hell."
Saying this he returned to his prayers. The Sultan Abdallah Tlahir went
away from the sheik's house weeping.

He then betook himself to the house of Mahomet Islam. At the news that
the Sultan was coming to see him, the sheik shut the door of his house,
saying: "I ought not to see him. I ought not to speak to him."

The Sultan departed in tears and said: "Friday, when the sheik goes to
the mosque I will go to him."

When Friday came he was on horseback, surrounded by soldiers, awaiting
the arrival of the sheik. As soon as he perceived him, he dismounted,
approached him on foot, and saluted him. The sheik asked: "Who are you?
What do you want of me?"

The Sultan answered: "It is I, Abdallah Tlahir. I have come to see the
sheik."

The latter, turning away his face, said to the Sultan, "What connection
is there between you and me?"

The Sultan fell at the feet of the sheik, in tears, in the middle of
the highway, and, invoking God the most high, spoke as follows, "O
Lord, forgive my faults, on account of the many virtues of this
faithful sheik." And he was forgiven and became a good man.

The imam El-Chafei (may mercy be with him!), going from the city of
Jerusalem to the country of Egypt, halted in a town called Ramla. One
of the inhabitants of this town took him into his house and entertained
him with many attentions. The companions of the imam El-Chafei
perceived that he felt a certain inquietude, but none of them knew the
reason for it. The more the master of the house showered his attentions
and civilities, the more disturbed the imam seemed to be. Finally at
the moment when the imam was mounting his horse to continue his
journey, the master of the house arrived and put a writing into his
hands. On reading this, the imam lost his worried air, and, giving
orders to pay the man thirty dinars, he went on his way rejoicing. One
of his companions asked him:

"Why were you so disturbed? What did the writing say? And why did you
show so much joy in reading it?"

The imam El-Chafei answered: "When our host took us to his house I
noticed that his face lacked the characteristic signs of honesty. But
as he treated us so well I began to think perhaps I was mistaken in
judging him. But when I read the writing he handed me I saw it was as
follows: 'While the imam has been here I have spent on him ten dinars.
He ought therefore to pay me back twenty.' So then I knew that I had
made no error in reading his character, and was pleased at my skill."

The story is told that one day as the prophet Solomon was seated on his
royal throne, surrounded by men, spirits, and birds, two women came
before him, each claiming possession of a child. These two women kept
saying, "It is my child," but neither could give proof. All their
arguments amounting to nothing, the prophet Solomon commanded that the
child should be cut in two, and that each woman should take half. When
the executioner advanced, drawing his sword, one of the women bursting
into sobs cried out in anguish: "O Prophet Solomon, don't kill the
child. Give it to this woman, it is all I ask!"

As the murder of the child never drew a tear nor a movement of anxiety
from the other woman, Solomon commanded them to give it to the woman
who had wept, because her tears proved her to be the true mother, and
that the child belonged to her, and not to the other woman. Thus did
King Solomon show his wisdom in judging character.

O you who are magnificent! listen, I pray you, and hear to what degree
of sublimity generosity is lifted. In the Kitab Adab-is-Selathin it is
said that two qualities were given by God in all their perfection to
two men--justice to Sultan Nouchirvau, King of Persia, and generosity
to a subject of an Arab sultan named Hatim-Thai. The author of that
work says that in the time of Hatim-Thai there were three kings
celebrated throughout the whole world, and rivals in showing the
perfection of generosity--the King of Roum, the King of Syria, and the
King of Yemen. But as none of them was as famous as Hatim-Thai, they
became jealous of him and united in hostility toward him. They said:
"We are the kings of vast countries, and shall we suffer a simple
subject of an Arab sultan to be counted as more generous than we are?"
And each of these kings thought to try Hatim-Thai and destroy him.

The first of the three who attempted the undertaking was the King of
Roum. This King said to one of his ministers: "O minister, I hear tell
that there is among the Arabs a man named Hatim-Thai, and that he is
reputed the most generous man in the world. I am displeased that my
name is not as noted for generosity as his. I want to make a proof and
see if his fame is true or false. I have heard that Hatim-Thai
possesses a horse which he loves as he does his own soul. Well, we will
ask him to give us this beloved horse."

The minister sent an envoy, with suitable presents and a letter to give
to Hatim-Thai. He arrived in a great storm of wind and rain which
permitted no one to attend to his affairs abroad. It was already night,
and Hatim-Thai had made no preparations to receive a guest, but he
received the stranger with the marks of the highest respect and
greatest cordiality.

"What need brings you here to-night?" he asked.

"Nothing but to visit you," replied the envoy, and he never mentioned
that evening his mission from the King of Roum.

As there was nothing in the house to eat, Hatim-Thai killed his
favorite horse and served it for his guest's supper. As soon as it was
day, the envoy presented the gifts and the letter from the King of
Roum. When he read the passage in the letter where the King asked for
the horse which had just been killed, Hatim-Thai turned pale and could
not say a word. The envoy, observing him in this state, imagined that
he regretted the gift of his horse, and said:

"O Hatim-Thai, if it is not with pleasure that you give your horse to
my master, think no more about it, and let me return to my country."

Hatim-Thai answered: "O envoy of the King of Roum! if I had a thousand
horses like that one I should give them all without a moment's
hesitation. But last night I asked you the motive which brought you
hither, and you said it was merely to visit me. So I killed the horse
for your food, and that is why I am afflicted with sorrow at my lack of
foresight." He sent the envoy back home with many other horses as a
gift.

The envoy told the whole story and the King of Roum said: "The renown
of Hatim-Thai is deserved; he is the most generous of men." He made an
alliance of friendship with him, and the fame of Hatim-Thai grew apace.

The second one who tested Hatim-Thai's generosity was the King of
Syria. He said: "How can Hatim-Thai, who lives in the woods and the
plains, occupied in pasturing goats, camels, and horses, be more
generous than so great a King as I? I will put him to the proof. I will
ask rich presents that he cannot give, and he will be shamed and
humiliated before kings and peoples."

So the King of Syria sent an envoy to Hatim-Thai to ask for 100 red
camels with long manes, black eyes, and very tall. Camels of this sort
are hard to find, only kings having four or five. When the envoy had
arrived he told Hatim-Thai what the King of Syria asked of him. Hatim-
Thai was full of joy hearing the words of the envoy, and hastened to
regale him bountifully with food and drink. Then he searched among his
camels, but found none such as the King of Syria desired. He ordered
search to be made among the peoples of his nation, Arabs and Bedouins,
offering a large price. By the will of God a Bedouin succeeded in
finding 100, and Hatim-Thai asked only the delay of one month in
payment. The envoy returned home with the red camels and many other
presents. Seeing them, the King of Syria was struck with astonishment
and cried: "Behold, we wished only to test Hatim-Thai, and now he has
gone into debt to satisfy our desire. Yes, truly he is the most
generous man in the world."

He commanded them to send back to Hatim-Thai the 100 red camels loaded
with magnificent presents. As soon as they arrived, Hatim-Thai summoned
the owner and gave him the camels with all their burden of riches,
without keeping anything for himself. When the envoy, returning home
again, recounted all these things, the King of Syria marvelled and
exclaimed: "No one can equal Hatim-Thai. He is generosity itself, in
all its perfection."

The third king, that is, the King of Yemen, was very generous, and
wanted no one to rival him in this particular. So when he heard of the
fame of Hatim-Thai for generosity, he was vexed and full of sorrow. He
said: "How can that poor Hatim equal in generosity a great king like
me? I give alms to the poor, I feed them, and every day I give them
clothing. How is it possible that anyone can dare to mention the name
of Hatim-Thai in my presence as the most generous of men?"

Now, at that time an ambassador of the King of Maghreb arrived at the
Court of the King of Yemen, who spoke of the wonderful generosity of
Hatim-Thai. He felt as if his heart was burning, but did not let his
grief appear, and said to himself:

"Everybody repeats the praises of Hatim, one after another, without
knowing exactly who he is, of what birth, and what are the means which
permit him thus to give hospitality. I shall cause him to perish."

The King of Yemen summoned a Bedouin, a bandit celebrated for his
ferocity, without pity for the life of a man. The Bedouin arrived, and
the King gave him gold, silver, and clothing. "O Bedouin," he said to
him, "if you will perform an affair for us, we will give you whatever
you ask."

The Bedouin answered: "O my lord, king of the world, what is your
Majesty's will?"

The King of Yemen replied: "There is a man named Hatim-Thai, of the
tribe of Thai, on the confines of Syria. Go to this country, and employ
all the tricks you can to kill him. When you have killed him bring me
his head. If you succeed in doing as I wish, whatever you ask, it shall
be given you."

These words of the King filled with joy the Bedouin's heart. He said to
himself: "Here is a good piece of work. For an old tattered cloak I
will kill a man. Why then should I hesitate a moment for a superb cloak
of scarlet?"

Taking leave of the King, the Bedouin set out promptly and went toward
Syria in search of Hatim-Thai. After a while he arrived at a village
near to Syria, and there he met a young man of a rare beauty. His face
bore the marks of virtue, his language was full of sweetness and
affability, his soul was righteous, and his heart compassionate. He
asked the Bedouin where he was going. The latter answered, "I am from
the country of Yemen, and am going to Syria."

The young man replied: "O my brother! I wish you would do me the favor
to rest for a day and a night in my house, and I will do the best to
entertain you. After that you shall go on your journey when you wish."

The Bedouin heard these words with pleasure, and went into the young
man's house. There he was treated magnificently and regaled so lavishly
that he thought he had never seen and eaten so much. He slept
peacefully all night. At dawn he said farewell, eager to gain the end
of his journey. The young man said to him: "O my brother, if it is
possible, stay two or three days longer, I beg you, so that by my
hospitality I may show all the sincere affection that my heart feels
for you."

The Bedouin replied: "O my brother, truly would I remain some time
longer here, had I not a most important and delicate mission to fulfil.
It is impossible for me to stay and enjoy myself here, while I have not
yet accomplished my errand."

The young man answered: "O my brother, what is this difficult and
delicate affair which prevents you from staying here? If you will tell
me, doubtless I shall find some means of coming to your aid, and
lightening the burden which weighs so heavily upon your heart. But,
now, what can I do since you tell me nothing?"

Hearing these words, the Bedouin kept silence. He said to himself:
"This affair is not easy to execute. It might be of use for me to have
a prudent and discreet companion to confer with him about it. Perhaps I
should do well to talk of it to this young man and ask his advice."

And nevertheless he dared not yet trust his secret, and his perplexity
was written on his countenance. He could not utter a single word, and
remained very anxious.

The young man observing the state of the Bedouin said to him: "O
servant of God, your embarrassment is evident; you fear to open your
heart to me. God alone, in truth, knows the secrets of his servants.
But, in your present situation, it may be that I can be of some benefit
to you."

The Bedouin, hearing these words of the young man, said to him: "O my
loyal friend, know then that I am an Arab-Bedouin of the country of
Yemen; that of all the Bedouins of Arabia there is not one so wicked
nor so great a thief as I, and that my fame as a bandit is celebrated
throughout all Yemen. The King, having resolved upon a wicked deed,
ordered his minister to find a man capable of performing it. As I had
the reputation of being the greatest bandit of the country of Yemen, I
was summoned to the presence of the King. As soon as his Majesty saw me
he loaded me with presents and said: 'If you do as I wish I will give
you many more presents of gold and silver and other magnificent
things.' I replied, 'O my lord, king of the world, what is this
affair?' 'You must go and kill a man named Hatim-Thai, who lives on the
confines of Syria.' To this I replied: 'O my lord, king of the world, I
am only a Bedouin, a poor robber, wandering in the forests and the
plains. For drink I have but the brackish water of the marshes. For
food I have only rats and locusts.' On account of my wretchedness, I
obeyed the wishes of the King, and promised to execute this affair. But
here I am, in a very embarrassing situation, for I do not know this
Hatim-Thai, and I don't even know where his tribe is, the Ben-Thai."

The young man, hearing these words, began to laugh, and said: "O my
brother, be not disturbed. I know this Hatim-Thai, and I will show him
to you." These words rejoiced the Bedouin. The young man continued: "O
my brother, know that the tribe of Ben-Thai inhabit this village, and
that the man named Hatim-Thai is himself in this tribe. If you will
follow exactly what I indicate to you, you will certainly accomplish
your mission."

The Bedouin answered: "O my brother, I place my life in your hands.
What must be done?"

The young man answered: "O my brother, there is a place where Hatim-
Thai goes for recreation. It is an extremely deserted place, which no
one ever visits. When he gets there he eats, drinks, and then he
sleeps, his head covered with a cloth, and his horse tied near by. You
will arrive at that moment, you will promptly execute the wish of the
King, you will jump upon the horse and dash away from this place and go
wherever you like."

The young man went then to show the place to the Bedouin, and giving
him a poniard with two edges well sharpened, he said: "O my brother,
to-morrow Hatim-Thai will come to this spot. Forget nothing that you
have to do."

All the instruction of the young man were followed by the Bedouin.
Early in the morning Hatim-Thai repaired to the designated place. He
ate, he drank, and when he had finished his repast he tied his horse
near by. Then, covering his head with a cloth, he fell fast asleep. At
this very moment the wicked Bedouin arrived. By the will of God, just
as he was about to assassinate the young man, a thought came into his
heart. "Hatim-Thai is celebrated throughout the whole world for his
generosity and his benevolence. Before I kill him, while he is still
alive, I want to see his face." And he raised the cloth that covered
his head. At the sight of the countenance of the sleeping young man he
fell at his feet and covered them with kisses, saying: "O my friend!
What have you done? You ought not to act thus!"

Hearing these words of the Bedouin, the young man said: "What could I
do? For the one called Hatim-Thai is I. The head that the King of Yemen
wants is mine. What other means could I employ?" He conducted the
Bedouin to his house, regaled him again, and gave him all he needed.

Then the Bedouin took leave and returned to his country. As soon as he
arrived in Yemen, he went before the King and recounted all the
circumstances relative to Hatim-Thai.

Having heard the story the King shed tears, and said: "Of a truth,
Hatim-Thai is liberal, benevolent, and noble, brave and generous."
Afterward the King of Yemen made a friendship with Hatim-Thai that
lasted as long as his life.

When the Sultan Yakoub invaded Khorassan and besieged the capital, the
Sultan Mahomet, shut up in the city, made such a strong resistance that
for a long time it was impossible to capture the place. But his
ministers betrayed him by sending to Sultan Yakoub letters which showed
how it might be taken. One only of these ministers, named Ibrahim
Hadjib, abstained from sending any traitorous letters, and remained
faithful to his master. After a while the city was taken and Sultan
Yakoub ascended the throne. Then all the most important people of the
country came to pay homage to him. The ministers who had betrayed the
former Sultan were conspicuous in their demonstrations of joy. The
Sultan Yakoub gave a pleasant reception to those who came, and made
them suitable gifts.

After this he asked, "Who has not come to present himself before me on
this day of rejoicing?"

The ministers immediately answered, "Ibrahim Hadjib is the only one who
has not come to present his congratulations."

Then the Sultan asked, "Why has he not done so? Is he ill?"

"No," they answered, "he is not ill."

The Sultan summoned Ibrahim Hadjib, and the latter came into the royal
presence. The Sultan, observing on his countenance evident marks of
care and sorrow, spoke thus to him: "Ibrahim Hadjib, are you the
minister in whom the Sultan Mahomet placed his confidence?" He replied
in the affirmative.

"From what motive, Ibrahim Hadjib, did you keep silence, and send me no
word of advice while the ministers of Sultan Mahomet, now here, sent
many letters to show me how to capture the city? Why did you refrain
from appearing before me at court to-day, at the same time with the
ministers and grandees? Why, now that you are here, are you the only
one to wear a sad and mournful appearance and a long face, while all
the others show their joy? To all these questions you must truthfully
respond. And if you speak not the truth you shall be put to death."

"If the Sultan wishes to hear the language of truth and will not be
vexed by it, I will reply to each of his questions. To the first
question, why I sent no letter betraying my King, I will say: Know,
Sultan, that the Sultan Mahomet was the King of this country; that he
gave me many presents and had full confidence in me, thinking that in
the moment of danger I would be his companion and his counsellor. How
could I, then, betray him? I knew you not, and had received no benefits
from you. Would it have been just for me to send you letters and cause
the fall of one who had been so bountiful to me?"

"Your words are just and true," said the Sultan Yakoub.

Ibrahim Hadjib continued: "As to the question why I abstained from
presenting myself at court to-day, and why I wore so sorrowful a face,
I answer: Know that I could not present myself before the Sultan,
because he was the enemy of my master and benefactor, and brought about
the ruin of my lord. That is why I wore a sad face in your presence.
Beside, the children and grandchildren of my lord are plunged in grief
and anxiety, and how could I be happy in your presence, like these
hypocrites, who are very different elsewhere? I have told the truth."

When the Sultan Yakoub had heard these words of Ibrahim Hadjib, he
cried: "God be praised! Up to this time I have heard tell of ministers,
I have seen many kinds, but never have I seen nor heard of a minister
like this one. Now, only for the first time have I seen a true minister
and listened to the words of truth." The Sultan Yakoub loaded Ibrahim
Hadjib with favors, made him prime minister, and gave him the name of
father. As for the other ministers, he caused them to perish, with
their whole families. Then he published this proclamation:

"Behold the fate of those who are faithless to their promises and
commit treason toward their King, for they cannot be counted as men."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Malayan Literature, by Various Authors





This eBook was produced by David A. Schwan <davidsch@earthlink.net>.



The March of Portola and the Discovery of the Bay of San Francisco



by
Zoeth S. Eldredge



-



The Log of the San Carlos

and

Original Documents Translated and Annotated



by
E. J. Molera



Published by the Reception Committee of The California Promotion
Committee



This Book is published with the approval and endorsement of the
Executive Committee of the Portola Festival.



The March of Portola

and

The Log of the San Carlos



San Francisco

-

"Serene, indifferent of fate,
Thou sittest at the Western Gate;

Upon thy heights so lately won,
Still slant the banners of the sun;

Thou seest the white seas strike their tents,
O warder of two continents,

And scornful of the peace that flies,
Thy angry winds and sullen skies,

Thou drawest all things, small or great,
To thee beside the Western Gate."



Table of Contents

-

Introduction
The March of Portola and Discovery of the Bay of San Francisco
Data regarding Portola after he left California
Letter of the Viceroy of New Spain to Don Julian de Arriaga
Causes that led to the Expedition of the San Carlos
Log of the San Carlos
Report of the Commander of the San Carlos
Description of the Bay of San Francisco
Report of the Pilot of the San Carlos



Illustrations

The March to Monterey (Frontispiece)
Carrying the Sick
Discovery of the Bay of San Francisco
Departure of the San Carlos from La Paz
Facsimile of signature of Governor Portola
First Survey and Map of the Bay of San Francisco



Introduction

In the annals of adventure, there are no more thrilling narratives of
heroic perseverance in the performance of duty than the record of
Spanish exploration in America. To those of us who have come into
possession of the fair land opened up by them, the story of their
travels and adventures have the most profound interest. The account of
the expedition of Portola has never been properly presented. Many
writers have touched on it, and H. H. Bancroft, in his History of
California, gives a brief digest of Crespi's diary. Most writers on
California history have drawn on Palou's Vida del V. P. F. Junipero
Serra and Noticias de la Nueva California, and without looking further,
have accepted the ecclesiastical narrative. We have endeavored in this
sketch to give, in a clear and concise form, the conditions which
preceded and led up to the occupation of California.

The importance of California in relation to the control of the Pacific
was early recognized by the great European powers, some of whom had but
small respect for the Bull of Pope Alexander VI dividing the New World
between Spain and Portugal. England, France, and Russia sent repeated
expeditions into the Pacific. In 1646 the British Admiralty sent two
ships to look in Hudson's Bay for a northwest passage to the South Sea,
one of which bore the significant name of California. The voyage of
Francis Drake, 1577-1580, was a private venture, but at Drake's Bay he
proclaimed the sovereignty of Elizabeth, and named the country New
Albion. Two hundred years later (1792-1793) Captain George Vancouver
explored the coast of California down to thirty degrees of north
latitude (Ensenada de Todos Santos), which, he says, "is the
southernmost limit of New Albion, as discovered by Sir Francis Drake, or
New California, as the Spaniards frequently call it." Even after the
occupation and settlement by the Spaniards, so feeble were their
establishments that, as Vancouver reports to the Admiralty, it would
take but a small force to wrest from Spain this most valuable
possession. But though the growing feebleness of Spain presaged the time
when her hold upon America would be loosened, the standard of individual
heroism was not lowered, and the achievements of Portola and of Anza
rank with those of De Soto and Coronado. The California explorer did
not, it is true, have to fight his way through hordes of fierce natives.
The California Indians, as a rule, received the white adventurers
gladly, and entertained them with such hospitality as they had to offer,
but the Indians north of the Santa Barbara Channel were but a poor lot.
In a country abounding in game of all kinds, a sea swarming with fish, a
soil capable of growing every character of foodstuff, these miserable
natives lived in a chronic state of starvation.

As in heroic qualities, so also in skill and judgment, Portola upholds
the best traditions of Spain. The success of an expedition depends upon
the character of the leader. Panfilo de Narvaez landed on the coast of
Florida in April, 1528, with a well-equipped army of three hundred men
and forty horses, just half the force he sailed with from Spain the
previous June, and of the three hundred men whom he led into Florida,
only four lived to reach civilization - the rest perished. That is but
one example of incompetent leadership. When Portola organized his
expedition for the march from San Diego Bay to Monterey, many of his
soldiers were ill from scurvy, and at one time on the march the sick
list numbered nineteen men, including the governor and Rivera, his chief
officer. Sixteen men had to be carried, and to three, in extremis, the
viaticum was administered; but he brought them all through, and returned
to San Diego without the loss of a man.

There are two full diaries of this expedition, one by Father Crespi and
the other by Alferez Costanso. There is, besides, a diary of Junipero
Serra of the march from Velicata to San Diego Bay, a translation of
which is printed in Out West magazine (Los Angeles), March-July, 1902.
It is of small value to the student of history. There is a diary by
Portola, quoted by Bancroft, and a Fragmento by Ortega, also used by
Bancroft. These we have not seen. There are letters from Francisco
Palou, Juan Crespi and Miguel Costanso, printed in Out West for January
1902. The diary of Father Crespi is printed in Palou's Noticias de la
Nueva California. Documentos para la Historia de Mexico, re-printed San
Francisco, 1874. The diary of Miguel Costanso is in the Sutro library.
It has never been printed. It is prefaced by an historical narrative, a
poor translation of which was published by Dalrymple, London, 1790, and
a better one by Chas. F. Lummis in Out West, June-July, 1901. In
Publications of the Historical Society of Southern California, Vol. II,
Part 1, Los Angeles, 1891, a number of documents of the Sutro collection
are printed, with translations by George Butler Griffin. These relate to
the explorations of the California coast by ships from the Philippines,
the two voyages of Vizcaino, with some letters of Junipero Serra, and
diaries of the voyage of the Santiago to the northern coast in 1774.

The sketch here submitted is the result of much study of original
documents, and the route of the expedition is laid down after careful
survey of the physical geography where possible, and in other cases, by
the contoured maps of the Geological Survey, following the directions
and language as given by the diarists. Among the printed books consulted
are Palou's Vida del Padre Junipero Serra and his Noticias de la Nueva
California, above noted. The Conquest of the Great Northwest, Agnes C.
Laut, New York, 1908; History of California by H. H. Bancroft; Treaties
of Navigation, Cabrera Bueno, Translation, Dalrymple, London, 1790; The
Discovery of San Francisco Bay, George Davidson, and Francis Drake on
the Northwest Coast of America in 1579, the same author; Proceedings of
the Geographical Society of the Pacific.

In view of the forthcoming Portola Festival, The California Promotion
Committee, through its Reception Committee, appointed three of its
members to compile a history of the first expedition for the settlement
of California. In the endeavor to obtain further knowledge of the life
and character of Portola, the committee has been enabled, through the
efforts of one of its members, to have careful search made among the
archives of Madrid, of the India Office at Saville, of the City of
Mexico, and of Puebla, and while we have little to show, as yet,
concerning Portola, we have received other documents of the utmost
importance to the history of San Francisco: a chronicle of the events
following the discovery of the Bay.

By royal edict, a maritime expedition for the exploration of the
northwestern coasts of America sailed from San Blas early in the year
1775. This consisted of the frigate Santiago, under the
commander-in-chief, Don Bruno de Heceta; the packet boat San Carlos,
under Lieutenant Ayala, and schooner Sonora, under Lieutenant Bodega. To
Lieutenant Ayala was assigned the exploration of the Bay of San
Francisco, while the Santiago and the Sonora sailed for the north.
Bodega discovered the Bay which bears his name, and Heceta (to spell his
name as it is usually written) discovered the Columbia River. Bancroft
(History of California), in giving Palou's Vida as authority for his
short and incorrect account of Ayala's survey, says: "It is unfortunate
that neither map nor diary of this earliest survey is extant." It is
with pleasure we are permitted to present to the public these important
documents, now printed for the first time, and only regret that the
shortness of time allowed for their study may perhaps necessitate later
some minor corrections.

We have also received from the Minister of Marine of Spain, Don Jose
Ferrano, under date of July 14, 1909, a drawing of the paquebot, San
Carlos, together with the record of her gallant commander, Don Juan
Manuel de Ayala.

Ayala was born in Osuna, Andalucia, on the 28th of December, 1745. He
entered the Marine Corps on the 19th of September, 1760, and was made
Alferez de Fragata, October 10, 1767; Alferez de Navio, June 15, 1769;
Teniente de Fragata, April 28, 1774; Teniente de Navio, February, 1776;
and Capitan de Fragata, December 21, 1782.

When the order for the exploration of the northern coast was made, Ayala
was one of the officers assigned to the work. He arrived in Vera Cruz in
August, 1774, proceeded to the City of Mexico, and was ordered by
Viceroy Bucareli to San Blas, where he was given command of the schooner
Sonora. The squadron under Heceta had hardly got under way, when the
commander of the San Carlos, Don Miguel Manrique, suddenly went mad.
Ayala was ordered to the command of the packet-boat, and returned to San
Blas with the unfortunate officer, to follow the squadron a few days
later.

In December, 1775, Ayala conducted a reconnaissance on the coast of New
Spain, and at its conclusion was placed in command of the Santiago, and
until October, 1778, served the new establishments of California. In
August, 1779, he was sent to the Philippine Islands in command of the
San Carlos, returning to San Blas in 1781. In July, 1784, he returned to
Spain, and on March 14, 1785, was retired, at his own request, the royal
order granting him full pay as captain of frigate in consideration of
his services to California. He died December 30, 1797.



Zoeth S. Eldredge,
E. J. Molera,
Charles H. Crocker,

San Francisco, August, 1909. - Committee.



The March of Portola and the Discovery of the Bay of San Francisco

by

Zoeth S. Eldredge.



The popular mind accepts the oft-repeated statement that the settlement
of California was due to the pious zeal of a devoted priest, eager to
save the souls of the heathen, supplemented by the paternal care of a
monarch solicitous for the welfare of his subjects. The political
exigencies of the day are forgotten; military commanders and civil
governors sink into insignificance and become mere executives of the
priestly will, while the heroic efforts of Junipero Serra to convert the
natives, his courage in the face of danger, his sublime zeal, and his
unwearied devotion, make him the impelling factor in the colonization of
California.

Nor is the popular conception that the church led the way into
California strange, when we understand that it is to the writings of
Fray Francisco Palou, friend, disciple, and successor of Junipero, that
all historians turn for the account of the occupation. Fray Palou
details the glorious life of the leader with whom he toiled; he
eulogizes the worthy priest, the ardent missionary, as he passed up and
down the length of the land, founding missions, planting the vine, the
olive, and the fruit tree in a land whose inhabitants had often suffered
from hunger; giving aid and comfort to the sick and weary and
consolation to the dying. Indeed, the pictures of the padres are
fascinating. The infant establishments planted by the church grew rich
and powerful, but so wise and gentle was the administration of the
priests and so generous their hospitality, that life in California in
the first quarter of the nineteenth century was an almost dolce far
niente existence.

Radiant as is the priestly figure of Junipero drawn by Palou, the
careful investigator will find that the impelling factor in the
occupation of California was stern military necessity, not missionary
zeal. From the time of Cabrillo, Spain had claimed the coasts of the
Pacific up to forty-two degrees north latitude by right of discovery,
but more than two hundred years had passed and she had done nothing
towards making good this right by settlement. The country was open to
colonization by any nation strong enough to maintain and protect its
colonies.

Before relating the story of Portola's march, let us consider for a
moment the situation of California in its relation to Spain and other
European nations, and we will then understand why Spain found it
necessary to occupy the country.

When Legaspi completed the conquest of the Philippines in 1565, he sent
his flagship, the San Pedro, back to New Spain under command of his
grandson, Felipe Salcedo, with orders to survey and chart a practicable
route for ships returning from the Islands. The San Pedro sailed from
Cebu, June 1, 1565, and took her course east-northeast to the Ladrones,
thence northward to latitude thirty-eight, thence sailing eastward,
following the Kuroshiwo, the Black Current of Japan, they made a
landfall on the coast of California about the latitude of Cape
Mendocino. A sail of two thousand five hundred miles down the coasts of
California and New Spain brought the voyagers to the port of Acapulco.
This route was charted by the priests on board the San Pedro, and for
nearly three centuries was the one followed by the galleons of Spain
sailing from Manila to Acapulco. The voyage across the Pacific was a
long one and ships in distress were obliged to put about and make for
Japan. A harbor on the coast of California in which ships could find
shelter and repair damages was greatly desired. A survey of the unknown
coasts of the South Sea, as it was called, was ordered, and it was also
suggested that the explorations be extended beyond the forty-second
degree of north latitude, it being held that the coast was a part of the
same continent as that of China, or only separated therefrom by the
narrow strait of Anian, which was believed to open in latitude
forty-two.

Up to this time the only exploration of the northern coast of California
was that of Juan Rodrigues Cabrillo, and continued after his death by
his chief pilot, Bartolome Ferrelo, in 1542-1543. Cabrillo sailed as far
north as Fort Ross, anchored in the Gulf of the Farallones, off the
entrance to the Golden Gate, and then sought refuge from the terrible
storms in San Miguel Island, Santa Barbara Channel, where he died.
Ferrelo took command and sailed up to Cape Mendocino, which he named in
honor of Don Antonio de Mendoza, first viceroy of New Spain.

On the 17th of June, 1579, Francis Drake, in command of the Golden
Hinde, took refuge in the bay under Point Reyes, now known as Drake's
Bay. He took possession of the country in the name of Queen Elizabeth,
and named it New Albion, because of the white cliffs which, Chaplain
Fletcher writes, "lie towards the sea," and also "that it might have
some affinity with our own country." It was in this place and at this
time that the first English service was held in America, by Master
Francis Fletcher, chaplain to Francis Drake. The "Prayer Book Cross" in
Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, commemorates the event.

Drake remained in this bay thirty-seven days, refitted his ship,
supplied himself with wood and water, and sailed on July 23d to the
Southeast Farallones, where he laid in a store of seal meat, and on the
25th sailed across the Pacific for England by way of the Cape of Good
Hope.

In 1585, Captain Francisco de Gali, sailing for the Philippines, was
directed to sail, on the return voyage, as far north as the weather
would permit, and on reaching the coast of California, examine the land
and the harbors on his way homeward, make maps of all, and report all
that he accomplished. It does not appear from Gali's report that he
accomplished anything in particular. He reached the coast in latitude
37deg. 30' (Pillar Point), and noted that the land was high and fair; that
the mountains[1] were without snow, and that there were many indications
of rivers, bays, and havens along the coast.

In 1594, Captain Sebastian Cermenon, a Portuguese sailor in the service
of Spain, sailed for the Philippines with orders similar to those of
Gali. In an attempt to survey the coast, he lost his ship, the San
Agustin. It is supposed she struck on one of the Farallones and was
beached in Drake's Bay. From the trunk of a tree they constructed a
boat, called a viroco, and in this the ship's company of more than
seventy persons continued the homeward voyage. The little vessel reached
Puerto de Navidad in safety, and here the commander and part of the
company left it in charge of the pilot, Juan de Morgana, with a crew of
ten men, who brought it into Acapulco on the 31st of January, 1596; a
most remarkable voyage of nearly twenty-five hundred miles by
shipwrecked, sick, and hungry men, crowded into an open boat. With the
loss of the San Agustin, explorations of the California coast by laden
ships from the Philippines came to an end.

Sometime prior to the summer of 1595, the viceroy of New Spain, Don Luis
de Velasco, entered into an agreement with certain persons looking to
the exploration of the coasts of the Californias and the settlement of
the land. The consideration for this undertaking, which was to be at the
expense of the adventurers, was the privilege of pearl fishing and
trade, together with all the honors, favors, and exemptions usually
given to the pacifiers and settlers of new provinces. Preparations for
the expedition were under way, when a dispute arose between the leader
and his partners in the enterprise, and the matter was carried into the
courts. Before a decision was reached, the leader died, and the judge
ordered the other partners, among whom was one Sebastian Vizcaino, to
begin the voyage to the Californias within three months. Under this
order, Vizcaino applied to Viceroy Velasco, and received his permission
to make the journey. This was the condition of affairs when, on October
5, 1596, Velasco was relieved and a new viceroy, Don Gaspar de Zuniga y
Azevedo, Count of Monterey, took command. At Velasco's request, Zuniga
made a careful examination of all matters pertaining to the expedition
to the Californias, and the result was not favorable to Vizcaino. The
new viceroy did not think that an enterprise which might involve results
of such vast importance should be entrusted to the leadership of a
person of such obscure position and limited capital. He also doubted if
Vizcaino had the resolution and capacity necessary for so great an
undertaking, and it appeared to him that if disorders should arise among
his men through lack of discipline, or if the natives of the country to
which he was going should repel him, the repute and royal authority of
the king would be in danger. On the other hand, there was the decision
of the court, the concession of the viceroy, and the fact that Vizcaino
had already been at expense in the matter. Zuniga communicated his
doubts to the former viceroy, who, in his perplexity, submitted the
question to a theologian and a jurist, selected as the viceroy writes,
from the number of those whose opinions were entitled to the greatest
consideration. Their decision was that the concession of the viceroy had
the force of an agreement and contract; that what was at first a favor
had become a right, and that, as the captain had manifested no
incapacity and had been guilty of no offense, the compact could not be
varied. The audiencia[2], before whom Zuniga also laid the matter, was
of like opinion. In view, therefore, of the length to which the affair
had gone, the viceroy resolved not to annul the contract but to do all
in his power to insure the success of the expedition. That Vizcaino's
soldiers might respect and esteem him, the viceroy clothed him with
authority and showed him the greatest honor. He required Vizcaino to
furnish him with complete memorandums and inventories of the ships and
lanchas he intended to take with him, with their sails and tackle, the
number of people, and the provisions for them, arms, ammunition, and all
other property, and he instructed the royal officers at Acapulco that
the expedition must not be permitted to sail until it was fully provided
with everything necessary for the voyage and the safety of the people.
The Council of the Indies, on receiving Zuniga's report, ordered him to
cancel Vizcaino's commission and select another leader for the
expedition, but before this order could reach the viceroy, Vizcaino had
sailed. The expedition consisted of the flagship San Francisco, six
hundred tons; the San Jose, a smaller ship, under command of Captain
Rodrigo de Figueroa, and a lancha. Vizcaino sailed from Acapulco in
March, 1596. His first stop was at the port of Calagua on the coast of
Colima, where he took on some of his people and stores, and to this
point the watchful viceroy sent a personal representative to see that
Vizcaino complied with all of his requirements, and to report on the
conduct of his soldiers. From here Vizcaino sailed northwest to Cape
Corrientes, thence northerly to the Islands of San Juan de Mazatlan.
From Mazatlan he bore west-northwest across the Gulf of California and
landed in a large bay which he named San Felipe, afterwards known as the
Bay of Cerralbo. From here he went to La Paz bay, which he so named
because of the peaceful character of the Indians, who received him
hospitably with presents of fish, game, and fruits. This was, it is
supposed, the place where Jimenez, the discoverer of California, lost
his life in 1533, and where Cortez planted his ill-fated colony two
years later. In entering the bay, the flagship ran on a shoal, and they
were obliged to cut away her masts and lighten her of her cargo of
provisions, a great part of which was wet and lost. Here Vizcaino landed
and built a stockade fort, and leaving the dismantled flagship and the
married men of his company under command of his lieutenant, Figueroa, he
sailed on October 3rd, with the San Jose and the lancha and eighty men
to explore the gulf. He encountered severe storms which separated his
vessels, and not having proper discipline among his men, had trouble
with the Indians of the coast, during which nineteen men were lost by
the overturning of the ship's long boat. He turned back to La Paz, where
his men, disheartened by the storms and the loss of their comrades,
demanded to be returned to New Spain. His stock of provisions was
running low, and putting the disaffected on the flagship and the lancha,
he sent them back, and with the San Jose and forty of the more
adventurous of the men, again sailed, on October 28th, for the
headwaters of the gulf. For sixty-six days he battled against strong
north winds, and only succeeded in reaching latitude twenty-nine; then
yielding to the demands of his men, he sailed for the port of the Isles
of Mazatlan.

The results of the expedition did not add to Vizcaino's reputation, but
he made a most glowing report of his discoveries. He told of a land
double the extent of New Spain and in situation much preferable; its
seas abounding in pearls of excellent quality and in fish of all kinds,
in quantity greater than was contained in any other discovered sea;
while in the interior of the land, some twenty days' journey to the
northwest, were people who lived in towns, wore clothes, had gold and
silver ornaments, cloaks of cotton, maize and provisions, fowls of the
country (turkeys), and of Castile (chickens); thus the Indians told him
- not only in one place but in many. He desired permission to make
another voyage, and as the late expedition had exhausted his own
resources, asked that he be granted thirty-five thousand dollars from
the royal treasury and outfitting for his ships. These advances he
agreed to repay from the first gain received by him during the voyage.
He also asked, on behalf of those who accompanied him, that the
countries brought by him into subjection to the crown be given to them
encomienda for five lives[3]; that they be made gentlemen and granted
all the favors, exemptions, and liberties that other gentlemen enjoy,
not only in the provinces of the Indies but also in Spain. For these and
for other favors asked, Vizcaino agreed to sail with five ships,
equipped with proper artillery, one hundred and fifty men, arms and
ammunition, provisions, etc. - all things necessary for the voyage. He
would pay the king one-fifth part of all gold, precious stones and
valuable mineral substances obtained, one-tenth part of the fish taken,
and one-twentieth part of the salt obtained. He also agreed to make
discovery of the whole ensenada and gulf of the Californias, take
possession of the land in the name of his majesty, make settlements,
build forts, and explore the country inland for a distance of one
hundred leagues.

Vizcaino's rose-colored report did not deceive the authorities, but as
he had the necessary outfit and had had some experience, the Council
decided that he was the best man to head the expedition, though Zuniga
favored Don Gabriel Maldonado, of Saville, for commander. The Council
ordered that Vizcaino be supplied from the royal treasury with all
necessary funds; it granted the boon of encomienda for three lives, and
that the discoverers should have all the privileges of gentlemen
throughout the Indies. It also granted other minor privileges and boons
asked for. Vizcaino was made captain-general of the expedition, and
sailed from Acapulco May 5, 1602, with orders to explore the coasts of
the Californias from Cape San Lucas to Cape Mendocino, or as far north
as latitude forty-two. His ships were the San Diego, flagship, the Santo
Tomas, under Toribio Gomez de Corvan, the Tres Reyes, a small fragata or
tender, under Alferez Martin Aguilar, and a barcolongo for exploring
rivers and bays[4]. The chief pilot of the expedition was Francisco
Bolanos who had been one of the pilots with Cermenon on the lost San
Agustin. Three barefooted Carmelites looked after the spiritual needs of
the adventurers. The story of this second voyage of Vizcaino is well
known. On the 10th of November, they were in the Bay of San Diego, which
Vizcaino named for San Diego de Alcala, whose day, November 14th, they
spent in the bay, ignoring the name, San Miguel, given it by Cabrillo
sixty years before. Later in the month he entered and named San Pedro
bay, for Saint Peter, bishop of Alexandria, whose day, November 26th, it
was. He also named the islands still known as Santa Catalina and San
Clemente. He next sailed through and named the Canal de Santa Barbara,
which saint's day, December 4th, was observed while in the channel, and
also named Isla de Santa Barbara and Isla de San Nicolas. Passing Punta
de la Concepcion, which he named[5], Vizcaino sailed up the coast in a
thick fog, which lifting on December 14th, revealed to the voyagers the
lofty coast range usually sighted by the ships coming from the
Philippines. Four leagues beyond they saw a river flowing from high
hills through a beautiful valley to the sea. To the mountains he gave
the name of Sierra de la Santa Lucia, in honor of the Saint whose day
(December 13th) they had just celebrated, and the stream he named Rio
del Carmelo, in honor of the Carmelite friars. Rounding a high wooded
point, which he named Punta de los Pinos, he dropped anchor in Monterey
bay, December 16th, 1602. Here Vizcaino found the much desired harbor of
refuge, and he named it for his patron, the Conde de Monterey. Vizcaino
made the most of his discovery, and in a letter to the king, written in
Monterey Bay, December 28, 1602[6], he gives a most glowing description
of the bay, which is, at best, but an open roadstead. The Indians, as
usual, told him of large cities in the interior, which they invited him
to visit, but Vizcaino could not tarry. His provisions were almost gone,
his men were sick with scurvy, of which many had died, and putting the
most helpless on board the Santo Tomas, he sent her to Acapulco for aid,
and sailed, January 3, 1603, with the flagship and fragata, for the
north. A storm soon separated the vessels and they did not see each
other again until they met in the harbor of Acapulco. Vizcaino was told
by the pilot, Bolanos, that Cermenon had left in Drake's Bay a large
quantity of wax and several chests of silk, and he entered the bay on
January 8th to see if any vestiges remained of ship or cargo. He did not
land, but awaited the arrival of the fragata. As she did not appear, he
became uneasy, and sailed the next morning in search of her. On the
13th, a violent gale from the southeast drove him northward. This was
followed by a dense fog, and when it lifted, he found himself in
latitude forty-two - the limit of his instructions - with Cape Blanco in
sight, "and the trend of the coast line onward," he writes, "towards
Japan and Great China, which are but a short run away." Only six of his
men were now able to keep the deck, and he bore away for Acapulco, where
he arrived March 21, 1603. Of the company that sailed with him,
forty-two had died.

In 1606, Philip III, King of Spain, ordered that Monterey be occupied
and provision made there to succor and refit the Philippine ships. He
directed that to Vizcaino should be given the command of the expedition.
His orders were not carried out and Vizcaino sailed instead for Japan,
whence he returned in 1613, and died three years later.

For over one hundred and sixty years, no steps were taken for the
pacification and settlement of Alta California. The galleons continued
to make their yearly voyages to the Philippines, and returning, sail
down the coast within sight of the fair land; but no harbor of refuge
was established and no attempt was made to colonize the country.

At last the Spanish king began to realize that if he would retain his
possessions in America, some action was necessary for their protection.
Spanish sovereignty in the Pacific was threatened. The Russians had
crossed Bering Sea, had established themselves on the coast of Alaska,
and their hunters were extending their pursuit of the sea otter into
more southern waters. England had wrested Canada from France and was
ready to turn her attention to the American possessions of Spain. The
Family Compact of the Bourbon princes of France, Spain, and Italy had
aroused the ire of Pitt, then at the zenith of his fame, and he resolved
to demand an explanation from Spain, and, failing to receive it, attack
her at home and abroad before she was prepared, declaring that it was
time for humbling the whole house of Bourbon. A check in the cabinet
caused Pitt's resignation, but in 1766 he was again restored to power
with vigor and arrogance unabated.

On February 27, 1767, Don Carlos III of Spain issued his famous decree
expelling the Jesuits from the Spanish dominions. This society had
established a number of missions in Lower California, and Don Gaspar de
Portola, a captain of dragoons of the Regiment of Spain, was appointed
governor of the Californias  and sailed from Tepic with twenty-five
dragoons, twenty-five infantry, and fourteen Franciscan friars to
dispossess the Jesuits and turn the California missions over to the
Franciscans.

The king having been warned of the advance of the Russians upon the
northern coasts of California, ordered the viceroy of New Spain to take
effective measures to guard that part of his dominions from danger of
invasion and insult. While the viceroy was casting about to find a
person of sufficient importance and ability to organize and carry out so
great an undertaking, Don Jose de Galvez, visitador-general of the
kingdom and member of the Council of the Indies, offered his services
and volunteered to go to Lower California and effect the organization
and equipment of the expedition. His services were eagerly accepted, and
Galvez set out from the City of Mexico, April 9, 1768, for San Blas, on
the coast of New Galicia. Before arriving at that port, he was overtaken
by a courier from the viceroy bringing orders just received from the
court directing that a maritime expedition should be at once dispatched
to Monterey and that port fortified. Convening the Junta at San Blas on
the 16th of May, 1768, the senor visitador laid before them the
situation and the wishes of the king. He stated that on the exterior or
occidental coasts of the Californias, Spain claimed from Cape San Lucas
on the south to the Rio de los Reyes[7] in 43 degrees, though the only
portion occupied was from Cape San Lucas up to 30deg. 30'.[8] The civilized
or Christian portion of the community (gente de razon - people of
reason) did not, he said, number more than four hundred souls, including
the families of the soldiers of the garrison of Loreto and those of the
miners in the south; that if foreigners of any nation were to establish
themselves in the celebrated ports of San Diego and Monterey, they might
fortify themselves there before the government could receive notice of
it. In all the Sea of the South that washes the shores of New Spain
there were no other vessels than the two packet-boats recently built in
San Blas, the San Carlos and the San Antonio, and two others of small
tonnage which served the Jesuit missionaries in their communications
between California and the coast of Sonora. In these few ships consisted
all the maritime forces which could have been opposed to foreign
invasion. All this Galvez laid before the Junta, there being present the
commandant of the department and the army officers and pilots who
chanced to be there. It was resolved to send an expedition by sea in the
San Carlos and San Antonio, and orders were made to prepare the ships,
while Galvez proceeded to the peninsula to attend to the gathering of
supplies and provisions. All the missions of Lower California were laid
under contribution of vestments and sacred vessels for the new missions
to be established, also dried fruits, wine, oil, riding horses and mule
herd; for Galvez had decided to supplement the maritime expedition by
one by land, lest the infinite risks and dangers attending a long
sea-voyage should render the attempt abortive. The governor, Don Gaspar
de Portola, volunteered to lead the expedition, and he was named
commander-in-chief. Don Fernando de Rivera y Moncado, captain of the
presidio of Loreto, was appointed second in command. The troops were
composed of forty cavalrymen from the presidio of Loreto in Lower
California, under Rivera, and twenty-five infantrymen of the compania
franca of Catalonia, under Lieutenant Don Pedro Fages. To the presidial
troops were joined thirty Christian Indians from the missions, armed
with bows and arrows. These were intended for the land expedition. The
mission of Santa Maria, the northernmost mission on the peninsula, was
the rendezvous of the land forces, and from Loreto four lighters loaded
with provisions for the land expedition were sent up the gulf to the bay
of San Luis Gonzaga, the nearest point to the mission of Santa Maria,
whither also went by land the troops, muleteers, and vaqueros, with the
herd of every sort. Finding insufficient pasturage for the cattle at
Santa Maria, they advanced to Velicata, some thirty miles distant, and
here was assembled the land expedition. In addition to the officers
named, Don Miguel Costanso, ensign of royal engineers, was ordered to
join the expedition as cosmographer and diarist, and Don Pedro Prat was
appointed physician. To minister to the soldiers and take charge of the
missions to be established in the new land, the following missionary
priests, all of the college of San Fernando in Mexico, were named to
accompany the expedition. Fray Junipero Serra, appointed president of
the missions of Alta California, Fray Juan Crespi, Fray Fernando Parron,
Fray Juan Vizcaino, and Fray Francisco Gomez.

On the 6th of January, 1769, at the port of La Paz, the San Carlos was
loaded and ready for sea. The venerable Father Junipero Serra sang mass
aboard her, and with other devotional exercises blessed the ship and the
standards. The visitador named the Senor San Jose patron of the
expedition, and in a fervent exhortation, kindled the spirits of those
about to sail. These were Don Pedro Fages, with his twenty-five Catalans
of the 1st batallion 2d regiment, Voluntarios de Cataluna, Alferez
Miguel Costanso, Surgeon Don Pedro Prat, and Padre Fernando Parron. The
ship was commanded by Don Vicente Vila, lieutenant of the royal navy;
the mate was Don Jorge Estorace, and twenty-three sailors, two boys,
four cooks, and two blacksmiths made up the rest of the ship's company -
sixty-two in all. They embarked on the night of January 9th and sailed
on the 10th. Galvez appointed Fages gefe de las armas - chief of the
military expedition at sea, and instructed him to retain command of the
soldiers on land until the arrival of the governor at Monterey[9]. On
the 15th of February, Father Junipero performed like offices for the San
Antonio, and she sailed the same day under command of Don Juan Perez,
"of the navigation of the Philippines," carrying Frays Vizcaino and
Gomez, some carpenters, blacksmiths, and cooks, that, with the sailors,
made some ninety persons, all told, on both ships. The rendezvous was
San Diego bay, where all were to meet.

The land expedition was divided into two parts. The first division,
under Rivera, started from Velicata March 24th, and the second, under
command of the governor, started May 15th. With Rivera were Padre
Crespi, Pilotin (Mate) Jose Canizares. Twenty-five soldados de
cuera[10], three muleteers, and eleven Christian Indians - forty-two
men. With the governor marched Junipero Serra, fifteen soldados de
cuera, under Sergeant Jose Francisco de Ortega, two servants, muleteers
and Indians - forty-four in all. The previous day, May 14, 1769, being
Easter Sunday, Junipero established the Mission of San Fernando with
Fray Miguel de la Campa as Minister. For the succor and relief of the
forces, both sea and land, Galvez built, at San Blas, a ship which he
named in honor of the protector of the expedition, the San Jose, and
loading her with supplies and provisions, sent her with orders to meet
the expedition at Monterey. She was lost at sea.

There is very little of interest in this march of some two hundred miles
through a barren country to the bay of San Diego. Junipero's diary lies
before me[11]; it is a dreary recital of small incidents of the march, the
Indians they met, the barrancas they crossed, with pious comments, etc.;
no course, no distances traveled, or other like information necessary to
an understanding of the route and country. As a diarist, he is not to be
compared with Crespi. On June 20th they came first in sight of the sea
at the Ensenada de Todos Santos; thence their journey was by the sea
until they came to the rendezvous. As they drew near to San Diego, their
Indian allies began to desert, evidently in fear of the Dieguenos, whom
they began to meet in numbers and who proved a rascally lot. They
thronged the camp and became a perfect nuisance with their begging and
stealing. They begged from Junipero his robe and from the governor his
cuera, waistcoat, breeches, and all he had on. One of them succeeding in
inducing Junipero to take off his spectacles to show them to him and as
soon as he got them in his hands made off with them, causing the priest
a thousand difficulties to recover them. On the 27th of June Sergeant
Ortega, with his scouts, pushed on to San Diego and announced to the
anxious camp the proximity of the governor. Rivera sent ten of his
soldiers with fresh horses back with Ortega, and Portola, in advance of
his command, reached the camp June 29th, and the entire division
arrived, June 30th, in good order and condition, forty-six days from
Velicata.

Let us anticipate their arrival and ascertain the fate of the other
divisions of the expedition. For more than a century and a half the
placid waters of San Diego bay had lain undisturbed by any craft more
formidable than the tule rafts (balsas de enea) of the natives, when on
the 11th of April, 1769, a silent ship slowly entered the bay and
dropped her anchor not far from the point where now the ferry boat for
Coronado leaves the slip. It was the San Antonio, the first arrival at
the rendezvous. No attempt was made to land, for they were alone and
dread scurvy had them in its grip. Two had died, and most of the ship's
company were sick. On the 29th, the San Carlos arrived, 110 days from La
Paz, with her company in even worse condition. All were sick, some had
died, and only four sailors remained on their feet, aided in working the
ship by such of the soldiers as were able to help. She had been driven
far out of her course; had found herself short of water, and had to put
into the island of Cedros to supply herself, and it was with the
greatest difficulty she reached the bay of San Diego. The first thing to
be done was to find good water and to minister to the sick. For this
purpose there landed, on May 1st, Don Pedro Fages, Don Miguel Costanso,
and Don Jorge Estorace, with twenty-five men-soldiers, sailors, etc.,
all who were able to do duty, and, proceeding up the shore, found, by
direction of some Indians, a river of good mountain water at a distance
of three leagues to the northeast. Moving their ships as near as they
could, they prepared on the beach a camp, which they surrounded with a
parapet of earth and fascines, and mounted two cannon. Within they made
two large hospital tents from the sails and awnings of the ships, and
set up the tents of the officers and priests. Then they transferred the
sick. The labor was immense, for all were sick, and the list of those
able to perform duty daily grew smaller. The difficulties of their
situation were very great. Nearly all the medicines and food had been
consumed during the long voyage, and Don Pedro Prat, the surgeon,
himself sick with scurvy, sought in the fields with a thousand anxieties
some healing herbs, of which he himself was in as sore need as the
others. The cold made itself felt with vigor at night and the sun burned
them by day - alternations which made the sick suffer cruelly, two or
three of them dying every day, until the whole sea expedition which had
been composed of more than ninety men, found itself reduced to eight
soldiers and as many sailors in a state to attend to the safeguarding of
the ships, the working of the launches, the custody of the camp, and the
care of the sick.

There was no news whatever of the land divisions. The neighborhood of
the fort was diligently searched for tracks of a horse herd, but none
were discovered. They did not know what to think of this delay. At
length, on the 14th of May, the Indians gave notice to some soldiers on
the beach that from the direction of the south men mounted on horses and
armed as they, were coming. It was the first land division under Rivera,
fifty days from Velicata, without the loss of a man or having a sick
one; but they were on half rations; they had only three sacks of flour
left and were issuing two tortillas[12] per day to each man. Great was
the rejoicing in the camp of the sick over the arrival of Rivera's
force. It was now resolved to remove the camp near to the river. This
was done, and a new camp established on a hill in what is now known as
"Old Town," where a stockade was made and the cannon mounted. The
surgeon, Pedro Prat, devoted himself to the sick, but the deaths
continued, until of the ninety and more who had sailed from La Paz,
two-thirds were laid under the sand of Punta de los Muertos[13]. It was
now thought best to send one of the packets to San Blas to inform the
viceroy and the visitador of the state of the expedition, and it was
feared that if this were longer delayed, the ship would be unable to put
to sea for lack of mariners. The San Antonio was selected for this
purpose, and was prepared for sea, but as she was about to sail, the
camp was thrown into an ecstasy of joy by the arrival of Portola and the
second division, sound in body, and with 163 mules laden with
provisions. The governor promptly informed himself of the condition of
affairs, and desirous that the senor visitador's orders concerning the
sea expedition should be carried out, offered to Captain Vila of the San
Carlos sixteen men of his command to work the ship, that he might pursue
the voyage to Monterey. As Vila had lost all his ship's officers,
boatswain, storekeeper, coxswain of the launch, and there was not a
sailor among the men offered by Portola, he declined to go to sea under
such conditions. All the available sailors were therefore placed on
board the San Antonio, and she sailed for San Blas, June 8th, with eight
men only for a crew.

The governor now proceeded to organize his force for the march to
Monterey. He determined to move at once, lest the advancing season
should expose them to the danger of having the passes of the sierra
closed by snow, as even at San Diego those who came by sea reported the
sierras covered with snow on their arrival in April.

On the 14th of July, Portola began his march to Monterey, distant one
hundred and fifty-nine leagues. His force consisted of Sergeant Ortega,
with twenty-seven soldados de cuera under Rivera, Fages with six Catalan
volunteers - all that could travel, Ensign Costanso, the priests, Crespi
and Gomez, seven muleteers, fifteen Christian Indians from the missions
of Lower California, and two servants - sixty-four in all. Both Fages
and Costanso were sick with scurvy, but joined the command
notwithstanding. The personnel of this expedition contains some of the
best known names in California. Portola, the first governor; Rivera,
comandante of California from 1773 to 1777, killed in the Yuma revolt on
the Colorado in 1781; Fages, first comandante of California, 1769-1773,
governor, 1782-1790; Ortega, pathfinder, explorer, discoverer of the
Golden Gate and of Carquines Strait[14]; lieutenant and brevet captain,
comandante of the presidio of San Diego, of Santa Barbara, and of
Monterey; founder of the presidio of Santa Barbara and of the missions
of San Juan Capistrano and San Buenaventura. Among the rank and file
were men whose names are not less known: Pedro Amador, who gave his name
to Amador county; Juan Bautista Alvarado, grandfather of Governor
Alvarado; Jose Raimundo Carrillo, later alferez, lieutenant, and
captain, comandante of the presidio of Monterey, of Santa Barbara, and
of San Diego, and founder of the great Carrillo family; Jose Antonio
Yorba, sergeant of Catalonia volunteers, founder of the family of that
name and grantee of the Rancho Santiago de Santa Ana; Pablo de Cota,
Jose Ignacio Oliveras, Jose Maria Soberanes, and others.

At San Diego, Portola left the sick under the care of the faithful
surgeon, Prat, and a guard of ten cuera soldiers; Captain Vila of the
San Carlos, with a few seamen; Frays Junipero Serra, Juan Vizcaino, and
Fernando Parron, a carpenter, a blacksmith, and a few Lower California
Indians, some forty persons in all. The governor also left with them a
sufficient number of horses and mules and about sixty loads[15] of
provisions. On July 16th, two days after the Portola expedition started,
Junipero founded, with appropriate ceremonies, the mission of San Diego
de Alcala, the first mission established in Alta California. The deaths
continued, and before Portola's return in January, eight soldiers, four
sailors, one servant, and eight Indians died, leaving but about twenty
persons at the camp.

We will now follow the governor. Relying somewhat on the supply ship,
San Jose, which was to meet him at Monterey, but which, as we have seen,
was lost at sea, and also on the supplies to be brought by the San
Antonio, the governor, knowing the uncertainties of a sea voyage, took
with him one hundred mules loaded with provisions, sufficient, he
concluded, to last him for six months.

On the march the following order was observed. Sergeant Ortega, with six
or eight soldiers, went in advance, laid out the route, selected the
camping place, and cleared the way of hostile Indians by whom he was
frequently surrounded. At the head of the column rode the comandante,
with Fages, Costanso, the two priests, and an escort of six Catalonia
volunteers; next came the sappers and miners, composed of Indians, with
spades, mattocks, crowbars, axes, and other implements used by pioneers;
these were followed by the main body divided into four bands of
pack-animals, each with its muleteers and a guard of presidial soldiers.
The last was the rear guard, commanded by Captain Rivera, convoying the
spare horses and mules (caballada y mulada).

The presidial soldiers were provided with two kinds of arms, offensive
and defensive. The defensive consisted of the cuera (leather jacket) and
the adarga (shield)[16]. The first, being made in the form of a coat
without sleeves, was composed of six or seven thicknesses of dressed
deer skins impervious to the Indian arrows, except at very short range.
The adarga was of two thicknesses of raw bulls-hide, borne on the left
arm, and so managed by the trooper as to defend himself and his horse
against the arrows and spears of the Indians; in addition, they used a
species of apron of leather, fastened to the pommel of the saddle, with
a fall to each side of the horse down to the stirrup, wide enough to
cover the thigh and a leg of the horseman, and protect him when riding
through the brush. This apron was called the armas. Their offensive arms
were the lance, which they managed with great dexterity on horseback,
the broadsword, and a short musket, carried in a case. Costanso, who was
an officer of the regular army, bears testimony to the unceasing labor
of the presidial soldiers of California on this march, and says they
were men capable of enduring much fatigue, obedient, resolute, and
active; "and it is not too much to say that they are the best horsemen
in the world, and among the best soldiers who gain their bread in the
service of the king."[17]

It must be understood that the marches of these troops with such a train
through an unknown country and by unused paths, could not be long ones.
It was necessary to explore the land one day for the march of the next,
and the camp for the day was sometimes regulated by the distance to be
traveled to the next place where water, fuel, and pastures could be had.
The distance made was from two to four leagues[18], and the command
rested every four days, more or less, according to the fatigue caused
by the roughness of the road, the toil of the pioneers, the wandering
off of the beasts, or the necessities of the sick. Costanso says that
one of their greatest difficulties was in the control of their caballada
(horse-herd), without which the journey could not be made. In a country
they do not know, horses frighten themselves by night in the most
incredible manner. To stampede them, it is enough for them to discover a
coyote or fox. The flight of a bird, the dust flung by the wind-any of
these are capable of terrifying them and causing them to run many
leagues, precipitating themselves over barrancas and precipices, without
any human effort availing to restrain them. Afterwards it costs immense
toil to gather them again, and those that are not killed or crippled,
remain of no service for some time. In the form and manner stated, the
Spaniards made their marches, traversing immense lands, which grew more
fertile and pleasing as they progressed northward.

The expedition followed practically the route which afterwards became
the Camino Real. Its fourth jornada (day's journey) brought it to the
pretty valley where later was established the mission of San Luis Rey.
They called it San Juan Capistrano, but that name was afterwards
transferred to a mission forty miles north of this place. The command
rested here, July 19th. Resuming the march on the 20th, the sierra (San
Onofre), whose base they were skirting, drew so near the sea that it
seemed to threaten their advance, but by keeping close to the shore,
they held their way, and on the 24th they encamped on a fine stream of
water running through a mesa at the foot of a sierra, whence looking
across the sea, they could descry Santa Catalina Island. This was San
Juan Capistrano, and here they rested on the 25th. On the 28th they
reached the Santa Ana river, near the present town of that name; a
violent shock of earthquake which they experienced caused them to name
the river Jesus de los Temblores[19]. July 30th and 31st they were in
the San Gabriel valley, which they called San Miguel, and on August 1st
they rested near the site of the present city of Los Angeles. The stop
this day, in addition to the needed rest and the necessity for
exploration, was to give opportunity for the soldiers and people of the
expedition to gain the great indulgence of Porciuncula.[20] The priests
said mass and the sacrament was administered. In the afternoon the
soldiers went to hunt and brought in an antelope (barrendo), with which
the land seemed to abound. The next day they crossed the Los Angeles
river by the site of the present city, and named it Rio de Nuestra
Senora de Los Angeles de Porciuncula[21]. Passing up the river, they
went through the canon and came into the San Fernando valley, which they
called Valle de Santa Catalina de los Encinos - Valley of St. Catherine
of the Oaks. Five days they spent in the valley, and crossing the Santa
Susana mountains, perhaps by the Tapo canon, they came to the Santa
Clara river near the site of Camulos, and there rested, August 9th.
Portola named the river Santa Clara, which name it still bears, in honor
of the saint, whose day, August 12th, was observed by them. Five days,
by easy jornadas, they traveled down the river, and arrived on the 14th
at the first rancheria[22] of the Channel Indians. It being the vespers
of the feast of La Asuncion de Nuestra Senora, Portola named the village
La Asuncion. It contained about thirty large, well-constructed houses of
clay and rushes, and each house held three or four families. These
Indians were of good size, well-formed, active, industrious, and very
skillful in constructing boats, wooden bowls, and other articles.
Portola thought this pueblo must be the one named by Cabrillo, Pueblo de
Canoas (Pueblo of the Boats). This was the site selected for the mission
of San Buenaventura, founded March 31, 1782. The natives received them
kindly, gave them an abundance of food, and showed them their well-made
boats, twenty-four feet long, made of pine boards tied together with
cords and covered with asphaltum, and capable of carrying ten men each.
The next four days they followed the beach and camped, on August 18th,
at a large laguna, called by them La Laguna de la Concepcion. This was
the site of the future presidio and mission of Santa Barbara. Everywhere
were large populous rancherias of the Indians, and everywhere they were
received in the most hospitable manner and provided with more food than
they could eat. The next stop was three leagues beyond, on the shore of
a large lagoon and marsh, containing a good-sized island on which was a
large rancheria, while four others lined the banks of the lagoon.
Portola gave to this group the name In Mediaciones de las Rancherias de
Mescaltitan - The Contiguous Rancherias of Mescaltitan. The name of
Mescaltitan is still attached to the island, though the marsh is mostly
drained and contains some of the finest walnut groves in California. On
the 28th, they turned Point Concepcion and camped just north at a place
called by them Paraje de los Pedernales. Point Pedernales, about five
miles beyond, preserves the name. On the 30th they crossed a large
river, which they named the Santa Rosa, in honor of that saint, whose
day it was. This is now the Santa Inez, so called from the mission of
that name, established on its bank in 1804. Passing northward along the
beach, a sharp spur of the sierra jutting out at Point Sal turned them
inland through the little pass followed by the Southern Pacific Coast
Line, and they came, on September 10th, to a large lake in the northwest
corner of Santa Barbara county, to which was given the name of Laguna
Larga, now known as Guadalupe Lake. Three leagues beyond, they camped at
a lake named by Costanso, Laguna Redonda, but which the soldiers called
El Oso Flaco - The Thin Bear - and it is still known by that name. Here
Sergeant Ortega was taken ill, and ten of the soldiers complained of
sore feet. They rested on the 3d, and on the 4th reached the mouth of
the San Luis canon. Here they were hospitably received by the chief of a
large rancheria, whose appearance caused the soldiers to apply to him
the name of "El Buchon," he having a large tumor hanging from his neck.
Father Crespi did not approve of the name which the soldiers applied to
the chief, his rancheria, and to the canon leading up to San Luis
Obispo, and he named the village San Ladislao. As in so many cases the
good father was unable to make the name he gave stick, the saint has
been ignored, but Point Buchon, just above Point Harford and Mount
Buchon, otherwise known as Bald Knob, bear witness to the staying
qualities of the tumor on the chief's neck. Passing up the narrow canon
of San Luis creek, they camped at or near the site of the mission and
city of San Luis Obispo. From here, instead of proceeding over the
Sierra de Santa Lucia by the Cuesta pass into the upper Salinas valley,
whence the march to Monterey would have been easy, they turned to the
west and followed the Canada de los Osos to the sea at Morro Bay, which
they called El Estero de San Serafin. The Canada de los Osos[23], still
so called, they named because of a fight with some very fierce bears,
one of which they succeeded in killing after it had received nine balls.
Another wounded the mules, and the hunters with difficulty saved their
lives.

The travelers now marched up the coast until, on the 13th, they came to
a point where further progress was disputed by the Sierra de Santa
Lucia. This was where a spur from the sierra terminating in Mount Mars,
blocks the passage by the beach and presents a bold front, rising three
thousand feet from the water. Camping at the foot of the sierra, Portola
sent out the explorers under Rivera to find a passage through the
mountains. During the 14th and 15th, the pioneers labored to open a way
into the sierra through San Carpoforo canon, and on the 16th the command
moved up the steep and narrow gulch, with inaccessible mountains on
either side. It is impossible to follow their route through this rugged
mountain range with any degree of accuracy. Their progress was slow and
painful. On the 20th, they toiled up an exceedingly high ridge to the
north, and from its summit the Spaniards looked upon a boundless sea of
mountains, "presenting," writes Crespi, "a sad prospect to us poor
travelers worn out with the fatigue of the journey." The cold was
beginning to be severe, and many of the men were suffering from scurvy
and unfit for service, which increased the hardship for all; yet they
did not falter but pressed bravely on, and on the 26th emerged from the
mountains by the Arroyo Seco, which they named the Canada del Palo
Caido[24] (Valley of the Fallen Tree), and camped on the Salinas river,
which they christened Rio de San Elizario. From now on the march is an
easy one down the Salinas valley to the sea.

On the last day of September, the command halted near the mouth of the
Salinas river, within sound of the ocean, though they could not see it.
They were persuaded that they were not far from the desired port of
Monterey and that the mountain range they had crossed was unquestionably
that of the Santa Lucia, described by Torquemada in his history of the
voyage of Vizcaino, and shown on the chart of the pilot Cabrera Bueno.
The governor ordered the explorers to go out and ascertain on what part
of the coast they were. On the morrow, Rivera, with eight soldiers,
explored the coast to the southward, marching along the shore of the
very port they were seeking, while Portola, with Costanso, Crespi, and
five soldiers, climbed a hill from whose top they saw a great ensenada,
the northern point of which extended a long way into the sea, and bore
northwest at a distance of eight maritime leagues, while on the south a
hill ran out into the sea in the form of a point, and appeared to be
wooded with pines. They recognized the one on the north as the Punta de
Ano Nuevo and that on the south as Punta de Pinos, while between the two
lay the great ensenada[25], with its dreary sand dunes. This was as laid
down in the coast pilot (derretero) of Cabrera Bueno, but where was the
famous port of Monterey?

They thought that perhaps they had passed Monterey in the great circuit
they had made through the mountain ranges. For three days the search was
continued. Rivera reported that south of the Point of Pines and between
it and another point to the south (Point Carmelo) was a small ensenada,
where a stream of water came down from the mountains and emptied into an
estero; that beyond this the coast was so high and impenetrable they
were obliged to turn back, and he believed that it was the same sierra
which compelled them to leave the coast on the 16th of September.

Much perplexed by these reports, the governor called a council of
officers to deliberate as to the best course to pursue. On Wednesday,
October 4th, the council met and after hearing mass, the commander laid
the matter before them. He set forth the shortness of their store of
provisions, the seventeen men on the sick list, unfit for duty, the
excessive burden of labor imposed on the rest in sentinel duty, care of
the animals, and continual explorations, and to the lateness of the
season. In view of these circumstances, and of the fact that the port of
Monterey could not be found where it was said to be, each person present
was called upon to express freely his opinion.

Costanso spoke first; Vizcaino had put Monterey in 37deg.; they had only
reached 36deg. 42'; they should not fail to explore up to 37deg. 30', so as
either to find the port or decide it did not exist. Fages was for going
up to 37deg. or a little more. Rivera thought they should establish
themselves somewhere. Then the resolute commander determined to go
forward and put his trust in God. If they found the desired port of
Monterey and therein the supply-ship San Jose, all would be well. If
Monterey did not appear, they would find a place for a settlement; but
if it should be the will of God that all were to perish, they would have
discharged their duty to God and man in laboring until death in their
endeavor to accomplish the enterprise on which they had been sent. To
this decision all agreed, and signed their names to the compact.

Ortega and his scouts were now dispatched to lay out the route and
locate camping places for several days in advance, and on the 7th of
October, the march was resumed. Sixteen sick men had now lost use of
their limbs. Each night they were rubbed with oil, and each morning they
were put into hammocks swung between two mules, tandem, and thus carried
in the mode of travel used by the women of Andalusia[26]. The march was
slow and painful. Some of the sick were believed to be in the last
extremity, and on October 8th, the holy viaticum was administered to
three, who were thought to be dying.

On this day they crossed the Rio del Pajaro, which they named because of
a great bird the Indians had killed and stuffed with straw, and which
measured seven feet and four inches from the tip of one wing to that of
the other. It was thought to be a royal eagle, and that the natives were
preparing it for some ceremony when they were frightened away by the
approach of the Spaniards. Crespi, who still had a supply of saints on
hand, gave the river the name La Senora Santa Ana, but again the saint
was ignored, and the river is known as the Pajaro (Bird). On the 17th
they crossed and named the Rio de San Lorenzo, at the site of the
present city of Santa Cruz. On the 20th they were at Punta de Ano Nuevo,
and camped at the entrance of the canon of Waddell creek. They
recognized Point Ano Nuevo from the description given by Cabrera Bueno,
and Crespi estimated that it was one league distant from the camp. With
good water and fuel, the command rested here the 21st and 22d. Both
Portola and Rivera were now added to the sick list. Meat and vegetables
had given out and the rations were reduced to five tortillas of bran and
flour per day. Crespi named the camp San Luis Beltran, while the
soldiers called it La Canada de Salud. On the 23d, they again moved
forward, passing Punta de Ano Nuevo and, traveling two leagues, camped
probably on Gazos creek, where was a large Indian rancheria, whose
inhabitants received them kindly. This camp, which was about opposite
Pigeon Point, they named Casa Grande, also San Juan Nepomuceno[27]. The
next jornada was a long one of four leagues, and their camp was on San
Gregoria creek. It began to rain and the command was prostrated by an
epidemic of diarrhoea which spared no one. They now thought they saw
their end, but the contrary appeared to be the case. The diarrhoea
seemed to relieve the scurvy, and the swollen limbs of the sufferers
began to be less painful. They named the camp Vane de los Soldados de
los Cursos, and Crespi applied the name of Santo Domingo to it. Unable
to travel on the 25th and 26th, but resuming the march October 27th,
they pressed forward. The next stop was Purisima creek, two short
leagues distant, but the way was rough, and the pioneers had to make
roads across three arroyos where the descents were steep and difficult
for the transportation of the invalids. On the bank of the stream was an
Indian rancheria, apparently deserted. The Spaniards took possession of
the huts, but soon came running forth with cries of "las pulgas! las
pulgas![28]" They preferred to camp in the open. The soldiers called
the camp Rancheria de las Pulgas, while Crespi named it San Ibon. On the
28th they camped on Pilarcitos creek, site of Spanish town or Half Moon
Bay. They named the camp El Llano de los Ansares - The Plain of the Wild
Geese - and Crespi called it San Simon y San Judas. Every man in the
command was ill; the medicines were nearly gone and the supply of food
very short. They contemplated killing some of the mules. That night it
rained heavily and Portola, who was very ill, decided to rest on the
29th. On Monday, October 30th, they moved forward. Half Moon Bay and
Pillar Point were noted but no names given. Several deep arroyos were
crossed, some of which required the building of bridges to get the
animals over. They proceeded up the shore until a barrier of rock
confronted them and disputed the passage. Here in a rincon (corner)
formed by the sierra and. sheltered from the north wind they camped
while Ortega and his men were sent out to find a passage over the
Montara mountains. A little stream furnished them with water and they
named the camp El Rincon de las Almejas, on account of the mussels and
other shell fish they found on the rocks. Crespi calls it La Punta del
Angel Custodia. The site of the camp is about a mile north of the
Montara fog signal. By noon of the next day, October 31st, the pioneers
had prepared a passage over the bold promontory of Point San Pedro, and
at ten o'clock in the morning the company set out on the trail of the
exploradores and made their painful way to the summit. Here a wondrous
sight met their eyes and quickened their flagging spirits. Before them,
bright and beautiful, was spread a great ensenada, its waters dancing in
the sunlight. Far to the northwest a point reached out into the sea,
rising abruptly before them, high above the ocean. Further to the left,
west-northwest, were seen six or seven white Farallones and finally
along the shore northward they discerned the white cliffs and what
appeared to be the mouth of an inlet. There could be not mistake. The
distant point was the Punta de los Reyes and before them lay the Bahia o
Puerto de San Francisco. The saint had been good to them and with joy in
their hearts they made the steep and difficult descent and camped in the
San Pedro valley[29] at the foot of the Montara mountains.

Some of the company thought they had left the Port of Monterey behind
but would not believe they had reached the Port of San Francisco. To
settle the matter, the governor ordered Ortega and his men to examine
the country as far as Point Reyes, giving them three days in which to
report, while the command remained in camp in the Vallecito de la Punta
de las Almejas del Angel de la Guarda, as Crespi calls it, combining the
two names of the camp of October 30th and transferring them to the camp
in San Pedro valley.

The next day, Thursday, November 2nd, being All Souls day, after mass
some of the soldiers asked permission to go and hunt for deer. They
climbed the mountains east of the camp and returning after nightfall
reported that they had seen from the top of the mountain an immense
estero or arm of the sea, which thrust itself into the land as far as
the eye could reach, stretching to the southeast; that they had seen
some beautiful plains thickly covered with trees, while the many columns
of smoke rising over them showed that they were well stocked with Indian
villages. This story confirmed them in the belief that they were at the
Port of San Francisco, and that the estero described was that spoken of
by Cabrera Bueno, the mouth of which they imagined they had seen from
the Montara mountains[30]. They were now satisfied that Ortega would be
unable to reach Point Reyes, and that three days was not sufficient time
to go around the head of such an estero. The exploring party returned in
the night of November 3d, discharging their fire-arms as they
approached. They reported that they found themselves obstructed by
immense estuaries which ran extraordinarily far back into the land[31],
but what caused their rejoicing was that they understood from the signs
of the Indians that at two days journey from where they were there was a
port in which a ship was anchored. On this announcement, some thought
that they were at the port of Monterey, and that the supply ship San
Jose or the San Carlos was waiting for them. Crespi says that if they
were not in Monterey, they were certainly in San Francisco.

On Saturday, November 4th, being the day of San Carlos Borromeo, in
whose honor they had come to establish a royal presidio and mission in
the Port of Monterey, and also the day of the king, Don Carlos III (que
Dios guarde), the holy sacrifice of the mass was celebrated "in this
little valley, beach of the Port (without the least doubt) of my father
San Francisco." The men feasted liberally on the mussels which abounded
on the nearby rocks, and which were pronounced large and good, and, in
better spirits than they had been for some time, they took up their
march at one o'clock in the afternoon. Proceeding a short distance up
the beach, they turned into the mountains on their right, and from the
summit beheld the immense estero o brazo del mar. Then descending into
the Canada de San Andres, they turned to the south and southeast, and
traveling two leagues camped in the canada at the foot of a hill, very
green with low brush, and having a cluster of oaks at its base. The next
two days they traveled down the canada, coasting the estero, which they
could not see for the low hills (lomeria) on their left, noting the
pleasant land with its groves of oak, redwood (palo colorado), and
madrono. They saw the tracks of many deer and also of bears. The Indians
met them with friendly offers of black tamales and atole, which were
gladly received by the half-starved Spaniards. They begged the strangers
to go to their rancherias, but the governor excused himself, saying that
he must go forward, and dismissed them with presents of beads and
trinkets. On the 6th, they reached the end of the canada, which suddenly
turned to the east, and saw that the estero[32] was finished in a
spacious valley. To the canada they gave the name of San Francisco[33].
Traveling a short distance towards the east, they camped on a deep
arroyo, whose waters came down from the sierra and flowed precipitately
into the estero. They were on the San Francisquito creek, near the site
of Stanford University[34].

Having failed to get through to Point Reyes by the ocean beach route,
Portola now sent Ortega around by the contra costa giving him four days
in which to explore the country and find the port containing the
supply-ship.

Ortega with his exploradores, guided by some friendly Indians from the
neighboring rancherias, set out after noon on November 7th and returned
in the night of the 10th. He reported that he had seen no sign of port
or ship, and was convinced he had not understood the information the
Indians had tried to convey to him, and that the port of Monterey could
not be in advance. They also reported that the country they had seen
towards the north and northeast was impassable for the expedition, for
the reason that the Indians had burned the grass and, in addition, were
hostile and would dispute the passage. They said that they had
encountered another immense estero on the northeast (Carquinez Strait),
which also ran far inland and connected with the one on the southeast,
and that to double it would take many leagues of travel[35].

During the absence of the explorers, the people of the expedition were
compelled for want of meat to eat oak acorns, which caused them much
suffering from indigestion and fever.

Portola called a council of officers, on November 11th, to determine the
best course to pursue. The decision was unanimous to return to the Point
of Pines and renew the search for the elusive Puerto de Monterey, which
they believed they had left behind. This was at once acted upon, and the
command took up the march in the afternoon of that day, returning by the
route of its coming, and on the 27th camped in sight of the Point of
Pines at a little lake of muddy water. They had partly subsisted on wild
geese which they shot, and on mussels gathered from the rocks of the
coast. The following day, November 28th, they moved across the Point of
Pines and camped in the canada of the Carmelo, where was plenty of wood
and good water from the river. After giving his men a rest, the governor
sent ten soldiers, under command of Rivera, with six of the Indian
pioneers, who undertook to guide them by the coast trails, with
instructions to thoroughly explore the coast to the south and see if the
Port of Monterey was concealed in some "rincon" of the Sierra de Santa
Lucia.

The exploring party returned on Monday, December 4th, at night. They
were tired out with their travels over the rough mountain trails, and
they reported that no port of Monterey existed south of their camp; that
the mountains belonged to the Sierra de Santa Lucia, and that there was
no passage along the shore.

Vizcaino had said that Monterey was just north of the Sierra de Santa
Lucia. "It is all that can be desired for commodiousness and as a
station for ships making the voyage to the Philippines, sailing whence
they make a landfall on this coast. This port is sheltered from all
winds * * * and is thickly settled with people, whom I found to be of
gentle disposition, peaceable, and docile; * * * they have flax like
that of Castile, and hemp, and cotton,"[36] etc.

The commander knew not what to think. What should be a great port,
protected from all winds, was but an ensenada; what should be the Rio
Carmelo was but an arroyo; what should be great lakes were but
lagunillas; "and where, too, were the people, so intelligent and docile,
who raised flax and hemp and cotton?" Costanso says that in their entire
journey, they found no country so thinly populated, nor any people more
wild and savage than the few natives whom they met here. It is not
strange that Portola failed to recognize, in the broad ensenada,
Vizcaino's Famoso Puerte de Monterey.

The situation of the command was becoming very grave. The food supply
was almost gone. They had killed a mule, but only the Indians and the
Catalonians would eat it. The commander called a council of officers, on
December 6th, and told them the condition of affairs. They had not found
the port they had come in search of, he said, and had no hope of finding
it or the vessel that should have succored them; they had but fourteen
half sacks of flour left; winter was upon them, the cold was becoming
excessive, and snow was beginning to fall in the mountains. He invited
free discussion, but postponed the decision until the next day, that all
might have time for reflection. On December 7th, after hearing mass, the
junta again met. Some were for remaining where they were until the
provisions were entirely consumed, and then retreat, relying on the
mules for food during the journey to San Diego; others thought it better
to divide the party, one-half to remain and the other return to San
Diego. Both projects were carefully discussed, and both presented
difficulties. The prevailing sentiment seemed to favor a return, and the
governor announced his determination. They would return to San Diego at
once, he said, for if the snow should close the mountain passes, the
whole expedition would be lost.

A violent storm arose in the afternoon, which lasted until the night of
December 9th, delaying the march.

On Sunday, December 10th, they began the retreat from Monterey. Before
leaving Carmelo Bay, they set up a large cross on a little hill on the
shore of the ensenadita, and on it, cut into the wood, the legend: "Dig;
at the foot you will find a writing." A message was put into a bottle
and buried at the foot of the cross. It gave the facts of the
expedition, its commander, date of starting, the dates of entering the
channel of Santa Barbara, of passing Point Concepcion, of the passage of
the Santa Lucia mountains, of the sight of Punta de Pinos, of Point
Reyes, etc.

"The expedition desired to reach Point Reyes, but some esteros
intervened which ran far inland, which required a long journey to go
around, and other difficulties (the chief of which was the want of
provisions), made it necessary for us to return, believing that the Port
of Monterey might perhaps be near the Sierra de Santa Lucia, and
thinking that we might have passed it without observing it. We left the
estero of San Francisco on our return on the 11th of November. We passed
the Punta de Ano Nuevo on the 19th of said month, and reached the second
time this Port and Ensenada de Pinos on the 27th of the same."

It states that from that day to this they have made diligent search for
the port of Monterey, but in vain, and now, despairing of finding it,
their provisions nearly gone, they return to San Diego. Then follows the
latitude at various points as observed by Costanso. It requests the
commanders of the San Jose or San Antonio, if they, or either of them,
should be informed of the contents of the letter and the condition of
the expedition, to sail down the coast as near the land as possible,
that the expedition might sight and obtain succor from them.

The march that day was across the Point of Pines, one league and a half,
and they camped on the shore of Monterey Bay, where they erected another
cross with an inscription announcing their departure. On the 11th, they
ascended the Salinas and began to retrace the route of their coming.
They killed many geese, which relieved their necessities somewhat, and
on the 21st were clear of the Santa Lucia mountains. The hungry soldiers
stole flour, and to prevent further theft, the comandante divided the
remainder among them. On the 28th the command was stuck fast in a
mudhole near San Luis Obispo, and were unable to say mass, though it was
a feast day[37]. On January 3d, they passed Point Concepcion. Here,
among the Channel Indians, food was abundant, their severe trials were
over, and the health of the command improved daily. Instead of following
up the Santa Clara river, they crossed the Santa Susana mountains, into
the San Fernando valley, and followed down the Los Angeles river,
crossed the Santa Ana, January 18th, and reached San Diego, January 24,
1770, with the command in good health and without the loss of a man,
"with the merit of having been compelled to eat the flesh of male and
female mules, and with not having found the Port of Monterey, which we
judged to have been filled up by the great sand dunes which were in the
place where we had expected to find it."[38]

Portola found a joyful welcome at the little camp at San Diego. Many had
died, and Junipero and Father Parron were just recovering from scurvy.
No tidings were yet received from the San Antonio. The commander made a
careful inventory of supplies, and reserved enough to march to Velicata
in case the San Antonio did not appear when the remainder should be
exhausted. This, he calculated, would be a little after the middle of
March, and the 20th of that month was fixed as the date of departure,
very much to the disappointment of the priests. On February 11th Rivera
was sent to Velicata with a guard of nineteen or twenty soldiers, to
bring up the cattle and supplies that had been left there.

After sundown of the day before that appointed for the departure, a sail
appeared in the distance. It was the San Antonio, just in time to
prevent the abandonment of San Diego. She brought abundant supplies, and
Portola prepared for a second expedition in search of the Port of
Monterey. Captain Vila of the San Carlos declared, when the details of
the search were related to him, that the place where they erected the
second cross was the long-lost Port of Monterey.

On April 16th the San Antonio sailed for Monterey, carrying Junipero,
Costanso, Prat, and a cargo of stores for the new mission. On the 17th,
Portola set out by land with Fages, twelve Catalan volunteers, seven
soldados de cuera, Crespi, two muleteers, and five natives. At San Diego
was left Vila with his mate and five sailors on the San Carlos, Fathers
Parron and Gomez, with Sergeant Ortega and eight soldados de cuera as
guard, and Rivera arrived in July with over eighty mules laden with
supplies, and one hundred and sixty head of cattle.

Portola followed the same route that he took on the retreat from
Monterey, and on May 24th arrived at the Ensenada Grande under Punta de
Pinos, near the cross they had erected, December 10th. Selecting a place
for the camp, Portola took Fages, Crespi, and a soldier for guard, and
went to the cross to see if any vessel had visited the spot. They found
around the cross a ring of arrows stuck in the ground, some of which
were decked with feathers; others had fish and meat attached to them,
while at the foot of the cross was a small pile of shell-fish. As
Portola, Fages, and Crespi walked along the beach and looked out over
the bay and noted its calm and placid waters, with its swimming seals
and spouting whales, they broke forth with one voice, "This is the Port
of Monterey which we have sought. It is exactly as reported by Sebastian
Vizcaino and Cabrera Bueno."[39]

Remembering the good water at the camp on the Rio del Carmelo, Portola
ordered the expedition to Carmelo Bay by direct line, while he, with
Fages and Crespi, proceeded around the Point of Pines. They found it
well covered with pine trees, many of them large enough for masts of a
ship. They also came upon a grove of cypress at a point beyond (Cypress
Point), and arrived at camp after a walk of four good leagues. Here they
awaited the arrival of the San Antonio.

On May 31st the paquebot was sighted near Point Pinos. The soldiers made
signals, to which the ship replied with her guns, and before night had
dropped her anchor in Monterey Bay, which was pronounced by the sailors
to be a most famous port.

On the 3d of June, 1770, under a shelter of branches near the oak where,
in 1602, Vizcaino's Carmelite friars had celebrated mass, Don Gaspar de
Portola, with his officers, soldiers, and people of the land expedition,
Fray Junipero Serra and Fray Juan Crespi, Don Juan Perez, captain of the
San Antonio, Don Miguel del Pino, his second in command, together with
the crew, assembled to establish a presidio and mission. The father
president chanted the mass and preached from the Gospel, while the
musical deficiency was made good by repeated discharges from the guns of
the San Antonio and volleys from the muskets of the soldiers. At the
conclusion of the religious ceremonies, Don Gaspar de Portola, governor
of the Californias, took possession of the country in the name of his
majesty Don Carlos III, King of Spain, and the presidio and mission of
San Carlos de Borromeo de Monterey were founded and established, the
first presidio and second mission in California.

In accord with the orders of the visitador-general, Portola now
delivered to Lieutenant Fages, as comandante of California, the command
of the new establishments, sailed on the San Antonio, July 9th, for San
Blas, and California knew him no more.



[1] Sierra de Santa Lucia.

[2] Audiencia, the highest judicial body.

[3] The system of encomienda conferred feudal rights upon the
discoverers. The Indians became vassals of Spanish lords.

[4] Vizcaino says he set out on the discovery of the coast of the South
Sea with two ships, a lancha, and a barcoluengo. A lancha was a small
vessel having no deck and but one mast, and propelled by sweeps. Vanegas
calls the vessel a fragata. A barcoluengo, or barcolongo, was a long
open boat.

[5] The second voyage of Vizcaino is of particular interest to
Californians for the reason that the names given by him to the various
geographical features of the coast still remain. The particulars of the
first voyage are taken largely from the publications of the Southern
California Historical Society of documents in the Sutro collection.

[6] Sutro Col. Pub. Southern California Hist. Socy.

[7] Prof. George Davidson identifies the Rio de los Reyes as Rogue River
in 42deg. 25'.

[8] About Cape San Quintin, the latitude of their northernmost mission.

[9] Instruccion qua ha de observer el Teniente de Infanteria. Dn Pedro
Pages, 5 enero de 1769. Provincial State Papers; i, 38.9, Ms. Spanish
Archives of California.

[10] So-called from the cuera, a leathern jacket worn by them as a
defensive armor.

[11] Out West. March-July, 1902.

[12] Pancakes.

[13] Dead Men's Point. The name has disappeared from the modern maps,
but is found on all of the old ones. It is the foot of H street where
the cars for the Coronado ferry turn on to the wharf.

[14] I am well aware that this claim will be disputed by one whose study
of original documents and power of analysis make him perhaps the
greatest authority on early California History; but I am nevertheless
prepared to maintain my position.

[15] Carga, 275 lbs.

[16] Hence the presidial soldiers were called Soldados de Cuera and so
distinguished from soldiers of the regular army.

[17] Diario Historico de los viages de Mar y de tierra hichos al norte
de la California. Ms. Original in Sutro Library.

[18] The league is the Spanish league of 5,000 varas. 2.63 miles.

[19] They also gave it the name of Santa Ana, whose day, July 26th,
they had just observed.

[20] Sometimes called the Grand Pardon of Assisi - the great indulgence
of the Franciscans. Originally granted to St. Francis for the Church of
Our Lady of the Angeles of Porciuncula, it was, by apostolic indult,
expanded to accompany the child of St. Francis wherever he may be. It is
enough for him to erect an altar and that altar will be to him St. Mary
of the Angels, and he will there find the Porciuncula of the
revelations. Whoso confesses and receives the sacrament in the church of
Porciuncula is granted plenary remission of his sins in this world and
the next. This indulgence is only for August 2nd - that is, from the
afternoon of August 1st until sunset of August 2nd.

[21] It is to this incident that the city of Los Angeles owes its name.
The full baptismal name of the city is Nuestra Senora La Reina de los
Angeles - Our Lady the Queen of the Angels. It was founded in 1781, by
royal order, the second pueblo established in California.

[22] Rancheria is the name given to an Indian village or town.

[23] The Valley of the Bears.

[24] The diarists applied the word canada to either a canon or an open
valley.

[25] The word ensenada, much used by the Spanish explorers, means a
bight or open roadstead, not an enclosed and protected bay.

[26] "Transportar en Xamus al Modo que cominan las mujeres en
Andalucia," Crespi: Palou's Noticias de la Nueva California, ii. 181.

[27] The names given on this portion of the route have all disappeared,
but are here given as a suggestion to the Ocean Shore Railroad.

[28] The Fleas.

[29] It must be borne in mind that what they called the Bay or Port of
San Francisco was that stretch of water reaching from Point Reyes to
Point San Pedro and later known as the Gulf of the Farallones.

[30] Professor George Davidson says that what was seen by Portola from
the Montara mountains was the break in the Ballenos cliffs, a deep
narrow valley which runs straight from Ballenos bay to Tomales bay,
fourteen miles.

[31] The Golden Gate and Bay of San Francisco.

[32] The Bay of San Francisco continued to be called the "Estero," until
some time after Colonel Anza established the presidio and mission of San
Francisco in 1776.

[33] The present name, Canada de San Andres, was given by Rivera, Nov.
30, 1714.

[34] On November, 1774, Rivera came up the peninsula on an exploring
expedition and on the spot where he had camped with the first expedition
in 1769, he planted a cross to mark the place for a mission. In March,
1776, Col. Juan Bautista de Anza, coming to select sites for the
Presidio and Mission of San Francisco, notes this cross on the bank of
the Arroyo de San Francisco (now San Francisquito creek), about one
hundred paces above the great redwood tree, and says the plan for a
mission there was abandoned because the creek was dry in summer. I note
this explanation because an excellent authority has located Portola's
camp on Redwood creek.

[35] I give to Ortega the credit of discovering the Golden Gate and the
Straits of Carquinez. The testimony seems sufficient to me.

[36] Vizcaino to the King, May 23, 1603. Pub. Hist. Socy. of Southern
California, Vol. ii, Part 1.

[37] On the day of the Holy Innocents it was not possible to say mass.
We are sorry for it, because it is the only feast day in all the journey
up to the present that we have been without mass. We are stuck in a mud
hole and are unable to move from the place where we are all wet through,
and it is not possible to make a journada to a plain that is dry for
this is bubbling up water - Crespi, Diario.

[38] Crespi: Diario.

[39] Palou: Noticias de la Nueva California.



Data Regarding Don Gaspar de Portola After He Left California

by
E. J. Molera



Portola and Costanso sailed, on July 9, 1770, for Mexico, to give to the
viceroy an account of their discoveries. Costanso remained in the
capital and took part in several engineering works, among others, the
map of the Valley of Mexico and its drainage. Diligent search instituted
by the writer in Mexico and Spain regarding Portola's further history,
has so far discovered little beyond the fact that the commander's return
to the capital was followed by promotion from Captain to
Lieutenant-Colonel in the Royal Spanish Army, and his appointment as
Governor of Puebla, February 23, 1777.

In the municipal archives of the city of Puebla, on page 33 of the folio
covering the years 1776-1783, is the following description of Portola's
taking possession of the office as Governor of that city and state:

"Possession of Governor Portola."

"In the session (meeting of February 23d, 1777), the council saw a royal
title of Political and Military Governor of this city granted by his
Majesty to Senor Don Gaspar de Portola, Lieutenant-Colonel of the Royal
Army, and also a superior order of his Excellency the Viceroy, Governor,
and Captain General of this New Spain, in which is stated that said
title has been forwarded."

"The President of the Council, standing and uncovered, took the title in
his hand and kissed it and put it over his head, being a letter from the
king, our master, and said that he would obey and he did obey its
contents and in its provisions it was ordered that Lieutenant-Colonel
Don Gaspar de Portola be given possession of said office, and for that
purpose, said noble corporation went out with the heralds to bring him
to this hail of sessions, and when he was in, a notary-public having
certified to his identity, he swore to use faithfully and well the
office of Governor, doing justice, punishing, and not burdening the poor
with excessive taxes; to keep and cause to be kept, the rights,
privileges, royal decrees and ordinances, etc."

"Having signed the oath, the president gave him the cane of Royal
justice, by which the act of possession was completed."

In the same volume many decrees and ordinances are signed by Portola as
Governor of Puebla.

That in the year 1779, Portola was still Governor of Puebla is proved by
two original manuscripts in possession of the writer. One is a circular
official notice to all the head authorities of Mexico, announcing the
death of Viceroy Frey Don Antonio Bucareli y Ursua, and shown herewith;
the other is a letter of Don Gaspar de Portola, dated April 17th, 1779.



Letter from the Viceroy of New Spain to Don Julian de Arriaga, Giving an
Account of the arrival at San Blas of the Packet Boat San Carlos,
Returning from the Survey of the Port of San Francisco.
Document Obtained from the Archives of the Indies, Seville.



"My Dear Sir:"

"By courier sent to me from San Blas, I have just learned that the royal
packet-boat San Carlos, under command of Lieutenant of the frigate Don
Juan Manual Ayala, which with provisions and goods sailed for the harbor
of Monterey, thence to the port of San Francisco, anchoring on the 6th
inst. at San Blas."

"In the copies which I send herewith, of the extensive examination made
by this officer and his pilot, Don Jose Canizares, your Excellency will
see, in detail, all that was found advantageous, and the news obtained
gives knowledge of all that that vast port contains and the facilities
that is has to invernate[40] vessels. The docility and gentle manners of
the heathen that live in its vicinity inspire hopes in the utility of
the plan, on which I had previously determined, of colonizing this
land."

"The letter of this officer, a copy of which is also enclosed, confirms
everything, extolling the grandeur of the view of the port, the water,
wood, and ballast with which it abounds, and although the climate is
rather cold, it is healthy and free from the fogs found in Monterey."

"He gives an account of what happened on his return, and praises the
merit of the pilot, Don Jose Canizares, in discharging the commission
entrusted to him, and he recommends him to my attention, which I reserve
to that of the King; at the same time recommending to Your Excellency
that you remind His Majesty that this pilot is one of the most useful
that the Department of San Blas has, and that in the voyages he has made
has always shown the same honor, conduct, and intelligence as on the one
just finished with such advantage to the service, because of the
information and knowledge he has shown in the discharge of his duty."

"For his reward, I consider him worthy of the royal bounty, as well as
Lieutenant of frigate, Don Juan Manuel de Ayala, for his part in such
important work."

"That the Lord may keep you from harm for many years is my wish."

"Exmdeg.. Sr."

"Your most obedient servant who kisses Your Excellency's hands,"

"Bailio Frey D. Antonio Bucareli y Ursua."

"Mexico, November 26th, 1775. "
"To His Excellency
Sr. Bailio Frey Don Julian de Arriaga."



[40] Invernate - to winter.



Causes that Decided the Government of Spain to Send an Expedition by Sea
to Ascertain if there were any Russian Settlements on the Coast of
California, and to Examine the Port of San Francisco.



Father Junipero Serra had difficulty in obtaining from Commandant Fages
the soldiers necessary to found the missions that were projected and
notwithstanding his old age, he decided to go to the capital of Mexico
to lay before the authorities his troubles. He sailed from San Diego in
the mail boat San Carlos October 19, 1772, but, stricken by fever in
Guadalajara, did not reach Mexico till February 16, 1773.

Viceroy Bucareli, then in command of the colony, made the orders he
considered necessary for California, but his orders would have had but
little effect or would have followed the slow process of all official
business, had not an outside incident given them force.

Count de Lacy, then Minister Plenipotentiary of Spain to St. Petersburg,
communicated to the court in Madrid, that the Russians were exploring
the coast of America. He corroborated his statement with copies of the
newspapers of the Russian capital[41]. This news with the corroborating
proofs was sent to Bucareli with the Royal edicts of April 11th and
September 23, 1773.

The result of this information was to give a better organization to the
maritime department of San Blas and better regulations for California.
It was also ordered that a settlement should be made at San Francisco;
that better means of communication be established between San Diego and
Monterey, and that an expedition should be sent to ascertain if the
Russians had made settlements on the coast of California.



[41] Manuel Orozco y Berra, Apuntes Airs. la Historia de la Geografia an
Mexico, Anales del Ministerio de Formento de la Republica Mexicana Tomo
VI, p. 269. Documents in the Archives of the Indies, Seville.



The Log of the San Carlos

Alias Toison De Oro (Golden Fleece)

Under Command of

Lieutenant of Frigate of the Royal Navy Don Juan Manuel de Ayala

From the Port of San Blas to the Port of San Francisco

-

The First Ship to Enter the Port of San Francisco. Transcript of a
Certified Copy of the Original, now in the Archives of the Indies, at
Seville, Spain[42].

-



On the 19th of March, 1775, Lieutenant of Frigate, Don Juan Manuel de
Ayala had the schooner under his command anchored near the white rock in
the harbor of San Blas, waiting the sailing of the frigate Santiago to
the west coast of California, when the commander of the expedition, Don
Bruno de Ezeta, ordered him to deliver to Lieutenant of Frigate, Don
Juan de la Bodega y Cuadra, the command of his schooner and take command
of the packet boat, San Carlos, as her captain, Don Miguel Manrique, was
sick and unable to make the voyage. Ayala obeyed the order and waited
until the morning of the 21st, for the return of the launch which
carried his predecessor to San Blas. He made everything ready on board
to follow the frigate and schooner and he asked the commander of the
expedition, Don Bruno de Ezeta, to take in his frigate some brown sugar
and provisions which he could not accommodate in his boat except on deck
where they were liable to be damaged.

At 3 p. m. of the 21st he sailed from the anchorage of San Blas with the
wind east-northeast and on the following day came in sight of Isabela
Island, lying about five miles to the west. On the 23rd he came in sight
of the Maria Islands and saw the frigate and schooner going to the
southeast of the islands, where he lost sight of them. Contrary winds
and calm weather prevented the San Carlos from making any considerable
progress. On the 26th, Ayala sent his pilot to see if he could obtain
some water to replace that which had been consumed[43]. The pilot could
not make a landing and consequently did not obtain any water. On April
2d, he saw Mazatlan and the packetboat Concepcion. The following day he
came near the Concepcion, and the captain informed him that he had on
board the governor of California[44]. From the Concepcion Ayala obtained
six kegs of water. On the 4th of April a serious accident happened to
the commander. When his predecessor was taken sick, he had a number of
loaded pistols. Ayala ordered them placed where they could not injure
anyone. In doing this, one fell and was discharged, the bullet entering
the commander's foot between the second and third toes, coming out under
the big toe. This accident caused him to keep his bed.

On the 7th of April, Cape San Lucas was seen to the north, distant about
two leagues. On the 8th, Cape San Lucas was seen to the west, about
twelve leagues distant. On account of contrary winds, the progress
northward was very slow. On June 22d, while they were warming some pitch
to calk the launch, it took fire, but was extinguished before great
damage was done. On the same day indications of land were noted and some
whales were seen, which the sailors say is the first sign of land. On
the following day they saw some seals, which, according to the sailors,
was the second sign of land. On the 24th, they saw some ducks, which,
they say, is proof positive of land being near. On the same day land was
sighted at 4 p. m.; the North Farallones of San Francisco were seen to
the north and Point Ano Nuevo to the southeast. At 7 p. m., the South
Farallones were seen at a distance of about two leagues to the
northeast. The variation of the needle was observed and found to be 13deg.
E.

Next day, at 9 a. m., the fog having lifted, land was seen and Point Ano
Nuevo was recognized to the northwest about three leagues distant. At
noon the sun's altitude was taken, and the latitude found to be 36deg. 58'.
At 3 p. m. they took bearings to make Point Pinos, but this point could
not be seen on account of the fog. At 4 p. m. the fog lifted, and at 5
p. m. they saw the point which protects the harbor of Monterey. The
variation of the needle was observed and found to be 12deg. 58' E. They had
some difficulty in finding good anchorage, but finally did so on a sandy
bottom.

On the 26th of June, Commander Ayala sent his launch on shore with mail
and documents, and on its return the vessel was made fast.

Ayala remained in the harbor of Monterey till July 26th, during which
time he unloaded his cargo, took ballast, water, and fuel, mended sails
and repaired the ship, which needed it badly, the sixth board under
water at the poop having to be replaced for a length of one and one-half
yards.

He got ready to start for the newly-discovered Port of San Francisco.

-

Starting from the shelter of Monterey, situated at latitude 36deg.deg. 33',
longitude 16deg. 45' W. of San Blas to the newly-discovered Port of San
Francisco, July 26, 1775.

That day it was impossible to sail on account of the wind coming from a
contrary direction.

On July 27th, the launch towed the San Carlos until she came to the
range of a southwest wind and sailed in a northwest direction[45]. At
noon Point Pinos was seen bearing south 13deg. distant five miles; at 3 p.
m. it had disappeared from view. Very soon after, Point Ano Nuevo came
in sight and the land adjoining it, about four or five miles distant.
From July 28th to August 3d, little progress was made on account of
contrary winds from the northwest. On August 3d, at 1 p. m., land was
seen to the east 1/4 northeast, distant about twelve leagues. It was
found to be Point Ano Nuevo. At 7 p. m. another point came into view
bearing north 1/4 northeast, distant about twelve leagues, which was
considered to be Point Reyes. At 10 p. m., the wind being northwest, the
San Carlos steered west-southwest and continued in that course until 8
a. m. of the 4th, when the bearing was changed to the north-northeast.
At noon the sun's altitude was taken and the latitude was found to be
37deg. 11', and longitude 17deg. 51' W. of San Blas. At 6 p. m., August 4th,
the southernmost Farallon of the Port of San Francisco was seen to the
northwest, distant about eight leagues. The land to the north was Point
Reyes, bearing 4deg. W., distant about fourteen leagues. At half past
eleven, considering the coast was near, the course was changed to the
south-southwest, until 3 a. m. of August 5th, when it was changed again
to the north-northeast 5deg. north to bring the ship at sunrise to the
point it was at sunset of the day before. At 5 a. m. four of the
Farallones of San Francisco were seen to the north-northwest, distant
four leagues. Point Ano Nuevo was southeast 1/4 east from twelve to
fourteen leagues and Point Almejas northeast 4deg. east, distant three
leagues. At 8 a. m., being near land, commander Ayala lowered the
launch, and in it Pilot Canizares was sent with ten men to search for an
anchorage, while the San Carlos continued along the coast. At 9 a. m. a
strong current was felt, which drove them to sea, but at eleven it was
observed that the vessel was nearing the coast, which convinced the
commander that it was due to the tide, and this was confirmed by the
soundings; in entering the port, as on the first occasion, the tide was
going out, and on the second one the tide was coming in. The altitude of
the sun was taken at noon of that day, with the utmost care, and the
latitude was found to be 37deg. 42' and the longitude 17deg. 14' W. of San
Blas. At this time Point Ano Nuevo was about fourteen leagues distant to
the southeast south; the Farallones to the northwest, distant four
leagues, and Point Reyes north 1/4 northeast, distant four leagues. The
wind was from the west. At 4 p. m. the vessel was steered to the
north-northeast, and half an hour later soundings were taken and bottom
found at sixteen brazas[46] of mud and sand mixed, and distant from the
mouth about two leagues. At 5 p. m. bottom was found at fifteen brazas,
with the same kind of bottom material. Sounding was continued and the
bottom was found to be as noted in the large map. The current was so
great at the mouth of this port that at 8:30 p. m., with a strong wind
from the west-southwest with full sails, the current allowed them to go
not more than a mile and a half per hour, which shows that the current
must go at least six miles at the middle of the channel. The swiftness
of the current, the fact that the launch had not returned and that night
was coming on, made it necessary to seek for an anchorage; this was done
with great care and precaution; as the force of the wind made it
necessary to have full sail, it was feared that some of the rigging
might give way. For that reason, soundings were taken continually with a
20-lb. lead, and a line of sixty brazas could not reach bottom, either
in the channel or near the point. This seemed very strange until it was
realized that the current was carrying the lead and it did not strike
bottom. They continued thus until they were one league inside the mouth
of the bay and a quarter of a mile from the shore, when the wind
suddenly stopped. Finding that the current was carrying the ship towards
the mouth, an anchor was thrown overboard, after having made it fast to
the big mast so that if it did not catch the bottom it would not be
lost. It was found that the anchor held. Two more anchors were made
ready to drop in case the big one should drag. When the wind stopped and
the current ceased, the vessel was found to be in twenty-two brazas,
with sandy bottom[47].

At 6 a. m. of August 6, the launch, which had not been seen since sunset
the day before, came to the vessel. The pilot was asked why he had not
come to meet the ship when he saw her sailing shoreward looking for the
entrance of the bay, answered that at 6 p. m. he had seen a suitable
harbor for the packet-boat to the east of the entrance, and when he
attempted to go out the whirlpools and eddies caused by the current were
such that it was impossible to make any progress, as the current carried
him back towards the shore, so that he determined to stay in the harbor
he had attempted to leave. This, and the fact that the men were fired
out, made him wait until 4 a. m., when he again attempted to go out,
with the same result as before. During his efforts to get out, he saw
the packet-boat, and putting the bow towards her he had no difficulty in
reaching her.

At 7 a. m., the commander sent the pilot to examine a harbor which was
to the west-northwest. He found it useless, because, though it had
sufficient water, the bottom was sticky mud. As Ayala was not in need of
shelter then, he did not enter that harbor, as he was afraid of losing
his anchor in the mud, and also because it was open from the south to
the east, although the wind came from the landward which was about two
leagues from the harbor[48]. He called this harbor "Carmeita," because
in it was a rock resembling a friar of that order. There was in its
vicinity an Indian village, the inhabitants of which came out from their
huts and cried out and made signs for the vessel to go near them. As the
sailors were taking soundings and came near the shore, the Indians
erected a pole, at the top of which was a large number of feathers. The
sailors having no orders to answer them, remained at a distance from the
shore. The Indians, thinking, no doubt, that the sailors were afraid of
them, endeavored to assure them by dropping their bows to the ground,
and after describing a circle in the air with the arrows stuck them in
the sand. The launch came on board again, and soon after, the Indians,
from a point of land near the vessel, talked to the sailors with loud
cries, and although their voices were heard distinctly, they could not
be understood for want of an interpreter. At 9 the launch was sent again
to another harbor to the north, which seemed to be better sheltered and
to have better anchorage[49]. It was so, and when the launch returned at
10, the pilot stated that he found bottom at eight to fourteen brazas,
and the bottom was sticky with mud. At 3 p. m. the vessel sailed towards
the place examined, but a strong current prevented her reaching it. It
was then decided to anchor in fifteen brazas, sandy bottom, and they
stayed there all night, during which time the vessel moved on account of
the bad quality of the anchors.

On the 7th, at 9 a. m., the vessel was started towards a large and
fine-looking harbor which seemed commodious. Soundings were taken, and
the bottom was found at twelve to fourteen brazas. It had been decided
to go to the end of it, but the tide was contrary and it was necessary
to return to the vessel at 1 p. m. Indians from the shore were calling
to the men with loud cries, and the commander decided to send the launch
with the priest, the pilot, and armed men, with orders that they must
not molest the Indians but treat them well and make them presents, for
which purpose the commander gave the men beads and other trinkets and
ordered them to observe good precaution, so that in case the Indians
showed fight they could easily return to the launch, where four armed
men must always remain to protect the retreat. It is true that from the
day when intercourse was first had with the Indians, it was seen how
affable and hospitable they were, showing the greatest desire for the
Spaniards to go to their village, where, they said, they could eat and
sleep. They had already prepared on shore a meal of pinole, bread from
their corn, and tomales of the same. During the time the Spaniards were
with the Indians, they found that the latter repeated the Spanish words
with great facility, and by signs the Spaniards asked the Indians to go
on board the packet boat, but the Indians, also by signs, signified that
until the Spaniards should visit their village, they could not go on
board. After a little while the Spaniards returned to the boat and the
Indians disappeared.

On the 8th, the pilot, with men, was sent in the launch to explore the
bay, and on the 9th returned and made his report.

On the 12th the launch was lowered to look for a better anchorage near
Angel Island, which is the largest in this bay, and many good places
were found. It was also thought a good idea to examine another island,
which was found to be very steep and barren and would not afford shelter
even for the launch. This island was called "Alcatraz"[50] on account of
the abundance of those birds that were on it.

On the 13th the vessel moved to another anchorage with nine brazas of
water at pistol shot of the land. On the 21st, the first pilot, Don Jose
de Canizares, returned from an expedition on which he had been sent a
few days before and made his report. On the same day, the second pilot,
Don Juan B. Aguirre, went, with fresh men, in the launch to try to find
the party which the commander of the presidio had promised to send to
San Francisco by land. The second pilot did not see the party, but
explored an estero which enters the land about twelve leagues[51].

On the 23d fifteen Indians came on a raft and were taken on board, where
they were entertained and given something to eat. They learned how to
ask for bread in Spanish.

From this day to the 6th of September, the explorations of the Bay of
San Francisco continued, and first pilot Don Jose de Canizares was
instructed to make his report and the map of the bay.

On September 7th an attempt was made to go to sea for the return voyage,
but the rudder was injured by a submerged rock on which the current had
carried the vessel.

From this day to September 18th, the time was passed in repairing the
rudder and making preparations for the return voyage, which took place
on that day, going to Monterey, where they arrived the following day.

In order to make the necessary repairs to the ship and pass the equinox
in good shelter, the San Carlos remained in the harbor of Monterey till
October 13, 1775, when she started for San Blas, where she arrived on
November 6th of the same year.



[42] This is a summary of the document. A full translation would be too
tedious for a work of this kind.

[43] On the Tres Marias Islands.

[44] Don Pedro Fages. Commandante of California, who had been recalled.

[45] Bancroft. Hist. of Cal., says Ayala sailed from Monterey, July
24th. That was to make the sailing fit the Bancroft theories.

[46] Braza - Fathom: Six feet.

[47] Ayala anchored inside Port Point - the Presidio anchorage.

[48] Richardson's Bay.

[49] Angel Island.

[50] Alcatraz  - Pelican

[51] The Southern portion of the bay.



Report of Don Juan Manuel de Ayala Commander of the Packet Boat San
Carlos to Don Antonio Maria Bucareli Viceroy of New Spain On the
Examination of the Port of San Francisco



Your Excellency: - I have finished the orders under which I took command
of the San Carlos, returning to this port of San Blas today, November
6th, after having visited the ports of Monterey and San Francisco.

Although Your Excellency will see in the account of my examination,
together with the pilot, Don Jose Canizares' report of his examination
and the map he made of this port, the nature of the work done. I will,
notwithstanding in this, give a brief account, that shows the port of
San Francisco to be one of the best that I have seen on this coast from
Cape Horn.

After one hundred and one days of navigation, I arrived at the harbor of
Monterey, where I had to remain till July 27th, discharging the cargo
and making some repairs necessary for the safety of my vessel. On July
27th, I started in search of the Port of San Francisco, where I arrived
on the night of August 5th. I remained there forty-four days, inspecting
by myself, or by my pilot, with all possible accuracy, everything that
pertains to this matter.

It is true that this port is good, not only for the beautiful harmony
that offers to the view, but because it does not lack very good fresh
water, wood, and ballast in abundance. Its climate though cold, is
healthful and free from those troublesome fogs which we had daily in
Monterey, because the fogs here hardly reach the entrance of the port,
and once inside the harbor, the weather is very clear. To these many
advantages is to be added the best: and this is that the heathen Indians
around this port are so constant in their good friendship and so gentle
in their manners, that I received them with pleasure on board several
times, and I had the sailors frequently visit with them on land; so that
from the first to the last day, they remained the same in their
behavior. This made me present them with trinkets, beads, and biscuit;
the last they learned to ask for clearly in our language.

There is no doubt that this good friendship was a great comfort to us,
enabling us to make with less fear the reconnaissance that was ordered
of me. Although in a letter written by Your Excellency to my
predecessor, Don Miguel Manrique, dated January 2d, I read that it was
possible we might find in San Francisco the land expedition undertaken
by Captain Don Juan de Anza; I did not on that account refuse the offer
of another small land expedition which the Captain of Monterey, Don
Fernando de Rivera, made me. I did not see either of them while I
remained in that port, but I did not, on that account, postpone the
reconnaissance. I could not do all of this in person, because I was
convalescing from a serious wound in my right foot, received April 3d by
the accidental discharge of a double-barrel pistol, which Don Miguel
Manrique had left loaded in the cabin. Notwithstanding this, I am
satisfied that Don Jose Canizares executed with his usual ability
everything I entrusted to his care. I therefore state to Your Excellency
(in order that the merit of his work may not be ignored), that as long
as he was with me, he acted not only with his usual honesty, but showed
such great talent in his profession that in the midst of my troubles I
found him one to entrust with the more delicate points of my duty.

On September 7th, I decided to leave the Port of San Francisco, as I
considered the reconnaissance completed, and in doing this, having no
wind, I was carried by the strong current against some rocks, injuring
the rudder and breaking two female and one male bolts. This obliged me
to enter a cove, where I repaired as well as possible the accident, and
again tried to sail forth, a light breeze from the north (the only one I
noticed in the forty-four days) aiding the sailing. On the 18th, because
the rudder was injured, and those who had been on this coast before had
warned me that at this time of year the weather was very severe, I
determined to pass the Equinox at Monterey, and arrived there on the
19th. At this port I found the frigate Santiago. The schooner came
October 7th, and I left for San Blas on the 13th, where I am sick of my
foot, but always desirous to obey Your Excellency.

I pray the Lord to keep the life of Your Excellency many years.

San Blas, November 9, 1775.

Juan Manuel de Ayala.

To His Excellency, Bailio Frey Don Antonio Maria Bucareli.



Description of the Newly-discovered Port of San Francisco

Situated in Latitude 37deg. 53' North, Longitude 17deg. 10' West of San Blas

by
Lieutenant Don Juan Manuel Ayala



Placed about two leagues west-southwest of Point Almejas[52], latitude
37deg. 42', the following is to be seen: First that it[53] is large, with
two red barrancas[54], and second, that to the north there are three
white rocks at a stone's throw[55]. From that point the coast runs
north-northeast, forming a small harbor in which there are five
submerged rocks close to its shore; above it some white barrancas[56],
ending in a sloping bill which top, to the north, is what is called
Angel Point[57]. This has near it several rocks[58], the furtherest one
a gunshot distant. From this point there is a harbor sufficient to
accommodate any vessel[59], not only on account of its bottom, but because
it is sheltered from all winds excepting those from the west-southwest.
The middle of this harbor is to the northwest, where a copious creek
empties[60]; the point runs northeast 1/4 east. This harbor, with the one
inside of it, which I called San Jose[61], has been found very good,
with the prevailing winds from the south to the northwest.

From Pt. Almejas to the northwest 1/4 west, four Farallones are seen,
distant about four leagues. The one southernmost looks like a
sugar-loaf. To the northwest 1/4 north, at a distance of about twelve
leagues, a mountain[62] is seen which ends in a low point. According to
the records of Sebastian Vizcaino and coast pilot of Cabrera Bueno, this
is the one called Point Reyes. From this point the coast runs
east-southeast in the shape of a half-moon, open to all winds of the
third quarter and ending in two barrancas at the foot of which a low
point comes out with two submerged rocks. This point was called
Santiago[63], and, with one called Angel de la Guarda, forms the mouth
of the channel of the entrance of the port[64]. Following this shore in
a northeast direction, another harbor is to be found within three small
rocks near the shore which, in case of necessity, may shelter any
vessel. This harbor[65] ends on the north with a large, steep, and
broken point, at the foot of which there is a white farallon to which
and to the point I gave the name of San Carlos[66], and with Point San
Jose, which is distant about half a league, forms the entrance of this
famous port. It is to be borne in mind that any vessel that enters or
leaves this port must take the precaution not to come near San Carlos
Point, because in this place exist violent whirlpools which make useless
the rudder, but must take the middle of the channel or sail near the
shores of San Jose Point.

To the northeast 1/4 north of the middle of the entrance, an island[67]
is seen, distant about one and a half leagues. This island divides the
water of the flood in two channels in which a vessel may anchor,
especially in the one that runs northeast 1/4 north near the island
where water and wood are to be found in abundance. The vicinity of the
island is such good anchorage that a vessel can anchor within a
pistol-shot of the shore.

To the east-northeast of Point San Jose there is a sheltered harbor,
landlocked, with bottom which diminishes gradually to the shore, where
water and some wood are to be found[68]. In this harbor there is no
current, and for that reason, and because it is so near the point I
consider, it one of the best anchorages.

Once Points San Jose and San Carlos have been passed, and taking care to
leave at one side the principal channel, an anchorage can be made at any
place, because it is sheltered from all winds; the only thing to avoid
is the current, which in the principal channel is five miles, and in its
branches three miles.

This report was made to me by Pilot Don Jose Canizares, to whom I
entrusted the examination of the port, because I was seriously sick.



[52] Pt. San Pedro.

[53] That is: Pt. Almejas or Pt. San Pedro.

[54] Barranca: The dictionary definition is a ravine or gulch, but it
also means a high bluff or cliff and in that sense is used by these
explorers.

[55] i. e.: from Pt. Almejas.

[56] Cliff Rouse Rocks.

[57] Punta del Angel de la Guarda - Point Lobos.

[58] Seal Rocks.

[59] Bakers Beach.

[60]  Lobos Creek.

[61] i. e.: Inside of Point San Jose - Fort Point.

[62] Tamalpais

[63] Point Bonita. The present name was given it in 1776.

[64] Golden Gate Strait.

[65] i. e.: The outer harbor; outside of the Golden Gate.

[66] Lime Point.

[67] Angel Island.

[68] The Presidio anchorage.



Reconnaissance of the Port of San Francisco, with Map

-

Report of the Pilot Don Jose de Canizares to Commander Don Juan de Ayala

-

Translation of a Certified Copy of the Original in the Archives of the
Indies at Seville.



Dear Captain: - During the four times that I made reconnaissance of
this Port, and made its map, I found at the northeast and
north-northeast what is shown on the map and I here describe. To the
north-northeast of Angel Island, distant about a mile, there is a bay
running in a direction north-northwest to south-southwest. The distance
between the points forming said bay, is about two leagues, and the shore
line is about two and a half leagues. To the northwest of the shore
there are three small islands, forming between them and the shore a
narrow passage of shallow water closed to the southwest. This bay is all
surrounded with hills with few trees, which are mostly laurel and oak,
but at a distance to the west-northwest, is visible a wood of what seems
to be pines. In the middle of this bay is standing a high farallon with
submerged rocks around it. On the northeast of it there is sufficient
water for anchorage, as is shown on the map. There is no doubt of its
being good anchorage for vessels, provided they have good cables and
anchors, for they are subject to great stress because of the current,
which at this point, cannot be less than four miles an hour[69].

North-northeast of said bay there is a mouth about two miles wide, where
there are four small white rocks, the two north ones with the two south
ones[70] form a channel of nine brazas depth. From this, one passes to
another bay[71] more spacious, the diameter of which is about eight
leagues, its shape a perfect isosceles triangle; its mouth is divided
into two channels, - one, on the side of the southwest coast, turns to
the northwest at about the distance of a mile and ends in two large
harbors which are situated in the same shore at about four league's
distance from the mouth that communicates with the first bay; from the
northwest point of the furthest harbor to the north of it, distant about
one and a half leagues, in turning a point to the west-northwest, a
large body of water[72] is seen, which I did not examine because the
channel which leads to it is extremely limited, its depth not having
three codos[73] of water; from here to the east-northeast follows a
low-lying island, just above the water level, ending in a division made
by the hills[74].  The other channel, which is roomy and deep, runs
directly in a northeast direction till it reaches the division of the
hills through a canon that runs in the same direction.

All the bay, which is called the round bay (Bahia Redondo), though it is
not shaped that way, is surrounded with steep hills, without trees,
excepting two spots on the slopes fronting the two harbors to the
southwest. The rest of it is arid, rugged, and of a melancholic aspect.
Outside of the channels there is in this bay about five codos of water,
and at low tide two and a half, and in some places it is dry. It is not
difficult to enter this bay, but going out will be difficult on account
of the wind from the southwest. After a careful examination of its
shore, I did not find any fresh water or any signs of it. Standing in
the canon, which is to the northeast, there is a channel[75] a mile and
a half wide, deep and clear. East of its entrance there is a rancheria
of about four hundred souls. I had dealings with them, but did not buy
anything, though I presented them with beads, which you had given me for
that purpose, and some old clothing of mine. Their acquaintance was
useful to my men and to me, as they presented us with exquisite fishes
(amongst them salmon), seeds, and pinole. I had opportunity of visiting
them four times and found them always as friendly as the first time,
noticing in them polite manners, and what is better, modesty and
retirement in the women. They are not disposed to beg, but accept with
good will what is given them, without being impertinent, as are many
others I have seen during the conquest. This Indian village has some
scows or canoes, made of tule, so well constructed and woven that they
caused me great admiration. Four men get in them to go fishing, pushing
with two-ended oars with such speed that I found they went faster than
the launch. These were the only Indians with whom I had communication in
this northern part.

Following said channel a distance to the west from its mouth, there is a
harbor, so commodious, accessible, abundant in fresh water and wood, and
sheltered from all winds, that I considered it one of the best inland
ports that our Sovereign has for anchoring a fleet of vessels. I called
it Puerto de la Asumpta, having examined it the day of the festivity of
that saint[76].

To the southeast of this port[77] the canon continues, until it joins
the channel of the Indian village. Following a distance of three leagues
in an east-northeast direction, it enters another bay[78] with a depth
of thirteen brazas, diminishing to four where some rivers[79] empty and
take the saltiness of the water which there becomes sweet, the same as
in a lake. The rivers come, one from the east-northeast (this is the
largest, about two hundred and fifty yards wide), the other, which has
many branches, comes from the northeast through tulares and swamps in
very low land, the channels not over two brazas with sandy bars at their
mouths, where I found in sounding the water not more than a half braza.
This made me think they were not navigable, especially as on the second
occasion I entered them, I touched bottom both in the channels and on
the bars. The bay where these rivers empty, is another port larger than
the Asumpta, where any vessel may enter, but it would be difficult to
obtain wood, which is far from the shore. All the eastern coast is
covered with trees; that to the west is arid, dry, full of grasshoppers,
and impossible of settlement. This is all I have reconnoitered to the
north of Angel Island. To the southeast of said island following the
estero is as follows:

To the east of this island, at a distance of about two leagues, there is
another, steep and barren, without any shelter, which divides the mouth
of the channel in two[80], through which the sea enters to a distance of
about twelve leagues. The width of this channel is in some parts, one,
two, and three leagues; its depth is not over four brazas, its width
ample, but a pistol shot outside of the channel; its depth is not over
two brazas. The extreme end of this sound, eastward, forms with a point,
a pocket, which, at low tide is nearly dry[81]. In every part there are
seen poles driven in (the mud), with black feathers, bunches of tule,
and little shells, which I believe are buoys for fishing, since they are
in the water. I think it will be impossible to anchor for three leagues
inside of this slough, because it is so exposed to the weather that
strong cables and good anchorage are needed to hold against the strong
current from the north.

The northeast part of this slough is surrounded by high hills, and has
in its mouth a thick wood of oaks, and at the other end groves of thick
redwood trees. At the southwest of the coast is a small slough,
navigable only by launches[82], and on the coast two harbors[83] where
vessels can anchor. On the more eastern one there is an Indian village,
rough, like the ones in Monterey. This part seems to have better places
for missions, though I did not examine it except from a distance.

All the above stated in this report is what I observed, saw, surveyed,
and sounded, during the days, in which by your orders, I went to the
reconnoitering of this Port of San Francisco in its interior; and as
proof of it, I sign it in this new Port of San Francisco, at the shelter
of Angel Island, on September 7th, 1775.

Jose de Canizares.



[69] This is the body of water between Pt. San Pedro, Pt. San Pablo, Pt.
Richmond and Tiburon Peninsula. The high farallon is Red Rock.

[70] The rocks are The Sisters and The Brothers.

[71] San Pablo Bay.

[72] Napa Slough. The marsh was evidently under water, and island number
one, with Mare Island, made one long island.

[73] Codo - 1 1/2 feet.

[74] Mare Island. The division of the hills or canon is Carquines
Strait.

[75] Carquines Straits.

[76] The Assumption of the Virgin - August 15th. It is Southampton bay.

[77] That is, from Puerto de la Asumpta.

[78] Suisun Bay.

[79] The Sacramento and San Joaquin. Suisun Bay was long known as Puerto
Dulce - Freshwater Port.

[80] Yerba Buena or Goat Island. Canizaries marked it on the map (c) for
isla do Alcatraces, but that evidently was a mistake, as a comparison of
the entry in the Log under date of August 12, with the map will show.

[81] Oakland and Berkeley tide flats.

[82] Islais creek.

[83] Yerba Buena cove and Mission bay.



Index of Places



Acapulco
Alcatraz Island
Almejas, El Rincon de las
Almejas, Punta del
Angel Island
Angel Point
Ano Nuevo, Punta de
Arroyo de San Francisco
Arroyo Seco
Baker's Beach
Barranca
Ballenas Bay
Bonita, Point
Brazas
California, Baja
California, Gulf of
Canada
Canada do los Osos
Canada do San Andres
Carmelo, Pt
Carmelo, bay
Carmelo, Rio del
Carquines, strait
Cerralbo, Bay of
Codo
Columbia river
Concepcion, Laguna de la
Concepcion, Point
Dieguenos
Drake's Bay
El Buchon
El Oso Flaco
Ensenada
Farallones de San Francisco
Farallones, Gulf of
Florida
Fort Point
Golden Gate
Golden Gate, strait
Guadalupe, lake
Islais creek
Jesus de los Temblores, Rio de
La Paz, Bay of
La Paz, port of
Lime Point
Lobos creek
Loreto, presidio of
Los Angeles, City of
Los Angeles, river
Napa slough
Mare Island
Mendocino, Cape
Mescaltitan
Mission bay
Montara mountains
Monterey, Bay of
Monterey, Port of
Monterey, presidio and mission of
Muertos, Punta de los
Navidad, Puerto de
Oakland Flats
Pajaro, Rio del
Pedernales, Point
Philippine Islands
Pilar Point
Pinos, Punta de
Porciuncula, Indulgence
Puerto Dulce
Punta del Angel de la Guarda
Presidio anchorage
Rancheria
Reyes, Punta de los
Reyes, Rio de los
Richardson's bay
Red Rock
Ross, Fort
San Blas
San Buenaventura, mission of
San Carlos, Point
San Clemente, island
San Corpoforo, canon
San Diego
San Diego, bay
San Diego, Founding of mission
San Diego, presidio of
San EIizario, Rio de
San Fernando, valley
San Francisco, Bahia o Puerto de
San Francisco, Bay of
San Francisco, Port of
San Francisco, creek
San Gabriel, valley
San Joaquin river
San Jose, Point
San Juan Capistrano, mission of
San Lorenzo, Rio de
San Luis Obispo
San Luis Rey, mission of
San Miguel (island)
San Nicolas, Isla de
San Pablo bay
San Pedro bay
San Pedro Point
San Pedro valley
Santa Ana, Rio de
Santa Barbara Channel
Santa Barbara Isla de
Santa Barbara presidio of
Santa Catalina, island
Santa Clara, river
Santa Inez, river
Santa Lucia, Sierra de
Santa Maria, mission of
Santa Rosa, river
Santa Susana, Sierra de
Sacramento, river
Sal, Point
Salines, river
Santiago, Point
Seal Rocks
Suisun bay
Tamalpais, mountain
The Brothers (rocks)
The Sisters (rocks)
Tomales bay
Velicata
Yerba Buena cove



Index of Persons



Aguilar, Martin
Aguirre, Juan B.
Alvarado, Juan Bautista
Amador, Pedro
Anza, Juan Bautista de
Arriaga, Julian de
Ayala, Juan Manuel
Bancroft, H. H.
Bodega y Quadra, Juan de la
Bolanos, Francisco
Bucareli, Antonio Maria
Bueno, Cabrera
Cabrillo, Juan Rodrigues
Canizares, Jose
Carrillo, Jose Raimundo
Cermenon, Sebastian
Coronado, Francisco Vasquez
Cortes, Hernando
Corvan, Toribio Gomez de
Costanso, Miguel
Cota, Pablo de
Crespi, Juan
Davidson, George
De Gali, Francisco
De Soto, Hernando
Drake, Francis
Estorace, Jorge
Fages, Pedro
Ferrelo, Bartolome
Figueroa, Rodriga de
Fletcher, Francis
Galvez, Jose de
Gomez, Fray Francisco
Griffin, George Butler
Heceta, Bruno de
Jiminez (Fortun)
Laut, Agnes C.
Legaspi, Miguel Lopez de
Lummis, Chas. F.
Maldonado, Gabriel
Manrique, Miguel
Mendoza, Antonio de
Monterey, Conde de
Morgana, Juan de
Oliveros, Jose Ignacio
Ortega, Jose Francisco
Palou, Fray Francisco
Perez, Juan
Parron, Fray Fernando
Pino, Miguel del
Portola, Gaspar de
Prat, Pedro
Rivera y Moncada, Fernando de
Salcedo, Felipe
Serra, Fray Junipero
Soberanes, Jose Maria
Vancouver, Captain George
Velasco, Luis de
Vila, Vicente
Vizcaino, Fray Juan
Vizcaino, Sebastian
Yorba, Jose Antonio
Zuniga y Asevedo, Gaspar de









Originally scanned at sacred-texts.com by John B. Hare
This eBook was produced by Chetan Jain at BharatLiterature




Markandeya Purana

Books VII and VIII.



JOURNAL

OF

THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.



[New Series, Volume XIII]

[London, Trubner and Company]

[1881]


Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May 2002




ART. XIII.--__Translation of the Markandeya Purana__
Books VII. VIII.  By the Rev. B. HALE WORTHAM.



BOOK VII.


ONCE upon earth there lived a saintly king
Named Harischandra; pure in heart and mind,
In virtue eminent, he ruled the world,
Guarding mankind from evil.  While he reigned
No famine raged, nor pain; untimely death
Ne'er cut men off; nor were the citizens
Of his fair city lawless.  All their wealth,
And power, and works of righteousness, ne'er filled
Their hearts with pride; in everlasting youth
And loveliness the women passed their days.

It so fell out, that while this mighty king
Was hunting in the forest, that he heard
The sound of female voices raised in cry
Of supplication.  Then he turned and said,
Leaving the deer to fly unheeded: "Stop!
Who art thou, full of tyranny and hate,
That darest thus oppress the earth; while I,
The tamer of all evil, live and rule?"
Then, too, the fierce Ganesa,--he who blinds
The eyes, and foils the wills of men,--he heard
The cry, and thus within himself he thought:
"This surely is the great ascetic's work,
The mighty Visvamitra; he whose acts
Display the fruits of penance hard and sore.
Upon the sciences he shows his power,
While they, in patience, discipline of mind,
And silence perfected, cry out with fear,
'What shall we do?  The illustrious Kausika
Is powerful; and we, compared with him,
Are feeble.'  Thus they cry.  What shall I do?
My mind is filled with doubt.  Yet stay; a thought
Has come across me: Lo! this king who cries
Unceasingly, 'Fear not!' meeting with him,
And entering his heart, I will fulfil
All my desire."  Then filled with Rudra's son--
Inspired with rage by Vigna Raj--the king
Spake up and said: "What evil doer is here,
Binding the fire on his garment's hem,
While I, his king, in power and arms renowned,
Resplendent in my glory, pass for nought?
Surely the never-ending sleep of death
Shall overtake him, and his limbs shall fail,
Smitten with darts from my far-reaching bow,
Whose fame this lower world may scarce contain."
Hearing the prince's words, the saint was filled
With wrath o'erpow'ring, and the sciences
Fell blasted in a moment at his glance.

But when the king beheld the pious sage
All-powerful, he quaked exceedingly,
And trembled like the sacred fig-tree's leaves.
Then Visvamitra cried: "Stop, miscreant!"
And Harischandra, humbly falling down
Before the saint, in accents low and meek:
"O Lord! most holy! most adorable!
Oh, blame me not!  This is no fault of mine!
My duty calls," he said, "I must obey."
"Is it not written in the Holy Law,
'Alms must be given by a virtuous king;
His people must be fought for, and be kept
From every ill'?"  Then Visvamitra spoke
And said: "To whom, O king, should'st thou give alms?
For whom in battle should'st thou fight? and whom
Should'st thou protect?  Oh, tell me, nor delay,
But quickly answer, if thou fearest sin."
"Alms should be given to Brahmans," said the king:
"Those who are weak should be protected: foes
In battle should be met and overcome."

Then Visvamitra spoke and said: "O king!
If thus indeed thou rightly dost perceive
Thy royal duty, give thine alms to me;
I am a holy Brahman, and I seek
A dwelling-place; moreover I would gain
A wife: therefore bestow on me thine alms."
The king, his heart filled with exceeding joy,
Felt, as it were, his youth return, and said:
"Fear not! but tell me, son of Kausika,
Thy heart's desire; and be it hard to gain,
Or be it easy, it shall still be thine.
Say, shall I give thee gold, or wealth, or life?
Or shall I give thee wife, or child, or land?
Or my prosperity itself?"  "O king!"
The sage replied, "thy present I accept;
But let thine alms, I pray, be granted first,--
The offering for the kingly sacrifice."
"O Brahman!" said the king, "the alms are thine;
Further than this, whatever be the gift
Thou mayest desire, freely I give it thee.
Ask what thou wilt."  Then Visvamitra spake:
"Give me the earth, its mountains, seas, and towns,
With all its kingdoms, chariots, horses, men;
Its elephants, its treasure-houses too;
Its treasures vast, and all whate'er beside
Is recognized as thine: oh! give me all,
I pray, except thyself, thy wife, thy son,
And this thy righteousness, that follows close
Beside thee.  Sinless one! oh thou who art
Perfect in righteousness! oh give me all--
All beside these.  What need of further words."

The king, with heart rejoicing, and unchanged
In countenance, hearing the sage's words,
Said, humbly bowing down before the saint,
"So be thy wish fulfilled."  "O saintly king,"
Said Visvamitra, "if the world is mine,
And power, and wealth, I pray you who shall reign,
Since in this kingdom as a devotee
I dwell?"  Then Harischandra said: "'Ere this,
Before the world was thine by my free gift,
Thou wast the lord of all; how much more now?
Thy right is doubly sure."  Then said the sage:
"If this indeed be so,--if the whole world
Be truly mine, and all its sovereignty,
Then should'st thou not remain, nor leave thyself
Aught of that kingdom which thou hast renounced,
But, casting off thy royal ornaments,
Thou should'st depart, clothed in a dress of bark."
The king, obedient to the sage's word,
Stripped off his royal dress, and, with his wife
And son, made haste to go.  Then said the saint:
"Stop, Harischandra!  Hast thou then forgot
The offering for the kingly sacrifice
That thou hast promised us?"  Replied the king:
"O mighty saint! the kingdom now is __thine__;
All have I given to __thee__: and as for me,
What have I left?--nought! save myself,
My wife, my son!"  "Thou sayest the truth, indeed,"
Answered the sage; "but yet there still remains
The offering for the kingly sacrifice.
And this know well:  A vow to Brahmans made,
If unfulfilled, works special woe to him
Who made the vow.  For in this sacrifice
Must offerings of worth be freely made
To Brahmans;--offerings until they cry
Hold! that suffices for us!  Therefore pay
Thy promised vow, nor longer hesitate.
'Alms are for Brahmans,' thou thyself hast said,
'Those who are weak must be protected: foes
In battle must be met and overcome.'"
"O saintly priest!" answered the king, "my wealth
Is all departed: nothing now remains
For me to give: yet grant me time I pray,
And I will pay the offering!"  "Noble king,"
Said Visvamitra, "speak I pray thee!  Say
What time dost thou appoint that I should wait?
Speak! no delay! or else my curse of fire
Shall burn thee up."  Then Harischandra said:
"Most holy Brahman! when a month has past
The money for the offering shall be thine.
Now I have nothing.  Oh! be pleased to grant
Remission for the present."  Said the sage,
"Go! go! most noble prince! maintain thy faith!
And may'st thou prosper! may no enemies
Harass thy road."  Commanded thus, the king
Departed as an outcast;--he, the king
Of all the earth, an exile with his wife
Unused to go afoot, and with his son
Went forth: while cries and lamentations rose
On every side: "Our hearts are filled with pain,
Why dost thou leave us thus?  O virtuous king!
Show mercy to thy subjects.  Righteousness
Indeed shines forth in thee; if thou art full
Of mercy, may it overflow on us.
Stay!  Mighty Prince! one moment, while we gaze
With lover's eyes upon thy beauteous form.
Alas! our Prince!  Shall we ne'er see thee more?
How changed thy princely state!  Thou, who did'st once
Go forth, surrounded by attendant kings,
Who marched on foot; while stately elephants
Bore e'en thy ministers.  Now, Lord of Kings!
Thyself art driven forth on foot.  Yet, stay!
Think, Harischandra! how wilt thou endure
The dust, the heat, the toil?  Stay, mighty prince,
Nor cast thy duty off.  Oh, show to us
Some mercy, for herein thy duty lies.
Behold, we cast off all for thee!  Our wives,
Our wealth, our children, our possessions, all
Have we relinquished; like thy shadow,
We would follow thee.  Oh leave us not!
For wheresoe'er thou art is happiness,
And heaven itself would be no heaven to us
Without our prince."  Then, overwhelmed with grief
At these laments, the king stayed on his course,
In pity for his loving citizens.
Then Visvamitra, filled with rage, his eyes
Rolling with wrath, exclaimed: "Shame on thee! shame!
O full of falsehood, and of wickedness.
How! would'st thou, then, speaker of lies!
Resume the gifts that thou hast freely made,
And reinstate thee in thy kingdom?"  "Sir!
I go!" replied the king to these rude words,
And trembling crept away in haste, his wife
Holding him by the hand.  And, as she went,
Her fragile form o'ercome with weariness,
The Brahman smote her fiercely with his stick.
Then Harischandra, pained with inmost grief,
Seeing the stroke, said meekly, "Sir! I go!"
Nor further spoke.  Filled with compassion then,
The Visvadevas said: "What sin is this?
What torments shall indeed suffice for him
By whom this pious king--the offerer
Of prayer, and sacrifice, has been cast forth.
Who now will sanctify the Soma-juice
With prayers and hymns, at the great sacrifice,
That we may drink it with rejoicing hearts?"

Then, having heard these words, the Brahman turned
Upon the Visvedevas; and, in wrath
Exceeding hot, he spake a fearful curse:
"You shall be cast down from the height of heaven,
And live as men."  The curse had hardly passed
His lips, when filled with pity for their fate,
The sage yet further added: "you shall live
Indeed as men, but yet, there shall be born
To you no son, nor shall you know the state
Of marriage.  Envy, love, and wrath shall ne'er
Hold sway o'er you: and when the appointed time
Has past, you shall re-enter once again
The courts of heaven, and wear again the form
Which you had lost."  The Visvedevas then
Came down from heaven, and, clothed in human form,
Were born as men, the sons of Pritha, wife
Of Pa.n.du.  Therefore those five Pa.n.davas--
Mighty in war--by Visvamitra cursed,
Knew not the state of marriage.  Thou hast heard
The tale of Pa.n.du's sons; thy question, too,
Of fourfold import has been answered.
I pray thee, say, what further would'st thou hear?




BOOK VIII.


Said Jaimini: An answer ye have found
To all my questions; and indeed have filled
Me full of deepest interest.  Oh! I long
To hear yet more!  Alas! that saintly king!
What grief he suffered!  Did he e'er attain
To any comfort answering to his woe?
Noblest of Birds!  Oh tell me this, I pray.

The Holy Birds continued:  Then the king,
O'ercome with grief and pain, hearing the words
Of Visvamitra, with his wife and son
Journeyed along, dragging his weary steps.
At length the holy place appeared in view--
The shrine of Siva; thus within himself,
He said: "Benares, sacred to the god,
Lies now before me; there shall I find rest,
For there man has no power."  The king approached
The gates on foot: lo! at the entry stood
The Brahman Visvamitra.  Mighty Saint!
The king, his hands in supplication joined,
With humble reverence, said:  "Here is my life,
My wife, my son, I offer all to thee;
Accept, I pray, the offering! or choose
Whatever else thou wouldest!"  But the sage
Replied: "The month is past! most saintly king!
Give me the present for the sacrifice--
The offering thou hast promised."  "One half-day
As yet remains before the month be past,
Oh Brahman of surpassing piety,
And penances unfading.  Wait, I pray,
A few short hours."  Then Visvamitra said:
"So be it, king! once more I will return,
But if the offering be not duly paid,
Before the sinking of this evening's sun,
My curse shall smite thee."  And the priest
Departed, while the king, in anxious thought,
Debated thus: "How shall I make the gift?
The promised gift? where are my friends? my wealth?
I may not beg for alms; how can I then
Fulfil my vow?  Nor even in the world
Beyond shall I find rest.  Destruction waits,
If with my promise unfulfilled, I pass
From hence.  A robber of the holy saints;
I shall become the lowest of the low.
Nay, I will sell myself! and, as a slave,
Redeem my promise."  Then the queen, in tears
Bewildered, and afflicted, lost in thought,
With face cast down, "Maintain thy truth," she said,
"Most mighty prince!  Oh! let not doubt prevail!
The man devoid of truth is to be shunned
Like contact with the dead.  The highest law
Declares, that inward truth and faithfulness
Must be maintained.  Burnt sacrifices, alms,
The study of the scriptures, penances,
Are counted not for righteousness to him
Whose word is faithless.  Listen! noble prince!
Is it not written in the sacred law:
'The wise attain Salvation through the truth,
While lies and falsehood are destruction's way
To men of low and evil minds.'  There lived,
'Tis said, a king upon the earth, by whom
The kingly sacrifice--burnt offerings too,
Were offered in abundance.  That same king
Fell once from truthfulness, and by that fall,
He lost his righteousness, and forfeited
His place in heaven.  Prince! I have borne a son"--
Her utterance failed her, issuing forth in nought
But sighs and lamentations.  Then the king,
With eyes o'erflowing, said, "Behold thy son!
He stands beside thee! cast away thy grief!
Tell me what presses on thee."  Said the queen,
"Prince, I have borne a son; and sons are born
To none but worthy women.  This my son
Shall take me--he shall offer me for sale--
Then with the money gained, pay thou the priest
The promised offering."  Hearing these words,
He fell down fainting.  When his sense returned,
Filled with exceeding pain, the king burst forth,
Lamenting: "This, alas! most loving one!
Is hardly to be framed in words, much less
Be carried out in deed.  Alas! alas!"--
His spirit fled again, and to the earth
He fell unconscious.  Overcome with grief,
The queen exclaimed, filled with compassion: "King!
How art thou fallen from thy high estate!
The ground is now thy resting-place, whom once
A gorgeous couch received.  Lo! this my lord,
By whom wealth, honour, power, are freely given
An offering to the Brahman--see, he lies
Insensate on the ground.  Ye gods of heaven!
Tell me, I pray you, has this noble king,
Equal to gods in rank, committed sin
Against you, that he lies thus overcome
With woe?"  Then fell the queen, bereft of sense
Upon the earth, o'erwhelmed with grief and pain,
Seeing her husband's misery.  When the boy
Beheld his parents lying on the ground,
He cried in terror: "Father! give me food!
Mother! my tongue is parched with thirst!"  Meanwhile
Upon the scene the mighty Brahman came;
And when he saw the king lie senseless, "King!"--
Sprinkling cold water on his face--he said,
"Rise up! rise up! Pay me the promised vow;
For this thy misery from day to day
Increases, and will yet increase, until
The debt be paid."  The water's cooling touch
Refreshed the king; his consciousness returned;
But when he saw the Brahman, faintness seized
His limbs again.  Then overpowering rage
Seized Visvamitra; but before he left,
The best of Brahmans said: "If what is just,
Or right, or true, enters thy mind, O king!
Give me the present.  Lo! by truth divine
The sun sends forth his vivifying rays
Upon the earth.  By truth this mighty world
Stands firm and steadfast.  Truth all law excels.
By truth the very heaven itself exists.
Wert thou to weigh the truth, and in the scale
Opposing, wert to place burnt-offerings,
And sacrifices countless, still the truth
Would far outweigh them all.  Why need I waste
My words of loving-kindness upon thee--
An ill-intentioned, false, ignoble man.
Thou art a king,--so should the truth prevail
With thee.  Yet hear me;--if the offering
Be still unpaid when th' evening's sun has sunk
Behind the western mountain to his rest,
My curse shall smite thee."  Speaking words like these
The Brahman left him; and the king, o'ercome
With fear--a fugitive--robbed of his wealth--
Degraded to unfathomable depths--
The victim of his evil creditor--
Heard once again the counsel of his wife:
"O king! sell __me__! nor let the fiery curse
Dissolve thy being!"  Urged repeatedly,
The king at length replied: "Most loving one!
What the most wicked man could hardly do,
That same will I:--and I will sell my wife.
Alas! that I should utter such a word!"
And going with his wife into the town--
Eyes dimmed with tears, voice choked with grief--he cried:
"Come hither, townsmen! hearken unto me!
A wretch! inhuman! savage as a fiend!
I offer here my wife for sale, and yet
I live!  Here is a female slave!  Who buys?
Make haste and speak."  "The female slave is mine!"
(So spake an ancient Brahman to the king.)
"Money I have in heaps, and I will pay
You well for her.  My wife is delicate;
Her household duties are beyond her strength;
I want a slave, and therefore I will give
A price proportioned to the woman's skill
And temper; nor will I o'erlook her youth
And beauty.  What you think is fair and right,
That will I pay."  Struck dumb with grief, the king
Stood mute, nor answered aught.  And then the priest,
Tying the price in the king's garment-hem--
His bark-cloth garment--roughly grasped the queen,
And dragged her off.  But when the loving child
Beheld his mother led away, he seized
Her by her garment.  And the queen exclaimed:
"If only for a moment, noble sir!
Oh! let me go! that I may gaze once more
Upon my child, whom I shall never see,
And never touch again!  My child, behold
Thy mother, now a slave! And thou--a prince!
Oh, touch me not!  My lot of servitude
Forbids that thou should'st touch me."  But the child,
His eyes bedewed with tears, ran after her,
Calling her "Mother!"  As the boy came near,
The Brahman spurned him with his foot; but he
Still following close would not be torn from her,
Calling her "Mother!"  "Oh, my lord!  I pray,
Be gracious to me!" said the queen.  "Oh, buy
My son with me; divide us not!  For I
Without him shall be nought of use to you.
Be gracious, O my lord!"  Then said the priest:
"Here! take the money! give the boy to me!
The saints, who know the scriptures, have ordained
The right and lawful sum.  Take it!"  He tied
The money in the king's bark dress, and led
Them both away--the mother and the child--
Together bound.  But when the king beheld
Himself bereft of both his wife and son,
He burst forth: "Ah! my wife! whom neither sun,
Nor moon, nor air have ever seen I who hast
Been kept from vulgar gaze!  Alas I a slave
Hast thou become!  Alas! thou, too, my son!--
A scion of the noble dynasty,
Sprung from the sun! disgrace has seized on thee,
And--shame upon me!--thou too art a slave!
Ye have become a sacrifice; ye, through my fault,
Have fallen.  Would that I were dead!"  Thus spoke
The king.  Meanwhile the Brahman hastily
Entered the grove wherein his dwelling stood,
And vanished with his slaves.  Then met the king
The Brahman Visvamitra.  "Prince!" he said,
Pay me the offering!"  Harischandra gave
The money gained by the shameful sale
Of wife and child.  And when the priest beheld
The money, overcome with wrath, he said:
"How canst thou mock me with this paltry sum!
Base Kshatriya!  And thinkest thou that this
Suffices for a sacrificial gift
Such as I would accept?  But if thy mind
Thus far misleads thee, thou shalt feel my power--
Power transcendant, gained by penances,
And scripture meditation.  Yes! the power
Of my pure Brahmanhood shall show itself
On thee."  "More will I give thee," said the king,
"But wait, most noble saint!  Nought have I left!
Even my wife and child are sold."  Replied
The Brahman: "Hold! be silent!  Further time
Than the remaining fourth part of to-day
I grant thee not."  Enraged, he turned away,
Departing with the money.  And the king,
Immersed in grief and fear, with face cast down,
Cried out: "If there be any one of you
Who wants a slave, let him make haste and speak
While day remains."  Then Dharma, putting on
The form of a Cha.n.dala, hastily
Came forward, taking pity on the king.
His countenance was fearful,--black, with tusks
Projecting; savage in his words; his smell
Was foul and horrible; a crowd of dogs
Came after him.  "Tell me thy price," he said;
"Be quick; and whether it be large or small
I care not, so I have thee as my slave:"
The king, beholding such a loathsome form,
Of mien revolting--"What art thou?" he said.
"Men call me a Cha.n.dala," he replied.
I dwell in this same city--in a part
Of evil fame.  As of a murderer
Condemned to death, such is my infamy.
My calling is a robber of the dead."
"I will not be a slave," exclaimed the king,
"To thee, a base Cha.n.dala.  Better far
That I should perish by the fiery curse."
The words were scarcely uttered, when the saint
Returned, his countenance with rage
Distorted; and he thus addressed the king:
"The sum is fair; why dost thou not accept
The offer?  Then indeed thou mightest pay
The gift thou owest for the sacrifice."
"O son of Kusika!" replied the king,
"Consider this, I pray!--my noble race!
Truly am I descended from the sun!
How can I then become, though sore in want,
Lowest of creatures--a Cha.n.dala's slave?"
"Delay no more," the Brahman said, "but pay
The gift at once, and sell thyself a slave
To the Cha.n.dala--or assuredly
I curse thee."  "Saintly priest, be merciful!"
The king entreated; and, immersed in care,
He seized the Brahman's feet, exclaiming thus:
"What am I but a slave, o'erwhelmed with grief!
Fear holds me!  Saintly priest, be merciful!
Protect me, mighty saint!  Save me, I pray,
From this most horrible Cha.n.dala.  Sir!
Most noble saint! hereafter shall thy will
Be all the object of my life!  To serve
Thy lightest wish shall be my highest joy!
Thus will I make the offering--I will be
Thy __slave__!" Replied the Brahman: "If thou art
My slave, then will I sell thee as a slave
To the Cha.n.dala."  Then, filled with delight,
Paying the money, the Svapaka bound
His lately-purchased slave, and striking him,
Led hill away.  Parted from all his friends;
In utmost grief; in the Cha.n.dala's house
Abiding--morning, noon, and eventide,
And night, the king thus made lament:
"Alas! my tender wife, overwhelmed with pain,
Looking upon her son in misery,
Bewails her lot.  But yet she says: 'The king
Will surely ransom us, for he has gained
By now more money than the Brahman paid
For us;' and all the time she little knows
My fate--worse than her own.  For I have passed
From woe to woe--kingdom and friends--my wife,
My son, have passed from me, and now the state
Of a Cha.n.dala holds me."  While he dwelt
A slave in the Cha.n.dala's house, the forms
Of those he loved were still before his eyes--
Were ever in his mind.  Meanwhile the king,
Obedient to his master's will, became
A robber of the dead; and night and day
He watched for plunder.  "One part of the spoil
Is for the king, three for thy master, two
For thee.  Go to the city's southern part,
Where is the dwelling of the dead, there wait."
Obeying the Cha.n.dala, to the place
Of burial he went;--an awful place,
Filled full of fearful sounds and loathsome sights--
Of evil smells, and smoke, and locks of hair
Fallen from the dead; while troops of fiends and ghouls,
Vampires and demons, wandered to and fro.
Vultures and jackals prowled, and spirit forms'
Of evil hovered o'er.  The ground was strewn
With heaps of bones; and wailing, sharp and shrill,
Re-echoed from the mourners of the dead.
The bodies on the funeral piles, half burnt,
Crackled and hissed; showing their shining teeth,
They grinned, as if in sport; while all the time
The howl of demons and the wail of fiends
Were mingled with the roar of flames--a sound
Of fearful import, such as ushers in
The day of doom.  The sights, and sounds, and smells--
The heaps of ashes, and the piles of bones,
Blackened with filth--the smoke, the shouts,
The yells--struck fear on fear into the heart.
The burial-place resembled nought but hell.
Such was the place appointed for the king.
"Priests! Brahmans! Counsellors! how have I fallen
From all my royal state!  Alas! my queen!
Alas! my son!  Oh! miserable fate!
We have been torn asunder by the power
Of Visvamitra."  Thoughts like these possessed
His inmost mind; while foul, unshorn, unwashed,
He served his master.  Running here and there,
Armed with a jagged club, he sought the dead,
From whom he gained his wages.  So he lived,
Degraded from his caste.  Old knotted rags
Served as his dress; his face and arms and feet
With dust and ashes from the funeral piles
Begrimed; his hands defiled with putrid flesh
From contact with the bodies of the dead.
So neither day nor night he ceased from toil.
And twelve months passed--twelve weary months, which seemed
To his grief-stricken mind a hundred years;
And then at last, worn out, the best of kings
Lay down to rest; and as upon his couch
All motionless in sleep he lay, he saw
A wondrous vision.  By the power divine
He seemed to wear another form,--a form
Both new and strange,--and in that form to pay
The vow.  Twelve years of expiation passed
With difficulty.  Then within himself
King Harischandra thought: "So too will I,
When I am freed from hence, perform my vows
With generous freedom."  Forthwith he was born
As a Pukkasa; while a place was found
For him among the dead, and funeral rites
Were ordered as his task.  Thus seven years
Were passed; then to the burying-place was brought
A Brahman seeking sepulture: in life
He had been poor, but honest; and the king,
Though he knew this--the dead man's poverty
And his uprightness--pressed his friends to pay
The funeral dues.  "Enforce thy right," they said,
"And do this evil deed; yet know thou this:
Once upon earth there was a mighty king
Named Harischandra; though he but disturbed
A Brahman's sleep, through that offence he lost
His merit, and by Visvamitra's curse
Became a base Pukkasa."  "Yet the king
Spared not the dead man's friends, but still required
His fee.  Therefore they cursed him in their rage--
"Go!--go!--thou most degraded of mankind--
Go to the lowest hell!"  Then in his dream
The king beheld the messengers of death.
Fearful to look at, armed with heavy chains,
They seized him, and they bound him hand and foot,
And bore him off.  And then, in fear and pain,
Headlong he fell into the bath of oil
In Naraka.  There, torn with instruments
Sharp-edged as razors, fed on putrid blood,
He saw himself.  For seven years in hell--
Now burnt from day to day, now tossed and torn,
Now cut by knives, and now by icy winds
Frozen and numbed--a dead Pukkasa's fate
He underwent.  Each day in Naraka,
A hundred years of mortal reckoning--
So count the demons who inhabit hell.
Then he beheld himself cast up to earth,
His spirit entering a filthy dog;
Feeding on things all foul and horrible--
Consumed by cold.  A month thus passed away.
His spirit changed its dwelling, and he saw
Himself an ass; and after that an ox,
A cow, a goat, a sheep, a bird, a worm.
So day by day he saw his spirit change
Its outward shape.  A multitude of forms--
Some moving, others rooted to the ground--
Received his soul.  And when the hundred years
Were passed and gone, he saw himself again
Re-occupy his pristine human form--
Once more a king.  And then he seemed to lose
His kingdom, casting it away in games
Of chance.  Turned from his home a wanderer
Into the forest with his wife and child:
Devoured by a ravening beast, but raised
To life again on earth, he sore bewailed
His wife: "Alas! why hast thou left me thus?
Alas!  O Saivya! where hast thou gone?"
Then in his dream he seemed to see his wife
And son lamenting: "What hast thou to do
With gambling?  Oh protect us, mighty king!"
The vision faded, and he saw no more
The cherished forms.  And then the dream returned
By power divine.  And Harischandra stood
In heaven, and he beheld his wife on earth,
With flowing hair, dragged forcibly along--
Stripped of her clothes: the cry came to his ear,
"Protect us, king of men!"  Then, snatched away,
The demons hurried him before the judge;
And Harischandra seemed to hear the words:
"Go forth! return once more to earth!  Thy grief
Is well nigh past and ended; joy ere long
Shall come to thee.  The sorrows that remain
Endure."  The king, then driven from the sky
By Yama's messengers, falling through space--
Senseless in fear and terror, filled with pain
Yet more exceeding--thought within himself,
"How shall I suffer all these torments sore!--
The changes manifold of form--the pain
In Naraka."  Then Harischandra sought
Aid from the gods: "O mighty lords," he said,
"Protect me!  O protect my wife and child!
O mighty Dharma, thee I worship!  Thee,
O Krish.na, the Creator!  Faultless ones,
Both far and near, before you now I come,
A suppliant.  On thee, O lord of prayer,
I call! on thee, O Indra too! to thee
O ancient one! I pray--immutable!"
The vision fled, the king arose from sleep.
His tangled hair, his body black and grimed,
Recalled to him his state--the plunderer
Of dead men's clothes.  His recollection gone,
He thought not of his sorrowing wife and child,
For reason failed.  The loss of kingdom, wealth,
And friends, his dwelling-place among the tombs,
Had overthrown his senses, and destroyed
His mind.  Then to the burying-place the queen
Came, bearing the dead body of her son--
Pale and distracted.  "My beloved son!
My child!" she kept exclaiming, while she threw
Dust on her head.  "Alas! alas! O king!
O that thou could'st behold thy child," she said--
"Thy child now lying dead upon the earth,
Killed by a serpent's bite.  Alas! my son!
So lovely! so delightful!" Then the king,
Rearing the sounds of mourning, went in haste
To rob the dead: nor did he recognize
His wife, in that sad mourner, changed by grief
As if into another.  And the queen
Knew not the form that stood before her, clothed
In rags, with matted hair, withered and foul.
Then recollection dawned upon the king,
Seeing the dead child's princely form, the thought
Of his own son came o'er him.  "Ah! my child!
What evil chance," he said, "has brought thee here!
A child of princely race thou seemest.  He, my son,
Long lost to me through my accursed fate,
Would have been even such as thou in age."
Then raised the queen her voice, and thus she spoke:
"Alas! has some unexpiated crime
Brought upon us, my child! this endless woe.
My absent lord! since thou did'st not console
My grief in times gone by, how can the pain
I suffer now assuage?  Did'st thou not lose
Thy kingdom? did'st thou not desert thy friends?
Did'st thou not sell thy wife and child?"  The king
Heard her lament, and as he heard, the wail
Fell from his eyes,--he recognized again
His wife and son--and saying but the words,
"Ah! Saivya!  Ah! my beloved child!"
He fainting fell to earth.  Then, too, the queen,
Hearing her husband's voice, o'ercome with grief,
Insensate fell.  Returning consciousness
Brought to them both affliction's heaviest weight
And mutual lamentations.  "Ah! my son!"
Thus mourned the king, "my inmost heart is torn,
When I behold thy form so delicate:
My child! embracing thee in tend'rest love,
Words of affection I will speak, that rise
Unbidden to my lips.  Alas! thy limbs
Will be defiled by my embrace; the dust
That clings about my garments will pollute
Thy lovely form!  Alas! my child, thou had'st
An evil father!  He who should have kept
All dangers from thee, he it was who sold
Thee as a slave! and yet in heart and mind
First of all things I love thee.  Ah! my child!
Thy father's realm--my heaped-up wealth--all this
By lawful right was thine inheritance,
And now thou liest slain!  Ah me! the tears
Rise to my eyes in blinding force: thy form,
In grace and beauty like the lotus flower,
Fades from my sight."  He spoke, and faltering
With grief embraced his son.  The queen exclaimed:
"This is indeed my lord--I know his voice!
I know his form! this is the mighty king.
The wisest of all beings.  But how changed!
What fate is this?  Ah what a dreadful place
For him, the lord of men.  This grief yet more
Is added to the mourning for my son--
My husband's fate--for as a slave he serves
A base Cha.n.dala.  Cursed be that god,
Or demon foul, through whom a godlike king
Has fallen to this degraded state; the lot
Of a Svapaka.  Ah! most noble prince,
My mind is filled with grief, when I recall
Thy regal state, thy past magnificence.
No kingly ensigns go before thee now,
No captive kings, brought down to slavery,
Humbly precede thee, casting in the way
Their garments, lest the dust should soil thy feet.
But now!  O king! alas, thyself a slave,
Thou livest in this fearful place, begrimed
With filth; thy sacred cord concealed, thy hair
Tangled and long, plunder of dead men's clothes
Thy livelihood.  Ah! king! and is thy life
Spent in this awful wise?"  So spake the queen,
And falling on his neck, embraced her lord:
While she, sprung from a king herself, bewailed
Her sorrows endless.  "King! I pray thee speak!
Is this a dream?  If it be real and true,
Then justice, truth, and righteousness have fled
And gone from earth: nor aught avails mankind,
Of sacrifice, or reverence, to gods
Or priests!  'Tis vain to follow innocence
If thou, most perfect, purest of mankind,
Art brought to such a depth of infamy."
Then spoke the king, and told his sorrowing wife
How he had fallen to this wretched state,--
The state of a Cha.n.dala.  She, in turn,
Weeping, with many sighs, poured out her tale,
Telling him how the serpent's bite had killed
Their child.  "Beloved one! I suffer not
These evils," said the king, "by mine own will--
Thou seest what I endure; my evil fate
Depends not on myself.  I am a slave,
And if I fly from the Cha.n.dala's bonds,
The fiery torment in the depths of hell
Will overtake me, and I shall become
A slave again.  My doom is fixed! lo! hell
Is my abode hereafter; and in forms,
Creeping and loathsome, shall my soul abide.
Yet from this miserable life on earth
There is one only refuge.  He! my son!
My hope! my stay! is dead; drowned by the sea
Of my misfortunes.  But I am a slave!
I am dependent on another's will!
Can I give up my wife?  Yes! even so!
For know thou this: one who is steeped in woe
Cares not for evil chances; not the state
Of the most loathsome beast, nor yet the wood
Of sword-leaved plants, nor even hell's dread stream,
Could add the smallest fraction to the pain
I have already borne.  My son is dead!
Who then will make atonement for my sins?
Yet listen to my words, beloved one,
If I have offered sacrifice, and paid
Due reverence to the saints; if I have given
Alms to the needy--may we meet again
Hereafter, in the world to come, and find
The refuge for our woes denied us here.
Let us together follow in the path
By which our son has gone.  Our hopeless fate
Can never alter here.  Whatever words
I may have uttered, thoughtlessly, in jest,
These, when I pray for pardon, shall receive
Fullest forgiveness.  Thou must not despise
Thy lord: nor pride thee on thy queenly state
Now passed and gone."  The prince's wife replied:
"I am prepared to tread that path with thee,
O king, most saintly! and with thee that world
To enter."  While she spoke these words, the king
Made up the funeral pile, and placed thereon
His son, himself ascending with his wife.
And then, in meditation wrapt, he thought
Upon Narayana, the lord supreme,
And Vasudeva, lord of deities,
Siva, and Brahma the eternal god,
And Krish.na clothed in glory.  As the king
Was meditating, all the gods from heaven
Came down headed by Dharma.  And they said:
"Hear us, O king! hear us, O lord! The gods--
Even the mighty gods have come to earth,
And at their head is Dharma.  Gods, and saints,
And heroes--yea, and Visvamitra too,
The sage implacable,--all summon thee--
Ascend! to heaven: receive the due reward,
That thou hast gained.  O king! slay not thyself!
I, perfect Righteousness, I summon thee
To enter now the heaven that thou hast gained
By thy transcendant virtues, self-control,
Patience, and truth." Then Indra spoke, and said:--
"O Harischandra! King, most eminent!
In virtue! lo! before you Indra stands--
For I am he.  The everlasting world
Thou hast attained: together with thy wife,
And son, ascend to heaven;--to that third heav'n--
So difficult to be attained by men--
The heav'n that thou hast won."  Then Indra rained
Life-giving am.rit from the sky, and flowers
That blossomed in the heavenly courts: while sounds
Of music filled the air, and round him stood
The gods, a vast assembly.  Then the son
Of Harischandra rose, restored to life,
And health, his mind and senses whole, his form
More beautiful than ever: and the king
Embraced his wife and son, with perfect joy
Filled to o'erflowing, crowned with heavenly wreaths.
Then Indra said: "Thou, with thy wife, and son,
Shalt dwell in bliss supreme: bliss that thyself
Hast purchased, by thy virtues and thy toils."
Then spoke the king: "Hear me! most holy gods!
Unbidden by my master, will I not
To heaven itself ascend."  Then Dharma spoke:
"I am thy master.  I assumed the form
Of a Cha.n.dala.  All thy pain and woe
Was brought upon thee by my magic power,
And thou wast made a slave!  I have beheld
Thy truth, and thy uprightness.  Saintly king!
The highest place that heaven accords to men,
Whose virtue has been tried and proved:--to that
Ascend!"  But Harischandra answering, said:
"Receive, most mighty lord! my words of praise
And thanksgiving.  I offer them to thee
Full of affection.  Lo! my people stand
With grieving hearts, longing for my return.
Can I ascend to heav'n while they on earth
Lament for me?  If they have ever slain,
Brahmans, or teachers of the holy law,--
If lust or avarice have ruled their hearts,--
Then may my labours and my toils atone,
For these their sins.  I may not leave my friends.
For neither here, nor in the world to come,
Can there be peace to one who casts aside
The friend whose love is pure and true--the friend
Who serves him from the heart.  Return!
Return! to heaven!  O Indra! If thou grant
My friends to rise with me, to heav'n will I
Ascend; if not, with them will I descend
To Naraka."  "O king! thy prayer is heard!
Thy people's sins are pardoned: even for them,
Hard though it be, thy toils and pains have gained
A place in heaven."  Thus mighty Indra spoke.
Replied the king: "Indra! I will not leave
My kinsmen.  By his kinsmen's help a king
His kingdom rules; by them he offers up
The kingly sacrifice, and for himself
Lays up a store of meritorious deeds.
So have my kinsmen too enabled me
To work whate'er I may of righteousness.
My actions virtuous, my granted prayers,
Truly I owe to them, for by their aid
Have these been possible.  May the reward
Thou grantest me, I pray, be shared with them.
My kinsmen, though I should ascend to heaven,
I will not leave."  "So be it!" Indra said;
"So be it!" said the Brahman; Dharma, too,
Gave his assent; and then, in countless hosts,
Appeared the heavenly chariots.  Indra said:
"Men of Ayodhya, ascend to heaven."
The saintly Brahman, having heard with joy
The words of Indra, poured the sacred oil
Upon the prince, and with the perfect ones,
The sages, and the gods, anointed him
"Son of the mighty king."  Then all the throng--
The king, his wife, his son, his followers--
Filled with rejoicing and delight, ascend
To heaven, surrounding, as they go, the king
Borne in his chariot.  He, too, filled with joy--
The mighty father, who eternal bliss
Both for his people and himself had gained,
Once more in form and mien a king--reposed,
Resting from all his toils, his faithful friends
Surrounding him with a protecting wall.
And Indra spoke and said: "Upon this earth
Great Harischandra's equal has not been
Nor shall be.  Whosoe'er may hear his life,
His toils, his sorrows, and in sympathy
For him lament, transcendant happiness
Shall he attain, and all his heart's desire
Shall be accomplished.  Is his prayer a wife,
Or son, or kingdom, he shall gain them all,
E'en heaven itself.  And he who imitates
The truth, and steadfastness, of that great king,
Like him shall enter everlasting rest.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Markandeya Purana, Books VII., VIII.
Translated by Rev. B. Hale Wortham





Produced by Nicole Apostola.



IN MIDSUMMER DAYS
AND OTHER TALES.

BY AUGUST STRINDBERG

TRANSLATED BY ELLIE SCHLEUSSNER





CONTENTS

IN MIDSUMMER DAYS
THE BIG GRAVEL-SIFTER
THE SLUGGARD
THE PILOT'S TROUBLES
PHOTOGRAPHER AND PHILOSOPHER
HALF A SHEET OF FOOLSCAP
CONQUERING HERO AND FOOL
WHAT THE TREE-SWALLOW SANG IN THE BUCKTHORN TREE
THE MYSTERY OF THE TOBACCO SHED
THE STORY OF THE ST. GOTTHARD
THE STORY OF JUBAL WHO HAD NO "I"
THE GOLDEN HELMETS IN THE ALLEBERG
LITTLE BLUEWING FINDS THE GOLDPOWDER




IN MIDSUMMER DAYS

In Midsummer days when in the countries of the North the earth is
a bride, when the ground is full of gladness, when the brooks are
still running, the flowers in the meadows still untouched by the
scythe, and all the birds singing, a dove flew out of the wood and
sat down before the cottage in which the ninety-year-old granny
lay in her bed.

The old woman had been bedridden for twenty years, but she could
see through her window everything that happened in the farmyard
which was managed by her two sons.  But she saw the world and the
people in her own peculiar manner, for time and the weather had
painted her window-panes with all the colours of the rainbow; she
need but turn her head a little and things appeared successively
red, yellow, green, blue, and violet.  If she happened to look out
on a cold winter's day when the trees were covered with hoar-frost
and the white foliage looked as if it were made of silver, she
had but to turn her head a little on the pillow, and all the trees
were green; it was summer-time, the ploughed fields were yellow,
and the sky looked blue even if a moment before it had been ever
so grey. And therefore the old granny imagined that she could work
magic, and was never bored.

But the magical window-panes possessed another quality; they bulged
a little and consequently they magnified or reduced every object
which came into their field of vision. Whenever, therefore, her
grown-up son came home in a bad temper and scolded everybody, granny
had but to wish him to be a good little boy again, and straightway
she saw him quite small. Or, when she watched her grandchildren
playing in the yard, and thought of their future--one, two,
three--she changed her position ever so slightly, and they became
grown-up men and women, as tall as giants.

Ail during the summer the window stood open, for then the window-panes
could not show her anything so beautiful as the reality. And now,
on Midsummer Eve, the most beautiful time of all the year, she lay
there and looked at the meadows and towards the wood, where the dove
was singing its song. It sang most beautifully of the Lord Jesus,
and the joy and splendour of the Kingdom of Heaven, where all are
welcome who are weary and heavy laden.

The old woman listened to the song for a little while, and then she
laid that she was much obliged, but that Heaven could be no more
beautiful than the earth itself, and she wanted nothing better.

Thereupon the dove flew away over the meadow into the mountain
glen, where the farmer stood digging a well.  He stood in a deep
hole which he had dug, three yards below the surface; it was just
as if he were standing in his grave.

The dove settled on a fir tree and sung of the joy of Heaven, quite
convinced that the man in the hole, who could see neither sky, nor
sea, nor meadow, must be longing for Heaven.

"No," said the farmer, "I must first dig a well; otherwise my summer
guest will have no water, and the unhappy little mother will take
her child and go and live elsewhere."

The dove flew down to the strand, when the farmer's brother was busy
hauling in the fishing-nets; it sat among the rushes and began to
sing.

"No," said the farmer's brother, "I must provide food for my family,
otherwise my children will cry with hunger.  Later on!  Later on,
I tell you!  Let's live first and die afterwards."


***

And the dove flew to the pretty cottage, where the unhappy little
mother had taken rooms for the summer.  She sat on the verandah,
working at a sewing machine; her face was as white as a lily, and
her red felt hat looked like a huge poppy on her hair, which was
as black as a mourning veil.  She was busy making a pinafore which
her little girl was to wear on Midsummer Eve, and the child sat at
her feet on the floor, cutting up little pieces of material which
were not wanted.

"Why isn't daddy coming home?" asked the little girl, looking up.

That was a very difficult question, so difficult that the young
mother could not answer it; and very possibly daddy could not have
answered it either, for he was far away in a foreign country with
his grief, which was twice as great as mammy's.

The sewing machine was not in good order, but it stitched and
stitched; it made as many pricks as a human heart can bear before
it breaks, but every prick only served to pull the thread tighter--it
was curious!

"I want to go to the village, mammy," said the little girl. "I want
to see the sun, for it is so dark here."


"You shall go and play in the sunshine this afternoon, darling."

I must tell you that it was very dark between the high cliffs on
this side of the island; the cottage stood in a gloomy pine-grove,
which completely hid the view of the sea.

"And I want you to buy me a lot of toys, mammy."

"Darling, we have so little money to buy toys with," answered the
mother, bending her head still lower over their work.

And that was the truth; for their comfort had changed into penury.
They had no servant, and the mother had to do the whole house-work
herself.

But when she saw the sad face of the little girl, she took her on
her knees.

"Put your little arms round mammy's neck," she said.

The little one obeyed.

"Now give mammy a kiss!"

The rosy little half-open mouth, which looked like the mouth of a
little bird, was pressed against her lips; and when the blue eyes,
blue as the flower of the flax, smiled into hers, her beautiful
face reflected the sweet innocence of the little one, and made her
look like a happy child herself, playing in the sunshine.

"No use my singing to them of the Kingdom of Heaven," thought the
dove, "but if I can in any way serve them, I will."

And then it flew away towards the sunny village, for it had work
to do there.

***

It was afternoon now; the little mother took a basket on one arm
and the child's little hand into hers, and they left the cottage.
She had never been to the village, but she knew that it was situated
somewhere towards sunset, on the other side of the island, and the
farmer had told her that she would have to get over six stiles and
walk through six latticed gates before she could get there.

And on they went.

Their way lay along a footpath, full of stones and old tree-roots,
so that she was obliged to carry the little girl, and that was very
hard work. The doctor had told her that the child must not strain
her left foot, because it was so weak that it might easily have
grown deformed.

The young mother staggered along, under her beloved burden, and
large beads of perspiration stood like pearls on her forehead, for
it was very hot in the wood.

"I am so thirsty, mammy," whispered the little, complaining voice.

"Have patience, darling, there will be plenty of water when we get
there."

And she kissed the little parclied mouth, and the child smiled and
forgot all about her thirst.

But the scorching rays of the sun burned their skin and there was
not a breath of air in the wood.

"Try and walk a little, darling," said the mother, putting the
child down.

But the little foot gave way and the child could not walk a step.

"I am so tired, mammy," she laid, sitting down and beginning to
cry.

But the prettiest little flowers, which looked like rose-coloured
bells and smelt of sweet almonds, grew all over the spot where she
was sitting. She smiled when she saw them, for she had never seen
anything half as lovely, and her smile strengthened the heart of
the mother so that she could continue her walk with the child in
her arms.

Now they had arrived at the first gate. They passed through it and
carefully re-fastened the latch.

All of a sudden they heard a noise like a loud neighing; a horse
galloped towards them, blocked the path and neighed again; its
neighing was answered on the right and the left and from all sides
of the wood; the ground trembled, the branches of the trees cracked,
and the stones were scattered in all directions by the approaching
hoofs. In less than no time the poor, frightened travellers were
surrounded on all sides by a herd of savage horses.

The child hid her face on her mother's shoulder, and her little
heart ticked with fear like a watch.

"I am so frightened!" she whispered.

"Oh! Father in Heaven, help us!" prayed the mother.

At the same moment a blackbird, sitting on a fir tree, began to
sing; the horses scudded away as fast as they could, and there was
once more silence in the wood.

They came to the second gate, walked through and re-fastened the
latch.

They were on fallow ground now, and the sun scorched them even
worse than it had done before.  They saw before them rows and rows
of dull clods of earth, but in a steep place the clods suddenly began
to move, and then they knew that what they had taken for clods of
earth were really the backs of a flock of sheep.

Sheep are quite gentle and inoffensive, especially the little lambs,
but that is a good deal more than can be said of the ram, who is a
savage brute and often takes a delight in attacking those who have
never done him any harm. There he was already, jumping over a ditch
right into the middle of their path. He lowered his head and walked
a few steps backwards.

"I am so frightened, mammy," said the little girl, and her heart
began to beat fast.

"Oh! Merciful Father in Heaven, help us!" sighed the mother, with
an imploring look upwards.

And high up, in the blue vault of the sky, fluttering its wings
like a butterfly, a little lark began to sing. And as it sang the
ram disappeared among the grey clods.

They stood before the third gate. They were on a slope now;
the ground was swampy and before long they came to a crevice. The
hillocks looked like little graves, overgrown with vetch or white
cotton-flowers and they had to be careful to avoid sinking into
the swamp. Black berries of a poisonous kind grew in abundance
everywhere; the little girl wanted to gather them, and because
her mother would not permit it, she began to cry, for she did not
understand what poisonous meant.

And as they walked on, they noticed a white sheet, which looked
as if it had been drawn in and out through the trees; the sun
disappeared behind a bank of clouds and a white darkness, which
was very went towards them, hoping to find some water in the place
whence they came.

On their way they passed a white cottage, behind a green fence
with a white gate; the gate stood hospitably open.  They entered
and found themselves in a garden where peonies and colombines grew.
The mother noticed that the curtains in the lower storey were all
drawn before the windows, and that all the curtains were white.  But
one of the attic windows stood open and a white hand appeared above
the pots of touch-me-nots.  It waved a little white handkerchief,
as if it were waving a last farewell to one who was going on a long
journey.

They walked as far as the cottage; in the high grass lay a wreath
of myrtle and white roses. But it was too big for a bridal wreath.

They went through the front door and the mother called out if
anybody were in?  As there was no reply they went into the parlour.
On the floor, surrounded by a whole forest of flowers, stood a black
coffin with silver feet and in the coffin lay a young girl with a
bridal crown on her head.

The walls of the room were made of new pinewood and only varnished
with oil, so that all the knots were visible.  And the knots in
the knot-holes looked for all the world like so many eyes.

"Oh!  Just look at all the eyes, mammy," exclaimed the little girl.

Yes, there were eyes of every description; big eyes, eloquent eyes,
grave eyes; little shining baby eyes, with a lurking smile in the
corner; wicked eyes, which showed too much white; frank and candid
eyes, which looked one straight into the heart; and, over there,
a big, gentle mother's eye, which regarded the dead girl lovingly;
and a transparent tear of resin trembled on the lid, and sparkled
in the setting sun like a green and red diamond.

"Is she asleep?" asked the child, looking into the face of the dead
girl.

"Yes, she is asleep."

"Is she a bride, mammy?"

"Yes, darling."

The mother had recognised her. It was the girl who was to be a
bride on Midsummer day, when her sailor lover would return home;
but the sailor had written to say that he would not be home until
the autumn, and his letter had broken her heart; for she could
not bear to wait until the autumn, when the leaves would drop dead
from the trees and the winter wind have a rough game with them in
the lanes and alleys.

She had heard the song of the dove and taken it to heart.

The young mother left the cottage; now she knew where she would go.
She put the heavy basket down outside the gate and took the child
into her arms; and so she walked across the meadow which separated
her from the shore.

The meadow was a perfect sea of flowers, waving and whispering round
her ankles, and the pollen water was calm and blue; and presently
it was not water through which they sailed, but the blue blossoms
of the flax, which she gathered in her outstretched hands.

And the flowers bent down and rose up again, whispering, lapping
against the sides of the boat like little waves. The flax-field
before them appeared to be infinite, but presently a white mist
enveloped them, and they heard the plashing of real waves, but
above the mist they heard a lark singing.

"How does the lark come to sing on the sea?" asked the child.

"The sea is so green that the lark takes it for a meadow," answered
the mother.

The mist had dispersed again. The sky was blue and the lark was
still singing.

Then they saw, straight before them, in the middle of the sea, a
green island with a white, sandy beach, and people, dressed all in
pure white, walking hand in hand. The setting sun shone on the golden
roof of a colonnade, where white fires burnt in sacred sacrificial
vessels; and the green island was spanned by a rainbow, the colour
of which was rose-red and sedge-green.

"What is it, mammy?"

The mother could make no reply.

"Is it the Kingdom of Heaven of which the dove sang? What is the
Kingdom of Heaven, mammy?"

"A place, darling, where all people love one another," answered
the mother, "where there is neither grief nor strife."

"Then let us go there," said the child.

"Yes, we will go," said the tired, forsaken little mother.




THE BIG GRAVEL-SIFTER

An eel-mother and her son were lying at the bottom of the sea, close
to the landing-stage, watching a young fisherman getting ready his
line.

"Just look at him!" said the eel-mother, "there you have an example
of the malice and cunning of the world . ... Watch him! He is
holding a whip in his hand; he throws out the whip-lash--there it
is!  attached to it is a weight which makes it sink--there's the
weight! and below the weight is the hook with the worm. Don't take
it in your mouth, whatever you do, for if you do, you are caught.
As a rule only the silly bass and red-eyes take the bait.  There!
Now you know all about it."

The forest of seaweed with its shells and snails began to rock; a
plashing and drumming could be heard and a huge red whale passed
like a flash over their heads; he had a tail-fin like a cork-screw,
and that was what he worked with.

"That's a steamer," said the eel-mother; "make room!"

She had hardly spoken these words when a furious uproar arose above.
There was a tramping and stamping as if the people overhead were
intent on building a bridge between the shore and the boat in two
seconds. But it was difficult to see anything on account of the
oil and soot which were making the water thick and muddy.

There was something very heavy on the bridge now, so heavy that it
made it creak, and men's voices were shouting:

"Lift it up!--Ho, there!--Up!--Hold tight!--Up with it!--Up!--Push
it along!--Lift it up!"

Then something indescribable happened.  First it sounded as if
sixty piles of wood were all being sawn at the same time; then a
cleft opened in the water which went down to the bottom of the sea,
and there, wedged between three stones, stood a black box, which
sang and played and tinkled and jingled, close to the eel-mother
and her son, who hastily disappeared in the lowest depths of the
ocean.

Then a voice up above shouted:--

"Three fathoms deep! Impossible! Leave it alone. It isn't worth
while hauling the old lumber up again; it would cost more to repair
than it's worth."

The voice belonged to the master of the mine, whose piano had fallen
into the sea.

Silence followed; the huge fish with a fin like a screw swam away,
and the silence deepened.

After sunset a breeze arose; the black box in the forest of seaweed
rocked and knocked against the stones, and at every knock it played,
so that the fishes came swimming from all directions to watch and
to listen.

The eel-mother was the first to put in an appearance.  And when
she saw herself reflected in the polished surface, she said: "It's
a wardrobe with a plate-glass door."

There was logic in her remark, and therefore all the others said:
"It is a wardrobe with a plate-glass door."

Next a rock-fish arrived and smelt at the candlesticks, which had
not yet come off. Tiny bits of candle ends were still sticking in
the sockets. "That's something to eat," it said, "if only it weren't
for the whipcord!"

Then a great bass came and lay flat on the pedal; but immediately
there arose such a rumbling in the box that all the fishes hastily
swam away.

They got no further on that day.

At night it blew half a gale, and the musical box went thump, thump,
thump, like a pavier's beetle, until sunrise. When the eel-mother
and all the rest of them returned, they found that it had undergone
a change.

The lid stood open like a shark's mouth; they saw a row of teeth,
bigger than they had ever seen before, but every other tooth was
black. The whole machine was swollen at the sides like a seed-fish;
the boards were bent, and the pedal pointed upwards like a foot
in the act of walking; the arms of the candlesticks looked like
clenched fists. It was a dreadful sight!

"It's falling to pieces," screamed the bass, and spread out a fin,
ready to turn.

And now the boards fell off, the box was open, and one could see
what it was like inside; and that was the prettiest sight of all.

"It's a trap! Don't go too near!" said the eel-mother.

"It's a hand-loom!" said the stickleback, who builds a nest for
itself and understands the art of weaving.

"It's a gravel-sifter," said a red-eye, who lived below the
lime-quarry.

It may have been a gravel-sifter.  But there were a great many
fallals and odds and ends which were not in the least like the
sifter which they use for riddling sand. There were little manichords
which resembled toes in white woollen stockings, and when they
moved it was just as if a foot with two hundred skeleton toes were
walking; and it walked and walked and yet never left the spot.

It was a strange thing. But the game was up, for the skeleton no
longer touched the strings; it played on the water as if it were
knocking at a door with its fingers, asking whether it might come
in.

The game was up. A school of sticklebacks came and swam right through
the box, and when they trailed their spikes over the strings, the
strings sounded again; but they played in a new way, for now they
were tuned to another pitch.

***

On a rosy summer evening soon afterwards two children, a boy and
a girl, were sitting on the landing-bridge. They were not thinking
of anything in particular, unless it was a tiny piece of mischief,
when all at once they heard soft music from the bottom of the sea,
which startled them.

"Do you hear it?"

"Yes, what is it? It sounds like scales."

"No, it's the song of the gnats."

"No, it's a mermaid!"

"There are no mermaids. The schoolmaster said so."

"The schoolmaster doesn't know."

"Oh! do listen!"

They listened for a long time, and then they went away, home.

Presently two newly arrived summer guests sat down on the bridge;
he looked into her eyes, which reflected the golden sunset and the
green shores.  Then they heard the sounds of music; it sounded as
if somebody were playing on musical glasses, but in a strange new
key, only heard in the dreams of those who dream of giving a new
message to the world.  But they never thought of looking for any
outside source, they believed that it was the song which their own
hearts were singing.

Next a couple of annual visitors came sauntering along; they knew
the trick and took a delight in saying in a loud voice:

"It is the submerged piano of the master of the mine."

But whenever there were only new arrivals present, who did not know
anything about it, they were puzzled and enjoyed the music, until
some of the older ones came and enlightened them. And then they
enjoyed it no longer.

The musical box lay there all the summer. The sticklebacks taught
their art to the bass, who became much more expert. And the piano
became a regular fishing-ground for the summer guests, where they
could always be sure to catch bass; the pilots spread out their
nets round about it, and once a waiter fished there for red-eyes.
But when his line with the old bell weight had run out, and he tried
to wind it up again, he heard a run in X minor, and then the hook
was caught. He pulled and pulled, and in the end he brought up five
fingers with wool at the fingertips, and the bones cracked like
the bones of a skeleton. Then he was frightened and flung his catch
back into the sea, although he knew quite well what it was.

In the dog days, when the water is warm and all the fish retire to
the greater depths to enjoy the coolness, the music ceased. But on
a moonlit night in August, the summer guests held a regatta. The
master of the mine and his wife were present. They sat in a white
boat and were slowly rowed about by their sons. And as their boat
was gliding over the black water, the surface of which was like
silver and gold in the moonlight, they heard a sound of music just
below their boat.

"Ha ha!" laughed the master of the mine, "listen to our old piano!
Ha ha!"

But he was silent when he saw that his wife hung her head, in the
way pelicans do in pictures; it looked as if she wanted to bite
her own neck and hide her face.

The old piano and its long history had awakened memories in her of
the first dining-room they furnished together, the first of their
children which had had music lessons, the boredom of the long
evenings, only to be chased away by the crashing volumes of sound
which overcame the dulness of everyday life, changed bad temper
into cheerfulness, and lent new beauty even to the old furniture
. . . . But that is a story which belongs elsewhere.

When it was autumn and the winter wind began to blow, the pilchards
came in their thousands and swam through the musical box. It was
like a farewell concert, and nothing else, and the seagulls and
stormy petrels came in crowds to listen to it. And in the night the
musical box was carried out to sea; that was the end of the matter.



THE SLUGGARD

Conductor Crossberg was fond of lying in bed in the morning,
firstly, because  he had to conduct the orchestra in the evening,
and secondly, because he drank more than one glass of beer before
he went home and to bed. He had tried once or twice to get up early,
but had found no sense in it.  He had called on a friend, but had
found him asleep; he had wanted to pay money into the bank, but had
found it still closed; he had gone to the library to borrow music,
but it was not yet open; he had wanted to use the electric trams,
but they had not yet started running. It was impossible to get a
cab at this hour of the morning; he could not even buy a pinch of
his favourite snuff; there was nothing at all for him to do. And
so he had eventually formed the habit of staying in bed until late;
and after all, he had no one to please but himself.

He loved the sun and flowers and children; but he could not live on
the sunny side of the street on account of his delicate instruments,
which were out of tune almost as soon as they were put into a sunny
room.

Therefore, on the 1st of April, he took rooms which faced north.
He was quite sure that there was no mistake about this, for he
carried a compass on his watch-chain, and he could find the Great
Bear in the evening sky.

So far, so good; but then the spring came, and it was so warm that
it was really pleasant to live in rooms with a northern aspect.
His bedroom joined the sitting-room; he always kept his bedroom
in pitch-black darkness by letting down the Venetian blinds; there
were no Venetian blinds in the sitting-room, because they were not
wanted there.

And the early summer came and everything grew green. The conductor
had dined at the restaurant "Hazelmount," and had drunk a bottle of
Burgundy with his dinner, and therefore he slept long and soundly,
especially as the theatre was closed on that day.

He slept well, but while he slept it grew so warm in the room that
he woke up two or three times, or, at any rate, he thought he did.
Once he fancied that his wall-paper was on fire, but that was probably
the effect of the Burgundy; another time he felt as if something
hot had touched his face, but that was certainly the Burgundy; and
so he turned over and fell asleep again.

At half-past nine he got up, dressed, and went into the sitting-room
to refresh himself with a glass of milk which always stood ready
for him in the morning.

It was anything but cool in the sitting-room this morning; it
was almost warm, too warm. And the cold milk was not cold; it was
lukewarm, unpleasantly lukewarm.

The conductor was not a hot-tempered man, but he liked order and
method in everything. Therefore he rang for old Louisa, and since
he made his first fifty remonstrances always in a very mild tone,
he spoke kindly but firmly to her, as she put her head through the
door.

"Louisa," he said, "you have given me lukewarm milk."

"Oh! no, sir," replied Louisa, "it was quite cold, it must have
got warm in standing."

"Then you must have had a fire in the room; it's very warm here
this morning."

No, Louisa had not had a fire; and she retired into the kitchen,
very much hurt.

He forgave her for the milk. But a look round the sitting-room
made him feel very depressed. I must tell you that he had built a
little private altar in a corner, near the piano, which consisted
of a small table with two silver candlesticks, a large photograph
of a young woman, and a tall, gold-edged champagne glass. This
glass--it was the glass he had used on his wedding-day, and he was
a widower now--always contained a red rose in memory of and as an
offering to her who once had been the sunshine of his life. Whether
it was summer or winter, there was always a rose; and in the winter
time it lasted a whole week, that is to say if he trimmed the stem
occasionally and put a little salt into the water. Now, he had put
a fresh rose into the glass only last night, and to-day it was faded,
shrivelled up, dead, with its head drooping.  This was a bad omen.
He knew what sensitive creatures flowers are, and had noticed that
they thrive with some people and not with others. He remembered how
sometimes, in his wife's lifetime, her rose, which always stood on
her little work-table, had faded and died quite unexpectedly. And
he had also noticed that this always happened when _his sun_ was
hiding behind a cloud, which after a while would dissolve in large
drops to the accompaniment of a low rumbling. Roses must have peace
and kind words; they can't bear harsh voices. They love music, and
sometimes he would play to the roses and they opened their buds
and smiled.

Now Louisa was a hard woman, and often muttered and growled to
herself when she turned out the room. There were days when she was
in a very bad temper, so that the milk curdled in the kitchen, and
the whole dinner tasted of discord, which the conductor noticed
at once; for he was himself like a delicate instrument, whose soul
responded to moods and influences which other people did not feel.

He concluded that Louisa had killed the rose; perhaps if she had
scolded the poor thing, or knocked the glass, or breathed on the
flower angrily, a treatment which it could not bear. Therefore he
rang again; and when Louisa put in her head, he said, not unkindly,
but more firmly than before:

"What have you done to my rose, Louisa?"

"Nothing, sir!"

"Nothing? Do you think the flower died without a very good reason?
You can see for yourself that there is no water in the glass! You
must have poured it away!"

As Louisa had done no such thing, she went into the kitchen and began
to cry, for it is disagreeable to be blamed when one is innocent.

Conductor Crossberg, who could not bear to see people crying, said
no more, but in the evening he bought a new rose, one which had
only just been cut, and, of course, was not wired, for his wife
had always had an objection to wired flowers.

And then he went to bed and fell asleep. And again he fancied in
his sleep that the wall-paper was on fire, and that his pillow was
very hot; but he went on sleeping.

On the following morning, when he came into the sitting-room, to
say his morning prayers before the little altar--alas! there lay
his rose, all the pink petals scattered by the side of the stem.
He was just stretching out his hand to touch the bell, when he saw
the photograph of his beloved, half rolled up, lying by the side
of the champagne glass.  Louisa could not have done that!

"She, who was my all, my conscience and my muse," he thought in his
childlike mind, "she is dissatisfied and angry with me; what have
I done?"

Well, when he put this question to his conscience, he found, as
usual, more than one little fault, and he resolved to eradicate
his faults, gradually, of course.

Then he had the portrait framed and a glass shade put over the rose,
hoping that now things would be all right, but secretly fearing
that they would not.

After that he went on a week's journey; he returned home late at
night and went straight to bed.  He woke up once, imagining that
the hanging lamp was burning.

When he entered the sitting-room late on the following morning, it
was downright hot there, and everything looked frightfully shabby.
The blinds were faded; the cover on the piano had lost its bright
colours; the bound volumes of music looked as if they were deformed;
the oil in the hanging-lame had evaporated and hung in a trembling
drop under the ornament, where the flies used to dance; the water
in the water-bottle was warm.

But the saddest thing of all was that her portrait, too, was faded,
as faded as autumn leaves. He was very unhappy, and whenever he
was very unhappy he went to the piano, or took up his violin, as
the case might be . ...

This time he sat down at the piano, with a vague notion of
playing the sonata in E minor, Grieg's, of course, which had been
her favourite, and was the best and finest, in his opinion, after
Beethoven's sonata in D minor; not because E comes after D, but
because it was so.

But the piano was very refractory to-day. It was out of tune, and
made all sorts of difficulties, so that he began to believe that
his eyes and fingers were in a bad temper. But it was not their
fault.  The piano, quite simply, was out of tune, although a very
clever tuner had only just tuned it. It was like a piano bewitched,
enchanted.

He seized his violin; he had to tune it, of course.  But when he
wanted to tighten the E string, the screw refused to work. It had
dried up; and when the conductor tried to use force, the string
snapped with a sharp sound, and rolled itself up like a dried
eel-skin.

It was bewitched!

But the fact that her photograph had faded was really the worst
blow, and therefore he threw a veil over the altar.

In doing this, he threw a veil over all that was most beautiful
in his life; and he became depressed, began to mope, and stopped
going out in the evening.

It would be Midsummer soon. The nights were shorter than the days,
but since the Venetian blinds kept his bedroom dark, the conductor
did not notice it.

At last, one night--it was Midsummer night--he awoke, because the
clock in the sitting-room struck thirteen. There was something
uncanny about this, firstly, because thirteen is an unlucky number,
and secondly, because no well-behaved clock can strike thirteen.
He did not fall asleep again, but he lay in his bed, listening.
There was a peculiar ticking noise in the sitting-room, and then
a loud bang, as if a piece of furniture had cracked. Directly
afterwards he heard stealthy footsteps, and then the clock began
to strike again; and it struck and struck, fifty times--a hundred
times. It really was uncanny!

And now a luminous tuft shot into his bedroom and threw a figure
on the wall, a strange figure, something like a fylfot, and it came
from the sitting-room.  There was a light, then, in the sitting-room?
But who had lit it? And there was a tinkling of glasses, just as
if guests were there; champagne glasses of cut-crystal; but not a
word was uttered.  And now he heard more sounds, sounds of canvas
being furled, or clothes passed through a mangle, or something of
that sort.

The conductor felt compelled to get up and look, and he went,
commending his soul into the hands of the Almighty.

Well, first of all he saw Louisa's print-dress disappearing through
the kitchen door; then he saw blinds, but blinds which had been
pulled up; he saw the dining-table covered with flowers, arranged
in glasses; as many flowers as there had been on his wedding-day
when he had brought his bride home.

And behold! The sun, the sun shone right into his face, shone on
blue fjords and distant woods; it was the sun which had illuminated
the sitting-room and played all the little tricks. He blessed the
sun which had been up so early in the morning and made a game of
the sluggard.  And he blessed the memory of her whom he called the
sun of his life.  It was not a new name, but he could not think of
a better one, and as it was, it was good enough.

And on his altar stood a rose, quite fresh, as fresh as _she_ had
been before the never-ending work had tired her. Tired her! Yes,
she had not been one of the strong ones; and life with its blows
and knocks had been too brutal for her! He had not forgotten how,
after a day's cleaning or ironing, she would throw herself on the
sofa and say in a complaining little voice, "I am so tired!" Poor
little thing, this earth had not been her home, she had only played
once, on tour, as it were, and then had gone far away.

"She lacked sunshine," the doctor had said, for at that time they
couldn't afford sun, because rooms on the sunny side are so expensive.

But now he had sun without having known it; he stood right in the
sunlight, but it was too late.  Midsummer was past, and soon the
sun would disappear again, stay away for a year and then come back.
Things are very strange in this world!



THE PILOT'S TROUBLES

The pilot cutter lay outside, beyond the last beacon fire on the
headland; the winter sun had set long ago and the sea ran high; it
was the real sea with real huge breakers. Suddenly the first mate
signalled: "Sailing ship to windward."

Far out at sea, a long way off the harbour, a brig was visible; she
had backed her sails and hoisted the pilot's flag; she was asking
to be taken into port.

"Look out!" shouted the master-pilot, who was standing at the helm.
"We'll have a job in this sea, but we must try and get hold of her
in tacking, and you, Victor, throw yourself into her rigging as
soon as you get the chance ... bring the boat round!  Now! Clear!"

The cutter turned and steered a course to the brig which lay outside,
pitching.

"Queer that she should have furled all her canvas.   ... Can any
one see a light aboard? No! And no light on the masthead, either!
Look out, Victor!" Now the cutter was alongside; Victor stood
waiting on the gunwale, and the next time she rose on the crest of
a big wave, he leapt into the rigging of the brig, while the cutter
sheered off, tacked, and made for the harbour.

Victor sat in the rigging, half-way between deck and cross-trees,
trying to recover his breath before descending on deck. As soon as
he came down he went to the helm, which was quite the right thing
for him to do. Imagine how shocked he was when he found it deserted!
He shouted "Ho there!" but received no reply.

"They're all inside, drinking," he thought, peering through the
cabin windows. No, not a soul!  He crossed over to the kitchen,
examined the quarterdeck,--not a living being anywhere. Then he
realised that he was on a deserted ship; he concluded that she had
sprung a leak and was sinking.

He tried to discover the whereabouts of the cutter, but she had
disappeared in the darkness.

It was quite impossible for him to make port.  To set the sails,
haul in the brails and bowlines, and at the same time stand at the
helm, was more than any sailor could manage.

There was nothing to b0e done, then, but let the vessel drift,
although he was aware of the fact that she was drifting out to sea.

It would not be true to say that he was pleased, but a pilot is
prepared for anything, and the thought that he might possibly meet
a sailing ship by and by, reassured him. But it was necessary to
show a light and signal.

He made his way towards the kitchen, intending to look for matches
and a lantern. Although the sea was very rough, he noticed that
the ship did not move, a fact which astonished him very much.  But
when he came to the mainmast, he was even more astonished to find
himself walking on a parqueted floor, partly covered by a strip
of carpet of a small blue and white checked pattern. He walked and
walked, but still the carpet stretched before him, and still he
came no nearer to the kitchen. It was certainly uncanny, but it
was also amusing, for it was a new experience.

He was a long way off the end of the carpet yet, when he found
himself at the entrance to a passage with brilliantly illuminated
shops on either side.  On his right stood a weighing machine and
an automatic figure. Without a moment's hesitation he jumped on the
little platform of the weighing machine and slipped a penny in the
slot. As he was quite sure that he weighed eleven stone, he could
not help smiling when the indicator registered only one.  Either
the machine has gone wrong, he thought, or I have been transported
to some other planet, ten times larger, or ten times smaller than
the earth; he had been a pupil at the School of Navigation, you
see, and knew something of astronomy.

He jumped off and turned to the automatic figure, eager to find
out what it contained; his penny had hardly dropped when a little
flap opened and a large, white envelope, sealed with a big, red seal,
fell out.  He couldn't make out the letters on the seal, but that
was neither here nor there, as he did not know who his correspondent
was.

He tore open the envelope and read  ... first of all the signature,
just as everybody else does. The letter began ... but I'll tell
you that later on; it's sufficient for you to know now that he read
it three times and then put it into his breast-pocket with a very
thoughtful mien; a very thoughtful mien.

Then he penetrated into the heart of the passage, all the time
keeping carefully in the centre of the carpet. There were all sorts
of shops, but not a single human being, either before or behind
the counters. When he had walked a little way, he stopped before a
big shop window, behind which a great number of shells and snails
were exhibited.  As the door stood open, he went in. The walls of
the shop were lined with shelves from floor to ceiling and filled
with snails collected from all the oceans of the world. Nobody was
in the shop, but a ring of tobacco smoke hung in the air, which
looked as if somebody had only just blown it. Victor, who was a
bright lad, put his finger through it. "Hurrah!" he laughed, "now
I'm engaged to Miss Tobacco!"

A queer sound, like the ticking of a clock, fell on his ear, but
there was no clock anywhere, and presently he discovered that the
sound came from a bunch of keys. One of the keys had apparently
just been put into the cash-box, and the other keys swung to and
fro with the regular movement of a pendulum. This went on for quite
a little while.  Then there was silence once more, and when it was
as still as still could be, a low whistling sound, like the wind
blowing through the rigging of a ship, or steam escaping through
a narrow tube, could be heard.  The sound was made by the snails;
but as they were of different sizes, each one of them whistled in
a different key; it sounded like a whole orchestra of whistlers.
Victor, who was born on a Thursday, and therefore understood the
birds' language, pricked up his ears and tried to catch what they
were whistling. It was not long before he understood what they were
saying.

"I have the prettiest name," said one of them, "for I am called
Strombus pespelicanus!"

"I'm much the best looking," said the purple-snail, whose name was
Murex and something else quaint.

"But I've the best voice," said the tiger-shell; it is called
tiger-shell because it looks like a panther.

"Oh!  tut, tut!" said the common garden-snail, "I'm more in demand
than any other snail in the world; you'll find me all over the
flower-beds in the summer, and in the winter I lie in the wood-shed
in a cabbage tub. They call me uninteresting, but they can't do
without me."

"What dreadful creatures they are," thought Victor, "they think
of nothing but blowing their own trumpets"; and to while away the
time he took up a book which lay on the counter. As he had learned
to use his eyes, he saw at a glance that it opened at page 240 and
that chapter 51 began at the top of the left-hand side, and had
for a motto a verse written by Coleridge, the gist of which struck
him like a flash of lightning. With burning cheeks and bated breath
he read ... I'll tell you what he read later on, but I may admit
at once that it had nothing whatever to do with snails.

Victor liked the shop and sat down at a little distance from
the cash-box, the immediate vicinity of which is never without a
certain risk. He began to ponder over all the queer animals which
went down to the sea as he did; he was sure that they could not
find it too warm at the bottom of the sea and yet they perspired;
and whenever they perspired chalk, it immediately became a new
house. They wriggled like worms, some to the right and some to the
left; it was clear that they had to wriggle in some direction and,
of course, they could not all turn to the same side.

All at once a voice came from the other side of the green curtain
which separated the shop from the back parlour.

"Yes, we know all that," shouted the voice, "but what we don't
know is this: the cockle of the ear belongs to the species of the
Helix, and the little bones near the drum are exactly like the
animal in Limnaeus stagnalis, and that's printed in a book."

Victor, who realised at once that the voice belonged to a thought-reader,
shouted back brutally, but without showing the least surprise:--

"We know all that, but why we should have a Helix in our ears is
as unknown to the book as to the dealer in snails--"

"I'm not a dealer in snails," bellowed the voice behind the curtain.

"What are you, then?" Victor bellowed back.

"I'm ... a troll!"

At the same moment the curtains were drawn aside a little, and
a head appeared in the opening of so terrifying an aspect, that
anybody but Victor would have taken to his heels. But he, who
knew exactly how to treat a troll, looked steadily at the glowing
pipe-bowl; for that is exactly what the troll looked like as he
stood blowing rings through the parted curtains. When the smoke
rings had floated within his reach, he caught them with his fingers
and threw them back.

"I see you can play quoits," snarled the troll.

"A little bit," answered Victor.

"And you aren't afraid?"

"A sailor must never be afraid of anything; if he is, the girls
won't like him."

And as he was tired of the snails, Victor seized the opportunity
to beat a retreat without appearing to run away. He left the shop,
walking backwards, for he knew that a man must never show his back
to the enemy, because his back is far more sensitive than ever his
face could be.

And on he went on the blue and white carpet.  The passage was not
a straight one, but wound and curved so that it was impossible to
see the end of it; and still there were new shops, and still no
people and no shop proprietors. But Victor, taught by his experience,
understood that they were all in the back parlours.

At last he came to a scent shop, which smelt of all the flowers of
wood and meadow; he thought of his sweetheart and decided to go in
and buy her a bottle of Eau-de-Cologne.

No sooner thought than done. The shop was very much like the snail
shop, but the scent of the flowers was so overpowering that it made
his head ache, and he had to sit down on a chair. A strong smell
of almonds caused a buzzing in his cars, but left a pleasant taste
in his mouth, like cherry-wine.  Victor, never at a loss, felt in
his pocket for his little brass box, that had a tiny mirror on the
inside of the lid, and put a piece of chewing tobacco in his mouth;
this cleared his brain and cured his headache.  Then he rapped on
the counter and shouted:--

"Hallo! Any one there?"

There was no answer. "I'd better go into the back parlour," he
thought, "and do my shopping there." He took a little run, put his
right hand on the counter and cleared it at a bound. Then he pushed
the curtains aside and peeped into the room.  A sight met his eyes
which completely dazzled him.  An orange tree, laden with blossoms
and fruit, stood on a long table covered with a Persian rug, and
its shining leaves looked like the leaves of a camellia.  There
were rows of cut-crystal glasses filled with all the most beautiful
scented flowers of the whole world, such as jasmine, tuberoses,
violets, lilies of the valley, roses, and lavender. On one end
of the table, half hidden by the orange tree, he saw two delicate
white hands and a pair of slender wrists under turned-up sleeves,
busy with a small distilling apparatus, made of silver. He did not
see the lady's face, and she, too, did not appear to see him.  But
when he noticed that her dress was green and yellow, he knew at once
that she was a sorceress, for the caterpillar of the hawk-moth is
green and yellow, and it, too, knows how to bewitch the eye.  The
lower end of its body looks as if it were its head and has a horn
like a unicorn, so that it frightens away its enemies with its
mock face, while it feeds in peace with that part of its body which
looks like its hind quarter.

"I know that I'll have a bit of a tussle with her," thought Victor,
"but I'd better let her begin!" He was quite right, because if one
wants to make people talk, one has but to remain silent oneself.

"Are you the gentleman who is looking for a summer resort?" asked
the lady, coming towards him.

"That's me!" said Victor, merely in order to say something, for
he had never thought of looking for a summer resort in the winter
time.

The lady seemed embarrassed, but she was as beautiful as sin, and
cast a bewitching glance at the pilot.

"It's no use trying to bewitch me, for I am engaged to a very nice
girl," he said, staring between her second and third finger in the
manner of a witch, when she wants to charm the judge.

The lady was young and beautiful from the waist upwards, but below
the waist she seemed very old; it was just as if she had been
patched together of two pieces which didn't match.

"Well, show me the summer resort," said the pilot.

"If you please, sir," replied the lady, opening a door in the
background.

They went out and at once found themselves in a wood, consisting
entirely of oak trees.

"We'll only just have to cross the wood, and we'll be there," said
the lady, beckoning to the pilot to go on, for she did not want to
show him her back.

"I shouldn't wonder if there were a bull somewhere about," said
the pilot, who had all his wits about him.

"Surely you aren't afraid of a bull?" replied the lady.

"We'll see," answered the pilot.

They walked across stony hillocks, tree-roots, moors and fells,
clearings and deep recesses, but Victor could not help turning
round every now and then to see whether she was following him, for
he could not hear her footsteps. And even when he had turned round
and had her right before his eyes he had to look very hard, for
her green and yellow dress made her almost invisible.

At last they came to an open space, and when Victor had reached
the centre of the clearing, there was the bull; it was just as if
it had stood there all the time waiting for him. It was jet black,
with a white star in the middle of its forehead, and the corners
of its eyes were blood-red.

Escape was impossible; there was nothing for it but to fight. Victor
glanced at the ground and behold! there lay a stout cudgel, newly
cut. He seized it and took up his position.

"You or I!" he shouted. "Come on! One--two--three!"  The fight
began.  The bull backed like a steam-boat, smoke came through its
nostrils, it moved its tail like a propeller, and then came on at
full speed.

The cudgel flashed through the air and with a sound like a shot hit
the bull right between the eyes.  Victor sprang aside, and the bull
dashed past him.  Then everything seemed to change, and Victor,
terrified, saw the monster make for the border of the wood, from
whence his sweetheart, in a light summer dress, emerged to meet
him.

"Climb up the tree, Anna," he shouted. "The bull's coming!" It was
a cry of anguish from the very bottom of his soul.

And he ran after the monster and hit it on the slenderest part of
its hind-legs in the hope of breaking its shin-bone. With superhuman
strength he felled the giant. Anna was saved, and the pilot held
her in his arms.

"Where shall we go?" he asked. "Home, of course?"

It did not occur to him to ask her whence she had come, for reasons
which we shall learn hereafter.

They walked along the footpath, hand in hand, happy at their
unexpected meeting. When they had gone a little way, Victor suddenly
stood still.

"Just wait a moment," he said. "I must go and have a look at the
bull; I'm sorry for it, poor brute!"

The expression of Anna's face changed, and the corners of her eyes
grew bloodshot. "All right!  I'll wait," she said, with a savage
and malicious glance at the pilot.

Victor gazed at her sadly, for he knew that she had told him an
untruth. But he followed her.  There was something extraordinary
about her walk, and all at once the whole of his left side grew as
cold as ice.

When they had proceeded a little further, Victor stopped again.

"Give me your hand," he said. "No, the left one."  He saw that she
was not wearing her engagement ring.

"Where's your ring?" he asked.

"I've lost it," she replied.

"You are my Anna, and yet you are not," he exclaimed. "A stranger
has taken possession of you."

As he said these words, she looked at him with a side-long glance,
and all at once he realised that her eyes were not human, but the
blood-shot eyes of a bull; and then he understood.

"Begone, witch!" he cried, and breathed into her face.

If you could only have seen what happened now!  The would-be Anna
was immediately transformed, her face grew green and yellow like
gall, and she burst with rage; at the next moment a black rabbit
jumped over the bilberry bushes and disappeared in the wood.

Victor stood alone in the perplexing, bewildering forest, but he
was not afraid. "I will go on," he thought, "and if I should meet
the devil himself, I will not be afraid; I shall say the Lord's
Prayer, and that will go a long way towards protecting me."

He trudged on and presently he came to a cottage.  He knocked; the
door was opened by an old woman; he inquired whether he could stay
the night. He could stay, if he liked, but the old dame had nothing
to offer him but a small attic, which was only so so.

Victor did not mind what it was like, as long as it was a place
where he could sleep.

When they were agreed about the price, he followed her upstairs
to the attic. A huge wasp's nest hung right over the bed, and the
old dame began to make excuses for harbouring such guests.

"It doesn't matter in the least," interrupted the pilot, "wasps
are like human beings, quite inoffensive until you irritate them.
Perhaps you keep snakes, too?"

"Well, there are some, of course."

"I thought so; they like the warmth of the bed, so we shall get
on. Are they adders or vipers? I don't very much mind which, but
on the whole I prefer vipers."

The old dame watched him breathlessly while he arranged his bed,
and in every way betrayed his firm resolution to spend the night
in her cottage.

All at once an excited buzzing could be heard outside the closed
window, and a huge hornet bumped against the glass.

"Let the poor thing come in," said the pilot, opening the window.

"No, no, not that one, kill it!" yelled the old dame.

"Why should I? Perhaps its young ones are in this room, and would
starve. Am I to lie here and listen to the screaming of hungry
babies? No, thank you! Come in, little wasp!"

"It will sting you!" shrieked the old dame.

"No, indeed it won't. It only stings the wicked."

The window was open now. A big hornet, as large as a pigeon's egg,
flew in; buzzing like a bass string, it flew at once to the nest.
And then it was still.

The old dame left the attic, and the pilot got between the sheets.

When he came downstairs into the parlour on the following morning,
the old dame was not there. A black cat sat on the only chair and
purred; cats have been condemned to purr, because they are such
lazy beasts, and they must do something.

"Get up, pussy," said the pilot, "and let me sit down."

And he took the cat and put it on the hearth.  But it was no
ordinary cat, for immediately sparks began to fly from its fur,
and the chips caught file.

"If you can light a fire, you can make me some coffee," said the
pilot.

But the cat is so constituted that it never wants to do what it
is told, and so it began at once to swear and spit until the fire
was out.

In the meantime the pilot had heard somebody leaning a spade against
the wall of the cottage. He looked out of the window and saw the
old dame standing in a pit which she had dug in the garden.

"I see you are digging a grave for me, old woman," he said.

The old dame came in. When she saw Victor safe and sound, she was
beside herself with amazement; she confessed that up to now nobody
had ever left the attic alive, and that therefore she had dug his
grave in anticipation.

She was a little short-sighted, but it seemed to her that the pilot
was wearing a strange handkerchief round his neck.

"Ha ha! Have you ever seen such a handkerchief in all your life?"
laughed Victor, putting his hand up to his throat.

Wound round his neck was a snake which had tied itself in front
into a knot with two bright yellow spots; the spots were its ears,
and its eyes shone like diamonds.

"Show auntie your scarfpins, little pet," said the pilot, gently
scratching its head, and the snake opened its mouth and disclosed
two sharp, pointed teeth right in the middle of it.

At the sight of them the old dame fell on her knees and said, "Now
I see that you have received my letter and understood its meaning.
You are a brave lad!"

"So the letter I got out of the automatic machine was from you,"
said the pilot, taking it from his breast pocket. "I shall have it
framed when I get home."

Would you like to know what was written in the letter? Just these
few words in plain English, "Don't be bluffed," which might be
translated, "Fortune favours the Brave."

***

Yes, but how was it that the pilot could walk from the ship down the
passage?" asked Annie-Mary, when her mama had finished the story.
"And did he come back, or had he dreamed the whole story?"

"I'll tell you another time, little Miss Curiosity," said her mama.

"And then there was a verse in the book--"

"What verse? Oh, I see ... in the snail shop.  ... Well, I'm afraid
I've forgotten it. But you mustn't ask too many details, for it's
only a fairy tale, little girlie."





PHOTOGRAPHER AND PHILOSOPHER

Once upon a time there was a photographer.  He was a splendid
photographer; he did profiles and full-faces, three-quarter and
full-length portraits; he could develop and fix, tone and print
them. He was the deuce of a fellow!  But he was always discontented,
for he was a philosopher, a great philosopher and a discoverer. His
theory was that the world was upside down. It was plainly proved by
the plate in the developer. Everything that was on the right side
of the original, now appeared on the left; everything that was
dark, became light; light became shade;  blue turned into white,
and silver buttons looked as dark as iron.  The world was upside
down.

He had a partner, quite an ordinary man, full of petty characteristics.
For instance, he smoked cigars all day long; he never shut a door;
he put his knife into his mouth, instead of using his fork; he
wore his hat in the room; he cleaned his nails in the studio, and
in the evening he drank three glasses of beer.

He was full of faults!

The philosopher, on the other hand, was perfect, and therefore
he nursed resentment against his imperfect brother; he would have
liked to dissolve the partnership, but he could not, because their
business held them together; and because they were bound to remain
in partnership, the resentment of the philosopher turned into an
unreasonable hatred. It was dreadful!

When the spring came they decided to take a lodging in a summer
resort, and the partner was despatched to find one. He did find
one. And one Saturday they departed together on a steamer.

The philosopher sat all day long on deck and drank punch. He was
a very stout man and suffered from several things; his liver was
out of order, and there was something wrong with his feet, perhaps
rheumatism, or some similar disease. When they arrived, they crossed
the bridge and went ashore.

"Is this the place?" asked the philosopher.

"A very little walk will take us there," answered the partner.

They went along a footpath, full of roots, and the path ended
abruptly before a stile. They had to climb over it. Then the road
became stony, and the philosopher complained of his feet, but he
forgot all about his pains when they came to another stile.  After
that, all trace of the road disappeared; they walked on the bare
rock through shrubs and bilberry bushes.

Behind the third fence stood a bull, who chased the philosopher
to the fourth stile, where he arrived in a bath of perspiration,
which opened all the pores of his skin. When they had crossed the
sixth stile, they could see the house. The philosopher went in and
immediately stepped on to the verandah.

"Why are there so many trees?" he asked.  "They interrupt the view."

"But they shelter the house from the strong sea-breezes," answered
the partner.

"And the place looks like a churchyard; why, the house stands in
the centre of a pine-wood."

"A very healthy spot," replied the partner.

Then they wanted to go and bathe. But there was no proper bathing-place,
in the philosophical sense of the word. There was nothing but the
stony ground and mud.

After they had bathed the philosopher felt thirsty, and wanted to
drink a glass of water at the spring.  It was of a reddish-brown
colour, and had a peculiar, strong taste. It was no good. Nothing
was any good. And meat was unobtainable, there was nothing to be
had but fish.

The philosopher grew gloomy and sat down under a pumpkin to deplore
his fate. But there was no help for it. He had to stay, and his
partner returned to town to look after the business during his
friend's absence.

Six weeks passed and then the partner returned to his philosopher.

He was met on the bridge by a slender youth with red cheeks and a
sunburnt neck. It was the philosopher, rejuvenated and full of high
spirits.

He jumped over the six stiles and chased the bull.

When they were sitting on the verandah, the partner said to him:--

"You are looking very well, what sort of a time have you had?"

"Oh! an excellent time!" said the philosopher.  "The fences have
taken off my fat; the stones have massaged my feet; the mud-baths
have cured me of my rheumatism; the plain food has cured my liver,
and the pine-trees my lungs; and, could you believe it, the brown
spring-water contained iron, just what I wanted!"

"Well, you old philosopher," said the partner, "don't you understand
that from the negative you get a positive, where all the shade
becomes light again? If you would only take such a positive picture
of me and try and find out what faults I do _not_ possess, you would
not dislike me so much.  Only think: I don't drink, and therefore
I am able to manage the business; I don't steal; I never talk evil of
you behind your back; I never complain; I never make white appear
black; I am never rude to the customers; I rise early in the morning;
I clean my nails so as to keep the developer clean; I leave my
hat on so that no hairs shall fall on the plates; I smoke so as to
purify the air of poisonous gases; I keep the door ajar so as not
to make a noise in the studio; I drink beer in the evening so as
to escape the temptation of drinking whisky; and I put the knife
into my mouth because I am afraid of pricking myself with the fork."

"You really are a great philosopher," said the photographer,
"henceforth we will be friends!  Then we shall get on in life!"



HALF A SHEET OF FOOLSCAP

The last furniture van had left; the tenant, a young man with
a crape band round his hat, walked for the last time through the
empty rooms to make sure that nothing had been left behind. No,
nothing had been forgotten, nothing at all. He went out into the
front hall, firmly determined never to think again of all that
had happened to him in these rooms. And all at once his eyes fell
on half a sheet of foolscap, which somehow had got wedged between
the wall and the telephone; the paper was covered with writing,
evidently the writing of more persons than one.  Some of the
entries were written quite legibly with pen and ink, while others
were scribbled with a lead-pencil; here and there even a red pencil
had been used. It was a record of everything that had happened to
him in the short period of two years; all these things, which he
had made up his mind to forget, were noted down. It was a slice of
a human life on half a sheet of foolscap.

He detached the paper; it was a piece of scribbling paper, yellow
and shining like the sun. He put it on the mantelpiece in the
drawing-room and glanced at it. Heading the list was a woman's name:
"Alice," the most beautiful name in the world, as it had seemed
to him then, for it was the name of his fiancee. Next to the name
was a number, "15,11." It looked like the number of a hymn, on the
hymn-board. Underneath was written "Bank." That was where his work
lay, his sacred work to which he owed bread, home, and wife--the
foundations of life.  But a pen had been drawn through the word, for
the Bank had failed, and although he had eventually found another
berth, it was not until after a short period of anxiety and
uneasiness.

The next entries were: "Flower-shop and livery-stable." They related
to his betrothal, when he had plenty of money in his pockets.

Then came "furniture dealer and paper-hanger "--they were furnishing
their house. "Forwarding agents"--they were moving into it. The
"Box-office of the Opera-house, No. 50,50"--they were newly married,
and went to the opera on Sunday evenings; the most enjoyable hours
of their lives were spent there, for they had to sit quite still,
while their souls met in the beauty and harmony of the fairyland
on the other side of the curtain.

Then followed the name of a man, crossed out.  He had been a friend
of his youth, a man who had risen high in the social scale, but
who fell, spoilt by success, fell irremediably, and had to leave
the country.

So unstable was fortune!

Now, something new entered the lives of husband and wife. The next
entry was in a lady's hand: "Nurse." What nurse? Well, of course,
the kindly woman with the big cloak and the sympathetic face, who
walked with a soft footfall, and never went into the drawing-room,
but walked straight down the passage to the bedroom.

Underneath her name was written "Dr. L."

And now, for the first time, a relative appeared on the list:
"Mama." That was his mother-in-law, who had kept away discreetly,
so as not to disturb their newly found happiness, but was glad to
come now, when she was needed.

A great number of entries in red and blue pencil followed: "Servants'
Registry Office"--the maid had left and a new one had to be engaged.
"The chemist's"--hm! life was growing dark. "The dairy"--milk had
been ordered--sterilised milk!

"Butcher, grocer, etc." The affairs of the house were being conducted
by telephone; it argued that the mistress was not at her post. No,
she wasn't, for she was laid up.

He could not read what followed, for it grew dark before his eyes;
he might have been a drowning man trying to see through salt water.
And yet, there it was written, plainly enough: "undertaker--a large
coffin and a small one." And the word "dust" was added in parenthesis.

It was the last word of the whole record. It ended with "dust"!
and that is exactly what happens in life.

He took the yellow paper, kissed it, folded it carefully, and put
it in his pocket.

In two minutes he had lived again through two years of his life.

But he was not bowed down as he left the house.  On the contrary,
he carried his head high, like a happy and proud man, for he knew
that the best things life has to bestow had been given to him.  And
he pitied all those from whom they are withheld.



CONQUERING HERO AND FOOL

It was on the evening of a spring day in 1880 (a day which will never
be forgotten in Sweden, because it is the day of commemoration of
a national event), when an old couple, simple country people, were
standing on the headland at the entrance to the harbour of Stockholm,
looking at the dark watercourse under the dim stars, and watching
a man who was busy with a dark, undefinable object on the landing
bridge. They stood there for a long, long time, now gazing at the
dark watercourse, now looking at the brilliant lights of the town.

At last a light appeared on the fjord, then another, then many
lights. The old man seized the woman's hand and pressed it, and
in silence, under the stars, they thanked God for having safely
brought home their son whom they had mourned as dead for a whole
year.

It is true, he had not been the leader of the expedition, but he
had been one of the crew. And now he was to dine with the long,
receive an order, and, in addition to a sum of money from the
nation, which Parliament had voted for the purpose, an appointment
which would mean bread and butter for the rest of his life.

The lights grew in size as they approached; a small steamer was
towing a big dark craft, which, seen close by, looked as plain and
simple as most great things do.

And now the man on the bridge, who had been very busy about the
dark object, struck a match.

"Whatever is it?" said the old man, much puzzled. "It looks like
huge wax candles."

They went nearer to examine it more closely.

"It looks like a frame for drying fishes," said the old woman, who
had been born on the coast.

Ratsh! It-sh! Si-si-si-si! it said, and the old people were instantly
surrounded by fire and flames.

Great fiery globes rose up to the skies and, bursting, lit up the
night with a shower of stars; an astronomer, observing the heavens
with a telescope, might have come to the conclusion that new stars
had been born.  And he would not have been altogether wrong, for
in the year 1880 new thoughts were kindled in new hearts, and new
light and new discoveries vouchsafed to mankind. Doubtless, there
were weeds, too, growing up together with the splendid wheat; but
weeds have their uses, also; shade and moisture depend on their
presence, and they will be separated from the wheat at harvest
time. But there must be weeds, they are as inseparable from wheat
as chaff is from corn.

What had puzzled the old couple, however, was a rocket frame, and
when all the smoke had cleared away--for there is no fire without
smoke--not a trace of all the magnificence was left.

"It would have been jolly to have been in town with them to-night,"
said the old woman.

"Oh, no!" replied the man. "We should have been in the way, poor
people like we ought never to push themselves to the front. And
there's plenty of time to-morrow for seeing the boy, after he has
left his sweetheart, who is dearer to him than we are."

It was a very sensible speech for the old man to make; but who in
the world is to have sense, if old people have not?

And then they continued their way to the town.

***

Now, let us see what happened to the son.

He was the leadsman, that is to say, it was his business to sound
the depths of the sea; he had plumbed the profound abysses of the
ocean, calculated the elevation of the land and the apparent motion
of the sky; he knew the exact time by looking at the sun, and he
could tell from the stars how far they had travelled. He was a man
of importance; he believed that he held heaven and earth in his
hand, measured time and regulated the clock of eternity.  And after
he had been the king's guest and received an order to wear on his
breast, he fancied that he was made of finer stuff than most men;
he was not exactly haughty when he met his poor parents and his
sweetheart, but, although they said nothing, they felt that he
thought himself their superior. Possibly he was a little stiff, he
was built that way.

Well, the official ceremonies were over, but the students also had
decided to pay homage to the heroes, who had returned home after
a prolonged absence. And they went to the capital in full force.

Students are queer people, who read books and study under Dr.
Know-all; consequently they imagine that they know more than other
people. They are also young, and therefore they are thoughtless
and cruel.

The respectful and sensible speeches which the old professors had
been making all the afternoon in honour of the explorers had come
to an end, and the procession of the students had started.

The leadsman and his sweetheart were sitting on a balcony in the
company of the other great men. The ringing of the church bells
and the booming of the guns mingled with the sound of the bugles
and the rolling of the drums; flags were waving and fluttering in
the breeze. And then the procession marched by.

It was headed by a ship, with sailors and everything else belonging
to it; next walruses came and polar bears, and all the rest of it;
then students in disguise, representing the heroes; the Great Man
himself was represented in his fur coat and goggles.  It wasn't
quite respectful, of course; it wasn't a very great honour to be
impersonated in this way; but there it was! It was well meant, no
doubt. And gradually every member of the expedition passed by, one
after the other, all represented by the students.

Last of all came the leadsman. It was true, nobody could ever have
dreamt of calling him handsome, but there is no need for a man to
be handsome, as long as he is an able leadsman, or anything else
able. The students had chosen a hideous old grumbler to impersonate
him. That alone would not have mattered; but nature had made one of
his arms shorter than the other, and his representative had made
a feature of this defect. And that was too bad; for a defect is
something for which one ought not to be blamed.

But when the fool who played the leadsman approached the balcony,
he said a few words with a provincial accent, intended to cast
ridicule on the leadsman, who was born in one of the provinces.
It was a silly thing to do, for every man speaks the dialect which
his mother has taught him; and it is nothing at all to be ashamed
of.

Everybody laughed, more from politeness than anything else, for
the entertainment was gratuitous, but the girl was hurt, for she
hated to see her future husband laughed at. The leadsman frowned
and grew silent. He no longer enjoyed the festivities.  But he
carefully hid his real feelings, for otherwise he would have been
laughed at for a fool unable to appreciate a joke. But still worse
things happened, for his impersonator danced and cut all sorts of
ridiculous antics, in the endeavour to act the leadsman's name in
dumb charade; first his surname, which he had inherited from his
father, and then his Christian name, which his mother had chosen
for him at his baptism. These names were sacred to him, and although
there may have been a little boastful sound about them, he had
always scorned to change them.

He wanted to rise from his chair and leave, but his sweetheart
caught hold of his hand, and he stayed where he was.

When, the procession was over and everybody who had been sitting
on the balcony had risen, the great man laid a friendly hand on
the girl's shoulder, and said, with his kindly smile:--

"They have a strange way here of celebrating their heroes, one
mustn't mind it!"

In the evening there was a garden party and the leadsman was
present, but his pleasure was gone; he had been laughed at, and he
had grown small in his own estimation, smaller than the fool, who
had made quite a hit as a jester. Therefore he was despondent,
felt uneasy at the thought of the future and doubtful of his own
capability. And wherever he went he met the fool who was caricaturing
him.  He saw his faults enlarged, especially his pride and his
boastfulness; all his secret thoughts and weaknesses were made
public.

For three painful hours he examined the account book of his
conscience; what no man had dared to tell him before, the fool had
told him. Perfect knowledge of oneself is a splendid thing, Socrates
calls it the highest of all goods. Towards the end of the evening
the leadsman had conquered himself, admitted his faults, and resolved
to turn over a new leaf.

As he was passing a group of people he heard a voice behind a hedge
saying:--

"It's extraordinary, how the leadsman has improved. He's really
quite a delightful fellow!"

These words did him good; but what pleased him more than anything
else were a few whispered words from his sweetheart.

"You are so nice to-night," she said, "that you look quite handsome."

He handsome? It must have been a miracle then, and miracles don't
happen nowadays. Yet he had to believe in a miracle, for he knew
himself to be a very plain man.

Finally the Great Man touched his glass with his knife, and
immediately there was silence, for every body wanted to hear what
he had to say.

"When a Roman conqueror was granted a triumphal procession," he
began, "a slave always stood behind him in the chariot and incessantly
called out, 'Remember that you are but a man!' while senate and
people paid him homage. And at the side of the triumphal car, which
was drawn by four horses, walked a fool, whose business it was to
dim the splendour of his triumph by shouting insults, and casting
suspicion on the hero's character by singing libellous songs. This
was a good old custom, for there is nothing so fatal to a man than
to believe that he is a god, and there is nothing the gods dislike
so much as the pride of men. My dear young friends! The success
which we, who have just returned home, have achieved, has perhaps
been overrated, our triumph went to our heads, and therefore it was
good for us to watch your antics to-day! I don't envy the jester
his part--far from it; but I thank you for the somewhat strange
homage which you have done us. It has taught me that I have still
a good deal to learn, and whenever my head is in danger of being
turned by flattery, it will remind me that I am nothing but an
ordinary man!"

"Hear! Hear!" exclaimed the leadsman, and the festivities continued,
undisturbed even by the fool, who had felt a little ashamed of
himself and had quietly withdrawn from the scene.

So much for the Great Man and the leadsman. Now let us see what
happened to the fool.

As he was standing close to the table during the Great Man's speech,
he received a glance from the leadsman, which, like a small fiery
arrow, was capable of setting a fortress aflame. And as he went out
into the night, he felt beside himself, like a man who is clothed
in sheets of fire. He was not a nice man. True, fools and jailers
are human beings, like the rest of us, but they are not the very
nicest specimen. Like everybody else he had many faults and weaknesses,
but he knew how to cloak them. Now something extraordinary happened.
Through having mimicked the leadsman all day long, and also, perhaps,
owing to all the drink he had consumed, he had become so much the
part which he had played that he was unable to shake it off; and
since he had brought into prominence the faults and weaknesses of
the leadsman, he had, as it were, acquired them, and that flash
from the leadsman's eye had rammed them down to the very bottom of
his soul, just as a ramrod pushes the powder into the barrel of a
gun. He was charged with the leadsman, so to speak, and therefore,
as he stepped out into the street he at once began to shout and
boast. But this time luck was against him. A policeman ordered him
to be quiet. The fool said something funny, imitating the leadsman's
provincial accent. But the policeman, who happened to be a native
of the same province, was annoyed and wanted to arrest the fool.
Now it is just as difficult for a fool to take a thing seriously
as it is for a policeman to understand a joke; therefore the fool
resisted and created such a disturbance that the policeman struck
him with his truncheon.

He received a sound beating, and then the policeman let him go.

You would think that he had had enough trouble now--far from it!

The chastisement which he had received had only embittered him,
and he went on the warpath, like a red Indian, to see on whom he
might avenge his wrongs.

Accident, or some other power, guided his footsteps to a locality
mainly frequented by peasants and labourers.  He entered a brewery
and found a number of millers and farmer's labourers sitting round
a table, drinking the health of the explorers. When they saw the
fool they took him for the leadsman, and were highly delighted when
he condescended to take a glass in their company.

Now the demon of pride entered into the soul of the fool. He boasted
of his great achievements; he told them that it was he who had led
the expedition, for would they not have foundered if he had not
sounded the depth of the sea? Would they ever have returned home
if he had not read the stars?

Smack! an egg hit him between the eyebrows.

"Leadsman, you're a braggart!" said the miller. "We've known that
for a long time; we knew it when you wrote to the paper saying the
Great Man was another Humboldt!"

Now another of the leadsman's weaknesses gained the upper hand.

"The Great Man is a humbug!" he exclaimed, which was not true.

This was too much for the assembly. They rose from their seats like
one man, seized the fool, and with a leather strap bound him to a
sack of flour. They covered him with flour until he was white from
top to toe, and blackened his face with the wick from one of the
lanterns.  The millers' apprentice sewed him to the sack; they
lifted him, sack and lantern, on to the cart, and amid shouting
and laughter proceeded to the market-place.

There he was exhibited to the passers-by, and everybody laughed at
him.

When they let him go at last, he went and sat on some stone stairs
and cried. The big fellow sobbed like a little child; one might
almost have felt sorry for him.




WHAT THE TREE-SWALLOW SANG IN THE BUCKTHORN TREE

If you are standing at the harbour where all the steamers call, and
look out towards the sea, you will see a mountain on your left,
covered with green trees, and behind the trees a large house built in
the shape of a spider. For in the centre there is a round building
from which radiate eight wings, that look very much like the eight
legs on the round body of a spider. The people who enter the house
do not leave it again at will, and some of them stay there for the
rest of their life, for the house is a prison.

In the days of King Oscar I, the mountain was not green. On the
contrary, it was grey and cold, for neither moss nor heart's-ease
would grow there, although these plants generally thrive on the
bare rock. There was nothing but grey stone and grey people, who
looked as if they had been turned into stone, and who quarried
stone, broke stone, and carried stone. And among these people there
was one who looked stonier than all the others.

He was still a youth when, in the reign of King Oscar I., he was
shut up in this prison because he had killed a man.

He was a prisoner for life, and sewn on his grey prison garb was
a large black "L."

He was always on the mountain, in winter days and summer time,
breaking stones. In the winter he had only the empty and deserted
harbour to look at; the semicircular bridge with its poles had the
appearance of a yawning row of teeth, and he could see the wood-shed,
the riding-school, and the two gigantic, denuded lime trees.
Sometimes an ice-yacht would sail past the islet; sometimes a few
boys would pass on skates; otherwise it was quiet and forsaken.

In the summer time it was much jollier. For then the harbour was
full of smart boats, newly painted and decorated with flags. And the
lime trees, in the shade of which he had sat when he was a child,
waiting for his father, who was an engineer on one of the finest
boats, were green.

It was many years now since he had heard the rustling of the breeze
in the trees, for nothing grew on his cliff, and the only thing in
the world he longed for was to hear once again the whispering of
the wind in the branches of the lime trees at Knightsholm.

Sometimes, on a summer's day, a steamer would pass the islet; then
he heard the plashing of the waves, or, perhaps, snatches of music;
and he saw bright faces which grew dark as soon as their eyes fell
on the grey stone men on the mountain.

And then he cursed heaven and earth, his fate and the cruelty of men.
He cursed, year in, year out. And he and his companions tormented
and cursed each other day and night; for crime isolates, but
misfortune draws men together.

In the beginning his fate was unnecessarily cruel, for the keepers
ill-treated the prisoners, mercilessly and at their pleasure.

But one day there was a change; the food was better, the treatment
was less harsh, and every prisoner was given a cell of his own to
sleep in. The king himself had loosened the chains of the prisoners
a little; but since hopelessness had petrified the hearts of these
unfortunate men, they were unable to feel anything like gratitude,
and so they continued to curse; and now they came to the conclusion
that it was more pleasant to sleep together in one room, for then
they could talk all night. And they continued to complain of the
food, the clothes, and the treatment, just as before.

One fine day all the bells of the town were ringing, and those of
Knightsholm rang louder than any of the others.  King Oscar was
dead, and the prisoners had a holiday.  Since they could talk to
one another now, they talked of murdering the guards and escaping
from prison; and they also talked of the dead king, and they spoke
evil of him.

"If he had been a just man, he would have set us free," said one
of the prisoners.

"Or else he would have imprisoned all the criminals who are at
large."

"Then he himself would have had to be Governor of the Prison, for
the whole nation are criminals."

It is the way of prisoners to regard all men as criminals, and to
maintain that they themselves were only caught because they were
unlucky.

But it was a hot summer's day, and the stone man walked along the
shore, listening to the tolling of the bells for Oscar the king.
He raised the stones and looked for tadpoles and sticklebacks, but
could find none; not a fish was visible in the water, and consequently
there was not a sign of a sea-gull or a tern. Then he felt that a
curse rested on the mountain, a curse so strong that it kept even
the fishes and the birds away. He fell to considering the life he
was leading. He had lost his name, both Christian and surname, and
was no more now than No. 65, a name written in figures, instead of
in letters. He was no longer obliged to pay taxes. He had forgotten
his age. He had ceased to be a man, ceased to be a living being,
but neither was he dead. He was nothing but something grey moving
on the mountain and being terribly scorched by the sun. It burned
on his prison garb and on his head with the close-cropped hair,
which in days long passed had been curly, and was combed with a
tooth-comb every Saturday by his mother's gentle hand. He was not
allowed to wear a cap to-day, because it would have facilitated an
attempt at escape. And as the sun scorched his head, he remembered
the story of the prophet Jonah, to whom the Lord gave a gourd so
that he might sit in its shade.

"A nice gift, that!" he sneered, for he did not believe in anything
good; in fact, he did not believe in anything at all.

All at once he saw a huge birch branch tossed about in the surf.
It was quite green and fresh and had a white stem; possibly it had
fallen off a pleasure-boat. He dragged it ashore, shook the water
off and carried it to a gully where he put it up, wedged firmly
between three stones. Then he sat down and listened to the wind
rustling through its leaves, which smelt of the finest resin.

When he had sat for a little while in the shade of the birch he
fell asleep.

And he dreamed a dream.

The whole mountain was a green wood with lovely trees and odorous
flowers. Birds were singing, bees and humble-bees buzzing, and
butterflies fluttering from flower to flower. But all by itself
and a little aside stood a tree which he did not know; it was more
beautiful than all the rest; it had several stems, like a shrub,
and the branches looked like lacework. And on one of its branches,
half hidden by its foliage, sat a little black-and-white bird which
looked like a swallow, but wasn't one.

In his dream he could interpret the language of the birds, and
therefore he understood to some extent what the bird was singing.
And it sang:

Mud, mud, mud, mud here!  We'll throw, throw, throw here!  In mud,
mud, mud you died, From mud, mud, mud you'll rise.

It sang of mud, death, and resurrection; that much he could make
out.

But that was not all. He was standing alone on the cliff in the
scorching heat of the sun. All his fellows-in-misfortune had forsaken
him and threatened his life, because he had refused to be a party
to their setting the prison on fire. They followed him in a crowd,
threw stones at him and chased him up the mountain as far as he
could go.

And finally he was stopped by a stone wall.

There was no possibility of climbing over it, and in his despair
he resolved to kill himself by dashing his head against the stones.
He rushed down the mountain, and behold! a gate was opened at the
same moment--a green garden gate ... and ...  he woke up.

When he thought of his life and realised that the green wood was
nothing but the branch of a birch tree, he grew very discontented
in his heart.

"If at least it had been a lime tree," he grumbled.  And as he
listened he found that it was the birch which had sung so loudly;
it sounded as if some one were sifting sand or gravel, and again
he thought of the lime trees, which make the soft velvety sounds
that touch the heart.

On the following day his birch was faded and gave little shade.

On the day after that the foliage was as dry as paper and rattled
like teeth. And finally there was nothing left but a huge birch
rod, which reminded him of his childhood.

He remembered the gourd of the prophet Jonah, and he cursed when
the sun scorched his head.

***

A new king had come to the throne, and he brought fresh life into
the government of the country. The town was to have a new watercourse,
and therefore all the prisoners were commanded to dredge.

It was for the first time after many years that he was allowed to
leave his cliff. He was in the boat, swimming on the water, and
saw much in his native town that was new to him; he saw the railway
and the locomotive. And they began dredging just below the railway
station.

And gradually they brought up all the corruption which lay buried
at the bottom of the sea. Drowned cats, old shoes, decomposed
fat from the candle factory, the refuse from the dye works called
"The Blue Hand," tanners' bark from the tannery, and all the human
misery which the laundresses had batted off the clothes for the
last hundred years. And there was such a terrible smell of sulphur
and ammonia that only a prisoner could be expected to bear it.

When the boat was full, the prisoners wondered what was going to
be done with their cargo of dirt? The riddle was solved when the
overseer steered for their own cliff.

All the mud was unloaded there and thrown on the mountain, and soon
the air was filled with the foulest of smells. They waded ankle-deep
in filth, and their clothes, hands, and faces were covered with
it.

"This is like the infernal regions!" said the prisoners.

They dredged and unloaded on the cliff for several years, and
ultimately the cliff disappeared altogether.

And the white snow fell winter after winter on all the corruption
and threw a pure white cover over it.

And when the spring came once again and all the snow had melted,
the evil smell had disappeared, and the mud looked like mould. There
was no more dredging after this spring, and our stone man was sent
to work at the forge and never came near the cliff. Only once,
in the autumn, he went there secretly, and then he saw something
wonderful.

The ground was covered with green plants. Ugly sappy plants, it
was true, mostly bur-marigolds, that look like a nettle with brown
flowers, which is ugly because flowers should be white, yellow,
blue or red. And there were true nettles with green blossoms, and
burs, sorrel, thistles, and notch-weed; all the ugliest, burning,
stinging, evil-smelling plants, which nobody likes, and which grow
on dust-heaps, waste land, and mud.

"We cleaned the bottom of the sea, and now we have all the dirt
here; this is all the thanks we get!" said the prisoner.

Then he was transferred to another cliff, where a fort was to be
built, and again he worked in stone; stone, stone, stone!

Then he lost one of his eyes, and sometimes he was flogged.
And he remained a very long time there, so long that the new king
died and was followed by his successor.  On coronation day one of
the prisoners was to be released.  And it was to be the one who
had behaved best during all the time and had arrived at a clear
understanding that he had sinned. And that was he! But the other
prisoners considered that it would be a wrong towards them, for in
their circles a man who repents is considered a fool, "because he
has done what he couldn't help doing."

And so the years passed. Our stone man had grown very old, and
because he was now unable to do hard work, he was sent back to his
cliff and set to sew sacks.

One day the chaplain on his round paused before the stone man, who
sat and sewed.

"Well," said the clergyman, "and are you never to leave this cliff?"

"How would that be possible?" replied the stone man.

"You will go as soon as you come to see that you did wrong."

"If ever I find a human being who does not only do right, but more
than is right, I will believe that I did wrong! But I don't believe
that there is such a being."

"To do more than that which is right is to have compassion. May it
please God that you will soon come to know it!"

One day the stone man was sent to repair the road on the cliff,
which he had not seen for, perhaps, twenty years.

It was again a warm summer's day, and from the passing steamers,
bright and beautiful as butterflies, came the sounds of music and
gay laughter.

When he arrived at the headland he found that the cliff had disappeared
under a lovely green wood, whose millions of leaves glittered and
sparkled in the breeze like small waves. There were tall, white
birch trees and trembling aspens, and ash trees grew on the shore.

Everything was just as it had been in his dream.  At the foot of
the trees tall grasses nodded, butterflies played in the sunshine,
and humble-bees buzzed from flower to flower. The birds were singing,
but he could not understand what they said, and therefore he knew
that it was not a dream.

The cursed mountain had been transformed into a mountain of bliss,
and he could not help thinking of the prophet and the gourd.

"This is mercy and compassion," whispered a voice in his heart, or
perhaps it was a warning.

And when a steamer passed, the faces of the passengers did not grow
gloomy, but brightened at the sight of the beautiful scenery; he
even fancied that he saw some one wave a handkerchief, as people
on a steamer do when they pass a summer resort.

He walked along a path beneath waving trees. It is true, there was
not one lime tree; but he did not dare to wish for one, for fear
the birches might turn into rods. He had learnt that much.

As he walked through a leafy avenue, he saw in the distance a white
wall with a green gate. And somebody was playing on an instrument
which was not an organ, for the movement was much jollier and
livelier. Above the wall the pretty roof of a villa was visible,
and a yellow and blue flag fluttered in the wind.

And he saw a gaily coloured ball rise and fall on the other side
of the wall; he heard the chattering of children's voices, and
the clinking of plates and glasses told him that a table was being
laid.

He went and looked through the gate. The syringa was in full
flower, and the table stood under the flowering shrubs; children
were running about, the piano was being played and somebody sang
a song.

"This is Paradise," said the voice within him.

The old man stood a long time and watched, so long that in the end
he broke down, overcome by fatigue, hunger, and thirst, and all
the misery of life.

Then the gate was opened and a little girl in a white dress came
out. She carried a silver tray in her hand, and on the tray stood
a glass filled with wine, the reddest wine which the old man had
ever seen. And the child went up to the old man and said:

"Come now, daddy, you must drink this!"

The old man took the glass and drank. It was the rich man's wine,
which had grown a long way off in the sunny South; and it tasted
like the sweetness of a good life when it is at its very best.

"This is compassion," said his own old broken voice.  "But you,
child, in your ignorance, you wouldn't have brought me this wine
if you had known who I am. Do you know what I am?"

"Yes, you are a prisoner, I know that," replied the little girl.

When the old stone man went back, he was no longer a man of stone,
for something in him had begun to quicken.

And as he passed a steep incline, he saw a tree with many trunks,
which looked like a shrub. It was more beautiful than the others; it
was a buckthorn tree, but the old man did not know it. A restless
little bird, black and white like a swallow, fluttered from
branch to branch. The peasants call it tree-swallow, but its name
is something else. And it sat in the foliage and sang a sweet sad
song:

In mud, in mud, in mud you died, From mud, from mud, from mud you
rose.

It was exactly as it had been in his dream. And now the old man
understood what the tree-swallow meant.




THE MYSTERY OF THE TOBACCO SHED

Listen to the story of a young opera-singer who was so beautiful
that the people in the street turned round to stare at her when she
passed. And she was not only very beautiful, but she had a better
voice than most singers.

The conductor of the orchestra, who was also a composer, came and
laid his heart and all his possessions at her feet. She took his
possessions, but left his heart lying in the dust.

Now she was famous, more famous than any other singer; she drove
through the streets in her elegant victoria, and nodded to her
portrait, which greeted her from all the stationers' and booksellers'
shop windows.

And as her fame grew, her picture appeared on post-cards, soap and
cigar boxes. Finally her portrait was hung up in the foyer of the
theatre, amongst all the dead immortals; and as a result her head
began to swell.

One day she was standing on a pier, the sea was very rough and
there was a strong current. The conductor, of course, stood by her
side, and a great many young men were present, paying her court.
The beauty was playing with a rose; all the cavaliers coveted the
flower, but she said that it should become the property of him who
knew how to earn it, and she flung it far out into the sea. The
cavaliers looked at it with longing glances, but the conductor
jumped off the pier without a moment's hesitation, swam like a
sea-gull on the crests of the waves and soon held the flower between
his lips.

The cavaliers cheered, and the swimmer could read the promise of
love in his lady's eyes. But when he struck out for the shore, he
found that he could not move from the spot. He had been caught in
the current. The singer on the pier did not realise his danger,
but merely thought he was fooling, and therefore she laughed. But
the conductor, who saw death staring him in the face, misunderstood
her laughter; a bitter pang shot through his heart, and then his
love for her was dead.

However, he came ashore at last, with bleeding hands, for he had
cut them at the pier in many places.

"I will marry you," said the beauty.

"No, thank you," replied the conductor; turned, and walked away.

This was an offence for which she swore that she would be revenged.

Only the people connected with the theatre, who  understand these
things, know how it happened that the conductor lost his post. He
had been firmly established, and it took two years to get rid of
him.

But he was got rid of; she watched the downfall of her benefactor
and triumphed, and her head swelled still more, in fact it swelled
so much that everybody noticed it. The public, who realised that
the heart underneath the beautiful form was wicked, ceased to be
touched by her singing, and no longer believed in her smiles and
tears.

She soon became aware of it, and it embittered her.  But she continued
ruling at the theatre, suppressed all young talents, and used her
influence with the press to ruin their careers.

She lost the love and respect of her audiences, but she did not
mind that as long as she remained in power; and as she was wealthy,
influential, and contented, she throve and prospered.

Now, when people are prosperous, they do not lose flesh; on the
contrary, they are inclined to grow stout; and she really began
to grow corpulent.  It came so gradually that she had no idea
of it until it was too late. Bang! The downhill journey is ever a
fast journey, and in her case it was accom-plished with startling
rapidity. She tried every remedy--in vain! She kept the best table
in the whole town, but she starved herself, and the more she starved,
the stouter she grew.

One more year, and she was no longer a great star, and her pay was
reduced. Two more years and she  was half forgotten, and her place
was filled by others.  After the third year she was not re-engaged,
and she went and rented an attic.

"She is suffering from an unnatural corpulency," said the stage-manager
to the prompter.

"It's not corpulency at all," replied the prompter, "she's just
puffed up with pride."

***

Now she lived in the attic and looked out on a large plantation. In
the middle of this plantation stood a tobacco shed, which pleased
her, because it had no windows behind which curious people could sit
and stare at her. Sparrows had built their nests under the eaves,
but the shed was no longer used for drying or storing tobacco,
which was not, now, grown on the plantation.

There she lived during the summer, looking at the shed and wondering
what purpose it could possibly serve, for the doors were locked
with large padlocks, padlocks, and nobody ever went in or out.

She knew that it contained secrets, and what these secrets were,
she was to learn sooner than she expected.

A few little shreds of her great reputation, to which she clung
desperately, and which helped her to bear her life, were still
left: the memory of her best parts, Carmen and Aida, for which
no successor had yet been found; the public still remembered her
impersonation of these parts, which had been beyond praise.

Very well, August came; the street lamps were again lighted in the
evenings, and the theatres were reopened.

The singer sat at her window and looked at the tobacco shed, which
had been painted a bright red, and, moreover, had just received a
new red-tiled roof.

A man walked across the potato field; he carried a large rusty key,
with which he opened the shed and went in.

Then two other men arrived; two men whom she thought she had seen
before; and they, too, disappeared in the shed.

It began to be interesting.

After a while the three men reappeared, carrying large, strange
objects, which looked like the bottom of a bed or a big screen.

When they had passed the gate, they turned the screens round
and leaned them against the wall; one of them represented a badly
painted tiled stove, another the door of a country cottage, perhaps
a forester's cottage. Others a wood, a window, and a library.

She understood. It was the scenery of a play. And after a while
she recognised the rose tree from Faust.

The shed was used by the theatre for storing scenes and stage
properties; she herself had more than once stood by the side of
the rose tree, singing "Gentle flowers in the dew."

The thought that they were going to play Faust wrung her heart, but
she had one little comfort: she had never sung the principal part
in it, for the principal part is Margaret's.

"I don't mind Faust; but I shall die if they play Carmen or Aida."

And she sat and watched the change in the repertoire.  She knew a
fortnight before the papers what was going to be played next. It
was amusing in a way. She knew when the Freischuetz was going to
be played, for she saw the wolves' den being brought out; she knew
when they were going to put on the Flying Dutchman, for the ship
and the sea came out of the shed; and Tannhaeuser, and Lohengrin,
and many others.

But the inevitable day dawned--for the inevitable must happen. The
men had again gone into the shed (she remembered that the name of
one of them was Lindquist, and that it was his business to look after
the pulleys), and presently reappeared with a Spanish market-place.
The scene was not standing straight up, so that she could not see
at once what it was, but one of the men turned it slowly over,
and when he stood it up on its side she could see the back, which
is always very ugly.  And one after the other, slowly, as if they
warded to prolong the torture, huge, black letters appeared: CARMEN.
It was Carmen!

"I shall die," said the singer.

But she did not die, not even when they played  Aida. But her
name was blotted out from the memory of the public, her picture
disappeared from the stationers' windows, and from the post-cards;
finally her portrait was removed from the foyer of the theatre by
an unknown hand.

She could not understand how men could forget so quickly. It was
quite inexplicable! But she mourned for herself as if she were
mourning a friend who had died; and wasn't it true, that the singer,
the famous singer, was dead?

One evening she was strolling through a deserted street.  At one
end of the street was a rubbish shoot. Without knowing why, she
stood still, and then she had an object lesson on the futility of
all earthly things. For on the rubbish heap lay a post-card, and
on the post-card was her picture in the part of Carmen.

She walked away quickly, suppressing her tears. She came to a little
side street, and stopped before a stationer's shop.  It had been
her custom to look at the shop windows to see whether her portrait
was exhibited. But it was not exhibited here; instead of that her
eyes fell on a text and she read it, unconsciously:

"The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from the earth."

Them that do evil! That was the reason why her memory was blotted
out. That was the explanation of the forgetfulness of men.

"But is it not possible to undo the wrong I have done?" she moaned.
"Have I not been sufficiently punished?"

And she wandered in the direction of the wood, where she was not
likely to meet anybody. And as she was walking along, crushed,
humiliated, her heart full of despair, she met another lonely
being, who stopped her as she was going to pass him. His eyes begged
permission to speak to her.

It was the conductor. But his eyes did not reproach her, nor did they
pity her, they only expressed admiration, admiration and tenderness.

"How beautiful and slender you have grown, Hannah," he said.

She looked at herself, and she could not help admitting that he
was right. Grief had burnt all her superfluous fat and she was more
beautiful than she had ever been.

"And you look as young as ever! Younger!"

It was the first kind word which she had heard for many a day; and
since it had been spoken by him whom she had wronged, she realised
what a splendid character he had, and said so.

"I hope you haven't lost your voice?" asked the conductor, who
could not bear flattery.

"I don't know," she sobbed.

"Come to me to-morrow ... yes, come to the Opera-house, and then
we shall see. I am conducting there.  ..."

The singer went, not once or twice, but many times, and regained
her former position.

The public had forgiven and forgotten all the evil she had done.
And she became greater and more famous than she had been before.

Isn't that an edifying story?




THE STORY OF THE ST. GOTTHARD

It was Saturday night in Goeschenen, in the canton of Uri, that
part of Switzerland which William Tell and Walter Fuerst have made
famous. The pretty green village on the northern side of the St.
Gotthard is situated on a little stream which drives a mill-wheel
and contains trout. Quiet, kindly people live there, who speak the
German language and have home rule, and the "sacred wood" protects
their homes from avalanche and landslip.

On the Saturday night I am speaking of, all the folks were gathering
round the village pump, underneath the great walnut tree, at the
hour when the church bells were ringing the Angelus. The postmaster,
the magistrate, and the colonel were there, all in their shirt-sleeves
and carrying scythes. They had been mowing all day long, and had
come to the pump to wash their scythes, for in the little village
work was sacred and every man was his own servant. Then the young
men came trooping through the village street, carrying scythes too,
and the maids with their milk-pails; finally the cows, a gigantic
breed, every cow as big as a bull. The country is rich and fertile,
but it bears neither wine nor olives, neither the mulberry tree
nor the luxurious maize.  Nothing but green grass and golden corn,
the walnut tree and the luscious beet-root grow there.

At the foot of the steep wall of the St. Gotthard, close to the pump,
stood the inn, "The Golden Horse." All the tired men, regardless
of rank or position, were sitting at a long table in the garden,
not one of them was missing: the magistrate, the postmaster, the
colonel and the farmers' labourers; the straw-hat manufacturer and
his workmen, the little village shoemaker, and the schoolmaster,
they were all there.

They talked of cattle breeding and harvest time; they sang songs,
reminiscent in their simplicity of cowbells and the shepherd's
flute. They sang of the spring and its pure joys, of its promise
and its hope.  And they drank the golden beer.

After a while the young men rose to play, to wrestle and to jump,
for on the following day was the annual festival of the Rifle
Club, and there would be trials of strength, and competitions; it
was im-portant therefore that their limbs should be supple.

And at an early hour that night the whole village was in bed, for
no man must be late on the morning of the festival, and no one must
be sleepy or dull.  The honour of the village was involved.

***

It was Sunday morning; the sun was shining  brightly and the church
bells were ringing. Men and women from the neighbouring villages,
in their best Sunday clothes, were gathering on the village green,
and all of them looked happy and very wide awake. Nearly every man
carried a gun instead of the scythe; and matrons and maids looked
at the men with scrutinising and encouraging eyes, for it was for
the defence of their country and their homes that they had learned
to handle a gun; and to-night the best shot would have the honour
of opening the dance with the prettiest girl of the village.

A large waggon, drawn by four horses, gaily decorated with flowers
and ribbons, drew up; the whole waggon had been transformed into a
summer arbour; one could not see the people inside, but one could
hear their songs. They sang of Switzerland and the Swiss people,
the most beautiful country and the bravest people in the world.

Behind the waggon walked the children's procession. They went by
twos, hand in hand, like good friends or little brides and bridegrooms.

And with the pealing of bells the procession slowly wound up the
mountain to the church.

After divine service the festivities began, and very soon shots
were fired on the rifle-range, which was built against the rocky
wall of the St. Gotthard.

The postmaster's son was the best shot in the village, and nobody
doubted that he would win the prize. He hit the bull's-eye four
times out of six.

From the summit of the mountain came a hallooing and a crashing;
stones and gravel rolled down the precipice, and the fir trees in
the sacred wood rocked as if a gale were blowing. On the top of
a cliff, his rifle slung across his shoulders, frantically waving
his hat, appeared the wild chamois hunter Andrea of Airolo, an
Italian village on the other side of the mountain.

"Don't go into the wood!" screamed the riflemen.

Andrea did not understand.

"Don't go into the sacred wood," shouted the magistrate, "or the
mountain will fall on us!"

"Let it fall, then," shouted Andrea, running down the cliff with
incredible rapidity.

"Here I am!"

"You're too late!" exclaimed the magistrate.

"I have never been too late yet!" replied Andrea; went to the
shooting-range, raised his rifle six times to his cheek, and each
time hit the bull's-eye.

Now, he really was the best shot, but the club had its regulations,
and, moreover, the dark-skinned men from the other side of the
mountain, where the wine grew and the silk was spun, were not very
popular. An old feud raged between them and the men of Goeschenen,
and the newcomer was disqualified.

But Andrea approached the prettiest girl in the grounds, who
happened to be the magistrate's own daughter, and politely asked
her to open the dance with him.

Pretty Gertrude blushed, for she was fond of Andrea, but she was
obliged to refuse his request.

Andrea frowned, bowed and whispered words into her ear, which
cover